"It is not only possible, it is obvious," Zen answered, unruffled by
the cutting question. "If I knew everything, I wouldn't be sitting here
talking to you. I would be out there winning a war."

"The point I want to make, colonel, is that the human race is divided
against itself. Historically, this has been going on since remote ages.
War after war after war."

"I do not see how America is responsible for the errors of history,"
Zen said. "We tried to avoid them. God knows we tried." Emphasis crept
into his voice.

"I did not say these were errors, colonel," West replied. "I merely
said they were history."

"But what point are you making if not the one that wars are mistakes?"
Zen asked, surprised at the way the other's thinking had gone.

"I am making the point that war seems to be the way the entity, the
human race as a whole, evolves. The method of evolution revealed by
history is the pitting of one part of the entity against another part,
then letting them fight it out to see which is the more efficient." A
touch of grimness sounded in the voice of the craggy man. In the dimly
lighted room, his face was as bleak--and as lonely--as the granite
outcropping at the top of a mountain.

"This is a very savage philosophy," Kurt Zen commented.

"If I may disagree with you again, colonel, I do not think that this
philosophy is necessarily savage. True, a great many men die in
fiendishly ingenious ways. A great many women and children suffer.
True, this system produces hunger in the world, and a fear so deep and
so intense that the heart is hurt even to contemplate it."

"How can this be anything but savage?" Zen protested. "I don't care
whether our side or the other side is doing it--it's still total
savagery, utter barbarism!"

"But that is a short-term view and one which does not take into
consideration all the factors in the equation. What is the purpose
back of this savagery, if it is not to force men to learn and to grow?
What if this so-called savagery is also the result of ignorance, of an
entity trying desperately to learn how to solve a problem, but never
quite succeeding?"

"But surely there must be some way which does not involve so much
suffering," Zen protested. He was growing more and more uncomfortable.
It was his impression that he was shifting sides in the argument
without quite realizing he was doing it. Or perhaps West was the one
who was shifting sides. This side-changing was producing confusion in
his thinking.

"I have harbored the same hope," West answered. "However, I know of no
way to accomplish this result. In a human being, we have a growing,
evolving organism that is possessed of a keen brain and a vast
curiosity. Such an organism, by its very nature, will have to try every
possible road." West pressed a button.

Again the screen came to life. Dim and shadowy, human figures began to
move there. Kurt Zen leaned forward to see them more clearly.




X


At first, the figures were indistinct and Zen could not see them
clearly. He mentioned this to West.

"They will get sharper in a minute," the craggy man answered. His voice
had sunk to a whisper heard from afar. Zen glanced at him to make
certain he was still there. The colonel had the flickering impression
that the chair was vacant but before the impression could firm itself,
West, faster than the eyes could follow, seemed to be back in the
chair. "Note the screen now, Kurt," West said.

The figures had become clear. It seemed to be a view of some kind of
underground cavern where men were working on an object that looked
like--Zen squinted his eyes, to make certain.

"A small space ship!" the colonel said. He felt eagerness rise in his
voice. Like so many kids born in the age of science, he had harbored
the dream of the days to come when men would fly beyond the sky, to
storied space islands that lay afar. Science had promised that this
would happen and the fiction writers had embellished this belief with
dream worlds. Somehow, it had never come to pass. One problem after
another had prevented realization of this dream. The war, which should
have accelerated development, had stopped it completely. Neither side
had the materials or the engineers or the skilled technicians to
construct a vessel capable of space flight.

"No," West said. His voice was toneless and the far-away note was still
strong in it. "Sorry to contradict you, colonel, but that is not a
small space ship, though it is designed to get out of the atmosphere
for a short time. Look again."

"Hell, it's a super bomb!" Zen gasped, as recognition came to him.

"Right, colonel!"

"A bomb big enough to devastate a continent!" Cold currents suddenly
flurried at the base of Zen's spine.

"Right, colonel." West's voice was as dry as the Nevada wind.

"I didn't know we had such a bomb under construction," Zen blurted out.

"We haven't."

"Then who--where?" The cold currents at the base of Zen's back were
flowing down both legs and up his spine.

"Look at the men, colonel. Look closely." West's voice was also cold.

"They're Asiatics!" Shouting the words, Zen was out of his chair. "I
didn't see the yellow faces and the slanted eyes at first. West, that's
a huge guided missile. It's being built to drop out of the sky at
thousands of miles an hour, on us!"

"Yes," West said. He did not move a muscle in his body. On the other
side of Kurt Zen, Nedra sat equally silent and motionless.

"I have to get out of here," Zen said. "This information must be
reported to the general staff, at once!" Urgency pounded in the tones
of his voice.

"The new people do not fight," West said. "I thought you were one of
us."

"It doesn't matter who I am," Zen said quickly. "The building of this
super bomb must be reported. _It must be!_ Extra warnings must be
issued. We must alert every z-type fighter we possess and have them in
the air constantly, in the hope that we can destroy this bomb before
it lands. We've got to follow the construction hourly, so we will know
when it is ready to be launched. And that means we've got to have
top-flight intelligence men here, to follow the building of that bomb
every inch of the way. Or we've got to take this super-radar of yours
to headquarters and use it there. That's the best solution, if it is
at all practical." Zen was striding back and forth in the darkened
room, planning the steps that had to be taken.

"West, do you realize this super-radar of yours will win the war!"
Excitement tightened the colonel's voice. "With it, the enemy won't
be able to make a move that we don't know about in advance." His
excitement grew as the vast longing hidden in him for the end of the
war tried to come to the surface.

"You have tears in your eyes, colonel," West said.

"You're out of your mind," Zen retorted. But he knew the craggy man was
speaking the truth. He swallowed harder. "We've got the Asians cold.
We'll know every move they make in advance." He exulted as he realized
again how much this meant.

"I have always known every move they made in advance," West answered.

"We'll have them on their knees in--huh? What was that you just said?
What was that?" Desperation appeared in the colonel's voice.

West repeated his words.

"Then why didn't you warn us?" Zen felt each word sting as it left his
lips. "Why didn't you warn us? Why did you let so many of us die so
unnecessarily?"

West did not answer.

The silence in the room grew deeper. Cold had begun to appear in the
air. On the screen, the silent figures continued busily engaged in the
building of their bomb.

"Don't you realize that your failure to report what you knew is high
treason?" Zen continued.

The silence grew. West sat as solid and as immobile as a mountain.
Nedra seemed to have shrunk in upon herself still farther. More than
ever she looked like a very small girl who had somehow managed to
intrude into a world of adults and was tremendously confused and hurt
by what was happening here.

"Don't you hear me?" Zen said.

"I hear you," West answered. "Your loyalty to your country does you
credit, colonel. It is to be expected from a person in your stage
of development. However, you seem to have forgotten that I am not a
citizen of your country. Or perhaps you did not know this?"

"Not a citizen?" Zen said. "But this mountain exists in America.
I don't know whether it is actually on Canadian ground or lies in
the United States, but this does not matter. By mutual treaty, the
countries have become one nation. A citizen of one is automatically a
citizen of the other."

"True, colonel." West did not attempt to explain.

"Then what country do you claim to belong to?" Zen felt his voice
falter as he tried to grasp what lay back of this very strange man.
"You talk like an American."

"I was born here."

"Then you are a citizen."

"No. I resigned my citizenship. As to my real country, it is a far
land. I am sure you have no knowledge of it. My loyalty, colonel, is
not to any nation on the face of the globe, but is to--growth, to the
new people who will come into existence one day."

As West spoke, the cold that was freezing Zen's spine suddenly
disappeared and was replaced by a sudden deep warmth. The words seemed
to touch some hidden spring of warmth within him.

"My loyalty is to the future, to the growing tip of the life force,
to what the human race will become, not to what it is today. Only the
future has meaning, colonel, and to the building of that future I have
dedicated my life."

In spite of the fact that the words thrilled him, Zen knew he had to
deny them. "This is sophistry," he snapped. "I think any court in the
land would hold it to be evasion of your proper duties. You can't
continue living in a country and enjoying its ble--" Confusion came
into Zen's mind.

"Were you going to say _blessings_, colonel?" West said, almost
maliciously.

"Yes."

"Would you point out these blessings?"

"We had them once," Zen said. "And we're going to have them again."

"Are you?" West nodded toward the screen where the far-off enemy
technicians and engineers were busy with their super bomb.

"Now that we know that it exists, that bomb will never land," Zen said.
"I'll see to that personally."

"How are you going to discharge this responsibility?" West inquired.

"I'll find a way," Zen answered.

"I admire your spirit, colonel, though not necessarily your evaluation
of your personal position at this moment. Also, there is one other
thing that I want you to see."

The screen went blank. Slowly another scene formed on it. Zen, staring,
blurted out words.

"That's another one. They're making two of those super bombs. I didn't
think they had the materials and the technical know-how to make even
one! This doubles the problem, and more than doubles the urgency. We'll
have to guard the skyways from all directions, including straight up.
Damn it, West!" Zen slapped his fist into his open palm to emphasize
his feeling of urgency.

"Look again, colonel," the craggy man invited.

On second look Zen saw something that he had missed before. "Those are
Americans! We're building that bomb!" His words were little gusts of
explosive sound in the quiet room.

"Right," West said. His voice was very grim.

"Then it's a race to see which side gets its bomb built first?" Zen
asked. He did not know whether or not he liked what his eyes were
seeing and the interpretation his mind was giving him.

"I am afraid that is true," West reluctantly agreed. "But doesn't that
change the picture, colonel?"

"How?" Zen demanded. "We're going to win a war. We've got to win it."
The words were firmly spoken but somewhere a lingering doubt remained
as if some point had not been considered.

"The other side also thinks it has to win," West pointed out.

"To hell with what they think. They started it. We didn't. Man, you
don't intend to tell me that you are going to sit right here and watch
two nations frantically try to destroy each other--and maybe the Earth
with them--when you have the means to stop it in your hand?" Horror
exploded in Zen's words.

"I am going to do just that," West stated. His voice was as firm and as
solid as the granite core of a mountain.

"But you can't!" Zen expostulated.

"Why can't I?" West demanded. "I am not a citizen of either country and
I owe nothing to any nation."

"Even if you are not a citizen of either country, you're still a human
being. You owe loyalty to your own race," Zen said.

The craggy man showed faint signs of discomfort. But when he spoke, his
voice was still imperturbable. "Granting your statement, what do you
propose I do?"

"Stop the Asians," Zen answered promptly. "Give us complete information
on the location of their super-bomb. We'll make certain we get ours
finished first and we'll use it to blow their installation out of
existence." At the moment, his plan seemed feasible.

"That would create the very danger you are trying to avoid, would it
not?" West pointed out. "Both super bombs would explode simultaneously.
