aboard the aero I can make observations to determine our position, and I
shall steer for the Pike's Peak region."

When the party had become accustomed to their situation, and had gained
confidence in their craft by observing how buoyantly it bore them, they
became almost cheerful in their demeanor. The children gradually lost all
fear, and, with the thoughtless joy of childhood in the pleasures and
wonders of the present moment, amused themselves in the cabin, and about
the deck, which had been surrounded with guard lines made of wire cable.

The water was almost waveless, and, if no storm should arise, there
appeared to be no reason for anxiety concerning the outcome of their
adventure. But as they drove slowly on over the submerged range of the
Great Smokies, and across the valleys of Eastern Tennessee, and then over
the Cumberland range, and so out above the lowlands, they could not keep
their thoughts from turning to what lay beneath that fearful ocean. And
occasionally something floated to the surface that wrenched their
heart-strings and caused them to avert their faces.

Professor Pludder kept them informed of their location. Now they were over
central Tennessee; now Nashville lay more than three thousand feet beneath
their keel; now they were crossing the valley of the Tennessee River; now
the great Mississippi was under them, hidden deep beneath the universal
flood; now they were over the highlands of southern Missouri; and now over
those of Kansas.

"George," said Professor Pludder one day, addressing the President, with
more emotion than was often to be detected in his voice, "would you like
to know what is beneath us now?"

"What is it, Abiel?"

"Our boyhood home--Wichita."

The President bowed his head upon his hands and groaned.

"Yes," continued Professor Pludder musingly, "there it lies, three thousand
feet deep. There is the Arkansas, along whose banks we used to play, with
its golden waters now mingling feebly with the mighty flood that covers
them. There is the schoolhouse and the sandy road where we ran races
barefoot in the hot summer dust. There is your father's house, and mine,
and the homes of all our early friends--and where are _they?_ Would to God
that I had not been so blind!"

"But there was another not so blind," said the President, with something
of the condemnatory manner of his former speech.

"I know it--I know it too well now," returned the professor. "But do not
condemn me, George, for what I did not foresee and could not help."

"I am sorry," said the President sadly, "that you have awakened these old
memories. But I do not condemn you, though I condemn your science--or your
lack of science. But we can do nothing. Let us speak of it no more."

The weather was wonderful, considering what had so recently occurred. No
clouds formed in the sky, there was only a gentle breeze stirring, at
night the heavens glittered with starry gems, and by day the sun shone so
hotly that awnings were spread over those whose duties required them to be
employed outside the shelter of the cabin. The improvised propeller and
rudder worked to admiration, and some days they made as much as eighty
miles in the twenty-four hours.

At length, on the fourteenth day of their strange voyage, they caught
sight of a curiously shaped "pike" that projected above the horizon far to
the west. At the same time they saw, not far away toward the north and
toward the south, a low line, like a sea-beach.

"We are getting into shallow water now," said Professor Pludder. "I have
been following the course of the Arkansas in order to be sure of a
sufficient depth, but now we must be very careful. We are close to the
site of Las Animas, which is surrounded with land rising four thousand
feet above sea-level. If we should get aground there would be no hope for
us. That pike in the distance is Pike's Peak."

"And what is that long line of beach that stretches on the north and
south?" asked the President.

"It is the topographic line of four thousand feet," replied the
professor.

"And we shall encounter it ahead?"

"Yes, it makes a curve about Las Animas, and then the land lies at an
average elevation of four thousand feet, until it takes another rise
beyond Pueblo."

"But we cannot sail across this half-submerged area," said the President.

"There are depressions," Professor Pludder responded, "and I hope to be
able to follow their traces until we reach land that still lies well
above the water."

Near nightfall they got so close to the "beach" that they could hear the
surf, not a thundering sound, but a soft, rippling wash of the slight
waves. The water about them was ruddy with thick sediment. Professor
Pludder did not dare to venture farther in the coming darkness, and he
dropped overboard two of the aero's grapples, which he had heavily
weighted and attached to wire cables. They took the ground at a depth of
only ten feet. There was no wind and no perceptible current, and so they
rode all night at anchor off this strangest of coasts.

At daybreak they lifted their anchors, and went in search of the
depressions of which the professor had spoken. So accurate was his
topographic knowledge and so great his skill, that late in the afternoon
they saw a tall chimney projecting above the water a little ahead.

"There's all that remains of Pueblo," said Professor Pludder.

They anchored again that night, and the next day, cautiously approaching
a bluff that arose precipitously from the water, their hearts were
gladdened by the sight of three men, standing on a bluff, excitedly
beckoning to them, and shouting at the top of their voices.




CHAPTER XVI

MUTINY IN THE ARK


We left Cosmo Versal and his arkful of the flower of mankind in the midst
of what was formerly the Atlantic Ocean, but which had now expanded over
so many millions of square miles that had once been the seats of vast
empires that to an eye looking at it with a telescope from Mars it would
have been unrecognizable.

All of eastern North America, all of South America to the feet of the
Andes, all but the highest mountains of Europe, nearly all of Africa,
except some of the highlands of the south, all of northern and
southwestern Asia, as well as the peninsula of India, all of China and
the adjacent lands and islands except the lofty peaks, the whole of
Australia, and the archipelagoes of the Pacific, had become parts of the
floor of a mighty ocean which rolled unbroken from pole to pole.

The Great Deep had resumed its ancient reign, and what was left of the
habitable globe presented to view only far separated islands and the
serrated tops of such ranges as the Alps, the Caucasus, the Himalayas,
and the Andes. The astonished inhabitants of the ocean depths now swam
over the ruins of great cities, and brushed with their fins the chiseled
capitals of columns that had supported the proudest structures of human
hands.

We have seen how the unexpected arrest of the flood had left Cosmo
uncertain as to the course that he ought to pursue. But he did not long
remain in doubt. He was sure that the downpour would be resumed after an
interval which at the most could not exceed a few weeks, and he resolved
to continue his way toward the future land of promise in Asia.

But he thought that he would have time to turn his prow in the direction
of Europe, for he felt a great desire to know by actual inspection to what
height the water had attained. He was certain that it could not be less
than he had estimated--the indications of his rain-gage had been too
unvarying to admit of doubt on that point--but he had no means of direct
measurement since he could not sound the tremendous depths beneath the
Ark.

After long meditation on the probable effects of the descending columns of
water which he had seen, he concluded that they might have added more
rapidly than he first supposed to the increase of the general level.
Besides, he reflected that there was no proof that the general downpour
might not have been greater over some parts of the earth than others. All
these doubts could be dissipated if he could get a good look at some lofty
mountain range, such as the Sierra Nevada of Spain, or the Pyrenees, or,
if he could venture within sight of them, the Alps.

So he said to Captain Arms:

"Steer for the coast of Europe."

The fine weather had produced a good effect upon the spirits of the
company. Not only were the ports and the gangways all open, but Cosmo
ordered the temporary removal of rows of adjustable plates on the sides of
the vessel, which transformed the broad outer gangways, running its whole
length, into delightful promenade decks. There, in cozy chairs, and
protected with rugs, the passengers sat, fanned by a refreshing breeze,
and dazzled by the splendor of the ocean.

They recalled, by their appearance, a shipload of summer tourists bound
for the wonders and pleasures of foreign parts. This likeness to a
pleasure cruise was heightened by the constant attentions of the crew,
under Cosmo's orders, who carried about refreshing drinks and lunches,
and conducted themselves like regular ocean "stewards."

It seemed impossible to believe that the world had been drowned, and some
almost persuaded themselves that the whole thing was a dream.

It must not be supposed that the thousand-odd persons who composed this
remarkable ship's company were so hard-hearted, so selfish, so forgetful,
so morally obtuse, that they never thought of the real horror of their
situation, and of the awful calamity that had overwhelmed so many millions
of their fellow-creatures. They thought of all that only too seriously
and in spite of themselves. The women especially were overwhelmed by it.
But they did not wish to dwell upon it, and Cosmo Versal did not wish that
they should.

At night he had musicians play in the grand saloon; he distributed books
among the passengers from a large library which he had selected; and at
last he had the stage set, and invited his friends, the players, to
entertain the company.

But he would have no plays but those of Shakespeare.

There were, probably, not half a dozen persons in the Ark who had ever
seen representations of these great dramas, and very few who had read them,
so that they had the advantage of complete novelty.

The play selected for the first representation was the tragedy of "King
Lear," a strange choice, it would, at first sight, seem, but Cosmo Versal
had a deep knowledge of human nature. He knew that only tragedy would be
endured there, and that it must be tragedy so profound and overmastering
that it would dominate the feelings of those who heard and beheld it. It
was the principle of immunizing therapeutics, where poison paralyzes
poison.

It came out as he anticipated. The audience, unused to such depth of
dramatic passion, for the plays to which they had been accustomed had been
far from the Shakespearian standard, was wholly absorbed in the
development of the tragedy. It was a complete revelation to them, and they
were carried out of themselves, and found in the sympathy awakened by this
heart-crushing spectacle of the acme of human woe an unconscious solace for
 their own moral anguish.

Afterward Cosmo put upon the stage "Hamlet," and "Othello," and "Macbeth,"
and "Coriolanus," and "Julius Caesar," but he avoided, for the present, the
less tragic dramas. And all of them, being new to the hearers, produced an
enormous effect.

On alternate nights he substituted music for the drama, and, as this was
confined to the most majestic productions of the great masters of the past,
many of whose works, like those of Shakespeare, had long been neglected if
not forgotten, their power over the spirits of the company was, perhaps,
even more pronounced.

Cosmo Versal was already beginning the education of his chosen band of
race regenerators, while he mused upon the wonders that the science of
eugenics would achieve after the world should have reemerged from the
waters.

One of the most singular effects of the music was that produced upon the
insane billionaire, Amos Blank. He had been confined in the room that
Cosmo had assigned to him, and was soothed, whenever Cosmo could find time
to visit him, with pretended acquiescence in his crazed notion that the
trip of the Ark was part of a scheme to "corner" the resources of the
world.

Cosmo persuaded him that the secret was unknown except to themselves, and
that it was essential to success that he (Blank) should remain in
retirement, and accordingly the latter expressed no desire to leave his
place of imprisonment, which he regarded as the headquarters of the
combination, passing hours in covering sheets of paper with columns of
figures, which he fancied represented the future profits of the
enterprise.

One night when a symphony of Beethoven was to be played, Cosmo led Amos
Blank through the crowded saloon and placed him near the musicians. He
resisted at first, and when he saw the crowd he drew back, exclaiming:

"What? Not overboard yet?"

But Cosmo soothed him with some whispered promise, and he took his seat,
glancing covertly around him. Then the instruments struck up, and
immediately fixed his attention. As the musical theme developed his eyes
gradually lost their wild look, and a softened expression took its place.
He sank lower in his seat, and rested his head upon his hand. His whole
soul seemed, at last, to be absorbed in the music. When it was finished
Blank was a changed man.

Then Cosmo clearly explained to him all that had happened.

After the first overwhelming effect of his reawakening to the realities
of his situation had passed, the billionaire was fully restored to all
his faculties. Henceforth he mingled with the other passengers and, as if
the change that had come over his spirit had had greater results than the
simple restoration of sanity, he became one of the most popular and useful
members of Cosmo Versal's family of pilgrims.

Among the other intellectual diversions which Cosmo provided was something
quite unique, due to his own mental bias. This consisted of "conferences,"
held in the grand saloon, afternoons, in the presence of the entire
company, at which the principal speakers were his two "speculative
geniuses," Costake Theriade and Sir Wilfrid Athelstone. They did not care
very much for one another and each thought that the time allotted to the
other was wasted.

Theriade wished to talk continuously of the infinite energy stored up in
the atoms of matter, and of the illimitable power which the release of
that energy, by the system that he had all but completed, would place at
the disposition of man; and at the same time Sir Athelstone could with
difficulty be held in leash while he impatiently awaited an opportunity to
explain how excessively near he had arrived to the direct production of
protoplasm from inanimate matter, and the chemical control of living cells,
so that henceforth man could people or unpeople the earth as he liked.

One evening, when everybody not on duty was in bed, Captain Arms, with his
whiskers fairly bristling, entered Cosmo's cabin, where the latter was
dictating to Joseph Smith, and softly approaching his chief, with a furtive
glance round the room, stooped and whispered something in his ear. A
startled, though incredulous, expression appeared on Cosmo's face, and he
sprang to his feet, but before speaking he obeyed a sign from the captain
and told Smith to leave the room. Then he locked the door and returned to
his table, where he dropped into a chair, exclaiming in a guarded voice:

"Great Heaven, can this be possible! Have you not made a mistake?"

"No," returned the captain in a stridulous whisper, "I have made no
mistake. I'm absolutely sure. If something is not done instantly we are
lost!"

"This is terrible!" returned Cosmo, taking his head in his hands. "You
say it is that fellow Campo? I never liked his looks."

"He is the ringleader," replied the captain. "The first suspicion of what
he was up to came to me through an old sailor who has been with me on many
a voyage. He overheard Campo talking with another man and he listened.
Trust an old sea dog to use his ears and keep himself out of notice."

"And what did they say?"

"Enough to freeze the marrow in your bones! Campo proposed to begin by
throwing 'old Versal' and me into the sea, and then he said, with us gone,
and nobody but a lot of muddle-headed scientists to deal with, it would be
easy to take the ship; seize all the treasure in her; make everybody who
would not join the mutiny walk the plank, except the women, and steer for
some place where they could land and lead a jolly life.

"'You see,' says Campo, 'this flood is a fake. There ain't going to be no
more flood; it's only a shore wash. But there's been enough of it to fix
things all right for us. We've got the world in our fist! There's millions
of money aboard this ship, and there's plenty of female beauty, and we've
only got to reach out and take it.'"

Cosmo Versal's brow darkened as he listened, and a look that would have
cowed the mutineers if they could have seen it came into his eyes. His
hand nervously clutched a paper-knife which broke in his grasp, as he said
in a voice trembling with passion:

"They don't _know_ me--_you_ don't know me. Show me the proofs of this
conspiracy. Who are the others? Campo and his friend can't be alone."

"Alone!" exclaimed the captain, unconsciously raising his voice. "There's
a dozen as black-handed rascals in it as ever went unswung."

"Do you know them?"

"Jim Waters does."

"Why haven't you told me sooner? How long has it been going on?"

"Almost ever since the deluge stopped, I think; but it was only last night
that Waters got on the track of it, and only now that he told me. This
fellow that Waters heard Campo talking to is plainly a new recruit. I say
there are a dozen, because Waters has found out that number; but I don't
know but that there may be a hundred."

"How did these wretches get aboard?" demanded Cosmo, fiercely opening and
shutting his fists.

"Excuse me," said the captain, "but that is up to you to say."

"So it is," replied Cosmo, with a grim look; "and it's 'up to me' to say
