it would fill her dear old heart with pride and pleasure to feel that
anyone cared to learn of her, for she fancies her day gone by. Let
her teach you how to be what she has been a skilful, frugal, cheerful
housewife; the maker and the keeper of a happy home, and by and by you
will see what a valuable lesson it is."

"I will, uncle. But how shall I begin?"

"I'll speak to her about it, and she will make it all right with Dolly,
for cooking is one of the main things, you know."

"So it is! I don't mind that a bit, for I like to mess, and used to try
at home; but I had no one to tell me, so I never did much but spoil my
aprons. Pies are great fun, only Dolly is so cross, I don't believe she
will ever let me do a thing in the kitchen."

"Then we'll cook in the parlour. I fancy Aunt Plenty will manage her,
so don't be troubled. Only mind this, I'd rather you learned how to make
good bread than the best pies ever baked. When you bring me a handsome,
wholesome loaf, entirely made by yourself, I shall be more pleased than
if you offered me a pair of slippers embroidered in the very latest
style. I don't wish to bribe you, but I'll give you my heartiest kiss,
and promise to eat every crumb of the loaf myself."

"It's a bargain! it's a bargain! Come and tell aunty all about it, for
I'm in a hurry to begin," cried Rose, dancing before him toward the
parlor, where Miss Plenty sat alone knitting contentedly, yet ready to
run at the first call for help of any sort, from any quarter.

No need to tell how surprised and gratified she was at the invitation
she received to teach the child the domestic arts which were her only
accomplishments, nor to relate how energetically she set about her
pleasant task. Dolly dared not grumble, for Miss Plenty was the one
person whom she obeyed, and Phebe openly rejoiced, for these new lessons
brought Rose nearer to her, and glorified the kitchen in the good girl's
eyes.

To tell the truth, the elder aunts had sometimes felt that they did not
have quite their share of the little niece who had won their hearts long
ago, and was the sunshine of the house. They talked it over together
sometimes, but always ended by saying that as Alec had all the
responsibility, he should have the larger share of the dear girl's love
and time, and they would be contented with such crumbs of comfort as
they could get.

Dr. Alec had found out this little secret, and, after reproaching
himself for being blind and selfish, was trying to devise some way of
mending matters without troubling anyone, when Rose's new whim suggested
an excellent method of weaning her a little from himself. He did not
know how fond he was of her till he gave her up to the new teacher, and
often could not resist peeping in at the door to see how she got on,
or stealing sly looks through the slide when she was deep in dough, or
listening intently to some impressive lecture from Aunt Plenty. They
caught him at it now and then, and ordered him off the premises at the
point of the rolling-pin; or, if unusually successful, and, therefore,
in a milder mood, they lured him away with bribes of ginger-bread, a
stray pickle, or a tart that was not quite symmetrical enough to suit
their critical eyes.

Of course he made a point of partaking copiously of all the delectable
messes that now appeared at table, for both the cooks were on their
mettle, and he fared sumptuously every day. But an especial relish
was given to any dish when, in reply to his honest praise of it, Rose
coloured up with innocent pride, and said modestly,

"I made that, uncle, and I'm glad you like it."

It was some time before the perfect loaf appeared, for bread-making
is an art not easily learned, and Aunt Plenty was very thorough in her
teaching; so Rose studied yeast first, and through various stages of
cake and biscuit came at last to the crowning glory of the "handsome,
wholesome loaf." It appeared at tea-time, on a silver salver, proudly
borne in by Phebe, who could not refrain from whispering, with a beaming
face, as she set it down before Dr. Alec,

"Ain't it just lovely, sir?"

"It is a regularly splendid loaf! Did my girl make it all herself?" he
asked, surveying the shapely, sweet-smelling object with real interest
and pleasure.

"Every particle herself, and never asked a bit of help or advice
from anyone," answered Aunt Plenty, folding her hands with an air of
unmitigated satisfaction, for her pupil certainly did her great credit.

"I've had so many failures and troubles that I really thought I never
should be able to do it alone. Dolly let one splendid batch burn up
because I forgot it. She was there and smelt it, but never did a thing,
for she said, when I undertook to bake bread I must give my whole mind
to it. Wasn't it hard? She might have called me at least," said Rose,
recollecting, with a sigh, the anguish of that moment.

"She meant you should learn by experience, as Rosamond did in that
little affair of the purple jar, you remember."

"I always thought it very unfair in her mother not to warn the poor
thing a little bit; and she was regularly mean when Rosamond asked for a
bowl to put the purple stuff in, and she said, in such a provoking way,
'I did not agree to lend you a bowl, but I will, my dear.' Ugh! I always
want to shake that hateful woman, though she was a moral mamma."

"Never mind her now, but tell me all about my loaf," said Dr. Alec, much
amused at Rose's burst of indignation.

"There's nothing to tell, uncle, except that I did my best, gave my mind
to it, and sat watching over it all the while it was in the oven till I
was quite baked myself. Everything went right this time, and it came out
a nice, round, crusty loaf, as you see. Now taste it, and tell me if it
is good as well as handsome."

"Must I cut it? Can't I put it under a glass cover and keep it in the
parlor as they do wax flowers and fine works of that sort?"

"What an idea, uncle! It would mould and be spoilt. Besides, people
would laugh at us, and make fun of my old-fashioned accomplishment. You
promised to eat it, and you must; not all at once, but as soon as you
can, so I can make you some more."

Dr. Alec solemnly cut off his favourite crusty slice, and solemnly ate
it; then wiped his lips, and brushing back Rose's hair, solemnly kissed
her on the forehead, saying, heartily,

"My dear, it is perfect bread, and you are an honour to your teacher.
When we have our model school I shall offer a prize for the best bread,
and you will get it."

"I've got it already, and I'm quite satisfied," said Rose, slipping into
her seat, and trying to hide her right hand which had a burn on it.

But Dr. Alec saw it, guessed how it came there, and after tea insisted
on easing the pain which she would hardly confess.

"Aunt Clara says I am spoiling my hands, but I don't care, for I've had
such good times with Aunt Plenty, and I think she has enjoyed it as
much as I have. Only one thing troubles me, uncle, and I want to ask
you about it," said Rose, as they paced up and down the hall in the
twilight, the bandaged hand very carefully laid on Dr. Alec's arm.

"More little confidences? I like them immensely, so tell away, my dear."

"Well, you see I feel as if Aunt Peace would like to do something for
me, and I've found out what it can be. You know she can't go about like
Aunty Plen, and we are so busy nowadays that she is rather lonely,
I'm afraid. So I want to take lessons in sewing of her. She works so
beautifully, and it is a useful thing, you know, and I ought to be a
good needlewoman as well as housekeeper, oughtn't I?"

"Bless your kind little heart, that is what I was thinking of the other
day when Aunt Peace said she saw you very seldom now, you were so busy I
wanted to speak of it, but fancied you had as much on your hands as
you could manage. It would delight the dear woman to teach you all her
delicate handicraft, especially button-holes, for I believe that is
where young ladies fail; at least, I've heard them say so. So, do you
devote your mind to button-holes; make 'em all over my clothes if you
want something to practice on. I'll wear any quantity."

Rose laughed at this reckless offer, but promised to attend to that
important branch, though she confessed that darning was her weak point.
Whereupon Uncle Alec engaged to supply her with socks in all stages of
dilapidation, and to have a new set at once, so that she could run the
heels for him as a pleasant beginning.

Then they went up to make their request in due form, to the great
delight of gentle Aunt Peace, who got quite excited with the fun that
went on while they would yarn, looked up darning needles, and fitted out
a nice little mending basket for her pupil.

Very busy and very happy were Rose's days now, for in the morning she
went about the house with Aunt Plenty attending to linen-closets and
store-rooms, pickling and preserving, exploring garret and cellar to see
that all was right, and learning, in the good old-fashioned manner, to
look well after the ways of the household.

In the afternoon, after her walk or drive, she sat with Aunt Peace
plying her needle, while Aunt Plenty, whose eyes were failing, knitted
and chatted briskly, telling many a pleasant story of old times, till
the three were moved to laugh and cry together, for the busy needles
were embroidering all sorts of bright patterns on the lives of the
workers, though they seemed to be only stitching cotton and darning
hose.

It was a pretty sight to see the rosy-faced little maid sitting between
the two old ladies, listening dutifully to their instructions, and
cheering the lessons with her lively chatter and blithe laugh. If the
kitchen had proved attractive to Dr. Alec when Rose was there at work,
the sewing-room was quite irresistible, and he made himself so agreeable
that no one had the heart to drive him away, especially when he read
aloud or spun yarns.

"There! I've made you a new set of warm night-gowns with four
button-holes in each. See if they are not neatly done," said Rose, one
day, some weeks after the new lessons began.

"Even to a thread, and nice little bars across the end so I can't tear
them when I twitch the buttons out. Most superior work, ma'am, and I'm
deeply grateful; so much so, that I'll sew on these buttons myself, and
save those tired fingers from another prick."

"You sew them on?" cried Rose, with her eyes wide open in amazement.

"Wait a bit till I get my sewing tackle, and then you shall see what I
can do."

"Can he, really?" asked Rose of Aunt Peace, as Uncle Alec marched off
with a comical air of importance.

"Oh, yes, I taught him years ago, before he went to sea; and I suppose
he has had to do things for himself, more or less, ever since; so he has
kept his hand in."

He evidently had, for he was soon back with a funny little work-bag, out
of which he produced a thimble without a top; and, having threaded his
needle, he proceeded to sew on the buttons so handily that Rose was much
impressed and amused.

"I wonder if there is anything in the world that you cannot do," she
said, in a tone of respectful admiration.

"There are one or two things that I am not up to yet," he answered,
with a laugh in the corner of his eye, as he waxed his thread with a
flourish.

"I should like to know what?"

"Bread and button-holes, ma'am."



Chapter 17--Good Bargains

It was a rainy Sunday afternoon, and four boys were trying to spend it
quietly in the "liberry," as Jamie called the room devoted to books and
boys, at Aunt Jessie's. Will and Geordie were sprawling on the sofa,
deep in the adventures of the scapegraces and ragamuffins whose
histories are now the fashion. Archie lounged in the easy chair,
surrounded by newspapers; Charlie stood upon the rug, in an Englishman's
favourite attitude, and, I regret to say, both were smoking cigars.

"It is my opinion that this day will never come to an end," said Prince,
with a yawn that nearly rent him asunder.

"Read and improve your mind, my son," answered Archie, peering solemnly
over the paper behind which he had been dozing.

"Don't you preach, parson, but put on your boots and come out for a
tramp, instead of mulling over the fire like a granny."

"No, thank you, tramps in an easterly storm don't strike me as amusing."
There Archie stopped and held up his hand, for a pleasant voice was
heard saying outside,

"Are the boys in the library, auntie?"

"Yes, dear, and longing for sunshine; so run in and make it for them,"
answered Mrs. Jessie.

"It's Rose," and Archie threw his cigar into the fire.

"What's that for?" asked Charlie.

"Gentlemen don't smoke before ladies."

"True; but I'm not going to waste my weed," and Prince poked his into
the empty inkstand that served them for an ash tray.

A gentle tap at the door was answered by a chorus of "Come in," and Rose
appeared, looking blooming and breezy with the chilly air.

"If I disturb you, say so, and I'll go away," she began, pausing on the
threshold with modest hesitation, for something in the elder boys' faces
excited her curiosity.

"You never disturb us, cousin," said the smokers, while the readers tore
themselves from the heroes of the bar-room and gutter long enough to nod
affably to their guest.

As Rose bent to warm her hands, one end of Archie's cigar stuck out of
the ashes, smoking furiously and smelling strongly.

"Oh, you bad boys, how could you do it, to-day of all days?" she said
reproachfully.

"Where's the harm?" asked Archie.

"You know as well as I do; your mother doesn't like it, and it's a bad
habit, for it wastes money and does you no good."

"Fiddlesticks! every man smokes, even Uncle Alec, whom you think so
perfect," began Charlie, in his teasing way.

"No, he doesn't! He has given it up, and I know why," cried Rose
eagerly.

"Now I think of it, I haven't seen the old meerschaum since he came
home. Did he stop it on our account?" asked Archie.

"Yes," and Rose told the little scene on the seashore in the camping-out
time.

Archie seemed much impressed, and said manfully, "He won't have done
that in vain so far as I'm concerned. I don't care a pin about smoking,
so can give it up as easy as not, and I promise you I will. I only do it
now and then for fun."

"You too?" and Rose looked up at the bonny Prince, who never looked less
bonny than at that moment, for he had resumed his cigar just to torment
her.

Now Charlie cared as little as Archie about smoking, but it would not
do to yield too soon: so he shook his head, gave a great puff, and said
loftily,

"You women are always asking us to give up harmless little things just
because you don't approve of them. How would you like it if we did the
same by you, miss?"

"If I did harmful or silly things, I'd thank you for telling me of them,
and I'd try to mend my ways," answered Rose heartily.

"Well, now, we'll see if you mean what you say. I'll give up smoking to
please you, if you will give up something to please me," said Prince,
seeing a good chance to lord it over the weaker vessel at small cost to
himself.

"I'll agree if it is as foolish as cigars."

"Oh, it's ever so much sillier."

"Then I promise; what is it?" and Rose quite trembled with anxiety to
know which of her pet habits or possessions she must lose.

"Give up your ear-rings," and Charlie laughed wickedly, sure that she
would never hold to that bargain.

Rose uttered a cry and clapped both hands to her ears where the gold
rings hung.

"Oh, Charlie, wouldn't anything else do as well? I've been through so
much teasing and trouble, I do want to enjoy my pretty ear-rings, for I
can wear them now."

"Wear as many as you like, and I'll smoke in peace," returned this bad
boy.

"Will nothing else satisfy you?" imploringly.

"Nothing," sternly.

Rose stood silent for a minute, thinking of something Aunt Jessie once
said "You have more influence over the boys than you know; use it for
their good, and I shall thank you all my life." Here was a chance to
do some good by sacrificing a little vanity of her own. She felt it was
right to do it, yet found it very hard, and asked wistfully,

"Do you mean never wear them, Charlie?"

"Never, unless you want me to smoke."

"I never do."

"Then clinch the bargain."

He had no idea she would do it, and was much surprised when she took
the dear rings from her ears, with a quick gesture, and held them out to
him, saying, in a tone that made the colour come up to his brown cheek,
it was so full of sweet good will,

"I care more for my cousins than for my ear-rings, so I promise, and
I'll keep my word."

"For shame, Prince! let her wear her little danglers if she likes, and
don't bargain about doing what you know is right," cried Archie, coming
out of his grove of newspapers with an indignant bounce.

But Rose was bent on showing her aunt that she could use her influence
for the boys' good, and said steadily,

"It is fair, and I want it to be so, then you will believe I'm in
earnest. Here, each of you wear one of these on your watch-guard
to remind you. I shall not forget, because very soon I cannot wear
ear-rings if I want to."

As she spoke, Rose offered a little ring to each cousin, and the boys,
seeing how sincere she was, obeyed her. When the pledges were safe, Rose
stretched a hand to each, and the lads gave hers a hearty grip, half
pleased and half ashamed of their part in the compact.

Just at that moment Dr. Alec and Mrs. Jessie came in.

"What's this? Dancing Ladies' Triumph on Sunday?" exclaimed Uncle Alec,
surveying the trio with surprise.

"No, sir, it is the Anti-Tobacco League. Will you join?" said Charlie,
while Rose slipped away to her aunt, and Archie buried both cigars
behind the back log.

When the mystery was explained, the elders were well pleased, and Rose
received a vote of thanks, which made her feel as if she had done a
service to her country, as she had, for every boy who grows up free from
bad habits bids fair to make a good citizen.

"I wish Rose would drive a bargain with Will and Geordie also, for I
think these books are as bad for the small boys as cigars for the large
ones," said Mrs. Jessie, sitting down on the sofa between the readers,
who politely curled up their legs to make room for her.

"I thought they were all the fashion," answered Dr. Alec, settling in
the big chair with Rose.

"So is smoking, but it is harmful. The writers of these popular stories
intend to do good, I have no doubt, but it seems to me they fail because
their motto is, 'Be smart, and you will be rich,' instead of 'Be honest,
and you will be happy.' I do not judge hastily, Alec, for I have read a
dozen, at least, of these stories, and, with much that is attractive to
boys, I find a great deal to condemn in them, and other parents say the
same when I ask them."

"Now, Mum, that's too bad! I like 'em tip-top. This one is a regular
screamer," cried Will.

"They're bully books, and I'd like to know where's the harm," added
Geordie.

"You have just shown us one of the chief evils, and that is slang,"
answered their mother quickly.

"Must have it, ma'am. If these chaps talked all right, there'd be no fun
in 'em," protested Will.

"A boot-black mustn't use good grammar, and a newsboy must swear a
little, or he wouldn't be natural," explained Geordie, both boys ready
to fight gallantly for their favourites.

