time he babbled her whole story. The girls got hold of it and gibed her
at the fountain.

All she had gone through was light to her, compared with the pins and
bodkins her own sex drove into her heart, whenever she came near the
merry crew with her pitcher, and that was every day. Each sex has its
form of cruelty; man's is more brutal and terrible; but shallow women,
that have neither read nor suffered, have an unmuscular barbarity of
their own (where no feeling of sex steps in to overpower it). This
defect, intellectual perhaps rather than moral, has been mitigated in
our day by books, especially by able works of fiction; for there are
two roads to the highest effort of intelligence, Pity; Experience of
sorrows, and Imagination, by which alone we realize the grief we
never felt. In the fifteenth century girls with pitchers had but one;
Experience; and at sixteen years of age or so, that road had scarce been
trodden. These girls persisted that Margaret was deserted by her lover.
And to be deserted was a crime (They had not been deserted yet.) Not a
word against the Gerard they had created out of their own heads. For the
imaginary crime they fell foul of the supposed victim. Sometimes they
affronted her to her face. Oftener they talked at her backwards and
forwards with a subtle skill, and a perseverance which, "oh, that they
had bestowed on the arts," as poor Aguecheek says.

Now Margaret was brave, and a coward; brave to battle difficulties and
ill fortune; brave to shed her own blood for those she loved. Fortitude
she had. But she had no true fighting courage. She was a powerful young
woman, rather tall, full, and symmetrical; yet had one of those slips
of girls slapped her face, the poor fool's hands would have dropped
powerless, or gone to her own eyes instead of her adversary's. Nor was
she even a match for so many tongues; and besides, what could she say?
She knew nothing of these girls, except that somehow they had found out
her sorrows, and hated her; only she thought to herself they must be
very happy, or they would not be so hard on her.

So she took their taunts in silence; and all her struggle was not to let
them see their power to make her writhe within.

Here came in her fortitude; and she received their blows with
well-feigned, icy hauteur. They slapped a statue.

But one day, when her spirits were weak, as happens at times to females
in her condition, a dozen assailants followed suit so admirably, that
her whole sex seemed to the dispirited one to be against her, and she
lost heart, and the tears began to run silently at each fresh stab.

On this their triumph knew no bounds, and they followed her half way
home casting barbed speeches.

After that exposure of weakness the statue could be assumed no more. So
then she would stand timidly aloof out of tongue-shot, till her young
tyrants' pitchers were all filled, and they gone; and then creep up with
hers. And one day she waited so long that the fount had ceased to flow.
So the next day she was obliged to face the phalanx, or her house go
dry. She drew near slowly, but with the less tremor, that she saw a
man at the well talking to them. He would distract their attention, and
besides, they would keep their foul tongues quiet if only to blind
the male to their real character. This conjecture, though shrewd, was
erroneous. They could not all flirt with that one man; so the outsiders
indemnified themselves by talking at her the very moment she came up.

"Any news from foreign parts, Jacqueline?"

"None for me, Martha. My lad goes no farther from me than the town
wall."

"I can't say as much," says a third.

"But if he goes t' Italy I have got another ready to take the fool's
place."

"He'll not go thither, lass. They go not so far till they are sick of us
that bide in Holland."

Surprise and indignation, and the presence of a man, gave Margaret a
moment's fighting courage.

"Oh, flout me not, and show your ill nature before the very soldier. In
Heaven's name, what ill did I ever to ye? what harsh word cast back, for
all you have flung on me, a desolate stranger in your cruel town,
that ye flout me for my bereavement and my poor lad's most unwilling
banishment? Hearts of flesh would surely pity us both, for that ye cast
in my teeth these many days, ye brows of brass, ye bosoms of stone."

They stared at this novelty, resistance; and ere they could recover and
make mincement of her, she put her pitcher quietly down, and threw her
coarse apron over her head, and stood there grieving, her short-lived
spirit oozing fast. "Hallo!" cried the soldier, "why, what is your ill?"
She made no reply. But a little girl, who had long secretly hated the
big ones, squeaked out, "They did flout her, they are aye flouting her;
she may not come nigh the fountain for fear o' them, and 'tis a black
shame."

"Who spoke to her! Not I for one."

"Nor I. I would not bemean myself so far."

The man laughed heartily at this display of dignity. "Come, wife," said
he, "never lower thy flag to such light skirmishers as these. Hast a
tongue i' thy head as well as they."

"Alack, good soldier, I was not bred to bandy foul terms."

"Well, but hast a better arm than these. Why not take 'em by twos across
thy knee, and skelp 'em till they cry Meculpee?"

"Nay, I would not hurt their bodies for all their cruel hearts."

"Then ye must e'en laugh at them, wife. What! a woman grown, and not
see why mesdames give tongue? You are a buxom wife; they are a bundle of
thread-papers. You are fair and fresh; they have all the Dutch rim under
their bright eyes, that comes of dwelling in eternal swamps. There lies
your crime. Come, gie me thy pitcher, and if they flout me, shalt see
me scrub 'em all wi' my beard till they squeak holy mother." The
pitcher was soon filled, and the soldier put it in Margaret's hand. She
murmured, "Thank you kindly, brave soldier."

He patted her on the shoulder. "Come, courage, brave wife; the divell
is dead!" She let the heavy pitcher fall on his foot directly. He cursed
horribly, and hopped in a circle, saying, "No, the Thief's alive and has
broken my great toe."

The apron came down, and there was a lovely face all flushed with'
emotion, and two beaming eyes in front of him, and two hands held out
clasped.

"Nay, nay, 'tis nought," said he good-humouredly, mistaking.

"Denys?"

"Well?--But--Hallo! How know you my name is--"

"Denys of Burgundy!"

"Why, ods bodikins! I know you not, and you know me."

"By Gerard's letter. Crossbow! beard! handsome! The divell is dead."

"Sword of Goliah! this must be she. Red hair, violet eyes, lovely face.
But I took ye for a married wife, seeing ye---"

"Tell me my name," said she quickly.

"Margaret Brandt."

"Gerard? Where is he? Is he in life? Is he well? Is he coming? Is he
come? Why is he not here? Where have ye left him? Oh tell me! prithee,
prithee, prithee, tell me!"

"Ay, ay, but not here. Oh, ye are all curiosity now, mesdames, eh? Lass,
I have been three months a-foot travelling all Holland to find ye,
and here you are. Oh, be joyful!" and he flung his cap in the air, and
seizing both her hands kissed them ardently. "Ah, my pretty she-comrade,
I have found thee at last. I knew I should. Shall be flouted no more.
I'll twist your necks at the first word, ye little trollops. And I have
got fifteen gold angels left for thee, and our Gerard will soon be here.
Shalt wet thy purple eyes no more."

But the fair eyes were wet even now, looking kindly and gratefully at
the friend that had dropped among her foes as if from heaven; Gerard's
comrade. "Prithee come home with me good, kind Denys. I cannot speak of
him before these." They went off together, followed by a chorus. "She
has gotten a man. She has gotten a man at last. Boo! boo! boo!"

Margaret quickened her steps; but Denys took down his crossbow and
pretended to shoot them all dead: they fled quadrivious, shrieking.



CHAPTER LI

The reader already knows how much these two had to tell one another.
It was a sweet yet bitter day for Margaret, since it brought her a true
friend, and ill news; for now first she learned that Gerard was all
alone in that strange land. She could not think with Denys that he would
come home; indeed he would have arrived before this.

Denys was a balm. He called her his she-comrade, and was always cheering
her up with his formula and hilarities, and she petted him and made
much of him, and feebly hectored it over him as well as over Martin, and
would not let him eat a single meal out of her house, and forbade him to
use naughty words. "It spoils you, Denys. Good lack, to hear such ugly
words come forth so comely a head: forbear, or I shall be angry: so be
civil." Whereupon Denys was upon his good behaviour, and ludicrous the
struggle between his native politeness and his acquired ruffianism. And
as it never rains but it pours, other persons now solicited Margaret's
friendship. She had written to Margaret Van Eyck a humble letter telling
her she knew she was no longer the favourite she had been, and would
keep her distance; but could not forget her benefactress's past
kindness. She then told her briefly how many ways she had battled for a
living, and in conclusion, begged earnestly that her residence might not
be betrayed, "least of all to his people. I do hate them, they drove
him from me. And even when he was gone, their hearts turned not to me as
they would an if they had repented their cruelty to him."

The Van Eyck was perplexed. At last she made a confidante of Reicht. The
secret ran through Reicht, as through a cylinder, to Catherine.

"Ay, and is she turned that bitter against us?" said that good woman.
"She stole our son from us, and now she hates us for not running into
her arms. Natheless it is a blessing she is alive and no farther away
than Rotterdam."

The English princess, now Countess Charolois, made a stately
progress through the northern states of the duchy, accompanied by her
stepdaughter the young heiress of Burgundy, Marie de Bourgogne. Then the
old duke, the most magnificent prince in Europe, put out his splendour.
Troops of dazzling knights, and bevies of fair ladies gorgeously
attired, attended the two princesses; and minstrels, jongleurs, or
story-tellers, bards, musicians, actors, tumblers followed in the train;
and there was fencing, dancing, and joy in every town they shone on.
Richart invited all his people to meet him at Rotterdam and view the
pageant.

They had been in Rotterdam some days, when Denys met Catherine
accidentally in the street, and after a warm greeting on both sides,
bade her rejoice, for he had found the she-comrade, and crowed; but
Catherine cooled him by showing him how much earlier he would have found
her by staying quietly at Tergou, than by vagabondizing it all over
Holland. "And being found, what the better are we? her heart is set dead
against us now."

"Oh, let that flea stick; come you with me to her house."

No, she would not go where she was sure of an ill welcome. "Them that
come unbidden sit unseated." No, let Denys be mediator, and bring the
parties to a good understanding. He undertook the office at once, and
with great pomp and confidence. He trotted off to Margaret and said,
"She-comrade, I met this day a friend of thine."

"Thou didst look into the Rotter then, and see thyself."

"Nay, 'twas a female, and one that seeks thy regard; 'twas Catherine,
Gerard's mother."

"Oh, was it?" said Margaret; "then you may tell her she comes too late.
There was a time I longed and longed for her; but she held aloof in my
hour of most need, so now we will be as we ha' been."

Denys tried to shake this resolution. He coaxed her, but she was bitter
and sullen, and not to be coaxed. Then he scolded her well; then, at
that she went into hysterics.

He was frightened at this result of his eloquence, and being off his
guard, allowed himself to be entrapped into a solemn promise never to
recur to the subject. He went back to Catherine crestfallen, and
told her. She fired up and told the family how his overtures had been
received. Then they fired up; it became a feud and burned fiercer every
day. Little Kate alone made some excuses for Margaret.

The very next day another visitor came to Margaret, and found the
military enslaved and degraded, Martin up to his elbows in soapsuds,
and Denys ironing very clumsily, and Margaret plaiting ruffs, but with
a mistress's eye on her raw levies. To these there entered an old man,
venerable at first sight, but on nearer view keen and wizened.

"Ah," cried Margaret. Then swiftly turned her back on him and hid her
face with invincible repugnance. "Oh, that man! that man!"

"Nay, fear me not," said Ghysbrecht; "I come on a friend's errand. I
bring ye a letter from foreign parts."

"Mock me not, old man," and she turned slowly round.

"Nay, see;" and he held out an enormous letter.

Margaret darted on it, and held it with trembling hands and glistening
eyes. It was Gerard's handwriting.

"Oh, thank you, sir, bless you for this, I forgive you all the ill you
ever wrought me."

And she pressed the letter to her bosom with one hand, and glided
swiftly from the room with it.

As she did not come back, Ghysbrecht went away, but not without a scowl
at Martha. Margaret was hours alone with her letter.



CHAPTER LI

When she came down again she was a changed woman. Her eyes were wet, but
calm, and all her bitterness and excitement charmed away.

"Denys," said she softly, "I have got my orders. I am to read my lover's
letter to his folk."

"Ye will never do that?"

"Ay will I."

"I see there is something in the letter has softened ye towards them."

"Not a jot, Denys, not a jot. But an I hated them like poison I would
not disobey my love. Denys, 'tis so sweet to obey, and sweetest of all
to obey one who is far, far away, and cannot enforce my duty, but must
trust my love for my obedience. Ah, Gerard, my darling, at hand I might
have slighted thy commands, misliking thy folk as I have cause to do;
but now, didst bid me go into the raging sea and read thy sweet letter
to the sharks, there I'd go. Therefore, Denys, tell his mother I have
got a letter, and if she and hers would hear it, I am their servant; let
them say their hour, and I'll seat them as best I can, and welcome them
as best I may."

Denys went off to Catherine with this good news. He found the family at
dinner, and told them there was a long letter from Gerard. Then in the
midst of the joy this caused, he said, "And her heart is softened, and
she will read it to you herself; you are to choose your own time."

"What does she think there are none can read but her?" asked Catherine.
"Let her send the letter and we will read it."

"Nay, but, mother," objected little Kate; "mayhap she cannot bear to
part it from her hand; she loves him dearly."

"What, thinks she we shall steal it?"

Cornelis suggested that she would fain wedge herself into the family by
means of this letter.

Denys cast a look of scorn on the speaker. "There spoke a bad heart,"
said he. "La camarade hates you all like poison. Oh, mistake me not,
dame; I defend her not, but so 'tis; yet maugre her spleen at a word
from Gerard she proffers to read you his letter with her own pretty
mouth, and hath a voice like honey--sure 'tis a fair proffer."

"'Tis so, mine honest soldier," said the father of the family, "and
merits a civil reply, therefore hold your whisht ye that be women, and
I shall answer her. Tell her I, his father, setting aside all past
grudges, do for this grace thank her, and would she have double thanks,
let her send my son's letter by thy faithful hand, the which will I
read to his flesh and blood, and will then to her so surely and faithful
return, as I am Eli a Dierich a William a Luke, free burgher of Tergou,
like my forbears, and like them, a man of my word."

"Ay, and a man who is better than his word," cried Catherine; "the only
one I ever did foregather."

"Hold thy peace, wife."

"Art a man of sense, Eli, a dirk, a chose, a chose(1),"' shouted Denys.
"The she-comrade will be right glad to obey Gerard and yet not face you
all, whom she hates as wormwood, saving your presence. Bless ye, the
world hath changed, she is all submission to-day: 'obedience is honey,'
quoth she; and in sooth 'tis a sweetmeat she cannot but savour, eating
so little on't, for what with her fair face, and her mellow tongue; and
what wi' flying in fits and terrifying us that be soldiers to death, an
we thwart her; and what wi' chiding us one while, and petting us like
lambs t' other, she hath made two of the crawlingest slaves ever you
saw out of two honest swashbucklers. I be the ironing ruffian, t' other
washes."

"What next?

"What next? why, whenever the brat is in the world I shall rock cradle,
and t' other knave will wash tucker and bib. So, then, I'll go fetch
the letter on the instant. Ye will let me bide and hear it read, will ye
not?"

"Else our hearts were black as coal," said Catherine.

So Denys went for the letter. He came back crestfallen. "She will not
let it out of her hand neither to me nor you, nor any he or she that
lives."

"I knew she would not," said Cornelis.

"Whisht! whisht!" said Eli, "and let Denys tell his story."

"'Nay,' said I, 'but be ruled by me.' 'Not I,' quoth she. 'Well, but,'
quoth I, 'that same honey Obedience ye spake of.' 'You are a fool,' says
she; 'obedience to Gerard is sweet, but obedience to any other body, who
ever said that was sweet?'

"At last she seemed to soften a bit, and did give me a written paper for
you, mademoiselle. Here 'tis."

"For me?" said little Kate, colouring.

"Give that here!" said Eli, and he scanned the writing, and said almost
in a whisper, "These be words from the letter Hearken!

"'And, sweetheart, an if these lines should travel safe to thee, make
thou trial of my people's hearts withal. Maybe they are somewhat turned
towards me, being far away. If 'tis so they will show it to thee, since
now to me they may not. Read, then, this letter! But I do strictly
forbid thee to let it from thy hand; and if they still hold aloof from
thee, why, then say nought, but let them think me dead. Obey me in
this; for, if thou dost disrespect my judgment and my will in this, thou
lovest me not.'"

There was a silence, and Gerard's words copied by Margaret here handed
round and inspected.

"Well," said Catherine, "that is another matter. But methinks 'tis for
her to come to us, not we to her."

"Alas, mother! what odds does that make?"

"Much," said Eli. "Tell her we are over many to come to her, and bid her
hither, the sooner the better."

When Denys was gone, Eli owned it was a bitter pill to him.

"When that lass shall cross my threshold, all the mischief and misery
she hath made here will seem to come in adoors in one heap. But what
could I do, wife? We must hear the news of Gerard. I saw that in thine
eyes, and felt it in my own heart. And she is backed by our undutiful
but still beloved son, and so is she stronger than we, and brings our
noses down to the grindstone, the sly, cruel jade. But never heed.
We will hear the letter; and then let her go unblessed as she came
unwelcome."

"Make your mind easy," said Catherine. "She will not come at all." And a
tone of regret was visible.

Shortly after Richart, who had been hourly expected, arrived from
Amsterdam grave and dignified in his burgher's robe and gold chain,
ruff, and furred cap, and was received not with affection only, but
respect; for he had risen a step higher than his parents, and such steps
were marked in mediaeval society almost as visibly as those in their
staircases.

Admitted in due course to the family council, he showed plainly, though
not discourteously, that his pride was deeply wounded by their having
deigned to treat with Margaret Brandt. "I see the temptation," said he.
"But which of us hath not at times to wish one way and do another?" This
threw a considerable chill over the old people. So little Kate put in a
word. "Vex not thyself, dear Richart. Mother says she will not come.

"All the better, sweetheart. I fear me, if she do, I shall hie me back
to Amsterdam."

Here Denys popped his head in at the door, and said--

"She will be here at three on the great dial."

They all looked at one another in silence.

     (1) Anglice, a Thing-em-bob.


CHAPTER LIII

"Nay, Richart," said Catherine at last, "for Heaven's sake let not this
one sorry wench set us all by the ears: hath she not made ill blood
enough already?"

"In very deed she hath. Fear me not, good mother. Let her come and read
the letter of the poor boy she hath by devilish arts bewitched and then
let her go. Give me your words to show her no countenance beyond decent
and constrained civility: less we may not, being in our own house; and
I will say no more." On this understanding they waited the foe. She, for
her part, prepared for the interview in a spirit little less hostile.
When Denys brought word they would not come to her, but would receive
her, her lip curled, and she bade him observe how in them every feeling,
however small, was larger than the love for Gerard. "Well," said she, "I
have not that excuse; so why mimic the pretty burgher's pride, the pride
of all unlettered folk? I will go to them for Gerard's sake. Oh, how I
loathe them!"

Thus poor good-natured Denys was bringing into one house the materials
of an explosion.

Margaret made her toilet in the same spirit that a knight of her day
dressed for battle--he to parry blows, and she to parry glances--glances
of contempt at her poverty, or of irony at her extravagance. Her kirtle
was of English cloth, dark blue, and her farthingale and hose of the
same material, but a glossy roan, or claret colour. Not an inch of
pretentious fur about her, but plain snowy linen wristbands, and
curiously plaited linen from the bosom of the kirtle up to the
commencement of the throat; it did not encircle her throat, but framed
it, being square, not round. Her front hair still peeped in two waves
much after the fashion which Mary Queen of Scots revived a century
later; but instead of the silver net, which would have ill become her
present condition, the rest of her head was covered with a very small
tight-fitting hood of dark blue cloth, hemmed with silver. Her shoes
were red; but the roan petticoat and hose prepared the spectator's mind
for the shock, and they set off the arched instep and shapely foot.

Beauty knew its business then as now.

And with all this she kept her enemies waiting, though it was three by
the dial.

At last she started, attended by her he-comrade. And when they were
halfway, she stopped and said thoughtfully, "Denys!"

"Well, she-general?"

"I must go home" (piteously).

"What, have ye left somewhat behind?"

"What?"

"My courage. Oh! oh! oh!"

"Nay, nay, be brave, she-general. I shall be with you."

"Ay, but wilt keep close to me when I be there?"

Denys promised, and she resumed her march, but gingerly.

Meantime they were all assembled, and waiting for her with a strange
mixture of feelings.

Mortification, curiosity, panting affection, aversion to her who came to
gratify those feelings, yet another curiosity to see what she was like,
and what there was in her to bewitch Gerard and make so much mischief.

At last Denys came alone, and whispered, "The she-comrade is without."

"Fetch her in," said Eli. "Now whisht, all of ye. None speak to her but
I."

They all turned their eyes to the door in dead silence.

A little muttering was heard outside; Denys's rough organ and a woman's
soft and mellow voice.

Presently that stopped; and then the door opened slowly, and Margaret
Brandt, dressed as I have described, and somewhat pale, but calm and
lovely, stood on the threshold, looking straight before her.

They all rose but Kate, and remained mute and staring.

"Be seated, mistress," said Eli gravely, and motioned to a seat that had
been set apart for her.

She inclined her head, and crossed the apartment; and in so doing her
condition was very visible, not only in her shape, but in her languor.

Cornelis and Sybrandt hated her for it. Richart thought it spoiled her
beauty.

It softened the women somewhat.

She took her letter out of her bosom, and kissed it as if she had been
alone; then disposed herself to read it, with the air of one who knew
she was there for that single purpose.

But as she began, she noticed they had seated her all by herself like a
leper. She looked at Denys, and putting her hand down by her side, made
him a swift furtive motion to come by her.

He went with an obedient start as if she had cried "March!" and stood
at her shoulder like a sentinel; but this zealous manner of doing it
revealed to the company that he had been ordered thither; and at that
she coloured. And now she began to read her Gerard, their Gerard, to
their eager ears, in a mellow, clear voice, so soft, so earnest, so
thrilling, her very soul seemed to cling about each precious sound. It
was a voice as of a woman's bosom set speaking by Heaven itself.

"I do nothing doubt, my Margaret, that long ere this shall meet thy
beloved eyes, Denys, my most dear friend, will have sought thee out,
and told thee the manner of our unlooked for and most tearful parting.
Therefore I will e'en begin at that most doleful day. What befell him
after, poor faithful soul, fain, fain would I hear, but may not. But I
pray for him day and night next after thee, dearest. Friend more stanch
and loving had not David in Jonathan, than I in him. Be good to him, for
poor Gerard's sake."

At these words, which came quite unexpectedly to him, Denys leaned his
head on Margaret's high chair, and groaned aloud.

She turned quickly as she sat, and found his hand, and pressed it.

And so the sweetheart and the friend held hands while the sweetheart
read.

"I went forward all dizzied, like one in an ill dream; and presently a
gentleman came up with his servants, all on horseback, and had liked to
have rid o'er me. And he drew rein at the brow of the hill, and sent
his armed men back to rob me. They robbed me civilly enough and took my
purse and the last copper, and rid gaily away. I wandered stupid on, a
friendless pauper."

There was a general sigh, followed by an oath from Denys.

"Presently a strange dimness came o'er me; I lay down to sleep on the
snow. 'Twas ill done, and with store of wolves hard by. Had I loved thee
as thou dost deserve, I had shown more manhood. But oh, sweet love, the
drowsiness that did crawl o'er me desolate, and benumb me, was more than
nature. And so I slept; and but that God was better to us, than I to
thee or to myself, from that sleep I ne'er had waked; so all do say.
I had slept an hour or two, as I suppose, but no more, when a hand did
shake me rudely. I awoke to my troubles. And there stood a servant girl
in her holiday suit. 'Are ye mad,' quoth she, in seeming choler, 'to
sleep in snow, and under wolves' nosen? Art weary o' life, and not long
weaned? Come, now, said she, more kindly, 'get up like a good lad;' so
I did rise up. 'Are ye rich, or are ye poor?' But I stared at her as one
amazed. 'Why, 'tis easy of reply,' quoth she. 'Are ye rich, or are ye
poor?' Then I gave a great, loud cry; that she did start back. 'Am I
rich, or am I poor? Had ye asked me an hour agone, I had said I am rich.
But now I am so poor as sure earth beareth on her bosom none poorer.
An hour agone I was rich in a friend, rich in money, rich in hope and
spirits of youth; but now the Bastard of Burgundy hath taken my friend,
and another gentleman my purse; and I can neither go forward to Rome nor
back to her I left in Holland. I am poorest of the poor.' 'Alack!' said
the wench. 'Natheless, an ye had been rich ye might ha' lain down again
in the snow for any use I had for ye; and then I trow ye had soon fared
out o' this world as bare as ye came into it. But, being poor, you are
our man: so come wi' me.' Then I went because she bade me, and because I
recked not now whither I went. And she took me to a fine house hard by,
and into a noble dining-hall hung with black; and there was set a table
with many dishes, and but one plate and one chair. 'Fall to!' said she,
in a whisper. 'What, alone?' said I. 'Alone? And which of us, think ye,
would eat out of the same dish with ye? Are we robbers o' the dead?'
Then she speered where I was born. 'At Tergou,' said I. Says she, 'And
when a gentleman dies in that country, serve they not the dead man's
dinner up as usual, till he be in the ground, and set some poor man to
it?' I told her, 'nay.' She blushed for us then. Here they were better
Christians.' So I behoved to sit down. But small was my heart for meat.
Then this kind lass sat by me and poured me out wine; and tasting it,
it cut me to the heart Denys was not there to drink with me. He doth so
love good wine, and women good, bad, or indifferent. The rich, strong
wine curled round my sick heart; and that day first I did seem to
glimpse why folk in trouble run to drink so. She made me eat of every
dish. ''Twas unlucky to pass one. Nought was here but her master's daily
dinner.' 'He had a good stomach, then,' said I. 'Ay, lad, and a good
heart. Leastways, so we all say now he is dead; but, being alive, no
word on't e'er heard I.' So I did eat as a bird, nibbling of every dish.
And she hearing me sigh, and seeing me like to choke at the food, took
pity and bade me be of good cheer. I should sup and lie there that
night. And she went to the hind, and he gave me a right good bed; and I
told him all, and asked him would the law give me back my purse. 'Law!'
quoth he; 'law there was none for the poor in Burgundy. Why, 'twas the
cousin of the Lady of the Manor, he that had robbed me. He knew the
wild spark. The matter must be judged before the lady; and she was quite
young, and far more like to hang me for slandering her cousin, and a
gentleman, and a handsome man, than to make him give me back my own.
Inside the liberties of a town a poor man might now and then see the
face of justice; but out among the grand seigneurs and dames--never.'
So I said, 'I'll sit down robbed rather than seek justice and find
gallows.' They were all most kind to me next day; and the girl proffered
me money from her small wage to help me towards Rhine."

"Oh, then, he is coming home! he is coming home!" shouted Denys,
interrupting the reader. She shook her head gently at him, by way of
reproof.

"I beg pardon, all the company," said he stiffly.

"'Twas a sore temptation; but being a servant, my stomach rose against
it. 'Nay, nay,' said I. She told me I was wrong. ''Twas pride out o'
place; poor folk should help one another; or who on earth would?' I said
if I could do aught in return 'twere well; but for a free gift, nay: I
was overmuch beholden already. Should I write a letter for her? 'Nay, he
is in the house at present,' said she. 'Should I draw her picture, and
so earn my money?' 'What, can ye?' said she. I told her I could try; and
her habit would well become a picture. So she was agog to be limned, and
give it her lad. And I set her to stand in a good light, and soon made
sketches two, whereof I send thee one, coloured at odd hours. The other
I did most hastily, and with little conscience daub, for which may
Heaven forgive me; but time was short. They, poor things, knew no
better, and were most proud and joyous; and both kissing me after their
country fashion, 'twas the hind that was her sweetheart, they did bid me
God-speed; and I towards Rhine."

Margaret paused here, and gave Denys the coloured drawing to hand round.
It was eagerly examined by the females on account of the costume, which
differed in some respects from that of the Dutch domestic: the hair was
in a tight linen bag, a yellow half kerchief crossed her head from ear
to ear, but threw out a rectangular point that descended the centre of
her forehead, and it met in two more points over her bosom. She wore a
red kirtle with long sleeves, kilted very high in front, and showing a
green farthingale and a great red leather purse hanging down over it;
red stockings, yellow leathern shoes, ahead of her age; for they were
low-quartered and square-toed, secured by a strap buckling over the
instep, which was not uncommon, and was perhaps the rude germ of the
diamond buckle to come.

Margaret continued:--

"But oh! how I missed my Denys at every step! often I sat down on the
road and groaned. And in the afternoon it chanced that I did so set me
down where two roads met, and with heavy head in hand, and heavy heart,
did think of thee, my poor sweetheart, and of my lost friend, and of the
little house at Tergou, where they all loved me once; though now it is
turned to hate."

Catherine. "Alas! that he will think so."

Eli. "Whisht, wife!"

"And I did sigh loud, and often. And me sighing so, one came carolling
like a bird adown t' other road. 'Ay, chirp and chirp,' cried I
bitterly. 'Thou has not lost sweetheart, and friend, thy father's
hearth, thy mother's smile, and every penny in the world.' And at last
he did so carol, and carol, I jumped up in ire to get away from his most
jarring mirth. But ere I lied from it, I looked down the path to see
what could make a man so lighthearted in this weary world; and lo! the
songster was a humpbacked cripple, with a bloody bandage o'er his eye,
and both legs gone at the knee."

"He! he! he! he! he!" went Sybrandt, laughing and cackling.

Margaret's eyes flashed: she began to fold the letter up.

"Nay, lass," said Eli, "heed him not! Thou unmannerly cur, offer't but
again and I put thee to the door."

"Why, what was there to gibe at, Sybrandt?" remonstrated Catherine more
mildly. "Is not our Kate afflicted? and is she not the most content of
us all, and singeth like a merle at times between her pains? But I am
as bad as thou; prithee read on, lass, and stop our gabble wi' somewhat
worth the hearkening."

"'Then,' said I, 'may this thing be?' And I took myself to task.
'Gerard, son of Eli, dost thou well to bemoan thy lot, thou hast youth
and health; and here comes the wreck of nature on crutches, praising
God's goodness with singing like a mavis?'"

Catherine. "There you see."

Eli. "Whisht, dame, whisht!"

"And whenever he saw me, he left carolling and presently hobbled up and
chanted, 'Charity, for love of Heaven, sweet master, charity,' with
a whine as piteous as wind at keyhole. 'Alack, poor soul,' said I,
'charity is in my heart, but not my purse; I am poor as thou.' Then he
believed me none, and to melt me undid his sleeve, and showed a sore
wound on his arm, and said he, 'Poor cripple though I be, I am like to
lose this eye to boot, look else.' I saw and groaned for him, and to
excuse myself let him wot how I had been robbed of my last copper.
Thereat he left whining all in a moment, and said, in a big manly voice,
'Then I'll e'en take a rest. Here, youngster, pull thou this strap: nay,
fear not!' I pulled, and down came a stout pair of legs out of his back;
and half his hump had melted away, and the wound in his eye no deeper
than the bandage.

"Oh!" ejaculated Margaret's hearers in a body.

"Whereat, seeing me astounded, he laughed in my face, and told me I
was not worth gulling, and offered me his protection. 'My face was
prophetic,' he said. 'Of what?' said I. 'Marry,' said he, 'that its
owner will starve in this thievish land.' Travel teaches e'en the young
wisdom. Time was I had turned and fled this impostor as a pestilence;
but now I listened patiently to pick up crumbs of counsel. And well I
did: for nature and his adventurous life had crammed the poor knave with
shrewdness and knowledge of the homelier sort--a child was I beside him.
When he had turned me inside out, said he, 'Didst well to leave France
and make for Germany; but think not of Holland again. Nay, on to
Augsburg and Nurnberg, the Paradise of craftsmen: thence to Venice, an
thou wilt. But thou wilt never bide in Italy nor any other land, having
once tasted the great German cities. Why, there is but one honest
country in Europe, and that is Germany; and since thou art honest, and
since I am a vagabone, Germany was made for us twain.' I bade him make
that good: how might one country fit true men and knaves! 'Why, thou
novice,' said he, 'because in an honest land are fewer knaves to bite
the honest man, and many honest men for the knave to bite. I was in
luck, being honest, to have fallen in with a friendly sharp. Be my pal,'
said he; 'I go to Nurnberg; we will reach it with full pouches. I'll
learn ye the cul de bois, and the cul de jatte, and how to maund, and
chaunt, and patter, and to raise swellings, and paint sores and ulcers
on thy body would take in the divell.' I told him shivering, I'd liever
die than shame myself and my folk so."

Eli. "Good lad! good lad!"

"Why, what shame was it for such as I to turn beggar? Beggary was an
ancient and most honourable mystery. What did holy monks, and bishops,
and kings, when they would win Heaven's smile? why, wash the feet of
beggars, those favourites of the saints. 'The saints were no fools,' he
told me. Then he did put out his foot. 'Look at that, that was washed by
the greatest king alive, Louis, of France, the last Holy Thursday that
was. And the next day, Friday, clapped in the stocks by the warden of
a petty hamlet.' So I told him my foot should walk between such high
honour and such low disgrace, on the same path of honesty, please
God. Well then, since I had not spirit to beg, he would indulge my
perversity. I should work under him, he be the head, I the fingers.
And with that he set himself up like a judge, on a heap of dust by the
road's side, and questioned me strictly what I could do. I began to say
I was strong and willing. 'Ba!' said he, 'so is an ox. Say, what canst
do that Sir Ox cannot?' I could write; I had won a prize for it. 'Canst
write as fast as the printers?' quo' he, jeering. 'What else?' I could
paint. 'That was better.' I was like to tear my hair to hear him say so,
and me going to Rome to write. I could twang the psaltery a bit. 'That
was well. Could I tell stories?' Ay, by the score. 'Then,' said he, 'I
hire you from this moment.' 'What to do?' said I. 'Nought crooked, Sir
Candour,' says he. 'I will feed thee all the way and find thee work; and
take half thine earnings, no more.' 'Agreed,' said I, and gave my hand
on it, 'Now, servant,' said he, 'we will dine. But ye need not stand
behind my chair, for two reasons--first I ha' got no chair; and next,
good fellowship likes me better than state.' And out of his wallet he
brought flesh, fowl, and pastry, a good dozen of spices lapped in flax
paper, and wine fit for a king. Ne'er feasted I better than out of this
beggar's wallet, now my master. When we had well eaten I was for going
on. 'But,' said he, 'servants should not drive their masters too hard,
especially after feeding, for then the body is for repose, and the mind
turns to contemplation;' and he lay on his back gazing calmly at the
sky, and presently wondered whether there were any beggars up there.
I told him I knew but of one, called Lazarus. 'Could he do the cul de
jatte better than I?' said he, and looked quite jealous like. I told him
nay; Lazarus was honest, though a beggar, and fed daily of the crumbs
fal'n from a rich man's table, and the dogs licked his sores. 'Servant,'
quo' he, 'I spy a foul fault in thee. Thou liest without discretion: now
the end of lying being to gull, this is no better than fumbling with the
divell's tail. I pray Heaven thou mayest prove to paint better than thou
cuttest whids, or I am done out of a dinner. No beggar eats crumbs, but
only the fat of the land; and dogs lick not a beggar's sores, being made
with spearwort, or ratsbane, or biting acids, from all which dogs, and
even pigs, abhor. My sores are made after my proper receipt; but no dog
would lick e'en them twice. I have made a scurvy bargain: art a cozening
knave, I doubt, as well as a nincompoop.' I deigned no reply to this
bundle of lies, which did accuse heavenly truth of falsehood for not
being in a tale with him. He rose and we took the road; and presently
we came to a place where were two little wayside inns, scarce a furlong
apart. 'Halt,' said my master. 'Their armories are sore faded--all the
better. Go thou in; shun the master; board the wife; and flatter her inn
sky high, all but the armories, and offer to colour them dirt cheap.'
So I went in and told the wife I was a painter, and would revive her
armories cheap; but she sent me away with a rebuff. I to my master. He
groaned. 'Ye are all fingers and no tongue,' said he; 'I have made a
scurvy bargain. Come and hear me patter and flatter.' Between the two
inns was a high hedge. He goes behind it a minute and comes out a decent
tradesman. We went on to the other inn, and then I heard him praise it
so fulsome as the very wife did blush. 'But,' says he, 'there is one
little, little fault; your armories are dull and faded. Say but the
word, and for a silver franc my apprentice here, the cunningest e'er
I had, shall make them bright as ever. Whilst she hesitated, the rogue
told her he had done it to a little inn hard by, and now the inn's face
was like the starry firmament. 'D'ye hear that, my man?' cries she,
'"The Three Frogs" have been and painted up their armories; shall "The
Four Hedgehogs" be outshone by them?' So I painted, and my master stood
by like a lord, advising me how to do, and winking to me to heed him
none, and I got a silver franc. And he took me back to 'The Three
Frogs,' and on the way put me on a beard and disguised me, and
flattered 'The Three Frogs,' and told them how he had adorned 'The Four
Hedgehogs,' and into the net jumped the three poor simple frogs, and I
earned another silver franc. Then we went on and he found his crutches,
and sent me forward, and showed his "cicatrices d'emprunt," as he called
them, and all his infirmities, at 'The Four Hedgehogs,' and got both
food and money. 'Come, share and share,' quoth he: so I gave him one
franc. 'I have made a good bargain,' said he. 'Art a master limner, but
takest too much time.' So I let him know that in matters of honest craft
things could not be done quick and well. 'Then do them quick,' quoth he.
And he told me my name was Bon Bec; and I might call him Cul de Jatte,
because that was his lay at our first meeting. And at the next town my
master, Cul de Jatte, bought me a psaltery, and set himself up again
by the roadside in state like him that erst judged Marsyas and Apollo,
piping for vain glory. So I played a strain. 'Indifferent well,
harmonious Bon Bec,' said he haughtily. 'Now tune thy pipes.' So I did
sing a sweet strain the good monks taught me; and singing it reminded
poor Bon Bec, Gerard erst, of his young days and home, and brought the
water to my een. But looking up, my master's visage was as the face of
a little boy whipt soundly, or sipping foulest medicine. 'Zounds, stop
that bellyache blether,' quoth he, 'that will ne'er wile a stiver out
o' peasants' purses; 'twill but sour the nurses' milk, and gar the kine
jump into rivers to be out of earshot on't. What, false knave, did I buy
thee a fine new psaltery to be minded o' my latter end withal? Hearken!
these be the songs that glad the heart, and fill the minstrel's purse.'
And he sung so blasphemous a stave, and eke so obscene, as I drew away
from him a space that the lightning might not spoil the new psaltery.
However, none came, being winter, and then I said, 'Master, the Lord
is debonair. Held I the thunder, yon ribaldry had been thy last, thou
foul-mouthed wretch.'

"'Why, Bon Bec, what is to do?' quoth he. 'I have made an ill bargain.
Oh, perverse heart, that turneth from doctrine.' So I bade him keep
his breath to cool his broth, ne'er would I shame my folk with singing
ribald songs. 'Then,' says he sulkily, 'the first fire we light by the
wayside, clap thou on the music box! so 'twill make our pot boil for the
nonce; but with your,

     Good people, let us peak and pine,
     Cut tristful mugs, and miaul and whine
     Thorough our nosen chaunts divine,

never, never, never. Ye might as well go through Lorraine crying,
Mulleygrubs, Mulleygrubs, who'll buy my Mulleygrubs!' So we fared on,
bad friends. But I took a thought, and prayed him hum me one of his
naughty ditties again. Then he brightened, and broke forth into ribaldry
like a nightingale. Finger in ears stuffed I. 'No words; naught but the
bare melody.' For oh, Margaret, note the sly malice of the Evil One!
Still to the scurviest matter he wedded the tunablest ditties."

Catherine. "That is true as Holy Writ."

Sybrandt. "How know you that, mother?"

Cornelis. "He! he! he!"

Eli. "Whisht, ye uneasy wights, and let me hear the boy. He is wiser
than ye; wiser than his years."

"'What tomfoolery is this,' said he; yet he yielded to me, and soon I
garnered three of his melodies; but I would not let Cul de Jatte wot the
thing I meditated. 'Show not fools nor bairns unfinished work,' saith
the byword. And by this time 'twas night, and a little town at hand,
where we went each to his inn; for my master would not yield to put
off his rags and other sores till morning; nor I to enter an inn with
a tatterdemalion. So we were to meet on the road at peep of day, and
indeed, we still lodged apart, meeting at morn and parting at eve
outside each town we lay at. And waking at midnight and cogitating, good
thoughts came down to me, and sudden my heart was enlightened. I called
to mind that my Margaret had withstood the taking of the burgomaster's
purse. ''Tis theft,' said you; 'disguise it how ye will.' But I must
be wiser than my betters; and now that which I had as good as stolen,
others had stolen from me. As it came so it was gone. Then I said,
'Heaven is not cruel, but just;' and I vowed a vow, to repay our
burgomaster every shilling an' I could. And I went forth in the morning
sad, but hopeful. I felt lighter for the purse being gone. My master was
at the gate becrutched. I told him I'd liever have seen him in another
disguise. 'Beggars must not be choosers,' said he. However, soon he bade
me untruss him, for he felt sadly. His head swam. I told him forcefully
to deform nature thus could scarce be wholesome. He answered none; but
looked scared, and hand on head. By-and-by he gave a groan, and rolled
on the ground like a ball, and writhed sore. I was scared, and wist
not what to do, but went to lift him; but his trouble rose higher and
higher, he gnashed his teeth fearfully, and the foam did fly from his
lips; and presently his body bended itself like a bow, and jerked and
bounded many times into the air. I exorcised him; it but made him
worse. There was water in a ditch hard by, not very clear; but the poor
creature struggling between life and death, I filled my hat withal, and
came flying to souse him. Then my lord laughed in my face. 'Come, Bon
Bec, by thy white gills, I have not forgotten my trade.' I stood with
watery hat in hand, glaring. 'Could this be feigning?' 'What else?' said
he. 'Why, a real fit is the sorriest thing; but a stroke with a feather
compared with mine. Art still betters nature.' 'But look, e'en now blood
trickleth from your nose,' said I. 'Ay, ay, pricked my nostrils with a
straw.' 'But ye foamed at the lips.' 'Oh, a little soap makes a mickle
foam.' And he drew out a morsel like a bean from his mouth. 'Thank thy
stars, Bon Bec,' says he, 'for leading thee to a worthy master. Each day
his lesson. To-morrow we will study the cul de bois and other branches.
To-day, own me prince of demoniacs, and indeed of all good fellows.'
Then, being puffed up, he forgot yesterday's grudge, and discoursed
me freely of beggars; and gave me, who eftsoons thought a beggar was a
beggar, and there an end, the names and qualities of full thirty sorts
of masterful and crafty mendicants in France and Germany and England;
his three provinces; for so the poor, proud knave yclept those kingdoms
three; wherein his throne it was the stocks I ween. And outside the next
village one had gone to dinner, and left his wheelbarrow. So says he,
'I'll tie myself in a knot, and shalt wheel me through; and what with
my crippledom and thy piety, a-wheeling of thy poor old dad, we'll bleed
the bumpkins of a dacha-saltee.' I did refuse. I would work for him; but
no hand would have in begging. 'And wheeling an "asker" in a barrow, is
not that work?' said he; 'then fling yon muckle stone in to boot: stay,
I'll soil it a bit, and swear it is a chip of the holy sepulchre; and
you wheeled us both from Jerusalem.' Said I, 'Wheeling a pair o' lies,
one stony, one fleshy, may be work, and hard work, but honest work 'tis
not. 'Tis fumbling with his tail you wot of. And,' said I, 'master, next
time you go to tempt me to knavery, speak not to me of my poor old dad.'
Said I, 'You have minded me of my real father's face, the truest man in
Holland. He and I are ill friends now, worse luck. But though I offend
him shame him I never will.' Dear Margaret, with this knave' saying,
'your poor old dad,' it had gone to my heart like a knife. ''Tis well,'
said my master gloomily; 'I have made a bad bargain.' Presently he
halts, and eyes a tree by the wayside. 'Go spell me what is writ on
yon tree.' So I went, and there was nought but a long square drawn in
outline. I told him so. 'So much for thy monkish lore,' quoth he. A
little farther, and he sent me to read a wall. There was nought but a
circle scratched on the stone with a point of nail or knife, and in the
circle two dots. I said so Then said he, 'Bon Bec, that square was a
warning. Some good Truand left it, that came through this village faring
west; that means "dangerous." The circle with the two dots was writ by
another of our brotherhood; and it signifies as how the writer, soit
Rollin Trapu, soit Triboulet, soit Catin Cul de Bois, or what not, was
becked for asking here, and lay two months in Starabin.' Then he broke
forth. 'Talk: of your little snivelling books that go in pouch. Three
books have I, France, England, and Germany; and they are writ all over
in one tongue, that my brethren of all countries understand; and that
is what I call learning. So sith here they whip sores, and imprison
infirmities, I to my tiring room.' And he popped behind the hedge, and
came back worshipful. We passed through the village, and I sat me down
on the stocks, and even the barber's apprentice whets his razor on a
block, so did I flesh my psaltery on this village, fearing great cities.
I tuned it, and coursed up and down the wires nimbly with my two wooden
strikers; and then chanted loud and clear, as I had heard the minstrels
of the country,

'Qui veut ouir qui veut Savoir,'

some trash, I mind not what. And soon the villagers, male and female,
thronged about me; thereat I left singing, and recited them to the
psaltery a short but right merry tale out of 'the lives of the saints,'
which it is my handbook of pleasant figments and this ended, instantly
struck up and whistled one of Cul de Jatte's devil's ditties, and played
it on the psaltery to boot. Thou knowest Heaven hath bestowed on me a
rare whistle, both for compass and tune. And with me whistling bright
and full this sprightly air, and making the wires slow when the tune did
gallop, and tripping when the tune did amble, or I did stop and shake on
one note like a lark i' the air, they were like to eat me; but looking
round, lo! my master had given way to his itch, and there was his hat
on the ground, and copper pouring in. I deemed it cruel to whistle the
bread out of poverty's pouch; so broke off and away; yet could not get
clear so swift, but both men and women did slobber me sore, and smelled
all of garlic. 'There, master,' said I, 'I call that cleaving the divell
in twain and keeping his white half.' Said he, 'Bon Bec, I have made
a good bargain.' Then he bade me stay where I was while he went to the
Holy Land. I stayed, and he leaped the churchyard dike, and the sexton
was digging a grave, and my master chaffered with him, and came back
with a knuckle bone. But why he clept a churchyard Holy Land, that I
learned not then, but after dinner. I was colouring the armories of a
little inn; and he sat by me most peaceable, a cutting, and filing, and
polishing bones, sedately; so I speered was not honest work sweet? 'As
rain water,' said he, mocking. 'What was he a making?' 'A pair of bones
to play on with thee; and with the refuse a St. Anthony's thumb and
a St. Martin's little finger, for the devout.' The vagabone! And now,
sweet Margaret, thou seest our manner of life faring Rhineward. I with
the two arts I had least prized or counted on for bread was welcome
everywhere; too poor now to fear robbers, yet able to keep both master
and man on the road. For at night I often made a portraiture of the
innkeeper or his dame, and so went richer from an inn; the which it is
the lot of few. But my master despised this even way of life. 'I love
ups and downs,' said he. And certes he lacked them not. One day he would
gather more than I in three; another, to hear his tale, it had rained
kicks all day in lieu of 'saltees,' and that is pennies. Yet even then
at heart he despised me for a poor mechanical soul, and scorned my arts,
extolling his own, the art of feigning.

"Natheless, at odd times was he ill at his ease. Going through the town
of Aix, we came upon a beggar walking, fast by one hand to a cart-tail,
and the hangman a lashing his bare bloody back. He, stout knave, so
whipt, did not a jot relent; but I did wince at every stroke; and my
master hung his head.

"'Soon or late, Bon Bec,' quoth he. 'Soon or late.' I, seeing his
haggard face, knew what he meaned. And at a town whose name hath slipped
me, but 'twas on a fair river, as we came to the foot of the bridge he
halted, and shuddered. 'Why what is the coil?' said I. 'Oh, blind,' said
he, 'they are justifying there.' So nought would serve him but take a
boat, and cross the river by water. But 'twas out of the frying-pan, as
the word goeth. For the boatman had scarce told us the matter, and that
it was a man and a woman for stealing glazed windows out of housen, and
that the man was hanged at daybreak, and the quean to be drowned, when
lo! they did fling her off the bridge, and fell in the water not far
from us. And oh! Margaret, the deadly splash! It ringeth in mine ears
even now. But worse was coming; for, though tied, she came up and cried
'Help! help!' and I, forgetting all, and hearing a woman's voice cry
'Help!' was for leaping in to save her; and had surely done it, but the
boatman and Cul de Jatte clung round me, and in a moment the bourreau's
man, that waited in a boat, came and entangled his hooked pole in her
long hair, and so thrust her down and ended her. Oh! if the saints
answered so our cries for help! And poor Cul de Jatte groaned; and I
sat sobbing, and beat my breast, and cried, 'Of what hath God made men's
hearts?'"

The reader stopped, and the tears trickled down her cheeks. Gerard
crying in Lorraine, made her cry at Rotterdam. The leagues were no more
to her heart than the breadth of a room.

Eli, softened by many touches in the letter, and by the reader's womanly
graces, said kindly enough, "Take thy time, lass. And methinks some of
ye might find her a creepie to rest her foot, and she so near her own
trouble."

"I'd do more for her than that an I durst," said Catherine. "Here,
Cornelis," and she held out her little wooden stool, and that worthy,
who hated Margaret worse than ever, had to take the creepie and put it
carefully under her foot.

"You are very kind, dame," she faltered. "I will read on; 'tis all I can
do for you in turn.

"Thus seeing my master ashy and sore shaken, I deemed this horrible
tragic act came timeously to warn him, so I strove sore to turn him from
his ill ways, discoursing of sinners and their lethal end. 'Too late!'
said he, 'too late!' and gnashed his teeth. Then I told him 'too late'
was the divell's favourite whisper in repentant ears. Said I--

     'The Lord is debonair,
     Let sinners nought despair.'

'Too late!' said he, and gnashed his teeth, and writhed his face, as
though vipers were biting his inward parts. But, dear heart, his was a
mind like running water. Ere we cleared the town he was carolling, and
outside the gate hung the other culprit, from the bough of a little
tree, and scarce a yard above the ground. And that stayed my vagabone's
music. But ere we had gone another furlong, he feigned to have dropped
his, rosary, and ran back, with no good intent, as you shall hear.
I strolled on very slowly, and often halting, and presently he came
stumping up on one leg, and that bandaged. I asked him how he could
contrive that, for 'twas masterly done. 'Oh, that was his mystery. Would
I know that, I must join the brotherhood.' And presently we did pass
a narrow lane, and at the mouth on't espied a written stone, telling
beggars by a word like a wee pitchfork to go that way. ''Tis yon
farmhouse,' said he: 'bide thou at hand.' And he went to the house, and
came back with money, food, and wine. 'This lad did the business,' said
he, slapping his one leg proudly. Then he undid the bandage, and with
prideful face showed me a hole in his calf you could have put your neef
in. Had I been strange to his tricks, here was a leg had drawn my last
penny. Presently another farmhouse by the road. He made for it. I stood,
and asked myself, should I run away and leave him, not to be shamed in
my own despite by him? But while I doubted, there was a great noise,
and my master well cudgelled by the farmer and his men, came towards me
hobbling and holloaing, for the peasants had laid on heartily. But more
trouble was at his heels. Some mischievous wight loosed a dog as big as
a jackass colt, and came roaring after him, and downed him momently. I,
deeming the poor rogue's death certain, and him least fit to die, drew
my sword and ran shouting. But ere I could come near, the muckle dog had
torn away his bad leg, and ran growling to his lair with it; and Cul de
Jatte slipped his knot, and came running like a lapwing, with his hair
on end, and so striking with both crutches before and behind at unreal
dogs as 'twas like a windmill crazed. He fled adown the road. I followed
leisurely, and found him at dinner. 'Curse the quiens,' said he. And not
a word all dinner time but 'Curse the quiens!'

"I said, I must know who' they were, before I would curse them.

"'Quiens? why, that was dogs. And I knew not even that much? He had made
