The Project Gutenberg EBook of Waverley, by Sir Walter Scott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Waverley
       Or 'Tis Sixty Years Hence

Author: Sir Walter Scott

Posting Date: October 27, 2014 [EBook #4966]
Release Date: January, 2004
First Posted: April 5, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAVERLEY ***




Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.










[Transcriber's Note:

I feel that it is important to note that this book is part of the
Caledonian series. The Caledonian series is a group of 50 books
comprising all of Sir Walter Scott's works.]







WAVERLEY

OR 'T IS SIXTY YEARS SINCE

BY SIR WALTER SCOTT

VOLUME I





PUBLISHERS' NOTE


It has long been the ambition of the present publishers to offer to the
public an ideal edition of the writings of Sir Walter Scott, the great
poet and novelist of whom William Hazlitt said, 'His works are almost
like a new edition of human nature.' Secure in the belief not only that
his writings have achieved a permanent place in the literature of the
world, but that succeeding generations will prize them still more
highly, we have, after the most careful planning and study, undertaken
the publication of this edition of the Waverley Novels and the complete
poetical writings.

It is evident that the ideal edition of a great classic must be
distinguished in typography, must present the best available text, and
must be illustrated in such a way as at once to be beautiful in itself
and to add to the reader's pleasure and his understanding of the book.
As to the typography and text, little need be said here. The format of
the edition has been most carefully studied, and represents the use of
the best resources of The Riverside Press. The text has been carefully
edited in the light of Scott's own revisions; all of his own latest
notes have been included, glossaries have been added, and full
descriptive notes to the illustrations have been prepared which will,
we hope, add greatly to the reader's interest and instruction in the
reading of the novels and poems.

Of the illustrations, which make the special feature of this edition,
something more may be said. In the case of an author like Sir Walter
Scott, the ideal edition requires that the beautiful and romantic
scenery amid which he lived and of which he wrote shall be adequately
presented to the reader. No other author ever used more charming
backgrounds or employed them to better advantage. To see Scotland, and
to visit in person all the scenes of the novels and poems, would enable
the reader fully to understand these backgrounds and thereby add
materially to his appreciation of the author.

Before beginning the preparation of this edition, the head of the
department having it in charge made a visit in person to the scenes of
the novels and poems, determined to explore all the localities referred
to by the author, so far as they could be identified. The field proved
even more productive than had been at first supposed, and photographs
were obtained in sufficient quantity to illustrate all the volumes.
These pictures represent the scenes very much as Scott saw them. The
natural scenery--mountains, woods, lakes, rivers, seashore, and the
like--is nearly the same as in his day. The ruins of ancient castles
and abbeys were found to correspond very closely with his descriptions,
though in many instances he had in imagination rebuilt these ruins and
filled them with the children of his fancy. The scenes of the stories
extend into nearly every county in Scotland and through a large part of
England and Wales. All of these were thoroughly investigated, and
photographs were made of everything of interest. One of the novels has
to do with France and Belgium, one with Switzerland, one with the Holy
Land, one with Constantinople, and one with India. For all of these
lands, which Scott did not visit in person, and therefore did not
describe with the same attention to detail as in the case of his own
country, interesting pictures of characteristic scenery were secured.
By this method the publishers have hoped to bring before the reader a
series of photographs which will not only please the eye and give a
satisfactory artistic effect to the volumes, but also increase the
reader's knowledge of the country described and add a new charm to the
delightful work of the author. In addition to the photographs, old
engravings and paintings have been reproduced for the illustration of
novels having to do with old buildings, streets, etc., which have long
since disappeared. For this material a careful search was made in the
British Museum, the Advocates' Library and City Museum, Edinburgh, the
Library at Abbotsford, the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, and other
collections.

It has been thought, too, that the ideal edition of Scott's works would
not be complete without an adequate portrayal of his more memorable
characters. This has been accomplished in a series of frontispieces
specially painted for this edition by twenty of the most distinguished
illustrators of England.

4 PARK STREET, BOSTON.





ADVERTISEMENT TO THE WAVERLEY NOVELS


IT has been the occasional occupation of the Author of Waverley, for
several years past, to revise and correct the voluminous series of
Novels which pass under that name, in order that, if they should ever
appear as his avowed productions, he might render them in some degree
deserving of a continuance of the public favour with which they have
been honoured ever since their first appearance. For a long period,
however, it seemed likely that the improved and illustrated edition
which he meditated would be a posthumous publication. But the course of
the events which occasioned the disclosure of the Author's name having,
in a great measure, restored to him a sort of parental control over
these Works, he is naturally induced to give them to the press in a
corrected, and, he hopes, an improved form, while life and health
permit the task of revising and illustrating them. Such being his
purpose, it is necessary to say a few words on the plan of the proposed
Edition.

In stating it to be revised and corrected, it is not to be inferred
that any attempt is made to alter the tenor of the stories, the
character of the actors, or the spirit of the dialogue. There is no
doubt ample room for emendation in all these points,--but where the
tree falls it must lie. Any attempt to obviate criticism, however just,
by altering a work already in the hands of the public is generally
unsuccessful. In the most improbable fiction, the reader still desires
some air of vraisemblance, and does not relish that the incidents of a
tale familiar to him should be altered to suit the taste of critics, or
the caprice of the Author himself. This process of feeling is so
natural, that it may be observed even in children, who cannot endure
that a nursery story should be repeated to them differently from the
manner in which it was first told.

But without altering, in the slightest degree, either the story or the
mode of telling it, the Author has taken this opportunity to correct
errors of the press and slips of the pen. That such should exist cannot
be wondered at, when it is considered that the Publishers found it
their interest to hurry through the press a succession of the early
editions of the various Novels, and that the Author had not the usual
opportunity of revision. It is hoped that the present edition will be
found free from errors of that accidental kind.

The Author has also ventured to make some emendations of a different
character, which, without being such apparent deviations from the
original stories as to disturb the reader's old associations, will, he
thinks, add something to the spirit of the dialogue, narrative, or
description. These consist in occasional pruning where the language is
redundant, compression where the style is loose, infusion of vigour
where it is languid, the exchange of less forcible for more appropriate
epithets--slight alterations in short, like the last touches of an
artist, which contribute to heighten and finish the picture, though an
inexperienced eye can hardly detect in what they consist.

The General Preface to the new Edition, and the Introductory Notices to
each separate work, will contain an account of such circumstances
attending the first publication of the Novels and Tales as may appear
interesting in themselves, or proper to be communicated to the public.
The Author also proposes to publish, on this occasion, the various
legends, family traditions, or obscure historical facts which have
formed the ground-work of these Novels, and to give some account of the
places where the scenes are laid, when these are altogether, or in
part, real; as well as a statement of particular incidents founded on
fact; together with a more copious Glossary, and Notes explanatory of
the ancient customs and popular superstitions referred to in the
Romances.

Upon the whole, it is hoped that the Waverley Novels, in their new
dress, will not be found to have lost any part of their attractions in
consequence of receiving illustrations by the Author, and undergoing
his careful revision.

ABBOTSFORD, January, 1829.





GENERAL PREFACE TO THE WAVERLEY NOVELS

    ---And must I ravel out
    My weaved-up follies?

    Richard II, Act IV.

Having undertaken to give an Introductory Account of the compositions
which are here offered to the public, with Notes and Illustrations, the
Author, under whose name they are now for the first time collected,
feels that he has the delicate task of speaking more of himself and his
personal concerns than may perhaps be either graceful or prudent. In
this particular he runs the risk of presenting himself to the public in
the relation that the dumb wife in the jest-book held to her husband,
when, having spent half of his fortune to obtain the cure of her
imperfection, he was willing to have bestowed the other half to restore
her to her former condition. But this is a risk inseparable from the
task which the Author has undertaken, and he can only promise to be as
little of an egotist as the situation will permit. It is perhaps an
indifferent sign of a disposition to keep his word, that, having
introduced himself in the third person singular, he proceeds in the
second paragraph to make use of the first. But it appears to him that
the seeming modesty connected with the former mode of writing is
overbalanced by the inconvenience of stiffness and affectation which
attends it during a narrative of some length, and which may be observed
less or more in every work in which the third person is used, from the
Commentaries of Caesar to the Autobiography of Alexander the Corrector.

I must refer to a very early period of my life, were I to point out my
first achievements as a tale-teller; but I believe some of my old
schoolfellows can still bear witness that I had a distinguished
character for that talent, at a time when the applause of my companions
was my recompense for the disgraces and punishments which the future
romance-writer incurred for being idle himself, and keeping others
idle, during hours that should have been employed on our tasks. The
chief enjoyment of my holidays was to escape with a chosen friend, who
had the same taste with myself, and alternately to recite to each other
such wild adventures as we were able to devise. We told, each in turn,
interminable tales of knight-errantry and battles and enchantments,
which were continued from one day to another as opportunity offered,
without our ever thinking of bringing them to a conclusion. As we
observed a strict secrecy on the subject of this intercourse, it
acquired all the character of a concealed pleasure, and we used to
select for the scenes of our indulgence long walks through the solitary
and romantic environs of Arthur's Seat, Salisbury Crags, Braid Hills,
and similar places in the vicinity of Edinburgh; and the recollection
of those holidays still forms an oasis in the pilgrimage which I have
to look back upon. I have only to add, that my friend still lives, a
prosperous gentleman, but too much occupied with graver business to
thank me for indicating him more plainly as a confidant of my childish
mystery.

When boyhood advancing into youth required more serious studies and
graver cares, a long illness threw me back on the kingdom of fiction,
as if it were by a species of fatality. My indisposition arose, in part
at least, from my having broken a blood-vessel; and motion and speech
were for a long time pronounced positively dangerous. For several weeks
I was confined strictly to my bed, during which time I was not allowed
to speak above a whisper, to eat more than a spoonful or two of boiled
rice, or to have more covering than one thin counterpane. When the
reader is informed that I was at this time a growing youth, with the
spirits, appetite, and impatience of fifteen, and suffered, of course,
greatly under this severe regimen, which the repeated return of my
disorder rendered indispensable, he will not be surprised that I was
abandoned to my own discretion, so far as reading (my almost sole
amusement) was concerned, and still less so, that I abused the
indulgence which left my time so much at my own disposal.

There was at this time a circulating library in Edinburgh, founded, I
believe, by the celebrated Allan Ramsay, which, besides containing a
most respectable collection of books of every description, was, as
might have been expected, peculiarly rich in works of fiction. It
exhibited specimens of every kind, from the romances of chivalry and
the ponderous folios of Cyrus and Cassandra, down to the most approved
works of later times. I was plunged into this great ocean of reading
without compass or pilot; and, unless when some one had the charity to
play at chess with me, I was allowed to do nothing save read from
morning to night. I was, in kindness and pity, which was perhaps
erroneous, however natural, permitted to select my subjects of study at
my own pleasure, upon the same principle that the humours of children
are indulged to keep them out of mischief. As my taste and appetite
were gratified in nothing else, I indemnified myself by becoming a
glutton of books. Accordingly, I believe I read almost all the
romances, old plays, and epic poetry in that formidable collection, and
no doubt was unconsciously amassing materials for the task in which it
has been my lot to be so much employed.

At the same time I did not in all respects abuse the license permitted
me. Familiar acquaintance with the specious miracles of fiction brought
with it some degree of satiety, and I began by degrees to seek in
histories, memoirs, voyages and travels, and the like, events nearly as
wonderful as those which were the work of imagination, with the
additional advantage that they were at least in a great measure true.
The lapse of nearly two years, during which I was left to the exercise
of my own free will, was followed by a temporary residence in the
country, where I was again very lonely but for the amusement which I
derived from a good though old-fashioned library. The vague and wild
use which I made of this advantage I cannot describe better than by
referring my reader to the desultory studies of Waverley in a similar
situation, the passages concerning whose course of reading were
imitated from recollections of my own. It must be understood that the
resemblance extends no farther.

Time, as it glided on, brought the blessings of confirmed health and
personal strength, to a degree which had never been expected or hoped
for. The severe studies necessary to render me fit for my profession
occupied the greater part of my time; and the society of my friends and
companions, who were about to enter life along with, me, filled up the
interval with the usual amusements of young men. I was in a situation
which rendered serious labour indispensable; for, neither possessing,
on the one hand, any of those peculiar advantages which are supposed to
favour a hasty advance in the profession of the law, nor being, on the
other hand, exposed to unusual obstacles to interrupt my progress, I
might reasonably expect to succeed according to the greater or less
degree of trouble which I should take to qualify myself as a pleader.

It makes no part of the present story to detail how the success of a
few ballads had the effect of changing all the purpose and tenor of my
life, and of converting a painstaking lawyer of some years' standing
into a follower of literature. It is enough to say, that I had assumed
the latter character for several years before I seriously thought of
attempting a work of imagination in prose, although one or two of my
poetical attempts did not differ from romances otherwise than by being
written in verse. But yet I may observe, that about this time (now,
alas! thirty years since) I had nourished the ambitious desire of
composing a tale of chivalry, which was to be in the style of the
Castle of Otranto, with plenty of Border characters and supernatural
incident. Having found unexpectedly a chapter of this intended work
among some old papers, I have subjoined it to this introductory essay,
thinking some readers may account as curious the first attempts at
romantic composition by an author who has since written so much in that
department. [Footnote: See Appendix No I.] And those who complain, not
unreasonably, of the profusion of the Tales which have followed
Waverley, may bless their stars at the narrow escape they have made, by
the commencement of the inundation, which had so nearly taken place in
the first year of the century, being postponed for fifteen years later.

This particular subject was never resumed, but I did not abandon the
idea of fictitious composition in prose, though I determined to give
another turn to the style of the work.

My early recollections of the Highland scenery and customs made so
favourable an impression in the poem called the Lady of the Lake, that
I was induced to think of attempting something of the same kind in
prose. I had been a good deal in the Highlands at a time when they were
much less accessible and much less visited than they have been of late
years, and was acquainted with many of the old warriors of 1745, who
were, like most veterans, easily induced to fight their battles over
again for the benefit of a willing listener like myself. It naturally
occurred to me that the ancient traditions and high spirit of a people
who, living in a civilised age and country, retained so strong a
tincture of manners belonging to an early period of society, must
afford a subject favourable for romance, if it should not prove a
curious tale marred in the telling.

It was with some idea of this kind that, about the year 1805, I threw
together about one-third part of the first volume of Waverley. It was
advertised to be published by the late Mr. John Ballantyne, bookseller
in Edinburgh, under the name of Waverley; or, 'Tis Fifty Years Since--a
title afterwards altered to 'Tis Sixty Years Since, that the actual
date of publication might be made to correspond with the period in
which the scene was laid. Having proceeded as far, I think, as the
seventh chapter, I showed my work to a critical friend, whose opinion
was unfavourable; and having then some poetical reputation, I was
unwilling to risk the loss of it by attempting a new style of
composition. I therefore threw aside the work I had commenced, without
either reluctance or remonstrance. I ought to add that, though my
ingenious friend's sentence was afterwards reversed on an appeal to the
public, it cannot be considered as any imputation on his good taste;
for the specimen subjected to his criticism did not extend beyond the
departure of the hero for Scotland, and consequently had not entered
upon the part of the story which was finally found most interesting.

Be that as it may, this portion of the manuscript was laid aside in the
drawers of an old writing-desk, which, on my first coming to reside at
Abbotsford in 1811, was placed in a lumber garret and entirely
forgotten. Thus, though I sometimes, among other literary avocations,
turned my thoughts to the continuation of the romance which I had
commenced, yet, as I could not find what I had already written, after
searching such repositories as were within my reach, and was too
indolent to attempt to write it anew from memory, I as often laid aside
all thoughts of that nature.

Two circumstances in particular recalled my recollection of the mislaid
manuscript. The first was the extended and well-merited fame of Miss
Edgeworth, whose Irish characters have gone so far to make the English
familiar with the character of their gay and kind-hearted neighbours of
Ireland, that she may be truly said to have done more towards
completing the Union than perhaps all the legislative enactments by
which it has been followed up.

Without being so presumptuous as to hope to emulate the rich humour,
pathetic tenderness, and admirable tact which pervade the works of my
accomplished friend, I felt that something might be attempted for my
own country, of the same kind with that which Miss Edgeworth so
fortunately achieved for Ireland--something which might introduce her
natives to those of the sister kingdom in a more favourable light than
they had been placed hitherto, and tend to procure sympathy for their
virtues and indulgence for their foibles. I thought also, that much of
what I wanted in talent might be made up by the intimate acquaintance
with the subject which I could lay claim to possess, as having
travelled through most parts of Scotland, both Highland and Lowland,
having been familiar with the elder as well as more modern race, and
having had from my infancy free and unrestrained communication with all
ranks of my countrymen, from the Scottish peer to the Scottish
plough-man. Such ideas often occurred to me, and constituted an
ambitious branch of my theory, however far short I may have fallen of
it in practice.

But it was not only the triumphs of Miss Edgeworth which worked in me
emulation, and disturbed my indolence. I chanced actually to engage in
a work which formed a sort of essay piece, and gave me hope that I
might in time become free of the craft of romance-writing, and be
esteemed a tolerable workman.

In the year 1807-08 I undertook, at the request of John Murray, Esq.,
of Albemarle Street, to arrange for publication some posthumous
productions of the late Mr. Joseph Strutt, distinguished as an artist
and an antiquary, amongst which was an unfinished romance, entitled
Queenhoo Hall. The scene of the tale was laid in the reign of Henry VI,
and the work was written to illustrate the manners, customs, and
language of the people of England during that period. The extensive
acquaintance which Mr. Strutt had acquired with such subjects in
compiling his laborious Horda Angel-Cynnan, his Regal and
Ecclesiastical Antiquities, and his Essay on the Sports and Pastimes of
the People of England had rendered him familiar with all the
antiquarian lore necessary for the purpose of composing the projected
romance; and although the manuscript bore the marks of hurry and
incoherence natural to the first rough draught of the author, it
evinced (in my opinion) considerable powers of imagination.

As the work was unfinished, I deemed it my duty, as editor, to supply
such a hasty and inartificial conclusion as could be shaped out from
the story, of which Mr. Strutt had laid the foundation. This concluding
chapter [Footnote: See Appendix No. II.] is also added to the present
Introduction, for the reason already mentioned regarding the preceding
fragment. It was a step in my advance towards romantic composition; and
to preserve the traces of these is in a great measure the object of
this Essay.

Queenhoo Hall was not, however, very successful. I thought I was aware
of the reason, and supposed that, by rendering his language too
ancient, and displaying his antiquarian knowledge too liberally, the
ingenious author had raised up an obstacle to his own success. Every
work designed for mere amusement must be expressed in language easily
comprehended; and when, as is sometimes the case in QUEENHOO HALL, the
author addresses himself exclusively to the antiquary, he must be
content to be dismissed by the general reader with the criticism of
Mungo, in the PADLOCK, on the Mauritanian music, 'What signifies me
hear, if me no understand?'

I conceived it possible to avoid this error; and, by rendering a
similar work more light and obvious to general comprehension, to escape
the rock on which my predecessor was shipwrecked.

But I was, on the other hand, so far discouraged by the indifferent
reception of Mr. Strutt's romance as to become satisfied that the
manners of the middle ages did not possess the interest which I had
conceived; and was led to form the opinion that a romance founded on a
Highland story and more modern events would have a better chance of
popularity than a tale of chivalry.

My thoughts, therefore, returned more than once to the tale which I had
actually commenced, and accident at length threw the lost sheets in my
way.

I happened to want some fishing-tackle for the use of a guest, when it
occurred to me to search the old writing-desk already mentioned, in
which I used to keep articles of that nature.

I got access to it with some difficulty; and, in looking for lines and
flies, the long-lost manuscript presented itself.

I immediately set to work to complete it according to my original
purpose.

And here I must frankly confess that the mode in which I conducted the
story scarcely deserved the success which the romance afterwards
attained.

The tale of WAVERLEY was put together with so little care that I cannot
boast of having sketched any distinct plan of the work. The whole
adventures of Waverley, in his movements up and down the country with
the Highland cateran Bean Lean, are managed without much skill. It
suited best, however, the road I wanted to travel, and permitted me to
introduce some descriptions of scenery and manners, to which the
reality gave an interest which the powers of the Author might have
otherwise failed to attain for them. And though I have been in other
instances a sinner in this sort, I do not recollect any of these novels
in which I have transgressed so widely as in the first of the series.

Among other unfounded reports, it has been said that the copyright of
Waverley was, during the book's progress through the press, offered for
sale to various book-sellers in London at a very inconsiderable price.
This was not the case. Messrs. Constable and Cadell, who published the
work, were the only persons acquainted with the contents of the
publication, and they offered a large sum for it while in the course of
printing, which, however, was declined, the Author not choosing to part
with the copyright.

The origin of the story of Waverley, and the particular facts on which
it is founded, are given in the separate introduction prefixed to that
romance in this edition, and require no notice in this place.

Waverley was published in 1814, and, as the title-page was without the
name of the Author, the work was left to win its way in the world
without any of the usual recommendations. Its progress was for some
time slow; but after the first two or three months its popularity had
increased in a degree which must have satisfied the expectations of the
Author, had these been far more sanguine than he ever entertained.

Great anxiety was expressed to learn the name of the Author, but on
this no authentic information could be attained. My original motive for
publishing the work anonymously was the consciousness that it was an
experiment on the public taste which might very probably fail, and
therefore there was no occasion to take on myself the personal risk of
discomfiture. For this purpose considerable precautions were used to
preserve secrecy. My old friend and schoolfellow, Mr. James Ballantyne,
who printed these Novels, had the exclusive task of corresponding with
the Author, who thus had not only the advantage of his professional
talents, but also of his critical abilities. The original manuscript,
or, as it is technically called, copy, was transcribed under Mr.
Ballantyne's eye by confidential persons; nor was there an instance of
treachery during the many years in which these precautions were
resorted to, although various individuals were employed at different
times. Double proof-sheets were regularly printed off. One was
forwarded to the Author by Mr. Ballantyne, and the alterations which it
received were, by his own hand, copied upon the other proof-sheet for
the use of the printers, so that even the corrected proofs of the
Author were never seen in the printing office; and thus the curiosity
of such eager inquirers as made the most minute investigation was
entirely at fault.

But although the cause of concealing the Author's name in the first
instance, when the reception of Waverley was doubtful, was natural
enough, it is more difficult, it may be thought, to account for the
same desire for secrecy during the subsequent editions, to the amount
of betwixt eleven and twelve thousand copies, which followed each other
close, and proved the success of the work. I am sorry I can give little
satisfaction to queries on this subject. I have already stated
elsewhere that I can render little better reason for choosing to remain
anonymous than by saying with Shylock, that such was my humour. It will
be observed that I had not the usual stimulus for desiring personal
reputation, the desire, namely, to float amidst the conversation of
men. Of literary fame, whether merited or undeserved, I had already as
much as might have contented a mind more ambitious than mine; and in
entering into this new contest for reputation I might be said rather to
endanger what I had than to have any considerable chance of acquiring
more. I was affected, too, by none of those motives which, at an
earlier period of life, would doubtless have operated upon me. My
friendships were formed, my place in society fixed, my life had
attained its middle course. My condition in society was higher perhaps
than I deserved, certainly as high as I wished, and there was scarce
any degree of literary success which could have greatly altered or
improved my personal condition.

I was not, therefore, touched by the spur of ambition, usually
stimulating on such occasions; and yet I ought to stand exculpated from
the charge of ungracious or unbecoming indifference to public applause.
I did not the less feel gratitude for the public favour, although I did
not proclaim it; as the lover who wears his mistress's favour in his
bosom is as proud, though not so vain, of possessing it as another who
displays the token of her grace upon his bonnet. Far from such an
ungracious state of mind, I have seldom felt more satisfaction than
when, returning from a pleasure voyage, I found Waverley in the zenith
of popularity, and public curiosity in full cry after the name of the
Author. The knowledge that I had the public approbation was like having
the property of a hidden treasure, not less gratifying to the owner
than if all the world knew that it was his own. Another advantage was
connected with the secrecy which I observed. I could appear or retreat
from the stage at pleasure, without attracting any personal notice or
attention, other than what might be founded on suspicion only. In my
own person also, as a successful author in another department of
literature, I might have been charged with too frequent intrusions on
the public patience; but the Author of Waverley was in this respect as
impassible to the critic as the Ghost of Hamlet to the partisan of
Marcellus. Perhaps the curiosity of the public, irritated by the
existence of a secret, and kept afloat by the discussions which took
place on the subject from time to time, went a good way to maintain an
unabated interest in these frequent publications. There was a mystery
concerning the Author which each new novel was expected to assist in
unravelling, although it might in other respects rank lower than its
predecessors.

I may perhaps be thought guilty of affectation, should I allege as one
reason of my silence a secret dislike to enter on personal discussions
concerning my own literary labours. It is in every case a dangerous
intercourse for an author to be dwelling continually among those who
make his writings a frequent and familiar subject of conversation, but
who must necessarily be partial judges of works composed in their own
society. The habits of self-importance which are thus acquired by
authors are highly injurious to a well-regulated mind; for the cup of
flattery, if it does not, like that of Circe, reduce men to the level
of beasts, is sure, if eagerly drained, to bring the best and the
ablest down to that of fools. This risk was in some degree prevented by
the mask which I wore; and my own stores of self-conceit were left to
their natural course, without being enhanced by the partiality of
friends or adulation of flatterers.

If I am asked further reasons for the conduct I have long observed, I
can only resort to the explanation supplied by a critic as friendly as
he is intelligent; namely, that the mental organisation of the novelist
must be characterised, to speak craniologically, by an extraordinary
development of the passion for delitescency! I the rather suspect some
natural disposition of this kind; for, from the instant I perceived the
extreme curiosity manifested on the subject, I felt a secret
satisfaction in baffling it, for which, when its unimportance is
considered, I do not well know how to account.

My desire to remain concealed, in the character of the Author of these
Novels, subjected me occasionally to awkward embarrassments, as it
sometimes happened that those who were sufficiently intimate with me
would put the question in direct terms. In this case, only one of three
courses could be followed. Either I must have surrendered my secret, or
have returned an equivocating answer, or, finally, must have stoutly
and boldly denied the fact. The first was a sacrifice which I conceive
no one had a right to force from me, since I alone was concerned in the
matter. The alternative of rendering a doubtful answer must have left
me open to the degrading suspicion that I was not unwilling to assume
the merit (if there was any) which I dared not absolutely lay claim to;
or those who might think more justly of me must have received such an
equivocal answer as an indirect avowal. I therefore considered myself
entitled, like an accused person put upon trial, to refuse giving my
own evidence to my own conviction, and flatly to deny all that could
not be proved against me. At the same time I usually qualified my
denial by stating that, had I been the Author of these works, I would
have felt myself quite entitled to protect my secret by refusing my own
evidence, when it was asked for to accomplish a discovery of what I
desired to conceal.

The real truth is, that I never expected or hoped to disguise my
connection with these Novels from any one who lived on terms of
intimacy with me. The number of coincidences which necessarily existed
between narratives recounted, modes of expression, and opinions
broached in these Tales and such as were used by their Author in the
intercourse of private life must have been far too great to permit any
of my familiar acquaintances to doubt the identity betwixt their friend
and the Author of Waverley; and I believe they were all morally
convinced of it. But while I was myself silent, their belief could not
weigh much more with the world than that of others; their opinions and
reasoning were liable to be taxed with partiality, or confronted with
opposing arguments and opinions; and the question was not so much
whether I should be generally acknowledged to be the Author, in spite
of my own denial, as whether even my own avowal of the works, if such
should be made, would be sufficient to put me in undisputed possession
of that character.

I have been often asked concerning supposed cases, in which I was said
to have been placed on the verge of discovery; but, as I maintained my
point with the composure of a lawyer of thirty years' standing, I never
recollect being in pain or confusion on the subject. In Captain
Medwyn's Conversations of Lord Byron the reporter states himself to
have asked my noble and highly gifted friend,' If he was certain about
these Novels being Sir Walter Scott's?' To which Lord Byron replied,
'Scott as much as owned himself the Author of Waverley to me in
Murray's shop. I was talking to him about that Novel, and lamented that
its Author had not carried back the story nearer to the time of the
Revolution. Scott, entirely off his guard, replied, "Ay, I might have
done so; but--" there he stopped. It was in vain to attempt to correct
himself; he looked confused, and relieved his embarrassment by a
precipitate retreat.' I have no recollection whatever of this scene
taking place, and I should have thought that I was more likely to have
laughed than to appear confused, for I certainly never hoped to impose
upon Lord Byron in a case of the kind; and from the manner in which he
uniformly expressed himself, I knew his opinion was entirely formed,
and that any disclamations of mine would only have savoured of
affectation. I do not mean to insinuate that the incident did not
happen, but only that it could hardly have occurred exactly under the
circumstances narrated, without my recollecting something positive on
the subject. In another part of the same volume Lord Byron is reported
to have expressed a supposition that the cause of my not avowing myself
the Author of Waverley may have been some surmise that the reigning
family would have been displeased with the work. I can only say, it is
the last apprehension I should have entertained, as indeed the
inscription to these volumes sufficiently proves. The sufferers of that
melancholy period have, during the last and present reign, been
honoured both with the sympathy and protection of the reigning family,
whose magnanimity can well pardon a sigh from others, and bestow one
themselves, to the memory of brave opponents, who did nothing in hate,
but all in honour.

While those who were in habitual intercourse with the real author had
little hesitation in assigning the literary property to him, others,
and those critics of no mean rank, employed themselves in investigating
with persevering patience any characteristic features which might seem
to betray the origin of these Novels. Amongst these, one gentleman,
equally remarkable for the kind and liberal tone of his criticism, the
acuteness of his reasoning, and the very gentlemanlike manner in which
he conducted his inquiries, displayed not only powers of accurate
investigation, but a temper of mind deserving to be employed on a
subject of much greater importance; and I have no doubt made converts
to his opinion of almost all who thought the point worthy of
consideration. [Footnote: Letters on the Author of Waverly; Rodwell and
Martin, London, 1822.] Of those letters, and other attempts of the same
kind, the Author could not complain, though his incognito was
endangered. He had challenged the public to a game at bo-peep, and if
he was discovered in his 'hiding-hole,' he must submit to the shame of
detection.

Various reports were of course circulated in various ways; some founded
on an inaccurate rehearsal of what may have been partly real, some on
circumstances having no concern whatever with the subject, and others
on the invention of some importunate persons, who might perhaps imagine
that the readiest mode of forcing the Author to disclose himself was to
assign some dishonourable and discreditable cause for his silence.

It may be easily supposed that this sort of inquisition was treated
with contempt by the person whom it principally regarded; as, among all
the rumours that were current, there was only one, and that as
unfounded as the others, which had nevertheless some alliance to
probability, and indeed might have proved in some degree true.

I allude to a report which ascribed a great part, or the whole, of
these Novels to the late Thomas Scott, Esq., of the 70th Regiment, then
stationed in Canada. Those who remember that gentleman will readily
grant that, with general talents at least equal to those of his elder
brother, he added a power of social humour and a deep insight into
human character which rendered him an universally delightful member of
society, and that the habit of composition alone was wanting to render
him equally successful as a writer. The Author of Waverley was so
persuaded of the truth of this, that he warmly pressed his brother to
make such an experiment, and willingly undertook all the trouble of
correcting and superintending the press. Mr. Thomas Scott seemed at
first very well disposed to embrace the proposal, and had even fixed on
a subject and a hero. The latter was a person well known to both of us
in our boyish years, from having displayed some strong traits of
character. Mr. T. Scott had determined to represent his youthful
acquaintance as emigrating to America, and encountering the dangers and
hardships of the New World, with the same dauntless spirit which he had
displayed when a boy in his native country. Mr. Scott would probably
have been highly successful, being familiarly acquainted with the
manners of the native Indians, of the old French settlers in Canada,
and of the Brules or Woodsmen, and having the power of observing with
