person. After dinner Davis, as usual, settled himself down to enjoy a
program of symphonic music from San Francisco, many thousands of miles
away. And Deirdre vanished from sight again.

Later on Terry found himself alone on the _Esperance's_ deck, except for
Nick at the wheel--a mere dark figure seen only by the light of the
binnacle lamp. There was a diffused, faint glow coming from the
after-cabin hatch. Up forward, one of the crew-cuts plucked a guitar,
and Terry could imagine Doug dourly trying to read poetry despite the
noise. The sails were black against the sky. The deck was darker than
the sea.

Terry's guesses haunted him. He assured himself that he did not
entertain them even for an instant. They were absurd! A part of his mind
argued speciously that if they were absurd there was no reason not to
test them. If he was afraid to try, it would imply that at least part of
him believed them.

He picked up one of the plastic objects, and moved the recorder close to
the lee rail. It still transmitted faithfully, at minimum volume, the
washing of the waves as heard from beneath, and occasional small sounds
from living creatures, generally far away in the sea. Heeled over as the
_Esperance_ was, his hand could reach down into the rushing waters
overside.

He came to a resolution. He felt foolish, but by now he was determined
to try an experiment. Tiny light-blue sparks flashed where the water
raced past the yacht's planking. When he dipped his hand, water piled up
against his wrist and a streak of brightness trailed away behind.

He tapped the plastic object against the hull. One tap, two taps, three
taps, four taps. Then five, six, seven, eight. He went back to one. One
tap, two, and three and four. Five and six and seven and eight.

The recorder gave out the tappings the underwater microphone had picked
up. It seemed to Terry that the loudspeaker struggled to emit the
shrillest imaginable sounds in strict synchrony with the tappings.

Then Deirdre's voice came quietly, very near.

"I don't think," she said evenly, "that that's a fair thing to do."

He'd been bent over the rail in an awkward position. He straightened up,
guiltily.

"I know it's nonsense, but I was ... ashamed to admit ..."

"To admit," Deirdre concluded for him, "that by tapping numbers with a
plastic spy-device, you hoped to say to whom it might concern that we've
found a communicator, and we know what it is, and we're trying to get in
touch with the intelligent creatures who made it."

To hear his own self-denied guesses spoken aloud was appalling. Terry
instantly disbelieved them entirely.

"It's ridiculous, of course," he protested. "It's childish...."

"But it could be true," said Deirdre. "And, if true, it could be
dangerous. Suppose whatever put those plastic gadgets on the fish
doesn't want to be communicated with? Suppose it feels that it should
defend the secret of its existence by killing those who suspect it? I
wasn't spying on you," she added. "I heard the tappings down below."

Then she was gone. He saw the interruption in the light from the
after-cabin hatch as she went below.

He was suddenly filled with horror at the idea that if his guesses did
prove to be right, he might have endangered Deirdre. And then he ceased
to feel foolish. He felt like a criminal instead.

For a long, long time he listened with desperate intensity to the
recorder, lest he hear some reply to his signals.

But no answer came. The sounds from undersea remained utterly
commonplace.

When morning arrived he was in a state of desperate gloom. At breakfast
Deirdre acted as if she considered the incident closed. And, such being
the nature of men, Terry felt worse than before.

He was not wholly at ease again, even when that afternoon the
_Esperance_ sailed in past Cavite and Corregidor and into Manila Bay. A
new ship was at anchor in the harbor. It was a stubby, stocky ship which
Davis regarded with interest.

"That's the _Pelorus_," he told Terry as the yacht passed within a mile,
on the way to her former anchorage. "She's the hydrographic ship with
the bathyscaphe on board. We'll visit her. I'll get Nick to call her on
short-wave."

He went forward, where Nick was making ready to drop the anchor. Davis
took over the chore, and Nick went below.

"Are you going ashore?" asked Deirdre.

Terry shrugged. "I've no reason to."

She looked relieved. "Then you'll stay with the _Esperance_
until--things are settled one way or another? I mean, you're really
enlisted?"

"Until there are no more ways left for me to blunder," said Terry
distastefully. "I'm about through the list, though."

"Not at all!" protested Deirdre. "Tapping numbers was really a very good
idea. I was horrible! I scolded because you'd kept it a secret from me.
I'd have been proud if I'd thought of it first!"

Nick came back and spoke to Davis. Davis came aft.

"The _Pelorus_ will send a boat as soon as we've anchored," he told
them. "They've heard something and want to see the plastic objects."

"I'd like the long end of a bet that they don't believe in them, or us,"
Terry said abruptly. "They're established authorities on the ocean
bottom. They know a lot. They probably know so much they can't really
believe there's anything more to know than what they're busy finding out
now."

Davis shook his head. He was confident. The _Esperance_ anchored, almost
exactly where she'd been when Terry first came on board. Within half an
hour a boat arrived from the _Pelorus_. Terry repeated his refusal to go
along. Deirdre went along with her father.

They came back a little over an hour later. At first Davis was almost
speechless with fury. Then he told Terry, choking on his rage,
"According to them, the plastic objects are a hoax. The hum is a school
of fish. We aren't trained observers. At Thrawn Island they're
astronomers and they simply don't know anything about biology. And we
should realize that it's starkly impossible for intelligence to develop
where the oxygen supply is limited. It's unthinkable that abyssal fish
should have their swim bladders punctured so they won't explode from
release of pressure when they come to the surface. Those in the lagoon
aren't abyssal fish, just unfamiliar species!"

"Well?" Terry asked.

"Oh, they're going to make a bathyscaphe dive!" said Davis as angrily as
before. "As a matter of courtesy to somebody--not us. They'll make it
where we found fish packed in a circle. That happens to be the deepest
part of the Luzon Deep, in any case. They don't object to our sending
our dredge down first. They will be politely interested if it comes back
up."

"I," announced Deirdre, "I am so mad I could spit!"

"There's no use in our staying here," said Davis, seething. "Our dredge
should be ready. We'll go up to Barca and tow it to the point we want to
send it down."

He ordered Nick to get ready to lift anchor.

"One question," Terry said finally. "Did you mention the bolides?"

"No!" snapped Davis. "Would I want them to think I was crazy?"

He stamped away.

The _Esperance_ put to sea again. She sailed north along the coast. At
dinner everybody was quiet. It was the only meal, since Terry's joining,
that had not been enlivened by an elaborate argument on some subject or
other. Davis was still in an abominable mood. He knew it, and held
himself to silence.

Later, Terry and Deirdre talked together. They refrained tacitly from
speaking of marine biology or any reasons for tapping plastic objects
against the _Esperance's_ hull. They discussed only trivia, but somehow
Terry found any subject absorbing, when he was with Deirdre.

After a while she went below, and he stayed abovedecks, smoking. The
moon had not yet risen when he turned in.

They sailed into the small harbor of Barca at ten in the morning. By
twelve, local boatmen had towed out an ungainly object some thirty-two
feet long. They tethered it to bitts at the _Esperance's_ stern. By one
o'clock they had loaded on her deck a large, folded sack of sailcloth
and half a dozen specially-cast concrete blocks with eyed iron rods
cemented in them. At half-past one Deirdre, who had gone ashore in one
of the yacht's own boats, came back with innumerable supplies she'd
bought. At two o'clock the _Esperance_ went out to sea again.

The towed object was a construction around a central wooden spar with an
iron tube at its top end and half a dozen lesser spars linked loosely to
its bottom. A mass of fishnet was fastened to the smaller spars and
heavy ropes were holding the spars and the net in place during its tow.
There was a hook for attaching the main spar to the concrete sinkers.

"It opens like an umbrella," explained Deirdre. "We'll hoist it upright
barely out of the water, and fasten on the weights. The canvas bag fits
on that iron pipe. When you let it go, it sinks like an umbrella that's
tightly closed, but when it touches bottom the weights spread it out and
an explosive charge automatically goes off in that iron tube. It's
special explosive. The gas it makes inflates the canvas bag, which can't
burn underwater, and that floats the whole thing back up with the ribs
of the umbrella stretched out and spreading the net between them. It
should catch anything it encounters as it rises. As the pressure lowers,
the excess gas can escape through a relief-valve. This dredge is
experimental. If it works, it can be modified to do lots of things."

"Such as poking at things we don't believe in," said Terry drily. "That
explosion ought to stir up anything in its neighborhood. It'll be much
more disturbing and audible than a few light taps against the
_Esperance's_ hull!"

Deirdre grinned ruefully and did not answer.

The bulky tow slowed the yacht. She did not reach the position of the
fish-filled circle until after nightfall, and it was necessary to have
plenty of light by which to locate the inflated bag when it came to the
surface, so nothing could be tried until the following morning. A short
while before daybreak, lights appeared at the horizon. Red and green
sidelights, and white central lights. It was a steamer. It came closer
and closer. Presently, it turned and headed upwind and went dead slow,
barely keeping steerage. It was the _Pelorus_.

Dawn arrived in a golden radiance which thrust aside the night. The
_Pelorus_ shone brightly in the first rays of the sun. A large object
was hoisted out of her hold. Its shape was that of a gravid goldfish,
with a smaller sphere hanging beneath it. It went overside, slowly, and
there it floated, rolling wildly on the waves. For a very long time
nothing seemed to happen. Then the water-level of the float sank a
little. It was being filled with gasoline, which is lighter than water
and practically incompressible.

On the _Esperance_, the tow had been pulled alongside and the yacht's
powerful winch hauled it upright. The yacht heeled over from the weight.
The crew-cuts fastened the canvas sack in place, and Davis loaded the
explosive charge into the iron tube. The crew-cuts cleared the nets.
This preliminary operation seemed promising, and it was quite likely
that the dredge would operate as it was designed to do.

The _Pelorus_ whistled impatiently. Nick abandoned his job and went
below to the short-wave set. He returned shortly after.

"The _Pelorus_ says she'll be ready to send the bathyscaphe down for a
test dive in two hours," he reported. "She says she will object if our
gadget is floating free at the time, on the chance that it might
interfere with the bathyscaphe. She asks if you can send our dredge down
right away and get it over with."

"Tell them yes," said Davis. "In five minutes."

He compressed his lips. The _Esperance's_ device, though clumsy, was
fundamentally simple. Five minutes later the top of the central spar was
level with the water. "Cut away," said Davis.

Doug slashed the single rope holding the dredge. It sank immediately.

The recorder gave off the sound of waves. Occasionally, very
occasionally, a chirping or a grunt could be heard. Twenty minutes.
Thirty.

There was a "crump!" from the loudspeaker which reported underwater
events. The sound seemed to come from very far below. Even a small
amount of explosive makes a very considerable concussion when it goes
off so far down, and the shock travels in all directions instead of
merely upward. The recorder picked up that concussion as a deep-bass
sound.

The sun shone. The wind increased. Waves marched in serried ranks from
here to there.

A long, long time later the inflated canvas bag came up and was floating
on top of the waves. The _Pelorus_ whistled. Nick went below. A few
minutes later he came up again to report.

"The _Pelorus_ says not to cast our dredge adrift. They're sending the
bathyscaphe down unmanned, to test all apparatus before a manned dive.
They don't want any debris in the sea."

"Tell them we send them a kiss," snapped Davis, "and they needn't
worry!"

The _Esperance_ approached the floating bag. Jug swung out on the
lifting boom and hooked it. The winch hauled it out of the water. The
concrete weights were gone. What the nets had captured was not pretty to
see. A dead fish with foliated appendages had come up from far below, to
judge by what its unpunctured swim bladder had done to it in
uncontrolled expansion. Davis said curtly it was _Linophrine arborifer_,
belonging two thousand fathoms below. An angry-looking creature,
similarly dead, was _Opisthoproctus grimaldi_. It belonged deeper than
the other. There were other specimens. A _genostoma_ of a species the
books didn't picture; a _Myctophum_; and various other creatures, mostly
as grotesque as their scientific names. All were abyssal fish. They had
died while rising from a pressure of several tons per square inch to
surface-pressure only.

"It worked," said Davis curtly. "I almost wish it hadn't. Let it down
into the water again. We'll jettison it when the _Pelorus_ gives us
permission."

Time passed. More time. Still more. The bathyscaphe was now in the
water, practically awash. Only a small conning tower showed above the
waves. Men swarmed around it.

There came a query from the _Pelorus_. The _Esperance_ gave assurance
that the deep-sea dredge had returned to the surface and would be kept
there.

The bathyscaphe was allowed to sink.

The recorder on the yacht began to pick up deep-toned mooing sounds from
the depths.

Presently, the mooing sounds ceased.

Two hours later, waves broke over an object completely awash on the
ocean. The _Pelorus_ steamed cautiously toward it. Boats went down from
her sides and surrounded the float.

After a long time the _Pelorus_ got alongside and men quickly fastened
the huge buoy to the ship. Then the down-wind sea changed its
appearance. A reek of gasoline reached the _Esperance_.

"Something happened," said Davis dourly. "They're dumping the
