
TOO BAD ABOUT THAT ONE, mused the Secretary briefly.  THEY SAY HE HAD A
FAMILY.  Rising, he left the small conference room and moved with swift
steps toward the Main Intercommunications studio to prepare his
pre-battle address to the subcommanders.  NO, ON SECOND THOUGHT I'D
BETTER MAKE IT THE ENTIRE CREW.  WE'VE GOT TO FIGHT LIKE THE THREE
HUNDRED SPARTANS TOMORROW.  And pleased with this metaphor, trying to
think how to work it into his speech, he continued on his way.


*


Squadron-leader Dorfman was approaching his thirtieth hour in
light-warp, and was less than sixteen hours away from his projected
time of Intercept.  His was one of only five missile-ships that
remained on course and on target.

There is a certain level of endurance beyond which even the strongest
minds cannot go without some loss of rationality.  Dorfman, a seasoned
veteran, had been on tough, grueling missions before, but this---he
could no longer deceive himself---was undoubtedly the cruelest.

He had been able to remain calmly alert and rest his eyes for brief
intervals, trusting somewhat to fate, for the first eighteen hours or
so, and this had bought him time.  A product of East German military
training and thinking, his own life or death was now secondary to the
success or failure of the mission and, truly believing this, his fears
had not been able to engulf him.  His life had been full:  his wife was
a soldier's wife, and his son was now fourteen and able to look after
her.  But it was not necessary for him, as it was for some men, to
discount his own death through such a progression of thought.  He knew
what his country was up against, and accepted his duty without
reservation.

But even through so many well-laid defenses, the exhaustion and mental
strain had begun to do their work on him.  Fatigue became a constant
torture.  To keep his eyes open and on anything, let alone the bulbous,
softly glowing scope before him, was next to impossible.  But to take a
stimulant, he knew, would be worse.  He could ill afford to compound
the demands on mind and body.   Muscle tremors and adrenalin surges
would make him useless if ever. . .WHEN he reached his target.  Having
no choice, he stayed where he was, his eyes fastened on the scope.

Being a thoroughly disciplined man, it was perhaps more difficult for
him to deal with the violent, primal images and emotions that now
thrashed about inside him.  Visions of tearing Stone's throat out, and
of sexual violence toward nameless, faceless women were particularly
prevalent, but not nearly so painful as the occasional outbursts of
groundless hatred toward his wife and son.  He knew these for what they
were, distorted by-products of the subconscious, and reminded himself
as their intensity grew that they could not physically hurt him.  But
secretly he was upset, and wished they would go away.

Finally he had to make a decision.  It was either rest his eyes and
neck for a moment, possibly get up and stretch, or smash his fist
against the screen.  He stood up and put his hands together behind him,
craning both neck and back, them pumped his ribs twice with his biceps.
 He sat back down after an elapse of two minutes and drank some water.
Then returned to his vigil.



*                        *                        *



It was nearing 6:00 AM, United Commonwealth Earth time, 0600 by the
military clock.  On the dark side of Goethe there was no time, only the
slow indifferent turning of the dark skied, sea-laden monster.

Hayes had decided to do the broadcast live.  He sat before the tiny
camera fixtures cool and alert, with a partial script before him.
Added to the natural intensity of his features was the hard, predatory
gleam that always rimmed his eyes before a battle.  No matter that the
rapid-black passage through the star gate, and the fighting sure to
follow, would not occur until the next morning.  He would not eat or
sleep until then, concentrating all his energies and attention on the
slightest details of preparation.  By seven o'clock the next morning he
would be transformed into the atavistic frame of mind where decisions
were not tainted by conscience or emotion but were ruthless, correct in
their unhesitating aggression, and sharp as razor steel.  In battle as
in life, he told himself, there was no substitute for hardness and
sheer force of will.  The subtle throb and hum of the giant ship felt
strong and reassuring around him, as it headed toward the limits of the
system.

The red light of the studio came on:  twenty seconds.  Ten.  The man in
the booth signaled him, and he began to speak.

"My fellow soldiers of the dauntless Third Fleet.  We stand on the eve
of a great battle.  At stake is nothing less....."

Nine minutes later the first of the East German scat-ships came out of
warp.  In the five seconds allotted him, SubCaptain Hessler located the
target, aimed and fired his missile, and broke off again into e-light.
The automated batteries aboard the Dreadnought picked up and analyzed
his presence, aimed a ruby laser and fired:  too late.  Also too late
were the bursts it fired at the lightning-fast projectile, sent in a
curved trajectory at its more vulnerable underside.

The neonuclear explosive hit home with a violence that even the
emptiness of Space could not diffuse, penetrating seven of the
Carrier's sixteen layered shields.

Within the ship there was a sudden, jarring concussion, and the
corridors of every vessel inside it resounded with the drone of a
battle-stations alert.  For the briefest instant the lights of the
studio went out; and when they returned Hayes saw that his speech was
ruined.  A pitcher of water had spilled across it, and the liquid
inside blurred ink and paper together into an unrecognizable wrinkle of
smeared sheaves.  The man in the booth made a quizzical motion, in the
form of a question drawing his finger across his throat.  But Hayes
shook him off angrily.

"All men to your posts," he barked gruffly.  "Maybe now you'll see that
this is no game."  He himself hastened to the uppermost bridge, furious
at this sneak attack, and even more at his own men for having allowed
it to happen.

"Damage report!" he shouted, entering the circle of men and equipment
that scrambled with sudden activity like an ant-hill beaten with a
stick.  "How many ships!"

"Damage report coming," said a voice, calm and professional.

"Just the one," came another.

"It only slowed to sub-light long enough to fire the projectile, then
broke off again just as fast."  This last belonged to Gen-Admiral
Frank, commander of the Fleet.

"Why didn't the robot-guns get him?"

"They weren't set for full kill intercept.  With so many Alliance ships
in the vicinity, they had to analyze---"

"I hope you've corrected THAT blunder."

"Yes, General.  And I've warned the Alliance pilots---"

"Tell those French faggots to stay the hell away from us."  Hayes had
taken to calling the Belgians 'French', and the Swiss 'Krauts'.  "If
they want to play soldier, let them do it somewhere else."

"Damage report," came the first voice.

"So what the hell are you waiting for?"

"Nothing, sir.  Outer seven shield-projectors damaged but reparable.
Several of the discharging chutes and one of the lower batteries out
for twelve to twenty-four hours.  No significant damage to interior
vessel or launch ships."

At this Hayes grew calmer, mastered his wrath.  NO SIGNIFICAN DAMAGE.
Then perhaps it was for the best after all. . .so long as no more of
them got through.  And he liked the unruffled manner of the officer who
had given him the report.

"Very well, Captain.  Admiral Frank, have we got a fix on where he came
from?"  The Fleet Commander was immediately aware of the change in his
superior's voice.

"Yes, General.  It came from the direction of East German Cerberus.
We've trained the First and Fourth Robot Artillery toward that vector,
since it's unlikely they've had time....."

"Correct, Admiral.  But see to it that the others aren't napping,
either."  THE JERRIES ARE NO FOOLS, THOUGH.  THEY KNOW WE'RE COMING
AFTER THEM.  "Let's go up into the bubble for a moment, shall we?
Gentlemen, keep us posted."

Entering the 'bubble' through the elevator, a small, Officers' Security
Chamber at the top of the uppermost bridge, the Secretary turned to
Frank, and unexpectedly put his arm around his smaller compatriot's
shoulder.  Though incapable of self-reproach, he knew he had been a bit
hard on this man, whose loyalty he could ill afford to lose.

Confused at this sudden gesture, Frank tried to clarify his position
with words.  "I'm sorry, General.  Not going into full Intercept was a
stupid oversight.  I'd just not had experience with this type of craft."

"No, Donald, that's all right.  It's a sign of desperation on their
part, turning to guerilla warfare so soon."  He motioned the Admiral to
a chair, remained standing himself.  "It may even be to our advantage
in the long run.  Sometimes there's nothing better for a cocky fighter
than to take a solid right to the jaw---let's him know he's in a real
fight.  Coffee?"  Frank shook his head, and Hayes continued his oration.

"The upcoming battle isn't going to be as easy as the last one, though
this time we'll be more experienced.  Obviously word has leaked out
that we plan to go after the D.G. Provinces.  They can't know where we
plan to hit them, of course (the last three digits of the attack
coordinates were only now being relayed to the engineers at the Gate),
but we could still run across the greater part of the Coalition forces
before we're through.  And who knows?  It might not end there."

"What do you mean?"  Frank's look was puzzled.

"I mean that Congress and the liberal press are giving Stone a tougher
time on this than I first let on.  He's got the authority and resources
to supply the Third Fleet, but when the House will come around with
full appropriations is another question."

"But surely after this attack the Soviets will intervene?  Why. . .we
can't take on Soviet Space with just the Third Fleet."  For a moment
Hayes stopped his pacing, and unconsciously ground his teeth.  He did
this with his back to the admiral, but realized that it might still
look odd.  He continued.

"All the same, I want to hold back as many of our ships as possible,
keep losses to a minimum.  And that means the launch-pilots, and our
own gunners, are going to have to fight like hell."

Frank was silent.  Hayes took a deep breath and half sighed.  "Well,
maybe we'll get reinforcements sooner.  One battle at a time!  For now
we've got the best men, the best equipment, AND the best leadership."
He winked with his eyelid only.  "Well.  Let's go back and see if the
Germans have any more surprises for us."

The man rose, shook the hand Hayes offered, and both returned to the
bridge.

"Got him, sir!" came a young voice, almost playful.  "Knocked him out
before he could fire; beat the damn computer, too."  The man, facing
the controls of Auxiliary Laser Deployment, had obviously not seen the
two generals re-enter.

"And just exactly what have you GOT?" said Frank disparagingly.  The
soldier whirled in his chair, and for a moment his face registered
alarm.  But very quickly the look of boyish confidence returned.

"One of those German torpedo-ships, Admiral.  Neutralized the missile,
too."

"Correct sir," added the main gunnery officer.  Frank started to say
something, but Hayes lightly touched his arm.

"That's very good shooting, gunner.  But what would have happened if
another 'torpedo ship' came out of warp while you were celebrating?  I
assure you, you'll have no time for games tomorrow.  And to be sure
that I make my point, I'm going to assign you a quota.  Knock out
twelve more targets tomorrow, and you might even retain your present
rank.  Do I make myself quite clear?"

The young man looked confused, turned to the gunnery officer as for
support.  But aware of Frank's eyes upon him, this older man nodded
sternly, and the gunner had no choice.

"Yes, Mr. Secretary."  Angry, humiliated, he turned back to his
station.  I'LL GET MORE THAN TWELVE, YOU OVERSTUFFED SON OF A BITCH.
Such were his thoughts all that morning, and the thoughts that carried
over, and were turned to hatred in the midst of the next day's fighting.

Returning after a time to the Intercom Studio, Hayes addressed the
assembly again, this time in different tone and with stronger words.
And like pondering horses to the whip, they responded.

But not all of them alike.


*


Squadron-leader Heinrich Dorfman, in the last of three German ships to
complete the mission, had held himself back on purpose, hoping to
arrive last and unexpectedly---to do real, rather than symbolic damage.
 And when his lead signal bounced back to him the image of Goethe,
still some distance away, along with the outward-bound trail of the
supercarrier, he set his course.  He did this carefully, staying just
above tracking speed, in a wide arc, hoping to come upon the
Dreadnought in a time and place not as thoroughly guarded.

And like the two younger pilots who had come so far, his mind had long
since crossed the line of rational human endurance.  Now, when he
closed his eyes he saw the gray, rotted-meat faces of old men crawling
with maggots.  He saw random sexual parts horribly distorted:  almost
physical the effect of their ugliness upon him.  His spirit had given
up all hope of survival:  strange voices.  His tortured neck and back
fused with the paroxysms of a migraine to form the single and
inescapable sensation of concrete and iron, bent-forward pain.  He felt
he no longer had eyes, but that the image of the scope shot straight
through the empty skull-sockets and into his brain.  The last remnants
of heart and courage despaired.

But now, on the verge of his thirtieth hour, with the target in reach,
it was almost as though his mind were no longer attached to the body.
Numb fatigue had shaken it off like the parting soul shakes off flesh.
Nothing remained but his mission and his will.

He was ready.  He would do it.  He tried to rouse himself mentally for
the last decisive seconds.  He bean to slow out of  light speed.

The time was now.  Not too fast.....



        :00-  The ship in sight, minor adjustment.
        :01-  Locked on.
        :02-  Fire.  WHAT THE HELL IS WRONG?
        :03-  Indicator light.  PROJECTILE NON-FUNCTIONAL
        :04-  DAMN IT!  Manual disengage, back to---
        :05-  Warp.  Robot batteries aboard Dreadnought destroy the
cast-off projectile.  Fan-burst of ruby lasers miss the second target,
fire again.


        :57-  Dorfman breaks his hand against the ceiling of the inner
hull.  He had failed.  "Damn it!  GOD DAMN IT!"  


        21:12-  The squadron leader slows his tiny ship and continues
to steer toward the sun, Athena.  Slowing further still, he places
himself directly in line with sun and planet, close enough to Athena to
distort tracking.  Sends out his sounding beam.



        34:29-  Dorfman continues to wait for his signal to proceed him
to Goethe.  The time arrives.  With the last of his e-light capacity
and deep-space fuel, he fires toward the distant speck of blue-green
ocean world.


        49:50-  The third echo of his signal tells him he is drawing
near.  Slows to sub-light and raises entry shields, makes other
preparations to enter atmosphere.


        1:13:30-  Entry halfway competed:  elevation 1200 Kilometers.
The buffeting of atmosphere increases.  Aware that he is being tracked
and pursued by Alliance fighters, he makes jerking motions with the
vessel, simulating (and nearly causing) atmospheric destruction.


        1:31:37-  Alliance fighters draw within firing range.  Dorfman
mimics a lifeless crash-landing into the dark, heaving waters.  The
pursuit ships hover for a time.  Sixty foot waves show only scattered
debris, no signs of life.  They break off.



        1:55:24-  Czech submarin-guerilla vessel picks up coded
recovery signal, makes toward the jettisoned escape pod, small and
coffin-shaped.


        3:27:02-  Submarin vessel recovers German pilot, returns to a
safer depth and slinks carefully back to guerilla base.


        5:56:00-  A large underwater door, thoroughly camouflaged,
opens in the root of tower-like Manta Island.  Vessel enters, continues
forward, then slowly rises to the surface of a vast, underground
hollow.  Heinrich Dorfman begins his exile, which will last until the
end of the war.



*                        *                        *


At 1440 hours, a bay door was opened aboard the Dreadnought, and a
small speed-shuttle emerged.  Major Janson brought her to a safe
distance from the mother ship, double-checked coordinates, and took a
deep breath.  Slowly he engaged the main engines, preparing for
light-speed.

"God help us.....  At least I'll get to see Jenny and the kids."

He achieved the necessary momentum, switched on to full power, and
turned the controls over to the computer.  Seven minutes later the bomb
detonated, and the ship burst into a thousand fragments.

His Christian God did nothing to save him.


......................................................................




V


At 0700 the following day the Dreadnought approached the Star Gate,
whose hexagonal frame gleamed coldly among the stars like the
blue-black barrel of a gun, surrounded by the vessels of its makers.

Linear skeletons, huge anti-matter projectors lay dormant within, their
task completed.  A soft-glistening sheet of silver, like a fine spray
of undulating mist, shrouded the multiplied blackness beyond.  This
protective film began to grow vague as the rounded monolith of the
Carrier, here and there ribbed or jagged, continued to advance
patiently, with measured speed.

This silent Gate to Cerberus, newest tool of Armageddon, like those
before it showed not the slightest emotion at its use, only cold,
