shall nail down the transom and stuff the keyhole with soap if you do."

"I never could stand suspense," exclaimed the old lady, shaking her head
until her lace breakfast cap, with its little bows of lavender ribbon,
quivered all over. "I fear I shall be tempted to break into the room
before Christmas night and unearth the whole business. But tell me this
much. Who is in the surprise?"

"All of us," declared Nora. "But now we'll have to get somebody to take
the place of----"

She paused and blushed scarlet.

"Mr. Thomas Gray," announced the old butler at the door, with a peculiar
expression on his countenance.

There was a dead silence. Mrs. Gray sat as if turned to stone, while
David half rose from his seat and Hippy seized a bread and butter knife
to plunge into the heart of his enemy, if necessary.

"Aunt Rose," cried a voice outside, "aren't you glad to see me?"

A broad-shouldered, well-built young man walked into the room and kissed
the old lady right in the mouth, before she could say a word. He had a
sunburned, wholesome face, kindly gray eyes, light-brown hair, and wore
a heavy suit of rough, blue cloth. He carried no cane; neither were his
shoes pointed at the toes, and there wasn't a tinge of English in his
accent except that his enunciation was unusually good.

Mrs. Gray rose from her chair and examined the young man long and
carefully.

"The very image of your uncle," she cried at last, and gave him a good
hug. "The very image, my dear Tom. Your old aunty has been a most
egregious fool. Why didn't you come last night?"

"Didn't you get my telegram? I sent it in good time. I was delayed and
had to take the night train up. I am awfully sorry if it inconvenienced
you."

"You haven't inconvenienced me, my boy, except for a slight loss of
sleep, and a fright and a narrow of escape from losing the family
silver, which David and Grace, here, prevented."

Then Mrs. Gray sat down and burst out laughing. The others joined in and
for a few minutes the breakfast table was in an uproar.

The real Tom Gray, who was the image of his uncle's portrait over the
sideboard, looked from one to another of the strange faces and then
began to laugh too, since it seemed to be the proper thing to do. He had
one of those delightful, hearty laughs that ring out in a whole roomful
of voices. When Mrs. Gray heard it she stopped short, patting her nephew
on the cheek; for he was sitting beside her now in a place hastily
arranged by the butler.

"Exactly your uncle's laugh. It's good to hear it again. You're a Gray,
every inch of you; and, thank God, you're a fine fellow! If you had come
down here with an English accent and no 'h's' and a monocle, I should
have shut the door in your face. I should, indeed."

"Who, me?" demanded her nephew, forgetting his grammar in his surprise
at such a state of affairs. "Not me, dear aunt. America's good enough
for me. I've had lots of good times with my English cousins, but
America's my home and country."

"Hurrah!" cried Hippy, dashing around the table and seizing the young
man's hand. "We're glad to know you. We're proud and happy to make your
acquaintance."

There was such an uproar of fun and laughter at this that Tom Gray began
at last to see that something had really happened, and that his sudden
and unheralded appearance had brought immense relief to the assembled
company.

"Don't you think it's time somebody put me on?" he asked finally when
the noise had quieted down a little.

"Tom," replied his aunt, "did you tell anyone you were coming to Oakdale
for Christmas to visit me!"

"Why, yes," answered Tom after a moment's thought. "I believe I did. In
fact I know I did. I was staying for a week in New York, with an English
friend, Arthur Butler. I told him all about it. It was on his account
that I stayed over one night. I sent the telegram by his servant,
Richards."

"Ah, ha!" cried Mrs. Gray. "And pray tell us what that wretch of a
servant looked like."

Tom laughed.

"Richards is quite an unusual fellow, a good servant I believe, but
rather effeminate and a kind of a dandy----"

"That's the man!"

"He's the one!"

"The very fellow!"

Half a dozen voices interrupted at once.

Then Mrs. Gray explained the rather serious adventure of the night
before. She ended by saying:

"I never, in my heart of hearts, really believed he was you, Tom, dear."

"The scoundrel!" exclaimed the young man. "Can't we set the police on
him?"

"The police in Oakdale are slow, Tom," replied his aunt. "Slow from lack
of occupation. Robbers do not flock here in great numbers."

"At least, I'll telegraph to Arthur Butler," said Tom, "and warn him.
They may catch him from that end."

The telegram was accordingly sent. Likewise the police were notified,
but Richards, who turned out to be a well-known English crook, made good
his escape and was heard from no more.

It did not take our young people long to make the acquaintance of the
real Tom Gray, nor to decide he was a fine fellow and one they could
admit to their circle without regret.

"He's like a breath of fresh air," thought Grace, and indeed it was
disclosed later that he intended to study forestry because he loved the
country and the open air, and spent all his vacations camping out and
taking long walking trips. But there was nothing of the gypsy in him. He
was full of energy and ambition and infused such a wholesome vigor into
whatever he did that the young people felt a new enthusiasm in his
presence.

"I propose to celebrate the return of the real Tom Gray," announced Mrs.
Gray, "by sending my boys and girls off on a sleighing party this
afternoon. The big old sleigh holds exactly eight. Reddy, you may drive,
since the roads are so familiar to you. You must all be back at six
o'clock, for, remember, to-night we decorate the Christmas tree and
every girl freshman in Oakdale High School must have a present on it."

Just after lunch, therefore, after a hard morning's work over Mrs.
Gray's "surprise," the young people bundled into the big side-seated
sleigh, and tucked the buffalo robes tightly around them. The horses
snorted in the crisp, dry air; there was a jingle of merry sleigh bells
as off they started down the street toward the open country.

    Jingle bells, jingle bells,
    Jingle all the way.
    Oh, what fun 'tis to ride
    In a one-horse open sleigh.

they sang as they bowled over the well-beaten track; and Tom Gray
breathed a sigh of pure delight.

"Isn't this great!" he exclaimed. "Wouldn't you rather do this than
write an essay or study Latin prose composition?"

"Next to riding in an airship and skating, it's the finest thing I know
of," answered David.

"Have you ever ridden in an airship?" demanded Tom.

"No, but I intend to," replied the other; for David had never for a
moment relinquished his pet scheme, but worked on his experiments
whenever he had a spare moment; little dreaming that one day he was to
become the talk of the town.

As the sleigh passed the Nesbit house, Miriam and some of her friends
were just entering her front gate. She saw the party and a shadow of
black jealousy darkened her face.

"Why don't we do the same thing?" she exclaimed aloud, and in another
twenty minutes she had bundled her own guests into the Nesbit sleigh,
while she herself took the reins and guided the pair of spirited black
horses.

"Miriam, I do wish you would let one of the boys drive," said her
mother, who had come to the door to see her off.

"I prefer to do the driving, mother," replied the spoiled girl, and with
a crack of the whip, the second sleighful was off after the first. It
was not long before the Nesbit sleigh had met and passed the other,
which was not going at a very great rate of speed. Mrs. Gray's carriage
horses were much older and more staid than Miriam's pair of young
blacks.

"Who is the girl in front?" asked Tom, as the sleigh flashed past.

"My sister," answered David shortly.

"She must be a pretty good driver," observed Tom.

David made no reply. He knew perfectly well that Miriam was not strong
enough to hold in the black team, once the horses got the upper hand;
but he hoped one of the boys would take the reins if they showed any
symptoms of running away.

The early twilight was just falling when the Gray house party came to a
narrow, rickety old bridge spanning the bed of a creek. Here they
stopped the horses for a time, while Grace and Hippy gathered some
branches of evergreen growing on the edge of a wood, just over the
bridge.

Suddenly the stillness was broken by the sound of bells ringing so
violently that it seemed as if all Bedlam had broken loose. Around a
curve and down the road in front of them loomed Miriam's blacks, making
straight for the other group. They were going like the wind, and the
empty sleigh, lying on its side, was clattering behind them.

"Jump, girls!" cried Tom, while with the other boys he started to cross
the bridge to intercept the horses.

If Grace had paused to reflect she might never have attempted
accomplishing the daring deed that suggested itself to her. Quickly
snatching off her scarlet cape, she dashed into the middle of the road,
waving it before her. Perhaps the horses also thought Bedlam had been
let loose. At sight of the terrifying apparition, they slackened up,
snorted and reared backward.

"She is a brave girl," thought Tom Gray, as he leaped at the nearest
rearing, plunging animal, while David seized the other. Far down the
road came the sound of a faint halloo.

"I'll pick up the others. I suppose they are in a drift," said Reddy, as
he drove off and in a few minutes returned carrying Miriam and her
party. Miriam herself looked white and frightened, although she
pretended to treat the affair lightly.

"A rabbit scared the horses," was all she said. "I'll let one of the
boys drive us home."

"Indeed, I shan't go back in that sleigh," cried Julia Crosby.

"Perhaps you'll accept a ride in the freshman sleigh, Miss Crosby,"
suggested Nora; and the other girl, somewhat ashamed, was obliged to
place herself at the mercy of her enemies.

"All of you girls get into Mrs. Gray's sleigh," commanded David, "and
Tom and I will drive the other sleigh back." No one ever cared to
disobey David when he spoke in this tone. Even his wilful sister took
her seat between Grace and Anne without a word and never spoke during
the entire drive back, except to say good night at her own front gate.

But Grace could not refrain from one sharp little thrust.

"You seem to be unlucky with sleighs and sleds both, Miriam," she said.




CHAPTER XVI

THE MARIONETTE SHOW


Do you remember your first party dress? How it gave a glimpse of the
throat and neck, and seemed to sweep the ground all around, although it
merely reached your shoe tops?

Did you feel a thrill of pleasure when the last hook and eye was
fastened and you surveyed yourself in the longest mirror in the house?

So it was with Anne in her pink crepe de Chine. Or was it really Anne,
this little vision in rose color with glowing cheeks and sparkling eyes?
She stood spellbound before the glass on that memorable Christmas night,
and no one disturbed her for awhile. Mrs. Gray and the girls had stolen
out so as not to embarrass the young girl who, for the first time, saw
herself in a beautiful new silk dress exactly the color of pink rose
petals, which hung in soft folds to the tips of her small pink satin
slippers.

"Give her a chance, girls," whispered Mrs. Gray. "We mustn't be too
enthusiastic about the difference. It might hurt her tender little
feelings. But she _does_ look sweet, doesn't she?"

"As pretty as a picture, Mrs. Gray," answered Grace, kissing the old
lady's peach blossom cheek. "But they are coming. I hear them on the
walk. We must get behind the scenes and see that everything is all
ready."

The big drawing room of the Gray house was soon full of young people
watching the folding doors leading into the library with expectant
faces. In the hall a string orchestra was discoursing soft music and the
place was filled with the hum of conversation and low laughter. Mrs.
Gray, seated on the front row, in the place of honor, occasionally
looked about her and smiled happily.

"Why didn't I do this long ago?" she said to herself. "But then, were
there ever before such nice girls as my four adopted daughters?"

Miriam sat near, with the other members of her house party. It had been
a source of much discussion whether or not to admit Julia Crosby to the
freshman party. But, since she was Miriam's guest, what else was there
to do?

"We shall be only heaping coals of fire on her head at any rate," hinted
Jessica, "and that certainly ought to make her feel worse than if she
had been left out."

After everyone was comfortably seated three loud raps were heard from
behind the folding doors. Some one began to play "The Funeral March of a
Marionette" on the piano, and the doors slid slowly back.

There was a murmur of surprise and wonder.

Two curtains had been stretched across the door opening above and below
and two hung down at each side, leaving an oblong space in the middle in
which stood a little doll theater nearly a yard and a half long and a
yard high. A row of footlights across the miniature stage presently
blossomed into light, and the freshman girls smiled as they recognized
some of those same little bulbs that had served to illuminate the
pumpkin face of Miss Leece's effigy. The music ceased and the curtains
rolled back. There sat Cinderella by the kitchen fire, very stiff and
straight, but weeping audibly with her little fists in her eyes. She was
ten inches high and, on careful examination, it could be seen that two
threads attached to her arms, and another to the back of her neck, made
it possible for her to move about and use her hands in a remarkably
life-like manner.

Wild applause from the audience. Well there might be, for the scene was
perfect, from the old brick fireplace with an iron pot steaming on the
coals to the rows of shining pans and blue dishes on a shelf at the
side, all of which came from a toy shop, along with a little kitchen
bench and chairs.

The cruel sisters swept in, dressed for the ball. When they spoke there
were convulsive titters among the guests for the voices of the cruel
step-sisters were those of Nora and Hippy. Anne read the lines of
Cinderella so plaintively that Mrs. Gray shed a secret tear or two when
Cinderella was left alone in the gloomy old kitchen. When the fairy
godmother appeared, in a peaked red hat and a long red cape, it was
Jessica who spoke the lines in a sweet, musical voice. How Cinderella
rolled out the pumpkin and displayed six white mice in a trap, and how,
after a brief interval of total darkness, could be seen through the open
door a coach of gold in which sat Cinderella in a silken gown, need not
be related here. It all took place without a single slip and the dolls
went through their parts with such funny life-like motions that the boys
and girls forgot they were not watching real actors.

It was the scene of the ballroom, however, which was the real triumph of
the evening.

"How did those clever children ever do it?" exclaimed Mrs. Gray, aloud,
when the curtain rolled back and disclosed the ballroom of the palace,
with a drop curtain at the back showing a vista of marble columns and
pillars. A gilt chandelier was suspended in the middle, from which
stretched garlands of real smilax. There were rows of little gilt chairs
against the walls filled with dolls in stiff satins and brocades. And
one large throne chair with a red velvet cushion in it, on which sat the
prince, who spoke with the voice of David Nesbit, and entertained his
guests in royal state. After the exciting arrival of Cinderella, Nora
played a minuet on the mandolin, the tinkling music of which seemed best
suited to the doll drama, and the prince and Cinderella executed a dance
of such intricate steps and low bows that the audience was convulsed
with laughter. There were even suppressed titters from behind the
scenes. This dance, which had been devised by Tom Gray and Grace,
necessitated two extra threads to manipulate the feet. It was most
difficult and had required long and tedious practice, but the results
were quite worth all the time and trouble.

Mrs. Gray laughed till the tears rolled down her cheeks and made a
personal appeal for an encore, which was given; but there was a mishap
this time; Cinderella's threads became entangled and she came near to
breaking her china nose. Audiences are invariably most pitiless when
they are most pleased, and have no mercy on exhausted actors. At the cry
of "Speech! Speech!" the Prince stepped forward and made a low bow.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he said, "we thank you for your approval and if
strength and breath permitted us, and the lady had not injured her nose,
we would gladly dance again for you."

Then came the last scene. The step-sisters made desperate efforts to
wear the slipper; Cinderella finally retired triumphantly on the
prince's arm, and the curtains closed only to open again a few moments
later upon a scene which bore a strong resemblance to Oakdale High
