man what had been done." The three disciples would be competent witnesses
of the miracle but a widespread report by the parents and their friends
might arouse such an outburst of excitement as to interrupt his work and
precipitate a crisis before the earthly ministry of our Lord was complete.




D. The Fourth Period. Ch. 9:1-50



1. The Mission of the Twelve. Ch. 9:1-9


    1 And he called the twelve together, and gave them power and
    authority over all demons, and to cure diseases. 2 And he sent
    them forth to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. 3
    And he said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither
    staff, nor wallet, nor bread, nor money; neither have two coats. 4
    And into whatsoever house ye enter, there abide, and thence
    depart. 5 And as many as receive you not, when ye depart from that
    city, shake off the dust from your feet for a testimony against
    them. 6 And they departed, and went throughout the villages,
    preaching the gospel, and healing everywhere.


    7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done: and he was
    much perplexed, because that it was said by some, that John was
    risen from the dead; 8 and by some, that Elijah had appeared; and
    by others, that one of the old prophets was risen again. 9 And
    Herod said, John I beheaded: but who is this, about whom I hear
    such things? And he sought to see him.


As Jesus sent forth his twelve disciples on their first mission he was
entering the closing period of his ministry in Galilee. Until now the
apostles had been his companions; henceforth they were to be more strictly
messengers and representatives. Jesus foresaw his approaching rejection
and death, but before leaving for Jerusalem and the cross he wished to
offer himself once more to the people of Galilee among whom he had long
been laboring; and for this purpose he sent out the Twelve. Their
circumstances and the directions given them by Jesus were peculiar to the
time and occasion. However, these commands are not without application to
the messengers of the Master in all ages of the world. They were given
"power and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases." Such
miraculous gifts were limited to their own day and were designed as
credentials of their mission. It is true, however, that those who
represent Christ must ever be concerned for the mental and physical
conditions of mankind, even though the great purpose is to bring a message
of spiritual import. The latter was, of course, the great purpose of the
apostles. They went forth "to preach the kingdom of God," as well as "to
heal the sick."

When Christ commanded the disciples to take nothing for their journey, he
did not intend to impose needless hardships or even to suggest peculiar
denial. He rather intimated the principle that his heralds must not be
encumbered with worldly cares and burdens and that those who proclaim his
gospel may expect to be supported by those to whom the message is
preached.

In advising the disciples to remain in the first home where they were
properly received, he indicated the wisdom of having a fixed center for
their work, of being content with their entertainment and surroundings,
and of avoiding social complications which might hinder their work. They
were instructed, in case they were not received and welcomed as the
messengers of Christ, to show their just displeasure as they departed from
the place, by shaking off the dust from their feet, an Oriental custom
which in this case indicated the disavowal of any possible relationship
with the enemies of their Lord.

"And they departed, and went throughout the villages, preaching the
gospel, and healing everywhere." These were the supreme representatives of
the great band of heroes who have continued the work and have made known
their message in all times and lands. They were prepared by the divine
instruction of their Master. It has been said that there is something
greater than preaching; it is to prepare preachers. Surely none were ever
so trained and none ever accomplished their work so well; but it is
possible for every follower of Christ to have some part in making known
the gospel of his grace.

The great success of the disciples and the tremendous excitement produced
by their mission is indicated by the fact that the reports of their work
reached Herod the king and made him tremble on his throne. It was not that
he feared what Jesus might do; it was rather because there was something
in the rumor which awakened his sleeping conscience and filled him with a
secret alarm and dread. "It was said by some, that John was risen from the
dead." Herod had beheaded John, but the memory of his foul deed could not
be buried; now he was wondering what might be the real nature of the
miracles which were being reported and of the Man in whose name they were
wrought. He "sought to see" Jesus. That was mere curiosity. He probably
wished to see some miracles performed. Before long an opportunity was to
be given him to stand face to face with the divine Man, but it was to be
on an unexpected occasion when the latter would stand before him as a
prisoner, when Herod might offer him protection or release; but when the
occasion came he was disappointed by the silence of the Lord and allowed
him to go away to crucifixion and death. One who beheaded John need not
have hoped to understand Jesus. One who violates his own conscience to-day
and refuses solemn warnings to repent, need not expect that Christ will be
revealed to him in his beauty and grace and saving power.



2. The Five Thousand Fed. Ch. 9:10-17


    10 And the apostles, when they were returned, declared unto him
    what things they had done. And he took them, and withdrew apart to
    a city called Bethsaida. 11 But the multitudes perceiving it
    followed him: and he welcomed them, and spake to them of the
    kingdom of God, and them that had need of healing he cured. 12 And
    the day began to wear away; and the twelve came, and said unto
    him, Send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages
    and country round about, and lodge, and get provisions: for we are
    here in a desert place. 13 But he said unto them, Give ye them to
    eat. And they said, We have no more than five loaves and two
    fishes; except we should go and buy food for all this people. 14
    For they were about five thousand men. And he said unto his
    disciples, Make them sit down in companies, about fifty each. 15
    And they did so, and made them all sit down. 16 And he took the
    five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he
    blessed them, and brake; and gave to the disciples to set before
    the multitude. 17 And they ate, and were all filled: and there was
    taken up that which remained over to them of broken pieces, twelve
    baskets.


The feeding of the five thousand is the only miracle recorded by all four
evangelists, in fact the only incident of the Galilaean ministry of our
Lord common to them all. Here this ministry attains its climax. This was
the hour of the greatest popularity of Jesus; the multitudes would have
offered him a crown, but he saw before him the shadow of the cross.

The Twelve had returned weary with labor but elated by success. Jesus
desired for them a season of retirement, of rest, and instruction. They
withdrew to a secluded place beyond Bethsaida on the east shore of the
lake; but there they were discovered by the eager multitudes. Jesus showed
his infinite sympathy by cordially welcoming the crowds which had intruded
upon his privacy and interrupted his plans; he gladdened their hearts with
the gospel message and healed their diseases. And as the day declined he
pitied their hunger and met their needs by miraculously multiplying five
loaves and two fishes which the disciples had secured.

For the disciples of to-day there are serious messages in this familiar
story; perhaps none is more obvious than that of the measureless
compassion of Christ. With something of his sympathy we should look upon
the multitudes perishing for lack of physical and spiritual food. Their
call for help should not be regarded as an interruption but as a guide in
shaping our personal plans. While of ourselves we are unable to give
relief, yet if our all is offered to the Master, it will be multiplied
marvelously by his divine power. The miracle seems to have been wrought as
Jesus looked up in prayer. We must surely look to him and seek his
blessing in our service. We must allow no broken fragments to be lost;
some families could live on what other families waste; then, too, the
followers of Christ must learn a true economy of time and talents and
wealth if the Bread of life is to be brought to a famishing world.



3. Jesus Predicting his Death. Ch. 9:18-27


    18 And it came to pass, as he was praying apart, the disciples
    were with him: and he asked them, saying, Who do the multitudes
    say that I am? 19 And they answering said, John the Baptist; but
    others _say_, Elijah; and others, that one of the old prophets is
    risen again. 20 And he said unto them, But who say ye that I am?
    And Peter answering said, The Christ of God. 21 But he charged
    them, and commanded _them_ to tell this to no man; 22 saying, The
    Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders
    and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be
    raised up. 23 And he said unto all, If any man would come after me
    let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.
    24 for whosoever would save his life shall lose it; but whosoever
    shall lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it. 25 For
    what is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and lose or
    forfeit his own self? 26 For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and
    of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he
    cometh in his own glory, and _the glory_ of the Father, and of the
    holy angels. 27 But I tell you of a truth, There are some of them
    that stand here, who shall in no wise taste of death, till they
    see the kingdom of God.


The first clear prediction of his death was made by Jesus directly after
he had heard the famous confession of Peter. The latter was occasioned by
a question Jesus himself had asked, "Who do the multitudes say that I am?"
The answer is exactly that given by multitudes in modern days, "And they
answering said, John the Baptist; but others say, Elijah; and others, that
one of the old prophets is risen again;" that is to say, a reformer, a
great preacher, a messenger of God. Such an estimate of himself never
satisfied our Lord and so he asked pointedly: "But who say ye that I am?
And Peter answering said, The Christ of God." This is the great
affirmation concerning Christ which the world to-day needs to hear; but at
that time Jesus earnestly commanded his disciples to "tell this to no
man." The message would then have been misunderstood and the disciples
themselves needed first to learn the truth concerning the death and
resurrection of Jesus. No man to-day is qualified to testify for Christ
who does not know the meaning of his atoning death and "the power of his
resurrection."

Then Jesus told his disciples of the absolute necessity of his approaching
sufferings and assured them that on the third day he would be raised up.
This prediction of death must have astonished the disciples; quite as
surprising was the further statement that every follower of Christ must
likewise take up his cross daily, and the cross was not merely a symbol of
suffering and shame; it was the instrument of death. Every Christian,
therefore, must die daily to self and yield himself wholly to the service
of Christ. Such self-denial and sacrifice and obedience will result in the
only experience worthy of the name "life;" to refuse is to forfeit "life;"
and the loss will be eternal for those who are ashamed to follow the
Master now will be rejected by him when he returns "in his own glory, and
the glory of the Father, and of the holy angels." Of this future glory of
the coming Christ, three of the disciples were to catch a foregleam only
eight days later on the Mount of Transfiguration, and Jesus therefore
adds, "There are some of them that stand here, who shall in no wise taste
of death, till they see the kingdom of God."



4. The Transfiguration. Ch. 9:28-36


    28 And it came to pass about eight days after these sayings, that
    he took with him Peter and John and James, and went up into the
    mountain to pray. 29 And as he was praying, the fashion of his
    countenance was altered, and his raiment _became_ white _and_
    dazzling. 30 And behold, there talked with him two men, who were
    Moses and Elijah; 31 who appeared in glory, and spake of his
    decease which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem. 32 Now
    Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: but when
    they were fully awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that
    stood with him. 33 And it came to pass, as they were parting from
    him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here:
    and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for
    Moses, and one for Elijah: not knowing what he said. 34 And while
    he said these things, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them:
    and they feared as they entered into the cloud. 35 And a voice
    came out of the cloud, saying, This is my Son, my chosen: hear ye
    him. 36 And when the voice came, Jesus was found alone. And they
    held their peace, and told no man in those days any of the things
    which they had seen.


The transfiguration of Christ was closely associated with the predictions
both of his death and of his return in glory. It prepared him and also his
disciples for the former and it was a symbol and a foretaste of the
latter. Just what the physical experience may have been, it is difficult
to conjecture. It was not like that of Moses on Mount Sinai when his face
glowed with reflected light. In the case of Jesus the glory was from
within. A divine splendor shone forth irradiating the body and even the
garments of our Lord.

Luke tells us that this occurred as Jesus was praying; and it is more than
a mere figure of speech to say that when in prayer his followers find, in
some measure, what it is to be transfigured into his likeness from one
degree of glory to another by the power of his indwelling Spirit.

Jesus had been accompanied on the mountain top by only Peter, James, and
John; but suddenly "There talked with him two men, who were Moses and
Elijah; who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he was about
to accomplish at Jerusalem." This, then, was the high purpose of the
event; it was to interpret to the mind of Christ more perfectly the
meaning of his death, and to encourage him to endure its anguish by this
glimpse of the glory that would follow. It is easy to understand why Moses
and Elijah should be selected for so august a conference. One had been
regarded as the symbol of law and the other of prophecy, and both law and
prophecy pointed forward to Calvary; and again both Moses and Elijah had
received a special revelation of the grace of God, and he was to manifest
his grace supremely in the death of his Son.

It is not strange that Peter longed to linger in such heavenly
companionship, and in bewilderment absurdly proposed the erection on the
mountain of three booths for the comfort of Jesus, Moses, and Elijah.
"While he said these things, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them:
... and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my Son, my chosen:
hear ye him." There was no need of detaining Moses and Elijah; if the
Master remained with his disciples, that was enough. Henceforth all that
the Law and the Prophets had foreshadowed would be completely revealed and
embodied in Jesus Christ. Part of that revelation was made in his death;
the full revelation will come when he returns in that glory of which the
Mount of Transfiguration gave a foregleam.



5. The Demoniac Boy. Ch. 9:37-45


    37 And it came to pass, on the next day, when they were come down
    from the mountain, a great multitude met him. 38 And behold, a man
    from the multitude cried, saying, Teacher, I beseech thee to look
    upon my son; for he is mine only child: 39 and behold, a spirit
    taketh him, and he suddenly crieth out; and it teareth him that he
    foameth, and it hardly departeth from him, bruising him sorely. 40
    And I besought thy disciples to cast it out; and they could not.
    41 And Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse
    generation, how long shall I be with you, and bear with you? bring
    hither thy son. 42 And as he was yet a coming, the demon dashed
    him down, and tare _him_ grievously. But Jesus rebuked the unclean
    spirit, and healed the boy, and gave him back to his father. 43
    And they were all astonished at the majesty of God.


    But while all were marvelling at all the things which he did, he
    said unto his disciples, 44 Let these words sink into your ears:
    for the Son of man shall be delivered up into the hands of men. 45
    But they understood not this saying, and it was concealed from
    them, that they should not perceive it; and they were afraid to
