
Despite himself, Mr Rawdon's voice took a colder tone as, for the
second time, he presented the pile of books; despite herself, Miss
Drake's smile was mechanical and forced; while the visitors made only a
show of applause.  "Hard luck for that fine, bright girl!" whispered the
fathers one to another; the mothers almost without exception had tears
in their eyes.  "And she looks so sweet and pretty!  It's a _shame_!"
cried the sisters rebelliously.  Even the girls on the benches at the
back of the room--Susan's companions who loved her and appreciated her
worth--even they looked oppressed and discomfited.  The romance of
Dreda's triumph had appealed to their young imaginations; they
understood even more keenly than their elders the suffering involved in
that humiliating confession.  "Poor Dreda!" they whispered to each
other.  "Oh! poor old Dreda!"

At tea in the drawing-room the tone of the teachers was distinctly
apologetic--the high spirits characteristic of the early hours had ebbed
away, and the visitors were glad to beat an early retreat.  Mr and Mrs
Saxon received Miss Drake's apologies in the kindest and most
sympathetic manner, and would not allow her to take any blame to
herself.

"It was an accident--no one can be blamed.  We are so sorry for you,
too!"  Mrs Saxon said sweetly.  "It is a disappointment, of course; it
was a very happy moment when we believed our dear girl had gained such a
prize.  We were so proud of her!"

"We are proud of her now," interrupted Dreda's father quickly, and at
that both his hearers smiled and nodded their heads in sympathetic
understanding.  "Yes, yes; we are proud of her _now_."

To Dreda herself her parents made no allusion to the tragic mistake.
The girl only made her appearance when the motor drove up to the door,
and her cool, somewhat haughty manner showed that sympathy was the last
thing which she desired at the moment.

"Good-bye, darling, till Thursday.  Only two days more before we have
you back among us."

"Good-bye, my girl.  I'll drive over for you on Thursday morning."

"Dreda, darling, I'm _so_ glad you are coming.  I've such lots to tell
you!"

"You've got your belt fastened on the wrong hook.  The point's crooked."

For once Maud's literal mind was a blessed relief.  Her parting words
made everyone laugh, and the car drove off with the cheery sound of that
laughter ringing in the air, and the remembrance of merry faces to cheer
Dreda's aching heart.  She turned and crept upstairs to the study.  She
had shed her own gala dress, thrusting it away in the cupboard as if she
never wished to behold it again.  The study was filled with odd pieces
of furniture which had been taken out of the big classrooms, and the
fire was dying out upon the grate.

"Here sit I, and my broken heart!" sighed Dreda dramatically, as she
subsided into a chair and drew her shoulders together in an involuntary
shiver.  It had been cold work standing at the door watching the
departure of the car, and the atmosphere of the deserted room was not
calculated to cheer her spirits.  "When you've had a great shock your
constitution is enfeebled; when you're enfeebled, you are sensitive to
chills; a chill on an enfeebled constitution is generally fatal.
Perhaps I've received my death blow this afternoon in more ways than
one."  Dreda sniffed and shivered miserably once more.  The stream of
visitors was still departing, saying good-bye to Miss Bretherton and the
teachers in the drawing-room and making their way to the door.  Dreda
would not risk leaving the study and encountering strange faces on the
staircase; besides which, it did not seem her place to seek her
companions at this moment.  It was her companions who should seek _her_.

"In the hour of my triumph they all crowded round me; now I am a pelican
on the housetop, and no one cares if I am dead or alive.  I must get
accustomed to it, I suppose.  Shame and humiliation must henceforth be
my portion.  Only fifteen and a half--in _years_.  In suffering I'm an
old, old woman!  Mr Rawdon was sorry; I saw it in his face; but he
liked Susan's best.  Susan has won the prize.  Where is Susan now?  Has
she forgotten all about me?"

As if in answer to this question the handle of the door turned, and a
head was thrust round the corner.  A voice exclaimed: "Here she is!" and
Nancy entered the room, followed closely by Susan herself.  They stood
and looked at Dreda, and Dreda looked at them, but none of the three
uttered a word.  Then suddenly Susan whispered something in Nancy's ear,
and while that young person hurried from the room with a most unusual
celerity, Susan dropped quietly on her knees beside the dying fire and
began coaxing it into a blaze.

Dreda sat back in her chair and watched the process with a dull,
detached curiosity.  Susan's back looked so narrow and small; the brown
dress fastened at the back with a row of ugly bone buttons; as she knelt
the soles of her new slippers seemed to fill up the entire foreground.
They were startlingly, shockingly white!  As she bent from side to side
blowing skilfully upon the struggling flames, one could catch a glimpse
of her profile, white and wan, with red circles round the eyes.  Such a
poor, weary little conqueror, on her knees striving to serve her fallen
rival.  Something stirred in Dreda's heart; the ice melted, she cleared
her throat, and addressed her friend by name.

"Susan!"

Susan sat back on her heels, lifting scared, pitiful eyes.

"Susan," said Dreda regally, "I don't hate you.  You needn't be
frightened.  I don't hate you a bit--I'm _sorry_ for you.  This should
have been your triumph, and I have spoiled it.  It's very hard on you
too, Susan!"

"Oh, Dreda!" gasped Susan breathlessly.  "Dreda, you're _magnificent_!"
She was wan and white no longer; her eyes blazed.  No one seeing Susan
at that moment could possibly have called her plain; the lovely soul of
her shone through the flesh, working its transformation, even as the
leaping flames were now turning the dull hearth into a thing of beauty
and life.

Still on her knees, Susan crawled across the few intervening yards of
floor, and rested her head against Dreda's knee.

"I'd have given it up a hundred times--a thousand over, Dreda, rather
than let you have this experience!" she said brokenly.  And Dreda knew
that she spoke the truth.

It was in this attitude that Nancy discovered the two girls when she
entered the room a few minutes later, bearing in her hands a temptingly
spread tea-tray.  One glance of the red-brown eyes testified to her
satisfaction at such eloquent signs of peace, but manner and speech
disdained sentiment.

"Corn in Egypt!" she cried cheerfully.  "The Duck fairly showered
dainties upon me--scones, sandwiches, cakes, _and_ a fresh pot of tea.
Let's fall to at once.  I am fainting with hunger."

She placed three chairs round the table, seated herself in front of the
tray, and, pouring out three cups of tea, handed them round with
hospitable zeal.  Dreda ate and drank and felt comforted, in spite of
herself.  It was wonderful how the mere creature comforts of warmth and
food seemed to soothe the pain at her heart.  She even began to feel a
faint enjoyment in the dramatic element of her position, to realise that
if she had failed she had failed in a noticeable, even in a tragic,
fashion.  To Susan belonged the glory, yet she, the beaten one, remained
unquestionably the heroine of the day!

By the time that second cups of tea had been handed round, and an attack
made upon the iced cake, Dreda was ready and eager to discuss her
trouble.

"How _could_ those numbers have been altered, Susan?  Mine was five and
yours was ten.  They aren't in the least alike!"

"Dreda, I don't know--I can't _think_!  If they had come loose and Mr
Rawdon had clipped them on again, he would have remembered doing it.  At
least, an ordinary person would; but he is a genius.  Perhaps geniuses
are different."

"_You_ are a genius, Susan.  You ought to know!" said Dreda, whereat the
poor little genius flushed miserably, and Nancy, rattling the tea-tray,
rushed hastily into the breach.

"Accidents _will_ happen!  It's no earthly use worrying your head about
the how and the why.  There it is, and you've got to make the best of
it, and forget it as soon as possible."

Dreda rolled tragic eyes to the ceiling.

"I shall never forget.  You can't reach the height of your ambition and
then see your treasure crumble to pieces in your hands in less than ten
minutes, and fall down into a very pit of humiliation without wearing a
mark for life."

"Don't say humiliation, Dreda," cried Susan tremulously.  "Don't, dear;
I can't bear it.  It was dreadful for you; but there was no humiliation.
There was nothing--nothing of which you could be ashamed.  Your essay
was very good, too; it has been mentioned as one of the best."

But Dreda was not in the mood to accept comfort.  She was miserable, and
she intended to be miserable in a thorough, systematic fashion, so that
for the moment alleviations seemed rather to irritate than to cheer--

"My essay was only one of the best four.  That's nothing.  Except our
three selves and Barbara Morton, there's not another girl in the school
who can write a decent essay to save her life.  The others were all as
dull and stupid as could be.  You have seen them, and know that that's
true.  If mine was only the fourth best, that's no praise at all.  Mr
Rawdon made no special mention of any but yours, except when he--_Oh-
h_!"  Dreda's voice shrilled with sudden panic; she dropped her cake on
to her plate and clasped her hands together, staring before her with
wide, startled eyes.  "Oh-h!  Do you remember?  He said that he had been
_amused_ by one of the four essays.  His lips twitched, and he tried not
to laugh.  Amused at the `high-flown eloquence.'  That was the
expression--wasn't it?  High-flown eloquence!  That means rubbish, of
course--bombastic, stupid, exaggerated rubbish!  Girls, _that was mine_!
I feel it--I know it!  Susan, you know it, too.  You wouldn't say that
it was good, even when I asked you straight out.  You were too honest to
say `Yes.'  Oh!  I am not angry.  You needn't look so miserable.  It was
true, and down at the very, very bottom of my heart I knew it myself.
When I thought I had won the prize I was only really happy for a few
minutes; after that I grew frightened, for I knew it was a mistake, and
that I was not really a genius at all, only a rather sharp-witted girl,
a ready girl,"--she gave a dreary little laugh--"who could pick up other
people's ideas, and string them together as if they were her own.  The
girls weren't clever enough to know the real from the sham, but Mr
Rawdon knew it at once.  He saw how--how--" (she paused, groping in her
extensive vocabulary for a word to express her meaning) "how
_meretricious_ it was!  He was--_amused_!"

The last word came with an involuntary quiver of pain, and there was
silence round the impromptu tea-table.  Dreda saw without surprise that
the tears were rolling down Susan's cheeks--it seemed natural that Susan
should cry.  What did give her a real shock of surprise was to hear a
sound of subdued snuffling on her right, and on turning her head to
behold the imperturbable Nancy suspiciously red about the eyes and nose.

"Nancy!" she cried involuntarily.  "You are crying!  I never believed
that it was possible that you _could_ cry!  Why are you crying, Nancy?
Is it about--_me_?"

But Nancy only jerked the tea-tray, tossing her head the while in her
most nonchalant fashion.

"Can't I cry if I like?  Can't I cry for myself?  If I don't, no one
else will.  No one thinks about Me!  _I_ tried for the prize as well as
you, and I've far more right to be disappointed.  No one ever said I
might be great!"

She tossed her head and frowned and pouted, but Dreda was not deceived
by the pretence.  At her heart lay a warm feeling of comfort and
gratitude.  In recalling the incidents of this tragic day, it would
always bring a throb of consolation to remember that Nancy, the
imperturbable, had shed tears on her behalf!



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

Home again, and home with quite a festival air about _it_ in honour of
your return.  Flowers in every corner, silver candelabra on the dining-
table, favourite dishes for every course, a fire in one's bedroom,
chocolates lying ready at every turn--it was all most grateful and
soothing!  Dreda sunned herself in the atmosphere of tenderness and
approval, and though no one referred in words to her disappointment, she
knew that it was an underlying thought in every mind, and her sore heart
was soothed afresh by each new instance of kindliness and care.  The
first evening was spent according to good old-fashioned custom, sitting
round the schoolroom fire, brothers and sisters together, talking over
the events of the term, and comparing exploits and adventures.  In the
dim firelight Dreda edged close to Gurth's side and slipped her hand
through his arm; and, wonder of wonders! instead of pushing her away,
Gurth gave it a quick little grip, and leant his broad shoulder against
hers in response.  The boys were on their best behaviour, amiable and
conciliatory, without a hint of the overbearing condescension which was
apt to mark the end of the holidays.  If there was a blot on the general
harmony it was to be found in the air of detachment with which Rowena
took part in the conversation.  She was perfectly amiable, perfectly
sweet, conscientiously interested in the different exploits, yet one and
all felt disagreeably conscious that she was no longer one of their
number, and that her thoughts were continually straying off on
excursions of their own.  Dreda remembered the parting promise of "Lots
to tell!" and looked forward to hair-brushing confidences later on, but
none were forthcoming.  Rowena remained loving, preoccupied, and
inscrutable.

Alone with Maud, Dreda discussed the change in her sister's manner; but
Maud's explanation, though verbose, was hardly enlightening.

"She's nineteen.  She'll be twenty on the twenty-first of October next.
She's got a train to her last new dress.  And then there's teaching
me...  She orders me about as if she were a hundred, but lately she's
grown moony.  If I keep quite still and ask no questions she begins
staring, and stares and stares and smiles to herself.  So silly!  But it
passes the time.  When the clock strikes she gives such a jump!  I'm not
getting on a bit; but I'm glad, because then I shall go to school.  She
takes no interest in me.  I did the same exercises four times over and
she never knew, and when I told mother she said, `Poor darling!'  I
thought she meant me, but she meant Rowena.  Well, if you grow up, you
grow up, but you needn't be silly!"

Three afternoons after Dreda's return home a sharp rat-tat sounded at
the door, and Maud, flattening her nose against the window, made one of
her characteristic announcements.

"Mr Seton's horse.  He's got on his new breeches!"

Dreda gave a glad exclamation.

"Mr Seton!  Already!  The dear thing!  How did he know I was home?"

There was a short, tense pause, while Mrs Saxon and Rowena kept their
eyes glued to the ground.  A sensitive hearer would have felt that pause
significant, but Dreda was too self-engrossed to be sensitive; she never
doubted that Guy Seton's object in calling was to welcome herself on her
return from school, and her first words informed him of the fact.

"Oh, Mr Seton, it _is_ nice of you to come so soon!  Have you got the
horse yet?  It's lovely of you to remember your promise."

"My--my--_what_ horse?  What promise?"

"The horse for me--my mount!  You said you would take me out riding--"

"Oh--er--yes!  Did I?  Delighted, I'm sure!" stammered Guy Seton
awkwardly.  He looked bigger and stronger and handsomer than ever, but
even Dreda could not delude herself that he looked "delighted" at that
moment.  There had been an expression of blankest surprise upon his face
as she had stepped forward to greet him, as if he had been unprepared
for her presence, and he had flushed uncomfortably at being reminded of
his promise.  Dreda stood looking on somewhat blankly while he greeted
the other occupants of the room--Mrs Saxon with punctilious politeness,
Maud with a smile and a jest, Rowena in silence with a short grip of the
hand.  Why did he not speak to Rowena?  Were they still at cross
purposes as on the occasion of their first meeting?  Dreda watched with
curious eyes and felt confirmed in her suspicion, for Rowena stitched
steadily at her embroidery, and Guy Seton never turned as much as a
glance in her direction.  It was true that on one occasion when she
required her scissors he had pounced upon them as they lay on the table,
and handed them to her before she had had time to reach them herself;
but instead of forming the beginning of a conversation, as such an
action should naturally have done, they both appeared overcome with
embarrassment, and ignored each other's presence more persistently than
before.

A quarter of an hour passed in a desultory and broken conversation, in
which each member of the party seemed to continue his or her own train
of thought, with little or no attention to the preceding remarks.  As,
for example:

Guy Seton: "It's such a ripping day.  I thought I could ride over and
see how you all were."

Maud: "Mr Morris dropped his spectacles in the stable when he was
feeding his new mare.  He heard something grind, so he thought she had
eaten them by mistake.  He sent off for a vet., and he gave her things
and charged a guinea, and all the while they were on the dressing-table
in his room."

Dreda: "I'm always losing things!  There's been a perfect fate against
me at school this term.  It's not my fault, for I have grown hideously
careful, and they all turn up again in time, but it's most wearing for
your nerves!"

Mrs Saxon: "I met your mother in the village on Thursday, Mr Seton.  I
was glad to see her looking so well."

Guy Seton: "This brisk weather braces people up.  There's a meet at
Newstead Market Square on Monday at eleven.  Ought to be a good run."

Maud: "Mr Morris's mare cost eighty pounds.  Their coachman told our
gardener.  He said he thought she was gone for sure when the eyeglasses
were missing.  They've got a gold rim."

Dreda: "People always lose glasses.  Flora Mason wears them at school.
She draws most beautifully.  She had caricatures of all the mistresses
inside an atlas.  She put them on the back of Balkan States because no
one ever looks at them; but there was an earthquake or something, and
The Duck turned them up.  As a punishment, she made Flora stand up
