Project Gutenberg's Wanted--7 Fearless Engineers!, by Warner Van Lorne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Wanted--7 Fearless Engineers!

Author: Warner Van Lorne

Release Date: October 17, 2008 [EBook #26941]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WANTED--7 FEARLESS ENGINEERS! ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: This civilization was advanced far beyond any the Terrans
had ever seen.]


 _Wanted--
 7 Fearless Engineers!_

 By WARNER VAN LORNE

    _A great civilization's fate lay in Dick Barrow's hands as he led
    his courageous fellow engineers into a strange and unknown land.
    None of them knew what lay ahead--what dangers awaited them--or what
    rewards. But they did not hesitate because the first question asked
    them had been: "Are you a brave man?"_




CHAPTER I

_Opportunity_


From where Dick Barrow sat, hundreds of men were visible, occupying
benches in every manner of position. Some stretched at full length,
sleeping in the morning sun after a night in the park. Others sat with
heads hanging; thinking thoughts of their own.

Depression or recession, it meant the same to all of them. Some didn't
care, but others tried to find any kind of work that would fill their
stomachs with food.

For three days Dick hadn't eaten a good meal, and felt almost as low as
the derelicts whom he had for companions. He would have enjoyed a smoke,
but turned away as two men dove for a cigarette-butt; discarded by a
passerby.

Anyone who could afford to buy a newspaper was an aristocrat, and Dick
watched until he saw one discarded. For three days he had been reading
them secondhand, but the only jobs were too far to walk and apply for.

His eyes stopped at one item in the column and a puzzled frown slowly
puckered his forehead.

    _Wanted: An Engineer. Young man with love for electrical and
    mechanical work, who is not afraid of isolation. Have some knowledge
    of engineering, but general experience more desirable than
    specialized training. Must be willing to leave country, never to
    return; for which he will be well remunerated. Have no close family
    ties, and willing to submit to certain amount of danger. Will be
    isolated with few members of own race, but will have great
    opportunity to develop mastery of huge machines. Come prepared to
    leave for post immediately, without preparation. Every want will be
    taken care of by employers. This position is for lifetime, without
    opportunity of turning back after having accepted responsibility.
    GREAT OPPORTUNITY! Room 36, 18 W. Morgan Ave., City._

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long time Dick Barrow gazed at the ad, mentally comparing his own
qualifications for the position--and they _seemed_ to fit! He was not a
graduate engineer, being forced to quit school after two years of study.
Three years later his father died, then Dick lost the job that had kept
them eating regularly. His love of mechanics remained insatiable, and he
constantly hoped for work which would allow him to use his knowledge and
ability.

He had no relations, and the _only_ girl had forgotten him, when he left
school. He heard that she married a classmate!

Dick was twenty-seven. Five years had slipped by since he quit school,
and he couldn't remember where they had gone. It was only six months
after his father died that he lost his last regular job. He tried
selling and was a failure. He had been carpenter's helper, plumber's
helper, porter, counter-man and busboy as the months passed, but nothing
steady. For the past two months he had been hunting for work, while his
few dollars dwindled to where he no longer had room rent. Then it was
the park.

His feet were sore and blistered from holes in his shoes, and he limped
with every step. It took so long to reach the address that there was
little chance of finding the job still open. It was not the first time
he had missed--for the same reason.

       *       *       *       *       *

He found that 18 Morgan Avenue was a dreary structure, appearing as if
it had been standing twenty years too long. The wooden stairs creaked as
he rested his weight on first one sore foot and then the other. Room 36
was at the top of the five-story building, and it seemed ages before he
reached the doorway. The only sign of furnishing in the room was a hard
bench, occupied by three men. Dick had to stand while his feet tortured
him, but it was hopeful to see men waiting--_the job wasn't filled_!

Suddenly a door at the opposite side of the room jerked open and a man
dashed through.

"Get out of here! The man's _insane_!"

Two of the men followed, but the man who remained on the bench glanced
at Dick, grinned, shrugged his shoulders and entered the door. A moment
later his booming voice could be heard through the thin partition,
although his words were not clear.

An hour passed while Dick waited. When the man came out, with a smile on
his face, he wished Dick luck and headed for the stairway.

Barrow felt a queer sensation as he stepped through the inner doorway. A
man faced him in a huge leather chair across the room. At least Dick
thought he was a man. Grotesque in every way, his body was small while
his head was twice as large as normal. He was light complexioned, with
almost white hair thinly covering the top of his enormous head. His
features were finely cut, with large aquiline nose. He was not
repulsive, and smiled in welcome as Dick hesitated at the threshold.
When he spoke his tone was soft and musical.

"Welcome, stranger. You have come in answer to my advertisement and I
will explain without wasting time. But first tell me about yourself."

Going over his complete life history, including the two years in
college, Dick came to the lean years when his father died. He hesitated
slightly not proud of this period.

"Go on, Mr. Barrow. It is not important to have been a success in
business, and I will not consider that in your applications. It isn't
what you _have_ done, but what you _want_ to do, that interests me."

He spoke with a strange accent, that Dick didn't recognize. But he was
pleasant and made it easy to talk.

When Barrow finished, by relating the finding of the newspaper and the
long walk to the office, the queer man was smiling.

"I like your frankness and will tell you about the position, although I
can't reveal the location of your work. It is not on any map, and you
will work among a race such as myself, with no opportunity of leaving
after reaching the destination.

"You will be given every comfort and advantage among my people, and be
required to work hard in return. There are several machines out of
commission which must be repaired and put to work again. After a few
months your work will be easier, although you must constantly watch all
machinery to see that it is in perfect condition, and does not stop work
for even a moment.

"My people use mechanics of greater size and development than anything
you have ever seen, and our lives depend on its perfect operation. In
order to accept this position you must be married. Your wife must come
with you, and be willing to accept the same living conditions which are
offered to you.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The man who left this office as you entered has a fiancee and has gone
to talk it over with her. In your instance _I must select your wife_!
You will be the leader of the workmen whom I take back. There will be
only a few people such as yourself, and you can never again see others
of your race.

"You will have power and wealth among my people, and every type of
entertainment that you desire. But remember that you leave your race
forever, with _no possibility_ of return! If you accept my offer you
must trust entirely in what I say about the future."

When the man finished speaking Dick was quiet for a long time.
Everything seemed so unreal, so different from what he had expected. He
must be willing to leave everything that he had always known--to enter
an existence which he didn't understand--without chance of return! Yet
he believed every word this man spoke, impossible as it seemed. But
_marriage_ ... with a girl he had never _seen_!

The man spoke again. "You hesitate about marrying; I can see it in your
eyes. But remember that _she_ must accept without knowing you, and is
taking just as great a chance. This I can say. She will be brilliant,
and I _could not_ trust you to pick out a brilliant woman for your wife.
Love would come first in your eyes. Other things would seem unimportant.
I know that you and the girl I select are apt to fall in love, as I
shall choose a girl suitable to your temperament."

Dick answered slowly, "I don't know what to say. I will have to live
with her all of my life, and if we are not happy anything you could
offer would mean nothing."

The smile spread over the strange man's face again. "I wouldn't worry
too much. I believe you could stand a greater chance of happiness if _I_
do the choosing than if you do it yourself as I can see more of the
future. If you are mutually likable and willing to understand each
other; if you are mentally on the same level, there is little chance of
_not_ falling in love. My race mates in this way, and it works out
better than your haphazard mating."

When he realized that Dick still hesitated, he was slightly upset. Then
reaching into a leather bag, hung from a strap around his neck, he
stretched forth a handful of bills.

"Go and get yourself a good meal. It is now morning. When two more
mornings have passed come again. Don't be afraid to use the money for
anything that you desire. This does not mean that I expect you to accept
the offer, but it will allow you to think it over carefully--without
thinking of your _stomach_. Buy clothes, a room to sleep in, anything
else that you want. Be comfortable and do not worry about what you
spend. If you refuse my terms, I will be disappointed, but will not
expect to be repaid."

       *       *       *       *       *

As Dick reached the street he shook his head. It all seemed so
fantastic. But the money in his hand was real money--and there was a lot
of it! Suddenly he realized that people were staring at the handful of
bills, and he hurriedly stuffed them in a pocket. When he was alone for
a moment he stepped into a vacant doorway to count it.

There were 14 twenties, 10 fifties, and three ten dollar bills in the
lot. Twenty-seven bills in all, representing eight hundred and ten
dollars. Folding the money carefully and placing it in a safe pocket, he
noticed a sign across the street. "SHOES," it said. He glanced at his
own, then limped slowly across when the traffic lights changed. For a
moment he looked in the window, then stepped inside.

While the shoe clerk was busy he carefully slipped a twenty from the
other bills. It would seem strange if he had too much money with his
feet in such shape.

The next stop was a restaurant. Then followed a trip to a clothing
store--and he left his old suit behind. With new clothes, shoes, and a
meal beneath his belt, he began to think the offer of the stranger was
far from fantastic. What if he did have to marry a strange girl? At
least they would both have comfort and companionship, wherever they
went.
