called out to trial by combat the day I can ride a tankette once more."

"I wouldn't be too sure, lad," The Barbarian said gently. "What does
that look like, over there?"

Geoffrey turned his head to follow the shadowy pointing arm, and saw a
flicker of light in the distance. He recognized it for what it was; a
huge campfire, with the Leaguesmen's tankettes drawn up around it.
"They're dividing the spoils--what prisoners there are, to work the
mills; whatever of your equipment is still usable; your baggage train.
And so forth. What of it?"

"Ah, yes, my baggage train," The Barbarian muttered. "Well, we'll come
back to that. What else do you suppose they're dividing?"

Geoffrey frowned. "Why--nothing else. Wait!" He sat up sharply, ignoring
his ribs. "The fiefs of the dead nobles."

"Exactly. Your ramshackle little League held together long enough to
whip us for the first time, but now the princelings are dividing up and
returning to their separate holdings. Once there, they'll go back to
peering covetously at each other's lands, and maybe raid amongst
themselves a little, until I come back again. And you're as poor as a
church mouse at this moment, lad--no fief, no lands, no title--unless
there's an heir?"

Geoffrey shook his head distractedly. "No. I've not wed. It's as you
say."

"And just try to get your property back. No--no, it won't be so easy to
return. Unless you'd care to be a serf on your own former holding?"

"Dugald would have me killed," Geoffrey said bitterly.

"So there you are, lad. The only advantage you have is that Dugald
thinks you're dead already--you can be sure of that, or it would have
been an assassin, and not me, that woke you. That's something, at least.
It's a beginning, but you'll have to lay your plans carefully, and take
your time. I certainly wouldn't plan on doing anything until your body's
healed and your brain's had time to work."

Young Geoffrey blinked back the tears of rage. The thought of losing the
town and lands his father had left him was almost more than his hot
blood could stand. The memory of the great old Keep that dominated the
town, with its tapestried halls and torchlit chambers, was suddenly very
precious to him. He felt a sharp pang at the thought that he must sleep
in a field tonight, like some skulking outlaw, while Dugald quite
possibly got himself drunk on Geoffrion wine and snored his headache
away on the thick furs of Geoffrey's bed.

But The Barbarian was right. Time was needed--and this meant that, to a
certain extent at least, his lot and Savage's were thrown in together.
The thought came to Geoffrey that he might have chosen a worse partner.

"Now, lad," The Barbarian said, "as long as you're not doing anything
else, you might as well help me with my problem."

The realization of just exactly who this man was came sharply back to
young Geoffrey. "I won't help you escape to your own lands, if that's
what you mean," he said quickly.

"I'll take good care of that myself, when the time comes," the man
answered drily. "Right now, I've got something else in mind. They're
dividing my baggage train, as you said. Now, I don't mind that, seeing
as most of it belonged to them in the first place. I don't mind it for
this year, that is. But there's something else one of you cockerels will
be wanting to take home with him, and I've a mind not to let him.
There's a perfectly good woman in my personal trailer, and I'm going to
get her. But if we're going to do that and get clear of this country by
morning, we'd better get to it."

Like every other young man of his time and place, Geoffrey had a
clear-cut sense of duty regarding the safety and well-being of ladies.
He had an entirely different set of attitudes toward women who were not
ladies. He had not the slightest idea of which to apply to this case.

What sort of woman would The Barbarian take to battle with him? What
sort of women would the inland barbarians have generally? He had very
little knowledge to go on. The inlanders had been appearing from over
the westward mountains for generations, looting and pillaging almost at
will, sometimes staying through a winter but usually disappearing in the
early Fall, carrying their spoils back to their mysterious homelands on
the great Mississippi plain. The seaboard civilization had somehow kept
from going to its knees, in spite of them--in this last generation, even
though the barbarians had The Barbarian to lead them, the Seaboard
League had managed to cobble itself together--but no one, in all this
time, had ever actually learned, or cared, much about these vicious,
compactly organized raiders. Certainly no one had learned anything
beyond those facts which worked to best advantage on a battlefield.

So, young Giulion Geoffrey faced his problem. This 'perfectly good
woman' of The Barbarian's--was she in fact a good woman, a lady, and
therefore entitled to aid in extremity from any and all gentlemen; or
was she some camp follower, entirely worthy of being considered a spoil
of combat?

"Well, come on, lad," The Barbarian rumbled impatiently at this point.
"Do you want that Dugald enjoying _her_ tonight along with everything
else?"

And that decided Geoffrey. He pushed himself to his feet, not liking the
daggers in his chest, but not liking the thought of Dugald's pleasures
even more. "Let's go, then."

"Good enough, lad," The Barbarian chuckled. "Now let's see how quietly
we can get across to the edge of that fire."

They set out--none too quietly, with The Barbarian's heavy bulk lurching
against Geoffrey's lean shoulder on occasion, and both of them uncertain
of their footing in the darkness. But they made it across without being
noticed--just two more battle-sore figures in a field where many such
might be expected--and that was what counted.

The noise and confusion attendant on the dividing of the spoils was an
added help; they reached the fringes of the campfire easily.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was very interesting, the way history had doubled back on itself,
like a worm re-growing part of its body but re-growing it in the wrong
place. At one end of the kink--of the fresh, pink scar--was a purulent
hell of fire and smoke that no one might have expected to live through.
Yet, people had, as they have a habit of doing. And at the other end of
the kink in time--Giulion Geoffrey's end, Harolde Dugald's time, The
Barbarian's day--there were keeps and moats in Erie, Pennsylvania,
vassals in New Brunswick, and a great stinking warren of low,
half-timbered houses on the island of Manhattan. If it had taken a few
centuries longer to recover from the cauterizing sun bombs, these things
might still have been. But they might have had different names, and
human history might have been considered to begin only a few hundred
years before. Even this had not happened. The link with the past
remained. There was a narrow, cobbled path on Manhattan, with sewage
oozing down the ditch in its center, which was still Fifth Avenue. It
ran roughly along the same directions as old Broadway, not because there
was no one who could read the yellowed old maps but because surveying
was in its second childhood. There was a barge running between two ropes
stretched across the Hudson, and this was The George Washington Bridge
ferry. So, it was only a kink in history, not a break.

But Rome was not re-built in a day. Hodd Savage--The Barbarian, the man
who had come out of the hinterlands to batter on civilization's badly
mortared walls--clamped his hand on Giulion Geoffrey's arm, grunted,
jerked his head toward the cluster of nobles standing beside the
campfire, and muttered: "Listen."

Geoffrey listened.

The nobles were between him and the fire, and almost none of them were
more than silhouettes. Here and there, a man faced toward the fire at
such an angle that Geoffrey could make out the thick arch of an eyebrow,
