its formation, through two or three large vessels of water, in which it
deposits some other ingredients, and especially water, tar, and oil,
which also arise from the distillation of coals. The gas-light
apparatus, therefore, consists simply in a large iron vessel, in which
the coals are exposed to the heat of a furnace,--some reservoirs of
water, in which the gas deposits its impurities,--and tubes that convey
it to the desired spot, being propelled with uniform velocity through
the tubes by means of a certain degree of pressure which is made upon
the reservoir.

EMILY.

What an admirable contrivance! Do you not think, Mrs. B., that it will
soon get into universal use?

MRS. B.

Most probably, as to the lighting of streets, offices, and public
places, as it far surpasses any former invention for that purpose; but
as to the interior of private houses, this mode of lighting has not yet
been sufficiently tried to know whether it will be found generally
desirable, either in regard to economy or convenience. It may, however,
be considered as one of the happiest applications of chemistry to the
comforts of life; and there is every reason to suppose that it will
answer the full extent of public, expectation.

I have another experiment to show you with hydrogen gas, which I think
will entertain you. Have you ever blown bubbles with soap and water?

EMILY.

Yes, often, when I was a child; and I used to make them float in the air
by blowing them upwards.

MRS. B.

We shall fill some such bubbles with hydrogen gas, instead of
atmospheric air, and you will see with what ease and rapidity they will
ascend, without the assistance of blowing, from the lightness of the
gas. --Will you mix some soap and water whilst I fill this bladder with
the gas contained in the receiver which stands on the shelf in the
water-bath?

CAROLINE.

What is the use of the brass-stopper and turn-cock at the top of the
receiver?

MRS. B.

It is to afford a passage to the gas when required. There is, you see,
a similar stop-cock fastened to this bladder, which is made to fit that
on the receiver. I screw them one on the other, and now turn the two
cocks, to open a communication between the receiver and the bladder;
then, by sliding the receiver off the shelf, and gently sinking it into
the bath, the water rises in the receiver and forces the gas into the
bladder. (PLATE IX. fig. 1.)

  [Illustration: Plate IX. Vol. I. p. 228

  Fig. 1. Apparatus for transferring gases from a Receiver into a
    bladder.
  Fig. 2. Apparatus for blowing Soap bubbles.]

CAROLINE.

Yes, I see the bladder swell as the water rises in the receiver.

MRS. B.

I think that we have already a sufficient quantity in the bladder for
our purpose; we must be careful to stop both the cocks before we
separate the bladder from the receiver, lest the gas should escape.
--Now I must fix a pipe to the stopper of the bladder, and by dipping
its mouth into the soap and water, take up a few drops--then I again
turn the cock, and squeeze the bladder in order to force the gas into
the soap and water at the mouth of the pipe. (PLATE IX. fig. 2.)

EMILY.

There is a bubble--but it bursts before it leaves the mouth of the pipe.

MRS. B.

We must have patience and try again; it is not so easy to blow bubbles
by means of a bladder, as simply with the breath.

CAROLINE.

Perhaps there is not soap enough in the water; I should have had warm
water, it would have dissolved the soap better.

EMILY.

Does not some of the gas escape between the bladder and the pipe?

MRS. B.

No, they are perfectly air tight; we shall succeed presently, I dare
say.

CAROLINE.

Now a bubble ascends; it moves with the rapidity of a balloon. How
beautifully it refracts the light!

EMILY.

It has burst against the ceiling--you succeed now wonderfully; but why
do they all ascend and burst against the ceiling?

MRS. B.

Hydrogen gas is so much lighter than atmospherical air, that it ascends
rapidly with its very light envelope, which is burst by the force with
which it strikes the ceiling.

Air-balloons are filled with this gas, and if they carried no other
weight than their covering, would ascend as rapidly as these bubbles.

CAROLINE.

Yet their covering must be much heavier than that of these bubbles?

MRS. B.

Not in proportion to the quantity of gas they contain. I do not know
whether you have ever been present at the filling of a large balloon.
The apparatus for that purpose is very simple. It consists of a number
of vessels, either jars or barrels, in which the materials for the
formation of the gas are mixed, each of these being furnished with a
tube, and communicating with a long flexible pipe, which conveys the gas
into the balloon.

EMILY.

But the fire-balloons which were first invented, and have been since
abandoned, on account of their being so dangerous, were constructed,
I suppose, on a different principle.

MRS. B.

They were filled simply with atmospherical air, considerably rarefied by
heat; and the necessity of having a fire underneath the balloon, in
order to preserve the rarefaction of the air within it, was the
circumstance productive of so much danger.

If you are not yet tired of experiments, I have another to show you. It
consists in filling soap-bubbles with a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen
gases, in the proportions that form water; and afterwards setting fire
to them.

EMILY.

They will detonate, I suppose?

MRS. B.

Yes, they will. As you have seen the method of transferring the gas from
the receiver into the bladder, it is not necessary to repeat it. I have
therefore provided a bladder which contains a due proportion of oxygen
and hydrogen gases, and we have only to blow bubbles with it.

CAROLINE.

Here is a fine large bubble rising--shall I set fire to it with the
candle?

MRS. B.

If you please . . . .

CAROLINE.

Heavens, what an explosion! --It was like the report of a gun: I confess
it frightened me much. I never should have imagined it could be so loud.

EMILY.

And the flash was as vivid as lightning.

MRS. B.

The combination of the two gases takes place during that instant of time
that you see the flash, and hear the detonation.

EMILY.

This has a strong resemblance to thunder and lightning.

MRS. B.

These phenomena, however, are generally of an electrical nature. Yet
various meteorological effects may be attributed to accidental
detonations of hydrogen gas in the atmosphere; for nature abounds with
hydrogen: it constitutes a very considerable portion of the whole mass
of water belonging to our globe, and from that source almost every other
body obtains it. It enters into the composition of all animal
substances, and of a great number of minerals; but it is most abundant
in vegetables. From this immense variety of bodies, it is often
spontaneously disengaged; its great levity makes it rise into the
superior regions of the atmosphere; and when, either by an electrical
spark, or any casual elevation of temperature, it takes fire, it may
produce such meteors or luminous appearances as are occasionally seen in
the atmosphere. Of this kind are probably those broad flashes which we
often see on a summer-evening, without hearing any detonation.

EMILY.

Every flash, I suppose, must produce a quantity of water?

CAROLINE.

And this water, naturally, descends in the form of rain?

MRS. B.

That probably is often the case, though it is not a necessary
consequence; for the water may be dissolved by the atmosphere, as it
descends towards the lower regions, and remain there in the form of
clouds.

The application of electrical attraction to chemical phenomena is likely
to lead to many very interesting discoveries in meteorology; for
electricity evidently acts a most important part in the atmosphere. This
subject however, is, as yet, not sufficiently developed for me to
venture enlarging upon it. The phenomena of the atmosphere are far from
being well understood; and even with the little that is known, I am but
imperfectly acquainted.


But before we take leave of hydrogen, I must not omit to mention to you
a most interesting discovery of Sir H. Davy, which is connected with
this subject.

CAROLINE.

You allude, I suppose, to the new miner's lamp, which has of late been
so much talked of? I have long been desirous of knowing what that
discovery was, and what purpose it was intended to answer.

MRS. B.

It often happens in coal-mines, that quantities of the gas, called by
chemists _hydro-carbonat_, or by the miners _fire-damp_, (the same from
which the gas-lights are obtained,) ooze out from fissures in the beds
of coal, and fill the cavities in which the men are at work; and this
gas being inflammable, the consequence is, that when the men approach
those places with a lighted candle, the gas takes fire, and explosions
happen which destroy the men and horses employed in that part of the
colliery, sometimes in great numbers.

EMILY.

What tremendous accidents these must be! But whence does that gas
originate?

MRS. B.

Being the chief product of the combustion of coal, no wonder that
inflammable gas should occasionally appear in situations in which this
mineral abounds, since there can be no doubt that processes of
combustion are frequently taking place at a great depth under the
surface of the earth; and therefore those accumulations of gas may arise
either from combustions actually going on, or from former combustions,
the gas having perhaps been confined there for ages.

CAROLINE.

And how does Sir H. Davy's lamp prevent those dreadful explosions?

MRS. B.

By a contrivance equally simple and ingenious; and one which does no
less credit to the philosophical views from which it was deduced, than
to the philanthropic motives from which the enquiry sprung. The
principle of the lamp is shortly this: It was ascertained, two or three
years ago, both by Mr. Tennant and by Sir Humphry himself, that the
combustion of inflammable gas could not be propagated through small
tubes; so that if a jet of an inflammable gaseous mixture, issuing from
a bladder or any other vessel, through a small tube, be set fire to, it
burns at the orifice of the tube, but the flame never penetrates into
the vessel. It is upon this fact that Sir Humphry's safety-lamp is
founded.

EMILY.

But why does not the flame ever penetrate through the tube into the
vessel from which the gas issues, so as to explode at once the whole of
the gas?

MRS. B.

Because, no doubt, the inflamed gas is so much cooled in its passage
through a small tube as to cease to burn before the combustion reaches
the reservoir.

CAROLINE.

And how can this principle be applied to the construction of a lamp?

MRS. B.

Nothing easier. You need only suppose a lamp enclosed all round in glass
or horn, but having a number of small open tubes at the bottom, and
others at the top, to let the air in and out. Now, if such a lamp or
lanthorn be carried into an atmosphere capable of exploding, an
explosion or combustion of the gas will take place within the lamp; and
although the vent afforded by the tubes will save the lamp from
bursting, yet, from the principle just explained, the combustion will
not be propagated to the external air through the tubes, so that no
farther consequence will ensue.

EMILY.

And is that all the mystery of that valuable lamp?

MRS. B.

No; in the early part of the enquiry a lamp of this kind was actually
proposed; but it was but a rude sketch compared to its present state of
improvement. Sir H. Davy, after a succession of trials, by which he
brought his lamp nearer and nearer to perfection, at last conceived the
happy idea that if the lamp were surrounded with a wire-work or
wire-gauze, of a close texture, instead of glass or horn, the tubular
contrivance I have just described would be entirely superseded, since
each of the interstices of the gauze would act as a tube in preventing
the propagation of explosions; so that this pervious metallic covering
would answer the various purposes of transparency, of permeability to
air, and of protection against explosion. This idea, Sir Humphry
immediately submitted to the test of experiment, and the result has
answered his most sanguine expectations, both in his laboratory and in
the collieries, where it has already been extensively tried. And he has
now the happiness of thinking that his invention will probably be the
means of saving every year a number of lives, which would have been lost
in digging out of the bowels of the earth one of the most valuable
necessaries of life. Here is one of these lamps, every part of which you
will at once comprehend. (See PLATE X. fig. 1.)

  [Illustration: Plate X.

  Fig. 1.
  A. the cistern containing the Oil
  B. the rim or screw by which the gauze cage is fixed to the cistern.
  C. apperture for supplying Oil.
  E. a wire for trimming the wick.
  D. F. the wire gauze cylinder.
  G. a double top.

  Fig. 2.
  A. the reservoir of condensed air.
  B. the condensing Syringe.
  C. the bladder for Oxygen.
  D. the moveable jet.]

CAROLINE.

How very simple and ingenious! But I do not yet well see why an
explosion taking place within the lamp should not communicate to the
external air around it, through the interstices of the wire?

MRS. B.

This has been and is still a subject of wonder, even to philosophers;
and the only mode they have of explaining it is, that flame or ignition
cannot pass through a fine wire-work, because the metallic wire cools
the flame sufficiently to extinguish it in passing through the gauze.
This property of the wire-gauze is quite similar to that of the tubes
which I mentioned on introducing the subject; for you may consider each
interstice of the gauze as an extremely short tube of a very small
diameter.

EMILY.

But I should expect the wire would often become red-hot, by the burning
of the gas within the lamp?

MRS. B.

And this is actually the case, for the top of the lamp is very apt to
become red-hot. But, fortunately, inflammable gaseous mixtures cannot be
exploded by red-hot wire, the intervention of actual flame being
required for that purpose; so that the wire does not set fire to the
explosive gas around it.

EMILY.

I can understand that; but if the wire be red-hot, how can it cool the
flame within, and prevent its passing through the gauze?

MRS. B.

The gauze, though red-hot, is not so hot as the flame by which it has
been heated; and as metallic wire is a good conductor, the heat does not
much accumulate in it, as it passes off quickly to the other parts of
the lamp, as well as to any contiguous bodies.

CAROLINE.

This is indeed a most interesting discovery, and one which shows at once
the immense utility with which science may be practically applied to
some of the most important purposes.




CONVERSATION VIII.

ON SULPHUR AND PHOSPHORUS.


MRS. B.

SULPHUR is the next substance that comes under our consideration. It
differs in one essential point from the preceding, as it exists in a
solid form at the temperature of the atmosphere.

CAROLINE.

I am glad that we have at last a solid body to examine; one that we can
see and touch. Pray, is it not with sulphur that the points of matches
are covered, to make them easily kindle?

MRS. B.

Yes, it is; and you therefore already know that sulphur is a very
combustible substance. It is seldom discovered in nature in a pure
unmixed state; so great is its affinity for other substances, that it is
almost constantly found combined with some of them. It is most commonly
united with metals, under various forms, and is separated from them by a
very simple process. It exists likewise in many mineral waters, and some
vegetables yield it in various proportions, especially those of the
cruciform tribe. It is also found in animal matter; in short, it may be
discovered in greater or less quantity, in the mineral, vegetable, and
animal kingdoms.

EMILY.

I have heard of _flowers of sulphur_, are they the produce of any plant?

MRS. B.

By no means: they consist of nothing more than common sulphur, reduced
to a very fine powder by a process called _sublimation_. --You see some
of it in this phial; it is exactly the same substance as this lump of
sulphur, only its colour is a paler yellow, owing to its state of very
minute division.

EMILY.

Pray what is sublimation?

MRS. B.

It is the evaporation, or, more properly speaking, the volatilisation of
solid substances, which, in cooling, condense again in a concrete form.
The process, in this instance, must be performed in a closed vessel,
both to prevent combustion, which would take place if the access of air
were not carefully precluded, and likewise in order to collect the
substance after the operation. As it is rather a slow process, we shall
not try the experiment now; but you will understand it perfectly if I
show you the apparatus used for the purpose. (PLATE XI. fig. 1.) Some
lumps of sulphur are put into a receiver of this kind, which is called a
_cucurbit_. Its shape, you see, somewhat resembles that of a pear, and
is open at the top, so as to adapt itself exactly to a kind of conical
receiver of this sort, called the head. The cucurbit, thus covered with
its head, is placed over a sand-bath; this is nothing more than a vessel
full of sand, which is kept heated by a furnace, such as you see here,
so as to preserve the apparatus in a moderate and uniform temperature.
The sulphur then soon begins to melt, and immediately after this,
a thick white smoke rises, which is gradually deposited within the head,
or upper part of the apparatus, where it condenses against the sides,
somewhat in the form of a vegetation, whence it has obtained the name of
flowers of sulphur. This apparatus, which is called an _alembic_, is
highly useful in all kinds of distillations, as you will see when we
come to treat of those operations. Alembics are not commonly made of
glass, like this, which is applicable only to distillations upon a very
small scale. Those used in manufactures are generally made of copper,
and are, of course, considerably larger. The principal construction,
however, is always the same, although their shape admits of some
variation.

  [Illustration: Plate XI. Vol. I. p. 237.

  Fig. 1. Sublimation of Sulphur.
  A Alembic.
  B Sand-bath.
  C Furnace.

  Fig. 2. Eudiometer.

  Fig. 3. Decomposition of water by Carbon.
  A Retort containing water.
  B Lamp to heat the water.
  C.C Porcelain tube containing Carbone.
  D Furnace through which the tube passes.
  E Receiver for the gas produced.
  F Water bath.]

CAROLINE.

What is the use of that neck, or tube, which bends down from the upper
piece of the apparatus?

MRS. B.

It is of no use in sublimations; but in distillations (the general
object of which is to evaporate, by heat, in closed vessels, the
volatile parts of a compound body, and to condense them again into a
liquid,) it serves to carry off the condensed fluid, which otherwise
would fall back into the cucurbit. But this is rather foreign to our
present subject. Let us return to the sulphur. You now perfectly
understand, I suppose, what is meant by sublimation?

EMILY.

I believe I do. Sublimation appears to consist in destroying, by means
of heat, the attraction of aggregation of the particles of a solid body,
which are thus volatilised; and as soon as they lose the caloric which
produced that effect, they are deposited in the form of a fine powder.

CAROLINE.

It seems to me to be somewhat similar to the transformation of water
into vapour, which returns to its liquid state when deprived of caloric.

EMILY.

There is this difference, however, that the sulphur does not return to
its former state, since, instead of lumps, it changes to a fine powder.

MRS. B.

Chemically speaking, it is exactly the same substance, whether in the
form of lump or powder. For if this powder be melted again by heat, it
will, in cooling, be restored to the same solid state in which it was
before its sublimation.

CAROLINE.

But if there be no real change, produced by the sublimation of the
sulphur, what is the use of that operation?

MRS. B.

It divides the sulphur into very minute parts, and thus disposes it to
enter more readily into combination with other bodies. It is used also
as a means of purification.

CAROLINE.

Sublimation appears to me like the beginning of combustion, for the
completion of which one circumstance only is wanting, the absorption of
oxygen.

MRS. B.

But that circumstance is every thing. No essential alteration is
produced in sulphur by sublimation; whilst in combustion it combines
with the oxygen, and forms a new compound totally different in every
respect from sulphur in its pure state. --We shall now _burn_ some
sulphur, and you will see how very different the result will be. For
this purpose I put a small quantity of flowers of sulphur into this cup,
and place it in a dish, into which I have poured a little water: I now
set fire to the sulphur with the point of this hot wire; for its
combustion will not begin unless its temperature be considerably raised.
--You see that it burns with a faint blueish flame; and as I invert over
it this receiver, white fumes arise from the sulphur, and fill the
vessel. --You will soon perceive that the water is rising within the
receiver, a little above its level in the plate. --Well, Emily, can you
account for this?

EMILY.

I suppose that the sulphur has absorbed the oxygen from the
atmospherical air within the receiver, and that we shall find some
oxygenated sulphur in the cup. As for the white smoke, I am quite at a
loss to guess what it may be.

MRS. B.

Your first conjecture is very right: but you are mistaken in the last;
for nothing will be left in the cup. The white vapour is the oxygenated
sulphur, which assumes the form of an elastic fluid of a pungent and
offensive smell, and is a powerful acid. Here you see a chemical
combination of oxygen and sulphur, producing a true gas, which would
continue such under the pressure and at the temperature of the
atmosphere, if it did not unite with the water in the plate, to which it
imparts its acid taste, and all its acid properties. --You see, now,
with what curious effects the combustion of sulphur is attended.

CAROLINE.

This is something quite new; and I confess that I do not perfectly
understand why the sulphur turns acid.

MRS. B.

It is because it unites with oxygen, which is the acidifying principle.
And, indeed, the word _oxygen_ is derived from two Greek words
signifying _to produce an acid_.

CAROLINE.

Why, then, is not water, which contains such a quantity of oxygen, acid?

MRS. B.

Because hydrogen, which is the other constituent of water, is not
susceptible of acidification. --I believe it will be necessary, before
we proceed further, to say a few words of the general nature of acids,
though it is rather a deviation from our plan of examining the simple
bodies separately, before we consider them in a state of combination.

Acids may be considered as a peculiar class of _burnt_ bodies, which
during their combustion, or combination with oxygen, have acquired very
characteristic properties. They are chiefly discernible by their sour
taste, and by turning red most of the blue vegetable colours. These two
properties are common to the whole class of acids; but each of them is
distinguished by other peculiar qualities. Every acid consists of some
particular substance, (which constitutes its basis, and is different in
each,) and of oxygen, which is common to them all.

EMILY.

But I do not clearly see the difference between acids and oxyds.

MRS. B.

Acids were, in fact, oxyds, which, by the addition of a sufficient
quantity of oxygen, have been converted into acids. For acidification,
you must observe, always implies previous oxydation, as a body must have
combined with the quantity of oxygen requisite to constitute it an oxyd,
before it can combine with the greater quantity that is necessary to
render it an acid.

CAROLINE.

Are all oxyds capable of being converted into acids?

MRS. B.

Very far from it; it is only certain substances which will enter into
that peculiar kind of union with oxygen that produces acids, and the
number of these is proportionally very small; but all burnt bodies may
be considered as belonging either to the class of oxyds, or to that of
acids. At a future period, we shall enter more at large into this
subject. At present, I have but one circumstance further to point out to
your observation respecting acids: it is, that most of them are
susceptible of two degrees of acidification, according to the different
quantities of oxygen with which their basis combines.

EMILY.

And how are these two degrees of acidification distinguished?

MRS. B.

By the peculiar properties which result from them. The acid we have just
made is the first or weakest degree of acidification, and is called
_sulphureous acid_; if it were fully saturated with oxygen, it would be
called _sulphuric acid_. You must therefore remember, that in this, as
in all acids, the first degree of acidification is expressed by the
termination in _ous_; the stronger, by the termination in _ic_.

CAROLINE.

And how is the sulphuric acid made?

MRS. B.

By burning sulphur in pure oxygen gas, and thus rendering its combustion
much more complete. I have provided some oxygen gas for this purpose; it
is in that bottle, but we must first decant the gas into the glass
receiver which stands on the shelf in the bath, and is full of water.

CAROLINE.

Pray, let me try to do it, Mrs. B.

MRS. B.

It requires some little dexterity--hold the bottle completely under
water, and do not turn the mouth upwards, till it is immediately under
the aperture in the shelf, through which the gas is to pass into the
receiver, and then turn it up gradually. --Very well, you have only let
a few bubbles escape, and that must be expected at a first trial. --Now
I shall put this piece of sulphur into the receiver, through the opening
at the top, and introduce along with it a small piece of lighted tinder
to set fire to it. --This requires being done very quickly, lest the
atmospherical air should get in, and mix with the pure oxygen gas.

EMILY.

How beautifully it burns!

CAROLINE.

But it is already buried in the thick vapour. This, I suppose, is
sulphuric acid?

EMILY.

Are these acids always in a gaseous state?

MRS. B.

Sulphureous acid, as we have already observed, is a permanent gas, and
can be obtained in a liquid form only by condensing it in water. In its
pure state, the sulphureous acid is invisible, and it now appears in the
form of a white smoke, from its combining with the moisture. But the
vapour of sulphuric acid, which you have just seen to rise during the
combustion, is not a gas, but only a vapour, which condenses into liquid
sulphuric acid, by losing its caloric. But it appears from Sir H. Davy's
experiments, that this formation and condensation of sulphuric acid
requires the presence of water, for which purpose the vapour is received
into cold water, which may afterwards be separated from the acid by
evaporation.

Sulphur has hitherto been considered as a simple substance; but Sir H.
Davy has suspected that it contains a small portion of hydrogen, and
perhaps also of oxygen.

On submitting sulphur to the action of the Voltaic battery, he observed
that the negative wire gave out hydrogen; and the existence of hydrogen
in sulphur was rendered still more probable by his observing that a
small quantity of water was produced during the combustion of sulphur.

EMILY.

And pray of what nature is sulphur when perfectly pure?

MRS. B.

Sulphur has probably never been obtained perfectly free from
combination, so that its radical may possibly possess properties very
