chances of losing his life?"

"I have faced danger and risked my life before this," said Justus
Miles quietly.

The other nodded. "Then that is all I am prepared to tell you at this
time."

Justus Miles accompanied Ward to his room where the latter laid out
for him a change of clothing. It was luxurious to splash in warm water
and bath-salts after the enforced griminess of weeks. The clothes
fitted him fairly well, the two men being of a size. Lounging in his
friend's room after a substantial meal, and smoking a Turkish
cigarette, he questioned Ward more closely.

"Who is the old fellow?"

"I don't know. He hired me through an advertisement and then set me to
employing others."

"But surely you know where we are going?"

"Hardly more than you do. Solino did say there was a country, a city
to be invaded. Whereabouts is a secret. I can't say I care for going
it blind, but neither do I like starving to death. I was in about the
same shape you were when you applied. Desperate."

Justus Miles stretched himself comfortably.

"A spiggoty by the looks of him," he said; "negro blood, no doubt.
Well, fighting's my trade. I'd rather cash in fighting than sit on a
park bench. I suppose the old boy will tell us more in good time, and
until then we're sitting pretty, with good eats to be had; so why
worry?"

And yet if Justus Miles had been able to look ahead he might not have
talked so blithely.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the week that followed his employment, he saw nothing of
Solino, though Ward met the old man for a few moments every day to
receive his instructions. "It puzzles me," he confessed to Miles,
"how the old chap lives. There's a private exit to the street from his
rooms, but I could swear he never goes out. How could he in that
wheelchair--no attendant. And yet he must. How would he get food?"

Justus Miles smiled lazily. "No mystery at all, Rusty. We're gone for
hours at a time. What's to prevent him from phoning to have his meals
brought in?"

"But I've questioned them at the restaurant and they say--"

"Good Lord!--is there only one restaurant in Manhattan?"

Yet Justus Miles himself could not help feeling there was something
mysterious about Solino, but just how mysterious he did not
realize--until, one evening, he stood with a half dozen of his fellow
adventurers in a lonely spot on the Long Island coast and watched the
darkness deepen around them. "We shall wait," said Solino presently,
"until the moon comes up."

The moon rose at about nine o'clock, flooding the beach and the
heaving expanse of water with a ghostly light. From the folds of
Solino's cloak, close about his muffled throat, a peculiar ray of
green light flashed out over the water. In answer, a green light
flashed back, and presently, something low and black, like the body of
a whale half submerged, stole towards the beach. Scarcely a ripple
marked its progress, and the nose of it slid up on the sand. "Good
Lord!" whispered Miles, grasping Ward by the arm: "it's a submarine!"

But the craft on which the surprised soldiers of fortune gazed was not
an ordinary submarine. In the first place, there was no conning tower;
and, in the second, from the blunt nose projected a narrow gangway
bridging the few feet of water between the mysterious craft and the
dry beach. But the men had little time to indulge in amazement.
"Quick," said Solino; "load those boxes onto the gangway. No need to
carry them further." He himself wheeled his chair into the interior of
the submarine, calling back, "Hurry, hurry!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The adventurers accomplished the loading in a few minutes. "Now," came
the voice of their employer, "stand on the gangway yourselves. Steady;
don't move."

Under their feet they felt the gangway vibrate and withdraw from the
land. For a moment they were in utter darkness; then a light flashed
up and revealed a long, box-like room. The opening through which they
had come had closed, leaving no sign of its existence.

In the center of the room stood a mechanism like a huge gyroscope, and
a plunging piston, smooth and black, went up and down with
frictionless ease. In front of what was evidently a control board sat
a swarthy man with a large hairless head and peculiarly colored eyes.
The adventurers stared in surprise, for this man, too, sat in a
wheelchair, seemingly a cripple; but unlike Mr. Solino he wore no
cloak, his body from the neck down being enclosed in a tubular metal
container. The body must have been very small, and the legs amputated
at the hips, since the container was not large and terminated on the
seat of the peculiar wheel chair to which it seemed firmly attached.

Solino did not offer to introduce them to the man at the control
board, who, aside from a quick look, paid them no attention. He
ushered them ahead into another, though smaller cabin, and after
indicating certain arrangements made for their comfort, withdrew. From
the slight sway of the floor under their feet and the perceptible
vibration of the craft, the adventurers knew they were under way.

"Well, this is a rum affair and no mistake about it," said one of
them.

"A freak--a bloomin' freak," remarked another whose cockney accent
proclaimed the Englishman.

"Yuh're shore right," said a lean Texan. "That hombre out there had no
legs."

"Nor hands either."

Miles and Ward glanced at one another. The same thought was in both
minds. Neither of them had ever seen Mr. Solino's hands. A rum affair
all right!

       *       *       *       *       *

Hours passed. Some of the men fell to gambling. At intervals they ate.
Twice they turned in and slept. Then, after what seemed an
interminable time, Solino summoned Miles and Ward to his presence in
the control room. "It is time," he said, "that you should know more of
the enterprise on which you have embarked. What I say, you can
communicate to the other men. A year's salary for all of you lies to
your credit at the Chase Bank of New York. And this money will not be
your sole reward if you survive and serve faithfully."

"Thank you, sir," said Ward; "but now that we are well on our way to
our destination, could you not tell us more about it? You have said
something of a city, a country. Where is that country?"

"Down," was the astounding answer.

"Down?" echoed both men.

"Yes," said Solino slowly, "down. The gateway to that land is at the
bottom of the ocean."

As the two men gaped at him, incredulous, an awful thing happened.
With an appalling roar and a rending of steel and iron, the submarine
halted abruptly in its headlong flight, reared upward at an acute
angle and then fell forward with a tremendous crash. The adventurers
