
'Yes, Sire, it is about forage for the cavalry horses.'

Napoleon smiled, and the action made his face look quite boyish.

'You remind me of Cambaceres, de Meneval.  When I wrote him an account
of the battle of Marengo, he thought that my letter was a rough plan of
the engagement.  It is incredible how much difficulty you appear to have
in reading what I write.  This document has nothing to do with cavalry
horses, but it contains the instructions to Admiral Villeneuve as to the
concentration of his fleet so as to obtain command of the Channel.
Give it to me and I will read it to you.'

He snatched the paper up in the quick impulsive way which was
characteristic of him.  But after a long fierce stare he crumpled it up
and hurled it under the table.

'I will dictate it to you,' said he; and, pacing up and down the long
room, he poured forth a torrent of words, which poor de Meneval, his
face shining with his exertions, strove hard to put upon paper.  As he
grew excited by his own ideas, Napoleon's voice became shriller, his
step faster, and he seized his right cuff in the fingers of the same
hand, and twisted his right arm in the singular epileptic gesture which
was peculiar to him.  But his thoughts and plans were so admirably clear
that even I, who knew nothing of the matter, could readily follow them,
while above all I was impressed by the marvellous grasp of fact which
enabled him to speak with confidence, not only of the line-of-battle
ships, but of the frigates, sloops, and brigs at Ferrol, Rochefort,
Cadiz, Carthagena, and Brest, with the exact strength of each in men and
in guns; while the names and force of the English vessels were equally
at his fingers' ends.  Such familiarity would have been remarkable in a
naval officer, but when I thought that this question of the ships was
only one out of fifty with which this man had to deal, I began to
realise the immense grasp of that capacious mind.  He did not appear to
be paying the least attention to me, but it seems that he was really
watching me closely, for he turned upon me when he had finished his
dictation.

'You appear to be surprised, Monsieur de Laval, that I should be able to
transact my naval business without having my minister of marine at my
elbow; but it is one of my rules to know and to do things for myself.
Perhaps if these good Bourbons had had the same habit they would not now
be living amidst the fogs of England.'

'One must have your Majesty's memory in order to do it,' I observed.

'It is the result of system,' said he.  'It is as if I had drawers in my
brain, so that when I opened one I could close the others.  It is seldom
that I fail to find what I want there.  I have a poor memory for names
or dates, but an excellent one for facts or faces.  There is a good deal
to bear in mind, Monsieur de Laval.  For example, I have, as you have
seen, my one little drawer full of the ships upon the sea.  I have
another which contains all the harbours and forts of France.  As an
example, I may tell you that when my minister of war was reading me a
report of all the coast defences, I was able to point out to him that he
had omitted two guns in a battery near Ostend.  In yet another of my
brain-drawers I have the regiments of France.  Is that drawer in order,
Marshal Berthier?'

A clean-shaven man, who had stood biting his nails in the window, bowed
at the Emperor's question.

'I am sometimes tempted to believe, Sire, that you know the name of
every man in the ranks,' said he.

'I think that I know most of my old Egyptian grumblers,' said he.
'And then, Monsieur de Laval, there is another drawer for canals,
bridges, roads, manufactures, and every detail of internal
administration.  The law, finance, Italy, the Colonies, Holland, all
these things demand drawers of their own.  In these days, Monsieur de
Laval, France asks something more of its ruler than that he should carry
eight yards of ermine with dignity, or ride after a stag in the forest
of Fontainebleau.'

I thought of the helpless, gentle, pompous Louis whom my father had once
taken me to visit, and I understood that France, after her convulsions
and her sufferings, did indeed require another and a stronger head.

'Do you not think so, Monsieur de Laval?' asked the Emperor.  He had
halted for a moment by the fire, and was grinding his dainty
gold-buckled shoe into one of the burning logs.

'You have come to a very wise decision,' said he when I had answered his
question.  'But you have always been of this way of thinking, have you
not?  Is it not true that you once defended me when some young
Englishman was drinking toasts to my downfall at an inn in this village
in which you lived?'

I remembered the incident, although I could not imagine how it had
reached his ears.

'Why should you have done this?'

'I did it on impulse, Sire.'

'On impulse!' he cried, in a tone of contempt.  'I do not know what
people mean when they say that they do things upon impulse.
In Charenton things are doubtless done upon impulse, but not amongst
sane people.  Why should you risk your life over there in defending me
when at the time you had nothing to hope for from me?'

'It was because I felt that you stood for France, Sire.'

During this conversation he had still walked up and down the room,
twisting his right arm about, and occasionally looking at one or other
of us with his eyeglass, for his sight was so weak that he always needed
a single glass indoors and binoculars outside.  Sometimes he stopped and
helped himself to great pinches of snuff from a tortoise-shell box, but
I observed that none of it ever reached his nose, for he dropped it all
from between his fingers on to his waistcoat and the floor.  My answer
seemed to please him, for he suddenly seized my ear and pulled it with
considerable violence.

'You are quite right, my friend,' said he.  'I stand for France just as
Frederic the Second stood for Prussia.  I will make her the great Power
of the world, so that every monarch in Europe will find it necessary to
keep a palace in Paris, and they will all come to hold the train at the
coronation of my descendants--' a spasm of pain passed suddenly over his
face.  'My God! for whom am I building?  Who will be my descendants?'
I heard him mutter, and he passed his hand over his forehead.

'Do they seem frightened in England about my approaching invasion?' he
asked suddenly.  'Have you heard them express fears lest I get across
the Channel?'

I was forced in truth to say that the only fears which I had ever heard
expressed were lest he should not get across.

'The soldiers are very jealous that the sailors should always have the
honour,' said I.

'But they have a very small army.'

'Nearly every man is a volunteer, Sire.'

'Pooh, conscripts!' he cried, and made a motion with his hands as if to
sweep them from before him.  I will land with a hundred thousand men in
Kent or in Sussex.  I will fight a great battle which I will win with a
loss of ten thousand men.  On the third day I shall be in London.
I will seize the statesmen, the bankers, the merchants, the newspaper
men.  I will impose an indemnity of a hundred millions of their pounds.
I will favour the poor at the expense of the rich, and so I shall have a
party.  I will detach Scotland and Ireland by giving them constitutions
which will put them in a superior condition to England.  Thus I will sow
dissensions everywhere.  Then as a price for leaving the island I will
claim their fleet and their colonies.  In this way I shall secure the
command of the world to France for at least a century to come.'

In this short sketch I could perceive the quality which I have since
heard remarked in Napoleon, that his mind could both conceive a large
scheme, and at the same time evolve those practical details which would
seem to bring it within the bounds of possibility.  One instant it would
be a wild dream of overrunning the East.  The next it was a schedule of
the ships, the ports, the stores, the troops, which would be needed to
turn dream into fact.  He gripped the heart of a question with the same
decision which made him strike straight for an enemy's capital.
The soul of a poet, and the mind of a man of business of the first
order, that is the combination which may make a man dangerous to the
world.

I think that it may have been his purpose--for he never did anything
without a purpose--to give me an object-lesson of his own capacity for
governing, with the idea, perhaps, that I might in turn influence others
of the Emigres by what I told them.  At any rate he left me there to
stand and to watch the curious succession of points upon which he had to
give an opinion during a few hours.  Nothing seemed to be either too
large or too small for that extraordinary mind.  At one instant it was
the arrangements for the winter cantonments of two hundred thousand men,
at the next he was discussing with de Caulaincourt the curtailing of the
expenses of the household, and the possibility of suppressing some of
the carriages.

'It is my desire to be economical at home so as to make a good show
abroad,' said he.  'For myself, when I had the honour to be a
sub-lieutenant I found that I could live very well upon 1,200 francs a
year, and it would be no hardship to me to go back to it.  This
extravagance of the palace must be stopped.  For example, I see upon
your accounts that 155 cups of coffee are drunk a day, which with sugar
at 4 francs and coffee at 5 francs a pound come to 20 sous a cup.
It would be better to make an allowance for coffee.  The stable bills
are also too high.  At the present price of fodder seven or eight francs
a week should be enough for each horse in a stable of two hundred.
I will not have any waste at the Tuileries.'

Thus within a few minutes he would pass from a question of milliards to
a question of sous, and from the management of a empire to that of a
stable.  From time to time I could observe that he threw a little
oblique glance at me as if to ask what I thought of it all, and at the
time I wondered very much why my approval should be of any consequence
to him.  But now, when I look back and see that my following his
fortunes brought over so many others of the young nobility, I understand
that he saw very much further than I did.

'Well, Monsieur de Laval,' said he suddenly, 'you have seen something of
my methods.  Are you prepared to enter my service?'

'Assuredly, Sire,' I answered.

'I can be a very hard master when I like,' said he smiling.  'You were
there when I spoke to Admiral Bruix.  We have all our duty to do, and
discipline is as necessary in the highest as in the lowest ranks.
But anger with me never rises above here,' and he drew his hand across
his throat.  'I never permit it to cloud my brain.  Dr. Corvisart here
would tell you that I have the slowest pulse of all his patients.'

'And that you are the fastest eater, Sire,' said a large-faced,
benevolent-looking person who had been whispering to Marshal Berthier.

'Ohe, you rascal, you rake that up against me, do you?  The Doctor will
not forgive me because I tell him when I am unwell that I had rather die
of the disease than of the remedies.  If I eat too fast it is the fault
of the State, which does not allow me more than a few minutes for my
meals.  Which reminds me that it must be rather after my dinner hour,
Constant?'

'It is four hours after it, Sire.'

'Serve it up then at once.'

'Yes, Sire.  Monsieur Isabey is outside, Sire, with his dolls.'

'Ah, we shall see them at once.  Show him in.'

A man entered who had evidently just arrived from a long journey.  Under
his arm he carried a large flat wickerwork basket.

'It is two days since I sent for you, Monsieur Isabey.'

'The courier arrived yesterday, Sire.  I have been travelling from Paris
ever since.'

'Have you the models there?'

'Yes, Sire.'

'Then you may lay them out on that table.'

I could not at first imagine what it meant when I saw, upon Isabey
opening his basket, that it was crammed with little puppets about a foot
high, all of them dressed in the most gorgeous silk and velvet costumes,
with trimmings of ermine and hangings of gold lace.  But presently, as
the designer took them out one by one and placed them on the table, I
understood that the Emperor, with his extraordinary passion for detail
and for directly controlling everything in his Court, had had these
dolls dressed in order to judge the effect of the gorgeous costumes
which had been ordered for his grand functionaries upon State occasions.

'What is this?' he asked, holding up a little lady in hunting costume of
amaranth and gold with a toque and plume of white feathers.

'That is for the Empress's hunt, Sire.'

'You should have the waist rather lower,' said Napoleon, who had very
definite opinions about ladies' dresses.  'These cursed fashions seem to
be the only thing in my dominions which I cannot regulate.  My tailor,
Duchesne, takes three inches from my coat-tails, and all the armies and
fleets of France cannot prevent him.  Who is this?'

He had picked up a very gorgeous figure in a green coat.

'That is the grand master of the hunt, Sire.'

'Then it is you, Berthier.  How do you like your new costume?  And this
in red?'

'That is the Arch-Chancellor.'

'And the violet?'

'That is the Grand Chamberlain.'

The Emperor was as much amused as a child with a new toy.  He formed
little groups of the figures upon the table, so that he might have an
idea of how the dignitaries would look when they chatted together.
Then he threw them all back into the basket.

'Very good,' said he.  'You and David have done your work very well,
Isabey.  You will submit these designs to the Court outfitters and have
an estimate for the expense.  You may tell Lenormand that if she
ventures to send in such an account as the last which she sent to the
Empress she shall see the inside of Vincennes.  You would not think it
right, Monsieur de Laval, to spend twenty-five thousand francs upon a
single dress, even though it were for Mademoiselle Eugenie de Choiseul.'

Was there anything which this wizard of a man did not know?  What could
my love affairs be to him amidst the clash of armies and the struggles
of nations?  When I looked at him, half in amazement and half in fear,
that pleasant boyish smile lit up his pale face, and his plump little
hand rested for an instant upon my shoulder.  His eyes were of a bright
blue when he was amused, though they would turn dark when he was
thoughtful, and steel-grey in moments of excitement.

'You were surprised when I told you a little while ago about your
encounter with the Englishman in the village inn.  You are still more
surprised now when I tell you about a certain young lady.  You must
certainly have thought that I was very badly served by my agents in
England if I did not know such important details as these.'

'I cannot conceive, Sire, why such trifles should be reported to you, or
why you should for one instant remember them.'

'You are certainly a very modest young man, and I hope you will not lose
that charming quality when you have been for a little time at my Court.
So you think that your own private affairs are of no importance to me?'

'I do not know why they should be, Sire.'

'What is the name of your great-uncle?'

'He is the Cardinal de Laval de Montmorency.'

'Precisely.  And where is he?'

'He is in Germany.'

'Quite so--in Germany, and not at Notre Dame, where I should have placed
him.  Who is your first cousin?'

'The Duke de Rohan.'

'And where is he?'

'In London.'

'Yes, in London, and not at the Tuileries, where he might have had what
he liked for the asking.  I wonder if I were to fall whether I should
have followers as faithful as those of the Bourbons.  Would the men that
I have made go into exile and refuse all offers until I should return?
Come here, Berthier!' he took his favourite by the ear with the
caressing gesture which was peculiar to him.  'Could I count upon you,
you rascal--eh?'

'I do not understand you, Sire.'  Our conversation had been carried on
in a voice which had made it inaudible to the other people in the room,
but now they were all listening to what Berthier had to say.

'If I were driven out, would you go into exile also?'

'No, Sire.'
