gadget's future--the damned thing will _actually_ be used for.

Or, at least, it _was_ kind of adventurous, until Artie started in on
his scheme of three weeks ago: a workable anti-gravity machine. And now,
I'm feeling my first tremors of regret that I ever hooked up with the
guy. Because--Well, it happened like this:

       *       *       *       *       *

"It looks great," I said, lifting my face from the blueprint, and
nodding across the workbench at Artie. "But what the hell does it do?"

Artie shoved a shock of dust-colored hair back off his broad, dull pink
forehead, and jabbed excitedly with a grimy forefinger at the diagram.
"Can't you _tell_, Burt? What does _this_ look like!"

My eyes returned to the conglomeration of sketchy cones beneath his
flailing finger, and I said, as truthfully as possible, "A pine forest
on a lumpy hill."

"Those," he said, his tone hurt as it always was when I inadvertently
belittled his draftmanship, "are flywheels."

"Cone-shaped flywheels?" I said. "Why, for pete's sake?"

"Only," he said, with specious casualness, "in order to develop a
centrifugal thrust that runs in a _straight line_!"

"A centr--" I said, then sat back from the drawings, blinking. "That's
impossible, Artie."

"And why should it be?" he persisted. "Picture an umbrella, with the
fabric removed. Now twirl the handle on its axis. What do the ribs do?"

"I suppose they splay out into a circle?"

"Right," he exulted. "And if they _impeded_ from splaying out? If,
instead of separate ribs, we have a hollow, bottomless cone of metal?
Where does the force go?"

I thought it over, then said, with deliberation, "In _all_ directions,
Artie. One part shoving up-to-the-right, one part up-to-the-left, like
that."

"Sure," he said, his face failing to fight a mischievous grin. "And
since none of them move, where does the _resultant_ force go?"

I shrugged, "Straight up, I guess--" Then my ears tuned in belatedly on
what I'd said, and a moment later I squeaked, "Artie! Straight _up_!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He nodded eagerly. "Or, of course, straight east, straight west, or
whichever way the ferrule of this here theoretical umbrella was pointed
at the time the twirling began. The point is, we can generate pure force
in _any_ direction. What do you think? Can you build it?"

"It'd be child's play. In fact, Artie, it's _too_ damned simple to be
believed! What's the hitch? Why hasn't anyone tried it before _now_?"

"Who knows?" he said, his blue eyes dancing. "Maybe no one ever thought
of it before. You could sit down and twist a paper clip out of a hunk
of soft wire, couldn't you? Easy as pie. But someone had to invent the
thing, first. All the great inventions have been simple. Look at the
wheel."

"Okay, okay," I said, since I'd been sold on his gadget the moment
I pictured that umbrella moving ferruleward like a whirling arrow.
"Still, it looks like you're getting something for nothing. A kind of
by-your-own-bootstraps maneuver...."

"An inventor," said Artie, quoting his favorite self-coined aphorism,
"must never think like a scientist!"

"But"--I said, more to stem the tide I expected than to really make a
coherent objection.

"An inventor," he went dreamily onward, "is essentially a dreamer; a
scientist is an observer. An inventor tries to make a result he wants
happen; a scientist tries to tell the inventor that the result cannot be
achieved."

"Please. Artie. Don't tell me about the bee again."

But Artie told me about the bumblebee, and how there were still some
scientists who insisted, according to the principles of aerodynamics,
that it was not constructed properly to enable it to fly. And about
how men of this short-sighted ilk were still scoffing at the ancient
alchemist's talk of the Philosopher's Stone for transmuting metals, even
though transmutation of metals was being done every day in atomic piles.
And how he'd theorized that there _was_ once a genuine Philosopher's
Stone, probably a hunk of pure U-235, that someone had managed to make,
which might explain why so many alchemists (lacking, unfortunately, any
knowledge of heavy radiations or Geiger counters) sort of died off in
their quest for the stone.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was nearly lunchtime when he finished his spiel, and I was kicking
myself in my short-memoried brain for having let him get onto the
subject, when abruptly the joyous glow behind his eyes damped its
sparkle a bit.

"There _is_ one little hitch--"

"I thought it looked too easy," I sighed, waiting for the clinker.
"Don't tell me it has to be made out of pure Gallium, which has the
regrettable tendency to liquiefy at about thirty degrees centigrade? Or
perhaps of the most elusive of its eleven isotopes?"

"No, no, nothing like that," he murmured almost distractedly. "It's the
force-per-gram part that's weak."

"Don't tell me," I said unhappily, "that this thing'll only generate
enough force to lift itself?"

A feeble ghost of his erstwhile grin rode briefly across his lips.
"That's the way it works out on paper," he said.

"Which means," I realized aloud, "that it's commercially useless,
because what's the good of an anti-gravity machine that can't lift
anything except _itself_! It falls into the class of lifeboats that
float up to the gunwales in the water while still _empty_. Fun to watch,
but impossible to use. Hell, Artie, if that's the setup, then this
thing wouldn't be any more help to a space-aiming government than an
aborigine's boomerang; it flies beautifully, but not if the aborigine
tries to go _with_ it."

"However," he said, a bit more brightly, "I've been wrong on paper
before. Remember the bumblebee, Burt! _That_ theory still holds up on
paper. But the bee still flies."

He had me, there. "So you want I should build it anyhow, just on the
off-chance that it _won't_ follow the rules of physical logic, and will
