workers. Yes, Primrose, I admire your spirit, and if I can do anything
to aid you three girls to conquer fate, I will."

The moment her school duties were over Miss Egerton went out. She
visited certain shops that she knew of--queer little, quaint,
out-of-the-way shops--quite pokey little places; but from their depths
she managed to extract one or two round tables, one or two
easy-chairs, a few brackets, which could be easily converted into
book-shelves, a certain sofa, with not too hard a back, a couple of
fenders, some fire-irons, some cups and saucers, some dinner plates.
These and a few more necessary articles she bought for what would have
seemed a ridiculously low figure to any one who was not in her secret.
The furniture was all conveyed to her neat little house that
afternoon, and there it was absolutely pounced upon by her willing and
hard-working servant who washed it, and scrubbed it, and rubbed it,
and polished it; and, finally, Miss Egerton purchased bright chintz,
and slipped it over the ugly little chairs, and covered up the
antiquated old sofa, and that very night a certain amount of her work
was got through, and the attics began already to look habitable.

"I mean to do a great deal more," thought Miss Egerton; "fortunately
the paper is fresh and the paint clean; but I must put up two or three
pictures, and I shall fill these book-shelves with the books I used to
love when I was young. My own white sheep-skin rug shall go in front
of the fire. Daisy will like to see the Pink curling down into the
depths of that sheep-skin. Ah, yes! the girls shall have a good
time--a cosy, home-like time--in these rooms, if I can give it to
them."

Then Miss Egerton went downstairs to meet Primrose with a smile about
her thin lips, and a serene, beautiful light in her kind eyes.

"They are getting ready--the rooms are beginning to look charming,
dear," she said. "Oh no, you must not see them yet. It is my fancy not
to show them to you until they are quite ready, and I fear that won't
be until the day after to-morrow; but to-morrow, Primrose, you and
Jasmine and little Daisy may occupy yourselves packing your trunks."

"It all sounds delightful," said Primrose. "You cannot think, Miss
Egerton, how cheered we all are at the thought of coming to you. As to
Daisy, I simply should not know her--she is a changed child. I told
the Doves that we were leaving as I went out this afternoon. They
looked rather cross, and Mrs. Dove asked for a week's rent, instead of
the usual notice. But I can manage to pay that nicely. I won't stay
now, dear Miss Egerton. I'm going round to see Mr. Jones about the
plates he was to try and sell for me, and then I shall hurry back to
Daisy."

"Take her this fresh egg and this little sponge-loaf for her supper,"
said Miss Egerton. "Now good-bye, dear. God bless you, dear!"

"It is wonderful what kind friends we girls seem to meet at every
turn," thought Primrose to herself, as she hurried down the dirty,
sloppy street. "It would be very strange if we did not succeed with so
many people wishing us well. Oh! I feel in good spirits to-night. Even
if Mr. Jones has not sold the plates I shall not complain."

Mr. Jones assured his industrious pupil when she entered his dark
little shop that he had "all but" got a customer for her. The customer
was a wealthy old gentleman, who had a passion for collecting china,
and, in special, liked the work of beginners. The old gentleman had
looked at Primrose's plates, and had said that they were very fine,
and had a certain crudity or freshness about them, which, for his
part, he took to; and if she had three or four more lessons he felt
morally certain that he would purchase her wares.

"He's a splendid customer, but he was most explicit on the point of
more lessons, Miss Mainwaring," said Mr. Jones.

"But you have found me so many 'all but' customers who just wished me
to have a few more lessons, Mr. Jones," said Primrose, smiling sadly.

"None like the present man--none like the present man, my dear young
lady," answered Mr. Jones, rubbing his fat hands softly together. "A
man who likes crudity, and calls it freshness, ain't to be found every
day of the week, Miss Mainwaring."

Primrose admitted this fact, and, bidding her teacher good evening,
without committing herself to any definite promise of taking further
lessons, she turned her steps homewards. Even Mr. Jones had scarcely
power to depress her to-night. She felt brave and bright, and all her
youth made itself manifest in her springing, elastic step. Now that
she was about to leave them, she felt horrified at the thought of
having lived so long with the Doves. Her sense of relief at the
thought of making her home with Miss Egerton was greater than she
could express.

She entered the house, and came upstairs singing a gay air under her
breath.

At the door of their attics she was met by Jasmine.

"Oh, Primrose! I have been watching for you. I am so glad you have
come. I cannot think what is the matter with Daisy."

"With Daisy?" echoed Primrose; "but I left her so bright two hours
ago."

"She was bright an hour ago, Primrose; she was sitting on the floor
with the Pink in her arms, and laughing and chatting. I put on my
bonnet, and left her alone for about ten minutes while I ran round
the corner to get what we wanted for our supper, and when I came back
she was sitting with her hands straight before her in her lap, and the
Pink standing by her side, and looking into her face and mewing and
Daisy not taking a scrap of notice, but with her eyes fixed straight
in front of her in quite a dreadful way. When I went up to her and
touched her, she began to shiver, and then to cry, and then she said,
'oh Jasmine! we can't go away from here--we can't; oh, we can't! We
mustn't do it, Jasmine; we must stay here always, always!'"

"Poor little darling!" said Primrose. "She must have had a bad dream;
certainly Miss Egerton is right, and her nerves are very much shaken
and she wants change as soon as possible. Is she in the bedroom,
Jasmine?"

"Yes."

"Will you cook the supper, and I will go to her?"

Jasmine nodded, and Primrose went straight into the other room. Her
little sister had once more flown to the Pink for consolation; she was
holding the little animal tightly in her arms, and was rocking herself
backwards and forwards, and sobbing under her breath.

Primrose knelt down by her.

"What is it, my own little darling?" she asked.

"Oh, nothing, Primrose," said poor little Daisy, raising her
tear-stained face; "nothing really, dear Primrose, only I don't like
to leave the poor Doves."

"Oh, is that all?" said Primrose, in a very cheerful tone. "Why,
Daisy, you did not at all mind leaving them a couple of days ago; but
if you are really fond of them you can still see them occasionally,
for we are not going far away."

"I don't wish to leave the poor Doves," repeated Daisy, bending down
over the Pink, and her tears falling afresh.

"But, Daisy dear, how very funny of you to speak like this! You know,
darling, you must allow Jasmine and me to decide for you; we feel that
you will be much happier and much more comfortable with Mrs. Egerton.
Come, Daisy, these tears are very bad for you in your weak state. Let
me wash your face and hands, and take you into the other room to a
nice surprise supper sent by Miss Egerton."

But Daisy only shook her head, and bent lower over her cat, and
repeated over, and over, and over:

"I can't go away from Mr. and Mrs. Dove."

Poor Primrose became really alarmed at last.

"Daisy," she said, "there must be some reason for this sudden change
in your wishes. You were quite delighted at the thought of going to
Miss Egerton's an hour ago, when Jasmine was here; Jasmine went out,
and when she came back she found you in this state. Did you see
anybody while Jasmine was out?"

"N--n--no--I mean--I mean I can't say. Don't ask me, Primrose. Oh,
Primrose, I'm such a miserable little girl! but please, please, please
don't take me away from the poor Doves."

Daisy cried herself nearly into hysterics, and Primrose had at last to
pacify her by assuring her that they were not going away from the
Doves just yet.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

A STARTLING DISCOVERY.


All through her dreams that night Daisy sobbed and moaned. Primrose,
lying awake by her side, felt more and more alarmed and concerned.
What was the matter with her little sister? She felt completely
puzzled. The bright little castle in the air she and Jasmine had been
building; the cheerful thought of the cosy rooms which the girls were
to share together in their friend's house; the dear delight of having
furniture of their very own again; all these very healthful and
natural dreams were fading and fading, for whenever Primrose even
alluded to their leaving their present quarters Daisy clutched her
hand, and looked at her with such pleading eyes, and used hurried
words of such anguished entreaty, that at last the eldest sister felt
obliged to say--

"We will stay where we are, Daisy, until you wish to leave."

Then the poor little thin face relaxed into a wan smile, the lids
drooped over the tired blue eyes, and the child slept more
peacefully.

When Primrose felt her head, however, it was feverish, and her little
hands burned to the touch. She went into the next room and called
Jasmine.

"Jasmine," she said, "I am going round to Mrs. Egerton's; I am going
to tell her all about Daisy's alarm and terror. I am going to consult
her, for I know she means to be a good friend to us. Jasmine, promise
me one thing--don't leave Daisy alone while I am out. I cannot in the
least understand how it happened, but I feel sure she must have got
some fright when you were out last night."

"Oh, she couldn't have," answered Jasmine--"I locked the door after
me. I never leave Daisy alone without locking the door. I won't leave
her now, of course, Primrose--I will take my little writing table
close to her bedside, and if she wakes I can read her a part of my
novel."

Primrose gave one or two more directions, and then hurried out, and
Jasmine, after she had washed up the breakfast things, and put the
little sitting-room perfectly tidy, moved her small writing-table into
the bedroom, and sat down by Daisy's side. She was in the scribbling
stage of her great work, and with her head bent low, her cheeks
flushed, and her fingers much stained with ink, was writing away with
great rapidity, when she was startled by some very earnest words from
the little sleeper.

"Oh, no, indeed, Mr. Dove--oh no, you may be quite certain. I know
where I'd go if I told a lie, of course, Mr. Dove. Yes, yes, you are
my friend, and I'm your friend--yes, yes."

"Daisy, do wake up," said Jasmine; "you are talking such rubbish about
Mr. Dove, and about telling lies, and Mr. Dove being your friend--open
your eyes, Daisy, and let me give you such a nice little breakfast."

"Is that you, Jasmine?" said Daisy--"I thought you were Mr. Dove--I
was asleep, and I was dreaming."

"Yes, Eyebright, and talking in your dreams," said Jasmine, stooping
down and kissing her.

Daisy held one of Jasmine's hands very tightly.

"Did I say anything, Jasmine--anything that you shouldn't
hear--anything about--about sticky sweetmeats, Jasmine?"

"No, you silly pet, not a word. Now sit up in bed, and let me give you
your breakfast. Daisy, I really do think my novel is going to be a
great success. I am going to put Mr. Dove into it, and Mrs. Dove, and
Tommy Dove, and our dear old Poppy, and of course ourselves. One
reason why I feel so confident that the novel will be a success is
that _all_ the characters will be sketched from the life."

"But please don't put in about the Doves," said Daisy. "I think they
are such dread--I mean, of course, they are my friends, particularly
Mr. Dove, he's my real, real friend, but I mean that I don't think
they'd come well into a book, Jasmine--I don't think they're book
people a bit--book people should be princes and knights and lovely
ladies, and there should be no houses, and no attics, only there might
be fairy palaces, and all the little girls should be happy, and kept
safe from ogres--the little girls in the books shouldn't even have an
ogre for a friend. Oh, Jasmine, Jasmine! I'm so very miserable!"

Daisy again broke into weak sobs, and poor Jasmine could scarcely
soothe her.

A little before noon Primrose and Miss Egerton, and a tall, grave,
kind-looking man, who went by the name of Dr. Griffiths, and was a
great friend of Miss Egerton's, came up the stairs.

Both Dove and his wife saw them go, and Dove shook his hand at Dr.
Griffiths, as that gentleman walked up the stairs. They all three went
into the attics, and the doctor had a long talk with the little
patient--he felt her pulse and her head, and looked into her eyes, and
tried to induce her to laugh, and did succeed in getting one little
startled and half-frightened sound from the child; then he went back
into the sitting-room, and had a long talk with Primrose and Miss
Egerton. The upshot of this was that Miss Egerton went sorrowfully
away, for the doctor absolutely forbade the girls to move from their
present quarters for another week or fortnight. At the end of that
time he said Daisy would be better, and might have got over the
foolish fancy which now troubled her, but for the time being she must
be yielded to, and at any risk kept easy in her mind.

Miss Egerton went very sorrowfully away, and upstairs to the rooms she
meant to make so pretty.

"There is no special hurry about the furnishing, Bridget," she said to
her servant. "Little Miss Daisy is too ill to be moved for the
present."

"The men have come round to be paid for the bits of furniture,
leastways, ma'am," answered Bridget, "and the foreman from the other
shop is standing in the hall, and wants to know if you'll settle with
him now, or if he shall call again."

"I'll settle with him now, Bridget. Dear Miss Primrose left some money
in my charge yesterday morning, and I can pay the man at once."

One of the rules of Miss Egerton's life was never to leave a bill
unpaid for twenty-four hours, if possible--she hated accounts, and
always paid ready money for everything. She now ran downstairs, and
unlocking her desk, took out Mr. Danesfield's envelope. Primrose had
begged of her to open it when the bills came in, and pay for the
furniture--Primrose seemed to have an absolute prejudice against
unfastening that envelope herself.

Miss Egerton opened it slowly now, smiling as she did so at the quaint
inscription on the cover. A folded sheet of paper lay within--she
spread the paper before her, expecting to see the three five-pound
notes folded within its leaves--blankness and emptiness alone met her
view--no money was inside the envelope--the whole thing was a cruel
fraud. The poor governess fairly gasped for breath--there lay the bill
for six pounds nineteen shillings which she had incurred, making sure
that she could meet it out of Primrose's money. Primrose had spoken so
confidently about her little nest-egg, and behold, she had not
any!--the envelope was a fraud--the girl had been subjected to a cruel
practical joke.

Miss Egerton was extremely poor--it was with the utmost difficulty she
could make two ends meet. She thought hard for a minute--then her brow
cleared, and she rose to her feet.

"Better I than those orphan girls!" she said, under her breath, and
then she went to her desk again, and filled in a cheque for the
amount.

"I can do without my winter cloak, and my black merino dress will last
me for some weeks longer if I sponge it with cold tea, and re-line the
tail," she said to herself. "Any little privation is better than to
hurt the hearts of the orphan girls."

She paid the man, who signed the receipt, and then she let him out
herself. As she did so a young man came hastily up the steps--he had a
bright face, and running up to the governess, he seized both her hands
in his.

"Oh, Arthur, how glad I am to see you!" said Miss Egerton.




CHAPTER XXIX.

A BLESSING.


Miss Egerton took Arthur Noel--for it was he--straight back into her
little sitting-room, and sitting down on her worn little horse-hair
sofa, and raising her eyes anxiously to the young man's face, she told
him the story of the attic upstairs, of the furniture she had
purchased, of the girls she had meant to serve. She showed him, with
hands that trembled, the envelope with its queer inscription, and she
unfolded for his benefit the empty sheet of blank paper. She told her
story at once without any reservation, even relating with a little
hasty blush how she felt obliged to pay for the furniture herself.

Perhaps Arthur Noel was the only person in the world to whom she would
have made this confession; for she was one of those who made it a
practice never to let her right hand know what her left did, but she
had known Arthur from his boyhood, and he was one of those men who
inspire trust and sympathy at a glance.

He listened to the story with interest, and even excitement--he was
naturally enthusiastic, but even Miss Egerton had never seen him so
perturbed and so moved as he was at present.

"I know about those girls," he said at last; "what are their names?--I
am sure I know about them. Nay, let me ask you a question--Is not one
called Jasmine? Has she not a piquant face, and very soft and yet
bright eyes, and a great lot of curly brown hair? Yes, Miss Egerton, I
am sure the girls you speak of are in a certain sense _my_ girls; for
if they are the ones I mean I took them under my protection long ago."

"Their name is Mainwaring. My dear Arthur, where and how have you met
them? My dear boy, I fully believe, I have always believed, in your
good intentions, in your wish to do your utmost for every one; but if
you have really known Primrose, and Jasmine and Daisy, and have taken
them, as you say, under your protection, I must say that of late you
have lost sight of them--you have not been as kind as you generally
are to people in difficulties, for I never met three more absolutely
friendless girls than these."

"It was a good Providence sent me here this morning," said Noel. "You
