had walked not less than three miles to attend the service. One was
forty-five or fifty years old, and her sentiments were decidedly
evangelical. The religion of the Gospel shone beautifully in some of
the Armenian families. Mr. Hamlin had an interesting experience at
Bebek. On the 13th of August, on returning from Constantinople, he
found nine women and one man waiting his return to preach to them
the Gospel. On the 21st, sixteen listened with breathless attention
to a sermon on the unsearchable riches of Christ, and nine of these
were women. On the 25th, another company of men and women called.
Mr. Hamlin was at work upon some philosophical apparatus, when one
of the men put his head through the door, and said, "Good-morning,
reverend sir, come here, and preach to us the Gospel." September
22d, a company of Armenian men and women, four of them from
Nicomedia, came and asked him "to teach them out of the Gospel." On
the 24th eight, besides the students, were present at the services,
forenoon and afternoon; two from Galata, one from Constantinople,
three from Nicomedia, and two from Adabazar. On the day following,
thirteen were present, most of whom had heard the maledictions of
the Armenian Patriarch pronounced, the day before, on all who should
visit the missionaries. On a day in December devoted to family
visitations, Mr. Dwight preached the Gospel to more than thirty
women.

It was not the missionaries alone, who labored in word and doctrine.
Several priests were "obedient to the faith," and preached it more
or less formally; and intelligent lay brethren,--scattered abroad,
some by persecution, some in the prosecution of their worldly
business,--like the primitive disciples, preached the Word; that is,
they took such opportunities as they could get, to make known the
truth to those of their countrymen who were disposed to hear it.
Vertanes, who had suffered imprisonment and banishment for the sake
of Christ, made an extensive missionary tour through Armenia.

In the summer of 1843, a body of Turkish police was seen conducting
a young man, under twenty years of age, in the European dress,
through the streets of Constantinople. His face was pale, and his
arms were pinioned behind him. Arriving at a place of public
concourse, they suddenly halted, the prisoner kneeled, and a blow of
the yatagan severed his head from the body. His crime was apostasy
from the Mohammedan faith. He was an obscure Armenian, and while
under the influence of alcohol had abjured the faith of his fathers,
and declared himself a Mohammedan. He had not submitted, however, to
the rite of circumcision before he repented of his rashness. The
penalty of apostasy being death, he fled to Greece. In about a year,
impatient to see his widowed mother, he returned in a Frank dress,
but was soon recognized, imprisoned, tortured to induce him to
reabandon his original belief, and even paraded through the streets
with his hands tied behind his back, as if for execution; but upon
his proclaiming aloud his firm belief in Christianity, he was
sentenced to decapitation. The British ambassador, Sir Stratford
Canning, impelled by motives of humanity, made an earnest effort to
procure his release, and the Grand Vizier promised that the young
man should not be beheaded. On learning that he had been, the
ambassador declared it to be an insult to the Established Religion
of England, as well as to all Europe, and insisted that no similar
act of fanaticism should ever again occur. In this he was said to be
warmly seconded both by the French and Prussian ministers. The Grand
Vizier, as before, was ready to give a verbal pledge; but soon a
second act of treachery was discovered. A Greek, in the interior of
Asia Minor, had declared himself it Mohammedan, and afterwards
refused to perform the rites of that religion, and the Turkish
minister was preparing the death-warrant for him, at the very time
when he was making these promises to the ambassador. Sir Stratford
now very peremptorily demanded, that a written pledge be given by
the Sultan himself (as his ministers could no longer be trusted),
that no person embracing the Moslem religion and afterwards
returning to Christianity, should on that account be put to death;
and the Earl of Aberdeen, on the part of the home government,
instructed him in a noble letter not to recede from the demand. The
Prussian and French governments were equally decided; and after some
hesitancy, even Russia threw the weight of her influence into the
scale. After a struggle of some weeks the required pledge was given,
signed by the Sultan himself, that henceforth NO PERSON SHOULD BE
PERSECUTED FOR HIS RELIGIOUS OPINIONS IN TURKEY. The British
ambassador distinctly acknowledged the finger of God in this
transaction, which he said seemed little less than a miracle.

It will hereafter appear, that the pledge had a wider range, than
was thought of at the time by the governments of Europe, by their
representatives, or even by the Turks. God was setting up a
spiritual kingdom, and his people must have freedom to worship Him
in his appointed way. The battle for religious freedom in Turkey was
fought over the mutilated remains of the Armenian renegade, and the
Sultan's pledge secured to the Protestant native Christians the full
enjoyment of their civil rites, while openly practicing their own
religion.1

1 This brief statement is compiled from the _Correspondence relating
to Executions in Turkey for Apostasy from Islamism_, published by
the British Parliament in 1844, occupying forty folio pages. The
correspondence is highly honorable to the great men who were then
controlling the political affairs of Europe, and to a large extent
also of Western Asia.

But before this comprehensive meaning of the pledge could be
understood, and the benefit of it actually enjoyed by the people of
God, they were subjected to more grievous sufferings for their faith
than any yet endured. From 1843 to 1846, there was no long respite
from persecution; yet in all this time the spirit of inquiry
wonderfully spread, and believers were the more added to the Lord.

In 1843, Priest Vertanes was rudely deposed from office, and thrown
into prison. Finding he could not be induced to sign a paper of
recantation, drawn up for him by the Patriarch, he was hurried by
the Patriarch's beadles, with great violence, into an open
sail-boat, without opportunity to obtain even an outer garment from
his house, although it was midwinter, and sent across the sea of
Marmora to the monastery of Ahmah, near Nicomedia.

The Foreign Secretary of the Board spent eleven weeks in this
mission, in the winter of 1843-44, accompanied by Dr. Joel Hawes, of
Hartford. At that time it was arranged by the mission, in full
accordance with the views of their visiting brethren, to discontinue
the Greek department, to give distinct names as missions to the
Jewish department and to the work among the Armenians, to open a
female high school at Constantinople, and to associate Mr. Wood with
Mr. Hamlin in the seminary at Bebek. It was also decided, that
Messrs. Riggs and Ladd, turning from the Greeks to the Armenians,
should acquire the use of the languages spoken by the latter people;
that Mr. Calhoun should be authorized to visit Syria, with a view to
an opening for him in connection with the projected seminary on
Mount Lebanon; that Mr. Temple, then too old to learn either the
Armenian or Turkish languages, ought to be authorized, in view of
the discontinuance of the Greek department, to return to the
churches whose faithful messenger he had been so long; and that the
native Armenian agency should be put upon a footing on which it
would be more likely to be sustained ultimately by the people.

There was reason afterwards to believe, that it would have been
better for Mr. Temple to remain in Turkey, in the exercise of his
eminently apostolic influence upon his brother missionaries and the
native Protestant community, Greek and Armenian. Yet his own opinion
was in favor of the course he pursued. "I am too old," he said, "to
think for a moment of learning a new language, and no opening
invites me here in any language I can command." After a farewell
visit to his brethren in Constantinople, he set his face homeward,
and arrived in Boston in the summer of 1844. He was usefully
employed as an agent of the Board, or in the pastoral relation,
until his health broke down. In January, 1851, through the kindness
of a friend, he made a voyage to Chagres, and another to Liverpool.
But he returned from the last of these voyages enfeebled by the
roughness of the passage; and his strength gradually declined, until
the 9th of August, 1851, seven years after his return to America,
when he died at Reading, Massachusetts, his native place, in the
sixty-second year of his age. It may be truly said, that few men
have borne more distinctively than he, the impress of the Saviour's
image.1

1 See _Life and Letters of Rev. Daniel Temple_, for twenty-three
years a Missionary in Western Asia. By his son, Rev. Daniel H.
Temple, Boston, 1855.

A daughter of Dr. Hawes accompanied him on his voyage to Smyrna as
the wife of Mr. Van Lennep, but was permitted only to enter upon the
work to which she had devoted herself in Asia. She died at
Constantinople of fever, within less than a year from the time of
her embarkation. The health of Mrs. Benjamin was such as to oblige
her and her husband to return home. A similar cause occasioned also
the return of Mr. and Mrs. Jackson.






CHAPTER X.

GREECE AND THE GREEKS.

1824-1844.


When the missions to the Oriental Churches were commenced, Greece
was suffering under the oppression of the Turks, and the people were
glad of sympathy from any quarter. In the department of education,
they seemed even to welcome Protestant missionaries. They compared
favorably with the Roman Catholics, in their reception of the
Scriptures, and in the matter of religious toleration. But an
unfavorable change came over them after they had achieved their
national independence.

Mr. Gridley was the first missionary to labor among the Greeks of
Turkey, though he was not sent with special reference to them. He
arrived at Smyrna in December, 1826. After acquiring the modern
Greek, he visited Cesarea, four hundred miles to the eastward,
hoping for better advantages in acquiring the Greco-Turkish
language, and also to learn the condition of the Greeks in the
interior. He was accompanied by Abraham, his teacher, a
well-informed native of Cappadocia, and for two months applied
himself to his studies, until admonished of danger by the frequent
recurrence of headaches. Finding that these yielded to exercise, he
deemed it prudent to execute a purpose he had long cherished of
ascending Mount Argeus, from the top of which, according to Strabo,
the Black and Mediterranean Seas might both be discerned in a clear
day. Outstripping his attendants, Mr. Gridley mounted with great
agility till he reached an elevation within three or four hundred
feet of the highest summit, when he was prevented from advancing
farther by the steepness of the ascent. There, in the region of
perpetual snow, he remained a quarter of an hour, but could not
discover the objects he had specially in view. The height of the
mountain he estimated at thirteen thousand feet. Descending rapidly,
he was overpowered with fatigue when he reached his companions, and
they were soon after exposed to a violent storm of hail and rain.
The headache soon returned with increasing violence, and was
followed by fever, so insidious in its progress as at no time to
suggest to him his danger. His death occurred on the 27th of
September, fifteen days after the ascent, and a year after leaving
his native land.

Thus he fell at the age of thirty-one, and at the very commencement
of his career. The predominant characteristics of Mr. Gridley were
resolution, promptness, and generosity. In all the duties of a
Christian missionary, he was indefatigable in no ordinary degree,
and his early removal was very trying.

The cause of education naturally became prominent at the outset of a
mission among the Greeks. Scio was the seat of their most favored
college, and when the people of that ill-fated island fled from the
murderous sword of the Turks, some of the families sought refuge in
Malta. There were bright youths among them, and six of these, and
two from other Greek islands, so interested Messrs. Fisk and Temple,
that they obtained permission to send them home, to be educated
chiefly at the expense of the Board. This was before the results of
the Foreign Mission School at Cornwall had become manifest. Three
others arrived in 1826, and one in 1828; and nearly all received a
liberal education, either at Amherst or Yale. Evangelinos Sophocles,
from Thessaly, who came last, has long held the honorable position
of a Professor in Harvard University. Four others,--Anastatius
Karavelles, Nicholas Petrokokino, Alexander G. Paspati, and Gregory
Perdicaris, were useful to the mission at different times after
their return to the East. Several young men from the Armenian nation
were likewise educated in the United States, and one of these,
Hohannes, was until his death, a useful minister of the gospel among
his countrymen. But the conclusion on the whole, to which the Board
came, both in respect to Greeks and Armenians, was that a native
agency must be trained in the country where it is to be employed.

The return of Mr. King to Greece, in 1829, has been mentioned.
During the visit of Mr. Smith and myself to the island of Poros, in
July of that year, he was united in marriage to a young Smyrniote
lady, whose acquaintance he had formed some years before, while
detained there on his return from Syria. Though Tenos was one of the
more bigoted of the Greek islands, nearly every person of standing
in the place called upon the newly married couple. A Greek priest
sent a pair of doves, and soon followed with his blessing. It was
this marriage which, in the providence of God, kept Mr. King in
Greece until the close of his long and useful life.

Mr. King opened a school for girls in Poros, and the chief men sent
their daughters to it. The town was noted for a modern church,
called the Evangelistria, which, though built during the revolution,
was the most showy edifice in Greece. It was the annual resort of
hundreds of pilgrims, chiefly the lame, sick, and lunatic, who were
brought there to be cured. It was the centre of modern Grecian
superstition; as Delos, in full view of the church, had been in
ancient times.

After some months, the trustees of the church became alarmed for
their craft, and made vigorous efforts to destroy the school. Some
of the scholars were withdrawn, one of the teachers was compelled to
leave, and the school-books were denounced as heretical. Through the
whole commotion Mr. King held on his way with characteristic
calmness, teaching and praying in the school as aforetime, and
freely expounding the Scriptures, every Lord's day, to more than
fifty of his pupils and a number of their friends. Two of the most
prominent inhabitants espoused his cause; and, just in the crisis of
the difficulty, he received a box of ancient Greek books from the
government, as a present to the school. Soon after, there appeared
in the government gazette a commendation of the school and of its
course of instruction. From that time, opposition from members of
the Greek Church seems to have ceased. A handsome donation of
school-books, slates, and pencils was made by the Greek School
Committee in New York, and forwarded to the President of Greece,
through the American Board. It was gratefully acknowledged by the
government.

In the autumn of 1830, Mr. King, anticipating the evacuation of
Athens by the Turks, made a visit to that city, then a ruin, and
arranged for his future residence. In April of the next year, having
resumed his connection with the American Board, he made a second
visit, and opened a Lancasterian school for both sexes; placing a
Greek, named Nikotoplos, at the head of it, who was author of an
epitome of the Gospels. The school was soon filled. He purchased
from a Turk, with private funds and at a nominal cost, the ruins of
a stone edifice with a garden, and there built himself a home, to
which he removed his family. He also purchased for a few hundred
dollars, while the city was still in Turkish hands, about an acre of
land delightfully situated, on which he subsequently erected a
building for a young ladies' school of a high order.

Capodistrias, the President, was assassinated about this time by two
men belonging to one of the first families in Greece. The protecting
powers required that his successor be a king, and a Bavarian prince
named Otho was put upon the throne of the new kingdom in 1833. The
Acropolis of Athens was soon after delivered up to its rightful
owners, and that event consummated the emancipation of Greece from
Turkish rule. A cabinet was formed, of which Tricoupis, a Greek
gentleman of patriotic and enlightened views, was the president.
Athens became the seat of government in 1834.

The Rev. Elias Riggs arrived as a missionary, with his wife, in
January, 1833, and was cordially welcomed not only by his associate,
but also by the brethren of the American Episcopal mission. Mr.
Riggs had paid much attention to the modern Greek, and was pleased
with Dr. King's manner of preaching on the Sabbath, and with his
familiar exposition of the Scriptures in his flourishing Hellenic
school.1 There were now two schools, called the "Elementary School"
and the "Gymnasium;" the latter having a well-arranged course of
study for four years, corresponding, as far as circumstances would
permit, with the studies of a New England college. The subsequent
removal of the government gymnasium from AEgina to Athens,
necessarily interfered with this, but until that removal it was a
popular institution, with sixty scholars. An examination was held in
1834 for three days in Ancient Greek, Geography, History, Geometry,
Algebra, the Philosophy of Language, and the Holy Scriptures; the
King and the bishop of the city being among the persons present.

1 Nassau College, in Princeton, N. J., had conferred the degree of
D. D. on Mr. King.

Mr. Riggs, after visiting the more important places in the
Peloponnesus, decided upon commencing a station at Argos, which he
did in 1834. The great body of the Greek people at that time, were
kindly disposed toward the missionaries and their efforts; but it
was becoming evident, that the jealousy of the clergy was on the
increase, and that the hierarchy had great facilities for exerting
an adverse influence. The Church in Greece, no longer subject to the
Greek Patriarch at Constantinople, was under the government of the
"Holy Council of the kingdom of Greece;" which was required to guard
the clergy and schools against heresy, and report to the government
any attempt at proselyting. No school could be established without
permission from the government, nor without such permission could
any teacher instruct, even in private families. No books could be
sold or given away in any place, without obtaining a license for
that place, and strong guards were thrown around the press. But
whatever the restrictions on schools and the press, the way was open
for circulating the Scriptures, and for enforcing repentance towards
God and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. In the three years from 1834
to 1836, Dr. King sold and gratuitously distributed nearly nine
thousand New Testaments in modern Greek, and eighty-seven thousand
school-books and religious tracts.

The "Holy Council" now took decided ground against the version of
the Old Testament from the Hebrew, declaring that the Septuagint
alone was to be regarded as the canonical translation, to be read in
the churches and used for religious instruction. This did not forbid
nor prevent the free circulation of the Old Testament in modern
Greek among individuals for their private use.

Dark intrigues were employed to arouse the popular feeling. A letter
against "the Americans," as all missionaries were called, purporting
to have been written from Syra, was printed in pamphlet form at
Paris and sent to Greece, where it attracted much attention. This
was followed by repeated attacks from a newspaper edited by one
Germanos. Pretended revelations and miracles at Naxos inflamed the
zeal of the ignorant and superstitious. Professed eye-witnesses
circulated absurd stories, of girls in the school at Syra being made
"Americans" by sealing them on the arm; that one of them refused to
be sealed, and two horns grew out of her head; and of a boy taken
into a dark room to catechize him, where he saw the devil, and was
frightened out of his senses. It was said, moreover, that the object
of the missionaries was to change the religion of the country, while
