
Secretary Stanton continued: "I have always tried to be calm, but I
think I lost my calmness for a moment, and with great enthusiasm I
arose, approached the President, extended my hand and said:

"'Mr. President, if the reading of chapters of "Artemus Ward" is a
prelude to such a deed as this, the book should be filed among the
archives of the nation, and the author should be canonized. Henceforth I
see the light and the country is saved.'

"And all said 'Amen!'

"And Lincoln said to me in a droll way, just as I was leaving, 'Stanton,
it would have been too early last Spring.'

"And as I look back upon it, I think the President was right."

It was a fitting fulfillment of the Declaration of Independence, which
proclaimed that:

"All men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with
certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness."

That Declaration young Abe Lincoln first read in the Gentryville
constable's copy of the "Statutes of Indiana."

At noon on the first of January, 1863, William H. Seward, Secretary of
State, with his son Frederick, called at the White House with the
Emancipation document to be signed by the President. It was just after
the regular New Year's Day reception.

Mr. Lincoln seated himself at his table, took up the pen, dipped it in
the ink, held the pen a moment, then laid it down. After waiting a while
he went through the same movements as before. Turning to his Secretary
of State, he said, to explain his hesitation:

"I have been shaking hands since nine o'clock this morning, and my arm
is almost paralyzed. If my name ever goes into history, it will be for
this act, and my whole soul is in it. If my hand trembles when I sign
the Proclamation, all who examine the document hereafter will say:

"'He hesitated.'"

Turning back to the table, he took the pen again and wrote, deliberately
and firmly, the "Abraham Lincoln" with which the world is now familiar.
Looking up at the Sewards, father and son, he smiled and said, with a
sigh of relief:

"_That will do!_"




CHAPTER XIX

THE GLORY OF GETTYSBURG


THE BATTLE

The Battle of Gettysburg, which raged through July 1st, 2nd and 3d,
1863, was called the "high water mark" of the Civil War, and one of the
"fifteen decisive battles" of history. It was decisive because General
Robert E. Lee, with his brave army, was driven back from Gettysburg,
Pennsylvania. If Lee had been victorious there, he might have destroyed
Philadelphia and New York. By such a brilliant stroke he could have
surrounded and captured Baltimore and Washington. This would have
changed the grand result of the war.

In point of numbers, bravery and genius, the battle of Gettysburg was
the greatest that had ever been fought up to that time. Glorious as this
was, the greatest glory of Gettysburg lay in the experiences and
utterances of one man, Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States
of America.

It came at a terrible time in the progress of the war, when everything
seemed to be going against the Union. There had been four disastrous
defeats--twice at Bull Run, followed by Fredericksburg and
Chancellorsville. Even the battle of Antietam, accounted victory enough
for the President to issue his Emancipation Proclamation, proved to be a
drawn battle, with terrific losses on both sides. Lee was driven back
from Maryland then, it is true, but he soon won the great battles of
Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville, and had made his way north into
Pennsylvania.

The night after the battle of Chancellorsville (fought May 2nd and 3d,
1863), was the darkest in the history of the Civil War. President
Lincoln walked the floor the whole night long, crying out in his
anguish, "O what will the country say!"

To fill the decimated ranks of the army, the Government had resorted to
the draft, which roused great opposition in the North and provoked
foolish, unreasoning riots in New York City.

After winning the battle of Gettysburg, which the President hoped would
end the war, General Meade, instead of announcing that he had captured
the Confederate army, stated that he had "driven the invaders from our
soil." Mr. Lincoln fell on his knees and, covering his face with his
great, strong hands, cried out in tones of agony:

"'Driven the invaders from our soil!' My God, is that all?"

But Lincoln's spirits were bound to rise. Believing he was "on God's
side," he felt that the cause of Right could not lose, for the Lord
would save His own.

The next day, July 4th, 1863, came the surrender of Vicksburg, the
stronghold of the great West. Chastened joy began to cover his gaunt and
pallid features, and the light of hope shone again in his deep, gray
eyes.

Calling on General Sickles, in a Washington hospital--for the general
had lost a leg on the second day of the battle of Gettysburg--the
President was asked why he believed that victory would be given the
Federal forces at Gettysburg.

"I will tell you how it was. In the pinch of your campaign up there,
when everybody seemed panic-stricken, and nobody could tell what was
going to happen, I went to my room one day and locked the door, and got
down on my knees before Almighty God, and prayed to him mightily for
victory at Gettysburg. I told Him this was His war, and our cause His
cause, but that we couldn't stand another Fredericksburg or
Chancellorsville. And I then and there made a solemn vow to Almighty God
that if He would stand by our boys at Gettysburg, I would stand by Him.
And He _did_, and I _will_!"

The President's call on General Sickles was on the Sunday after the
three-days' battle of Gettysburg, before the arrival of the gunboat at
Cairo, Illinois, with the glad tidings from Vicksburg, which added new
luster to the patriotic joy of Independence Day. The telegraph wires had
been so generally cut on all sides of Vicksburg that the news was sent
to Cairo and telegraphed to Washington. In proof that his faith even
included the Mississippi blockade he went on:

"Besides, I have been praying over Vicksburg also, and believe our
Heavenly Father is going to give us victory there, too, because we need
it, in order to bisect the Confederacy, and let 'the Father of Waters
flow unvexed to the sea.'"


THE ADDRESS

Not long after the conflict at Gettysburg a movement was on foot to
devote a large part of that battle-ground to a national cemetery.

The Hon. Edward Everett, prominent in national and educational affairs,
and the greatest living orator, was invited to deliver the grand
oration. The President was asked, if he could, to come and make a few
dedicatory remarks, but Mr. Everett was to be the chief speaker of the
occasion.

The Sunday before the 19th of November, 1863, the date of the
dedication, the President went with his friend Noah Brooks to Gardner's
gallery, in Washington, where he had promised to sit for his photograph.
While there he showed Mr. Brooks a proof of Everett's oration which had
been sent to him. As this printed address covered two newspaper pages,
Mr. Lincoln struck an attitude and quoted from a speech by Daniel
Webster:

"Solid men of Boston, make no long orations!" and burst out laughing.
When Mr. Brooks asked about _his_ speech for that occasion, Mr. Lincoln
replied: "I've got it written, but not licked into shape yet. It's
short, _short_, SHORT!"

During the forenoon of the 18th, Secretary John Hay was anxious lest the
President be late for the special Presidential train, which was to leave
at noon for Gettysburg.

"Don't worry, John," said Mr. Lincoln. "I'm like the man who was going
to be hung, and saw the crowds pushing and hurrying past the cart in
which he was being taken to the place of execution. He called out to
them: 'Don't hurry, boys. There won't be anything going on till I get
there!'"

When the train stopped, on the way to Gettysburg, a little girl on the
platform held up a bouquet to Mr. Lincoln, lisping: "Flowerth for the
Prethident."

He reached out, took her up and kissed her, saying:

"You're a sweet little rosebud yourself. I hope your life will open into
perpetual beauty and goodness."

About noon on the 19th of November, the distinguished party arrived in a
procession and took seats on the platform erected for the exercises. The
President was seated in a rocking-chair placed there for him. There
were fifteen thousand people waiting, some of whom had been standing in
the sun for hours. It was a warm day and a Quaker woman near the
platform fainted. An alarm was given and the unconscious woman was in
danger of being crushed.

The President sprang to the edge of the staging and called out:

"Here, let me get hold of that lady."

With a firm, strong grasp he extricated her from the crush and seated
her in his rocking-chair. When that modest woman "came to," she saw
fifteen thousand pairs of eyes watching her while the President of the
United States was fanning her tenderly.

This was too much for her. She gasped:

"I feel--better--now. I want to go--back to--my husband!"

"Now, my dear lady," said Mr. Lincoln. "You are all right here. I had an
awful time pulling you up out of there, and I couldn't stick you back
again!"

A youth who stood near the platform in front of the President says that,
while Mr. Everett was orating, Mr. Lincoln took his "little speech," as
he called it, out of his pocket, and conned it over like a schoolboy
with a half-learned lesson. The President had put the finishing touches
on it that morning. As it was expected that the President would make a
few offhand remarks, no one seems to have noticed its simple grandeur
until it was printed in the newspapers.

Yet Mr. Lincoln was interrupted four or five times during the two
minutes by applause. The fact that the President was speaking was
sufficient, no matter what he said. The people would have applauded
Abraham Lincoln if he had merely recited the multiplication table! When
he finished, they gave "three times three cheers" for the President of
the United States, and three cheers for each of the State Governors
present.

That afternoon there was a patriotic service in one of the churches
which the President decided to attend. Taking Secretary Seward with him,
he called on an old cobbler named John Burns, of whose courage in the
battle of Gettysburg Mr. Lincoln had just heard. Those who planned the
dedication did not think the poor cobbler was of much account. The old
hero, now known through Bret Harte's poem, "John Burns of Gettysburg,"
had the pride and joy of having all the village and visitors see him
march to the church between President Lincoln and Secretary Seward. This
simple act was "just like Lincoln!" He honored Gettysburg in thus
honoring one of its humblest citizens. It was Abraham Lincoln's tribute
to the patriotism of the dear "common people" whom he said "God must
love."




CHAPTER XX

"NO END OF A BOY"


"THE STORY OF YOUNG ABRAHAM LINCOLN" would be incomplete without some
insight into the perfect boyishness of the President of the United
States. When the cares of State and the horrors of war had made his
homely yet beautiful face pallid and seamed, till it became a sensitive
map of the Civil War, it was said that the only times the President was
ever happy were when he was playing with little Tad.

He used to carry the boy on his shoulder or "pick-a-back," cantering
through the spacious rooms of the Executive Mansion, both yelling like
Comanches. The little boy was lonely after Willie died, and the father's
heart yearned over the only boy left at home, for Robert was at Harvard
until near the close of the war, when he went to the front as an aide to
General Grant. So little Tad was his father's most constant companion
and the President became the boy's only playfellow. Mr. Lincoln, with a
heart as full of faith as a little child's, had always lived in deep
sympathy with the children, and this feeling was intensified toward his
own offspring.

When Abe Lincoln was living in New Salem he distinguished himself by
caring for the little children--a thing beneath the dignity of the other
young men of the settlement.

Hannah Armstrong, wife of the Clary's Grove bully, whom Abe had to
"lick" to a finish in order to establish himself on a solid basis in New
Salem society, told how friendly their relations became after the
thrashing he gave her husband:

"Abe would come to our house, drink milk, eat mush, cornbread and
butter, bring the children candy and rock the cradle." (This seemed a
strange thing to her.) "He would nurse babies--do anything to
accommodate anybody."


HOW HE REPAID THE ARMSTRONGS' KINDNESS

The Armstrong baby, Willie, grew to be a youth of wrong habits, and was
nicknamed "Duff." He was drawn, one afternoon, into a bad quarrel with
another rough young man, named Metzker, who was brutally beaten. In the
evening a vicious young man, named Morris, joined the row and the lad
was struck on the head and died without telling who had dealt the fatal
blow. The blame was thrown upon "Duff" Armstrong, who was arrested.
Illinois law preventing him from testifying in his own behalf.

When Lawyer Lincoln heard of the case, he wrote as follows:


                      "SPRINGFIELD, ILL., September, 1857.

        "DEAR MRS. ARMSTRONG:

        "I have just heard of your deep affliction, and
        the arrest of your son for murder.

        "I can hardly believe that he can be capable of
        the crime alleged against him.

        "It does not seem possible. I am anxious that
        he should be given a fair trial, at any rate;
        and gratitude for your long-continued kindness
        to me in adverse circumstances prompts me to
        offer my humble services gratuitously in his
        behalf.

        "It will afford me an opportunity to requite,
        in a small degree, the favors I received at
        your hand, and that of your lamented husband,
        when your roof afforded me a grateful shelter,
        without money and without price.

                                    "Yours truly,
                                           "A. LINCOLN."

The feeling in the neighborhood where the crime was committed was so
intense that it was decided that it must be taken over to the next
county to secure a fair trial. Lawyer Lincoln was on hand to defend the
son of his old friend.

Besides those who testified to the bad character of the young prisoner,
one witness, named Allen, testified that he saw "Duff" Armstrong strike
the blow which killed Metzker.

"Couldn't you be mistaken about this?" asked Mr. Lincoln. "What time did
you see it?"

"Between nine and ten o'clock that night."

"Are you certain that you saw the prisoner strike the blow?--Be
careful--remember--you are under oath!"

"I am sure. There is no doubt about it."

"But wasn't it dark at that hour?"

"No, the moon was shining bright."

"Then you say there was a moon and it was not dark."

"Yes, it was light enough for me to see him hit Metzker on the head."

"Now I want you to be very careful. I understand you to say the murder
