The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Treatise on Good Works, by Dr. Martin Luther

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Treatise on Good Works

Author: Dr. Martin Luther

Release Date: January 24, 2008 [EBook #418]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TREATISE ON GOOD WORKS ***









A Treatise on Good Works

together with the Letter of Dedication

by Dr. Martin Luther, 1520




INTRODUCTION

1. The Occasion of the Work.--Luther did not impose himself as reformer
upon the Church. In the course of a conscientious performance of the
duties of his office, to which he had been regularly and divinely
called, and without any urging on his part, he attained to this
position by inward necessity. In 1515 he received his appointment as
the standing substitute for the sickly city pastor, Simon Heinse, from
the city council of Wittenberg. Before this time he was obliged to
preach only occasionally in the convent, apart from his activity as
teacher in the University and convent. Through this appointment he was
in duty bound, by divine and human right, to lead and direct the
congregation at Wittenberg on the true way to life, and it would have
been a denial of the knowledge of salvation which God had led him to
acquire, by way of ardent inner struggles, if he had led the
congregation on any other way than the one God had revealed to him in
His Word. He could not deny before the congregation which had been
intrusted to his care, what up to this time he had taught with ever
increasing clearness in his lectures at the University--for in the
lectures on the Psalms, which he began to deliver in 1513, he declares
his conviction that faith alone justifies, as can be seen from the
complete manuscript, published since 1885, and with still greater
clearness from his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans (1515-1516),
which is accessible since 1908; nor what he had urged as spiritual
adviser of his convent brethren when in deep distress--compare the
charming letter to Georg Spenlein, dated April 8, 1516.

Luther's first literary works to appear in print were also occasioned
by the work of his calling and of his office in the Wittenberg
congregation. He had no other object in view than to edify his
congregation and to lead it to Christ when, in 1517, he published his
first independent work, the Explanation of the Seven Penitential
Psalms. On Oct 31 of the same year he published his 95 Theses against
Indulgences. These were indeed intended as controversial theses for
theologians, but at the same time it is well known that Luther was
moved by his duty toward his congregation to declare his position in
this matter and to put in issue the whole question as to the right and
wrong of indulgences by means of his theses. His sermon Of Indulgences
and Grace, occasioned by Tetzel's attack and delivered in the latter
part of March, 1518, as well as his sermon Of Penitence, delivered
about the same time, were also intended for his congregation. Before
his congregation (Sept., 1516-Feb., 1517) he delivered the Sermons on
the Ten Commandments, which were published in 1518 and the Sermons on
the Lord's Prayer, which were also published in 1518 by Agricola.
Though Luther in the same year published a series of controversial
writings, which were occasioned by attacks from outside sources, viz.,
the Resolutiones disputationis de Virtute indulgentiarum, the Asterisci
adversus obeliscos Joh. Eccii, and the Ad dialogum Silv. Prieriatis
responsio, still he never was diverted by this necessary rebuttal from
his paramount duty, the edification of the congregation. The autumn of
the year 1518, when he was confronted with Cajetan, as well as the
whole year of 1519, when he held his disputations with Eck, etc., were
replete with disquietude and pressing labors; still Luther served his
congregation with a whole series of writings during this time, and only
regretted that he was not entirely at its disposal. Of such writings we
mention: Explanation of the Lord's Prayer for the simple Laity (an
elaboration of the sermons of 1517); Brief Explanation of the Ten
Commandments; Instruction concerning certain Articles, which might be
ascribed and imputed to him by his adversaries; Brief Instruction how
to Confess; Of Meditation on the Sacred Passion of Christ; Of Twofold
Righteousness; Of the Matrimonial Estate; Brief Form to understand and
to pray the Lord's Prayer; Explanation of the Lord's Prayer "vor sich
und hinter sich"; Of Prayer and Processions in Rogation Week; Of Usury;
Of the Sacrament of Penitence; Of Preparation for Death; Of the
Sacrament of Baptism; Of the Sacrament of the Sacred Body; Of
Excommunication. With but few exceptions these writings all appeared in
print in the year 1519, and again it was the congregation which Luther
sought primarily to serve. If the bounds of his congregation spread
ever wider beyond Wittenberg, so that his writings found a surprisingly
ready sale, even afar, that was not Luther's fault. Even the
Tessaradecas consolatoria, written in 1519 and printed in 1520, a book
of consolation, which was originally intended for the sick Elector of
Saxony, was written by him only upon solicitation from outside sources.

To this circle of writings the treatise Of Good Works also belongs
Though the incentive for its composition came from George Spalatin,
court-preacher to the Elector, who reminded Luther of a promise he had
given, still Luther was willing to undertake it only when he recalled
that in a previous sermon to his congregation he occasionally had made
a similar promise to deliver a sermon on good works; and when Luther
actually commenced the composition he had nothing else in view but the
preparation of a sermon for his congregation on this important topic.

But while the work was in progress the material so accumulated that it
far outgrew the bounds of a sermon for his congregation.  On March 25.
he wrote to Spalatin that it would become a whole booklet instead of a
sermon; on May 5. he again emphasizes the growth of the material; on
May 13. he speaks of its completion at an early date, and on June 8. he
could send Melanchthon a printed copy. It was entitled: Von den guten
werckenn: D. M. L.  Vuittenberg. On the last page it bore the printer's
mark: Getruck zu Wittenberg bey dem iungen Melchior Lotther. Im Tausent
funfhundert vnnd zweyntzigsten Jar. It filled not less than 58 leaves,
quarto. In spite of its volume, however, the intention of the book for
the congregation remained, now however, not only for the narrow circle
of the Wittenberg congregation, but for the Christian layman in
general. In the dedicatory preface Luther lays the greatest stress upon
this, for he writes: "Though I know of a great many, and must hear it
daily, who think lightly of my poverty and say that I write only small
Sexternlein (tracts of small volume) and German sermons for the
untaught laity, I will not permit that to move me. Would to God that
during my life I had served but one layman for his betterment with all
my powers; it would be sufficient for me, I would thank God and suffer
all my books to perish thereafter.... Most willingly I will leave the
honor of greater things to others, and not at all will I be ashamed of
preaching and writing German to the untaught laity."

Since Luther had dedicated the afore-mentioned Tessaradecas
consolatoria to the reigning Prince, he now, probably on Spalatin's
recommendation, dedicated the Treatise on Good Works to his brother
John, who afterward, in 1525, succeeded Frederick in the Electorate.
There was probably good reason for dedicating the book to a member of
the reigning house. Princes have reason to take a special interest in
the fact that preaching on good works should occur within their realm,
for the safety and sane development of their kingdom depend largely
upon the cultivation of morality on the part of their subjects. Time
and again the papal church had commended herself to princes and
statesmen by her emphatic teaching of good works. Luther, on the other
hand, had been accused--like the Apostle Paul before him (Rom. 3
31)--that the zealous performance of good works had abated, that the
bonds of discipline had slackened and that, as a necessary consequence,
lawlessness and shameless immorality were being promoted by his
doctrine of justification by faith alone. Before 1517 the rumor had
already spread that Luther intended to do away with good works. Duke
George of Saxony had received no good impression from a sermon Luther
had delivered at Dresden, because he feared the consequences which
Luther's doctrine of justification by faith alone might have upon the
morals of the masses. Under these circumstances it would not have been
surprising if a member of the Electoral house should harbor like
scruples, especially since the full comprehension of Luther's preaching
on good works depended on an evangelical understanding of faith, as
deep as was Luther's own. The Middle Ages had differentiated between
fides informis, a formless faith, and fides formata or informata, a
formed or ornate faith. The former was held to be a knowledge without
any life or effect, the latter to be identical with love for, as they
said, love which proves itself and is effective in good works must be
added to the formless faith, as its complement and its content, well
pleasing to God. In Luther's time every one who was seriously
interested in religious questions was reared under the influence of
these ideas.

Now, since Luther had opposed the doctrine of justification by love and
its good works, he was in danger of being misunderstood by strangers,
as though he held the bare knowledge and assent to be sufficient for
justification, and such preaching would indeed have led to frivolity
and disorderly conduct. But even apart from the question whether or not
the brother of the Elector was disturbed by such scruples, Luther must
have welcomed the opportunity, when the summons came to him, to
dedicate his book Of Good Works to a member of the Electoral house. At
any rate the book could serve to acquaint him with the thoughts of his
much-abused pastor and professor at Wittenberg, for never before had
Luther expressed himself on the important question of good works in
such a fundamental, thorough and profound way.

2. The Contents of the Work.--A perusal of the contents shows that the
book, in the course of its production, attained a greater length than
was originally intended. To this fact it must be attributed that a new
numeration of sections begins with the argument on the Third
Commandment, and is repeated at every Commandment thereafter, while
before this the sections were consecutively numbered. But in spite of
this, the plan of the whole is clear and lucid. Evidently the whole
treatise is divided into two parts: the first comprising sections 1-17,
while the second comprises all the following sections. The first, being
fundamental, is the more important part. Luther well knew of the
charges made against him that "faith is so highly elevated" and "works
are rejected" by him; but he knew, too, that "neither silver, gold and
precious stone, nor any other precious thing had experienced so much
augmentation and diminution" as had good works "which should all have
but one simple goodness, or they are nothing but color, glitter and
deception." But especially was he aware of the fact that the Church was
urging nothing but the so-called self-elected works, such as "running
to the convent, singing, reading, playing the organ, saying the mass,
praying matins, vespers, and other hours, founding and ornamenting
churches, altars, convents, gathering chimes, jewels, vestments, gems
and treasures, going to Rome and to the saints, curtsying and bowing
the knees, praying the rosary and the psalter," etc., and that she
designated these alone as truly good works, while she represented the
faithful performance of the duties of one's calling as a morality of a
lower order. For these reasons it is Luther's highest object in this
treatise to make it perfectly clear what is the essence of good works.
Whenever the essence of good works has been understood, then the
accusations against him will quickly collapse.

In the fundamental part he therefore argues: "Truly good works are not
self-elected works of monastic or any other holiness, but such only as
God has commanded, and as are comprehended within the bounds of one's
particular calling, and all works, let their name be what it may,
become good only when they flow from faith, the first, greatest, and
noblest of good works." (John 6:29.) In this connection the essence of
faith, that only source of all truly good works, must of course be
rightly understood. It is the sure confidence in God, that all my doing
is wellpleasing to Him; it is trust in His mercy, even though He
appears angry and puts sufferings and adversities upon us; it is the
assurance of the divine good will even though "God should reprove the
conscience with sin, death and hell, and deny it all grace and mercy,
as though He would condemn and show His wrath eternally." Where such
faith lives in the heart, there the works are good "even though they
were as insignificant as the picking up of a straw"; but where it is
wanting, there are only such works as "heathen, Jew and Turk" may have
and do. Where such faith possesses the man, he needs no teacher in good
works, as little as does the husband or the wife, who only look for
love and favor from one another, nor need any instruction therein "how
they are to stand toward each other, what they are to do, to leave
undone, to say, to leave unsaid, to think."

This faith, Luther continues, is "the true fulfilment of the First
Commandment, apart from which there is no work that could do justice to
this Commandment." With this sentence he combines, on the one hand, the
whole argument on faith, as the best and noblest of good works, with
his opening proposition (there are no good works besides those
commanded of God), and, on the other hand, he prepares the way for the
following argument, wherein he proposes to exhibit the good works
according to the Ten Commandments. For the First Commandment does not
forbid this and that, nor does it require this and that; it forbids but
one thing, unbelief; it requires but one thing, faith, "that confidence
in God's good will at all times." Without this faith the best works are
as nothing, and if man should think that by them he could be
well-pleasing to God, he would be lowering God to the level of a
"broker or a laborer who will not dispense his grace and kindness
gratis."

This understanding of faith and good works, so Luther now addresses his
opponents, should in fairness be kept in view by those who accuse him
of declaiming against good works, and they should learn from it, that
though he has preached against "good works," it was against such as are
falsely so called and as contribute toward the confusion of
consciences, because they are self-elected, do not flow from faith, and
are done with the pretension of doing works well-pleasing to God.

This brings us to the end of the fundamental part of the treatise. It
was not Luther's intention, however, to speak only on the essence of
good works and their fundamental relation to faith; he would show, too,
how the "best work," faith, must prove itself in every way a living
faith, according to the other commandments. Luther does not proceed to
this part, however, until in the fundamental part he has said with
emphasis, that the believer, the spiritual man, needs no such
instruction (I. Timothy 1:9), but that he of his own accord and at all
times does good works "as his faith, his confidence, teaches him." Only
"because we do not all have such faith, or are unmindful of it," does
such instruction become necessary.

Nor does he proceed until he has applied his oft repeated words
concerning the relation of faith to good works to the relation of the
First to the other Commandments. From the fact, that according to the
First Commandment, we acquire a pure heart and confidence toward God,
he derives the good work of the Second Commandment, namely, "to praise
God, to acknowledge His grace, to render all honor to Him alone." From
the same source he derives the good work of the Third Commandment,
namely, "to observe divine services with prayer and the hearing of
preaching, to incline the imagination of our hearts toward God's
benefits, and, to that end, to mortify and overcome the flesh." From
the same source he derives the works of the Second Table.

The argument on the Third and Fourth Commandments claims nearly
one-half of the entire treatise. Among the good works which, according
to the Third Commandment, should be an exercise and proof of faith,
Luther especially mentions the proper hearing of mass and of preaching,
common prayer, bodily discipline and the mortification of the flesh,
and he joins the former and the latter by an important fundamental
discussion of the New Testament conception of Sabbath rest.

Luther discusses the Fourth Commandment as fully as the Third.  The
exercise of faith, according to this Commandment, consists in the
faithful performance of the duties of children toward their parents, of
parents toward their children, and of subordinates toward their
superiors in the ecclesiastical as well as in the common civil sphere.
The various duties issue from the various callings, for faithful
performance of the duties of one's calling, with the help of God and
for God's sake, is the true "good work."

As he now proceeds to speak of the spiritual powers, the government of
the Church, he frankly reveals their faults and demands a reform of the
present rulers. Honor and obedience in all things should be rendered
unto the Church, the spiritual mother, as it is due to natural parents,
unless it be contrary to the first Three Commandments. But as matters
stand now the spiritual magistrates neglect their peculiar work,
namely, the fostering of godliness and discipline, like a mother who
runs away from her children and follows a lover, and instead they
undertake strange and evil works, like parents whose commands are
contrary to God. In this case members of the Church must do as godly
children do whose parents have become mad and insane.  Kings, princes,
the nobility, municipalities and communities must begin of their own
accord and put a check to these conditions, so that the bishops and the
clergy, who are now too timid, may be induced to follow. But even the
civil magistrates must also suffer reforms to be enacted in their
particular spheres; especially are they called on to do away with the
rude "gluttony and drunkenness," luxury in clothing, the usurious sale
of rents and the common brothels. This, by divine and human right, is a
part of their enjoined works according to the Fourth Commandment.

Luther, at last, briefly treats of the Second Table of the
Commandments, but in speaking of the works of these Commandments he
never forgets to point out their relation to faith, thus holding fast
this fundamental thought of the book to the end.  Faith which does not
doubt that God is gracious, he says, will find it an easy matter to be
graciously and favorably minded toward one's neighbor and to overcome
all angry and wrathful desires. In this faith in God the Spirit will
teach us to avoid unchaste thoughts and thus to keep the Sixth
Commandment. When the heart trusts in the divine favor, it cannot seek
after the temporal goods of others, nor cleave to money, but according
to the Seventh Commandment, will use it with cheerful liberality for
the benefit of the neighbor. Where such confidence is present there is
also a courageous, strong and intrepid heart, which will at all times
defend the truth, as the Eighth Commandment demands, whether neck or
coat be at stake, whether it be against pope or kings. Where such faith
is present there is also strife against the evil lust, as forbidden in
the Ninth and Tenth Commandments, and that even unto death.

3. The Importance of the Work.--Inquiring now into the importance of
the book, we note that Luther's impression evidently was perfectly
correct, when he wrote to Spalatin, long before its completion--as
early as March 2 5.--that he believed it to be better than anything he
had heretofore written.  The book, indeed, surpasses all his previous
German writings in volume, as well as all his Latin and German ones in
clearness, richness and the fundamental importance of its content. In
comparison with the prevalent urging of self-elected works of monkish
holiness, which had arisen from a complete misunderstanding of the
so-called evangelical counsels (comp. esp. Matthew 19:16-22) and which
were at that time accepted as self-evident and zealously urged by the
whole church, Luther's argument must have appeared to all thoughtful
and earnest souls as a revelation, when he so clearly amplified the
proposition that only those works are to be regarded as good works
which God has commanded, and that therefore, not the abandoning of
one's earthly calling, but the faithful keeping of the Ten Commandments
in the course of one's calling, is the work which God requires of us.
Over against the wide-spread opinion, as though the will of God as
declared in the Ten Commandments referred only to the outward work
always especially mentioned, Luther's argument must have called to mind
the explanation of the Law, which the Lord had given in the Sermon on
the Mount, when he taught men to recognize only the extreme point and
manifestation of a whole trend of thought in the work prohibited by the
text, and when he directed Christians not to rest in the keeping of the
literal requirement of each Commandment, but from this point of vantage
to inquire into the whole depth and breadth of God's will--positively
and negatively--and to do His will in its full extent as the heart has
perceived it. Though this thought may have been occasionally expressed
in the expositions of the Ten Commandments which appeared at the dawn
of the Reformation, still it had never before been so clearly
recognized as the only correct principle, much less had it been so
energetically carried out from beginning to end, as is done in this
treatise. Over against the deep-rooted view that the works of love must
bestow upon faith its form, its content and its worth before God, it
must have appeared as the dawn of a new era (Galatians 3:22-25) when
Luther in this treatise declared, and with victorious certainty carried
out the thought, that it is true faith which invests the works, even
the best and greatest of works, with their content and worth before God.

This proposition, which Luther here amplifies more clearly than ever
before, demanded nothing less than a breach with the whole of prevalent
religious views, and at that time must have been perceived as the
discovery of a new world, though it was no more than a return to the
clear teaching of the New Testament Scriptures concerning the way of
salvation. This, too, accounts for the fact that in this writing the
accusation is more impressively repelled than before, that the doctrine
of justification by faith alone resulted in moral laxity, and that, on
the other hand, the fundamental and radical importance of righteousness
by faith for the whole moral life is revealed in such a
heart-refreshing manner. Luther's appeal in this treatise to kings,
princes, the nobility, municipalities and communities, to declare
against the misuse of spiritual powers and to abolish various abuses in
civil life, marks this treatise as a forerunner of the great
