without any assistance from outside of the hotel, they invited many of
the people of Rockhaven to join them in their indoor amusements. As Mr.
Hamilton was a native of the town, he was quite at home there, though he
had been absent from his boyhood. In addition to the dancing, the
billiards, and the bowling, one of the gentlemen of the party was an
elocutionist, and gave several "readings" in the parlor. A celebrated
writing-master, who was a guest at the hotel, gave an exhibition of his
sleight of hand tricks, in which he was almost as skillful as in the use
of his pen. At the end of the third day it was voted that, in spite of
the weather, the party had enjoyed themselves to the utmost. Mr.
Bennington and Leopold were unremitting in their efforts to make the
guests comfortable and happy.

But in spite of the enjoyment within doors, the New Yorkers were glad to
see the sun shine again. For the first time since their arrival they
were permitted to gaze upon the rugged and beautiful scenery of the
island. They were delighted with the cliffs, and with the views from
them. Most of the party spent the day in rambling about the town and in
climbing the rocks; but the younger members of it insisted upon
something more exciting. When Leopold carried their coffee to Rosabel
and her friend Isabel Peterson, at the breakfast table, he found them
very much excited. They were talking together with a furious enthusiasm,
though there was to be no wedding, or even a grand ball.

"We want to go to High Rock right off after breakfast," said Rosabel;
and it appeared that the high spirits of the young ladies were produced
simply by the anticipation of this excursion.

"In the Rosabel?" asked Leopold.

"Yes, certainly," answered Miss Hamilton.

"I will be ready for you," added the skipper.

"High Rock is such a delightful place!" exclaimed Rosabel, turning to
Isabel again. "I went there twice last summer; and I never enjoyed
myself so much as I did in climbing the rocks, and looking out upon the
ocean. I want you to see the place at once, Belle."

"I shall be delighted to go, especially if we are to sail in the
Rosabel," replied Miss Peterson. "Isn't it a nice thing to have a boat
named after you!"

"Of course it is a very great honor," laughed Rosabel, as she shook back
the affluence of wavy auburn locks which fell upon her shoulders.
"Leopold is a real good fellow."

"He is a very good-looking fellow, too," added Isabel, in a lower tone.
"His face is handsome, and if he were only dressed in good style, he
would be magnificent."

"I think he is nice now," said Rosabel, candidly, and without a blush,
for the little beauty was conscious of nothing but a kindly regard for
the landlord's son.

"He doesn't talk a bit country, and isn't clumsy and awkward, like many
young fellows away from the city."

"His manners are as pleasant as those of any young man I ever met. Do
you know, Belle, he speaks German?"

"What, Leopold!"

"He knows how to speak it a great deal better than I do, though he never
studied it in school, as I have for two years."

Leopold had left the dining-room for a moment, so that he did not hear
any of this conversation, and therefore had no idea how well he stood in
the estimation of these young ladies. Of course they did not intend that
he should know; and the next remark of Isabel, to the effect that she
wished he was not a "waiter," would certainly have hurt his feelings.
Leopold had gone into the office, where he found a boy waiting for a
chance to set up pins in the bowling alley, whom he sent for Stumpy,
with directions for him to have the Rosabel ready immediately for the
excursion to High Rock. Stumpy often went with him, and, as he intended
to wear his good clothes on the trip, he wanted his help on this
occasion.

As soon as breakfast was finished, Leopold was ready. His passengers
were to be Rosabel, Isabel, and Charley Redmond, a young man of
seventeen, and the son of one of the New Yorkers in the party. The sloop
was all ready when they reached the river. Stumpy had hoisted the
mainsail, and hauled her up where the passengers could embark without
difficulty.

"Why, she is a real nice boat!" exclaimed Isabel, as she seated herself
in the standing-room.

"I told you she was," replied Rosabel.

"Quite nobby," added Charley Redmond, with a patronizing tone, as he
adjusted his eye-glasses, for he was either near-sighted, or fancied
that the glasses added to his dignity and importance. "I dare say this
rustic is quite a boatman."

"He may be a rustic, but he is not so green as you are, Charley
Redmond," added Isabel, indignantly; but she spoke for her friend rather
than for herself.

The "rustic" did not hear any of these remarks, for after helping the
girls to their seats, he had gone to cast off the cable which Stumpy was
hauling in. But Leopold did not like Charley Redmond, for the young
gentleman was a person of ten times as much importance, in his own
estimation, as his father. He was supercilious, and, unlike the rest of
the party, looked down upon the boatman, and everybody else in the town.

"Of course you couldn't expect much of a fellow down here," added
Charley.

"He knows twice as much as you do," retorted Isabel, as the skipper took
his place at the helm, thus putting an end to the conversation.

"Now shove her off, Stumpy," said Leopold.

"Stumpy!" ejaculated Charley, with a laugh. "That's a romantic name."

"His name is Stumpfield Wormbury," Leopold explained. "He is a
first-rate fellow."

"No doubt of it," sneered the New Yorker, who was not a good specimen of
his _genus_, and could not appreciate such a "good fellow," with his
brown face and coarse clothes.

"He don't like his nickname very well, and when he objected to it, years
ago, the fellows began to call him 'Wormy.' He couldn't stand that, and
is satisfied now to be called 'Stumpy.'"

"Stumpy is better than Wormy," added Charley Redmond.

"Hoist the jib," said Leopold.

The Rosabel went off with a brisk breeze, at a speed which immediately
rekindled the enthusiasm of the girls; and, to prolong the sail, Leopold
stood off into the bay, going around a small rocky island, a mile from
the light-house.

"It's rather rough out here," said Charley Redmond, when the sloop began
to dance and leap on the waves thrown up by the fresh north-west wind.

"It's delightful!" exclaimed Isabel; "isn't it, Rose?"

"I think so, Belle; I enjoy it above all things."

"But the boat is rather small," suggested Charley, as a cloud of spray
dashed over the bow.

"So much the better," added Rosabel.

When the sloop was a mile from the shore, where the water was not
sheltered by the high cliffs, the white caps lighted up the bay, and it
was very lively sailing. The Rosabel, close-hauled, pitched smartly, and
the spray soon drenched Stumpy, who, presuming not to intrude himself
into the presence of the New Yorkers in the standing-room, remained upon
the half-deck. Mr. Redmond was not willing to own it, but he was
actually frightened, as Leopold could see by the way he started when the
boat pitched, and by the energy with which he held on to the washboard.

"I don't know that I like this very well," said he, at last, with a sort
of shudder.

"It's perfectly splendid," exclaimed Belle.

"Elegant," added Rosabel.

"I will come about whenever you wish, Miss Hamilton," said Leopold.

"O, no, not yet," protested Isabel.

"I think it is about time," put in Charley. "It is cold and wet."

The skipper enjoyed the starts and squirmings of the young gentleman. He
had the boat perfectly in hand, though by this time she had all the wind
she could stagger under. He knew very well that the most exciting part
of the sail was yet to come, for he would have the wind free as soon as
he came about. If the girls had not been on board, he would have let the
boat over far enough to take in a few buckets of water, for the especial
benefit of Mr. Redmond. He knew just how much she would bear, and he
could do it with entire safety; but he did not care to alarm his fair
passengers. Having weathered the island, he let off the sheets a little.
The Rosabel heeled over, and promptly increased her speed. The wind came
in gusts, and now every flaw carried her down to the washboard. Mr.
Redmond was more uneasy than ever, but the girls only shouted in the
exuberance of their delight.

"I don't believe in this thing," said Charley, at last, when his
nervousness overcame him.

"Are you afraid, Charley?" laughed Belle.

"Of course I'm not afraid--ugh!" he muttered, as the sloop heeled over
till the waves threatened to invade the standing-room.

"You _are_ afraid Charley."

"I'm not afraid; but I don't think it is safe. I've been in boats enough
to know that this isn't the way to do the thing. Why don't you lower
one of the sails, Leopold?"

"What for?" asked the skipper quietly.

"You will upset the boat!" gasped Charley.

"No danger of that."

"But I know there is: I have been in boats before," protested Charley.

"If the ladies wish me to reef the mainsail, I will do so," said
Leopold.

"O, no; don't, don't, Leopold!" cried Belle. "I think this is just
lovely."

"Fun alive--isn't it?" chimed in Rosabel. "It would spoil it all to
reef."

"If we only had a man with us, it would be another thing," groaned Mr.
Redmond, with a shudder, as the boat went down to her washboard again.

"I think I am strong enough to handle her," suggested Leopold.

"But you don't understand it," exclaimed the New Yorker, desperately.

"If you think you understand it any better than I do, I am willing to
let you take my place," said the skipper, with a smile.

"O, no! don't let him! I should certainly be afraid then," cried Belle.

"I don't pretend to know anything about a boat; and I don't think you
do," blubbered Charley, angrily.

"I think I can get along with her," added Leopold, pleasantly. "This is
a quiet time compared with what I have seen out here in this boat."

Mr. Raymond continued to growl, and the girls continued to scream and
"squeal" with delight when the sloop heeled over, and when the spray
drenched their water-proofs. The Rosabel was at least five miles from
the land, still making things very lively on board, when a large
schooner was seen dead ahead.

"I've had enough of this thing," said Charley, clinging to the washboard
behind him. "If you don't turn round, or lower one of the sails, I shall
call for help from that vessel."

"What a simpleton you are!" exclaimed Belle; and her remarks were often
much stronger than Rosabel could approve.

Leopold quietly put the helm up, and let off the sheets, so that the
boat did not go within half a mile of the schooner. Half an hour later
he put her about, and, with the wind on the quarter, stood in towards
High Rock. Being almost before the wind, the Rosabel jumped, leaped, and
"yawed" about more than ever; but she took in no more spray over her
bow. She seemed to fly on her course, and Charley Redmond expected every
moment to feel her go over. He held on with desperation, unnoticed now
by the girls. In another half hour the sloop passed into the calmer
waters, sheltered by the high cliffs. Charley began to be brave again.

"You feel better--do you, Mr. Redmond?" said the laughing Belle.

"I feel well enough."

"You were afraid."

"Afraid--I? Not a bit of it; at least not for myself," replied the young
gentleman. "The boatman don't understand his business. That's the whole
of this thing."

"My father says he knows all about a boat; and he would trust him
farther than he would most men," added Rosabel. "Didn't he take the
Orion into the river in the fog?"

"He didn't manage the yacht: Captain Bounce was on board. I have been in
boats before, and I think I can tell when a boatman knows his biz,"
replied Charley, confidently. "I wasn't at all concerned about myself;
but I was afraid he would drown you girls. You were placed in my care--"

"Were we? Indeed! Didn't we invite you to come?" demanded Belle.

"If you did, of course it was my duty, as a gentleman, to look out for
you. No; I wasn't a bit concerned about myself; but I was afraid for
you."

"It was very kind of you to be afraid for us," sneered his fair
tormentor. "It was very unselfish in you. I think I see you now,
reckless of yourself, but trembling for our safety! I hope you will tell
Leopold how to manage a boat!"

"I shall be glad to learn," laughed the skipper.

Leopold ran the sloop alongside a rock, which at this time of tide
served as a wharf, and landed his party. Rosabel led the way to the Hole
in the Wall, and they soon disappeared in the deep ravine. The skipper
would have been very glad to go with them, but he was not invited to do
so; and without this formality he was unwilling to do that which might
possibly be deemed an intrusion. Rosabel wondered that he did not come
with them, and would have been glad of his company; but as she did not
feel herself above the boatman, it did not occur to her to ask him.

"That fellow was scared--wasn't he, Le?" said Stumpy, when they were
alone.

"Of course he was. He is a regular spooney," replied the skipper. "If
the girls hadn't been with us, I would have put him through a course of
sprouts."

"He thinks he is a bigger man than the president of the United States.
You won't catch him in the Rosabel again."

"I don't want to catch him there."

"How long are they going to stay up there, Le?" asked Stumpy.

"They won't come down for a couple of hours yet."

"Then I can dig a bucket of clams while we are waiting," added Stumpy,
as he took the shovel and a pail from the cuddy.

Leopold fastened the painter to the rocks, and followed his friend. The
bucket was soon filled with clams, the largest and finest to be found on
the coast, for they were seldom dug on this beach. In returning to the
boat, they passed quite near Coffin Rock, and of course Leopold could
not help thinking of the hidden treasure in the sand. Stumpy, with the
bucket of clams in his hand, led the way to the spot, not exactly with
the approbation of his companion, who was afraid that the waters had not
yet smoothed over the beach so as to conceal his recent operations.

"Come, Stumpy, ain't you going down to the boat?" asked Leopold, as he
began to move in a different direction from that of his friend.

"No hurry--is there? _I_ want to go to the spring, and clean up a
little," replied the clam-digger.

"Can't you do it down by the boat?" suggested the money-digger, who did
not feel inclined to answer the questions which the disturbed state of
the beach under Coffin Rock would put into the mouth of Stumpy.

"I never wash in salt water when I can get fresh. Besides I want a
drink."

Without intending to be obstinate, Stumpy silently insisted upon having
his own way, by directing his steps towards the springs, which flowed
from the rocks not twenty feet from the hidden treasure. The pure water
dropped from an overhanging cliff, in a kind of alcove in the precipice.
It was clear and cold, and on a warm day it was emphatically a luxury.
If the weather was not warm on the present occasion, Stumpy was, for he
had been digging deep into the sand and mud of the beach. The water
dropping from the spring had formed a deep pool under the cliff, which
overflowed, and was discharged by a stream flowing down the sands into
the ocean. In this stream Stumpy washed his face and hands, and then his
feet, covered with the black mud which he had thrown up from under the
sand at low tide.

Leopold sat down on a bowlder, some distance from the cliff, to wait for
his companion. Stumpy seemed to be determined to do just what his friend
did not want him to do, for, as soon as he had washed his feet, he
walked directly out of the alcove to the spot under Coffin Rock, taking
the clams and shovel with him.

"I say, Le, can't we get up a clam-bake for the girls?" said he, calling
to the skipper in the distance.

"It won't pay," replied Leopold, walking to the place where Stumpy
stood, exactly over the buried treasure.

"Why not? You said Miss Rosabel liked clams."

"It will take too long. We must get back to the hotel by dinner time."

"Just as you say; but if the girls like clams, it would be a treat to
them; and this is just the place to do this thing."

"We haven't time to-day."

"All right," replied Stumpy, who seemed to be just then engaged in a
survey of the locality. "What in the world were you doing here, Le?" he
added. "This sand looks as though it had been all dug over."

No high tide had washed the beach since Leopold dug for the treasure,
and even his shovel marks were plainly to be seen under the overhanging
rock.

"I might as well tell him all about it," thought Leopold. "I can trust
him till the end of the world; and I should like to have some one to
help me bear the burden of the secret."

"What were you digging for, Le?" repeated Stumpy, his curiosity
considerably excited.

"Can you keep a secret, Stumpy?"

"Of course I can till the rocks crumble, and the earth sinks," replied
he, warmly.

Leopold told him the whole story, from the first glimpse he had of
Harvey Barth's diary, down to the finding of the bag of gold.

"I swow!" exclaimed Stumpy, drawing a long breath, when the narrative
was finished. "Twelve hundred in gold!"

"I haven't counted it; but that's what the diary says," replied Leopold.

"You will be as rich as mud, Le. Gold! Then it's worth double that in
paper."

"It don't belong to me," answered Leopold, decidedly.
