its labor union. Why not take advantage of it?"

"What's the advantage?"

"More Earth money coming in, for one thing. Of the twelve hundred CLU
members we've got in Fort Roye now, seventy-six per cent were unemployed
this month. We'll have a compensation check from the Territorial Office
with the next ship coming in." He smiled at her expression. "Sure, the
boys _could_ go back to the tupa ranches. But not everyone likes that
life as well as you and the Feeneys."

"Earth government lets you get away with it?" Beulah asked curiously.
"They used to be pretty tight-fisted."

"They still are--but it's the law. The Territorial Office also pays any
CLU president's salary, incidentally. I don't draw too much at the
moment, but that will go up automatically with the membership and my
responsibilities."

"What responsibilities?"

"We've set up a skeleton organization," Phil explained. "Now, when Earth
government decides eventually to establish a big military base here,
they can run in a hundred thousand civilians in a couple of months and
everyone will be fitted into the pattern on Roye without trouble or
confusion. That's really the reason for all the generosity."

Beulah sniffed. "Big base, my eye! There hasn't been six months since I
set foot here that somebody wasn't talking about Fort Roye being turned
into a Class A military base pretty soon. It'll never happen, Phil.
Roye's a farm planet, and that's what it's going to stay."

Phil's lips twitched. "Well, don't give up hope."

"_I'm_ not anxious for any changes," Beulah said. "I like Roye the way
it is."

She peered at a button on the go-chair's armrest which had just begun to
put out small bright-blue flashes of light. "Pies are done," she
announced. "Phil, are you sure you can't stay for dinner?"

Phil looked at his watch, shook his head. "I'd love to, but I really
have to get back."

"Then I'll go wrap up the pies for you."

Beulah swung the go-chair around, sent it slithering up the stairs and
out the door. Phil stood up quickly. He stepped over to the fireplace,
opened his coat and detached a flexible, box-shaped object from the
inner lining. He laid this object on the mantle, and turned one of three
small knobs about its front edge to the right. The box promptly extruded
a supporting leg from each of its four corners, pushed itself up from
the mantle and became a miniature table. Phil glanced at the door
through which Beulah had vanished, listened a moment, then took the
Geest gun from the wall, laid it carefully on top of the device and
twisted the second dial.

The odd-looking gun began to sink slowly down through the surface of
Phil's instrument, like a rock disappearing in mud. Within seconds it
vanished completely; then, a moment later, it began to emerge from the
box's underside. Phil let the Geest gun drop into his hand, replaced it
on the wall, turned the third knob. The box withdrew its supports and
sank down to the mantle. Phil clipped it back inside his coat, closed
the coat, and strolled over to the center of the room to wait for Aunt
Beulah to return with the pies.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was curious, Phil Boles reflected as his aircar moved out over the
craggy, plunging coastline to the north some while later, that a few
bold minds could be all that was needed to change the fate of a world. A
few minds with imagination enough to see how circumstances about them
might be altered.

On his left, far below, was now the flat ribbon of the peninsula, almost
at sea level, its tip widening and lifting into the broad, rocky
promontory on which stood Fort Roye--the only thing on the planet bigger
and of more significance than the shabby backwoods settlements. And Fort
Roye was neither very big nor very significant. A Class F military base
around which, over the years, a straggling town had come into existence,
Fort Roye was a space-age trading post linking Roye's population to the
mighty mother planet, and a station from which the otherwise vacant and
utterly unimportant 132nd Segment of the Space Territories was
periodically and uneventfully patrolled. It was no more than that. Twice
a month, an Earth ship settled down to the tiny port, bringing supplies,
purchases, occasional groups of reassigned military and civilians--the
latter suspected of being drawn as a rule from Earth's Undesirable
classification. The ship would take off some days later, with a return
load of the few local products for which there was outside demand,
primarily the medically valuable tupa roots; and Fort Roye lay quiet
again.

The planet was not at fault. Essentially, it had what was needed to
become a thriving colony in every sense. At fault was the Geest War. The
war had periods of flare-up and periods in which it seemed to be
subsiding. During the past decade it had been subsiding again. One of
the early flare-ups, one of the worst, and the one which brought the war
closest to Earth itself, was the Gunderland Battle in which Uncle
William Boles' trophy gun had been acquired. But the war never came near
Roye. The action was all in the opposite section of the giant sphere of
the Space Territories, and over the years the war drew steadily farther
away.

And Earth's vast wealth--its manpower, materials and money--was pouring
into space in the direction the Geest War was moving. Worlds not a tenth
as naturally attractive as Roye, worlds where the basic conditions for
human life were just above the unbearable point, were settled and held,
equipped with everything needed and wanted to turn them into independent
giant fortresses, with a population not too dissatisfied with its lot.
When Earth government didn't count the expense, life could be made
considerably better than bearable almost anywhere.

Those were the circumstances which condemned Roye to insignificance. Not
everyone minded. Phil Boles, native son, did mind. His inclinations were
those of an operator, and he was not being given an adequate opportunity
to exercise them. Therefore, the circumstances would have to be changed,
and the precise time to make the change was at hand. Phil himself was
not aware of every factor involved, but he was aware of enough of them.
Back on Earth, a certain political situation was edging towards a
specific point of instability. As a result, an Earth ship which was not
one of the regular freighters had put down at Fort Roye some days
before. Among its passengers were Commissioner Sanford of the
Territorial Office, a well-known politician, and a Mr. Ronald Black, the
popular and enterprising owner of Earth's second largest news outlet
system. They were on a joint fact-finding tour of the thinly scattered
colonies in this remote section of the Territories, and had wound up
eventually at the most remote of all--the 132nd Segment and Roye.

That was one factor. Just visible twenty thousand feet below
Phil--almost directly beneath him now as the aircar made its third
leisurely crossing of the central belt of the peninsula--was another.
From here it looked like an irregular brown circle against the
peninsula's nearly white ground. Lower down, it would have resembled
nothing so much as the broken and half-decayed spirals of a gigantic
snail shell, its base sunk deep in the ground and its shattered point
rearing twelve stories above it. This structure, known popularly as "the
ruins" in Fort Roye, was supposed to have been the last stronghold of a
semi-intelligent race native to Roye, which might have become extinct
barely a century before the Earthmen arrived. A factor associated with
