intelligent. Wasn't it the poet Herrick who had a pet pig? This little
chap's as sharp as a needle. I believe I could teach him tricks
directly, if I tried! Miss Carson says I mustn't let myself grow too
fond of all the creatures, because their ultimate end is bacon or the
boilerette, and it doesn't do to be sentimental over farming; but I
can't help it! I just love some of the chickens; they come flying up on
to my shoulder like pigeons."

A rough-coated pony formed part of the establishment. Twice a week he
was harnessed to the trap, and Miss Carson and one of the students drove
to Seaton to dispose of the farm produce. Miss Carson had undertaken to
supply several hotels and restaurants with eggs, fowls and vegetables,
and so far had found the demand for her goods exceeded the supply. Labor
was at present her greatest difficulty. Her students accomplished the
light work, but could not do heavy digging. She managed to secure the
occasional services of a farm hand, but with most able-bodied men at the
war the problem of trenching or of making an asparagus bed was almost
impossible to solve.

At the end of the orchard, against a south hedge of thick holly, stood
the hives. Bee-keeping was one of the most successful ventures of the
holding. Last autumn had shown a splendid yield of honey, and this year,
judging by the activity of the bees, an equal harvest might be expected.
There was continuous humming among the apple blossoms, and every minute
pollen-laden workers were hurrying home with their spoils. Miss Heald
lifted the lid of one of the hives, to show Winona the comb within. She
observed caution, however.

"They don't know me very well," she explained. "They have their likes
and dislikes. Miss Hunter can let them crawl all over her hands and
arms, and they never sting her. She must have a natural attraction for
them. They recognize a stranger directly. No, I'm not particularly fond
of them. I prefer pigs and chickens."

Miss Carson and Aunt Harriet had also been going the round of the farm,
and came up to inspect the hives. Miss Beach was greatly interested in
her friend's work, and full of congratulations.

"Such women as you are the backbone of the country!" she declared. "The
next best thing to fighting is to provide food for the nation. England
is capable of producing twice her annual yield if there is proper
organization. I'm a great advocate of small holdings, and I think women
can't show their patriotism better than by going 'back to the land.' You
and your students are indeed 'doing your bit'! You make me want to come
and help you!"

It was such a delicious warm afternoon that chairs were carried outside,
and they had tea in the garden under a gorgeous pink-blossomed almond
tree, with the perfume of wallflowers and sweet scented stocks wafted
from the rockery above. Two cats and a dog joined the party, also an
impudent bantam cock, who, being considered the mascot of the
establishment, was much petted, and allowed certain privileges. He would
sit on Miss Carson's wrist like a little tame hawk, and she sometimes
brought him into the garden at tea-time to give him tit-bits.

At 4.30 all the fowls and chickens were fed, a tremendous business, at
which Winona looked on with enthusiasm. She admired the systematic way
in which the food was measured and distributed so that each individual
member of the flock received its due share, and was not robbed by a
greedier and stronger neighbor. She was very reluctant to leave when
Miss Beach at last brought round the car.

"How I'd love to go and learn farming when I leave school!" she ventured
to remark as they drove home.

"It needs brains!" returned Aunt Harriet, rather snappily. "You mustn't
imagine it's all tea in the garden and playing with fluffy chickens. To
run such a holding intelligently requires a clever capable head. Your
examination's quite enough for you to think about at present. If you're
to have any chance at all of passing, it will take your whole energies,
I assure you!"

Winona, duly snubbed, held her peace.




CHAPTER XVIII

A Friend in Need


Under the coaching of Miss Goodson the Sixth Form had settled down to
grim work. Twelve girls were to present themselves for examination for
entering Dunningham University, and though the teacher naturally
concentrated her greatest energies on this elect dozen, the rest by no
means slipped through her intellectual net. There were stars among the
candidates of whom she might feel moderately certain, and there were
also laggers whose success was doubtful. In this latter category she
classed Winona. Poor Winona still floundered rather hopelessly in some
of her subjects. A poetic imagination may be a delightful inheritance
and a source of infinite enjoyment to its owner, but it does not supply
the place of a good memory. Examiners are prosaic beings who require
solid facts, and even the style of a Macaulay or a Carlyle would not
satisfy them unless accompanied by definite answers to their set
questions. By a piece of unparalleled luck, Winona had secured and
retained her County Scholarship, but her powers of essay writing were
not likely to serve her in such good stead again. She often groaned when
she thought of the examinations. Miss Bishop, Aunt Harriet, and her
mother would all be so disappointed if she failed, and alas! her failure
seemed only too probable.

"Miss Goodson doesn't tell me plump out that I'll be plucked, but I can
see she thinks so!" confided Winona to Garnet one day.

"Then show her she is wrong!"

"Not much chance of that, I'm afraid, but I'm doing my level best. I get
up at six every morning, and slave before breakfast."

"So do I, but I get such frightful headaches," sighed Garnet. "I've been
nearly mad with them. My cousin took me to the doctor yesterday. He says
it's my eyes. I shan't be at school to-morrow. I have to go to
Dunningham to see a specialist."

"Poor old girl! You never told me about your headaches."

"You never asked me! I've seen so little of you lately;"

Winona's conscience smote her. She had rather neglected Garnet since
they had entered the Sixth Form. During their year in V.a. they
had been fast friends. As new girls together and scholarship holders, a
close tie had existed between them, and they had shared in many small
excitements and adventures. When Winona was chosen Games Captain,
however, their interests seemed to separate. Garnet was not athletic,
she cared little for hockey or cricket, and preferred to devote her
surplus energies to the Literary Society or the Debating Club. Almost
inevitably they had drifted apart. Winona, wrapped up in the supreme
fascinations of hockey matches and gymnasium practice, had chummed with
Marjorie Kemp, Bessie Kirk, and Joyce Newton, who shared her enthusiasm
for games. She remembered with a pang of self-reproach that she had not
walked round the playground with Garnet once this term. Winona admired
fidelity, but she certainly could not pride herself upon having
practiced that virtue of late.

Garnet was absent from her desk next day, but when she returned to the
school on Thursday, Winona sought an opportunity, and bore her off for a
private talk. Garnet was looking very pale.

"I'm dreadfully upset," she confessed. "I told you I had to see a
specialist about my eyes? Well, yesterday we went to Dunningham, to
consult Sir Alfred Pollard. He says there's very serious trouble, and
that if I'm not careful, I may ruin my sight altogether. He absolutely
forbids any home work in the evenings."

"Forbids home work!" gasped Winona.

"Yes, utterly! Just think of it! With the examinations only six weeks
off! I begged and implored, but he said I might choose between my sight
and my exam. I suppose I shall have to fail!"

"Oh, Garnet!"

"Yes," continued her friend bitterly, "to fail at the very end, after
all my work! And I _have_ worked! When other girls have been getting all
sorts of fun, I've sat in my bedroom with my books. Oh, it's too
cruel!... Don't think me conceited, but I thought I might have a chance
for the Seaton Scholarship. It was worth trying for! If you knew how I
long to go to College! It would be so glorious to write B.A. after one's
name! Besides, I must do something in life. All my sisters have chosen
careers, and I had, quite decided to take up teaching as a profession. I
talked it over with Miss Goodson one day. She was so nice about it, and
strongly advised me to go to College if I could possibly get the
opportunity. Well, I suppose that dream's over now! Not much chance of a
scholarship with one's prep knocked off!"

"Oh, Garnet, I'm so sorry! Will the doctor let you take the exams, at
all?"

"Yes, I may attend school as usual, and go in for the exam., but I'm not
to look at a book after 4 p.m. or before 9 a.m., so it's a very empty
permission. How I shall rage all the evenings! I wish I had a gramophone
to howl out my work into my ears, as I mayn't use my eyes!"

"Would that help you?" asked Winona eagerly.

"Of course it would! It isn't my brain that's wrong, only my eyes. I
asked my cousin to read my prep. to me one evening, but it was beyond
her, and we only got into a muddle. Oh dear, I could cry! To have worked
to within six weeks of the exam., and then to have to slack like this!
I'm the unluckiest girl in the world!"

Winona comforted her poor friend as best she could. She had an idea at
the back of her mind, but she did not venture to confide it to Garnet
until she had first consulted Aunt Harriet about it. It was no less a
proposal than that they should do their preparation together, and that
by reading the work aloud she could act eyes for her chum. It. would be
difficult, no doubt, but not an utter impossibility, and it was
absolutely the only way in which Garnet could receive help. It would
necessitate their spending many hours daily in each other's company, and
to arrange this seemed to be the difficulty. She explained the situation
to Miss Beach, with some diffidence and hesitation. She was terribly
afraid of receiving a snubbing, and being told that her own work was
more than sufficient for her, without taking up her friend's burdens. To
her surprise, however, Aunt Harriet proved sympathetic, and heartily
acquiesced in the scheme. She indeed made the very kind proposal that
for the six weeks until the exam. Garnet should sleep with Winona at
Abbey Close, so that they might have both the evening and early morning
preparation together.

Winona carried her friend to a quiet corner of the gymnasium to
communicate her thrilling news.

"Win! You don't really mean it? Oh, you're big! I didn't think any one
in the world would have done that for me. Do you realize what you're
undertaking? It's the one thing that can save me! And only a girl who's
in my own Form, and going in for the exams. herself, could do it. Nobody
else understands exactly what one wants. Win! I'm ready to worship you!"

"Will your cousin let you come to stay with us?"

"I've no fear of that. She'll be as grateful to you as I am!"

Without any further loss of time, Garnet was installed at Abbey Close,
and the friends began their joint preparation. Garnet, by the doctor's
orders, sat with a black silk handkerchief tied over her eyes, so as to
give them all the rest which was possible. Her brain was very alert,
however, and her excellent memory retained most of what Winona read to
her. At first there were many difficulties to be overcome, for each had
had her own way of studying, but after a while they grew used to their
united method, and began to make headway with the work. They thoroughly
enjoyed being together. To Winona it was almost like being back at the
hostel to have a companion in her bedroom, and her many jokes and bits
of fun kept up Garnet's spirits. They set their alarm clock for 5.30,
and began study promptly at six each morning, after eating the bread and
butter and drinking the glasses of milk which, by Aunt Harriet's orders,
were always placed in readiness for them. These early hours, when the
day was cool, and a fresh breeze blew in through the open window, seemed
the most valuable of all; their brains felt clearer, and they were often
able to grasp problems and difficult points which had eluded them the
evening before.

Except for the ordinary practices which formed part of the school
curriculum, Winona was obliged for the present to appoint Bessie Kirk as
her deputy-Captain. She had no time herself to train juniors, to act
referee, or to stand watching tennis sets. It meant a great sacrifice to
relinquish these most congenial duties, but she knew Miss Bishop and
Miss Goodson approved, and she promised herself to return to them all
the more heartily when the examination should be over. She would ask
Bessie wistfully for reports of the progress of various stars who were
in training, and managed to keep in touch with the games, though she
could not always participate in them.

"Wait till June's over, and I'm emancipated! Then won't I have the time
of my life!" she announced. "Thank goodness the match with Binworth
isn't till July 21st!"

The weeks of strenuous work passed slowly by. The weather was warm and
sultry, with frequent thunderstorms, not a favorable atmosphere for
study. Garnet flagged palpably, and lost her roses. To Winona the time
seemed interminable. The task she had undertaken of helping her friend
was a formidable one. It needed all her courage to persevere. Sometimes
she longed just for an evening to throw it up, and go and play tennis
instead, but every hour was important to Garnet, and must not be lost.
Winona often had to set her teeth and force herself to resist the
alluring sound of the tennis in the next-door garden, where she had a
standing invitation to come and play, and it took all the will power of
which she was capable to focus her attention on the examination
subjects. She tried not to let Garnet see how much the effort cost her;
the latter was sensitive, and painfully conscious of being a burden.
Miss Beach dosed both the girls with tonics, and insisted upon their
taking a certain amount of exercise.

"Work by all means, but don't over-work," was her recommendation.
"There's such a thing as bending a bow until it breaks. I don't like to
see such white cheeks!"

The examination was for entering Dunningham University, and must be
taken at that city. The Governors of the Seaton High School had offered
a scholarship, tenable for three years, to whichever of their
candidates, obtaining First Class honors, appeared highest on the list
of passes. They had arranged with the examiners to place the names of
the successful candidates in order of merit and on the receipt of the
results they would award their exhibition. If no one obtained First
Class honors, the offer would be withdrawn, and held over until another
year.

Several of the girls were well up in their work, and seemed likely to
have a chance of winning. Linda Fletcher had the advantage of two years
in the Sixth, Agatha James was undoubtedly clever, and Beatrice Howell,
though not brilliant, possessed a steady capacity for grind. With three
such formidable rivals Garnet's heart might very reasonably fail her.
The doctor's prohibition was a most serious handicap for invaluable as
her chum's help proved, it was not so effective as being able to use her
own eyes. Sometimes she lost courage altogether, and it needed Winona's
most dogged determination to keep her mind fixed unwaveringly upon the
end in view.

"It's like playing in a match," Winona assured her. "If you think the
other side's going to win, you may as well throw up the sponge at once.
Don't give way an inch until you absolutely know you're beaten. I'm just
determined you're to have that scholarship!"

"If I could only think so!" sighed Garnet. "Oh, Win! what should I do
without you? When I'm with you my spirits go up, and I've courage enough
for anything, and when I'm by myself I feel a wretched jelly-fish of a
creature, just inclined to sit in a corner and blub!"

"No blubbering, please! Worst thing possible for the eyes!" commanded
Winona.

"Well, I won't! You've cheered me up tremendously. I'm glad you'll be in
the exam. room with me. I shall feel twice as brave if I know you're
there!"

The days sped on, and the very last one came. Miss Bishop and Miss
Goodson had given their final coachings and their most valuable help.
Winona and Garnet devoted the evening to mastering one or two doubtful
points.

"We've done our best, and it depends now whether we've luck in the
questions," said Winona. "I think we'd better put the books away. We
shall only muddle ourselves if we try any more to-night. Aunt Harriet
says we're not to get up at five to-morrow. We shall have quite a hard
enough day as it is."

"It wouldn't be much use," said Garnet, thrusting back the hair from her
hot forehead. "I feel I've taken in the utmost my brains can hold.
There's no room for anything more. How close the air is!"

"I believe we're going to have another storm," replied Winona, leaning
out of the widely opened window, to gaze at the lurid sky. "There's a
feeling of electricity about. Ah! There it begins!"

A vivid flash behind the tower of the old Minster was followed by a long
rumble of thunder. The atmosphere was painfully oppressive. Again a
white streak ran like a corkscrew over the clouds, and a louder peal
resounded. The storm was drawing nearer.

"Come from the window, Winona. It's not safe!"

Garnet was terribly afraid of thunder. The electricity in the air has a
powerful effect upon some temperaments, and at the first sound of
heaven's artillery she was crouching beside her bed, with her head
buried in the pillow.

"Don't be a silly ostrich!" retorted her chum. "It's quite far away yet,
and if it does come, the chances are a thousand to one against it
hitting this particular house. Why, you weren't half so scared of
Zeppelins! For goodness' sake don't get hysterical! Show some pluck!"

Winona's remarks might not be complimentary, but they were bracing.
Garnet laughed nervously, and consented to sit upon a chair. In about
half-an-hour the storm blew over, leaving a clear sky and stars.

"Come and put your head out of the window, and feel how deliciously
fresh and cool it is!" commanded Winona. "Look at that bright planet! I
think it must be Jupiter. I take it as a good omen for to-morrow. The
storm will have cleared your brain, and your star's in the ascendant.
Here's luck to the exam.!"

The city of Dunningham was about thirty miles away from Seaton. It was
a big manufacturing city, with a highly flourishing modern university,
which had lately come much to the fore, and had begun to make itself a
reputation. The three days' examination was to be held in the University
buildings, and all candidates were bound to present themselves there.
Miss Bishop had decided that the contingent of twelve from the Seaton
High School should travel to Dunningham each morning by the early
express, under the charge of Miss Lever, who would take them out for
lunch, and escort them safely back to Seaton again in the evening. The
arrangement necessitated an early start, but nobody minded that.

The little party met at the railway station in quite bright spirits. It
was rather fun, all going to Dunningham together, and having a special
compartment engaged for them on the train. It was a difficult matter for
thirteen people to cram into seats only intended for the accommodation
of ten, but they preferred over-crowding to separation, and cheerfully
took it in turns to sit on one another's knees.

"It's more like a beanfeast than the exam.!" laughed Mary Payne, handing
round a packet of chocolates. "I feel I absolutely don't care!"

"I feel like a criminal on the road to execution!" groaned Helena
Maitland. "Usedn't they to give the poor wretches anything they asked
for? Oh, yes, thanks! I'll have a chocolate by all means, but it's
crowning the victim with a garland of roses!"

"Rather mixed metaphors, my child! If you don't express yourself more
clearly in your papers, I'm afraid you won't satisfy the examiners!"

"I wonder who corrects the papers?" asked Freda Long.

"Oh! some snarling old dry-as-dust, probably, who's anxious to get
through the job as quickly as he can. It must be a withering experience
to go through thousands of papers. Enough to pulverize your brains for
the rest of your life!"

"I don't mind the examiners' brains. It's my own I'm anxious about. If
they'll last me out these three days, I'll be content to exist at a very
low mental level afterwards!"

"Right you are! Ditto this child! I'm going to read nothing but the
trashiest novels during the holidays!" announced Mary aggressively.

"And I'm not going to read at all! I shall just lounge and play tennis,"
added Hilda.

"Poor dears! I used to feel like that, but one gets over it!" smiled
Miss Lever. "Don't eat too many caramels, or you'll be so thirsty in the
exam room. Malted milk tablets are the best thing; they're sweet, but
sustaining. Plain chocolate is the next best. I shall think of you all
the whole morning."

"You'll have a lovely time gallivanting round Dunningham and
shop-gazing, while we're racking our brains!" said Garnet. "We're all
envious!"

"Remember, I've had my purgatory before!" returned Miss Lever, laughing.
"You must allow me a good time in my old age!"

Arrived at Dunningham station, they took the tramcar, and proceeded
straight to the University. It was a very fine modern building, erected
round three sides of a large quadrangle, the fourth side being occupied
by a museum. They were directed to the Women Students' Department, and
took off their hats and coats in the dressing-room. Miss Lever, who had
herself graduated at Dunningham, knew the place well, and was able to
give them exact directions. She escorted them across the quadrangle to
the big hall where the examination was to be held.

"The place has a classic look," said Garnet, gazing at the Corinthian
columns of the portico. "I'm afraid they won't consider my Latin up to
standard. May the fates send me an easy paper!"

"You should have asked them before!" giggled Winona. "The papers are
printed now, and not all the gods of Olympus could alter a letter. I
accept my fortunes in the spirit of a Mahomedan. It's Kismet!"

The first set of questions was easier than the girls had dared to
