whether he really thought that "grimaciere" was afraid of a mouse.

"Ay. She screamed hearty."

"Where is the coquette that cannot scream to the life? These she
tavern-keepers do still ape the nobles. Some princess or duchess hath
lain here a night, that was honestly afeard of a mouse, having been
brought up to it. And this ape hath seen her, and said, 'I will start
at a mouse, and make a coil,' She has no more right to start at a mouse
than to wear that fur on her bosom, and that velvet on her monkey's
head. I am of the town, young man, and have known the mijauree all her
life, and I mind when she was no more afeard of a mouse than she is of
a man." He added that she was fast emptying the inn with these
"singeries." "All the world is so sick of her hands, that her very
kinsfolk will not venture themselves anigh them." He concluded with
something like a sigh, "The 'Tete d'Or' was a thriving hostelry under my
old chum her good father; but she is digging its grave tooth and nail.'

"Tooth and nail? good! a right merry conceit and a true," said Gerard.
But the right merry conceit was an inadvertence as pure as snow, and
the stout burgher went to his grave and never knew what he had done:
for just then attention was attracted by Denys returning pompously. He
inspected the apartment minutely, and with a high official air: he also
looked solemnly under the table; and during the whole inquisition a
white hand was placed conspicuously on the edge of the open door, and
a tremulous voice inquired behind it whether the horrid thing was quite
gone.

"The enemy has retreated, bag and baggage," said Denys: and handed in
the trembling fair, who, sitting down, apologized to her guests for
her foolish fears, with so much earnestness, grace, and seeming
self-contempt, that, but for a sour grin on his neighbour's face, Gerard
would have been taken in as all the other strangers were. Dinner ended,
the young landlady begged an Augustine friar at her right hand to say
grace. He delivered a longish one. The moment he began, she clapped her
white hands piously together, and held them up joined for mortals to
admire; 'tis an excellent pose for taper white fingers: and cast her
eyes upward towards heaven, and felt as thankful to it as a magpie does
while cutting off with your thimble.

After supper the two friends went to the street-door and eyed the
market-place. The mistress joined them, and pointed out the town-hall,
the borough gaol, St. Catherine's church, etc. This was courteous, to
say the least. But the true cause soon revealed itself; the fair hand
was poked right under their eyes every time an object was indicated; and
Gerard eyed it like a basilisk, and longed for a bunch of nettles. The
sun set, and the travellers, few in number, drew round the great roaring
fire, and omitting to go on the spit, were frozen behind though roasted
in front. For if the German stoves were oppressively hot, the French
salles manger were bitterly cold, and above all stormy. In Germany men
sat bareheaded round the stove, and took off their upper clothes, but in
Burgundy they kept on their hats, and put on their warmest furs to sit
round the great open chimney places, at which the external air rushed
furiously from door and ill-fitting window. However, it seems their
mediaeval backs were broad enough to bear it: for they made themselves
not only comfortable but merry, and broke harmless jests over each
other in turn. For instance, Denys's new shoes, though not in direct
communication, had this day exploded with twin-like sympathy and
unanimity. "Where do you buy your shoon, soldier?" asked one.

Denys looked askant at Gerard, and not liking the theme, shook it off.
"I gather 'em off the trees by the roadside," said he surlily.

"Then you gathered these too ripe," said the hostess, who was only a
fool externally.

"Ay, rotten ripe," observed another, inspecting them.

Gerard said nothing, but pointed the circular satire by pantomime. He
slily put out both his feet, one after another, under Denys's eye, with
their German shoes, on which a hundred leagues of travel had produced no
effect. They seemed hewn out of a rock.

At this, "I'll twist the smooth varlet's neck that sold me mine,"
shouted Denys, in huge wrath, and confirmed the threat with singular
oaths peculiar to the mediaeval military. The landlady put her fingers
in her ears, thereby exhibiting the hand in a fresh attitude. "Tell me
when he has done his orisons, somebody," said she mincingly. And after
that they fell to telling stories.

Gerard, when his turn came, told the adventure of Denys and Gerard at
the inn in Domfront, and so well, that the hearers were rapt into sweet
oblivion of the very existence of mijauree and hands. But this made her
very uneasy, and she had recourse to her grand coup. This misdirected
genius had for a twelvemonth past practised yawning, and could do it
now at any moment so naturally as to set all creation gaping, could all
creation have seen her. By this means she got in all her charms. For
first she showed her teeth, then, out of good breeding, you know, closed
her mouth with three taper fingers. So the moment Gerard's story got too
interesting and absorbing, she turned to and made yawns, and "croix sur
la bouche."

This was all very fine: but Gerard was an artist, and artists are
chilled by gaping auditors. He bore up against the yawns a long time;
but finding they came from a bottomless reservoir, lost both heart and
temper, and suddenly rising in mid narrative, said, "But I weary our
hostess, and I am tired myself: so good night!" whipped a candle off the
dresser, whispered Denys, "I cannot stand her," and marched to bed in a
moment.

The mijauree coloured and bit her lips. She had not intended her byplay
for Gerard's eye: and she saw in a moment she had been rude, and silly,
and publicly rebuked. She sat with cheek on fire, and a little natural
water in her eyes, and looked ten times comelier and more womanly
and interesting than she had done all day. The desertion of the best
narrator broke up the party, and the unassuming Denys approached the
meditative mijauree, and invited her in the most flattering terms to
gamble with him. She started from her reverie, looked him down into the
earth's centre with chilling dignity, and consented, for she remembered
all in a moment what a show of hands gambling admitted.

The soldier and the mijauree rattled the dice. In which sport she was so
taken up with her hands, that she forgot to cheat, and Denys won an "ecu
au soleil" of her. She fumbled slowly with her purse, partly because her
sex do not burn to pay debts of honour, partly to admire the play of
her little knuckles peeping between their soft white cushions. Denys
proposed a compromise.

"Three silver franks I win of you, fair hostess. Give me now three
kisses of this white hand, and we'll e'en cry quits."

"You are malapert," said the lady, with a toss of her head; "besides,
they are so dirty. See! they are like ink!" and to convince him she put
them out to him and turned them up and down. They were no dirtier than
cream fresh from the cob and she knew it: she was eternally washing and
scenting them.

Denys read the objection like the observant warrior he was, seized them
and mumbled them.

Finding him so appreciative of her charm, she said timidly, "Will you do
me a kindness, good soldier?"

"A thousand, fair hostess, an you will."

"Nay, I ask but one. 'Tis to tell thy comrade I was right sorry to lose
his most thrilling story, and I hope he will tell me the rest to-morrow
morning. Meantime I shall not sleep for thinking on't. Wilt tell him
that--to pleasure me?"

"Ay, I'll tell the young savage. But he is not worthy of your
condescension, sweet hostess. He would rather be aside a man than a
woman any day."

"So would--ahem. He is right: the young women of the day are not worthy
of him, 'un tas des mijaurees' He has a good, honest, and right comely
face. Any way, I would not guest of mine should think me unmannerly, not
for all the world. Wilt keep faith with me and tell him?"

"On this fair hand I swear it; and thus I seal the pledge."

"There; no need to melt the wax, though. Now go to bed. And tell him ere
you sleep."

The perverse toad (I thank thee, Manon, for teaching me that word) was
inclined to bestow her slight affections upon Gerard. Not that she was
inflammable: far less so than many that passed for prudes in the town.
But Gerard possessed a triple attraction that has ensnared coquettes in
all ages. 1. He was very handsome. 2. He did not admire her the least.
3. He had given her a good slap in the face.

Denys woke Gerard and gave the message. Gerard was not enchanted "Dost
wake a tired man to tell him that? Am I to be pestered with 'mijaurees'
by night as well as day?"

"But I tell thee, novice, thou hast conquered her: trust to my
experience: her voice sank to melodious whispers; and the cunning jade
did in a manner bribe me to carry thee her challenge to Love's lists!
for so I read her message."

Denys then, assuming the senior and the man of the world, told Gerard
the time was come to show him how a soldier understood friendship
and camaraderie. Italy was now out of the question. Fate had provided
better; and the blind jade Fortune had smiled on merit for once. "The
Head of Gold" had been a prosperous inn, would be again with a man at
its head. A good general laid far-sighted plans; but was always ready
to abandon them, should some brilliant advantage offer, and to reap
the full harvest of the unforeseen: 'twas chiefly by this trait great
leaders defeated little ones; for these latter could do nothing not cut
and dried beforehand.

"Sorry friendship, that would marry me to a mijauree," interposed
Gerard, yawning.

"Comrade, be reasonable; 'tis not the friskiest sheep that falls down
the cliff. All creatures must have their fling soon, or late; and why
not a woman? What more frivolous than a kitten? what graver than a cat?"

"Hast a good eye for nature, Denys," said Gerard, "that I proclaim.

"A better for thine interest, boy. Trust then to me; these little doves
they are my study day and night; happy the man whose wife taketh her
fling before wedlock, and who trippeth up the altar-steps instead of
down 'em. Marriage it always changeth them for better or else for worse.
Why, Gerard, she is honest when all is done; and he is no man, nor half
a man, that cannot mould any honest lass like a bit of warm wax, and she
aye aside him at bed and board. I tell thee in one month thou wilt make
of this coquette the matron the most sober in the town, and of all
its wives the one most docile and submissive. Why, she is half tamed
already. Nine in ten meek and mild ones had gently hated thee like
poison all their lives, for wounding of their hidden pride. But she for
an affront proffers affection. By Joshua his bugle a generous lass, and
void of petty malice. When thou wast gone she sat a-thinking and spoke
not. A sure sign of love in one of her sex: for of all things else
they speak ere they think. Also her voice did sink exceeding low in
discoursing of thee, and murmured sweetly; another infallible sign. The
bolt hath struck and rankles in her; oh, be joyful! Art silent? I
see; 'tis settled. I shall go alone to Remiremont, alone and sad. But,
pillage and poleaxes! what care I for that, since my dear comrade will
stay here, landlord of the 'Tete d'Or,' and safe from all the storms
of life? Wilt think of me, Gerard, now and then by thy warm fire, of me
camped on some windy heath, or lying in wet trenches, or wounded on
the field and far from comfort? Nay!" and this he said in a manner truly
noble, "not comfortless or cold, or wet, or bleeding, 'twill still warm
my heart to lie on my back and think that I have placed my dear friend
and comrade true in the 'Tete d'Or,' far from a soldier's ills."

"I let you run on, dear Denys," said Gerard softly, "because at each
word you show me the treasure of a good heart. But now bethink thee, my
troth is plighted there where my heart it clingeth. You so leal, would
you make me disloyal?"

"Perdition seize me, but I forgot that," said Denys.

"No more then, but hie thee to bed, good Denys. Next to Margaret I love
thee best on earth, and value thy 'coeur d'or' far more than a dozen
of these 'Tetes d'Or.' So prithee call me at the first blush of
rosy-fingered morn, and let's away ere the woman with the hands be
stirring."

They rose with the dawn, and broke their fast by the kitchen fire.

Denys inquired of the girl whether the mistress was about.

"Nay; but she hath risen from her bed: by the same token I am carrying
her this to clean her withal;" and she filled a jug with boiling water,
and took it upstairs.

"Behold," said Gerard, "the very elements must be warmed to suit her
skin; what had the saints said, which still chose the coldest pool?
Away, ere she come down and catch us."

They paid the score, and left the "Tete d'Or," while its mistress was
washing her hands.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

Outside the town they found the snow fresh trampled by innumerable
wolves every foot of the road.

"We did well to take the old man's advice, Denys."

"Ay did we. For now I think on't, I did hear them last night scurrying
under our window, and howling and whining for man's flesh in yon
market-place. But no fat burgher did pity the poor vagabones, and drop
out o' window."

Gerard smiled, but with an air of abstraction. And they plodded on in
silence.

"What dost meditate so profoundly?"

"Thy goodness."

Denys was anything but pleased at this answer. Amongst his oddities you
may have observed that he could stand a great deal of real impertinence;
he was so good-humoured. But would fire up now and then where not even
the shadow of a ground for anger existed.

"A civil question merits a civil reply," said he very drily.

"Alas, I meant no other," said Gerard.

"Then why pretend you were thinking of my goodness, when you know I have
no goodness under my skin?"

"Had another said this, I had answered, 'Thou liest.' But to thee I say,
'Hast no eye for men's qualities, but only for women's.' And once more I
do defy thy unreasonable choler, and say I was thinking on thy goodness
of overnight. Wouldst have wedded me to the 'Tete d'Or' or rather to the
'tete de veau doree,' and left thyself solitary."

"Oh, are ye there, lad?" said Denys, recovering his good humour in a
moment. "Well, but to speak sooth, I meant that not for goodness; but
for friendship and true fellowship, no more. And let me tell you, my
young master, my conscience it pricketh me even now for letting you turn
your back thus on fortune and peaceful days. A truer friend than I had
ta'en and somewhat hamstrung thee. Then hadst thou been fain to lie
smarting at the 'Tete d'Or' a month or so; yon skittish lass had nursed
thee tenderly, and all had been well. Blade I had in hand to do't, but
remembering how thou hatest pain, though it be but a scratch, my craven
heart it failed me at the pinch." And Denys wore a look of humble
apology for his lack of virtuous resolution when the path of duty lay so
clear.

Gerard raised his eyebrows with astonishment at this monstrous but
thoroughly characteristic revelation; however, this new and delicate
point of friendship was never discussed; viz., whether one ought in
all love to cut the tendon Achilles of one's friend. For an incident
interposed.

"Here cometh one in our rear a-riding on his neighbour's mule," shouted
Denys.

Gerard turned round. "And how know ye 'tis not his own, pray?"

"Oh, blind! Because he rides it with no discretion."

And in truth the man came galloping like a fury. But what astonished the
friends most was that on reaching them the rustic rider's eyes opened
saucer-like, and he drew the rein so suddenly and powerfully, that the
mule stuck out her fore-legs, and went sliding between the pedestrians
like a four-legged table on castors.

"I trow ye are from the 'Tete d'Or?'" They assented. "Which of ye is the
younger?"

"He that was born the later," said Denys, winking at his companion.

"Gramercy for the news."

"Come, divine then!"

"And shall. Thy beard is ripe, thy fellow's is green; he shall be the
younger; here, youngster." And he held him out a paper packet. "Ye left
this at the 'Tete d'Or,' and our mistress sends it ye."

"Nay, good fellow, methinks I left nought." And Gerard felt his pouch.
etc.

"Would ye make our burgess a liar," said the rustic reproachfully; "and
shall I have no pourboire?" (still more reproachfully); "and came ventre
a terre."

"Nay, thou shalt have pourboire," and he gave him a small coin.

"A la bonne heure," cried the clown, and his features beamed with
disproportionate joy. "The Virgin go with ye; come up, Jenny!" and back
he went "stomach to earth," as his nation is pleased to call it.

Gerard undid the packet; it was about six inches square, and inside it
he found another packet, which contained a packet, and so on. At the
fourth he hurled the whole thing into the snow. Denys took it out
and rebuked his petulance. He excused himself on the ground of hating
affectation.

Denys attested, "'The great toe of the little daughter of Herodias'
there was no affectation here, but only woman's good wit. Doubtless the
wraps contained something which out of delicacy, or her sex's lovely
cunning, she would not her hind should see her bestow on a young man;
thy garter, to wit."

"I wear none."

"Her own then; or a lock of her hair. What is this? A piece of raw silk
fresh from the worm. Well, of all the love tokens!"

"Now who but thee ever dreamed that she is so naught as send me love
tokens? I saw no harm in her--barring her hands."

"Stay, here is something hard lurking in this soft nest. Come forth, I
say, little nestling! Saints and pikestaves! look at this!"

It was a gold ring with a great amethyst glowing and sparkling, full
coloured, but pure as crystal.

"How lovely!" said Gerard innocently.

"And here is something writ; read it thou! I read not so glib as some,
when I know not the matter beforehand."

Gerard took the paper. "'Tis a posy, and fairly enough writ." He read
the lines, blushing like a girl. They were very naive, and may be thus
Englished:--

     'Youth, with thee my heart is fledde,
     Come back to the 'golden Hedde!'
     Wilt not? yet this token keepe
     Of hir who doeth thy goeing weepe.
     Gyf the world prove harsh and cold,
     Come back to 'the Hedde of gold.'"

"The little dove!" purred Denys.

"The great owl! To go and risk her good name thus. However, thank Heaven
she has played this prank with an honest lad that will ne'er expose her
folly. But oh, the perverseness! Could she not bestow her nauseousness
on thee?" Denys sighed and shrugged. "On thee that art as ripe for folly
as herself?"

Denys confessed that his young friend had harped his very thought. 'Twas
passing strange to him that a damsel with eyes in her head should pass
by a man, and bestow her affections on a boy. Still he could not but
recognize in this the bounty of Nature. Boys were human beings after
all, and but for this occasional caprice of women, their lot would be
too terrible; they would be out of the sun altogether, blighted, and
never come to anything; since only the fair could make a man out of
such unpromising materials as a boy. Gerard interrupted this flattering
discourse to beg the warrior-philosopher's acceptance of the lady's
ring. He refused it flatly, and insisted on Gerard going back to the
"Tete d'Or" at once, ring and all, like a man, and not letting a poor
girl hold out her arms to him in vain.

"Her hands, you mean."

"Her hand, with the 'Tete d'Or' in it."

Failing in this, he was for putting the ring on his friend's finger.
Gerard declined. "I wear a ring already."

"What, that sorry gimcrack? why, 'tis pewter, or tin at best: and this
virgin gold, forbye the jewel."

"Ay, but 'twas Margaret gave me this one; and I value it above rubies.
I'll neither part with it nor give it a rival," and he kissed the base
metal, and bade it fear nought.

"I see the owl hath sent her ring to a goose," said Denys sorrowfully.
However, he prevailed on Gerard to fasten it inside his bonnet. To this,
indeed, the lad consented very readily. For sovereign qualities were
universally ascribed to certain jewels; and the amethyst ranked high
among these precious talismans.

When this was disposed of, Gerard earnestly requested his friend to let
the matter drop, since speaking of the other sex to him made him pine
so for Margaret, and almost unmanned him with the thought that each step
was taking him farther from her. "I am no general lover, Denys. There is
room in my heart for one sweetheart, and for one friend. I am far from
my dear mistress; and my friend, a few leagues more, and I must lose him
too. Oh, let me drink thy friendship pure while I may, and not dilute
with any of these stupid females."

"And shalt, honey-pot, and shalt," said Denys kindly'. "But as to
my leaving thee at Remiremont, reckon thou not on that! For" (three
consecutive oaths) "if I do. Nay, I shall propose to thee to stay
forty-eight hours there, while I kiss my mother and sisters, and the
females generally, and on go you and I together to the sea."

"Denys! Denys!"

"Denys nor me! 'Tis settled. Gainsay me not! or I'll go with thee
to Rome. Why not? his Holiness the Pope hath ever some little merry
pleasant war toward, and a Burgundian soldier is still welcome in his
ranks."

On this Gerard opened his heart. "Denys, ere I fell in with thee, I used
often to halt on the road, unable to go farther: my puny heart so pulled
me back: and then, after a short prayer to the saints for aid, would I
rise and drag my most unwilling body onward. But since I joined company
with thee, great is my courage. I have found the saying of the
ancients true, that better is a bright comrade on the weary road than
a horse-litter; and, dear brother, when I do think of what we have done
and suffered together! Savedst my life from the bear, and from yet
more savage thieves; and even poor I did make shift to draw thee out
of Rhine, and somehow loved thee double from that hour. How many ties
tender and strong between us! Had I my will, I'd never, never, never,
never part with my Denys on this side the grave. Well-a-day! God His
will be done.

"No, my will shall be done this time," shouted Denys. "Le bon Dieu has
bigger fish to fry than you or me. I'll go with thee to Rome. There is
my hand on it."

"Think what, you say! 'Tis impossible. 'Tis too selfish of me."

"I tell thee, 'tis settled. No power can change me. At Remiremont I
borrow ten pieces of my uncle, and on we go; 'tis fixed."

They shook hands over it. Then Gerard said nothing, for his heart was
too full; but he ran twice round his companion as he walked, then danced
backwards in front of him, and finally took his hand, and so on they
went hand in hand like sweethearts, till a company of mounted soldiers,
about fifty in number, rose to sight on the brow of a hill.

"See the banner of Burgundy," said Denys joyfully; "I shall look out for
a comrade among these."

"How gorgeous is the standard in the sun," said Gerard "and how brave
are the leaders with velvet and feathers, and steel breastplates like
glassy mirrors!"

When they came near enough to distinguish faces, Denys uttered an
exclamation: "Why, 'tis the Bastard of Burgundy, as I live. Nay, then;
there is fighting a-foot since he is out; a gallant leader, Gerard,
rates his life no higher than a private soldier's, and a soldier's no
higher than a tomtit's; and that is the captain for me."

"And see, Denys, the very mules with their great brass frontlets and
trappings seem proud to carry them; no wonder men itch to be soldiers;"
and in the midst of this innocent admiration the troop came up with
them.

"Halt!" cried a stentorian voice. The troop halted. The Bastard of
Burgundy bent his brow gloomily on Denys: "How now, arbalestrier, how
comes it thy face is turned southward, when every good hand and heart is
hurrying northward?"

Denys replied respectfully that he was going on leave, after some years
of service, to see his kindred at Remiremont.

"Good. But this is not the time for't; the duchy is disturbed. Ho! bring
that dead soldier's mule to the front; and thou mount her and forward
with us to Flanders."

"So please your highness," said Denys firmly, "that may not be. My home
is close at hand. I have not seen it these three years; and above all, I
have this poor youth in charge, whom I may not, cannot leave, till I see
him shipped for Rome.

"Dost bandy words with me?" said the chief, with amazement, turning fast
to wrath. "Art weary o' thy life? Let go the youth's hand, and into the
saddle without more idle words."

Denys made no reply; but he held Gerard's hand the tighter, and looked
defiance.

At this the bastard roared, "Jarnac, dismount six of thy archers, and
shoot me this white-livered cur dead where he stands--for an example."

The young Count de Jarnac, second in command, gave the order, and the
men dismounted to execute it.

"Strip him naked," said the bastard, in the cold tone of military
business, "and put his arms and accoutrements on the spare mule We'll
maybe find some clown worthier to wear them."

Denys groaned aloud, "Am I to be shamed as well as slain?"

"Oh, nay! nay! nay!" cried Gerard, awaking from the stupor into which
this thunderbolt of tyranny had thrown him. "He shall go with you on the
instant. I'd liever part with him for ever than see a hair of his dear
head harmed Oh, sir, oh, my lord, give a poor boy but a minute to bid
his only friend farewell! he will go with you. I swear he shall go with
you."

The stern leader nodded a cold contemptuous assent. "Thou, Jarnac, stay
with them, and bring him on alive or dead. Forward!" And he resumed his
march, followed by all the band but the young count and six archers, one
of whom held the spare mule.

Denys and Gerard gazed at one another haggardly. Oh, what a look!

And after this mute interchange of anguish, they spoke hurriedly, for
the moments were flying by.

"Thou goest to Holland: thou knowest where she bides. Tell her all. She
will be kind to thee for my sake."

"Oh, sorry tale that I shall carry her! For God's sake, go back to the
'Tete d'Or.' I am mad!"

"Hush! Let me think: have I nought to say to thee, Denys? my head! my
head!"

"Ah! I have it. Make for the Rhine, Gerard! Strasbourg. 'Tis but a step.
And down the current to Rotterdam. Margaret is there: I go thither. I'll
tell her thou art coming. We shall all be together."

"My lads, haste ye, or you will get us into trouble," said the count
firmly, but not harshly now.

"Oh, sir, one moment! one little moment!" panted Gerard.

"Cursed be the land I 'was born in! cursed be the race of man! and he
that made them what they are!" screamed Denys.

"Hush, Denys, hush! blaspheme not! Oh, God forgive him, he wots not what
he says. Be patient, Denys, be patient: though we meet no more on earth,
let us meet in a better world, where no blasphemer may enter. To my
heart, lost friend; for what are words now?" He held out his arms, and
they locked one another in a close embrace. They kissed one another
again and again, speechless, and the tears rained down their cheeks And
the Count Jarnac looked on amazed, but the rougher soldiers, to whom
comrade was a sacred name, looked on with some pity in their hard
faces. Then at a signal from Jarnac, with kind force and words of rude
consolation, they almost lifted Denys on to the mule; and putting him
in the middle of them, spurred after their leader. And Gerard ran wildly
after (for the lane turned), to see the very last of him; and the last
glimpse he caught, Denys was rocking to and fro on his mule, and tearing
his hair out. But at this sight something rose in Gerard's throat so
high, so high, he could run no more nor breathe, but gasped, and leaned
against the snow-clad hedge, seizing it, and choking piteously.

The thorns ran into his hand.

After a bitter struggle he got his breath again; and now began to see
his own misfortune. Yet not all at once to realize it, so sudden and
numbing was the stroke. He staggered on, but scarce feeling or caring
whither he was going; and every now and then he stopped, and his arms
fell and his head sank on his chest, and he stood motionless: then he
said to himself, "Can this thing be? this must be a dream. 'Tis scarce
five minutes since we were so happy, walking handed, faring to Rome
together, and we admired them and their gay banners and helmets oh
hearts of hell!"

All nature seemed to stare now as lonely as himself. Not a creature in
sight. No colour but white. He, the ghost of his former self, wandered
alone among the ghosts of trees, and fields, and hedges. Desolate!
desolate! desolate! All was desolate.

He knelt and gathered a little snow. "Nay, I dream not; for this is
snow: cold as the world's heart. It is bloody, too: what may that
mean? Fool! 'tis from thy hand. I mind not the wound Ay, I see: thorns.
Welcome! kindly foes: I felt ye not, ye ran not into my heart. Ye are
not cruel like men."

He had risen, and was dragging his leaden limbs along, when he heard
horses' feet and gay voices behind him. He turned with a joyful but wild
hope that the soldiers had relented and were bringing Denys back. But
no, it was a gay cavalcade. A gentleman of rank and his favourites in
velvet and furs and feathers; and four or five armed retainers in buff
jerkins.

They swept gaily by.

Gerard never looked at them after they were gone by: certain gay shadows
had come and passed; that was all. He was like one in a dream. But he
was rudely wakened; suddenly a voice in front of him cried harshly,
"Stand and deliver!" and there were three of the gentleman's servants in
front of him. They had ridden back to rob him.

"How, ye false knaves," said he, quite calmly; "would ye shame your
noble master? He will hang ye to the nearest tree;" and with these words
he drew his sword doggedly, and set his back to the hedge.

One of the men instantly levelled his petronel at him.

But another, less sanguinary, interposed. "Be not so hasty! And be not
thou so mad! Look yonder!"

Gerard looked, and scarce a hundred yards off the nobleman and his
friends had halted, and sat on their horses, looking at the lawless
act, too proud to do their own dirty work, but not too proud to reap
the fruit, and watch lest their agents should rob them of another man's
money.

The milder servant then, a good-natured fellow, showed Gerard resistance
was vain; reminded him common thieves often took the life as well as the
purse, and assured him it cost a mint to be a gentleman; his master had
lost money at play overnight, and was going to visit his leman, and so
must take money where he saw it.

"Therefore, good youth, consider that we rob not for ourselves, and
deliver us that fat purse at thy girdle without more ado, nor put us to
the pain of slitting thy throat and taking it all the same."

"This knave is right," said Gerard calmly aloud but to himself. "I
ought not to fling away my life; Margaret would be so sorry. Take then
the poor man's purse to the rich man's pouch; and with it this; tell
him, I pray the Holy Trinity each coin in it may burn his hand, and
freeze his heart, and blast his soul for ever. Begone and leave me to my
sorrow!" He flung them the purse.

They rode away muttering; for his words pricked them a little; a very
little: and he staggered on, penniless now as well as friendless, till
he came to the edge of a wood. Then, though his heart could hardly feel
this second blow, his judgment did; and he began to ask himself what was
the use going further? He sat down on the hard road, and ran his nails
into his hair, and tried to think for the best; a task all the more
difficult that a strange drowsiness was stealing over him. Rome he could
never reach without money. Denys had said, "Go to Strasbourg, and down
the Rhine home." He would obey Denys. But how to get to Strasbourg
without money?

Then suddenly seemed to ring in his ears--

     "Gyf the world prove harsh and cold,
     Come back to the hedde of gold."

"And if I do I must go as her servant; I who am Margaret's. I am
a-weary, a-weary. I will sleep, and dream all is as it was. Ah me, how
happy were we an hour agone, we little knew how happy. There is a house:
the owner well-to-do. What if I told him my wrong, and prayed his aid
to retrieve my purse, and so to Rhine? Fool! is he not a man, like the
rest? He would scorn me and trample me lower. Denys cursed the race of
men. That will I never; but oh, I begin to loathe and dread them. Nay,
here will I lie till sunset: then darkling creep into this rich man's
barn, and take by stealth a draught of milk or a handful o' grain, to
keep body and soul together. God, who hath seen the rich rob me, will
peradventure forgive me. They say 'tis ill sleeping on the snow. Death
steals on such sleepers with muffled feet and honey breath. But what can
I? I am a-weary, a-weary. Shall this be the wood where lie the wolves
yon old man spoke of? I must e'en trust them: they are not men; and I am
so a-weary."

He crawled to the roadside, and stretched out his limbs on the snow,
with a deep sigh.

"Ah, tear not thine hair so! teareth my heart to see thee."

"Margaret. Never see me more. Poor Margaret."

And the too tender heart was still.

And the constant lover, and friend of antique mould, lay silent on the
snow; in peril from the weather, in peril from wild beasts, in peril
from hunger, friendless and penniless in a strange land, and not halfway
to Rome.



CHAPTER XXXIX

Rude travel is enticing to us English. And so are its records; even
though the adventurer be no pilgrim of love. And antique friendship has
at least the interest of a fossil. Still, as the true centre of this
story is in Holland, it is full time to return thither, and to those
ordinary personages and incidents whereof life has been mainly composed
in all ages.

Jorian Ketel came to Peter's house to claim Margaret's promise; but
Margaret was ill in bed, and Peter, on hearing his errand, affronted him
and warned him off the premises, and one or two that stood by were for
ducking him; for both father and daughter were favourites, and the
whole story was in every mouth, and Sevenbergens in that state of hot,
undiscriminating irritation which accompanies popular sympathy.

So Jorian Ketel went off in dudgeon, and repented him of his good deed.
This sort of penitence is not rare, and has the merit of being sincere.
Dierich Brower, who was discovered at "The Three Kings," making a
chatterbox drunk in order to worm out of him the whereabouts of Martin
Wittenhaagen, was actually taken and flung into a horsepond, and
threatened with worse usage, should he ever show his face in the burgh
again; and finally, municipal jealousy being roused, the burgomaster
of Sevenbergen sent a formal missive to the burgomaster of Tergou,
reminding him he had overstepped the law, and requesting him to apply to
the authorities of Sevenbergen on any future occasion when he might have
a complaint, real or imaginary, against any of its townsfolk.

The wily Ghysbrecht, suppressing his rage at this remonstrance,
sent back a civil message to say that the person he had followed to
Sevenbergen was a Tergovian, one Gerard, and that he had stolen the town
records: that Gerard having escaped into foreign parts, and probably
taken the documents with him, the whole matter was at an end.

Thus he made a virtue of necessity. But in reality his calmness was but
a veil: baffled at Sevenbergen, he turned his views elsewhere he set his
emissaries to learn from the family at Tergou whither Gerard had fled,
and "to his infinite surprise" they did not know. This added to
his uneasiness. It made him fear Gerard was only lurking in the
neighbourhood: he would make a certain discovery, and would come back
and take a terrible revenge. From this time Dierich and others that were
about him noticed a change for the worse in Ghysbrecht Van Swieten. He
became a moody irritable man. A dread lay on him. His eyes cast furtive
glances, like one who expects a blow, and knows not from what quarter
it is to come. Making others wretched had not made him happy. It seldom
does.

The little family at Tergou, which, but for his violent interference,
might in time have cemented its difference without banishing spem gregis
to a distant land, wore still the same outward features, but within was
no longer the simple happy family this tale opened with. Little Kate
knew the share Cornelis and Sybrandt had in banishing Gerard, and
though, for fear of making more mischief still, she never told her
mother, yet there were times she shuddered at the bare sight of them,
and blushed at their hypocritical regrets. Catherine, with a woman's
vigilance, noticed this, and with a woman's subtlety said nothing, but
quietly pondered it, and went on watching for more. The black sheep
themselves, in their efforts to partake in the general gloom and sorrow,
succeeded so far as to impose upon their father and Giles: but the
demure satisfaction that lay at their bottom could not escape these
feminine eyes--

"That, noting all, seem nought to note."

Thus mistrust and suspicion sat at the table, poor substitutes for
Gerard's intelligent face, that had brightened the whole circle,
unobserved till it was gone. As for the old hosier his pride had been
wounded by his son's disobedience, and so he bore stiffly up, and did
his best never to mention Gerard's name; but underneath his Spartan
cloak, Nature might be seen tugging at his heart-strings. One anxiety he
never affected to conceal. "If I but knew where the boy is, and that his
life and health are in no danger, small would be my care," would he say;
and then a deep sigh would follow. I cannot help thinking that if Gerard
had opened the door just then, and walked in, there would have been many
tears and embraces for him, and few reproaches, or none.

One thing took the old couple quite by surprise--publicity. Ere Gerard
had been gone a week, his adventures were in every mouth; and to make
matters worse, the popular sympathy declared itself warmly on the side
of the lovers, and against Gerard's cruel parents, and that old busybody
the burgomaster, who must put his nose into a business that nowise
concerned him.

"Mother," said Kate, "it is all over the town that Margaret is down with
a fever--a burning fever; her father fears her sadly."

"Margaret? what Margaret?" inquired Catherine, with a treacherous
assumption of calmness and indifference.

"Oh, mother! whom should I mean? Why, Gerard's Margaret."

"Gerard's Margaret," screamed Catherine; "how dare you say such a word
to me? And I rede you never mention that hussy's name in this house,
that she has laid bare. She is the ruin of my poor boy, the flower of
all my flock. She is the cause that he is not a holy priest in the midst
of us, but is roaming the world, and I a desolate broken-hearted mother.
There, do not cry, my girl, I do ill to speak harsh to you. But oh,
Kate! you know not what passes in a mother's heart. I bear up before
you all; it behoves me swallow my fears; but at night I see him in my
dreams, and still some trouble or other near him: sometimes he is torn
by wild beasts; other times he is in the hands of robbers, and their
cruel knives uplifted to strike his poor pale face, that one should
think would move a stone. Oh! when I remember that, while I sit here
in comfort, perhaps my poor boy lies dead in some savage place, and all
along of that girl: there, her very name is ratsbane to me. I tremble
all over when I hear it."

"I'll not say anything, nor do anything to grieve you worse, mother,"
said Kate tenderly; but she sighed.

She whose name was so fiercely interdicted in this house was much spoken
of, and even pitied elsewhere. All Sevenbergen was sorry for her, and
the young men and maidens cast many a pitying glance, as they passed, at
the little window where the beauty of the village lay "dying for love."
In this familiar phrase they underrated her spirit and unselfishness.
Gerard was not dead, and she was too loyal herself to doubt his
constancy. Her father was dear to her and helpless; and but for bodily
weakness, all her love for Gerard would not have kept her from doing
her duties, though she might have gone about them with drooping head and
heavy heart. But physical and mental excitement had brought on an attack
of fever so violent, that nothing but youth and constitution saved
her. The malady left her at last, but in that terrible state of bodily
weakness in which the patient feels life a burden.

Then it is that love and friendship by the bedside are mortal angels
with comfort in their voice, and healing in their palms.

But this poor girl had to come back to life and vigour how she could.
Many days she lay alone, and the heavy hours rolled like leaden waves
over her. In her enfeebled state existence seemed a burden, and life a
thing gone by. She could not try her best to get well. Gerard was gone.
She had not him to get well for. Often she lay for hours quite still,
with the tears welling gently out of her eyes.

One day, waking from an uneasy slumber, she found two women in her room,
One was a servant, the other by the deep fur on her collar and sleeves
was a person of consideration: a narrow band of silvery hair, being
spared by her coiffure, showed her to be past the age when women of
sense concealed their years. The looks of both were kind and friendly.
Margaret tried to raise herself in the bed, but the old lady placed a
hand very gently on her.

"Lie still, sweetheart; we come not here to put you about, but to
comfort you, God willing. Now cheer up a bit, and tell us, first, who
think you we are?"

"Nay, madam, I know you, though I never saw you before: you are the
demoiselle Van Eyck, and this is Reicht Heynes. Gerard has oft spoken of
you, and of your goodness to him. Madam, he has no friend like you near
him now," and at this thought she lay back, and the tears welled out of
her eyes in a moment.

The good-natured Reicht Heynes began to cry for company; but her
mistress scolded her. "Well, you are a pretty one for a sick-room," said
she; and she put out a world of innocent art to cheer the patient; and
not without some little success. An old woman, that has seen life and
all its troubles, is a sovereign blessing by a sorrowful young woman's
side. She knows what to say, and what to avoid. She knows how to soothe
her and interest her. Ere she had been there an hour, she had Margaret's
head lying on her shoulder instead of on the pillow, and Margaret's soft
eyes dwelling on her with gentle gratitude.

"Ah! this is hair," said the old lady, running her fingers through it.
"Come and look at it, Reicht!"

Reicht came and handled it, and praised it unaffectedly. The poor
girl that owned it was not quite out of the reach of flattery; owing
doubtless to not being dead.

"In sooth, madam, I did use to think it hideous; but he praised it, and
ever since then I have been almost vain of it, saints forgive me. You
know how foolish those are that love."

"They are greater fools that don't," said the old lady, sharply.

Margaret opened her lovely eyes, and looked at her for her meaning.

This was only the first of many visits. In fact either Margaret Van Eyck
or Reicht came nearly every day until their patient was convalescent;
and she improved rapidly under their hands. Reicht attributed this
principally to certain nourishing dishes she prepared in Peter's
kitchen; but Margaret herself thought more of the kind words and eyes
that kept telling her she had friends to live for.


Martin Wittenhaagen went straight to Rotterdam, to take the bull by the
horns. The bull was a biped, with a crown for horns. It was Philip
the Good, duke of this, earl of that, lord of the other. Arrived at
Rotterdam, Martin found the court was at Ghent. To Ghent he went, and
sought an audience, but was put off and baffled by lackeys and pages. So
he threw himself in his sovereign's way out hunting, and contrary to
all court precedents, commenced the conversation--by roaring lustily for
mercy.

"Why, where is the peril, man?" said the duke, looking all round and
laughing.

"Grace for an old soldier hunted down by burghers!"

Now kings differ in character like other folk; but there is one trait
they have in common; they are mightily inclined to be affable to men
of very low estate. These do not vie with them in anything whatever,
so jealousy cannot creep in; and they amuse them by their bluntness and
novelty, and refresh the poor things with a touch of nature--a rarity in
courts. So Philip the Good reined in his horse and gave Martin almost a
tete-a-tete, and Martin reminded him of a certain battlefield where he
had received an arrow intended for his sovereign. The duke remembered
the incident perfectly, and was graciously pleased to take a cheerful
view of it. He could afford to, not having been the one hit. Then
Martin told his majesty of Gerard's first capture in the church, his
imprisonment in the tower, and the manoeuvre by which they got him out,
and all the details of the hunt; and whether he told it better than
I have, or the duke had not heard so many good stories as you have,
certain it is that sovereign got so wrapt up in it, that, when a number
of courtiers came galloping up and interrupted Martin, he swore like
a costermonger, and threatened, only half in jest, to cut off the next
head that should come between him and a good story; and when Martin had
done, he cried out--

"St. Luke! what sport goeth on in this mine earldom, ay! in my own
woods, and I see it not. You base fellows have all the luck." And he
was indignant at the partiality of Fortune. "Lo you now! this was a
man-hunt," said he. "I never had the luck to be at a man-hunt."

"My luck was none so great," replied Martin bluntly: "I was on the wrong
side of the dogs' noses."

"Ah! so you were; I forgot that." And royalty was more reconciled to its
lot. "What would you then?"

"A free pardon, your highness, for myself and Gerard."

"For what?"

"For prison-breaking."

"Go to; the bird will fly from the cage. 'Tis instinct. Besides, coop a
young man up for loving a young woman? These burgomasters must be void
of common sense. What else?"

"For striking down the burgomaster."

"Oh, the hunted boar will turn to bay. 'Tis his right; and I hold him
less than man that grudges it him. What else?"

"For killing of the bloodhounds."

The duke's countenance fell.

"'Twas their life or mine," said Martin eagerly.

"Ay! but I can't have, my bloodhounds, my beautiful bloodhounds,
sacrificed to--

"No, no, no! They were not your dogs."

"Whose dogs, then?"

"The ranger's."

"Oh. Well, I am very sorry for him, but as I was saying I can't have
my old soldiers sacrificed to his bloodhounds. Thou shalt have thy free
pardon."

"And poor Gerard."

"And poor Gerard too, for thy sake. And more, tell thou this burgomaster
his doings mislike me: this is to set up for a king, not a burgomaster.
I'll have no kings in Holland but one. Bid him be more humble; or by St.
Jude I'll hang him before his own door, as I hanged the burgomaster
of what's the name, some town or other in Flanders it was; no, 'twas'
somewhere in Brabant--no matter--I hanged him, I remember that much--for
oppressing poor folk."

The duke then beckoned his chancellor, a pursy old fellow that rode like
a sack, and bade him write out a free pardon for Martin and one Gerard.

This precious document was drawn up in form, and signed next day, and
Martin hastened home with it.

Margaret had left her bed some days, and was sitting pale and pensive
by the fireside, when he burst in, waving the parchment, and crying, "A
free pardon, girl, for Gerard as well as me! Send for him back when you
will; all the burgomasters on earth daren't lay a finger on him."

She flushed all over with joy and her hands trembled with eagerness
as she took the parchment and devoured it with her eyes, and kissed it
again and again, and flung her arms round Martin's neck, and kissed him.
When she was calmer, she told him Heaven had raised her up a friend in
the dame Van Eyck. "And I would fain consult her on this good news; but
I have not strength to walk so far."

"What need to walk? There is my mule."

"Your mule, Martin?"

The old soldier or professional pillager laughed, and confessed he
had got so used to her, that he forgot at times Ghysbrecht had a prior
claim. To-morrow he would turn her into the burgomaster's yard, but
to-night she should carry Margaret to Tergou.

It was nearly dusk; so Margaret ventured, and about seven in the evening
she astonished and gladdened her new but ardent friend, by arriving at
her house with unwonted roses on her cheeks, and Gerard's pardon in her
bosom.



CHAPTER XL

Some are old in heart at forty, some are young at eighty. Margaret
Van Eyck's heart was an evergreen. She loved her young namesake with
youthful ardour. Nor was this new sentiment a mere caprice; she was
quick at reading character, and saw in Margaret Brandt that which in
one of her own sex goes far with an intelligent woman; genuineness. But,
besides her own sterling qualities, Margaret had from the first a potent
ally in the old artist's bosom.

Human nature.

Strange as it may appear to the unobservant, our hearts warm more
readily to those we have benefited than to our benefactors. Some of the
Greek philosophers noticed this; but the British Homer has stamped it in
immortal lines:--

     "I heard, and thought how side by side
     We two had stemmed the battle's tide
     In many a well-debated field,
     Where Bertram's breast was Philip's shield.
     I thought on Darien's deserts pale,
     Where Death bestrides the evening gale,
     How o'er my friend my cloak I threw,
     And fenceless faced the deadly dew.
     I thought on Quariana's cliff,
     Where, rescued from our foundering skiff,
     Through the white breakers' wrath I bore
     Exhausted Bertram to the shore:
     And when his side an arrow found,
     I sucked the Indian's venom'd wound.
     These thoughts like torrents rushed along
     To sweep away my purpose strong."

Observe! this assassin's hand is stayed by memory, not of benefits
received, but benefits conferred.

Now Margaret Van Eyck had been wonderfully kind to Margaret Brandt; had
broken through her own habits to go and see her; had nursed her, and
soothed her, and petted her, and cured her more than all the medicine in
the world. So her heart opened to the recipient of her goodness, and she
loved her now far more tenderly than she had ever loved Gerard, though,
in truth, it was purely out of regard for Gerard she had visited her in
the first instance.

When, therefore, she saw the roses on Margaret's cheek, and read the
bit of parchment that had brought them there, she gave up her own views
without a murmur.

"Sweetheart," said she, "I did desire he should stay in Italy five
or six years, and come back rich, and above all, an artist. But your
happiness is before all, and I see you cannot live without him, so we
must have him home as fast as may be."

"Ah, madam! you see my very thoughts." And the young woman hung her head
a moment and blushed. "But how to let him know, madam? That passes my
skill. He is gone to Italy; but what part I know not. Stay! he named the
cities he should visit. Florence was one, and Rome." But then--Finally,
being a sensible girl, she divined that a letter, addressed, "My
Gerard--Italy," might chance to miscarry, and she looked imploringly at
her friend for counsel.

"You are come to the right place, and at the right time," said the old
lady. "Here was this Hans Memling with me to-day; he is going to Italy,
girl, no later than next week, 'to improve his hand,' he says. Not
before 'twas needed, I do assure you."

"But how is he to find my Gerard?"

"Why, he knows your Gerard, child. They have supped here more than
once, and were like hand and glove. Now, as his business is the same as
Gerard's, he will visit the same places as Gerard, and soon or late he
must fall in with him. Wherefore, get you a long letter written, and
copy out this pardon into it, and I'll answer for the messenger. In six
months at farthest Gerard shall get it; and when he shall get it, then
will he kiss it, and put it in his bosom, and come flying home. What are
you smiling at? And now what makes your cheeks so red? And what you
are smothering me for, I cannot think. Yes! happy days are coming to my
little pearl."

Meantime, Martin sat in the kitchen, with the black-jack before him and
Reicht Heynes spinning beside him: and, wow! but she pumped him that
night.


This Hans Memling was an old pupil of Jan Van Eyck and his sister. He
was a painter notwithstanding Margaret's sneer, and a good soul enough,
with one fault. He loved the "nipperkin, canakin, and the brown bowl"
more than they deserve. This singular penchant kept him from amassing
fortune, and was the cause that he often came to Margaret Van Eyck for
a meal, and sometimes for a groat. But this gave her a claim on him, and
