of nakir announced that all was ready and the anchor drawn. In the last
boat which left the shore the two commanders sat together in the sheets,
a strange contrast to one another, while under the feet of the rowers
was a litter of huge stones which Sir Nigel had ordered to be carried to
the cog. These once aboard, the ship set her broad mainsail, purple
in color, and with a golden St. Christopher bearing Christ upon his
shoulder in the centre of it. The breeze blew, the sail bellied, over
heeled the portly vessel, and away she plunged through the smooth blue
rollers, amid the clang of the minstrels on her poop and the shouting of
the black crowd who fringed the yellow beach. To the left lay the green
Island of Wight, with its long, low, curving hills peeping over each
other's shoulders to the sky-line; to the right the wooded Hampshire
coast as far as eye could reach; above a steel-blue heaven, with a
wintry sun shimmering down upon them, and enough of frost to set the
breath a-smoking.

"By St. Paul!" said Sir Nigel gayly, as he stood upon the poop and
looked on either side of him, "it is a land which is very well worth
fighting for, and it were pity to go to France for what may be had at
home. Did you not spy a crooked man upon the beach?"

"Nay, I spied nothing," grumbled Sir Oliver, "for I was hurried down
with a clam stuck in my gizzard and an untasted goblet of Cyprus on the
board behind me."

"I saw him, my fair lord," said Terlake, "an old man with one shoulder
higher than the other."

"'Tis a sign of good fortune," quoth Sir Nigel. "Our path was also
crossed by a woman and by a priest, so all should be well with us. What
say you, Edricson?"

"I cannot tell, my fair lord. The Romans of old were a very wise people,
yet, certes, they placed their faith in such matters. So, too, did
the Greeks, and divers other ancient peoples who were famed for their
learning. Yet of the moderns there are many who scoff at all omens."

"There can be no manner of doubt about it," said Sir Oliver Buttesthorn.
"I can well remember that in Navarre one day it thundered on the left
out of a cloudless sky. We knew that ill would come of it, nor had we
long to wait. Only thirteen days after, a haunch of prime venison was
carried from my very tent door by the wolves, and on the same day two
flasks of old vernage turned sour and muddy."

"You may bring my harness from below," said Sir Nigel to his squires,
"and also, I pray you, bring up Sir Oliver's and we shall don it here.
Ye may then see to your own gear; for this day you will, I hope, make a
very honorable entrance into the field of chivalry, and prove yourselves
to be very worthy and valiant squires. And now, Sir Oliver, as to our
dispositions: would it please you that I should order them or will you?"

"You, my cockerel, you. By Our Lady! I am no chicken, but I cannot claim
to know as much of war as the squire of Sir Walter Manny. Settle the
matter to your own liking."

"You shall fly your pennon upon the fore part, then, and I upon the
poop. For foreguard I shall give you your own forty men, with two-score
archers. Two-score men, with my own men-at-arms and squires, will serve
as a poop-guard. Ten archers, with thirty shipmen, under the master, may
hold the waist while ten lie aloft with stones and arbalests. How like
you that?"

"Good, by my faith, good! But here comes my harness, and I must to work,
for I cannot slip into it as I was wont when first I set my face to the
wars."

Meanwhile there had been bustle and preparation in all parts of the
great vessel. The archers stood in groups about the decks, new-stringing
their bows, and testing that they were firm at the nocks. Among them
moved Aylward and other of the older soldiers, with a few whispered
words of precept here and of warning there.

"Stand to it, my hearts of gold," said the old bowman as he passed from
knot to knot. "By my hilt! we are in luck this journey. Bear in mind the
old saying of the Company."

"What is that, Aylward?" cried several, leaning on their bows and
laughing at him.

"'Tis the master-bowyer's rede: 'Every bow well bent. Every shaft well
sent. Every stave well nocked. Every string well locked.' There, with
that jingle in his head, a bracer on his left hand, a shooting glove on
his right, and a farthing's-worth of wax in his girdle, what more doth a
bowman need?"

"It would not be amiss," said Hordle John, "if under his girdle he had
four farthings'-worth of wine."

"Work first, wine afterwards, mon camarade. But it is time that we
took our order, for methinks that between the Needle rocks and the Alum
cliffs yonder I can catch a glimpse of the topmasts of the galleys.
Hewett, Cook, Johnson, Cunningham, your men are of the poop-guard.
Thornbury, Walters, Hackett, Baddlesmere, you are with Sir Oliver on the
forecastle. Simon, you bide with your lord's banner; but ten men must go
forward."

Quietly and promptly the men took their places, lying flat upon their
faces on the deck, for such was Sir Nigel's order. Near the prow was
planted Sir Oliver's spear, with his arms--a boar's head gules upon a
field of gold. Close by the stern stood Black Simon with the pennon of
the house of Loring. In the waist gathered the Southampton mariners,
hairy and burly men, with their jerkins thrown off, their waists braced
tight, swords, mallets, and pole-axes in their hands. Their leader,
Goodwin Hawtayne, stood upon the poop and talked with Sir Nigel, casting
his eye up sometimes at the swelling sail, and then glancing back at the
two seamen who held the tiller.

"Pass the word," said Sir Nigel, "that no man shall stand to arms or
draw his bow-string until my trumpeter shall sound. It would be well
that we should seem to be a merchant-ship from Southampton and appear to
flee from them."

"We shall see them anon," said the master-shipman. "Ha, said I not so?
There they lie, the water-snakes, in Freshwater Bay; and mark the reek
of smoke from yonder point, where they have been at their devil's work.
See how their shallops pull from the land! They have seen us and called
their men aboard. Now they draw upon the anchor. See them like ants upon
the forecastle! They stoop and heave like handy ship men. But, my fair
lord, these are no niefs. I doubt but we have taken in hand more than
we can do. Each of these ships is a galeasse, and of the largest and
swiftest make."

"I would I had your eyes," said Sir Nigel, blinking at the pirate
galleys. "They seem very gallant ships, and I trust that we shall have
much pleasance from our meeting with them. It would be well to pass the
word that we should neither give nor take quarter this day. Have you
perchance a priest or friar aboard this ship, Master Hawtayne?"

"No, my fair lord."

"Well, well, it is no great matter for my Company, for they were all
houseled and shriven ere we left Twynham Castle; and Father Christopher
of the Priory gave me his word that they were as fit to march to heaven
as to Gascony. But my mind misdoubts me as to these Winchester men who
have come with Sir Oliver, for they appear to be a very ungodly crew.
Pass the word that the men kneel, and that the under-officers repeat to
them the pater, the ave, and the credo."

With a clank of arms, the rough archers and seamen took to their knees,
with bent heads and crossed hands, listening to the hoarse mutter from
the file-leaders. It was strange to mark the hush; so that the lapping
of the water, the straining of the sail, and the creaking of the timbers
grew louder of a sudden upon the ear. Many of the bowmen had drawn
amulets and relics from their bosoms, while he who possessed some
more than usually sanctified treasure passed it down the line of his
comrades, that all might kiss and reap the virtue.

The yellow cog had now shot out from the narrow waters of the Solent,
and was plunging and rolling on the long heave of the open channel. The
wind blew freshly from the east, with a very keen edge to it; and the
great sail bellied roundly out, laying the vessel over until the water
hissed beneath her lee bulwarks. Broad and ungainly, she floundered from
wave to wave, dipping her round bows deeply into the blue rollers, and
sending the white flakes of foam in a spatter over her decks. On her
larboard quarter lay the two dark galleys, which had already hoisted
sail, and were shooting out from Freshwater Bay in swift pursuit, their
double line of oars giving them a vantage which could not fail to bring
them up with any vessel which trusted to sails alone. High and bluff the
English cog; long, black and swift the pirate galleys, like two fierce
lean wolves which have seen a lordly and unsuspecting stag walk past
their forest lair.

"Shall we turn, my fair lord, or shall we carry on?" asked the
master-shipman, looking behind him with anxious eyes.

"Nay, we must carry on and play the part of the helpless merchant."

"But your pennons? They will see that we have two knights with us."

"Yet it would not be to a knight's honor or good name to lower his
pennon. Let them be, and they will think that we are a wine-ship for
Gascony, or that we bear the wool-bales of some mercer of the Staple. Ma
foi, but they are very swift! They swoop upon us like two goshawks on a
heron. Is there not some symbol or device upon their sails?"

"That on the right," said Edricson, "appears to have the head of an
Ethiop upon it."

"'Tis the badge of Tete-noire, the Norman," cried a seaman-mariner. "I
have seen it before, when he harried us at Winchelsea. He is a wondrous
large and strong man, with no ruth for man, woman, or beast. They say
that he hath the strength of six; and, certes, he hath the crimes of six
upon his soul. See, now, to the poor souls who swing at either end of
his yard-arm!"

At each end of the yard there did indeed hang the dark figure of a man,
jolting and lurching with hideous jerkings of its limbs at every plunge
and swoop of the galley.

"By St. Paul!" said Sir Nigel, "and by the help of St. George and Our
Lady, it will be a very strange thing if our black-headed friend does
not himself swing thence ere he be many hours older. But what is that
upon the other galley?"

"It is the red cross of Genoa. This Spade-beard is a very noted captain,
and it is his boast that there are no seamen and no archers in the world
who can compare with those who serve the Doge Boccanegra."

"That we shall prove," said Goodwin Hawtayne; "but it would be well,
ere they close with us, to raise up the mantlets and pavises as a screen
against their bolts." He shouted a hoarse order, and his seamen worked
swiftly and silently, heightening the bulwarks and strengthening them.
The three ship's anchors were at Sir Nigel's command carried into the
waist, and tied to the mast, with twenty feet of cable between, each
under the care of four seamen. Eight others were stationed with leather
water-bags to quench any fire-arrows which might come aboard, while
others were sent up the mast, to lie along the yard and drop stones or
shoot arrows as the occasion served.

"Let them be supplied with all that is heavy and weighty in the ship,"
said Sir Nigel.

"Then we must send them up Sir Oliver Buttesthorn," quoth Ford.

The knight looked at him with a face which struck the smile from his
lips. "No squire of mine," he said, "shall ever make jest of a belted
knight. And yet," he added, his eyes softening, "I know that it is but
a boy's mirth, with no sting in it. Yet I should ill do my part towards
your father if I did not teach you to curb your tongue-play."

"They will lay us aboard on either quarter, my lord," cried the master.
"See how they stretch out from each other! The Norman hath a mangonel
or a trabuch upon the forecastle. See, they bend to the levers! They are
about to loose it."

"Aylward," cried the knight, "pick your three trustiest archers, and see
if you cannot do something to hinder their aim. Methinks they are within
long arrow flight."

"Seventeen score paces," said the archer, running his eye backwards and
forwards. "By my ten finger-bones! it would be a strange thing if we
could not notch a mark at that distance. Here, Watkin of Sowley, Arnold,
Long Williams, let us show the rogues that they have English bowmen to
deal with."

The three archers named stood at the further end of the poop, balancing
themselves with feet widely spread and bows drawn, until the heads of
the cloth-yard arrows were level with the centre of the stave. "You
are the surer, Watkin," said Aylward, standing by them with shaft upon
string. "Do you take the rogue with the red coif. You two bring down the
man with the head-piece, and I will hold myself ready if you miss. Ma
foi! they are about to loose her. Shoot, mes garcons, or you will be too
late."

The throng of pirates had cleared away from the great wooden catapult,
leaving two of their number to discharge it. One in a scarlet cap
bent over it, steadying the jagged rock which was balanced on the
spoon-shaped end of the long wooden lever. The other held the loop of
the rope which would release the catch and send the unwieldy missile
hurtling through the air. So for an instant they stood, showing hard and
clear against the white sail behind them. The next, redcap had fallen
across the stone with an arrow between his ribs; and the other, struck
in the leg and in the throat, was writhing and spluttering upon the
ground. As he toppled backwards he had loosed the spring, and the huge
beam of wood, swinging round with tremendous force, cast the corpse of
his comrade so close to the English ship that its mangled and distorted
limbs grazed their very stern. As to the stone, it glanced off obliquely
and fell midway between the vessels. A roar of cheering and of laughter
broke from the rough archers and seamen at the sight, answered by a yell
of rage from their pursuers.

"Lie low, mes enfants," cried Aylward, motioning with his left hand.
"They will learn wisdom. They are bringing forward shield and mantlet.
We shall have some pebbles about our ears ere long."



CHAPTER XVI. HOW THE YELLOW COG FOUGHT THE TWO ROVER GALLEYS.


The three vessels had been sweeping swiftly westwards, the cog still
well to the front, although the galleys were slowly drawing in upon
either quarter. To the left was a hard skyline unbroken by a sail. The
island already lay like a cloud behind them, while right in front
was St. Alban's Head, with Portland looming mistily in the farthest
distance. Alleyne stood by the tiller, looking backwards, the fresh wind
full in his teeth, the crisp winter air tingling on his face and blowing
his yellow curls from under his bassinet. His cheeks were flushed and
his eyes shining, for the blood of a hundred fighting Saxon ancestors
was beginning to stir in his veins.

"What was that?" he asked, as a hissing, sharp-drawn voice seemed to
whisper in his ear. The steersman smiled, and pointed with his foot to
where a short heavy cross-bow quarrel stuck quivering in the boards.
At the same instant the man stumbled forward upon his knees, and lay
lifeless upon the deck, a blood-stained feather jutting out from his
back. As Alleyne stooped to raise him, the air seemed to be alive with
the sharp zip-zip of the bolts, and he could hear them pattering on the
deck like apples at a tree-shaking.

"Raise two more mantlets by the poop-lanthorn," said Sir Nigel quietly.

"And another man to the tiller," cried the master-shipman.

"Keep them in play, Aylward, with ten of your men," the knight
continued. "And let ten of Sir Oliver's bowmen do as much for the
Genoese. I have no mind as yet to show them how much they have to fear
from us."

Ten picked shots under Aylward stood in line across the broad deck, and
it was a lesson to the young squires who had seen nothing of war to note
how orderly and how cool were these old soldiers, how quick the command,
and how prompt the carrying out, ten moving like one. Their comrades
crouched beneath the bulwarks, with many a rough jest and many a scrap
of criticism or advice. "Higher, Wat, higher!" "Put thy body into it,
Will!" "Forget not the wind, Hal!" So ran the muttered chorus, while
high above it rose the sharp twanging of the strings, the hiss of the
shafts, and the short "Draw your arrow! Nick your arrow! Shoot wholly
together!" from the master-bowman.

And now both mangonels were at work from the galleys, but so covered
and protected that, save at the moment of discharge, no glimpse could
be caught of them. A huge brown rock from the Genoese sang over their
heads, and plunged sullenly into the slope of a wave. Another from the
Norman whizzed into the waist, broke the back of a horse, and crashed
its way through the side of the vessel. Two others, flying together,
tore a great gap in the St. Christopher upon the sail, and brushed three
of Sir Oliver's men-at-arms from the forecastle. The master-shipman
looked at the knight with a troubled face.

"They keep their distance from us," said he. "Our archery is over-good,
and they will not close. What defence can we make against the stones?"

"I think I may trick them," the knight answered cheerfully, and passed
his order to the archers. Instantly five of them threw up their hands
and fell prostrate upon the deck. One had already been slain by a bolt,
so that there were but four upon their feet.

"That should give them heart," said Sir Nigel, eyeing the galleys, which
crept along on either side, with a slow, measured swing of their great
oars, the water swirling and foaming under their sharp stems.

"They still hold aloof," cried Hawtayne.

"Then down with two more," shouted their leader. "That will do. Ma foi!
but they come to our lure like chicks to the fowler. To your arms, men!
The pennon behind me, and the squires round the pennon. Stand fast with
the anchors in the waist, and be ready for a cast. Now blow out the
trumpets, and may God's benison be with the honest men!"

As he spoke a roar of voices and a roll of drums came from either
galley, and the water was lashed into spray by the hurried beat of a
hundred oars. Down they swooped, one on the right, one on the left, the
sides and shrouds black with men and bristling with weapons. In heavy
clusters they hung upon the forecastle all ready for a spring--faces
white, faces brown, faces yellow, and faces black, fair Norsemen,
swarthy Italians, fierce rovers from the Levant, and fiery Moors from
the Barbary States, of all hues and countries, and marked solely by the
common stamp of a wild-beast ferocity. Rasping up on either side,
with oars trailing to save them from snapping, they poured in a
living torrent with horrid yell and shrill whoop upon the defenceless
merchantman.

But wilder yet was the cry, and shriller still the scream, when there
rose up from the shadow of those silent bulwarks the long lines of
the English bowmen, and the arrows whizzed in a deadly sleet among the
unprepared masses upon the pirate decks. From the higher sides of the
cog the bowmen could shoot straight down, at a range which was so short
as to enable a cloth-yard shaft to pierce through mail-coats or to
transfix a shield, though it were an inch thick of toughened wood.
One moment Alleyne saw the galley's poop crowded with rushing figures,
waving arms, exultant faces; the next it was a blood-smeared shambles,
with bodies piled three deep upon each other, the living cowering behind
the dead to shelter themselves from that sudden storm-blast of death.
On either side the seamen whom Sir Nigel had chosen for the purpose
had cast their anchors over the side of the galleys, so that the three
vessels, locked in an iron grip, lurched heavily forward upon the swell.

And now set in a fell and fierce fight, one of a thousand of which no
chronicler has spoken and no poet sung. Through all the centuries and
over all those southern waters nameless men have fought in nameless
places, their sole monuments a protected coast and an unravaged
country-side.

Fore and aft the archers had cleared the galleys' decks, but from either
side the rovers had poured down into the waist, where the seamen and
bowmen were pushed back and so mingled with their foes that it was
impossible for their comrades above to draw string to help them. It
was a wild chaos where axe and sword rose and fell, while Englishman,
Norman, and Italian staggered and reeled on a deck which was cumbered
with bodies and slippery with blood. The clang of blows, the cries of
the stricken, the short, deep shout of the islanders, and the fierce
whoops of the rovers, rose together in a deafening tumult, while the
breath of the panting men went up in the wintry air like the smoke from
a furnace. The giant Tete-noire, towering above his fellows and clad
from head to foot in plate of proof, led on his boarders, waving a
huge mace in the air, with which he struck to the deck every man who
approached him. On the other side, Spade-beard, a dwarf in height, but
of great breadth of shoulder and length of arm, had cut a road almost
to the mast, with three-score Genoese men-at-arms close at his heels.
Between these two formidable assailants the seamen were being slowly
wedged more closely together, until they stood back to back under the
mast with the rovers raging upon every side of them.

But help was close at hand. Sir Oliver Buttesthorn with his men-at-arms
had swarmed down from the forecastle, while Sir Nigel, with his three
squires, Black Simon, Aylward, Hordle John, and a score more, threw
themselves from the poop and hurled themselves into the thickest of the
fight. Alleyne, as in duty bound, kept his eyes fixed ever on his
lord and pressed forward close at his heels. Often had he heard of Sir
Nigel's prowess and skill with all knightly weapons, but all the tales
that had reached his ears fell far short of the real quickness and
coolness of the man. It was as if the devil was in him, for he sprang
here and sprang there, now thrusting and now cutting, catching blows on
his shield, turning them with his blade, stooping under the swing of an
axe, springing over the sweep of a sword, so swift and so erratic that
the man who braced himself for a blow at him might find him six paces
off ere he could bring it down. Three pirates had fallen before him, and
he had wounded Spade-beard in the neck, when the Norman giant sprang at
him from the side with a slashing blow from his deadly mace. Sir Nigel
stooped to avoid it, and at the same instant turned a thrust from the
Genoese swordsman, but, his foot slipping in a pool of blood, he fell
heavily to the ground. Alleyne sprang in front of the Norman, but his
sword was shattered and he himself beaten to the ground by a second
blow from the ponderous weapon. Ere the pirate chief could repeat it,
however, John's iron grip fell upon his wrist, and he found that for
once he was in the hands of a stronger man than himself.

Fiercely he strove to disengage his weapon, but Hordle John bent his arm
slowly back until, with a sharp crack, like a breaking stave, it turned
limp in his grasp, and the mace dropped from the nerveless fingers. In
vain he tried to pluck it up with the other hand. Back and back still
his foeman bent him, until, with a roar of pain and of fury, the giant
clanged his full length upon the boards, while the glimmer of a knife
before the bars of his helmet warned him that short would be his shrift
if he moved.

Cowed and disheartened by the loss of their leader, the Normans had
given back and were now streaming over the bulwarks on to their own
galley, dropping a dozen at a time on to her deck. But the anchor still
held them in its crooked claw, and Sir Oliver with fifty men was hard
upon their heels. Now, too, the archers had room to draw their bows
once more, and great stones from the yard of the cog came thundering and
crashing among the flying rovers. Here and there they rushed with wild
screams and curses, diving under the sail, crouching behind booms,
huddling into corners like rabbits when the ferrets are upon them,
as helpless and as hopeless. They were stern days, and if the honest
soldier, too poor for a ransom, had no prospect of mercy upon the
battle-field, what ruth was there for sea robbers, the enemies of
humankind, taken in the very deed, with proofs of their crimes still
swinging upon their yard-arm.

But the fight had taken a new and a strange turn upon the other side.
Spade-beard and his men had given slowly back, hard pressed by Sir
Nigel, Aylward, Black Simon, and the poop-guard. Foot by foot the
Italian had retreated, his armor running blood at every joint, his
shield split, his crest shorn, his voice fallen away to a mere gasping
and croaking. Yet he faced his foemen with dauntless courage, dashing
in, springing back, sure-footed, steady-handed, with a point which
seemed to menace three at once. Beaten back on to the deck of his
own vessel, and closely followed by a dozen Englishmen, he disengaged
himself from them, ran swiftly down the deck, sprang back into the
cog once more, cut the rope which held the anchor, and was back in an
instant among his crossbow-men. At the same time the Genoese sailors
thrust with their oars against the side of the cog, and a rapidly
widening rift appeared between the two vessels.

"By St. George!" cried Ford, "we are cut off from Sir Nigel."

"He is lost," gasped Terlake. "Come, let us spring for it." The two
youths jumped with all their strength to reach the departing galley.
Ford's feet reached the edge of the bulwarks, and his hand clutching a
rope he swung himself on board. Terlake fell short, crashed in among the
oars, and bounded off into the sea. Alleyne, staggering to the side, was
about to hurl himself after him, but Hordle John dragged him back by the
girdle.

"You can scarce stand, lad, far less jump," said he. "See how the blood
rips from your bassinet."

"My place is by the flag," cried Alleyne, vainly struggling to break
from the other's hold.

"Bide here, man. You would need wings ere you could reach Sir Nigel's
side."

The vessels were indeed so far apart now that the Genoese could use the
full sweep of their oars, and draw away rapidly from the cog.

"My God, but it is a noble fight!" shouted big John, clapping his
hands. "They have cleared the poop, and they spring into the waist. Well
struck, my lord! Well struck, Aylward! See to Black Simon, how he storms
among the shipmen! But this Spade-beard is a gallant warrior. He rallies
his men upon the forecastle. He hath slain an archer. Ha! my lord is
upon him. Look to it, Alleyne! See to the whirl and glitter of it!"

"By heaven, Sir Nigel is down!" cried the squire.

"Up!" roared John. "It was but a feint. He bears him back. He drives
him to the side. Ah, by Our Lady, his sword is through him! They cry for
mercy. Down goes the red cross, and up springs Simon with the scarlet
roses!"

The death of the Genoese leader did indeed bring the resistance to an
end. Amid a thunder of cheering from cog and from galleys the forked
pennon fluttered upon the forecastle, and the galley, sweeping round,
came slowly back, as the slaves who rowed it learned the wishes of their
new masters.

The two knights had come aboard the cog, and the grapplings having been
thrown off, the three vessels now moved abreast. Through all the storm
and rush of the fight Alleyne had been aware of the voice of Goodwin
Hawtayne, the master-shipman, with his constant "Hale the bowline!
Veer the sheet!" and strange it was to him to see how swiftly the
blood-stained sailors turned from the strife to the ropes and back. Now
the cog's head was turned Francewards, and the shipman walked the deck,
a peaceful master-mariner once more.

"There is sad scath done to the cog, Sir Nigel," said he. "Here is a
hole in the side two ells across, the sail split through the centre,
and the wood as bare as a friar's poll. In good sooth, I know not what I
shall say to Master Witherton when I see the Itchen once more."

"By St. Paul! it would be a very sorry thing if we suffered you to be
the worse of this day's work," said Sir Nigel. "You shall take these
galleys back with you, and Master Witherton may sell them. Then from the
moneys he shall take as much as may make good the damage, and the rest
he shall keep until our home-coming, when every man shall have his
share. An image of silver fifteen inches high I have vowed to the
Virgin, to be placed in her chapel within the Priory, for that she was
pleased to allow me to come upon this Spade-beard, who seemed to me from
what I have seen of him to be a very sprightly and valiant gentleman.
But how fares it with you, Edricson?"

