The Project Gutenberg EBook of Made in Tanganyika, by Carl Richard Jacobi

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Made in Tanganyika

Author: Carl Richard Jacobi

Release Date: June 25, 2009 [EBook #29242]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MADE IN TANGANYIKA ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Come, enjoy a Carl Jacobi field day--backed by his vivid,
    irresistible imagination and his keen sense of fun. Or was it so
    funny for Martin Sutter? For, unlike him, you'll surely be cautious
    the next time you turn on your TV set--especially if you notice it
    was made in Tanganyika._


       made
         in
 tanganyika

 _by ... Carl Jacobi_


 See what happens when two conchologists get caught
 in a necromantic nightmare of their own.


On his fortieth birthday Martin Sutter decided life was too short to
continue in the rut that had been his existence for more than twenty
years. He withdrew his savings from the Explosion City Third Federal
Bank, stopped in a display room and informed a somewhat surprised clerk
he was taking the electric runabout with the blue bonnet. The
ground-car, complete with extras, retailed for a tidy three thousand
credits.

To accustom himself to the car's controls Sutter chose Highway 56 for a
driving lesson. He tooled the electric runabout up into the third level,
purred out across state at an effortless two hundred, then descended via
a cloverleaf to ground tier and entered a maze of subsidiary roads that
led through the summer countryside.

In this manner he drove the major part of the afternoon. Travel was
light, away from the elevated lanes and he enjoyed himself.

At four o'clock he began to look for a convenient place to turn around.
It was then that he sighted the roadside stand ahead. Above it a freshly
painted sign read: TV SETS. LATEST MODELS. SPECIAL WHOLESALE PRICES!

Sutter smiled. Whoever heard of selling television sets on a country
highway? It was like--why, it was like selling eggs in the lobby of the
Hotel International! Then it occurred to him that his own TV set had not
been in good working order for more than a year. The olfactory control
had jammed last week while he was watching a Sumatran tribal ceremony,
inland from Soerabaja, and he had been unable to smell the backdrop
frangipani blossoms. It was time he bought a new set....

Sutter touched a stud and the electric runabout coasted to a halt. As he
climbed out of the car and walked across the highway toward the stand,
he thought for a moment there was something wrong with his contact
lenses or perhaps his eyes.

The stand and the sign above it appeared to waver uncertainly, to become
disjointed as though viewed through uneven glass. But the effect passed
and Sutter approached the stand and nodded to the individual tilted back
in a chair beside it.

He was a rawboned man with a thatch of thick black hair and small watery
eyes. He was dressed, oddly enough, in a pair of tight-fitting trousers
of white lawn, a flaming red tunic and a yellow cummerbund.
