adventure our little prince is fond of,' he muttered. 'But for my part,
M. de Marsac, the sweat is running down my forehead. I have played the
trick more than once before, for my brother and I are as like as two
peas. And yet it would have gone ill with us if the fool had been one of
his friends.'

'All's well that ends well,' I answered in a low voice, thinking it an
ill time for compliments. As it was, the remark was unfortunate, for M.
de Rosny was still in the act of reining back when Maignan called out to
us to say we were being followed.

I looked behind, but could see nothing except gloom and rain and
overhanging eaves and a few figures cowering in doorways. The servants,
however, continued to maintain that it was so, and we held, without
actually stopping, a council of war. If detected, we were caught in a
trap, without hope of escape; and for the moment I am sure M. do Rosny
regretted that he had chosen this route by Blois--that he had thrust
himself, in his haste and his desire to take with him the latest news,
into a snare so patent. The castle--huge, dark, and grim--loomed before
us at the end of the street in which we were, and, chilled as I was
myself by the sight, I could imagine how much more appalling it must
appear to him, the chosen counsellor of his master, and the steadfast
opponent of all which it represented.

Our consultation came to nothing, for no better course suggested
itself than to go as we had intended to the lodging commonly used by my
companion. We did so, looking behind us often, and saying more than once
that Maignan must be mistaken. As soon as we had dismounted, however,
and gone in, he showed us from the window a man loitering near; and
this confirmation of our alarm sending us to our expedients again, while
Maignan remained watching in a room without a light, I suggested that I
might pass myself off, though ten years older, for my companion.

'Alas!' he said, drumming with his fingers on the table 'there are too
many here who know me to make that possible. I thank you all the same.'

'Could you escape on foot? Or pass the wall anywhere, or slip through
the gates early?' I suggested.

'They might tell us at the Bleeding Heart,' he answered. But I doubt it.
I was a fool, sir, to put my neck into Mendoza's halter, and that is a
fact. But here is Maignan. What is it, man?' he continued eagerly.

'The watcher is gone, my lord,' the equerry answered.

'And has left no one?'

'No one that I can see.'

We both went into the next room and looked from the windows. The man
was certainly not where we had seen him before. But the rain was falling
heavily, the eaves were dripping, the street was a dark cavern with
only here and there a spark of light, and the fellow might be lurking
elsewhere. Maignan, being questioned, however, believed he had gone off
of set purpose.

'Which may be read half a dozen ways,' I remarked.

'At any rate, we are fasting,' M. de Rosny answered. Give me a full man
in a fight. Let us sit down and eat. It is no good jumping in the dark,
or meeting troubles half way.'

We were not through our meal, however, Simon Fleix waiting on us with a
pale face, when Maignan came in again from the dark room. 'My lord,' he
said quietly, 'three men have appeared. Two of them remain twenty paces
away. The third has come to the door.' As he spoke we heard a cautious
summons below, Maignan was for going down, but his master bade him
stand. Let the woman of the house go,' he said.

I remarked and long remembered M. de Rosny's SANG-FROID on this
occasion. His pistols he had already laid on a chair beside him throwing
his cloak over them; and now, while we waited, listening in breathless
silence, I saw him hand a large slice of bread-and-meat to his equerry,
who, standing behind his chair, began eating it with the same coolness.
Simon Fleix, on the other hand, stood gazing at the door, trembling in
every limb, and with so much of excitement and surprise in his attitude
that I took the precaution of bidding him, in a low voice, do nothing
without orders. At the same moment it occurred to me to extinguish two
of the four candles which had been lighted; and I did so, M. de Rosny
nodding assent, just as the muttered conversation which was being
carried on below ceased, and a man's tread sounded on the stairs.

It was followed immediately by a knock on the outside of our door.
Obeying my companion's look, I cried, 'Enter!'

A slender man of middle height, booted and wrapped up, with his face
almost entirely hidden by a fold of his cloak, came in quickly, and
closing the door behind him, advanced towards the table. 'Which is M. de
Rosny?' he said.

Rosny had carefully turned his face from the light, but at the sound
of the other's voice he sprang up with a cry of relief. He was about to
speak, when the newcomer, raising his hand peremptorily, continued, 'No
names, I beg. Yours, I suppose, is known here. Mine is not, nor do I
desire it should be. I want speech of you, that is all.'

'I am greatly honoured,' M. de Rosny replied, gazing at him eagerly.
'Yet, who told you I was here?'

'I saw you pass under a lamp in the street,' the stranger answered. 'I
knew your horse first, and you afterwards, and bade a groom follow you.
Believe me,' he added, with a gesture of the hand, 'you have nothing to
fear from me.'

'I accept the assurance in the spirit in which it is offered,' my
companion answered with a graceful bow, 'and think myself fortunate
in being recognised'--he paused a moment and then continued--'by a
Frenchman and a man of honour.'

The stranger shrugged his shoulders. 'Your pardon, then,' he said, 'if I
seem abrupt. My time is short. I want to do the best with it I can. Will
you favour me?'

I was for withdrawing, but M. de Rosny ordered Maignan to place lights
in the next room, and, apologising to me very graciously, retired
thither with the stranger, leaving me relieved indeed by these peaceful
appearances, but full of wonder and conjectures who this might be, and
what the visit portended. At one moment I was inclined to identify
the stranger with M. de Rosny's brother; at another with the English
ambassador; and then, again, a wild idea that he might be M. de Bruhl
occurred to me. The two remained together about a quarter of an hour and
then came out, the stranger leading the way, and saluting me politely
as he passed through the room. At the door he turned to say, 'At nine
o'clock, then?'

'At nine o'clock,' M. de Rosny replied, holding the door open. 'You will
excuse me if I do not descend, Marquis?'

'Yes, go back, my friend,' the stranger answered. And, lighted by
Maignan, whose face on such occasions could assume the most stolid air
in the world, he disappeared down the stairs, and I heard him go out.

M. de Rosny turned to me, his eyes sparkling with joy, his face and mien
full of animation. 'The King of Navarre is better,' he said. 'He is said
to be out of danger. What do you think of that, my friend?'

'That is the best news I have heard for many a day,' I answered. And I
hastened to add, that France and the Religion had reason to thank God
for His mercy.

'Amen to that,' my patron replied reverently. 'But that is not all--that
is not all.' And he began to walk up and down the room humming the 118th
Psalm a little above his breath--

  La voici l'heureuse journee
  Que Dieu a faite a plein desir;
  Par nous soit joie demenee,
  Et prenons en elle plaisir.

He continued, indeed, to walk up and down the floor so long, and with so
joyful a countenance and demeanour, that I ventured, at last to remind
him of my presence, which he had clearly forgotten. 'Ha! to be sure,'
he said, stopping short and looking at me with the utmost good-humour.
'What time is it? Seven. Then until nine o'clock, my friend, I crave
your indulgence. En fin, until that time I must keep counsel. Come,
I am hungry still. Let us sit down, and this time I hope we may not be
interrupted. Simon, set us on a fresh bottle. Ha! ha! VIVENT LE ROI ET
LE ROI DE NAVARRE!' And again he fell to humming the same psalm--

  O Dieu eternel, je te prie,
  Je te prie, ton roi maintiens:
  O Dieu, je te prie et reprie,
  Sauve ton roi et l'entretiens!

doing so with a light in his eyes and a joyous emphasis, which impressed
me the more in a man ordinarily so calm and self-contained. I saw that
something had occurred to gratify him beyond measure, and, believing his
statement that this was not the good news from La Ganache only, I waited
with the utmost interest and anxiety for the hour of nine, which had
no sooner struck than our former visitor appeared with the same air of
mystery and disguise which had attended him before.

M. de Rosny, who had risen on hearing his step and had taken up his
cloak, paused with it half on and half off, to cry anxiously, 'All is
well, is it not?'

'Perfectly,' the stranger replied, with a nod.

'And my friend?'

Yes, on condition that you answer for his discretion and fidelity.' And
the stranger glanced involuntarily at me who stood uncertain whether to
hold my ground or retire.

'Good,' M. de Rosny cried. Then he turned to me with a mingled air
of dignity and kindness, and continued: 'This is the gentleman. M. de
Marsac, I am honoured with permission to present you to the Marquis de
Rambouillet, whose interest and protection I beg you to deserve, for he
is a true Frenchman and a patriot whom I respect.'

M. de Rambouillet saluted me politely. 'Of a Brittany family, I think?'
he said.

I assented; and he replied with something complimentary. But afterwards
he continued to look at me in silence with a keenness and curiosity I
did not understand. At last, when M. de Rosny's impatience had reached
a high pitch, the marquis seemed impelled to add something. 'You quite
understand M. de Rosny?' he said. 'Without saying anything disparaging
of M. de Marsac, who is, no doubt, a man of honour'--and he bowed to me
very low--'this is a delicate matter, and you will introduce no one into
it, I am sure, whom you cannot trust as yourself.'

'Precisely,' M. de Rosny replied, speaking drily, yet with a grand
air which fully matched his companion's. 'I am prepared to trust this
gentleman not only with my life but with my honour.'

'Nothing more remains to be said then,' the marquis rejoined, bowing
to me again. 'I am glad to have been the occasion of a declaration so
flattering to you, sir.'

I returned his salute in silence, and obeying M. de Rosny's muttered
direction put on, my cloak and sword. M. de Rosny took up his pistols.

'You will have no need of those,' the Marquis said with a high glance.

'Where we are going, no,' my companion answered, calmly continuing to
dispose them about him. 'But the streets are dark and not too safe.'

M. de Rambouillet laughed. 'That is the worst of you Huguenots,' he
said. 'You never know when to lay suspicion aside.'

A hundred retorts sprang to my lips. I thought of the Bartholomew, of
the French fury of Antwerp, of half a dozen things which make my blood
boil to this day. But M. de Rosny's answer was the finest of all.
'That is true, I am afraid,' he said quietly. 'On the other hand, you
Catholics--take the late M. de Guise for instance--have the habit of
erring on the other side, I think, and sometimes trust too far.'

The marquis, without making any answer to this home-thrust, led the way
out, and we followed, being joined at the door of the house by a couple
of armed lackeys, who fell in behind us. We went on foot. The night was
dark, and the prospect out of doors was not cheering. The streets were
wet and dirty, and notwithstanding all our care we fell continually into
pitfalls or over unseen obstacles. Crossing the PARVIS of the cathedral,
which I remembered, we plunged in silence into an obscure street near
the river, and so narrow that the decrepit houses shut out almost
all view of the sky. The gloom of our surroundings, no less than my
ignorance of the errand on which we were bound, filled me with anxiety
and foreboding. My companions keeping strict silence, however, and
taking every precaution to avoid being recognised, I had no choice but
to do likewise.

I could think, and no more. I felt myself borne along by an irresistible
current, whither and for what purpose I could not tell; an experience to
an extent strange at my age the influence of the night and the weather.
Twice we stood aside to let a party of roisterers go by, and the
excessive care M. de Rambouillet evinced on these occasions to avoid
recognition did not tend to reassure me or make me think more lightly of
the unknown business on which I was bound.

Reaching at last an open space, our leader bade us in a low voice be
careful and follow him closely. We did so and crossed in this way and in
single file a narrow plank or wooden bridge; but whether water ran below
or a dry ditch only, I could not determine. My mind was taken up at the
moment with the discovery which I had just made, that the dark building,
looming huge and black before us with a single light twinkling here and
there at great heights, was the Castle of Blois.



CHAPTER XV. VILAIN HERODES.

All the distaste and misliking I had expressed earlier in the day for
the Court of Blois recurred with fresh force in the darkness and gloom;
and though, booted and travel-stained as we were, I did not conceive it
likely that we should be obtruded on the circle about the king, I felt
none the less an oppressive desire to be through with our adventure, and
away from the ill-omened precincts in which I found myself. The darkness
prevented me seeing the faces of my companions; but on M. de Rosny, who
was not quite free himself, I think, from the influences of the time
and place, twitching my sleeve to enforce vigilance, I noted that the
lackeys had ceased to follow us, and that we three were beginning
to ascend a rough staircase cut in the rock. I gathered, though the
darkness limited my view behind as well as in front to a few twinkling
lights, that we were mounting the scarp from the moat; to the side wall
of the castle; and I was not surprised when the marquis muttered to us
to stop, and knocked softly on the wood of a door.

M. de Rosny might have spared the touch he had laid on my sleeve, for by
this time I was fully and painfully sensible of the critical position in
which we stood, and was very little likely to commit an indiscretion. I
trusted he had not done so already! No doubt--it flashed across me while
we waited--he had taken care to safeguard himself. But how often, I
reflected, had all safeguards been set aside and all precautions eluded
by those to whom he was committing himself! Guise had thought himself
secure in this very building, which we were about to enter. Coligny had
received the most absolute of safe-conducts from those to whom we
were apparently bound. The end in either case had been the same--the
confidence of the one proving of no more avail than the wisdom of the
other. What if the King of France thought to make his peace with his
Catholic subjects--offended by the murder of Guise--by a second murder
of one as obnoxious to them as he was precious to their arch-enemy in
the South? Rosny was sagacious indeed; but then I reflected with sudden
misgiving that he was young, ambitious, and bold.

The opening of the door interrupted without putting an end to this
train of apprehension. A faint light shone out; so feebly as to illumine
little more than the stairs at our feet. The marquis entered at once, M.
de Rosny followed, I brought up the rear; and the door was closed by a
man who stood behind it. We found ourselves crowded together at the foot
of a very narrow staircase, which the doorkeeper--a stolid pikeman in a
grey uniform, with a small lanthorn swinging from the crosspiece of
his halberd--signed to us to ascend. I said a word to him, but he only
stared in answer, and M. de Rambouillet, looking back and seeing what I
was about, called to me that it was useless, as the man was a Swiss and
spoke no French.

This did not tend to reassure me; any more than did the chill roughness
of the wall which my hand touched as I groped upwards, or the smell
of bats which invaded my nostrils and suggested that the staircase was
little used and belonged to a part of the castle fitted for dark and
secret doings.

We stumbled in the blackness up the steps, passing one door and then a
second before M. de Rambouillet whispered to us to stand, and knocked
gently at a third.

The secrecy, the darkness, and above all the strange arrangements made
to receive us, filled me with the wildest conjectures. But when the
door opened and we passed one by one into a bare, unfurnished, draughty
gallery, immediately, as I judged, under the tiles, the reality agreed
with no one of my anticipations. The place was a mere garret, without a
hearth, without a single stool. Three windows, of which one was roughly
glazed, while the others were filled with oiled paper, were set in one
wall; the others displaying the stones and mortar without disguise or
ornament. Beside the door through which we had entered stood a silent
figure in the grey uniform I had seen below, his lanthorn on the floor
at his feet. A second door at the farther end of the gallery, which
was full twenty paces long, was guarded in like manner. A couple of
lanthorns stood in the middle of the floor, and that was all.

Inside the door, M. de Rambouillet with his finger on his lip stopped
us, and we stood a little group of three a pace in front of the sentry,
and with the empty room before us. I looked at M. de Rosny, but he was
looking at Rambouillet. The marquis had his back towards me, the sentry
was gazing into vacancy; so that baffled in my attempt to learn anything
from the looks of the other actors in the scene, I fell back on my ears.
The rain dripped outside and the moaning wind rattled the casements; but
mingled with these melancholy sounds--which gained force, as such things
always do, from the circumstances in which we were placed and our own
silence--I fancied I caught the distant hum of voices and music and
laughter. And that, I know not why, brought M. de Guise again to my
mind.

The story of his death, as I had heard it from that accursed monk in the
inn on the Claine, rose up in all its freshness, with all its details.
I started when M. de Rambouillet coughed. I shivered when Rosny shifted
his feet. The silence grew oppressive. Only the stolid men in grey
seemed unmoved, unexpectant; so that I remember wondering whether it was
their nightly duty to keep guard over an empty garret, the floor strewn
with scraps of mortar and ends of tiles.

The interruption, when it came at last, came suddenly. The sentry at the
farther end of the gallery started and fell back a pace. Instantly the
door beside him opened and a man came in, and closing it quickly behind
him, advanced up the room with an air of dignity, which even his strange
appearance and attire could not wholly destroy.

He was of good stature and bearing, about forty years old as I judged,
his wear a dress of violet velvet with black points cut in the extreme
of the fashion. He carried a sword but no ruff, and had a cup and ball
of ivory--a strange toy much in vogue among the idle--suspended from his
wrist by a ribbon. He was lean and somewhat narrow, but so far I found
little fault with him. It was only when my eye reached his face, and
saw it rouged like a woman's and surmounted by a little turban, that a
feeling of scarcely understood disgust seized me, and I said to myself,
'This is the stuff of which kings' minions are made!'

To my surprise, however, M. de Rambouillet went to meet him with the
utmost respect, sweeping the dirty floor with his bonnet, and bowing
to the very ground. The newcomer acknowledged his salute with negligent
kindness. Remarking pleasantly 'You have brought a friend, I think?' he
looked towards us with a smile.

'Yes, sire, he is here,' the marquis answered, stepping aside a little.
And with the word I understood that this was no minion, but the king
himself: Henry, the Third of the name, and the last of the great House
of Valois, which had ruled France by the grace of God for two centuries
and a half! I stared at him, and stared at him, scarcely believing what
I saw. For the first time in my life I was in the presence of the king!

Meanwhile M. de Rosny, to whom he was, of course, no marvel, had gone
forward and knelt on one knee. The king raised him graciously, and with
an action which, viewed apart from his woman's face and silly turban,
seemed royal and fitting. 'This is good of you, Rosny,' he said. 'But it
is only what I expected of you.'

'Sire,' my companion answered, 'your Majesty has no more devoted servant
than myself, unless it be the king my master.'

'By my faith,' Henry answered with energy--'and if I am not a good
churchman, whatever those rascally Parisians say, I am nothing--by my
faith, I think I believe you!'

'If your Majesty would believe me in that and in some other things
also,' M. de Rosny answered, 'it would be very well for France.' Though
he spoke courteously, he threw so much weight and independence into
his words that I thought of the old proverb, 'A good master, a bold
servant.'

'Well, that is what we are here to see,' the king replied. 'But one
tells me one thing,' he went on fretfully, 'and one another, and which
am I to believe?'

'I know nothing of others, sire,' Rosny answered with the same spirit.
'But my master has every claim to be believed. His interest in the
royalty of France is second only to your Majesty's. He is also a king
and a kinsman, and it erks him to see rebels beard you, as has happened
of late.'

'Ay, but the chief of them?' Henry exclaimed, giving way to sudden
excitement and stamping furiously on the floor. 'He will trouble me no
more. Has my brother heard of THAT? Tell me, sir, has that news reached
him?'

'He has heard it, sire.'

'And he approved? He approved, of course?'

'Beyond doubt the man was a traitor,' M. de Rosny answered delicately.
'His life was forfeit, sire. Who can question it?'

'And he has paid the forfeit,' the king rejoined, looking down at
the floor and immediately falling into a moodiness as sudden as his
excitement. His lips moved. He muttered something inaudible, and began
to play absently with his cup and ball, his mind occupied apparently
with a gloomy retrospect. 'M. de Guise, M. de Guise,' he murmured at
last, with a sneer and an accent of hate which told of old humiliations
long remembered. 'Well, damn him, he is dead now. He is dead. But being
dead he yet troubles us. Is not that the verse, father? Ha!' with a
start, 'I was forgetting. But that is the worst wrong he has done me,'
he continued, looking up and growing excited again. 'He has cut me off
from Mother Church. There is hardly a priest comes near me now, and
presently they will excommunicate me. And, as I hope for salvation, the
Church has no more faithful son than me.'

I believe he was on the point, forgetting M. de Rosny's presence there
and his errand, of giving way to unmanly tears, when M. de Rambouillet,
as if by accident, let the heel of his scabbard fall heavily on the
floor. The king started, and passing his hand once or twice across his
brow, seemed to recover himself. 'Well,' he said, 'no doubt we shall
find a way out of our difficulties.'

'If your Majesty,' Rosny answered respectfully, 'would accept the aid my
master proffers, I venture to think that they would vanish the quicker.'

'You think so,' Henry rejoined. 'Well, give me your shoulder. Let us
walk a little.' And, signing to Rambouillet to leave him, he began to
walk up and down with M. de Rosny, talking familiarly with him in an
undertone.

Only such scraps of the conversation as fell from them when they turned
at my end of the gallery now reached me. Patching these together,
however, I managed to understand somewhat. At one turn I heard the king
say, 'But then Turenne offers--' At the next, 'Trust him? Well, I do not
know why I should not. He promises--' Then 'A Republic, Rosny? That
his plan? Pooh! he dare not. He could not. France is a kingdom by the
ordinance of God in my family.'

I gathered from these and other chance words, which I have since
forgotten, that M. de Rosny was pressing the king to accept the help of
the King of Navarre, and warning him against the insidious offers of the
Vicomte de Turenne. The mention of a Republic, however, seemed to excite
his Majesty's wrath rather against Rosny for presuming to refer to such
a thing than against Turenne, to whom he refused to credit it. He paused
near my end of the promenade.

'Prove it!' he said angrily. 'But can you prove it? Can you prove it?
Mind you, I will take no hearsay evidence, sir. Now, there is Turenne's
agent here--you did not know, I dare say, that he had an agent here?'

'You refer, sire, to M. de Bruhl,' Rosny answered, without hesitation.
'I know him, sire.'

'I think you are the devil,' Henry answered, looking curiously at him.
'You seem to know most things. But mind you, my friend, he speaks me
fairly, and I will not take this on hearsay even from your master.
Though,' he added after pausing a moment, 'I love him.'

'And he, your Majesty. He desires only to prove it.'

'Yes, I know, I know,' the king answered fretfully. 'I believes he does.
I believe he does wish me well. But there will be a devil of an outcry
among my people. And Turenne gives fair words too. And I do not know,'
he continued, fidgeting with his cup and ball, 'that it might not suit
me better to agree with him, you see.'

I saw M. de Rosny draw himself up. 'Dare I speak openly to you, sire,'
he said, with less respect and more energy than he had hitherto used.
'As I should to my master?'

'Ay, say what you like,' Henry answered. But he spoke sullenly, and it
seemed to me that he looked less pleasantly at his companion.

'Then I will venture to utter what is in your Majesty's mind,' my patron
answered steadfastly. 'You fear, sire, lest, having accepted my master's
offer and conquered your enemies, you should not be easily rid of him.'

Henry looked relieved. 'Do you call that diplomacy?' he said with a
smile. 'However, what if it be so? What do you say to it? Methinks I
have heard an idle tale about a horse which would hunt a stag; and for
the purpose set a man upon its back.'

'This I say, sire, first,' Rosny answered very earnestly. 'That the King
of Navarre is popular only with one-third of the kingdom, and is only
powerful when united with you. Secondly, sire, it is his interest to
support the royal power, to which he is heir. And, thirdly, it must be
more to your Majesty's honour to accept help from a near kinsman than
from an ordinary subject, and one who, I still maintain, sire, has no
good designs in his mind.'
