air. It was like going into battle again. A little red-white-and-green
flag fluttered on a staff below the window. Whose flag? The city flag
was orange and blue. He shrugged away the problem. Cybrain knew what it
was doing.

The little finger of his right hand vibrated in its metal sheath. A pale
vibray leaped from the lensed fingertip. Breakthrough! The glasstic
pane dissolved. Lane streamed through the window.

The paragrav-paks cut off. Lane dropped lightly to the floor, inside the
room, in battle-crouch. A 3V set was yammering. A girl screamed. Lane's
hand shot out automatically. A finger vibrated. Out of the corner of his
eye, Lane saw the girl fold to the floor. There was no one else in the
room. Lane, still in a crouch, chewed his lip.

_The Mayor?_

His head swung around and he peered at the 3V set. He saw his own face.

"Lashing police with his vibray," said the announcer, "Lane broke
through the cordon surrounding Manhattan Armory. Two policemen were
killed, four others seriously injured. Tammany Hall has warned that this
man is extremely dangerous. Citizens are cautioned to keep clear of him.
Lane is an insane killer. He is armed with the latest military weapons.
A built-in electronic brain controls his reflexes--"

"At ease with that jazz," said Lane, and a sheathed finger snapped out.
There was a loud bang. The 3V screen dissolved into a puddle of
glasstic.

_The Mayor._

Lane strode to the window. The two police boats were hovering above the
towers. Lane's mailed hand snapped open a pouch at his belt. He flipped
a fist-sized cube to the floor.

The force-bomb "exploded"--swelled or inflated, really, but with the
speed of a blast. Lane glanced out the window. A section of the energy
globe bellied out from above. It shaded the view from his window and
re-entered the tower wall just below.

Now the girl.

He turned back to the room. "Wake up, outa-towner." He gave the blonde
girl a light dose of the vibray to slap her awake.

"Who are you?" she said, shakily.

Lane grinned. "Trooper Lane, of the Newyork Special Troops, is all." He
threw her a mock salute. "You from outa-town, girlie. I ain't seen a
Newyork girl with yellow hair in years. Orange or green is the action.
Whatcha doing in the Mayor's room?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The girl pushed herself to her feet. Built, Lane saw. She was pretty and
clean-looking, very out-of-town. She held herself straight and her
blue-violet eyes snapped at him.

"What the devil do you think you're doing, soldier? I am a diplomat of
the Grassroots Republic of Mars. This is an embassy, if you know what
that means."

"I don't," said Lane, unconcerned.

"Well, you should have had brains enough to honor the flag outside this
window. That's the Martian flag, soldier. If you've never heard of
diplomatic immunity, you'll suffer for your ignorance." Her large, dark
eyes narrowed. "Who sent you?"

"My cybrain sent me."

She went openmouthed. "You're _Lane_."

"I'm the guy they told you about on the 3V. Where's the Mayor? Ain't
this his place?"

"No. No, you're in the wrong room. The wrong building. That's the
Mayor's suite over there." She pointed. "See where the balcony is? This
is the Embassy suite. If you want the Mayor you'll have to go over
there."

"Whaddaya know," said Lane. "Cybrain didn't know, no more than me."

The girl noticed the dark swell of the force-globe. "What's that out
there?"

"Force-screen. Nothing gets past, except maybe a full-size blaster-beam.
Keeps cops out. Keeps you in. You anybody important?"

"I told you, I'm an ambassador. From Mars. I'm on a diplomatic mission."

"Yeah? Mars a big city?"

She stared at him, violet eyes wide. "The _planet_ Mars."
