remember that he galloped away among the bushes. No doubt, too, he was
driven a long distance by the storm. He can't be accounted for in any
other manner."

"There are some guesses so good that you know at once they're right,"
said Obed, "and yours is one of them, Ned. Now that is a valuable horse.
One of the most valuable that ever grazed in a valley of Mexico or any
other valley. He's so precious because we want him, and we want him so
bad that he's worth a million dollars to us."

"That one of us may ride him to Texas."

"Yes, and we may be able to secure another. You stay here, Ned, and let
me catch him. Horses like me better than some men do."

Ned sat down and Obed advanced warily, holding out his hand and
whistling gently. It was a most persuasive whistle, soft and thrilling
and the horse raised his head, looked contemplatively out of large
lustrous eyes at the whistler. Obed advanced, still whistling, in the
most wonderful, enticing manner. Ned felt that if he were a horse he
could not resist it, that he would go to the whistler, expecting to
receive oats, corn, and everything else that a healthy horse loves. It
seemed to have some such effect upon the quarry that Obed coveted,
because the horse, after withdrawing a step, advanced toward the man.

Obed stopped, but continued to whistle, pouring forth the most beautiful
and winning trills and quavers. The horse came and Obed, reaching out,
seized the bridle which hung loose. He stroked the horse's head and the
animal rubbed his nose against his shoulder. The conquest was complete.
Bridle in hand, Obed led the way and Ned met him.

"I think our good horse here was lonesome," said Obed, "Horses that are
used to human beings miss 'em for a while when they lose 'em, and we're
not enslaving our friend by taking him. Here's a lariat coiled at the
saddle bow; we'll just tether him by that, and let him go on with his
grazing, while we get our breakfast. You will notice, too, Ned, that
we've taken more than a horse. See this pair of holster pistols swung
across the saddle and ammunition to fit. The enemy is still supplying us
with our needs, Ned."

As they ate breakfast they resolved to secure another horse. Obed was of
the opinion that the army of Cos was not far away, and he believed that
he could steal one. At least, he was willing to try on the following
night, and, if he succeeded, their problem would be simplified greatly.

They remained nearly all the morning in the little valley and devoted a
large part of the time to developing their acquaintance with the horse,
which was a fine animal, amenable to good treatment, and ready to follow
his new masters.

"He looks like an American horse," said Obed, with satisfaction, "and
maybe he is one, stolen from the Texans. He'll carry one of us over many
miles of sand and cactus, and he'll be none the worse for it. But he
needs a friend. Horse was not made to live alone. It's my sympathy for
him as much as the desire for another mount that drives me to the theft
we contemplate."

Ned laughed and lolled on the grass which was now dry.

"Yon stay here with Bucephalus or Rosinante or whatever you choose to
call him," continued Obed, "and I think I'll cross the hills, and see if
Cos is near. If we're going to capture a horse, we must first know where
the horse is to be found."

"Suppose I go along, too."

"No, it would be easier for the Mexicans to see two than one, and we
shouldn't take unnecessary risks. Be sure you stay in the valley, Ned,
because I want to know where to find you when I come back. I've an idea
that the Mexican army isn't far, as we wound around a good deal during
the storm and darkness, and covered no great distance, if it were
counted in a straight line. At least I think so."

"You'll find me here."

Obed went toward the east, and Ned continued to make himself comfortable
on the grass, which was so long and thick that it almost hid his body.
But it was truly luxurious. It seemed that after so much hardship and
danger he could not get enough rest. He felt quite safe, too. It would
take a careful observer to see him lying there in the deep grass. It was
warm and dry where he lay, and the little valley was well hemmed in by
forest in which crotons, mimosas, myrtle oaks, okote pine and many other
trees grew. Some had large rich blossoms and he admired their beauty.

His eyes wandered back from the forest to their new friend, the horse.
Besides being an animal of utility the horse added to their comradeship.
Ned felt that he still had a friend with him, although Obed was away.
Obed had spoken truly. It was a fine horse, a bay, tall, strong and
young, grazing with dignified content, at the end of a lariat about
forty feet in length.

Ned watched the horse idly, and soon he saw him raise his head, stand
perfectly still for a moment or two, and then sniff the wind. The next
instant an extraordinary manifestation came from him. He whirled about
and galloped so fast to the end of his tether that he was thrown down by
the sharp jerk. He regained his feet and stood there, trembling all
over. His great eyes were distended. Ned had never before seen such a
picture of terror.

The boy raised himself a little in the grass, but not so high that he
would be seen by an enemy. It was his first idea that Mexicans had come,
but the horse would not show such fright at the presence of human
beings. He looked in the direction opposite to the spot on which the
horse was standing. At first he saw nothing, but with intent looking he
detected a great body crouched in the grass and stealing forward slowly.
It was their old enemy, the jaguar, not a black one but tawny in color.

Ned's rage rose. First a jaguar had attacked him, and now another was
stalking their horse. He felt pity for the poor animal which was tied,
and which could not escape. Now man who had tied him must save him. Ned
knew that if he cut the lariat the horse in its terror might run away
and never be retaken. A shot might be heard by the Mexicans, but he
believed that the probabilities were against it, and he decided to use
the rifle.

He raised himself just a little more, careful to make no noise, and
watched the jaguar stealing through the tall grass, so intent on the
horse that it failed to notice the most dangerous of all enemies who lay
near. But Ned waited until the flank of the animal was well presented,
and, taking a sure aim, fired.

The jaguar shot up into the air, as if an electric spring had been
released, then came down with a thump and was dead. The horse neighed in
terror at sight of his leaping foe and trembled more violently than
ever. Ned went to him first, and tried to soothe him which was a long
and difficult task. At last, he untethered the horse and led him to the
far end of the valley, where he tethered him again at least two hundred
yards from the dead body of the jaguar. Returning he looked at the
fallen animal, and marked with pleasure the correctness of his aim. He
had shot the jaguar squarely through the heart. Then he went back to his
place in the grass, but he did not doze or dream. The Mexicans might
come, drawn by his shot, and even if they did not, a member of the
unpleasant jaguar tribe might take a notion to stalk the only available
human being in that grassy little valley.

But no Mexicans appeared, nor did he observe any other jaguar. When the
sun set, he began to feel a little uneasy about Obed. His uneasiness
increased with the darkness, but he was finally reassured by a whistle
from the head of the valley. Then he saw Obed's tall figure striding
down the slope in the dusk, and he went forward to meet him.

"I suppose you've spent the afternoon sleeping," said Obed.

"I might have done so, but we had a visitor."

"A visitor? What kind of a visitor?"

"A jaguar. He wanted to eat our horse and as the horse could not get
away, being tethered strongly, I had to shoot his jaguarship."

He showed Obed the body, and his comrade approved highly of the shot.

"And now for the history of my own life and adventures during the
afternoon," said Obed. "The country to the eastward is not rough, and I
made good time through it. Sure enough the army of Cos is there, about
five miles away, camped in a plain. It was beaten about a good deal by
the storm, and it keeps poor guard, because it is in its own country far
from any expected foe, and because the Mexicans are Mexicans. I think,
Ned, that we can lift a horse without great trouble or excessive danger.
We'll go over there about midnight."

"And we'd better take our present horse with us," said Ned, "or other
jaguars may come."

They remained in their own valley until the appointed time, and then set
out on a fairly dark night, each taking his turn at riding the horse.
They halted at the crest of a low hill, from which they saw the flash of
camp fires.

"That's Cos and his army," said Obed. "They're down there, sprawled all
about the valley, and I imagine that by this time they're all asleep,
including a majority of the sentinels, and that's our opportunity."

They tethered their own horse and crept down the slope. Soon they came
to the edge of the woods and saw the camp fires more plainly. All had
burned low, but they made out the shapes of tents, and, nearer by, a
dark mass which they concluded to be the horses belonging to the lancers
and other cavalry. They approached within a hundred yards, and saw no
sentinels by the horses, although they were able to discern several
moving figures farther on.

"Now, Ned," said Obed, "you stay here and I'll try to cut out a horse,
the very best that I can find. Sit down on the ground, and have your
rifle ready. If I'm discovered and have to run for it you shoot the
first of my pursuers."

Ned obeyed and Obed stole down toward the horses. Ned knew his comrade's
skill, and he believed he would employ the soft whistle that had been so
effective with the first horse. He watched the dark figure stealing
forward, and he admired Obed's skill. It would be almost impossible for
anyone to notice so faint a shadow in the darkness. Nevertheless, his
heart beat heavily. Despite all that Obed had said it was a dangerous
task, requiring both skill and luck.

The faint shadow reached the black blur of the horses and disappeared.
Ned waited five minutes, ten, fifteen minutes, while the little pulses
beat hard in his temples. Then he saw a shadow detach itself from the
black blur. It was the figure of a man and he was on horseback. Obed had
succeeded.

Ned remained kneeling, rifle in hand, to guard against any mistake. The
man on horseback rode toward him, while the sprawling army of Cos still
slept. Then Ned saw clearly that it was Obed, and that he rode a
magnificent black horse, sixteen hands high, as fiery as any that could
be found in all Mexico.

In another moment Obed was by his side, looking down from the height of
his horse. In the moonlight Ned saw that his face was glowing.

"Isn't he a beauty?" he said. "And I think, too, that he likes me. There
were three or four sentinels down there by the horses, but all of them
were fast asleep, and I had time to pick. I've also brought away a roll
of blankets, two for each of us, and I never woke a man. Now, Ned, we're
furnished complete, and we're off to Texas with your message."

"The first thing, I suppose, is to introduce our horses to each other."

"Correct. You and I are friends, Ned, and so must our horses be."

They took a last look at the sleeping camp and went away through the
woods. Obed dismounted, and led his horse to the place where the second
was tied. The two horses whinnied and rubbed noses.

"It's all right," said Obed. "When horse and man agree who can stop us?"

Ned mounted the first, the bay, while Obed retained the black. Then they
rode all through the night, coming about dawn to a plain which turned
to sand and cactus, as they advanced further into the north. There was
no water here, but they had rilled their water bottles at the last brook
and they had no fear of perishing by thirst. Although they had passed
the army of Cos they did not fail to keep a vigilant watch. They knew
that patrols of Mexicans would be in the north, and the red men were
also to be feared. They were coming into regions across which mounted
Indians often passed, doing destruction with rifle and lance, spear and
arrow. Both had more apprehension now about Indians than Mexicans.

At noon of that day they saw four horsemen on their left who shaped
their course toward theirs in such a manner that if they moved at an
equal pace they would meet at the point of a triangle. But the horses
that Ned and Obed rode were powerful animals, far superior to the
ordinary Mexican mounts, and they rode steadily ahead, apparently taking
no notice of the four on their flank.

"They're Mexican scouts," said Obed, "I'm sure of it, but I don't
believe that they'll come too close. They see that we have rifles, and
they know the deadly nature of the Texan rifle. If we are friends it's
all right, if we are Texans it will be wise to keep at a good distance."

Obed was a good prophet. The Mexicans, at a distance of almost a quarter
of a mile, raised a great shout. The two took no notice of it, but rode
on, their faces toward the north.

"I can talk good Spanish or Mexican," said Obed, "and so can you, but
I'm out riding now and I don't feel like stopping for conversation. Ah,
there they are shouting again, and as I live, Ned, they're increasing
their speed. We'll give 'em a sign."

Obed and Ned wheeled about and raised their rifles. The four Mexicans,
who were galloping their ponies, stopped abruptly. Obed and Ned turned
and rode on.

"We gave 'em a sign," said Obed, "and they saw it. We're in no danger,
Ned. We could beat 'em either in a fight or a run. The battle is
sometimes to the strong and the race to the swift."

It was obvious that the Mexicans, who were probably only scouts, did not
want a fight with formidable Texans who carried such long rifles. They
dropped back until Ned, taking a final look, could not tell their
distant figures from the stem of the lonesome cactus.

"Horses and rifles are mighty useful in their place," said Obed. "Add to
them wood and water and what little more a man needs he should be able
to find."

"It's wood and water that we ought to hunt now."

"We may strike both before night, but if not we'll ride on a while
anyhow, and maybe we'll find 'em."

They went deeper into the great upland which was half a desert and half
a plain. Occasionally they saw besides the cactus, mesquite and yucca
and some clumps of coarse grass.

"Bunch grass," said Obed, "like that which you find further north, and
mighty good it is, too, for cattle and horses. We'll have plenty of food
for these two noble steeds of ours, and I shouldn't be surprised, too,
if we ran across big game. It's always where the bunch grass grows."

They did not reach wood and water by nightfall, but, riding two hours
longer in a clear twilight, they found both. The plain rose and fell in
deep swells, and in the deepest of the swells to which they had yet to
come they found a trickling stream of clear water, free from alkali,
fringed on either shore with trees of moderate size.

"Here we are," said Obed, "and here we stay till morning. You never know
how fine water looks until you've been a long time without it."

They let their horses drink first, and then, going further up the
stream, drank freely of the water themselves. They found it cold and
good, and they were refreshed greatly. There was also a belt of
excellent grass, extending a hundred yards back on either side of the
stream, and, unsaddling and tethering their horses, they let them graze.
Both Ned and Obed would have liked a fire, but they deemed it dangerous,
and they ate their food cold. After supper, Obed walked up the stream a
little distance, examining the ground on either side of the water. When
he came back he said to Ned:

"I saw animal tracks two or three hundred yards up the creek, and they
were made by big animals. Buffalo range about here somewhere, and we may
see 'em before we get through."

"I wouldn't mind having a shot at a fine buffalo," said Ned. But he was
not very eager about it. He was thinking more then of sleep. Obed, while
thinking of sleep also, was thinking of other things, too, and he was
somewhat troubled in his mind. But he bore himself as a man of cheerful
countenance.

"Now, Ned," he said, "you and I cannot go forever without sleep. We've
been through a good deal and we haven't closed our eyes for thirty-six
hours. I feel as if I had pound weights tied to my eyelids."

"Two-pound weights are tied to mine."

"Then we'll prove the value of my foresight in obtaining the two sets of
blankets by using them at once."

Each lay down between his blankets, and Ned was soon asleep, but Obed,
by a violent effort, kept his eyes open. He could never remember a time
when it seemed sweeter to sleep, but he struggled continually against
it. When he saw that Ned's slumber was deep he rose and walked up and
down the stream again, going a half mile in either direction.

At one point where there was a break in the fringe of trees the imprints
of the mighty hoofs were numerous, and, mingled with them, were tracks
made by horses' hoofs. It was these that worried Obed so much. They were
made by unshod hoofs, but evidently they were two or three days old,
and, after all, the riders might have passed on, not to return.
Smothering his anxiety as much as possible he went back to their little
camp, crept between his two blankets which felt very warm, and began to
watch with his eyes and ears, vowing to himself that he would not sleep.

Yet within two hours he slept. Exhausted nature triumphed over will and
claimed her own. He was not conscious of any struggle. He was awake and
then he was not. The two tethered horses, having eaten all they wanted,
also settled themselves comfortably and slept.

But while the two, or rather the four slept, something was moving far
out on the plain.

It was an immense black mass with a front of more than a mile, and it
was coming toward Ned and Obed. This mass had been disturbed by a great
danger and it advanced with mighty heavings and tramplings. Ned and Obed
slept calmly for a long time, but as the black front of the moving mass
drew closer to the creek and its thin lines of trees, the boy stirred in
his blankets. A vague dream came and then a state that was half an
awakening. He was conscious in a dim way of a low, thundering sound that
approached and he sprang to his feet. The next instant a neigh of terror
came from one of the horses and Obed, too, awoke.

"Listen!" exclaimed Ned. "Hear that roar! And it's drawing near, too!"

"Yes, it's a buffalo herd!" said Obed. "We're far enough north now to be
within the buffalo ranges, and they're coming down on us fast. But they
must be scared or be drawn on by something, because it's not yet dawn."

"All of which means that it's time for us to go."

"Or be trodden to death."

Naturally, they had slept in their clothes and they quickly gathered up
their arms and baggage. Then they released their frightened horses,
sprang upon their backs and galloped toward the north. They felt secure
now, so far as the herd was concerned. Their horses could easily take
them out of its reach.

"Maybe they'll stop at the creek," said Ned. "I should think that the
water would hold anything in this thirsty land."

Obed shook his head, but offered no further answer. The thunder of the
hoofs now filled their ears, and, as the sound advanced steadily, it was
evident that the creek had not stopped the buffalo herd.

The dawn suddenly came up sharp and clear after the manner of southern
lands. The heavens turned blue, and a rosy light suffused the prairie.
Then Ned saw the front of the buffalo herd extending two or three miles
to right and to left. And he saw more. He saw the cause of the terror
that had smitten the herd.

Brown men, almost naked and on horseback, darted in and out among the
buffaloes, shooting and stabbing. They were muscular men, fierce of
countenance, and their long black hair streamed out behind them. Some
carried rifles and muskets, and others carried lances and bows and
arrows.

"Lipans," said Obed, "one of the fiercest of all the southwestern
tribes. They belong mostly across the Rio Grande, but I suppose they've
come for the buffalo. Ned, we're not wanted here."

After the single look they were away toward the north, moving at a
smooth and easy gallop. They were truly thankful now that the horses
they rode were so large and powerful, evidently of American breed. It
was not difficult to increase the distance between them and the herd,
and they hoped to slip away before they were seen by any of the Lipans.
But a sudden shout behind them, a long, piercing whoop showed that they
had reckoned wrong.

The two looked back. A group of warriors had gathered in advance of the
band, and it was obvious, as they galloped on, that they had seen the
two fugitives. Two or three shook their long lances, and pointed them
straight at Ned and Obed. Then uttering that long, menacing whoop again,
the group, about twenty in number, rode straight for the two, while the
