water boat was alongside the Josephine, filling up the water tanks and
casks. Later in the day several shore boats came off to deliver the
provisions and supplies which the steward had purchased. Before night
the Josephine was ready for the long cruise up the Mediterranean,
though none of the students on board of the ship knew that anything
unusual was in progress.




CHAPTER XI.

A SHORT LECTURE ON GERMANY.


In answer to the summons of the boatswain, "All hands, attend lecture,
ahoy!" both ships' companies assembled in the steerage of the Young
America. The Arbuckles had seats near the foremast, on which the
professor displayed his maps, diagrams, and other illustrations of his
teachings. These lectures were received with different degrees of favor
by various students. While such as Paul Kendall, Shuffles, Gordon, and
Tremere regarded them as very valuable privileges, others considered
them as intolerable bores. Some were interested in a portion of the
descriptions and historical details, others closed their ears to the
whole, though all listened to anything that could be considered a
story.

The runaways were among those who regarded the present lecture--since
they did not expect to visit Germany--as an intolerable nuisance. They
were careful to select places where they could listen or not, without
attracting the attention of the professor. Herman and Perth had seated
themselves near one of the gangways before the boatswain sounded the
call. The latter held a very doubtful position on board. Although he
wore the white ribbon of the Order of the Faithful, it was a problem
whether he was in sympathy with the objects of the institution. He had
declined to serve as a seaman in place of the mutineers; but in spite
of his refusal, he took his place at the capstan, and went aloft when
the order was given to shake out the topsails. He did not like the idea
of being alone, and if he did not formally recant in so many words, he
did so by his actions. No fault could be found with him, so far as the
faithful discharge of his duty was concerned; still his position was
not altogether satisfactory.

Not only the faculty and the officers were in doubt in regard to his
standing, but also his former associates. He had done nothing to
indicate his regret for the past, on the one hand, and nothing to
assure his runaway friends that he was still in sympathy with them. The
principal did not know where to put him, and, consequently, was unable
to decide whether or not he should be relieved from the penalty of his
transgressions in the Josephine, and be permitted to accompany the
party to Germany.

"Are you going to the Rhine with the rest of the fellows, Perth?" asked
Herman, as they seated themselves at the opening of Gangway B.

"That's more than I know; but I suppose not, for I am considered too
wicked," replied the master, lightly.

"I thought you had joined the lambs."

_"Nicht viel!"_

"What do you mean by that?"

"Not much!"

"We all thought so. You have hardly spoken a word to one of our fellows
since you went into the cabin," added Herman.

"Well, I've prayed for you all the same. I declined to take a seaman's
place when you fellows in the steerage slopped over, and wouldn't come
to time."

"You didn't, though!"

"I did, though; but I couldn't stand alone, and I sort of backed out,
just as the rest of you did, and went to work at the braces and
buntlines."

"Then you really are not a lamb?"

"Not if I know myself! I didn't do anything to get into the cabin; so
it isn't my fault that I'm there. Whether I go to the Rhine or not, I
suppose it is certain enough that the rest of our fellows will not."

"No; we have spoiled all our chances."

"There's no doubt of that," laughed Perth.

"But we are going to Paris," added Herman, in a whisper. "We have the
wires all laid down."

"Are you, though?" said Perth, deeply interested in the communication.
"I should like to go with you."

"But we are not going in a bunch; only two or three in a squad. Don't
say anything to any of our fellows about it."

"I never says nothing to nobody," laughed Perth. "But I want to know
more about it."

"The arrangements are all made, and I don't think there is any chance
to fail."

"Good!"

But the professor commenced his lecture at this point, and the steerage
was hushed, so that it was not prudent even to whisper. The students
were all required, at these lectures, to be prepared with paper and
pencils, so that they could take notes, especially of dates and
statistics.

"Our party consists of Little, Ibbotson and myself," Herman wrote on
his paper, which he placed so that Perth could read it.

"Have you any stamps?" Perth wrote.

"No; but Ibbotson has a letter of credit on which he can raise some."

"My uncle, in Glasgow, sent me twenty pounds--four five-pound notes--at
the request of my father. I got it at Havre," wrote Perth. "I will join
you in Paris if I go to Germany; if not, I will start with you. Pop. N.
Ger., 28 mill.; S. Ger., 12.5 mill.; total, 40.5 mill.; about equal to
pop. of France."

The sudden change in the style of the second master's notes is
accounted for by the fact that the principal entered the steerage at
the moment indicated by the break in the conversation between the two
runaways. They were in the rear of all the other students, and were
fully exposed to Mr. Lowington's gaze as he passed out of the main
cabin. Perhaps he did not think it was quite natural for such students
as Perth and Herman to be engaged so industriously in taking notes; or
it may be that his practised eye fully comprehended at a glance the
nature of their occupation. The instant the door opened, Herman slyly
slipped off the sheet on which he had been writing, and thrust it into
his pocket. Perth had written over one of his small pages of note
paper, and begun upon a second. He had, when his companion had read
what he wrote upon it, slipped the first sheet into the atlas, which
served as a desk for him.

Mr. Lowington walked to the vicinity of Gangway B, and paused there.
Perth turned down the upper part of the sheet, on which he had written
the last part of his message to Herman, so that nothing objectionable
appeared on it, even if the principal took it into his head to look
over his shoulder. Perth was not at all flurried--he was too old a
rogue to commit himself by any weakness; and when he had written down
the statement of the professor, he paused and looked at the speaker, as
though he was wholly and entirely absorbed in the lecture. The entrance
of Mr. Lowington caused many of the students to look behind them, as
boys will do in school, on the smallest pretence. Mr. Mapps insisted
upon the students' attention, and he paused till his hearers had
gratified their curiosity.

Mr. Lowington did not appear to be quite satisfied with the conduct of
Perth, and, reaching over the shoulder of the second master, he took
the paper from the atlas. Of course this act produced a sensation among
the boys; the most insignificant event creates a sensation in the
school-room. Mr. Mapps lowered the pointer, and intimated by his
actions that he did not intend to proceed till order was restored.
Perth was confounded this time, if he never was before.

"What kind of a lecture are you delivering, Mr. Mapps?" asked the
principal, with a smile.

"A lecture on Germany, such as I have usually given on these
occasions."

"As this young gentleman writes it down, it seems to me rather a
singular lecture. I will read it."

Perth wanted to drop through into the hold.

"'I will join you in Paris if I go to Germany; if not, I will start
with you. Population North Germany, twenty-eight millions; South
Germany, twelve and a half millions; total, forty and a half millions;
about equal to population of France.' The latter part seems to be a
little more germane than the first part. 'I will join you in Paris if I
go to Germany,' is rather paradoxical, and I conclude that the young
gentleman has not correctly reported this part of your lecture."

"I think not, sir," laughed Mr. Mapps. "I do not remember saying
anything about going to Paris."

"Well, Mr. Perth, I recommend that you take a seat nearer to the
professor, so that you can understand him better; for certainly you
make very bad work of taking notes," added Mr. Lowington, as he pointed
to a seat near the foremast.

Perth walked forward, and took the place indicated. Mr. Mapps proceeded
with the lecture; but it is doubtful whether the second master
understood him any better than before, he was so completely absorbed by
the consideration of the little difficulty into which he had so
heedlessly plunged himself. After all, the situation was not so bad as
it might be. The principal could make nothing of the sentence he had
read, and as nothing had been found upon Herman, he could trust to his
ingenuity to explain away the meaning of it. So he used his brain in
trying to devise a solution of the sentence which would satisfy the
principal, instead of attending to the lecture, which he feared would
have no practical value to him.

A large majority of the students were deeply interested in the remarks
of the professor, and as they were to be in Germany in a few days, even
the dry statistics were considerably valued. As it would not be civil
to report the professor's lecture from the middle, where it was
interrupted by the entrance of the principal, it is necessary to return
to the commencement of it.

"What is the German for Germany?" asked the professor, as he picked up
his pointer.

"Deutschland."

"The French?"

"Allemagne."

"Germany can hardly be called a nation, though in some respects it is
similar to the United States. It is a confederation of nations, though
the people speak the same language, and are united by many other common
ties of manners and customs, as well as of contiguity of territory. But
it is peculiar in some respects, as, Prussia is a nation, under its own
king and laws; but only a portion of it belongs to Germany. Austria[1]
is an empire, under its own emperor; but only a part of his dominions
are represented in the Germanic Confederation. Its several states are
united for some specific purposes, such as the collection of certain
taxes, and mutual defence. In other respects its empires, kingdoms,
duchies, &c., are independent nations, making their own laws, and
regulating their own affairs."

      [1] Professor Mapps describes Germany as it was before the war of
      1866, and the subsequent reconstruction of North Germany. In
      "NORTHERN LANDS, OR YOUNG AMERICA IN PRUSSIA AND RUSSIA," the
      present status of Germany will be explained.

"I don't exactly understand the relations of Austria and Prussia to the
Germanic Confederation," said Paul Kendall. "How can part of them
belong to the confederation without the whole?"

"Very easily," replied the professor; "though, if you ask me why a
part, and not the whole, of Prussia or Austria should be included in
the Germanic Confederation, I cannot tell you, unless it be to preserve
'ancient landmarks.' The province of Prussia proper was not German; and
that may be a very good reason why it never should be. Germany is a
league of the several sovereignties into which the old German empire
had fallen. The archduchy of Austria was, and Hungary was not, German,
in the reign of the emperors. Holstein-Lauenburg[2] belongs to Denmark,
but belongs, at the same time, to Germany. Of the eight provinces of
Prussia, two are not included in the confederation. Of the twenty-one
states or provinces which constitute the Austrian empire, eleven are
German.

      [2] Annexed to Prussia in 1866.

"I can see no good reason why, if the Germanic league is of any
service, the provinces of Prussia and Posen should not be admitted, as
well as the other six divisions of the kingdom of Prussia. We take the
fact as we find it. Germany, then, is simply a union of states for
certain purposes. It is not, in any proper sense, a nation. It does not
send representatives to foreign countries, and it can make laws and
regulations only to cover the purposes of the league.

"In 1863 there were thirty-four states represented in the
confederation. The empire of Austria cast four votes in the general
convention; the kingdoms of Prussia, Bavaria, Saxony, Hanover, and
Wuertemburg, also four each; other states, grand duchies, duchies,
electorates, principalities, landgraviates, and free cities, from one
to three, according to their size and importance. These representatives
meet at Frankfort, which is the capital of Germany. The population of
Northern Germany is about twenty-eight millions; of Southern Germany,
twelve and a half millions; making about forty and a half millions, or
about equal to that of France.

"Of the early history of Germany there is no authentic record. The
ancient Romans had no knowledge of the people north of the Danube and
east of the Rhine, except as the barbarous tribes who made incursions
into their territory. When Gaul came into the possession of the Romans,
they learned more of the barbarians of the north, who were called
Germani--a word which is probably derived from _ger_, a spear,
indicating their warlike character. Among these tribes were the
Teutons, the Saxons, the Franks, the Goths, the Vandals, the Gauls,
whose names are common in history. Clovis, the ancient sovereign of the
Frankish empire, and his successors, conquered these tribes, and
incorporated their territory in the Empire of the West, which reached
the height of its glory under the reign of Charlemagne. His son Louis
was too weak to rule so vast a realm, and in 843 the empire was divided
into three parts, and given to his three sons. France became the
portion of Charles the Bald; Italy, of Lothaire; and Germany, of Louis.
At this time the German kingdom extended from the Rhine to the Elbe,
and from the German Ocean to the Danube.

"During the succeeding century, Germany was partitioned into three
smaller divisions, became a part of France again, and the throne was
subverted by the nobles, who elected the kings. Portions of Italy, and
other territory beyond the Elbe, were conquered. I will not weary you
even by mentioning the line of kings who followed. Their dominions were
torn by dissensions, while they struggled to increase their power. In
1273, Count Rudolph of Hapsburg was elected emperor, and, after a
fierce struggle with the unruly barons, succeeded in establishing his
authority, and in obtaining possession of the dukedom of Austria, and
several other provinces. The house of Hapsburg has to the present time
retained the throne of Austria.

"Jealous of the growing power of the Hapsburgs, the nobles elected
Adolph, Count of Nassau, Emperor of Germany; but Albert, Rudolph's son
and successor, wrested the crown from him. The Hapsburgs had
possessions in Switzerland, when the house obtained its power in
Austria, and they held them as dependencies upon the dukedom. The Swiss
revolted in the reign of Albert, and their long and severe struggle for
independence was commenced at this time.

"During the reign of Sigismund, one of the successors of Albert, John
Huss, the reformer, was burned at the stake at Constance, whither he
had gone with the safe-conduct of the emperor. His martyrdom caused the
Hussite war, in which several severe battles were fought, including one
at Prague. In 1593, Maximilian I. succeeded to the throne; and in his
reign the Reformation by Luther began. Charles V., the grandson of
Maximilian,--of whom I spoke to you in giving the history of Holland
and Belgium,--united the crowns of Spain, Germany, the Netherlands, and
Naples, and the empire became the leading power of Europe. The
Reformation produced fierce dissensions and savage contests. Charles
was obliged, sorely against his will, to grant privileges to his
Lutheran subjects. But he was disgusted with power, and resigned his
crown. He was succeeded by his brother, Ferdinand I., as Emperor of
Germany, and by his son, Philip II., as King of Spain; to whom, also,
he gave his possessions in the Netherlands. The dissensions in the
empire enabled France on the west and Turkey on the east to wrest
valuable possessions from it. The successors of Charles V. were unable
to breast the storm of progress successfully, and the imperial
authority was completely shattered. The power of the petty rulers of
small states increased and overshadowed that of the central authority.

"The emperors Ferdinand and Matthias treated the Protestants with so
much severity, committing the most flagrant outrages upon them, that it
brought on the Thirty Years' War. When Matthias died, the insurgents
declared the throne vacant, and chose the Elector Frederick emperor.
The Protestant princes fought for him, while the Catholic powers
sustained Ferdinand II., Archduke of Austria. Peace was established, by
the treaty of Westphalia, in 1648, by which Germany lost a portion of
her territory. After these events, the power of the emperors waned
still more, until their title was little more than a surname of the
rulers of Austria. When Prussia became a great Protestant power, under
Frederick the Great, she was a check upon Austria, and prevented the
latter from reestablishing the ancient power of the German empire.

"The French revolution practically destroyed the empire. Francis II. of
Austria, overwhelmed by Napoleon, ceded to him the country on the left
bank of the Rhine. When the Rhenish Confederation of Napoleon was
formed, in 1806, Francis resigned the crown of the German empire, which
was thus formally dissolved. Many changes in territorial limits were
made, and the free cities lost their independence. The country was
either actually or virtually subject to Napoleon, who dictated its
policy, and levied heavy contributions upon it.

"As it was not possible for all these small states to maintain their
separate independence unaided, when the Allied Powers had driven
Napoleon from Europe, and restored the nations to their original
condition, it became necessary to regulate the affairs of Germany.
Prussia objected to an independent empire, whose power might endanger
her safety and progress; and a confederation of the states was formed
in 1815, which exists at the present time."[3]

      [3] Dissolved in 1866.

The professor continued to describe the country, and to define the
powers and duties of the Federal Diet; but as many changes have been
made in the government and in the states, it is not necessary to
transcribe his remarks to these pages. He promised, as occasion might
offer on their travels, to give the students further explanations of
the nature of the territory, governments, and local peculiarities of
the several states they might visit. The boys were satisfied with this
arrangement, and the session was closed. The boatswain immediately
piped all hands to muster on deck.

"Whom do you purpose to join in Paris, if you go to Germany?" asked Mr.
Lowington, when Perth appeared among the officers.

"My uncle," replied the second master, promptly.

"Your uncle from Glasgow, I suppose you mean."

"Yes, sir. He wrote me that he should be in Paris early this month."

"How happened you to be writing the sentence on your paper?"

"I was writing a letter which I intended to copy with ink, as soon as I
