The next protracted squeak suddenly turned into a scream. Then there was
silence. Quorl removed a furry weasel and handed it to the boy.

The pelt was feather soft and still warm. The head hung crazily to the
side where the neck had been broken. The boy looked at the giant's hands
again.

Veins roped across the ligaments' taut ridges. The hair on the joints of
the fingers grew up to edge of the broad, furrowed knuckles. Now the
finders were pulling the brush back over the trap. They crossed the
clearing and Quorl uncovered a second trap. When the hand went into the
trap and the knot of muscle jumped on the brown forearm
(Squeeeeee_raaaaa_!), the boy looked away, out across the great drop.

The sky was smoke gray to the horizon where a sudden streak of orange
marked the sunset. The burning copper disk hung low in the purple gap of
the mountains. A fan of lavender drifted above the orange, and then
white, faint green.... The gray wasn't really gray, it was blue-gray. He
began to count colors, and there were twelve distinct ones (not a
thousand). The last one was a pale gold that tipped the edges of the few
low clouds that clustered near the burning circle.

A touch on the shoulder made the boy turn back. Quorl handed him the
second animal, and they went back into the woods. Later, they had built
a small fire and had skinned and quartered the animals on the
scimitar-like blade that the giant wore. They sat in the diminishing
shell of light with the meat on forked sticks, turning it over the
flame. The boy watched the gray-maroon fibers go first shiny with juice,
and then darken, turn crisp and brown. When the meat was done, Quorl
took a piece of folded skin from his pouch and shook some white powder
onto it. Then he passed the leather envelope to the boy.

The boy poured a scattering of white powder into his palm, then
carefully put his tongue to it. It was salt.

When they had nearly finished eating the forest had grown cooler and
still. Fire made the leaves around them into flickering shingles on the
darkness. Quorl was cleaning the last, tiny bone with big, yellow teeth
when there was a sound. They both turned.

Another branch broke to their left. "Tloto," Quorl called harshly,
followed by some sort of invective.

It moved closer, the boy could hear it moving, closer until the boy saw
the tall shadow at the edge of the ring of light.

With disgust--but without fear, the boy could see--Quorl picked up a
stick and flung it. The shadow dodged and made a small mewing sound.

"Di ta klee, Tloto," Quorl said. "Di ta klee."

Only Tloto didn't _di ta klee_, but came forward instead, into the
light.

Perhaps it had been born of human parents, but to call it human now ...
It was bone naked, hairless, shell white. It had no eyes, no ears, only
a lipless mouth and slitted nostril flaps. It sniffed toward the fire.

Now the boy saw that both the feet were clubbed and gnarled. Only two
fingers on each hand were neither misshapen or stiffly paralyzed. It
reached for Quorl's pile of bones, making the mewing sound with its
mouth.

With a sudden sweep of his hand, Quorl knocked the paraplegic claw away
and shouted another scattering of indifferent curses. Tloto backed away,
turned to the boy, and came forward, its nostril slits widening and
contracting.

The boy had eaten all he could and had a quarter of his meat still left.
It's only a head or two taller than I am, he thought. If it's from this
race of giants, perhaps it's still a child. Maybe it's my age. He stared
at the blank face. It doesn't know what's going on, the boy thought. It
doesn't know what's supposed to be happening.

Perhaps it was just the sound of the word in his head that triggered off
the sudden panic. (Or was it something else that caught in his chest?)
Anyway, he took the unfinished meat and extended it toward Tloto.

The claw jumped forward, grabbed, and snatched back. The boy tried to
make his mouth go into a smile. But Tloto couldn't see, so it didn't
matter. He turned back to the fire, and when he looked up again, Tloto
was gone.

As Quorl began to kick dirt onto the coals, he lectured the boy,
apparently on Tloto and perhaps a few other philosophical concepts. The
boy listened carefully, and understood at least that Tloto was not worth
his concern. Then they lay down beside the little cyst of embers, the
glowing scab of light on the darkness, and slept.

When the giant's hand came down and shook his shoulder, it was still
dark. He didn't jump this time but blinked against the night and pulled
his feet under him. It had grown colder, and dark wind brushed his neck
and fingered his hair. Then a high sound cut above the trees and fell
away. Quorl took the boy's arm and they started through the dark trees
quickly.

Gray light filtered from the left. Was it morning? No. The boy saw it
was the rising moon. The light became white, then silver white. They
reached a cliff at last, beyond which was the dark sea. Broken rock
spilled to ledges below. Fifty feet down, but still a hundred feet above
the water, was the largest table of rock. The moon was high enough to
light the entire lithic arena as well as the small temple at its edge.

In front of the temple stood a man in black robes who blew on a huge
curved shell. The piercing wail sliced high over the sea and the forest.
People were gathering around the edge of the arena. Some came in
couples, some with children, but most were single men and women.

The boy started to go down, but Quorl held him back. They waited. From
sounds about them, the boy realized there were others observing from the
height also. On the water, waves began to glitter with broken images of
the moon. The sky was speckled with stars.

Suddenly a group of people were led from the temple onto the platform.
Most of them were children. One was an old man whose beard twitched in
the light breeze. Another was a tall stately women. All of them were
bound, all of them were near naked, and all except the woman shifted
their feet and looked nervously about.

The priest in the black robe disappeared into the temple, and emerged
again with something that looked to the boy from this distance for all
the world like a back-scratcher. The priest raised it in the moonlight,
and a murmur rose and quieted about the ring of people. The boy saw that
there were three close prongs on the handle, each snagging on the
luminous beams of the moon, betraying their metallic keenness.

The priest walked to the first child and caught the side of her head in
his hand. Then he quickly drew the triple blade down the left side of
her face. She made an indefinite noise, but it was drowned in the rising
whisper of the crowd. He did the same to the next child who began to
cry, and to the next. The woman stood completely still and did not
flinch when the blades opened her cheek. The old man was afraid. The
boy could tell because he whimpered and backed away.

A man and a woman stepped from the ring of people and held him for the
priest. As the blade raked the side of his face, his high senile whine
turned into a scream. The boy thought for a moment of the trapped
animals. The old man staggered away from his captors and no one paid him
any more attention. The priest raised the shell to his mouth once more,
and the high, brilliant sound flooded the arena.

Then, as they had come, silently the people disappeared into the woods.
Quorl touched the boy's shoulder and they too went into the woods. The
boy looked at the giant with a puzzled expression, but there was no
explanation. Once the boy caught sight of a white figure darting at
their left as a shaft of moonlight slipped across a naked shoulder.
Tloto was following them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The boy spent his days learning. Quorl taught him to pull the gut of
animals to make string. It had to be stretched a long time and then
greased with hunks of fat. Once learned it became his job; as did
changing the bait in the traps; as did cutting willow boughs to make
sleeping pallets; as did sorting the firewood into piles of variously
sized wood; as did holding together the sticks while Quorl tied them
together and made a canopy for them, the night it rained.

He learned words, too. At least he learned to understand them.
_Tike_--trap, _Di'tika_--a sprung trap, _Tikan_--two traps. One
afternoon Quorl spent a whole six hours teaching words to the boy. There
were lots of them. Even Quorl, who did not speak much, was surprised how
many had to be learned. The boy did not speak at all. But soon he
understood.

"There is a porcupine," Quorl would say, pointing.

The boy would turn his eyes quickly, following the finger, and then look
back, blinking quietly in comprehension.

They were walking through the forest that evening, and Quorl said, "You
walk as loud as a tapir." The boy had been moving over dry leaves.
Obediently he moved his bare feet to where the leaves were damp and did
not crackle.

Sometimes the boy went alone by the edge of the stream. Once a wild pig
chased him and he had to climb a tree. The pig tried to climb after him
and he sat in the crotch of the branch looking quietly down into the
squealing mouth, the warty gray face; he could see each separate bristle
stand up and lie down as the narrow jaw opened and closed beneath the
skin. One yellow tusk was broken.

Then he heard a mewing sound away to his left. Looking off he saw
slug-like Tloto coming towards his tree. A sudden urge to sound pushed
him closer to speech (_Stay away! Stay Back!_) than he had been since
his arrival in the woods. But Tloto could not see. Tloto could not hear.
His hands tightened until the bark burned his palm.

Suddenly the animal turned from the tree and took off after Tloto.
Instantly the slug-man turned and was gone.

The boy dropped from the tree and ran after the sound of the pig's
crashing in the underbrush. Twenty feet later after tearing through a
net of thick foliage, he burst onto a clearing and stopped.

In the middle of the clearing, the pig was struggling half above ground
and half under. Only it wasn't ground. It was some sort of muckpool
covered by a floating layer of leaves and twigs. The pig was going under
fast.

Then the boy saw Tloto on the other side of the clearing, his nostrils
quivering, his blind head turning back and forth. Somehow the slug-man
must have maneuvered the animal into the trap. He wasn't sure how, but
that must have been what had happened.

The urge that welled in him now came too fast to be stopped. It had too
much to do with the recognition of luck, and the general impossibility
of the whole situation. The boy laughed.

He startled himself with the sound, and after a few seconds stopped.
Then he turned. Quorl stood behind him.

(Squeeeee ... Squeeee ... _raaaaaaa_! Then a gurgle, then nothing.)

Quorl was smiling too, a puzzled smile.

"Why did you--?" (The last word was new. He thought it meant laugh, but
he said nothing.)

The boy turned back now. Tloto and the pig were gone.

Quorl walked the boy back to their camp. As they were nearing the stream
Quorl saw the boy's footprints in the soft earth and frowned. "To leave
your footprints in wet earth is dangerous. The vicious animals come to
drink and they will smell you, and they will follow you, to eat. Suppose
that pig had smelled them and been chasing you, instead of running into
the pool? What then? If you must leave your footprints, leave them in
dry dust. Better not to leave them at all."

The boy listened, and remembered. But that night, he saved a large piece
of meat from his food. When Tloto came into the circle of firelight, he
gave it to him.

Quorl gave a shrug of disgust and flung a pebble at the retreating
shadow. "He is useless," Quorl said. "Why do you waste good food on him?
To throw away good food is a--." (Unintelligible word.) "You do not
understand--." (Another unintelligible word.)

The boy felt something start up inside him again. But he would not let
it move his tongue; so he laughed. Quorl looked puzzled. The boy laughed
again. Then Quorl laughed too. "You will learn. You will learn at last."
Then the giant became serious. "You know, that is the first--sound I
have heard you make since coming here."

The boy frowned, and the giant repeated the sentence. The boy's face
showed which word baffled him.

The giant thought a minute, and then said, "You, me, even Tloto, are
_malika_." That was the word. Now Quorl looked around him. "The trees,
the rocks, the animals, they are not _malika_. But the laughing sound,
that was a _malika_ sound."

The boy thought about it until perhaps he understood. Then he slept.

He laughed a lot during the days now. Survival had come as close to
routine as it could here in the jungle, and he could turn his attention
to more _malika_ concerns. He watched Quorl when they came on other
forest people. With single men and women there was usually only an
exchange of ten or twelve friendly words. If it were a couple,
especially with children, he would give them food. But if they passed
anyone with scars, Quorl would freeze until the person was by.

Once the boy wandered to the temple on the arena of rock. There were
carvings on much of the stone. The sun was high. The carvings
represented creatures somewhere between fish and human. When he looked
up from the rock, he saw that the priest had come from the temple and
was staring at him. The priest stared until he went away.

Now the boy tried to climb the mountain. That was hard because the
footing was slippery and the rocks kept giving. At last he stopped on a
jutting rock that looked down the side of the mountain. He was far from
any place he knew. He was very high. He stood with hand against the
leaning trunk of a near rotten tree, breathing deep and squinting at the
sky. (Three or four times Quorl and he had taken long hunting trips: one
had taken them to the edge of a deserted meadow across which was a
crazily sagging farmhouse. There were no people there. Another had taken
them to the edge of the jungle, beyond which the ground was gray and
broken, and row after row of unsteady shacks sat among clumps of
slithering ferns. Many of the forest people living there had scars and
spent more time in larger groups.) The boy wondered if he could see to
the deserted meadow from here, or to the deadly rows of prison shacks. A
river, a snake of light, coiled through the valley toward the sea. The
sky was very blue.

He heard it first, and then he felt it start. He scrambled back toward
firmer ground but didn't scramble fast enough. The rock tilted, tore
loose, and he was falling. (It pierced through his memory like a white
fire-blade hidden under canvas: "... knees up, chin down, and roll
quick," the girl had said a long time ago.) It was perhaps twenty feet
to the next level. Tree branches broke his fall and he hit the ground
spinning, and rolled away. Something else, the rock or a rotten log, bit
the ground a moment later where he had been. He uncurled too soon,
reaching out to catch hold of the mountain as it tore by him. Then he
hit something hard; then something hit him back, and he sailed off into
darkness in a web of pain.

Much later he shook his head, opened his eyes, then chomped his jaws on
the pain. But the pain was in his leg, so chomping didn't help. He moved
his face across crumbling dirt. The whole left side of his body ached,
the type of ache that comes when the muscles are tensed to exhaustion
but will not relax.

He tried to crawl forward, and went flat down onto the earth, biting up
a mouthful of dirt. He nearly tore his leg off.

He had to be still, calm, find out exactly what was wrong. He couldn't
tear himself to pieces like the wildcat who had gotten caught in the
sprung trap and who had bled to death after gnawing off both hind legs.
He was too _malika_.

But each movement he made, each thought he had, happened in the blurring
green haze of pain. He raised himself up and looked back. Then he lay
down again and closed his eyes. A log the thickness of his body lay
across his left leg. Once he tried to push it away but only bruised his
palm against the bark, and at last went unconscious with the effort.

When he woke up, the pain was very far away. The air was darkening. No,
he wasn't quite awake. He was dreaming about something, something soft,
a little garden, with shadows blowing in at the edge of his vision swift
and cool, a little garden behind the--

Suddenly, very suddenly, it struck him what was happening, the slowing
down of thoughts, his breathing, maybe even his heart. Then he was
struggling again, struggling hard enough that had he still the strength,
