where the people will be glad to feed the Wisest Creature in all the
World."

"Do you mean yourself?" he asked.

"No, I mean you."

The Frogman felt strongly impelled to tell the truth, but struggled hard
against it. His reason told him there was no use in letting Cayke know
he was not wise, for then she would lose much respect for him, but each
time he opened his mouth to speak he realized he was about to tell the
truth and shut it again as quickly as possible. He tried to talk about
something else, but the words necessary to undeceive the woman would
force themselves to his lips in spite of all his struggles. Finally,
knowing that he must either remain dumb or let the truth prevail, he
gave a low groan of despair and said:

"Cayke, I am _not_ the Wisest Creature in all the World; I am not wise
at all."

[Illustration]

"Oh, you must be!" she protested. "You told me so yourself, only last
evening."

"Then last evening I failed to tell you the truth," he admitted, looking
very shamefaced, for a frog. "I am sorry I told you that lie, my good
Cayke; but, if you must know the truth, the whole truth and nothing but
the truth, I am not really as wise as you are."

The Cookie Cook was greatly shocked to hear this, for it shattered one
of her most pleasing illusions. She looked at the gorgeously dressed
Frogman in amazement.

"What has caused you to change your mind so suddenly?" she inquired.

"I have bathed in the Truth Pond," he said, "and whoever bathes in that
water is ever afterward obliged to tell the truth."

"You were foolish to do that," declared the woman. "It is often very
embarrassing to tell the truth. I'm glad _I_ didn't bathe in that
dreadful water!"

The Frogman looked at his companion thoughtfully.

"Cayke," said he, "I want you to go to the Truth Pond and take a bath in
its water. For, if we are to travel together and encounter unknown
adventures, it would not be fair that I alone must always tell you the
truth, while you could tell me whatever you pleased. If we both dip in
the enchanted water there will be no chance in the future of our
deceiving one another."

"No," she asserted, shaking her head positively, "I won't do it, Your
Honor. For, if I told you the truth, I'm sure you wouldn't like me. No
Truth Pond for me. I'll be just as I am, an honest woman who can say
what she wants to without hurting anyone's feelings."

With this decision the Frogman was forced to be content, although he was
sorry the Cookie Cook would not listen to his advice.

[Illustration]




The Unhappy Ferryman

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 14


Leaving the grove where they had slept, the Frogman and the Cookie Cook
turned to the east to seek another house and after a short walk came to
one where the people received them very politely. The children stared
rather hard at the big, pompous Frogman, but the woman of the house,
when Cayke asked for something to eat, at once brought them food and
said they were welcome to it.

"Few people in need of help pass this way," she remarked, "for the
Winkies are all prosperous and love to stay in their own homes. But
perhaps you are not a Winkle," she added.

"No," said Cayke, "I am a Yip, and my home is on a high mountain at the
southeast of your country."

"And the Frogman--is he, also, a Yip?"

"I do not know what he is, other than a very remarkable and highly
educated creature," replied the Cookie Cook. "But he has lived many
years among the Yips, who have found him so wise and intelligent that
they always go to him for advice."

"May I ask why you have left your home, and where you are going?" said
the Winkie woman.

Then Cayke told her of the diamond-studded gold dishpan and how it had
been mysteriously stolen from her house, after which she had discovered
that she could no longer cook good cookies. So she had resolved to
search until she found her dishpan again, because a Cookie Cook who
cannot cook good cookies is not of much use. The Frogman, who wanted to
see more of the world, had accompanied her to assist in the search. When
the woman had listened to this story she asked.

"Then you have no idea, as yet, who has stolen your dishpan?"

"I only know it must have been some mischievous fairy, or a magician, or
some such powerful person, because none other could have climbed the
steep mountain to the Yip Country. And who else could have carried away
my beautiful, magic dishpan without being seen?"

The woman thought about this during the time that Cayke and the Frogman
ate their breakfast. When they had finished she said:

"Where are you going next?"

"We have not decided," answered the Cookie Cook.

"Our plan," explained the Frogman, in his important way, "is to travel
from place to place until we learn where the thief is located, and then
to force him to return the dishpan to its proper owner."

"The plan is all right," agreed the woman, "but it may take you a long
time before you succeed, your method being sort of haphazard and
indefinite. However, I advise you to travel toward the east."

"Why?" asked the Frogman.

[Illustration]

"Because if you went west you would soon come to the desert, and also
because in this part of the Winkie Country no one steals, so your time
here would be wasted. But toward the east, beyond the river, live many
strange people whose honesty I would not vouch for. Moreover, if you
journey far enough east and cross the river for a second time, you will
come to the Emerald City, where there is much magic and sorcery. The
Emerald City is ruled by a dear little girl called Ozma, who also rules
the Emperor of the Winkies and all the Land of Oz. So, as Ozma is a
fairy, she may be able to tell you just who has taken your precious
dishpan. Provided, of course, you do not find it before you reach her."

"This seems to me to be excellent advice," said the Frogman, and Cayke
agreed with him.

"The most sensible thing for you to do," continued the woman, "would be
to return to your home and use another dishpan, learning to cook cookies
as other people cook cookies, without the aid of magic. But, if you
cannot be happy without the magic dishpan you have lost, you are likely
to learn more about it in the Emerald City than at any other place in
Oz."

They thanked the good woman and on leaving her house faced the east and
continued in that direction all the way. Toward evening they came to the
west branch of the Winkie River and there, on the river bank, found a
ferryman who lived all alone in a little yellow house.

This ferryman was a Winkie with a very small head and a very large
body. He was sitting in his doorway as the travelers approached him and
did not even turn his head to look at them.

"Good evening," said the Frogman.

The ferryman made no reply.

"We would like some supper and the privilege of sleeping in your house
until morning," continued the Frogman. "At daybreak we would like some
breakfast and then we would like to have you row us across the river."

The ferryman neither moved nor spoke. He sat in his doorway and looked
straight ahead.

"I think he must be deaf and dumb," Cayke whispered to her companion.
Then she stood directly in front of the ferryman and putting her mouth
close to his ear she yelled as loudly as she could:

"Good evening!"

The ferryman scowled.

"Why do you yell at me, woman?" he asked.

"Can you hear what I say?" she asked in her ordinary tone of voice.

"Of course," replied the man.

"Then why didn't you answer the Frogman?"

"Because," said the ferryman, "I don't understand the frog language."

"He speaks the same words that I do and in the same way," declared
Cayke.

"Perhaps," replied the ferryman; "but to me his voice sounded like a
frog's croak. I know that in the Land of Oz animals can speak our
language, and so can the birds and bugs and fishes; but in _my_ ears
they sound merely like growls and chirps and croaks."

"Why is that?" asked the Cookie Cook in surprise.

"Once, many years ago, I cut the tail off a fox which had taunted me;
and I stole some birds' eggs from a nest to make an omelet with, and
also I pulled a fish from the river and left it lying on the bank to
gasp for lack of water until it died. I don't know why I did those
wicked things, but I did them. So the Emperor of the Winkies--who is the
Tin Woodman and has a very tender tin heart--punished me by denying me
any communication with beasts, birds or fishes. I cannot understand them
when they speak to me, although I know that other people can do so, nor
can the creatures understand a word I say to them. Every time I meet one
of them I am reminded of my former cruelty, and it makes me very
unhappy."

"Really," said Cayke, "I'm sorry for you, although the Tin Woodman is
not to blame for punishing you."

"What is he mumbling about?" asked the Frogman.

[Illustration]

"He is talking to me, but you don't understand him," she replied. And
then she told him of the ferryman's punishment and afterward explained
to the ferryman that they wanted to stay all night with him and be fed.

He gave them some fruit and bread, which was the only sort of food he
had, and he allowed Cayke to sleep in a room of his cottage. But the
Frogman he refused to admit to his house, saying that the frog's
presence made him miserable and unhappy. At no time would he look
directly at the Frogman, or even toward him, fearing he would shed tears
if he did so; so the big frog slept on the river bank, where he could
hear little frogs croaking in the river all the night through. But that
did not keep him awake; it merely soothed him to slumber, for he
realized how much superior he was to them.

Just as the sun was rising on a new day the ferryman rowed the two
travelers across the river--keeping his back to the Frogman all the
way--and then Cayke thanked him and bade him good-bye and the ferryman
rowed home again.

On this side the river there were no paths at all, so it was evident
they had reached a part of the country little frequented by travelers.
There was a marsh at the south of them, sandhills at the north and a
growth of scrubby underbrush leading toward a forest at the east. So the
east was really the least difficult way to go and that direction was the
one they had determined to follow.

Now the Frogman, although he wore green patent-leather shoes with ruby
buttons, had very large and flat feet, and when he tramped through the
scrub his weight crushed down the underbrush and made a path for Cayke
to follow him. Therefore they soon reached the forest, where the tall
trees were set far apart but were so leafy that they shaded all the
spaces between them with their branches.

"There are no bushes here," said Cayke, much pleased, "so we can now
travel faster and with more comfort."

[Illustration]




The Big Lavender Bear

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 15


It was a pleasant place to wander in and the two travelers were
proceeding at a brisk pace when suddenly a voice shouted:

"Halt!"

They looked around in surprise, seeing at first no one at all. Then from
behind a tree there stepped a brown fuzzy bear, whose head came about as
high as Cayke's waist--and Cayke was a small woman. The bear was chubby
as well as fuzzy; his body was even puffy, while his legs and arms
seemed jointed at the knees and elbows and fastened to his body by pins
or rivets. His ears were round in shape and stuck out in a comical way,
while his round black eyes were bright and sparkling as beads. Over his
shoulder the little brown bear bore a gun with a tin barrel. The barrel
had a cork in the end of it and a string was attached to the cork and to
the handle of the gun.

Both the Frogman and Cayke gazed hard at this curious bear, standing
silent for some time. But finally the Frogman recovered from his
surprise and remarked:

"It seems to me that you are stuffed with sawdust and ought not to be
alive."

"That's all you know about it," answered the little Brown Bear in a
squeaky voice. "I am stuffed with a very good quality of curled hair and
my skin is the best plush that was ever made. As for my being alive,
that is my own affair and cannot concern you at all--except that it
gives me the privilege to say you are my prisoners."

"Prisoners! Why do you speak such nonsense?" asked the Frogman angrily.
"Do you think we are afraid of a toy bear with a toy gun?"

"You ought to be," was the confident reply, "for I am merely the sentry
guarding the way to Bear Center, which is a city containing hundreds of
my race, who are ruled by a very powerful sorcerer known as the Lavender
Bear. He ought to be a purple color, you know, seeing he is a King, but
he's only light lavender, which is, of course, second-cousin to royal
purple. So, unless you come with me peaceably, as my prisoners, I shall
fire my gun and bring a hundred bears--of all sizes and colors--to
capture you."

"Why do you wish to capture us?" inquired the Frogman, who had listened
to this speech with much astonishment.

"I don't wish to, as a matter of fact," replied the little Brown Bear,
"but it is my duty to, because you are now trespassing on the domain of
His Majesty the King of Bear Center. Also I will admit that things are
rather quiet in our city, just now, and the excitement of your capture,
followed by your trial and execution, should afford us much
entertainment."

"We defy you!" said the Frogman.

"Oh, no; don't do that," pleaded Cayke, speaking to her companion. "He
says his King is a sorcerer, so perhaps it is he or one of his bears who
ventured to steal my jeweled dishpan. Let us go to the City of the Bears
and discover if my dishpan is there."
