
But it happened that when he was thirty years old, he drove outside of
the palace gates and saw a man who was old and worn out with labour
and whose weak limbs could hardly carry the burden of life. Siddhartha
pointed him out to his coachman, Channa, but Channa answered that there
were lots of poor people in this world and that one more or less did not
matter. The young prince was very sad but he did not say anything and
went back to live with his wife and his father and his mother and tried
to be happy. A little while later he left the palace a second time.
His carriage met a man who suffered from a terrible disease. Siddhartha
asked Channa what had been the cause of this man's suffering, but the
coachman answered that there were many sick people in this world and
that such things could not be helped and did not matter very much. The
young prince was very sad when he heard this but again he returned to
his people.

A few weeks passed. One evening Siddhartha ordered his carriage in order
to go to the river and bathe. Suddenly his horses were frightened by the
sight of a dead man whose rotting body lay sprawling in the ditch beside
the road. The young prince, who had never been allowed to see such
things, was frightened, but Channa told him not to mind such trifles.
The world was full of dead people. It was the rule of life that all
things must come to an end. Nothing was eternal. The grave awaited us
all and there was no escape.

That evening, when Siddhartha returned to his home, he was received with
music. While he was away his wife had given birth to a son. The people
were delighted because now they knew that there was an heir to the
throne and they celebrated the event by the beating of many drums.
Siddhartha, however, did not share their joy. The curtain of life had
been lifted and he had learned the horror of man's existence. The sight
of death and suffering followed him like a terrible dream.

That night the moon was shining brightly. Siddhartha woke up and began
to think of many things. Never again could he be happy until he should
have found a solution to the riddle of existence. He decided to find
it far away from all those whom he loved. Softly he went into the room
where Yasodhara was sleeping with her baby. Then he called for his
faithful Channa and told him to follow.

Together the two men went into the darkness of the night, one to find
rest for his soul, the other to be a faithful servant unto a beloved
master.

The people of India among whom Siddhartha wandered for many years were
just then in a state of change. Their ancestors, the native Indians,
had been conquered without great difficulty by the war-like Aryans
(our distant cousins) and thereafter the Aryans had been the rulers
and masters of tens of millions of docile little brown men. To maintain
themselves in the seat of the mighty, they had divided the population
into different classes and gradually a system of "caste" of the most
rigid sort had been enforced upon the natives. The descendants of the
Indo-European conquerors belonged to the highest "caste," the class of
warriors and nobles. Next came the caste of the priests. Below these
followed the peasants and the business men. The ancient natives,
however, who were called Pariahs, formed a class of despised and
miserable slaves and never could hope to be anything else.

Even the religion of the people was a matter of caste. The old
Indo-Europeans, during their thousands of years of wandering, had met
with many strange adventures. These had been collected in a book called
the Veda. The language of this book was called Sanskrit, and it was
closely related to the different languages of the European continent, to
Greek and Latin and Russian and German and two-score others. The three
highest castes were allowed to read these holy scriptures. The Pariah,
however, the despised member of the lowest caste, was not permitted to
know its contents. Woe to the man of noble or priestly caste who should
teach a Pariah to study the sacred volume!

The majority of the Indian people, therefore, lived in misery. Since
this planet offered them very little joy, salvation from suffering
must be found elsewhere. They tried to derive a little consolation from
meditation upon the bliss of their future existence.

Brahma, the all-creator who was regarded by the Indian people as the
supreme ruler of life and death, was worshipped as the highest ideal of
perfection. To become like Brahma, to lose all desires for riches and
power, was recognised as the most exalted purpose of existence. Holy
thoughts were regarded as more important than holy deeds, and many
people went into the desert and lived upon the leaves of trees and
starved their bodies that they might feed their souls with the glorious
contemplation of the splendours of Brahma, the Wise, the Good and the
Merciful.

Siddhartha, who had often observed these solitary wanderers who were
seeking the truth far away from the turmoil of the cities and the
villages, decided to follow their example. He cut his hair. He took his
pearls and his rubies and sent them back to his family with a message
of farewell, which the ever faithful Channa carried. Without a single
follower, the young prince then moved into the wilderness.

Soon the fame of his holy conduct spread among the mountains. Five young
men came to him and asked that they might be allowed to listen to his
words of wisdom. He agreed to be their master if they would follow him.
They consented, and he took them into the hills and for six years
he taught them all he knew amidst the lonely peaks of the Vindhya
Mountains. But at the end of this period of study, he felt that he was
still far from perfection. The world that he had left continued to
tempt him. He now asked that his pupils leave him and then he fasted for
forty-nine days and nights, sitting upon the roots of an old tree. At
last he received his reward. In the dusk of the fiftieth evening,
Brahma revealed himself to his faithful servant. From that moment on,
Siddhartha was called Buddha and he was revered as the Enlightened One
who had come to save men from their unhappy mortal fate.

The last forty-five years of his life, Buddha spent within the valley of
the Ganges River, teaching his simple lesson of submission and meekness
unto all men. In the year 488 before our era, he died, full of years and
beloved by millions of people. He had not preached his doctrines for the
benefit of a single class. Even the lowest Pariah might call himself his
disciple.

This, however, did not please the nobles and the priests and the
merchants who did their best to destroy a creed which recognised the
equality of all living creatures and offered men the hope of a second
life (a reincarnation) under happier circumstances. As soon as they
could, they encouraged the people of India to return to the ancient
doctrines of the Brahmin creed with its fasting and its tortures of the
sinful body. But Buddhism could not be destroyed. Slowly the disciples
of the Enlightened One wandered across the valleys of the Himalayas, and
moved into China. They crossed the Yellow Sea and preached the wisdom
of their master unto the people of Japan, and they faithfully obeyed the
will of their great master, who had forbidden them to use force. To-day
more people recognise Buddha as their teacher than ever before and their
number surpasses that of the combined followers of Christ and Mohammed.

As for Confucius, the wise old man of the Chinese, his story is a simple
one. He was born in the year 550 B.C. He led a quiet, dignified and
uneventful life at a time when China was without a strong central
government and when the Chinese people were at the mercy of bandits and
robber-barons who went from city to city, pillaging and stealing and
murdering and turning the busy plains of northern and central China into
a wilderness of starving people.

Confucius, who loved his people, tried to save them. He did not have
much faith in the use of violence. He was a very peaceful person. He
did not think that he could make people over by giving them a lot of new
laws. He knew that the only possible salvation would come from a change
of heart, and he set out upon the seemingly hopeless task of changing
the character of his millions of fellow men who inhabited the wide
plains of eastern Asia. The Chinese had never been much interested in
religion as we understand that word. They believed in devils and spooks
as most primitive people do. But they had no prophets and recognised no
"revealed truth." Confucius is almost the only one among the great moral
leaders who did not see visions, who did not proclaim himself as the
messenger of a divine power; who did not, at some time or another, claim
that he was inspired by voices from above.

He was just a very sensible and kindly man, rather given to lonely
wanderings and melancholy tunes upon his faithful flute. He asked for no
recognition. He did not demand that any one should follow him or worship
him. He reminds us of the ancient Greek philosophers, especially those
of the Stoic School, men who believed in right living and righteous
thinking without the hope of a reward but simply for the peace of the
soul that comes with a good conscience.

Confucius was a very tolerant man. He went out of his way to visit
Lao-Tse, the other great Chinese leader and the founder of a philosophic
system called "Taoism," which was merely an early Chinese version of the
Golden Rule.

Confucius bore no hatred to any one. He taught the virtue of supreme
self-possession. A person of real worth, according to the teaching of
Confucius, did not allow himself to be ruffled by anger and suffered
whatever fate brought him with the resignation of those sages who
understand that everything which happens, in one way or another, is
meant for the best.

At first he had only a few students. Gradually the number increased.
Before his death, in the year 478 B.C., several of the kings and the
princes of China confessed themselves his disciples. When Christ was
born in Bethlehem, the philosophy of Confucius had already become a part
of the mental make-up of most Chinamen. It has continued to influence
their lives ever since. Not however in its pure, original form. Most
religions change as time goes on. Christ preached humility and meekness
and absence from worldly ambitions, but fifteen centuries after
Golgotha, the head of the Christian church was spending millions upon
the erection of a building that bore little relation to the lonely
stable of Bethlehem.

Lao-Tse taught the Golden Rule, and in less than three centuries the
ignorant masses had made him into a real and very cruel God and had
buried his wise commandments under a rubbish-heap of superstition which
made the lives of the average Chinese one long series of frights and
fears and horrors.

Confucius had shown his students the beauties of honouring their Father
and their Mother. They soon began to be more interested in the memory of
their departed parents than in the happiness of their children and their
grandchildren. Deliberately they turned their backs upon the future and
tried to peer into the vast darkness of the past. The worship of the
ancestors became a positive religious system. Rather than disturb a
cemetery situated upon the sunny and fertile side of a mountain, they
would plant their rice and wheat upon the barren rocks of the other
slope where nothing could possibly grow. And they preferred hunger and
famine to the desecration of the ancestral grave.

At the same time the wise words of Confucius never quite lost their hold
upon the increasing millions of eastern Asia. Confucianism, with its
profound sayings and shrewd observations, added a touch of common-sense
philosophy to the soul of every Chinaman and influenced his entire life,
whether he was a simple laundry man in a steaming basement or the ruler
of vast provinces who dwelt behind the high walls of a secluded palace.

In the sixteenth century the enthusiastic but rather uncivilised
Christians of the western world came face to face with the older creeds
of the East. The early Spaniards and Portuguese looked upon the peaceful
statues of Buddha and contemplated the venerable pictures of Confucius
and did not in the least know what to make of those worthy prophets
with their far-away smile. They came to the easy conclusion that these
strange divinities were just plain devils who represented something
idolatrous and heretical and did not deserve the respect of the true
sons of the Church. Whenever the spirit of Buddha or Confucius seemed to
interfere with the trade in spices and silks, the Europeans attacked the
"evil influence" with bullets and grape-shot. That system had certain
very definite disadvantages. It has left us an unpleasant heritage of
ill-will which promises little good for the immediate future.




THE REFORMATION

THE PROGRESS OF THE HUMAN RACE IS BEST COMPARED TO A GIGANTIC PENDULUM
WHICH FOREVER SWINGS FORWARD AND BACKWARD. THE RELIGIOUS INDIFFERENCE
AND THE ARTISTIC AND LITERARY ENTHUSIASM OF THE RENAISSANCE WERE
FOLLOWED BY THE ARTISTIC AND LITERARY INDIFFERENCE AND THE RELIGIOUS
ENTHUSIASM OF THE REFORMATION


OF course you have heard of the Reformation. You think of a small but
courageous group of pilgrims who crossed the ocean to have "freedom of
religious worship." Vaguely in the course of time (and more especially
in our Protestant countries) the Reformation has come to stand for the
idea of "liberty of thought." Martin Luther is represented as the leader
of the vanguard of progress. But when history is something more than a
series of flattering speeches addressed to our own glorious ancestors,
when to use the words of the German historian Ranke, we try to discover
what "actually happened," then much of the past is seen in a very
different light.

Few things in human life are either entirely good or entirely bad.
Few things are either black or white. It is the duty of the honest
chronicler to give a true account of all the good and bad sides of every
historical event. It is very difficult to do this because we all have
our personal likes and dislikes. But we ought to try and be as fair as
we can be, and must not allow our prejudices to influence us too much.

Take my own case as an example. I grew up in the very Protestant centre
of a very Protestant country. I never saw any Catholics until I was
about twelve years old. Then I felt very uncomfortable when I met them.
I was a little bit afraid. I knew the story of the many thousand people
who had been burned and hanged and quartered by the Spanish Inquisition
when the Duke of Alba tried to cure the Dutch people of their Lutheran
and Calvinistic heresies. All that was very real to me. It seemed to
have happened only the day before. It might occur again. There might
be another Saint Bartholomew's night, and poor little me would be
slaughtered in my nightie and my body would be thrown out of the window,
as had happened to the noble Admiral de Coligny.

Much later I went to live for a number of years in a Catholic country.
I found the people much pleasanter and much more tolerant and quite as
intelligent as my former countrymen. To my great surprise, I began to
discover that there was a Catholic side to the Reformation, quite as
much as a Protestant.

Of course the good people of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
who actually lived through the Reformation, did not see things that
way. They were always right and their enemy was always wrong. It was
a question of hang or be hanged, and both sides preferred to do the
hanging. Which was no more than human and for which they deserve no
blame.

When we look at the world as it appeared in the year 1500, an easy date
to remember, and the year in which the Emperor Charles V was born, this
is what we see. The feudal disorder of the Middle Ages has given way
before the order of a number of highly centralised kingdoms. The most
powerful of all sovereigns is the great Charles, then a baby in a
cradle. He is the grandson of Ferdinand and Isabella and of Maximilian
of Habsburg, the last of the mediaeval knights, and of his wife Mary,
the daughter of Charles the Bold, the ambitious Burgundian duke who had
made successful war upon France but had been killed by the independent
Swiss peasants. The child Charles, therefore, has fallen heir to the
greater part of the map, to all the lands of his parents, grandparents,
uncles, cousins and aunts in Germany, in Austria, in Holland, in
Belgium, in Italy, and in Spain, together with all their colonies in
Asia, Africa and America. By a strange irony of fate, he has been born
in Ghent, in that same castle of the counts of Flanders, which the
Germans used as a prison during their recent occupation of Belgium, and
although a Spanish king and a German emperor, he receives the training
of a Fleming.

As his father is dead (poisoned, so people say, but this is never
proved), and his mother has lost her mind (she is travelling through her
domains with the coffin containing the body of her departed husband),
the child is left to the strict discipline of his Aunt Margaret. Forced
to rule Germans and Italians and Spaniards and a hundred strange races,
Charles grows up a Fleming, a faithful son of the Catholic Church, but
quite averse to religious intolerance. He is rather lazy, both as a boy
and as a man. But fate condemns him to rule the world when the world is
in a turmoil of religious fervour. Forever he is speeding from Madrid to
Innsbruck and from Bruges to Vienna. He loves peace and quiet and he is
always at war. At the age of fifty-five, we see him turn his back upon
the human race in utter disgust at so much hate and so much stupidity.
Three years later he dies, a very tired and disappointed man.

So much for Charles the Emperor. How about the Church, the second great
power in the world? The Church has changed greatly since the early days
of the Middle Ages, when it started out to conquer the heathen and show
them the advantages of a pious and righteous life. In the first place,
the Church has grown too rich. The Pope is no longer the shepherd of
a flock of humble Christians. He lives in a vast palace and surrounds
himself with artists and musicians and famous literary men. His churches
and chapels are covered with new pictures in which the saints look more
like Greek Gods than is strictly necessary. He divides his time unevenly
between affairs of state and art. The affairs of state take ten percent
of his time. The other ninety percent goes to an active interest in
Roman statues, recently discovered Greek vases, plans for a new summer
home, the rehearsal of a new play. The Archbishops and the Cardinals
follow the example of their Pope. The Bishops try to imitate the
Archbishops. The village priests, however, have remained faithful to
their duties. They keep themselves aloof from the wicked world and
the heathenish love of beauty and pleasure. They stay away from the
monasteries where the monks seem to have forgotten their ancient vows of
simplicity and poverty and live as happily as they dare without causing
too much of a public scandal.

Finally, there are the common people. They are much better off than they
have ever been before. They are more prosperous, they live in better
houses, their children go to better schools, their cities are more
beautiful than before, their firearms have made them the equal of their
old enemies, the robber-barons, who for centuries have levied such heavy
taxes upon their trade. So much for the chief actors in the Reformation.

Now let us see what the Renaissance has done to Europe, and then you
will understand how the revival of learning and art was bound to be
followed by a revival of religious interests. The Renaissance began in
Italy. From there it spread to France. It was not quite successful in
Spain, where five hundred years of warfare with the Moors had made the
people very narrow minded and very fanatical in all religious matters.
The circle had grown wider and wider, but once the Alps had been
crossed, the Renaissance had suffered a change.

The people of northern Europe, living in a very different climate,
had an outlook upon life which contrasted strangely with that of their
southern neighbours. The Italians lived out in the open, under a sunny
sky. It was easy for them to laugh and to sing and to be happy. The
Germans, the Dutch, the English, the Swedes, spent most of their time
indoors, listening to the rain beating on the closed windows of their
comfortable little houses. They did not laugh quite so much. They took
everything more seriously. They were forever conscious of their immortal
souls and they did not like to be funny about matters which they
considered holy and sacred. The "humanistic" part of the Renaissance,
the books, the studies of ancient authors, the grammar and the
text-books, interested them greatly. But the general return to the
old pagan civilisation of Greece and Rome, which was one of the chief
results of the Renaissance in Italy, filled their hearts with horror.

But the Papacy and the College of Cardinals was almost entirely composed
of Italians and they had turned the Church into a pleasant club where
people discussed art and music and the theatre, but rarely mentioned
religion. Hence the split between the serious north and the more
civilised but easy-going and indifferent south was growing wider and
wider all the time and nobody seemed to be aware of the danger that
threatened the Church.

There were a few minor reasons which will explain why the Reformation
took place in Germany rather than in Sweden or England. The Germans bore
an ancient grudge against Rome. The endless quarrels between Emperor and
Pope had caused much mutual bitterness. In the other European countries
where the government rested in the hands of a strong king, the ruler
had often been able to protect his subjects against the greed of the
priests. In Germany, where a shadowy emperor ruled a turbulent crowd of
little princelings, the good burghers were more directly at the mercy
of their bishops and prelates. These dignitaries were trying to collect
large sums of money for the benefit of those enormous churches which
were a hobby of the Popes of the Renaissance. The Germans felt that they
were being mulcted and quite naturally they did not like it.

And then there is the rarely mentioned fact that Germany was the home
of the printing press. In northern Europe books were cheap and the
Bible was no longer a mysterious manu-script owned and explained by
the priest. It was a household book of many families where Latin was
understood by the father and by the children. Whole families began to
read it, which was against the law of the Church. They discovered
that the priests were telling them many things which, according to the
original text of the Holy Scriptures, were somewhat different. This
caused doubt. People began to ask questions. And questions, when they
cannot be answered, often cause a great deal of trouble.

The attack began when the humanists of the North opened fire upon the
monks. In their heart of hearts they still had too much respect and
reverence for the Pope to direct their sallies against his Most Holy
Person. But the lazy, ignorant monks, living behind the sheltering walls
of their rich monasteries, offered rare sport.

The leader in this warfare, curiously enough, was a very faithful son
of the church Gerard Gerardzoon, or Desiderius Erasmus, as he is usually
called, was a poor boy, born in Rotterdam in Holland, and educated
at the same Latin school of Deventer from which Thomas a Kempis had
graduated. He had become a priest and for a time he had lived in a
monastery. He had travelled a great deal and knew whereof he wrote, When
he began his career as a public pamphleteer (he would have been called
an editorial writer in our day) the world was greatly amused at an
anonymous series of letters which had just appeared under the title of
"Letters of Obscure Men." In these letters, the general stupidity and
arrogance of the monks of the late Middle Ages was exposed in a strange
German-Latin doggerel which reminds one of our modern limericks. Erasmus
himself was a very learned and serious scholar, who knew both Latin and
Greek and gave us the first reliable version of the New Testament,
which he translated into Latin together with a corrected edition of the
original Greek text. But he believed with Sallust, the Roman poet, that
nothing prevents us from "stating the truth with a smile upon our lips."

In the year 1500, while visiting Sir Thomas More in Eng-land, he took
a few weeks off and wrote a funny little book, called the "Praise of
Folly," in which he attacked the monks and their credulous followers
with that most dangerous of all weapons, humor. The booklet was the best
seller of the sixteenth century. It was translated into almost every
language and it made people pay attention to those other books of
Erasmus in which he advocated reform of the many abuses of the church
and appealed to his fellow humanists to help him in his task of bringing
about a great rebirth of the Christian faith.

But nothing came of these excellent plans. Erasmus was too reasonable
and too tolerant to please most of the enemies of the church. They were
waiting for a leader of a more robust nature.

He came, and his name was Martin Luther.

Luther was a North-German peasant with a first-class brain and possessed
of great personal courage. He was a university man, a master of arts of
the University of Erfurt; afterwards he joined a Dominican monastery.
Then he became a college professor at the theological school of
Wittenberg and began to explain the scriptures to the indifferent
ploughboys of his Saxon home. He had a lot of spare time and this he
used to study the original texts of the Old and New Testaments. Soon
he began to see the great difference which existed between the words of
Christ and those that were preached by the Popes and the Bishops. In the
year 1511, he visited Rome on official business. Alexander VI, of the
family of Borgia, who had enriched himself for the benefit of his
son and daughter, was dead. But his successor, Julius II, a man of
irreproachable personal character, was spending most of his time
fighting and building and did not impress this serious minded German
theologian with his piety. Luther returned to Wittenberg a much
