The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Witch Shall Be Born, by Robert E. Howard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Witch Shall Be Born

Author: Robert E. Howard

Release Date: February 28, 2013 [EBook #42227]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A WITCH SHALL BE BORN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     A WITCH SHALL BE BORN

                      By Robert E. Howard

    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was first published in Weird Tales
    December 1934. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




1 The Blood-Red Crescent


Taramis, queen of Khauran, awakened from a dream-haunted slumber to a
silence that seemed more like the stillness of nighted catacombs than
the normal quiet of a sleeping place. She lay staring into the darkness,
wondering why the candles in their golden candelabra had gone out. A
flecking of stars marked a gold-barred casement that lent no
illumination to the interior of the chamber. But as Taramis lay there,
she became aware of a spot of radiance glowing in the darkness before
her. She watched, puzzled. It grew and its intensity deepened as it
expanded, a widening disk of lurid light hovering against the dark
velvet hangings of the opposite wall. Taramis caught her breath,
starting up to a sitting position. A dark object was visible in that
circle of light--_a human head_.

In a sudden panic the queen opened her lips to cry out for her maids;
then she checked herself. The glow was more lurid, the head more vividly
limned. It was a woman's head, small, delicately molded, superbly
poised, with a high-piled mass of lustrous black hair. The face grew
distinct as she stared--and it was the sight of this face which froze
the cry in Taramis's throat. The features were her own! She might have
been looking into a mirror which subtly altered her reflection, lending
it a tigerish gleam of eye, a vindictive curl of lip.

'Ishtar!' gasped Taramis. 'I am bewitched!'

Appallingly, the apparition spoke, and its voice was like honeyed venom.

'Bewitched? No, sweet sister! Here is no sorcery.'

'Sister?' stammered the bewildered girl. 'I have no sister.'

'You never had a sister?' came the sweet, poisonously mocking voice.
'Never a twin sister whose flesh was as soft as yours to caress or
hurt?'

'Why, once I had a sister,' answered Taramis, still convinced that she
was in the grip of some sort of nightmare. 'But she died.'

The beautiful face in the disk was convulsed with the aspect of a fury;
so hellish became its expression that Taramis, cowering back, half
expected to see snaky locks writhe hissing about the ivory brow.

'You lie!' The accusation was spat from between the snarling red lips.
'She did not die! Fool! Oh, enough of this mummery! Look--and let your
sight be blasted!'

Light ran suddenly along the hangings like flaming serpents, and
incredibly the candles in the golden sticks flared up again. Taramis
crouched on her velvet couch, her lithe legs flexed beneath her, staring
wide-eyed at the pantherish figure which posed mockingly before her. It
was as if she gazed upon another Taramis, identical with herself in
every contour of feature and limb, yet animated by an alien and evil
personality. The face of this stranger waif reflected the opposite of
every characteristic the countenance of the queen denoted. Lust and
mystery sparkled in her scintillant eyes, cruelty lurked in the curl of
her full red lips. Each movement of her supple body was subtly
suggestive. Her coiffure imitated that of the queen's, on her feet were
gilded sandals such as Taramis wore in her boudoir. The sleeveless,
low-necked silk tunic, girdled at the waist with a cloth-of-gold
cincture, was a duplicate of the queen's night-garment.

'Who are you?' gasped Taramis, an icy chill she could not explain
creeping along her spine. 'Explain your presence before I call my
ladies-in-waiting to summon the guard!'

'Scream until the roof beams crack,' callously answered the stranger.
'Your sluts will not wake till dawn, though the palace spring into
flames about them. Your guardsmen will not hear your squeals; they have
been sent out of this wing of the palace.'

'What!' exclaimed Taramis, stiffening with outraged majesty. 'Who dared
give my guardsmen such a command?'

'I did, sweet sister,' sneered the other girl. 'A little while ago,
before I entered. They thought it was their darling adored queen. Ha!
How beautifully I acted the part! With what imperious dignity, softened
by womanly sweetness, did I address the great louts who knelt in their
armor and plumed helmets!'

Taramis felt as if a stifling net of bewilderment were being drawn about
her.

'Who are you?' she cried desperately. 'What madness is this? Why do you
come here?'

'Who am I?' There was the spite of a she-cobra's hiss in the soft
response. The girl stepped to the edge of the couch, grasped the queen's
white shoulders with fierce fingers, and bent to glare full into the
startled eyes of Taramis. And under the spell of that hypnotic glare,
the queen forgot to resent the unprecedented outrage of violent hands
laid on regal flesh.

'Fool!' gritted the girl between her teeth. 'Can you ask? Can you
wonder? I am Salome!'

'Salome!' Taramis breathed the word, and the hairs prickled on her scalp
as she realized the incredible, numbing truth of the statement. 'I
thought you died within the hour of your birth,' she said feebly.

'So thought many,' answered the woman who called herself Salome. 'They
carried me into the desert to die, damn them! I, a mewing, puling babe
whose life was so young it was scarcely the flicker of a candle. And do
you know why they bore me forth to die?'

'I--I have heard the story--' faltered Taramis.

Salome laughed fiercely, and slapped her bosom. The low-necked tunic
left the upper parts of her firm breasts bare, and between them there
shone a curious mark--a crescent, red as blood.

'The mark of the witch!' cried Taramis, recoiling.

'Aye!' Salome's laughter was dagger-edged with hate. 'The curse of the
kings of Khauran! Aye, they tell the tale in the market-places, with
wagging beards and rolling eyes, the pious fools! They tell how the
first queen of our line had traffic with a fiend of darkness and bore
him a daughter who lives in foul legendry to this day. And thereafter in
each century a girl baby was born into the Askhaurian dynasty, with a
scarlet half-moon between her breasts, that signified her destiny.

'"Every century a witch shall be born." So ran the ancient curse. And so
it has come to pass. Some were slain at birth, as they sought to slay
me. Some walked the earth as witches, proud daughters of Khauran, with
the moon of hell burning upon their ivory bosoms. Each was named Salome.
I too am Salome. It was always Salome, the witch. It will always be
Salome, the witch, even when the mountains of ice have roared down from
the pole and ground the civilizations to ruin, and a new world has risen
from the ashes and dust--even then there shall be Salomes to walk the
earth, to trap men's hearts by their sorcery, to dance before the kings
of the world, to see the heads of the wise men fall at their pleasure.'

'But--but you--' stammered Taramis.

'I?' The scintillant eyes burned like dark fires of mystery. 'They
carried me into the desert far from the city, and laid me naked on the
hot sand, under the flaming sun. And then they rode away and left me for
the jackals and the vultures and the desert wolves.

'But the life in me was stronger than the life in common folk, for it
partakes of the essence of the forces that seethe in the black gulfs
beyond mortal ken. The hours passed, and the sun slashed down like the
molten flames of hell, but I did not die--aye, something of that torment
I remember, faintly and far away, as one remembers a dim, formless
dream. Then there were camels, and yellow-skinned men who wore silk
robes and spoke in a weird tongue. Strayed from the caravan road, they
passed close by, and their leader saw me, and recognized the scarlet
crescent on my bosom. He took me up and gave me life.

'He was a magician from far Khitai, returning to his native kingdom
after a journey to Stygia. He took me with him to purple-towering
Paikang, its minarets rising amid the vine-festooned jungles of bamboo,
and there I grew to womanhood under his teaching. Age had steeped him
deep in black wisdom, not weakened his powers of evil. Many things he
taught me--'

She paused, smiling enigmatically, with wicked mystery gleaming in her
dark eyes. Then she tossed her head.

'He drove me from him at last, saying that I was but a common witch in
spite of his teachings, and not fit to command the mighty sorcery he
would have taught me. He would have made me queen of the world and ruled
the nations through me, he said, but I was only a harlot of darkness.
But what of it? I could never endure to seclude myself in a golden
tower, and spend the long hours staring into a crystal globe, mumbling
over incantations written on serpent's skin in the blood of virgins,
poring over musty volumes in forgotten languages.

'He said I was but an earthly sprite, knowing naught of the deeper gulfs
of cosmic sorcery. Well, this world contains all I desire--power, and
pomp, and glittering pageantry, handsome men and soft women for my
paramours and my slaves. He had told me who I was, of the curse and my
heritage. I have returned to take that to which I have as much right as
you. Now it is mine by right of possession.'

'What do you mean?' Taramis sprang up and faced her sister, stung out of
her bewilderment and fright. 'Do you imagine that by drugging a few of
my maids and tricking a few of my guardsmen you have established a claim
