top of them; for Ebenezer had driven the small nail that supported the
structure into nothing better than ordinary loose plaster.  The only
wonder was how the thing stayed up two minutes.  So Ted Hammer's nose
was not out of joint after all.

This reminds us of the story of the two rival shoemakers, who lived
opposite one another, and always strove each to outdo the other in every
branch of their trade.  One day, one of the two painted over his door
the highly appropriate Latin motto, "Mens conscia recti."  His neighbour
gnashed his teeth, of course, and vowed to improve on the inscription.
And next day, when cobbler Number 1 and the world awoke, they beheld
painted in huge characters over the fellow's shop-front the startling
announcement, "_Men's and Women's_ conscia recti."

It is the easiest thing possible (where the operator is not quite such a
fool as this shoemaker) to improve on another's production.  When some
genius brings out a machine over the plans of which he has spent half an
anxious lifetime, a dozen copyists will in a year have out a dozen
"improved machines," each of them better than the first one, and
therefore each helping to ruin the inventor.  He had all the labour and
all the knowledge.  All the others did was to add a few slight
improvements, for which they get all the credit due to the man without
whom they would not have had an idea.  This is, alas! very common, and
cannot be avoided.

You can't make a law against one boy imitating another, or even against
his stepping into the credit due to you.

It is as easy to be unoriginal as it is hard at times to be original.
Everybody falls into the fault more or less.  Why is it we can never
find anything to begin a conversation with except the weather?
Somebody, I suppose, began on that topic once.  Why is it we always wear
the shaped coats that everybody else does?  Somebody must have
astonished the world by setting the fashion in the first instance.

There is a touch of envy in Ebenezer, I'm afraid; but the kindest way of
accounting for his annoying ways is to believe he is not clever.  No
more he is.  If he were, he would at least see how ridiculous he
sometimes makes himself.  The original boys, on the other hand, _are_
clever, and they are quick in their ideas, which Ebenezer is not.  The
great thing in originality is to have your idea out before any one else.
As long as it's in your head and no one knows of it, you are no better
off than the unoriginal many; but give your idea a shape and a name, and
you are one of the original few.  And the glory of being one of them is
that you are sure to have one or two of Ebenezer's sort at your tail!

Unoriginality is more a failing than a crime.  Sometimes it may lead to
actions which do real injury to another, but injury is rarely intended.
It is stupidity more than anything else.  But there is a point at which
unoriginality may become a sin.  Every boy has in him the power to say
"Yes" or "No," and he has also the conscience in him which tells him
when he ought to say the one or the other.  Now, when every one is
saying "Yes" to a thing about which your conscience demands that you
shall say "No," it becomes your positive duty for once in your life to
be original, and say it.

After all, most of us are medium sort of fellows.  We are not geniuses,
and we trust we are not dolts.  The best thing we can do is to look out
that we don't lose all our originality while knocking through this
world.  The more we can keep of it, the more good we shall do; and if we
find we have enough of it to entitle us to some "followers," let us see
to it we turn them out, if anything, better fellows than they were when
first they "jumped up behind."



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE DUFFER.

What school is without its duffer, I wonder?  Of course, none of us
answer to the name, but we all know somebody who does, and it's a
curious thing nobody ever thoroughly dislikes a duffer.  Why?  Well, one
reason may be that there's nothing as a rule objectionable about such
fellows, and another is that we are always ready enough to forgive one
who makes us laugh; but I have an idea that the best reason why we are
all so tolerant of duffers is that we are able to remind ourselves, when
laughing at them, how very much the reverse of duffers we are ourselves.

However that may be, we had a glorious duffer at our school, who got
himself and us into all sorts of scrapes, and yet was quite a favourite
among his schoolfellows.

Billy Bungle (that was his name) was not by any means an idiot.  He knew
perfectly well that two and two made four, and yet, such a queer chap as
he was, he would take any amount of pains to make five of it.

If there were two ways of doing anything, a right way and a wrong way,
he invariably selected the latter; and if there seemed only one way, and
that the right way, then he invented a wrong one for the occasion.

One day, one of the little boys in the school had a letter telling him
to come home at once.  He was not long in packing up his carpet bag, and
getting the doctor's leave to depart.  But the doctor was unwilling for
such a little helpless fellow as he to undertake the long journey all
alone.  He came down to the playground where we were, and beckoning to
Billy, who happened to be the nearest at hand, said, "Bungle, will you
go with this boy to the station, and see him off by the twelve train to
X--?  Here is the money to get his ticket; and carry his bag for him,
there's a man."

Billy readily accepted the commission, and we watched him proudly
marching from the playground with his small charge on one side and the
carpet bag on the other.  The station was a mile off, and it was nearly
one o'clock when he returned home.  We were in class at the time.

"Well, did you see him off?" asked the doctor.

"Yes, sir, all right; we caught an earlier train than the one you said--
at a quarter to," replied Billy, with the tone of a clever man.

"But the quarter to doesn't go to X--.  Didn't I tell you to see him off
by the twelve train?"

"I thought it would be all the better to catch the early one."

"Stupid boy, don't you know that train doesn't _go to_ X--?"

"No one said it didn't, sir," put in Billy, with an injured face.

"Did any one say it did?"

"I didn't hear," said Billy; "shall I go back and ask?"

"That would not be the least use," said the master, too vexed almost to
speak.

Billy stood before him, staring at him, and looking anything but
cheerful.

"I shall have to go down to the station myself," said the doctor.  "You
are the stupidest boy I ever had to do with."

Billy looked resigned; then fumbling in his waistcoat pocket, he pulled
out a bit of blue cardboard.  "Oh, here's the ticket, sir."

"What!  Wasn't it enough to send the poor boy off by a wrong train,
without keeping his ticket?  Go away, sir, this instant, to your room,
and stay there till I give you leave to quit it!"

Billy obeyed, evidently unable to make the affair out.

By dint of telegrams and messengers, the missing boy turned up again;
but it was a long time before Billy was allowed to forget the way he had
"seen him off."

This is just one specimen of our unlucky schoolfellow's blunders.  He
was always in some trouble of the kind.  He had to cease taking lessons
in chemistry, because one time he nearly succeeded in blowing himself
and three or four of us up by mixing certain combustibles together by
mistake; and another time he upset a bottle of sulphuric acid over his
clothes.

He was always very near the bottom of his class, because he _would_
prepare the wrong lessons, or misunderstand the questions asked him.
And yet he was always anxious to get on.  Once, I remember, he
confidentially asked me, if he were to learn Liddell and Scott's Lexicon
by heart, whether I thought he would be able to get the Greek prize?
But he bungled more in the playground than anywhere.  Perhaps it was
because we laughed at him and made him nervous.

It was rarely any one cared to have him on their side at cricket.  He
missed the easiest catches, he got leg before wicket, he stopped still
in the middle of a run to see if he would have time to finish it, and
whenever he did manage to score one he was sure, in his excitement, to
knock down his own wicket with a flourish of his bat.

In football it's no exaggeration to say he was more often on the ground
than the ball itself, and was invariably of more service to the other
side than to his own.  In fact, the possession of him got to be quite a
joke.

"Who's going to win?" asks some one, before a match begins.

"Which side is Billy Bungle on?" is the counter question.

"Oh, he's on our side."

"Then of course the other fellows will win," is the uncomplimentary
conclusion; and Billy, poor boy, who overhears it, half chokes with
wounded feelings, and tucks up his sleeves and goes into the game,
determined for once he will disappoint those who mock at him.  Alas I
scarcely has the ball been kicked off than he gets in the way of
everybody he ought not to get in the way of, and lets the others pass
him; he collars his own men, and kicks the ball towards his own goal,
and falls down just in time to cause half a dozen of his side to tumble
over him, and just as the ball rises, straight as an arrow, to fly over
the enemy's goal, his unlucky head gets in the way and spoils
everything.  No wonder he is in very poor demand as an ally.

Now, the question is, is it altogether Billy's fault he is such a
duffer?  Of course it is, say nineteen out of every twenty of my
readers.  Any one with an ounce of brains and common sense could avoid
such stupid blunders.  But the twentieth is not quite so positive.
"Perhaps it's not altogether Billy's fault," he says.  And I must
confess I am inclined to agree with this.  Of course, a great deal of
his "duffingness" (I believe that's the proper word) is due to his
carelessness.  If he took the trouble to think about what he was doing,
he would never translate a French exercise into Latin, or learn his
arithmetic by heart instead of his history; he would never mix together
(under his nose) two chemicals that would assuredly explode and nearly
blow his head off.  For he has a few brains in that head, which makes
such blunders all the less excusable.  But I am not sure if a good deal
of his bad luck is not due to the merciless way in which he was laughed
at, and called "duffer," and taught to believe that he could no more do
a thing right than a bull could walk through a china-shop without making
a smash.  He got it into his head he was a duffer, and therefore did not
take the pains he might have done.

"What's the use of my bothering?  I'm sure to make a mess of it!"

Fancy a boy saying this to himself at cricket, while a ball is flying
beautifully towards him, an easy catch, even for a duffer.  Do you
suppose he will catch it?  Not he.  He will stand where he is, and put
up his hands, and look another way.  In fact, he won't do his best.  And
why?  Because all of us never expect him to catch it; and if he did, we
should probably call it a "fluke," and laugh at him all the more.  Yes,
it's our fault in a certain measure that Billy is the awful "duffer" he
is.

Sometimes, as in the game of football we have referred to, he does make
up his mind to do his best; but even then the idea that "destiny" is
against him, and that everybody is expecting him to make a fool of
himself, as usual, is enough to make any fellow nervous and a duffer.

However, whatever excuses we may make for Billy, he was undoubtedly a
duffer.  I have named one reason of his bad luck--want of thought--and
another was hurry.  In fact, the two reasons become one, for it was
chiefly because Billy would never give himself time to think that he
made so many mistakes.  All his thinking came after the thing was done.
As soon as the chemicals had blown up, for instance, it entered his head
he had mixed the wrong ingredients, and as soon as the ball was flying
to the wrong goal it occurred to him he had kicked it in a wrong
direction.

And this really brings me to the moral of my discourse.  Don't despair,
if you are a duffer, for you may cure yourself of it, if you will only
_think_ and _take your time_.  If we are not quick-witted, it does not
follow we have no wits, and if we only use them carefully, we shall be
no greater duffers than some of our sharp fellows.

The great philosopher Newton once appeared in the light of a great
duffer.  He had a cat, and that cat had a kitten, and these two
creatures were continually worrying him by scratching at his study door
to be let either in or out.  A brilliant idea occurred to the
philosopher--he would make holes in the bottom of his door through which
they might pass in or out at pleasure without troubling him to get up
and open the door every time.  And thereupon he made a big hole for the
cat and a little hole for the kitten, as if both could not have used the
big hole!

Well, you say, one could fancy Billy Bungle doing a thing like that, but
what an extraordinary error for a philosopher to fall into!  It was, but
the reason in both cases is alike.  Neither thought sufficiently about
what he was doing.  Newton was absorbed with other things, and Billy was
thinking of nothing, and yet both he and Newton were duffers, which goes
to prove that without care any one may belong to that class.

How many men who have begun life as reputed "duffers" have turned out
great men! but you will find that none of them ever did themselves any
good till they had cured themselves of that fault.  That's what you, and
I, and Billy Bungle must all do, boys.

Just two words more about Billy.  We all liked him, as I have said, for
he was imperturbably good-tempered.  He bore no malice for all our
laughing, and now and then, when he was able to see the joke, would
assist in laughing at himself.

And then he never tried to make himself out anything but what he was.
Of all detestable puppies, the duffer who tries to pass himself off for
a clever man is the most intolerable; for nothing will convince him of
his error, and nothing will keep him in his place.  He's about the one
sort of character nobody knows how to deal with, for he sets everybody
else but himself down as duffers.  What can anybody do to such a one?

But there is another extreme.  Billy's great fault was that he was too
ready to believe others who called him a duffer.  Don't take it for
granted you are a duffer because any one tells you so.  Find it out for
yourself, and when you've found it out--"don't be a duffer!"



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

THE DANDY.

Fine feathers make fine birds.  This is a proverb which a great many
people in our country--especially young people--most devoutly believe
in, and they show their belief in a very emphatic way.  They rig
themselves out in the height of the fashion, no matter how ridiculous it
is, or how uncomfortable; they take airs upon themselves which do not
properly belong to them; they try to pass for something finer than they
are, and if they do not end by being laughed at it is no fault of
theirs.

You never saw such a dandy as we had at our school.  He rejoiced in the
name of Frederick Fop, and seemed possessed of the notion that his
dainty person was worthy of the utmost amount of decoration that any one
person could bestow upon it.  No one objects to a fellow having a good
coat and trousers, and a respectable hat; but when it comes to canary-
coloured pantaloons, and cuffs up to the finger ends, and collars as
high as the ears, and a hat as shiny as a looking-glass, the fellow gets
to be rather a nuisance.  Indeed, we had just as much objection to
walking out with Fred Fop as we had with Jack Sloven; one was quite as
unpleasantly conspicuous as the other.

It was often a marvel to some of us how it came to be allowed for a boy
to dress as Fred did.  You should have seen him coming down the stairs
on Sunday, as we were about to start for church, putting on a lavender
glove, and taking a couple of minutes to adjust his hat to the proper
angle on his head.

How he minced along the pavement, dreading to speck his exquisite boots,
and how artlessly he would carry one glove in his hand, in order to show
off his elegant ring.  His umbrella was the size of an ordinary young
lady's parasol, and as for his collars--of course it was impossible to
turn his head one way or the other with those things sticking up on
either side.  He always insisted on having the inside of the pavement,
in order to avoid the splashing of the cabs; and invariably entered
church last, having occupied a certain time in the porch (so it was
said) to make sure his necktie was properly tied, and that the corner of
his handkerchief was hanging sufficiently far out of his breast-pocket,
and that the expression of his countenance was sufficiently interesting.
Having satisfied himself on these points, he advanced up the aisle in
procession with himself, and scented the whole building in his triumphal
progress.

It is hardly to be wondered at that Master Fop became the victim of all
sorts of practical jokes.  If by any chance one of the fellows should
happen to be pitching water out of the window, it was an extraordinary
coincidence that Fred in his grand hat was nearly always walking
underneath.  Another time, when some of the elder boys were allowed to
attend a grand concert in the village, Fred of course was in his glory,
and took every means to create a sensation by his elaborate toilet.  And
so he did!  For as he sauntered beautifully up the hall to his seat in
front, he was wholly unconscious that a startling label was hanging
gracefully on the back buttons of his coat with this legend inscribed
thereon--

"Look here!  Our noted 50 shilling suit!  A bargain!"

It was not till he went to sit down that he discovered the heartless
joke, and then--but we may as well draw a veil over his confusion.
Suffice it to say he did not enjoy the concert a bit.

But he was by no means cured of his vanity.  No, not even by a
subsequent and still more embarrassing adventure.

Several of the boys, among whom were Fred and Jack Sloven, were one day
down at the river bathing, when a sudden thought seized certain of
Fred's tormentors to play him a very unkind trick.  So while he was
swimming by himself some distance off, they scuttled ashore and made
off, taking with them Jack Sloven dressed up in Fred's clothes, and, of
course, leaving that disreputable young gentleman's garments behind for
the dandy.  They made home as fast as they could, and Jack, as quickly
as possible, divested himself of his unwonted finery, and put on another
of his own suits.  Then the conspirators assembled in the playground
with as many of us as had heard what was going on, and awaited the
return of poor Fred.  He was a long time coming, and before he arrived
the head master and two ladies had appeared on the scene.

But the end came to our suspense at last, and we saw our hero march home
in state.  Such a spectacle you never saw! being rather tall, Sam's
greasy and ink-stained breeches came down only half-way below his knees,
and fitted as tight as gloves.  The elegant wrists, usually shrouded
beneath their snowy cuffs, now stuck out like skewers from two very
short, very tight, and very shabby sleeves.  Fred had not attempted to
don the shirt and collar which had been left for him, and it was pretty
evident by the way he shivered that if any one had unbuttoned the coat
and grimy waistcoat he would not have discovered much more in the shape
of vestments.  But he had Jack's great muddy boots on, and his
disgracefully caved-in hat.  In this guise he had to perambulate the
village, and now, worst of all, he found himself face to face not only
with a whole body of his schoolfellows, but with the doctor and two
ladies!

If the whole scene had not been so ludicrous, one would have felt
sympathy for the poor fellow; as it was, every one burst out laughing
the moment he appeared.  Even the doctor had to turn suddenly and walk
towards the house.

But we heard of the affair again presently; for the doctor always
visited severely any act of unkindness done even in joke, and the
offenders in this case were duly punished.  To his credit be it said,
Fred did not exult over his vindication; the only revenge he took was
when he had arrayed himself once more in his usual faultless get-up.  He
came down to the schoolroom where we were all assembled, and walking up
to Jack Sloven, drawled out in a voice which everybody could hear, "Oh,
you'll find your things in the bath-room--all but your shirt.  I really
couldn't touch _that_, so it's lying on the river bank still, where you
left it!"

There is one peculiarity about dandies.  They are hardly ever persons of
great minds.  When the exquisite, on being asked how on earth he came by
