The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Yellow Fairy Book, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Yellow Fairy Book

Author: Various

Editor: Andrew Lang

Release Date: August, 1996  [Etext #640]
Posting Date: November 30, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YELLOW FAIRY BOOK ***




Produced by Charles Keller for Tina





THE YELLOW FAIRY BOOK

By Various

Edited By Andrew Lang



Dedication

TO

JOAN, TODDLES, AND TINY

 Books Yellow, Red, and Green and Blue,
 All true, or just as good as true,
 And here's the Yellow Book for YOU!

 Hard is the path from A to Z,
 And puzzling to a curly head,
 Yet leads to Books--Green, Blue, and Red.

 For every child should understand
 That letters from the first were planned
 To guide us into Fairy Land

 So labour at your Alphabet,
 For by that learning shall you get
 To lands where Fairies may be met.

 And going where this pathway goes,
 You too, at last, may find, who knows?
 The Garden of the Singing Rose.




PREFACE

The Editor thinks that children will readily forgive him for publishing
another Fairy Book. We have had the Blue, the Red, the Green, and here
is the Yellow. If children are pleased, and they are so kind as to say
that they are pleased, the Editor does not care very much for what other
people may say. Now, there is one gentleman who seems to think that it
is not quite right to print so many fairy tales, with pictures, and to
publish them in red and blue covers. He is named Mr. G. Laurence Gomme,
and he is president of a learned body called the Folk Lore Society. Once
a year he makes his address to his subjects, of whom the Editor is one,
and Mr. Joseph Jacobs (who has published many delightful fairy tales
with pretty pictures)(1) is another. Fancy, then, the dismay of Mr.
Jacobs, and of the Editor, when they heard their president say that he
did not think it very nice in them to publish fairy books, above all,
red, green, and blue fairy books! They said that they did not see any
harm in it, and they were ready to 'put themselves on their country,'
and be tried by a jury of children. And, indeed, they still see no harm
in what they have done; nay, like Father William in the poem, they are
ready 'to do it again and again.'


(1) You may buy them from Mr. Nutt, in the Strand.


Where is the harm? The truth is that the Folk Lore Society--made up of
the most clever, learned, and beautiful men and women of the country--is
fond of studying the history and geography of Fairy Land. This is
contained in very old tales, such as country people tell, and savages:

     'Little Sioux and little Crow,
      Little frosty Eskimo.'


These people are thought to know most about fairyland and its
inhabitants. But, in the Yellow Fairy Book, and the rest, are many tales
by persons who are neither savages nor rustics, such as Madame D'Aulnoy
and Herr Hans Christian Andersen. The Folk Lore Society, or its
president, say that THEIR tales are not so true as the rest, and should
not be published with the rest. But WE say that all the stories which
are pleasant to read are quite true enough for us; so here they are,
with pictures by Mr. Ford, and we do not think that either the pictures
or the stories are likely to mislead children.

As to whether there are really any fairies or not, that is a difficult
question. Professor Huxley thinks there are none. The Editor never saw
any himself, but he knows several people who have seen them--in the
Highlands--and heard their music. If ever you are in Nether Lochaber,
go to the Fairy Hill, and you may hear the music yourself, as grown-up
people have done, but you must goon a fine day. Again, if there are
really no fairies, why do people believe in them, all over the world? The
ancient Greeks believed, so did the old Egyptians, and the Hindoos, and
the Red Indians, and is it likely, if there are no fairies, that so
many different peoples would have seen and heard them? The Rev. Mr.
Baring-Gould saw several fairies when he was a boy, and was travelling
in the land of the Troubadours. For these reasons, the Editor thinks
that there are certainly fairies, but they never do anyone any
harm; and, in England, they have been frightened away by smoke and
schoolmasters. As to Giants, they have died out, but real Dwarfs are
common in the forests of Africa. Probably a good many stories not
perfectly true have been told about fairies, but such stories have also
been told about Napoleon, Claverhouse, Julius Caesar, and Joan of Arc,
all of whom certainly existed. A wise child will, therefore, remember
that, if he grows up and becomes a member of the Folk Lore Society, ALL
the tales in this book were not offered to him as absolutely truthful,
but were printed merely for his entertainment. The exact facts he can
learn later, or he can leave them alone.


There are Russian, German, French, Icelandic, Red Indian, and other
stories here. They were translated by Miss Cheape, Miss Alma, and Miss
Thyra Alleyne, Miss Sellar, Mr. Craigie (he did the Icelandic tales),
Miss Blackley, Mrs. Dent, and Mrs. Lang, but the Red Indian stories
are copied from English versions published by the Smithsonian Bureau of
Ethnology, in America. Mr. Ford did the pictures, and it is hoped that
children will find the book not less pleasing than those which have
already been submitted to their consideration. The Editor cannot say
'good-bye' without advising them, as they pursue their studies, to read
The Rose and the Ring, by the late Mr. Thackeray, with pictures by
the author. This book he thinks quite indispensable in every child's
library, and parents should be urged to purchase it at the first
opportunity, as without it no education is complete.

                                        A. LANG.


CONTENTS

     The Cat and the Mouse in Partnership
     The Six Swans
     The Dragon of the North
     Story of the Emperor's New Clothes
     The Golden Crab
     The Iron Stove
     The Dragon and his Grandmother
     The Donkey Cabbage
     The Little Green Frog
     The Seven-headed Serpent
     The Grateful Beasts
     The Giants and the Herd-boy
     The Invisible Prince
     The Crow
     How Six Men travelled through the Wide World
     The Wizard King
     The Nixy
     The Glass Mountain
     Alphege, or the Green Monkey
     Fairer-than-a-Fairy
     The Three Brothers
     The Boy and the Wolves, or the Broken Promise
     The Glass Axe
     The Dead Wife
     In the Land of Souls
     The White Duck
     The Witch and her Servants
     The Magic Ring
     The Flower Queen's Daughter
     The Flying Ship
     The Snow-daughter and the Fire-son
     The Story of King Frost
     The Death of the Sun-hero
     The Witch
     The Hazel-nut Child
     The Story of Big Klaus and Little Klaus
     Prince Ring
     The Swineherd
     How to tell a True Princess
     The Blue Mountains
     The Tinder-box
     The Witch in the Stone Boat
     Thumbelina
     The Nightingale
     Hermod and Hadvor
     The Steadfast Tin-soldier
     Blockhead Hans
     A Story about a Darning-needle





THE YELLOW FAIRY BOOK




THE CAT AND THE MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP

A cat had made acquaintance with a mouse, and had spoken so much of
the great love and friendship she felt for her, that at last the Mouse
consented to live in the same house with her, and to go shares in the
housekeeping. 'But we must provide for the winter or else we shall
suffer hunger,' said the Cat. 'You, little Mouse, cannot venture
everywhere in case you run at last into a trap.' This good counsel was
followed, and a little pot of fat was bought. But they did not know
where to put it. At length, after long consultation, the Cat said, 'I
know of no place where it could be better put than in the church. No one
will trouble to take it away from there. We will hide it in a corner,
and we won't touch it till we are in want.' So the little pot was placed
in safety; but it was not long before the Cat had a great longing for
it, and said to the Mouse, 'I wanted to tell you, little Mouse, that my
cousin has a little son, white with brown spots, and she wants me to be
godmother to it. Let me go out to-day, and do you take care of the house
alone.'

'Yes, go certainly,' replied the Mouse, 'and when you eat anything
good, think of me; I should very much like a drop of the red christening
wine.'

But it was all untrue. The Cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to
be godmother. She went straight to the church, slunk to the little pot
of fat, began to lick it, and licked the top off. Then she took a walk
on the roofs of the town, looked at the view, stretched herself out in
the sun, and licked her lips whenever she thought of the little pot of
fat. As soon as it was evening she went home again.

'Ah, here you are again!' said the Mouse; 'you must certainly have had
an enjoyable day.'

'It went off very well,' answered the Cat.

'What was the child's name?' asked the Mouse.

'Top Off,' said the Cat drily.

'Topoff!' echoed the Mouse, 'it is indeed a wonderful and curious name.
Is it in your family?'

'What is there odd about it?' said the Cat. 'It is not worse than
Breadthief, as your godchild is called.'

Not long after this another great longing came over the Cat. She said to
the Mouse, 'You must again be kind enough to look after the house alone,
for I have been asked a second time to stand godmother, and as this
child has a white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.'

The kind Mouse agreed, but the Cat slunk under the town wall to the
church, and ate up half of the pot of fat. 'Nothing tastes better,' said
she, 'than what one eats by oneself,' and she was very much pleased with
her day's work. When she came home the Mouse asked, 'What was this child
called?'

'Half Gone,' answered the Cat.

'Halfgone! what a name! I have never heard it in my life. I don't
believe it is in the calendar.'

Soon the Cat's mouth began to water once more after her licking
business. 'All good things in threes,' she said to the Mouse; 'I have
again to stand godmother. The child is quite black, and has very white
paws, but not a single white hair on its body. This only happens once in
two years, so you will let me go out?'

'Topoff! Halfgone!' repeated the Mouse, 'they are such curious names;
they make me very thoughtful.'

'Oh, you sit at home in your dark grey coat and your long tail,' said
the Cat, 'and you get fanciful. That comes of not going out in the day.'

The Mouse had a good cleaning out while the Cat was gone, and made the
house tidy; but the greedy Cat ate the fat every bit up.

'When it is all gone one can be at rest,' she said to herself, and at
night she came home sleek and satisfied. The Mouse asked at once after
the third child's name.

'It won't please you any better,' said the Cat, 'he was called Clean
Gone.'

'Cleangone!' repeated the Mouse. 'I do not believe that name has been
printed any more than the others. Cleangone! What can it mean?' She
shook her head, curled herself up, and went to sleep.

From this time on no one asked the Cat to stand godmother; but when
the winter came and there was nothing to be got outside, the Mouse
remembered their provision and said, 'Come, Cat, we will go to our pot
of fat which we have stored away; it will taste very good.'

'Yes, indeed,' answered the Cat; 'it will taste as good to you as if
you stretched your thin tongue out of the window.'

They started off, and when they reached it they found the pot in its
place, but quite empty!

'Ah,' said the Mouse,' 'now I know what has happened! It has all come
out! You are a true friend to me! You have eaten it all when you stood
godmother; first the top off, then half of it gone, then----'

'Will you be quiet!' screamed the Cat. 'Another word and I will eat you
up.'

'Clean-gone' was already on the poor Mouse's tongue, and scarcely was it
out than the Cat made a spring at her, seized and swallowed her.

You see that is the way of the world.




THE SIX SWANS

A king was once hunting in a great wood, and he hunted the game so
eagerly that none of his courtiers could follow him. When evening came
on he stood still and looked round him, and he saw that he had quite
lost himself. He sought a way out, but could find none. Then he saw an
old woman with a shaking head coming towards him; but she was a witch.

'Good woman,' he said to her, 'can you not show me the way out of the
wood?'

'Oh, certainly, Sir King,' she replied, 'I can quite well do that, but
on one condition, which if you do not fulfil you will never get out of
the wood, and will die of hunger.'

'What is the condition?' asked the King.

'I have a daughter,' said the old woman, 'who is so beautiful that she
has not her equal in the world, and is well fitted to be your wife; if
you will make her lady-queen I will show you the way out of the wood.'

The King in his anguish of mind consented, and the old woman led him
to her little house where her daughter was sitting by the fire. She
received the King as if she were expecting him, and he saw that she was
certainly very beautiful; but she did not please him, and he could not
look at her without a secret feeling of horror. As soon as he had lifted
the maiden on to his horse the old woman showed him the way, and the
King reached his palace, where the wedding was celebrated.

The King had already been married once, and had by his first wife seven
children, six boys and one girl, whom he loved more than anything in the
world. And now, because he was afraid that their stepmother might not
treat them well and might do them harm, he put them in a lonely castle
that stood in the middle of a wood. It lay so hidden, and the way to it
was so hard to find, that he himself could not have found it out had
not a wise-woman given him a reel of thread which possessed a marvellous
property: when he threw it before him it unwound itself and showed him
the way. But the King went so often to his dear children that the Queen
was offended at his absence. She grew curious, and wanted to know what
he had to do quite alone in the wood. She gave his servants a great deal
of money, and they betrayed the secret to her, and also told her of the
reel which alone could point out the way. She had no rest now till she
had found out where the King guarded the reel, and then she made some
little white shirts, and, as she had learnt from her witch-mother, sewed
an enchantment in each of them.

And when the King had ridden off she took the little shirts and went
into the wood, and the reel showed her the way. The children, who saw
someone coming in the distance, thought it was their dear father coming
to them, and sprang to meet him very joyfully. Then she threw over each
one a little shirt, which when it had touched their bodies changed them
into swans, and they flew away over the forest. The Queen went home
quite satisfied, and thought she had got rid of her step-children; but
the girl had not run to meet her with her brothers, and she knew nothing
of her.

The next day the King came to visit his children, but he found no one
but the girl.

'Where are your brothers?' asked the King.

