placed in the hands of the heralds, who took their departure.

In a short time a handsome man of great stature was seen approaching,
who from his plumed head-dress and a coat of rich skins which he wore,
reaching to his waist, was shown to be their King.  In front marched a
fine-looking man of large size, carrying a heavy black club, to which
was suspended two feather crowns and three chains of great length, made
of bone highly polished, and a bag containing _tabak_.

He was accompanied by some tall warriors, who formed his body-guard,
their head-dresses and coats being very similar to those of the King.
They all had their faces painted, some with white, others black, and
others of various colours, each man carrying in his hand a gift of some
sort.  Behind these came a concourse of nearly naked people, their long
hair being gathered into a bunch behind, and ornamented with plumes of
feathers in various forms, some having stuck a feather on each side on
the front of their heads, which looked like horns.

Last of all came the women and children, the women carrying, hung round
their necks in front, baskets of _tabak_ and roots which they called
_petah_,--no doubt the potato,--and boiled fishes.  Their baskets,
formed of dried grass, were neatly woven, the edges ornamented with
mother-of-pearl and shells; while on the sides were interwoven red
feathers in various devices.  So fine were these baskets that they would
hold water.

As the _cortege_ approached they struck up a loud chant, to the measured
time of which they marched forward.  As they got nearer, after a shout
of welcome had been uttered by the entire concourse, the sceptre-bearer
advanced, and in a manly voice commenced an oration, prompted by a
companion, and at the conclusion, according to the rule, they all
shouted "Oh!" to signify "Amen."

The King himself then, accompanied by both men and women, the children
only being left behind, with stately step came down the hill.  On
reaching its foot, close to the fort, the sceptre-bearer commenced in a
slow measure a dignified dance, keeping time to a chant or song which he
began; then the King and his guards and every other person joined in the
song and dance, the women also dancing, but not singing.  In this way,
dancing and singing, they advanced close up to the fort.

So satisfied was Drake that these performances were friendly, that he
allowed them freely to enter the fort.  When the women approached with
their offerings, it was seen that blood was streaming from their bodies,
their faces, and necks.

They now requested Drake to sit down, when both the King and his chief
men made long orations, and these the English understood to signify that
they desired to place the country and everything they possessed at the
feet of her Majesty the Queen.  They were still further convinced of
this when the King--the rest singing a joyful song--placed the crown on
the Admiral's head, and threw the bone chains which had been brought
round his neck, addressing him as "_Hioh_."

Drake, not considering this as any superior reverence to himself, but
only such as would be paid to the King, did not think it right to refuse
the homage or the gifts thus freely offered, hoping that in time to come
it might redound to the honour and profit of his country, and that these
children of nature would willingly receive missionaries of the Gospel,
and be brought to a right knowledge of the true and ever-living God.

The natives now dispersing themselves among the English, each selected
some person on whom to bestow his present, choosing, it was observed,
most willingly the youngest.  This done, they again commenced shrieking
and tearing the flesh on their faces.  In vain the officers and men
endeavoured to dissuade them from continuing such heathenish practices,
by lifting up their eyes and hands to heaven, as if pointing to the
living God, whom they ought to serve.

Becoming at length more calm, the natives began to exhibit their sores
and wounds, shrunk sinews, and other complaints from which they
suffered, by signs beseeching them to cure them, as if by merely blowing
upon them this could be done.  On this the young surgeon got out such
lotions, plasters, and ointments as he fancied might do them service.
It was almost night before the savages retired, but nearly every day
they returned, and sometimes forgot to bring food with them, when the
Admiral ordered them to be supplied with mussels, seals, and such meat
as could be spared, with which they appeared well pleased.

Observing that their offerings were not acceptable, they refrained from
bringing them, but still came down and sat in groups, watching what was
going forward.  They appeared to be people of an especially tractable
and mild nature, free from treachery.  Their only weapons were their
bows and arrows, which constituted all their wealth.  These were,
however, so small and weak that they could do but little injury with
them; they employed them chiefly to shoot the fish swimming along shore
or the smaller animals of the chase.  This seemed strange, as the men
were strong, and would take up loads such as two or three Englishmen
could barely lift, and carry them without difficulty up or down hill for
a mile together.  They also ran with exceeding swiftness and for a long
time.

Having got on well in the repairing and refitting of the ship, Drake and
his officers made an excursion into the interior, where they saw vast
herds of fat deer, and the whole land seemed burrowed by small animals
somewhat like coneys, the heads resembling those of rats, the feet of
moles, and having tails of great length.  Under their chins and on
either side was a bag, into which they stowed their food after they had
gathered it, that they might either feed their young or themselves at
their leisure.  The people ate the meat of these animals, and the skins
were considered of great value, the King's robes of state being made of
them.  Several of the native houses were entered.  The lower part
consisted of a square pit dug in the earth, with a roof; while the upper
portion was formed by several poles stuck in the ground and joined
together at the top, the whole being interlaced with twigs, and this
being covered with earth was impervious to cold or rain.  The doorway
was of the size and shape of the scuttle of a ship, formed in the
sloping roof, and served also to allow the escape of smoke.

A fire was placed in the centre, and the beds of the inmates were on the
hard ground, covered only with rushes and mats.  The huts being low, and
without any means of ventilation except from a single small doorway, the
heat within, even though there was no fire, when a number of persons
were collected, was intense.

By the time the Admiral returned, everything was ready for continuing
the voyage.  Before sailing he put up a strong post, with a brass plate
fixed to it, on which was engraved the name of the Queen, the day and
year of their arrival, and the free giving up of the province, both by
the King and the people, into her Majesty's hands, together with a
sixpence, showing her Majesty's picture and arms.  Underneath Drake's
name was engraven, and further particulars.  He believed that no
Spaniard had ever before set foot on the shore, not being aware that
Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo, a Portuguese by birth, had thirty-seven years
previously explored the coast by command of the Viceroy of Spain.

As the natives perceived that the English were about to take their
departure, the ship being now hauled out, with her sails ready for
hoisting, they gave themselves up to unbounded grief, so that nothing
that could be said to them seemed to lighten their sorrow.  They could
not be prevented lighting a fire, supposed to be sacrificial; but when
the English commenced praying and singing psalms, they appeared to
forget their fury, and came round, lifting up their hands and eyes to
heaven, as they saw them doing.  On the 23rd of July they took a
sorrowful farewell of their visitors, who, shoving off in their boats,
went on board the _Golden Hind_.  Her crew, as they sailed away, saw
fires burning on all the surrounding heights, kindled by the natives,
evidently either to do them honour or to show their affection.

Drake bestowed on this country the name of Albion, in consequence of the
whiteness of the cliffs, which resembled those of England, and because
his native land was so-called.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

VOYAGE OF SIR FRANCIS DRAKE, CONTINUED--A.D. 1579-80.

Search of passage to north-east abandoned--Passage across the Pacific--A
group of islands made--Thievish practices of the natives--Called the
Carolines--The Moluccas reached--Friendly reception by the King of
Ternate--Comes off in his state barge--His magnificent jewels--The
_Hind_ sails--Careened at an island near Celebes--Gigantic trees,
fire-flies, crabs--Gets among reefs and shoals--Strikes on a rock--
Perilous position of the ship--Gets off--A heavy gale--Runs under bare
poles--Anchors off Baratira--Natives friendly--Sails on to Java--The
Rajah treats them well--The _Golden Hind_ sails across the Indian
Ocean--Rounds the Cape of Good Hope--Touches at Sierra Leone--Enters the
Channel--Plymouth reached the 25th of September, 1580--Received by the
Queen--The Queen visits the _Golden Hind_--Drake knighted--His
subsequent enterprises against the Spaniards--In command of the
_Bonaventura_ attacks the Spanish Armada--His last expedition to the
West Indies, and death at sea.

After touching at some islands which lie about a day's sail to the
westward of California, where there was a large supply of seals and
aquatic birds, the _Golden Hind_ continued her course.  In consequence
of the increased cold, all idea of finding a passage round the north of
America, by the consent of every officer on board, was abandoned, and a
course was steered which, it was hoped, would enable them to reach the
Moluccas.

For full sixty-eight days the voyagers sailed on, their view during the
whole of that period being bounded by sky and sea.  As far as their
experience went, it was to them a Pacific Ocean, for they had smooth
water and favouring breezes.  They fell in with the usual sights,
flying-fish endeavouring to escape from their foes the bonitos; huge
whales showing their presence by spouting clouds of mist into the air;
while now and then a strong-winged bird passed in their sight.

Good fellowship prevailed amongst them, no words of discontent escaped
from their lips.  They had confidence in their leader, and, above all,
reliance on God's good providence.  They were men pious after a manner.
The robberies they committed did not trouble their consciences, for they
considered that they had lawfully despoiled the Spaniards of their
unlawfully gotten gains.  They each considered that they had performed a
noble and meritorious act in thus revenging on the heads of the tyrants
the injuries inflicted on the helpless Indians, as well as of those
which they and their countrymen had received.  Even Master Fletcher, the
chaplain, looked with a complacent eye on the crucifix set with
brilliants, the bowls, chalices, and other articles, which, according to
his view, having been taken from the idolatrous temples of the hated
foe, were his proper share of the spoil; and he was ready to receive as
many more similar articles as might be allotted to him.

As the sailors thought of the huge bars of silver and the chests of
plate stowed away in the hold, they prayed with all earnestness to
Heaven for a successful termination to their voyage, and resolved, like
true men as they were, that nothing should be lacking on their part to
accomplish it.

At length a group of islands was seen, from which a large number of
canoes came off, manned some by four, others by fifteen men, bringing
with them cocoa-nuts, fish, potatoes, and fruits.  Their canoes were
formed out of one tree, but smoothly and cleverly hollowed out, having
the appearance of being skilfully burnished.  The bow and stern were of
the same shape, turned inwards in a semicircle, and highly ornamented
with glistening shells.  On either side of the canoe pieces of timber
were hung out, from a yard to a yard and a half long, according to the
size of the canoes, to the ends of which was fastened a beam, the object
being to keep them from upsetting.

The ears of the natives hung down on either side of their cheeks,
weighted by heavy ornaments.  Some had nails on their fingers an inch
long, and their teeth were as black as pitch, caused by rubbing them
with a black pigment contained in a cane.

On first coming alongside they appeared ready to trade in an ordinary
honest way, and gave the articles they had brought off willingly for
whatever they received; but others coming round in great numbers,
snatched up anything they could get hold of, and made off with it.

Drake, to show that this was not approved of, would not deal with those
who had thus behaved.  They still, however, came round with the greatest
impudence, and asked for more.  At length, to warn them, he ordered a
gun without shot to be fired over their heads.  On hearing the sound, in
natural alarm they leapt overboard, and dived under their canoes, when,
waiting until the ship had passed on, they got into them and made for
the shore.  Others, however, in a short time came off, one of whom had
the impudence to steal a dagger from a seaman's belt.  Being ordered to
restore it, instead of so doing, he grasped at other things, and tried
to make his escape.  At length the seamen, losing patience, handling the
ropes' ends and other still more formidable weapons, drove their roguish
visitors overboard, and as they sailed away, bestowed on the group the
name of the Islands of Thieves, now known as the Carolines.  Thence
sailing southward, the _Hind_ passed several islands till she reached
that of Mindanao, whence two canoes came off; but the wind blowing
strong, Drake could not wait to communicate with them.

On the 3rd of November she came in sight of the high-peaked Molucca
Islands, to the east of which lies the great island of Gilolo.  The two
principal are called Ternate and Tidore.  Drake had intended to touch at
the latter, but when near the little island of Motir, belonging to
Ternate, a person of consequence, the Viceroy of the island, came off
with the information that the King had driven the Portuguese, who were
enemies to him as well as to them, out of Ternate, and that he was
anxious to receive the English with due honour, and to open up a
commercial intercourse with them.  He assured Drake that if he dealt
with the Portuguese, he would find them treacherous and deceitful, and
that the King of Ternate would have nothing to do with him if he had any
intercourse with them.

In consequence of this Drake resolved to run to Ternate, off which
island, early the next day, the _Golden Hind_ came to an anchor.  The
Admiral immediately sent a velvet cloak to the King, with a message
stating that he came on a friendly visit.

The Viceroy did not fail strongly to impress the King's mind with an
idea of the consequence and power of the Queen of England, and he came
back carrying a signet ring, as a sign to Drake that he would be well
received, saying that the King himself, with his nobles, would soon pay
him a visit on board.

Meantime Drake sent one of his officers on shore, who was met on landing
by a number of the chief people, and by them was conducted into the
presence of the King.

His Majesty blamed himself for not having at once come off to pay his
promised visit, and announced his intention of speedily making his
appearance.  The ship was accordingly decked with flags, the officers
and crew were attired in their best, while the guns were got ready to
fire a salute.  At length signs were perceived that the great person was
coming off.

Three large canoes, each of which contained some of the chief people of
the kingdom, approached.  Canopies were spread from one end of the
canoes to the other, of fine mats supported on a framework of reeds.
The occupants were attired in white linen or cloth of Calicut, each
person seated in order according to his rank, the white heads of some of
them showing the wisdom of the King in employing grave and reverend
councillors.  Besides them were a number of young, handsome-looking men,
who, also attired in white, stood under the canopy, but showing, from
the places they occupied, that they were of inferior rank.  Round them,
again, were arranged soldiers, neat and orderly, with their arms
brightly polished.  On the galleries on the outside of the state barge
sat the rowers, in three ranks, each canoe having eight.  At the head of
the canoe sat two men, one holding a drum and the other a brass
instrument, with which they struck time to direct the rowers.  In the
bow also was a handsome brass cannon of about a yard in length, and each
man, except the rowers, had his sword, dagger, and shield, some of them
carrying other weapons, such as guns, lances, bows, and darts.

As these magnificently equipped barges came near the ship, they rowed
round and round, one following the other, the chief persons in them
bowing low as they did so, in token of homage.  They then put the former
envoy on board, who signified that the King was coming, and desired that
a hawser might be sent to the barges, in order that they might tow the
ship into a better berth.

As the _Golden Hind_ went gliding on, the King himself came off in a
handsome barge, richly ornamented, accompanied by six grave and ancient
fathers, and as he approached he also bowed towards the ship in a far
more humble way than could have been expected.  He was a tall, very
corpulent man, of a pleasant and handsome countenance.  So great was the
respect shown him, that even the chief councillors did not speak to him
except on their knees.  Drake, wishing to do all the honour in his power
to the King, and highly pleased at the confidence he exhibited, ordered
the ordnance to be fired, the trumpets to sound, and the band to strike
up a lively tune.

This delighted the King so much that he requested the band to come into
a boat, which was towed by his barge for a whole hour together.  Drake,
to strengthen the friendship thus commenced, sent a variety of presents
to the King, who had in the meantime dispatched a messenger to bring his
brother, named Moro.  The latter soon appeared, accompanied by a number
of followers, all handsomely dressed, in barges as magnificent as those
of the King.

His Majesty now expressed his wish to return on shore, saying that he
would come back the next day, and before night he sent on board rice,
sugar-canes, and sugar in various forms, fowls, plantains, cocoa-nuts,
and sago, now first known to the English.  They might also have obtained
any amount of cloves, but Drake did not wish further to load his ship.

The Admiral was expecting the arrival of the King, when Prince Moro came
with apologies, saying that if Drake would go ashore he himself would
remain as a hostage.  To this, however, all the officers were greatly
averse, suspecting treachery, and he therefore determined to send
several of them with Prince Moro, retaining the Viceroy of Motir as a
hostage.

On landing they were courteously received by a large number of persons
of rank in handsome dresses, and were conducted to the palace.  This was
a four-sided building, the centre canopied by a cloth of many colours,
such as tents are made of.  All the way round it were cushioned seats.
It was the usual council-house, and not used for any other purpose.  On
one side was the chair of state, placed on a handsome carpet, having
over it a very beautiful and rich canopy.

As the King did not make his appearance for an hour, the officers had
time to examine things at their leisure.  Before he appeared, about
threescore noble, grave, and ancient personages entered and took their
seats round the building, while at the farther end were a large number
of richly dressed young men.  Outside stood four fine-looking
white-headed persons clothed in red robes reaching to the ground, having
turbans on their heads similar to the Turks.  They were, it was
understood, strangers, but long resident in the country.  Two of them
were Turks, one an Italian, and the last a Spaniard, who had been
rescued from the Portuguese.

At length the King appeared, followed by ten grave senators, walking
under a rich canopy embossed with gold, and guarded by twelve men armed
with lances, the points turned downwards.

The officers, accompanied by Prince Moro, rose to meet him.  He received
them graciously.  He was dressed like his countrymen, but far more
sumptuously.  His garments from the waist downward were of cloth of gold
of the richest description; his legs were bare, but on his feet he wore
red slippers; his head-dress was a sort of turban twisted through wide
gold rings, and somewhat resembled a crown.  Round his neck he wore a
massive gold chain; on his left hand four magnificent rings, adorned by
a diamond, an emerald, a ruby, and a turquoise; and on his right an
unusually large turquoise in one ring, and in another ring many diamonds
of a smaller size artistically arranged.

While he sat in his chair of state, on his right side stood a page
holding a large fan, richly embroidered and set with sapphires, with
which he constantly fanned his master.  The heat was excessive, both on
account of the sun's rays and the number of persons assembled.

The officers, having delivered their message, received permission to
take their departure.  Before retiring to the boats, they had time to
examine the castle, which was very ill fortified.  It had only two guns,
which had been captured from the Portuguese, and they were not mounted.
The present King had lately succeeded his father, who had been killed by
the Portuguese.  Having driven them out of the country, he greatly
increased his strength, and was contemplating an attack on Tidore, from
which he hoped to expel them.

While the _Golden Hind_ remained off Ternate, a stranger came on board,
very well dressed, and of courteous manners.  He described himself as a
Chinese, related to the Emperor of China.  He said that being accused of
a crime of which he was innocent, he thought it prudent to quit his
country and travel, after having obtained permission from the King, that
should he bring back anything curious, he should obtain his pardon.

Having described the unbounded wealth of China, he entreated Drake to
visit the country before returning to Europe.  Drake, however, having
already more than wealth enough on board his ship, and wishing to get
back to England as soon as possible, declined his offer.

On the 9th of November, having shipped all necessary stores and
provisions, the _Golden Hind_ proceeded on her voyage.  It was
necessary, however, before she could attempt to cross the wide expanse
of the Indian Ocean, and to encounter the storms off Cape Horn and in
the Atlantic, which might be expected, to careen and thoroughly repair
her.  On the 14th, therefore, they anchored at a convenient spot near an
uninhabited island off the east coast of Celebes.  The first thing they
did was to pitch their tents, and entrench themselves as strongly as
they could on the shore, lest any of the inhabitants of the larger
island in view might attack them.  After having thus provided for their
security, they landed the cargo and set up a smith's forge.  As all
their coals were spent, before they could use it, they had to
manufacture charcoal.

The place was remarkably healthy, and those who had hitherto been sickly
quickly recovered their strength.  The island was thickly wooded with
trees of great height.  Among them fire-flies in vast numbers were seen
flitting, at night every twig on the trees appearing as if lighted up by
stars.

They also saw what they took to be huge bats, which moved rapidly
through the air with short flights.  When they alighted they hung on the
boughs, with their backs downwards.  They also found, in vast numbers,
large land crabs, which lived in colonies under the roots of trees, but
never, as far as they could see, entered the water.  They accordingly
called this place Crab Island.

All necessary repairs being completed, the _Golden Hind_ sailed on the
12th of December, directing her course westward.  When off the coast of
Celebes, she became entangled among reefs and shoals, from out of which
it required the greatest possible care to find a free passage.  Here
they were sailing, now in one direction, now in another, until the 9th
of January, when, a favourable breeze springing up, they believed that
they had extricated themselves from their dangerous position, and that
they had an open sea before them.  They were running under all sail,
when, in the beginning of the first night watch, a loud grating sound
was heard,--the masts quivered: the _Golden Hind_ had run hard and fast
on a rock.  No land was in sight; there appeared no hopes of getting her
off.  Like pious men as they were, of a sort, they fell down on their
knees and implored God's protection.  They then rose,--their brave
Admiral setting the example,--and bestirred themselves to see what could
be done.  The pumps were tried and quickly sucked dry, showing that the
hull of the _Golden Hind_ was sound.

It was now deemed important to carry an anchor out to seaward, but
before doing so a boat was lowered, into which the Admiral leaped,
undertaking the charge of sounding all round the ship; but even at a
boat's length from her no bottom was found to which a cable could reach.
She appeared fixed hard and fast, and should any sea get up she must
inevitably quickly go to pieces.

Of this all were thoroughly convinced, although, Drake and his officers
setting the example, all manfully kept up their spirits.  Their boat
could not carry more than twenty persons at once with safety, while the
whole company consisted of fifty-eight, and the land was six leagues
from them, the wind being directly off shore.  At first it was proposed
to send one boat-load on shore, but there was the risk of their falling
into the hands of the savage inhabitants.  Anxiously they awaited the
return of day.  It came at length.  They forthwith made another attempt
to carry out an anchor, but no holding ground was found.  They were
apparently on the very pinnacle of a rock.  It was the top of high
water.  There appeared every probability that, when the tide became
lower, the ship would fall over on her bilge and be destroyed.

Again they took to praying, and, after a short address by the Admiral
and chaplain, they all together partook of the sacrament.  Then, lest
they should be guilty of not using all lawful means to free themselves
from their danger, they commenced unloading the ship by casting all the
goods they could lay their hands on into the sea.

Powder and shot and provisions were hove overboard, for they trusted
that, should God permit the ship once more to float, He would not allow
them to fall into the hands of their enemies, or to perish from want of
food.  The tide continued to fall, but the breeze blew strongly against
the side which was inclined towards the rock, and kept the ship on an
even keel, although, at one time, on that side there was not more than
seven feet of water, while she required thirteen to float her.  The
breeze increasing, she heeled over on the opposite side, where the water
was the deepest, and by this means, her keel tearing away the coral
rock, she was suddenly floated, at a moment no one expected, into deep
water.  A shout of joy escaped the throats of the gallant crew of the
_Golden Hind_, nor did they forget to offer up their grateful thanks to
Heaven for their delivery.  This was the greatest danger they had
hitherto encountered.  For many days afterwards, however, they were
entangled among the reefs off the low coast of Celebes.

On the 20th of January, Drake, desiring to come to an anchor, sent the
boat a considerable distance off, to look for a spot where he could
bring up.  Before, however, she could return, the ship was struck by a
wind from the south-west, little short of a hurricane, by which the sea
was rapidly lashed into fury, endangering not only the boat, but the
ship herself, for she was now caught on a lee shore, off which it seemed
impossible to beat.  Happily the violence of the storm passed over, and
the _Golden Hind_, picking up her boat, was able to ply off the land.
Although she got clear of that danger, for many days she was exposed to
others of a similar nature, and, being struck by another violent squall,
it became necessary to furl all sail and to run under bare poles.

On the 6th of February five islands were in sight, towards one of which
they steered, and came to an anchor.  Here they wooded and watered, and
on the 8th, as they were again at sea, two canoes were seen coming off
to the ship.  The natives in them, who were fine-looking fellows, but
naked, with the exception of turbans on their heads and cloths round
their loins, invited them to come to their town of Barativa.

Piloted by the strangers, the _Golden Hind_ steered on for the town.
The inhabitants appeared honest and hospitably inclined, and brought off
a plentiful supply of nutmegs, pepper, lemons, cucumbers, cocoa-nuts,
figs, sago, and other fruits.  Indeed, they behaved in so kind and
friendly a way that the crew of the _Golden Hind_ felt themselves safer
and more at their ease than they had at any place they had visited, with
the exception of Ternate.

Two days were spent in recruiting their strength after their toil, and
taking fresh provisions on board.  Once more they sailed westward, and,
after passing many other islands, on the 9th of March came in sight of
the large island of Java.  Drake, without hesitation, accompanied by
several of his officers, went on shore and presented himself to the
King, by whom he was cordially welcomed and entertained with music and a
review of his troops.  They found that this island was governed by a
principal chief or Rajah, named Donan, who had under him several other
rajahs, each presiding over a certain district.  Scarcely a day passed
that the Rajah or some of his subordinates did not come on board.  They
were invariably entertained by music and the exhibition of those things
which it was thought would be pleasing to them.

Rajah Donan, in return, entertained them with a concert of his national
instruments, which sounded strange in their ears; he likewise sent on
board an ox.  Though these visits caused some interruption, the crew,
eager to prosecute their voyage, laboured hard in refitting and cleaning
the bottom of the ship, which was found to be covered with barnacles,
greatly impeding her sailing.

In all their transactions with these people they found them a mild and
gentle race, honest and just in their dealings.  Goats, hens,
cocoa-nuts, plantains, and other kinds of fruits were obtained.  The
_Golden Hind_ at length set sail from Java on the 26th of March,
steering west-south-west, directly for the Cape of Good Hope.

Thus, as they had passed over the Pacific, the bold mariners steered
their course, day after day the sea and sky alone in sight, until the
21st of May, when high rocky land was seen on the starboard bow, which
they well knew was the southern part of Africa.  They coasted along
until the 15th of June, when, with a smooth sea and gentle wind from the
south-east, they passed so near to the Cape that they might have sent a
shot on shore from one of their guns.

Thus their experience differed greatly from that of the Portuguese, who
had always represented it as a cape of storms.  The crew of the _Golden
Hind_ suspected that they had done so for the purpose of preventing
other mariners from attempting to pass it.  The crew of the _Golden
Hind_ had now proved that the dreaded cape could be rounded and the
Straits of Magellan passed through in safety.

For a whole month they did not again sight land until the 15th of June,
when they passed Rio de Sesto, where they saw some boats of negroes
fishing, but did not communicate with them.  On the 22nd of the same
month they came to an anchor off Sierra Leone, where, at the mouth of
the river Tagoine, they spent two days watering.  They were not a little
astonished to see countless numbers of oysters clinging to the branches
of the mangrove-trees overhanging the water.  These and plenty of
lemons, which they found very wholesome and refreshing, were used as
food.

Once more the _Golden Hind_ was at sea steering northward, the richest
argosy which had ever yet floated on the ocean.  The hearts of the
gallant crew beat high as they neared their native shores.  No longer
fearing danger, even from revengeful Spaniards, they stood on until,
greatly to their joy, soundings were struck.  The well-known Land's End
and the Start came in sight, and on the 25th of September, 1580--Sunday,
according to the reckoning on board--the _Golden Hind_, after a voyage
of two years and ten months, dropped her anchor in the harbour of
Plymouth.

Great was the astonishment of the mariners when they found that the true
day, with those who had remained on shore, was Monday the 26th, they not
being aware that they had lost a day by the course they had steered,
following the sun, and thereby gaining on him.

When the amount of wealth Drake had brought was known, his arrival was
hailed throughout the kingdom as an event of national importance; still
more so by those who could best appreciate the value of his great
undertaking in having circumnavigated the globe, passed through the
Straits of Magellan, and made many most important discoveries.

There were those, however, who endeavoured to detract from his merits,
and accused him merely of being a successful pirate.  Others blamed him
for having put the unhappy Doughty to death, and many complained that
his attack on the Spaniards would lay their mercantile marine at the
mercy of their enemies.

He was, notwithstanding the remarks of his detractors, graciously
received at Court in private, although the Queen thought it necessary to
show him a certain amount of coldness in public.

So violent were the complaints made by the Spanish ambassador, that she
sequestrated the treasure brought home by the _Golden Hind_, and part of
it was paid over to the Spanish agent, by whom it was transmitted to
Philip, and employed in supporting the Irish rebellion.  The Queen,
however, laughed at the complaints of the ambassador that the English
had intruded into the South Sea, observing that she knew not why her
