The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Tunnel Under The World, by Frederik Pohl

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Tunnel Under The World

Author: Frederik Pohl

Illustrator: Emsh

Release Date: April 14, 2010 [EBook #31979]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TUNNEL UNDER THE WORLD ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction January 1955.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                              The Tunnel

                                Under

                              The World


                           By FREDERIK POHL


     Pinching yourself is no way to see if you are dreaming.
     Surgical instruments? Well, yes--but a mechanic's kit is
     best of all!


                         Illustrated by EMSH

       *       *       *       *       *




On the morning of June 15th, Guy Burckhardt woke up screaming out of a
dream.

It was more real than any dream he had ever had in his life. He could
still hear and feel the sharp, ripping-metal explosion, the violent
heave that had tossed him furiously out of bed, the searing wave of
heat.

He sat up convulsively and stared, not believing what he saw, at the
quiet room and the bright sunlight coming in the window.

He croaked, "Mary?"

His wife was not in the bed next to him. The covers were tumbled and
awry, as though she had just left it, and the memory of the dream was
so strong that instinctively he found himself searching the floor to
see if the dream explosion had thrown her down.

[Illustration]

But she wasn't there. Of course she wasn't, he told himself, looking
at the familiar vanity and slipper chair, the uncracked window, the
unbuckled wall. It had only been a dream.

"Guy?" His wife was calling him querulously from the foot of the
stairs. "Guy, dear, are you all right?"

He called weakly, "Sure."

There was a pause. Then Mary said doubtfully, "Breakfast is ready. Are
you sure you're all right? I thought I heard you yelling--"

Burckhardt said more confidently, "I had a bad dream, honey. Be right
down."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the shower, punching the lukewarm-and-cologne he favored, he told
himself that it had been a beaut of a dream. Still, bad dreams weren't
unusual, especially bad dreams about explosions. In the past thirty
years of H-bomb jitters, who had not dreamed of explosions?

Even Mary had dreamed of them, it turned out, for he started to tell
her about the dream, but she cut him off. "You _did_?" Her voice was
astonished. "Why, dear, I dreamed the same thing! Well, almost the
same thing. I didn't actually _hear_ anything. I dreamed that
something woke me up, and then there was a sort of quick bang, and
then something hit me on the head. And that was all. Was yours like
that?"

Burckhardt coughed. "Well, no," he said. Mary was not one of these
strong-as-a-man, brave-as-a-tiger women. It was not necessary, he
thought, to tell her all the little details of the dream that made it
seem so real. No need to mention the splintered ribs, and the salt
bubble in his throat, and the agonized knowledge that this was death.
He said, "Maybe there really was some kind of explosion downtown.
Maybe we heard it and it started us dreaming."

Mary reached over and patted his hand absently. "Maybe," she agreed.
"It's almost half-past eight, dear. Shouldn't you hurry? You don't
want to be late to the office."

He gulped his food, kissed her and rushed out--not so much to be on
time as to see if his guess had been right.

But downtown Tylerton looked as it always had. Coming in on the bus,
Burckhardt watched critically out the window, seeking evidence of an
explosion. There wasn't any. If anything, Tylerton looked better than
it ever had before: It was a beautiful crisp day, the sky was
cloudless, the buildings were clean and inviting. They had, he
observed, steam-blasted the Power & Light Building, the town's only
skyscraper--that was the penalty of having Contro Chemical's main
plant on the outskirts of town; the fumes from the cascade stills left
their mark on stone buildings.

None of the usual crowd were on the bus, so there wasn't anyone
Burckhardt could ask about the explosion. And by the time he got out
at the corner of Fifth and Lehigh and the bus rolled away with a muted
diesel moan, he had pretty well convinced himself that it was all
imagination.

He stopped at the cigar stand in the lobby of his office building, but
Ralph wasn't behind the counter. The man who sold him his pack of
cigarettes was a stranger.

"Where's Mr. Stebbins?" Burckhardt asked.

The man said politely, "Sick, sir. He'll be in tomorrow. A pack of
Marlins today?"

"Chesterfields," Burckhardt corrected.

"Certainly, sir," the man said. But what he took from the rack and
slid across the counter was an unfamiliar green-and-yellow pack.

"Do try these, sir," he suggested. "They contain an anti-cough factor.
Ever notice how ordinary cigarettes make you choke every once in a
while?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Burckhardt said suspiciously, "I never heard of this brand."

"Of course not. They're something new." Burckhardt hesitated, and the
man said persuasively, "Look, try them out at my risk. If you don't
like them, bring back the empty pack and I'll refund your money. Fair
enough?"

Burckhardt shrugged. "How can I lose? But give me a pack of
Chesterfields, too, will you?"

He opened the pack and lit one while he waited for the elevator. They
weren't bad, he decided, though he was suspicious of cigarettes that
had the tobacco chemically treated in any way. But he didn't think
much of Ralph's stand-in; it would raise hell with the trade at the
cigar stand if the man tried to give every customer the same
high-pressure sales talk.

The elevator door opened with a low-pitched sound of music. Burckhardt
and two or three others got in and he nodded to them as the door
closed. The thread of music switched off and the speaker in the
ceiling of the cab began its usual commercials.

No, not the _usual_ commercials, Burckhardt realized. He had been
exposed to the captive-audience commercials so long that they hardly
registered on the outer ear any more, but what was coming from the
recorded program in the basement of the building caught his
attention. It wasn't merely that the brands were mostly unfamiliar; it
was a difference in pattern.

There were jingles with an insistent, bouncy rhythm, about soft drinks
he had never tasted. There was a rapid patter dialogue between what
sounded like two ten-year-old boys about a candy bar, followed by an
authoritative bass rumble: "Go right out and get a DELICIOUS
Choco-Bite and eat your TANGY Choco-Bite _all up_. That's
