faded blue uniform who had dropped his rifle in the rapidity of his
flight.

Harry kept one eye on him but the stranger did not see him until they
were nearly out of the wood.  Then Harry, with a clear purpose in view,
veered toward him.  He saw that they would escape from the fire.  Open
fields showed not far ahead, and while the sparks were numerous and
sometimes scorched, the roaring red monster behind them would soon be
at the end of his race.  He could not follow them into the open fields.

When the two emerged from the forest Harry was not more than fifteen
feet from the stranger, who evidently took him for a friend and who was
glad to have a comrade at such a time.  They raced across fields in
which the wheat had been cut, and then sank down four or five hundred
yards from the fire, which was crackling and roaring in the woods with
great violence, and sending up leaping flames.

"I was glad enough to get out of that.  Do you think the rebels set it
on fire?"

"I don't think so, but I was as pleased as you to escape from it, Mr.
Haskell."

"Why, how did you know my name?" exclaimed the man in wonder.

"Why should I forget you?  I've seen you often enough.  Your name is
John Haskell and you belong to the Fifth Pennsylvania."

"That's right, but I don't seem to recall you."

"It takes a lot of us some time to clear up our minds wholly after such
a battle as Gettysburg.  In some ways I've been in a sort of confused
state myself.  I dare say you've seen me often enough."

"That's likely."

"Pity you had your horse shot under you, Mr. Haskell.  A man who is
carrying important messages at a time like this can't do very well
without his horse."

"How did you know I'd lost my horse?"

"Oh, I'm a mind reader.  I can tell you a lot now.  You carry your
dispatch in the left-hand pocket of your waistcoat, just over your
heart. And it hasn't been long, either, since you lost your horse,
perhaps not more than an hour."

Haskell stared at him, but Harry's face was innocent.  Nevertheless he
had read Haskell's name and regiment on his canteen, cut there with his
own knife.  It was a mere guess that he was a dispatch bearer, but he
had located the dispatch, because at the mention of the word "message"
the man's hand had involuntarily gone to his left breast to see if the
dispatch were still there.  Boots with little dirt on them indicated
that he had been riding.

"A mind reader!" said Haskell, with suspicion.  "What business has a
mind reader in this war?"

"He could be of enormous value.  If he were a real mind reader he could
tell his general exactly what the opposing general intended to do. I'm
employed at a gigantic salary for that particular purpose."

"I guess you're trying to be funny.  Why do you carry both a rifle and
a shotgun?"

"In order to hit the target with one, if the other misses.  I always
use the rifle first, because if the bullet doesn't get home the
shotgun, spreading its charge over a much wider area, is likely to do
something."

"Now I know you're trying to be funny.  As I'm going about my business
as fast as I can, I'll leave you here."

"I like you so well that I can't bear to see you go.  Don't move. My
rifle covers your heart exactly and you are not more than ten feet
away.  I shall have no possible need of the shotgun.  Keep your hands
away from your belt.  You're in a dangerous position, Mr. Haskell."

"I believe you're an infernal rebel."

"Take out the objectionable adjective 'infernal' and you're right. Keep
those hands still, I tell you."

"What do you want?"

"Your dispatches!  Oh, I must have 'em.  Unbutton your coat and
waistcoat and hand 'em to me at once.  I hate to take human life, but
war demands a terrible service, and I mean what I say!"

His voice rang with determination.  The man slowly unbuttoned his
waistcoat and took out a folded dispatch.

"Put it on the ground in front of you.  That's right, and don't you
reach for it again.  Now, lay your canteen beside it!"

"What in thunder do you want with my canteen?  It's empty!"

"I can fill it again.  This is a well watered country.  That's right;
put it beside the dispatch.  Now you walk about one hundred yards to
the right with your back to me.  If you look around at all I fire, and
I'm a good marksman.  Stand there ten minutes, and then you can move
on! That's right!  Now march!"

The man walked away slowly and when he had gone about half the distance
Harry, picking up the dispatch, took flight again across the fields.
Climbing a fence, he looked back and saw the figure of John Haskell,
standing motionless on a hill.  He knew that the man was not likely to
remain in that position more than half the allotted time.  It was
certain that he would soon turn, despite the risk, but Harry was
already beyond his reach.

He leaped from the fence, crossed another field and entered a wood.
There he paused among the trees and saw Haskell returning.  But when he
had come a little distance, he shook his head doubtfully, and then
walked toward the north.

"A counsel of wisdom," chuckled Harry, who was going in quite another
direction.  "I think I'll read my dispatch now."

He opened it and blessed his luck.  It was from Meade to Pleasanton,
directing him to cut in with all the cavalry he could gather on the
enemy's flank.  The Potomac was in great flood and the Army of Northern
Virginia could not possibly cross.  If it were harried to the utmost by
the Union cavalry the task of destroying it would be much easier.

"So it would," said Harry to himself.  "But Pleasanton won't get this
dispatch.  Providence has not deserted me yet; and it's true that
fortune favors the brave.  I'm John Haskell of the Fifth Pennsylvania
and I can prove it."

He had put the canteen over his shoulder and the name upon it was a
powerful witness in his favor.  The dispatch itself was another, and
his faded uniform told nothing.

Harry had passed through so much that a reckless spirit was growing
upon him, and he had succeeded in so much that he believed he would
continue to succeed.  Regretfully he threw the shotgun away, as it
would not appear natural for a messenger to carry it and a rifle too.

He went forward boldly now, and, when an hour later he saw a detachment
of Union cavalry in a road, he took no measures to avoid them.  Instead
he went directly toward the horsemen and hailed them in a loud voice.
They stopped and their leader, a captain, looked inquiringly at Harry,
who was approaching rapidly.

Harry held up both hands as a sign that he was a friend, and called in
a loud voice:

"I want a horse!  And at once, if you please, sir!"

He had noticed that three led horses with empty saddles, probably the
result of a brush with the enemy, and he meant to be astride one of
them within a few minutes.

"You're a cool one," said the captain.  "You come walking across the
field, and without a word of explanation you say you want a horse.
Don't you want a carriage too?"

"I don't need it.  But I must have a horse, Captain.  I ride with a
message and it must be of great importance because I was told to go
with it at all speed and risk my life for it.  I've risked my life
already. My horse was shot by a band of rebels, but luckily it was in
the woods and I escaped on foot."

As he spoke he craftily moved the canteen around until the inscription
showed clearly in the bright sunlight.  The quick eyes of the captain
caught it at once.

"You do belong to the Fifth Pennsylvania," he said.  "Well, you're a
long way from your regiment.  It's back of that low mountain over
there, a full forty miles from here, I should say."

Harry felt a throb of relief.  It was his only fear that these men
themselves should belong to the Fifth Pennsylvania, a long chance, but
if it should happen to go against him, fatal to all his plans.

"I don't want to join my regiment," he said.  "I'm looking for General
Pleasanton."

"General Pleasanton!  What can you happen to want with him?"

Harry gave the officer a wary and suspicious look, and then his eyes
brightened as if he were satisfied.

"I told you I was riding with a message," he said, "and that message is
for General Pleasanton.  It's from General Meade himself and it's no
harm for me to show it to so good a patriot as you."

"No, I think not," said the captain, flattered by the proof of respect
and confidence.

Harry took the letter from his pocket.  It had been sealed at first,
but the warmth of the original bearer's body with a little help from
Harry later had caused it to come open.

"Look at that," said Harry proudly as he took out the paper.

The captain read it, and was mightily impressed.  He was, as Harry had
surmised, a thoroughly staunch supporter of the Union.  He would not
only furnish this valiant messenger with a good horse, but he would
help him otherwise on his way.

"Dexter," he called to an orderly, "bring the sorrel mare.  She was
ridden by a good man, Mr. Haskell, but he met a sharpshooter's bullet.
Jump up."

Harry sprang into the saddle, and, astride such a fine piece of
horseflesh, he foresaw a speedy arrival in the camp of General Lee.

"I'll not only mount you," said the captain, "but we'll see you on the
way.  General Pleasanton is on Lee's left flank and, as our course is
in that direction, we'll ride with you, and protect you from stray
rebel sharpshooters."

Harry could have shouted aloud in anger and disappointment.  While the
captain trusted him fully, he would not be much more than a prisoner,
nevertheless.

"Thank you very much, Captain," he said, "but you needn't trouble
yourself about me.  Perhaps I'd better go on ahead.  One rides faster
alone."

"Don't be afraid that we'll hold you back," said the captain, smiling.
"We're one of the hardest riding detachments in General Pleasanton's
whole cavalry corps, and we won't delay you a second.  On the contrary,
we know the road so well that we'll save you wandering about and losing
time."

Harry did not dare to say more.  And so Providence, which had been
watching over him so well, had decided now to leave him and watch over
the other fellow.  But he had at least one consolation.  Pleasanton was
on Lee's flank and their ride did not turn him from the line of his
true objective.  Every beat of his horse's hoofs would bring him nearer
to Lee.  Invincible youth was invincibly in the saddle again, and he
said confidently to the captain:

"Let's start."

"All right.  You keep by my side, Haskell.  You appear to be brave and
intelligent and I want to ask you questions."

The tone, though well meant, was patronizing, but Harry did not resent
it.

"This troop is made up of Massachusetts men, and I'm from Massachusetts
too," continued the captain.  "My name is Lester, and I had just
graduated from Harvard when the war began."

"Good stock up there in Massachusetts," said Harry boldly, "but I've
one objection to you."

"What's that?"

"Everything wonderful in our history was done by you.  No chance was
left for anybody else."

"Well, not everything, but almost everything.  Good old Massachusetts!
As Webster said, 'There she stands!'"

"It was mostly New York and Pennsylvania that stood at Gettysburg."

"Yes, you did very well there."

"Don't you think, Captain, that a nation or a state is often lucky in
its possession of writers?"

"I don't catch your drift exactly."

"I'll make an illustration.  I've often wondered what were the Persian
accounts of Marathon and Thermopylae, of Salamis and Plataea.  Now most
of our history has been written by Massachusetts men."

"And you insinuate that they have glorified my state unduly?"

"The expression is a trifle severe.  Let's say that they have dwelled
rather long upon the achievements of Massachusetts and not so long upon
those of New York and Pennsylvania."

"Then let New York and Pennsylvania go get great writers.  No state can
be truly great without them.  There's another detachment of ours just
ahead, but we'll talk to them only a minute or two."

The second detachment reported that Pleasanton, with a heavy cavalry
force, was about six miles farther west and that there was a fair road
all the way.  They should overtake him in an hour.

Harry's heart beat hard.  Unless something happened within that hour he
would never reach Lee, and his brain began to work with extraordinary
activity.  Plans passed in review before it as rapidly as pictures on a
film, but all were rejected.  He was in despair.  They were trotting
rapidly down a smooth road.  A quarter of an hour passed and then a
half-hour.  A low bare hill appeared immediately on their right, and
Harry saw beyond it the tops of trees.

"Captain Lester," he said, "suppose that you and I ride to the crest of
the hill.  You have strong glasses, so have I, and we may see something
worth while.  The men will ride on, but we can easily overtake them."

"Not a bad idea, Haskell," said the captain, still in that slightly
patronizing tone.  "I judge by your speech that you're a well educated
man, and you appear to think."

They rode quickly to the summit, and Lester, putting his glasses to his
eyes, gazed westward over a vast expanse of cultivated country.  But
Harry looking immediately down the slope, saw the forest that he wished.

Lester swept the glasses in a wide circle, looking for Union troops.
His own troop was about a hundred yards ahead and the hoofbeats were
growing fainter.  Then Harry's courage almost failed him, but necessity
was instant and cruel.  Still he modified the blow, nor did he use any
weapon, save one that nature had given him.

"Look out!" he cried, and as Lester turned in astonishment he struck
him on the point of the jaw.  Even as his fist flashed forward he held
back a little and his full strength was not in the blow.

Nevertheless it was sufficient to strike Lester senseless, and he slid
from his horse.  Harry caught him by the shoulder and eased him in his
fall.  Then he lay stretched on his back in the grass like one asleep,
with his horse staring at him.  Harry knew that he would revive in a
minute or two, and with a "Farewell, Captain Lester," he galloped down
the slope and into the covering woods.

He knew that Lester's men, finding that they did not follow, would
quickly come back, and he raced his horse among the trees as fast as he
dared.  A couple of miles between him and the hill and he felt safe, at
least so far as the troop of Captain Lester was concerned.  Fortune
seemed to have made him a favorite again, but he knew that dangers were
still as thick around him as leaves in Vallombrosa.

He tied his horse, climbed a tree, and used his glasses.  Two miles to
the west the bright sun flashed on long lines of mounted men, obviously
the horsemen of Pleasanton.  How was he to get through that cavalry
screen and reach Lee?  He did not see a way, but he knew that to find,
one must seek.  His desire to get through, intense as it always had
been, was now doubled.  He not only carried the news to Lee about the
possible ford, but he also bore Meade's dispatch to Pleasanton,
directing a movement which, if successful, must be most dangerous to
the Army of Northern Virginia.

He descended the tree and waited a while in the forest.  He found a
spring at which he drank, and he filled the canteen.  It was a precious
canteen with the name of John Haskell engraved upon it, and he meant
that it should carry him through all dangers into his camp.  But he did
not mean to use it yet.  If he rode into Pleasanton's ranks they would
merely take his letter to the general, and that would be the failure of
his real mission.

Night was now not far distant, and, concluding that he had a much
better chance to run the gantlet under its cover, he still waited in
the wood until the twilight came.

Wrapped in a coil of dangers he was ready to risk anything.  Quickness,
resource and boldness, of which the last had been most valuable, had
brought him so far, and, encouraged by success, he rode forward full of
confidence.

On his right was a small house standing among the usual shade trees,
and, approaching it without hesitation, he spoke to a man who stood in
the yard.

"Which way is General Pleasanton?" he asked.
