that it might contain fresh provisions, as the Esquimaux were in the
habit of thus preserving their superabundant food from bears and wolves.
In half an hour a hole large enough for a man to creep through was
formed, and Fred entered, but started back with an exclamation of horror
on finding himself in the presence of a human skeleton, which was seated
on the ground in the centre of this strange tomb with its head and arms
resting on the knees.

"It must be an Esquimaux grave," said Fred, as he retreated hastily;
"that must be the reason why Meetuck tried to hinder us."

"I should like to see it," said Grim, stooping and thrusting his head
and shoulders into the hole.

"What have you got there?" asked Bolton, as Grim drew back and held up
something in his hand.

"Don't know exactly.  It's like a bit o' cloth."  On examination the
article was found to be a shred of coarse cloth, of a blue or black
colour, and, being an unexpected substance to meet with in such a place,
Bolton turned round with it to Meetuck in the hope of obtaining some
information.  But Meetuck was gone.  While the sailors were breaking
into the grave, Meetuck had stood aloof with a displeased expression of
countenance, as if he were angry at the rude desecration of a
countryman's tomb; but the moment his eye fell on the shred of cloth an
expression of mingled surprise and curiosity crossed his countenance,
and without uttering a word he slipped noiselessly into the hole, from
which he almost immediately issued bearing several articles in his hand.
These he held up to view, and with animated words and gesticulations
explained that this was the grave of a white man, not of a native.

The articles he brought out were a pewter plate and a silver
table-spoon.

"There's a name of some kind written here," said Bolton, as he carefully
scrutinised the spoon.  "Look here, Fred, your eyes are better than
mine; see if you can make it out."

Fred took it with a trembling hand, for a strange feeling of dread had
seized possession of his heart, and he could scarcely bring himself to
look upon it.  He summoned up courage, however, but at the first glance
his hand fell down by his side, and a dimness came over his eyes, for
the word "_Pole Star_" was engraven on the handle.  He would have fallen
to the ground had not Bolton caught him.

"Don't give way, lad, the ship may be all right.  Perhaps this is one o'
the crew that died."

Fred did not answer, but, recovering himself with a strong effort, he
said: "Pull down the stones, men."

The men obeyed in silence, and the poor boy sat down on a rock to await
the result in trembling anxiety.  A few minutes sufficed to disentomb
the skeleton, for the men sympathised with their young comrade, and
worked with all their energies.

"Cheer up, Fred," said Bolton, coming and laying his hand on the youth's
shoulder, "it's _not_ your father.  There is a bit of _black_ hair
sticking to the scalp."

With a fervent expression of thankfulness Fred rose and examined the
skeleton, which had been placed in a sort of sack of skin, but was
destitute of clothing.  It was quite dry, and must have been there a
long time.  Nothing else was found, but from the appearance of the
skull, and the presence of the plate and spoon, there could be no doubt
that it was that of one of the _Pole Star's_ crew.

It was now resolved that they should proceed along the coast and examine
every creek and bay for traces of the lost vessel.

"Oh, Bolton, my heart misgives me!" said Fred, as they drove along; "I
fear that they have all perished."

"Niver a bit sir," said O'Riley in a sympathising tone, "yon chap must
have died and been buried here be the crew as they wint past."

"You forget that sailors don't bury men under mounds of stone, with
pewter plates and spoons beside them."

O'Riley was silenced, for the remark was unanswerable.

"He may ha' bin left or lost on the shore, and been found by the
Esquimaux," suggested Peter Grim.

"Is that not another tomb?" enquired one of the men, pointing towards an
object which stood on the end of a point or cape towards which they were
approaching.

Ere anyone could reply, their ears were saluted by the well-known bark
of a pack of Esquimaux dogs.  In another moment they dashed into the
midst of a snow village, and were immediately surrounded by the excited
natives.  For some time no information could be gleaned from their
interpreter, who was too excited to make use of his meagre amount of
English.  They observed, however, that the natives, although much
excited, did not seem to be so much surprised at the appearance of white
men amongst them as those were whom they had first met with near the
ship.  In a short time Meetuck apparently had expended all he had to say
to his friends, and turned to make explanations to Bolton in a very
excited tone; but little more could be made out than that what he said
had some reference to white men.  At length, in desperation, he pointed
to a large hut which seemed to be the principal one of the village, and,
dragging the mate towards it, made signs to him to enter.

Bolton hesitated an instant.

"He wants you to see the chief of the tribe, no doubt," said Fred;
"you'd better go in at once."

A loud voice shouted something in the Esquimaux language from within the
hut.  At the sound Fred's heart beat violently, and pushing past the
mate he crept through the tunnelled entrance and stood within.  There
was little furniture in this rude dwelling.  A dull flame flickered in a
stone lamp which hung from the roof, and revealed the figure of a large
Esquimaux reclining on a couch of skins at the raised side of the hut.

The man looked up hastily as Fred entered, and uttered a few
unintelligible words.

"Father!" cried Fred, gasping for breath, and springing forward.

Captain Ellice, for it was indeed he, started with apparent difficulty
and pain into a sitting posture, and, throwing back his hood, revealed a
face whose open, hearty, benignant expression shone through a coat of
dark brown which long months of toil and exposure had imprinted on it.
It was thin, however, and careworn, and wore an expression that seemed
to be the result of long-continued suffering.

"Father!" he exclaimed in an earnest tone; "who calls me father?"

"Don't you know me, Father?--don't you remember Fred?--look at--"

Fred checked himself, for the wild look of his father frightened him.

"Ah! these dreams," murmured the old man, "I wish they did not come
so--"

Placing his hand on his forehead he fell backwards in a state of
insensibility into the arms of his son.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

KEEPING IT DOWN--MUTUAL EXPLANATIONS--DEATH--NEW-YEAR'S DAY.

It need scarcely be said that the sailors outside did not remain long in
ignorance of the unexpected and happy discovery related in the last
chapter.  Bolton, who had crept in after Fred, with proper delicacy of
feeling retired the moment he found how matters stood, and left father
and son to expend, in the privacy of that chamber of snow, those
feelings and emotions which can be better imagined than described.

The first impulse of the men was to give three cheers, but Bolton
checked them in the bud.

"No, no, lads.  We must hold on," he said in an eager but subdued voice.
"Doubtless it would be pleasant to vent our feelings in a hearty cheer,
but it would startle the old gentleman inside.  Get along with you, and
let us get ready a good supper."

"Oh morther!" exclaimed O'Riley, holding on to his sides as if he
believed what he said, "me biler'll bust av ye don't let me screech."

"Squeeze down the safety-valve a bit longer, then," cried Bolton, as
they hurried along with the whole population to the outskirts of the
village.  "Now, then, ye may fire away; they won't hear ye--Huzza!"

A long enthusiastic cheer distantly burst from the sailors, and was
immediately followed by a howl of delight from the Esquimaux, who
capered round their visitors with uncouth gestures and grinning faces.

Entering one of the largest huts, preparations for supper were promptly
begun.  The Esquimaux happened to be well supplied with walrus flesh, so
the lamps were replenished, and the hiss of the frying steaks and
dropping fat speedily rose above all other sounds.

Meanwhile Fred and his father, having mutually recovered somewhat of
their wonted composure, began to tell each other the details of their
adventures since they last met, while the former prepared a cup of
coffee and a steak for their mutual comfort.

"But, Father," said Fred, busying himself at the lamp, "you have not yet
told me how you came here, and what has become of the _Pole Star_, and
how it was that one of your men came to be buried in the Esquimaux
fashion, and how you got your leg broken?"

"Truly, Fred, I have not told you all that; and to give it you all in
detail will afford us many a long hour of converse hereafter, if it
please God, whose tenderness and watchful care of me has never failed.
But I can give you a brief outline of it thus:--

"I got into Baffin's Bay and made a good fishing of it the first year,
but was beset in the ice and compelled to spend two winters in these
regions.  The third year we were liberated, and had almost got fairly on
our homeward voyage, when a storm blew us to the north, and carried us
up here.  Then our good brig was nipped and went to the bottom, and all
the crew were lost except myself and one man.  We succeeded in leaping
from one piece of loose ice to another until we reached the solid floe
and gained the land, where we were kindly received by the Esquimaux.
But poor Wilson did not survive long.  His constitution had never been
robust, and he died of consumption a week after we landed.  The
Esquimaux buried him after their own fashion, and, as I afterwards
found, had buried a plate and a spoon along with him.  These, with
several other articles, had been washed ashore from the wreck.  Since
then I have been living the life of an Esquimaux, awaiting an
opportunity of escape, either by a ship making its appearance or a tribe
of natives travelling south.  I soon picked up their language, and was
living in comparative comfort when, during a sharp fight I chanced to
have with a Polar bear, I fell and broke my leg.  I have lain here for
many months and have suffered much, Fred; but, thank God, I am now
almost well, and can walk a little, though not yet without pain."

"Dear Father," said Fred, "_how_ terribly you must have felt the want of
kind hands to nurse you during those dreary months, and how lonely you
must have been!"

It were impossible here to enter minutely into the details of all that
Captain Ellice related to Fred during the next few days, while they
remained together in the Esquimaux village.  To tell of the dangers, the
adventures, and the hairbreadth escapes that the crew of the _Pole Star_
went through before the vessel finally went down would require a whole
volume.  We must pass it all over, and also the account of the few days
that followed, during which sundry walrus were captured, and return to
the _Dolphin_, to which Captain Ellice had been conveyed on the sledge,
carefully wrapped up in deer-skins and tended by Fred.

A party of the Esquimaux accompanied them, and as a number of the
natives from the other village had returned with Saunders and his men to
the ship, the scene she presented, when all parties were united, was
exceedingly curious and animated.

The Esquimaux soon built quite a little town of snow-huts all round the
_Dolphin_, and the noise of traffic and intercourse was peculiarly
refreshing to the ears of those who had long been accustomed to the
death-like stillness of an Arctic winter.  The beneficial effect of the
change on men and dogs was instantaneous.  Their spirits rose at once,
and this, with the ample supply of fresh meat that had been procured,
soon began to drive scurvy away.

There was one dark spot, however, in this otherwise pleasant scene--one
impending event that cast a gloom over all.  In his narrow berth in the
cabin Joseph West lay dying.  Scurvy had acted more rapidly on his
delicate frame than had been expected.  Despite Tom Singleton's utmost
efforts and skill the fell disease gained the mastery, and it soon
became evident that this hearty and excellent man was to be taken away
from them.

During the last days of his illness Captain Ellice was his greatest
comfort and his constant companion.

It was on Christmas-day that West died.

Next day the body of Joseph West was put in a plain deal coffin and
conveyed to Store Island, where it was placed on the ground.  They had
no instruments that could penetrate the hard rock, so were obliged to
construct a tomb of stones, after the manner of the Esquimaux, under
which the coffin was laid and left in solitude.

New-year's Day came, and preparations were made to celebrate the day
with the usual festivities.  But the recent death had affected the crew
too deeply to allow them to indulge in the unrestrained hilarity of that
season.  Prayers were read in the morning, and both Captain Guy and
Captain Ellice addressed the men feelingly in allusion to their late
shipmate's death and their own present position.  A good dinner was also
prepared, and several luxuries served out, among which were the
materials for the construction of a large plum-pudding.  But no grog was
allowed, and they needed it not.  As the afternoon advanced, stories
were told, and even songs were sung, but these were of a quiet kind, and
the men seemed, from an innate feeling of propriety, to suit them to the
occasion.  Old friends were recalled, and old familiar scenes described.
The hearths of home were spoken of with a depth of feeling that showed
how intense was the longing to be seated round them again, and future
prospects were canvassed with keen interest and with hopeful voices.
New year's Day came and went, and when it was gone the men of the
_Dolphin_ did not say, "What a jolly day it was!"  They _said_ little or
nothing, but, long after, they _thought_ of it as a bright spot in their
dreary winter in the Bay of Mercy--as a day in which they had enjoyed
earnest, glad, and sober communings of heart.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

FIRST GLEAM OF LIGHT--TRIP TO WELCOME THE SUN--BEARS AND STRANGE
DISCOVERIES--O'RILEY IS RECKLESS--FIRST VIEW OF THE SUN.

The wisest of men has told us that, "it is a pleasant thing for the eyes
to behold the sun," but only those who spend a winter in the Arctic
regions can fully appreciate the import of that inspired saying.

It is absolutely essential to existence that the bright beams of the
great luminary should fall on animal as well as plant.  Most of the poor
dogs died for want of this blessed light, and had it been much longer
withheld, doubtless our navigators would have sunk also.

About the 20th of January a faint gleam of light on the horizon told of
the coming day.  It was hailed with rapture, and, long before the bright
sun himself appeared on the southern horizon, the most of the men made
daily excursions to the neighbouring hill-tops to catch sight of as much
as possible of his faint rays.  Day by day those rays expanded, and at
last a sort of _dawn_ enlightened a distant portion of their earth,
which, faint though it was at first, had much the appearance in their
eyes of a bright day.  But time wore on, and _real_ day appeared!  The
red sun rose in all its glory, showed a rim of its glowing disc above
the frozen sea, and then sank, leaving a long gladsome smile of twilight
behind.  This great event happened on the 19th of February, and would
have occurred sooner but for the high cliffs to the southward, which
intervened between the ship and the horizon.

On the day referred to a large party was formed to go to the top of the
cliffs at Red Snow Valley to welcome back the sun.

"There's scarce a man left behind," remarked Captain Guy, as they
started on this truly joyous expedition.

"Only Mizzle, sir," said Buzzby, slapping his hands together, for the
cold was intense; "he said as how he'd stop and have dinner ready agin
our return."

There was a general laugh from the men, who knew that the worthy cook
had other reasons for not going--namely, his shortness of wind and his
inveterate dislike to ascend hills.

"Come, Fred," cried Captain Ellice, who had completely recovered from
his accident, "I shall be quite jealous of your friend Singleton if you
bestow so much of your company on him.  Walk with me, sirrah, I command
you, as I wish to have a chat."

"You are unjust to me," replied Fred, taking his father's arm, and
falling with him a little to the rear of the party; "Tom complains that
I have quite given him up of late."

"Och! isn't it a purty sight," remarked O'Riley to Mivins, "to see us
all goin' out like good little childers to see the sun rise of a
beautiful mornin' like this?"

"So it _h_is," answered Mivins, "but I wish it wasn't quite so cold."

It was indeed cold--so cold that the men had to beat their hands
together, and stamp their feet, and rush about like real children, in
order to keep their bodies warm.  This month of February was the coldest
they had yet experienced.  Several times the thermometer fell to the
unexampled temperature of 75 degrees below zero, or 107 degrees below
the freezing-point of water.  When we remind our young readers that the
thermometer in England seldom falls so low as zero, except in what we
term weather of the utmost severity, they may imagine--or, rather, they
may try to imagine--what 75 degrees _below_ zero must have been.

It was not quite so cold as that upon this occasion, otherwise the men
could not have shown face to it.

"Let's have leap-frog," shouted Davie; "we can jump along as well as
walk along.  Hooray! _hup_!"

The "hup" was rather an exclamation of necessity than of delight
inasmuch as that it was caused by Davie coming suddenly down flat on the
ice in the act of vainly attempting to go leap-frog over Mivins's head.

"That's your sort," cried Amos Parr; "down with you, Buzzby."

Buzzby obeyed, and Amos, being heavy and past the agile time of life,
leaped upon, instead of over, his back, and there stuck.

"Not so high, lads," cried Captain Guy.  "Come, Mr Saunders, give us a
back."

"Faix, he'd better go on his hands an' knees."

"That's it! over you go; hurrah, lads!"

In five minutes nearly the whole crew were panting from their violent
exertions, and those who did not, or could not, join, panted as much
from laughter.  The desired result, however, was speedily gained.  They
were all soon in a glow of heat, and bade defiance to the frost.

An hour's sharp climb brought the party almost to the brow of the hill,
from which they hoped to see the sun rise for the first time for nearly
five months.  Just as they were about to pass over a ridge in the
cliffs, Captain Guy, who had pushed on in advance with Tom Singleton,
was observed to pause abruptly and make signals for the men to advance
with caution.  He evidently saw something unusual, for he crouched
behind a rock and peeped over it.  Hastening up as silently as possible,
they discovered that a group of Polar bears were amusing themselves on
the other side of the cliffs, within long gunshot.  Unfortunately not
one of the party had brought firearms.  Intent only on catching a sight
of the sun, they had hurried off, unmindful of the possibility of their
catching sight of anything else.  They had not even a spear, and the few
oak cudgels that some carried, however effectual they might have proved
at Donnybrook, were utterly worthless there.

There were four large bears and a young one, and the gambols they
performed were of the most startling as well as amusing kind.  But that
which interested and surprised the crew most was the fact that these
bears were playing with barrels, and casks, and tent-poles, and sails!
They were engaged in a regular frolic with these articles, tossing them
up in the air, pawing them about, and leaping over them like kittens.
In these movements they displayed their enormous strength several times.
Their leaps, although performed with the utmost ease, were so great as
to prove the iron nature of their muscles.  They tossed the heavy casks,
too, high in the air like tennis-balls; and in two instances, while the
crew were watching them, dashed a cask in pieces with a slight blow of
their paws.  The tough canvas yielded before them like sheets of paper,
and the havoc they committed was wonderful to behold.

"Most extraordinary!" exclaimed Captain Guy, after watching them for
some time in silence.  "I cannot imagine where these creatures can have
got hold of such things.  Were not the goods at Store Island all right
this morning, Mr Bolton?"

"Yes, sir, they were."

"Nothing missing from the ship!"

"No, sir, nothing."

"It's most unaccountable."

"Captain Guy," said O'Riley, addressing his commander with a solemn
face, "haven't ye more nor wance towld me the queer thing in the deserts
they calls the _mirage_?"

"I have," answered the captain with a puzzled look.

"An' didn't ye say there was something like it in the Polar seas, that
made ye see flags, an' ships, an' things o' that sort when there was no
sich things there at all?"

"True, O'Riley, I did."

"Faix, then, it's my opinion that yon bears is a mirage, an' the sooner
we git out o' their way the better."
