Project Gutenberg's Rebels of the Red Planet, by Charles Louis Fontenay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Rebels of the Red Planet

Author: Charles Louis Fontenay

Release Date: March 4, 2007 [EBook #20739]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REBELS OF THE RED PLANET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







REBELS OF THE RED PLANET

by

CHARLES L. FONTENAY



_Charles L. Fontenay has also written_:

TWICE UPON A TIME (D-266)



Copyright (C), 1961, by Ace Books, Inc.
All Rights Reserved

Printed in U.S.A.
ACE BOOKS, INC.
23 West 47th Street, New York 36, N.Y.




    MARS FOR THE MARTIANS!


    Dark Kensington had been dead for twenty-five years. It was a fact;
    everyone knew it. Then suddenly he reappeared, youthful, brilliant,
    ready to take over the Phoenix, the rebel group that worked to
    overthrow the tyranny that gripped the settlers on Mars.

    The Phoenix had been destroyed not once, not twice, but three times!
    But this time the resurrected Dark had new plans, plans which
    involved dangerous experiments in mutation and psionics.

    And now the rebels realized they were in double jeopardy. Not only
    from the government's desperate hatred of their movement, but also
    from the growing possibility that the new breed of mutated monsters
    would get out of hand and bring terrors never before known to man.


    CHARLES L. FONTENAY writes: "I was born in Brazil of a father who
    was by birth English and by parentage German and French, and of a
    mother who was by birth American and by parentage American and
    Scottish. This mess of internationalism caused me some trouble in
    the army during World War II as the government couldn't decide
    whether I was American, British, or Brazilian; and both as an
    enlisted man and an officer I dealt in secret work which required
    citizenship by birth. On three occasions I had to dig into the
    lawbooks. Finally they gave up and admitted I was an American
    citizen....

    "I was raised on a West Tennessee farm and distinguished myself in
    school principally by being the youngest, smallest (and consequently
    the fastest-running) child in my classes ... Newspaper work has been
    my career since 1936. I have worked for three newspapers, including
    _The Nashville Tennessean_ for which I am now rewrite man, and
    before the war for the Associated Press."

    Mr. Fontenay is married, lives in Madison, Tenn., and has had one
    other novel published by Ace Books.


       *       *       *       *       *



1


It is a sea, though they call it sand.

They call it sand because it is still and red and dense with grains.
They call it sand because the thin wind whips it, and whirls its dusty
skim away to the tight horizons of Mars.

But only a sea could so brood with the memory of aeons. Only a sea,
lying so silent beneath the high skies, could hint the mystery of life
still behind its barren veil.

To practical, rational man, it is the Xanthe Desert. Whatever else he
might unwittingly be, S. Nuwell Eli considered himself a practical,
rational man, and it was across the bumpy sands of the Xanthe Desert
that he guided his groundcar westward with that somewhat cautious
proficiency that mistrusts its own mastery of the machine. Maya Cara
Nome, his colleague in this mission to which he had addressed himself,
was a silent companion.

Nuwell's liquid brown eyes, insistent upon their visual clarity, saw the
red sand as the blowing surface of unliving solidity. Only clarity was
admitted to Nuwell, and the only living clarity was man and beast and
vegetation, spotted in the dome cities and dome farms of the lowlands.
He and Maya scurried, transiting sparks of the only life, insecure and
hastening in the absence of the net of roads which eventually would bind
the Martian surface to human reality from the toeholds of the dome
cities.

In that opposite world which was the other side of the groundcar's seat,
Maya Cara Nome's opaque black eyes struggled against the surface. They
struggled not from any rational motivation but from long stubbornness,
from habit, as a fly kicks six-legged and constant against the surface
tension of a trapping pool.

Formally, Maya was allied to Newell's clarity and solidity, and she
could express this alliance with complete logic if called on. But behind
the casually blowing sand she sensed a depth. The shimmering atmosphere,
hostile to man, which sealed the red desert was a lens that distorted
and concealed by its intervention. The groundcar was a mechanical bug,
an alienness with which timorous man had allied himself; allied with it
against reality, she and Nuwell were hastened by it through reality,
unseeing, toward the goal of a more comfortable unreality.

The groundcar bumped and slithered, and an orange dust-cloud boiled up
from its broad tires and wafted away across the sculpted sand. The
desert stretched away, silent and empty, to the distant horizon; the
groundcar the only humming disturbance of its silence and emptiness. The
steel-blue sky shimmered above, a lens capping the red surface.

The groundcar rolled westward, slashing toward its goal from the distant
lowland of Solis Lacus. Far away, two men, machineless, plodded this
same Xanthe Desert toward the same goal; but they plodded southward,
approaching on a different radius.

They were naked. In a thin atmosphere without sufficient oxygen to
support animal life or even the higher forms of terrestrial plant life,
they wore no marsuits, no helmets, no oxygen tanks.

The man who walked in front was tall, erect, powerfully muscled. His
features and short-clipped hair were coarse, but self-assured
intelligence shone in his smoky eyes. He moved across the loose sand,
barefoot, with easy grace.

The--man?--that shambled behind him was as tall, but appeared shorter
and even more muscular because his shoulders and head were hunched
forward. His even coarser face was characterized by vacuously slack
mouth and blue eyes empty of any expression except an occasional brief
frown of puzzlement.

Toward a focal point: from the east, two people; from the north, two
people. If in the efficient self-assurance of Adam Hennessey could be
paralleled a variant harmony with the insistent surfaceness of S. Nuwell
Eli, does any coincidental parallelism exist between Brute Hennessey and
Maya Cara Nome?

Puzzlement was the climate of Brute's mind. This surface film of things
through which he ploughed his way, the swarming currents below the
surface--all were chaos. He grasped vaguely at comprehension without
achieving, the effective coalescence of electric ideas always falling
short before reaching consciousness.

The two men plodded, naked, through the loose sand. Above them in the
Mars-blue dome of day, the weak sun turned downward, warning of its
eventual departure.

A two-passengered groundcar and two men, widely apart, and yet bound for
the same destination....

The destination was a lone, sprawling building in the desert. It could
have been a huge warehouse, or a fortress, of black, almost windowless
Martian stone. The only outstanding feature of its virtually featureless
hulk was a tower which struck upward from its northern side.

As the summer afternoon progressed, Dr. G. O. T. Hennessey paced the
windy summit of the tower, peered frequently into the desert north
beneath a sunshading hand, and waggled his goat beard in annoyance under
his transparent marshelmet.

Had the helmet speaker been on or the air less thin, one might have
determined that Goat Hennessey was utilizing some choice profanity,
directed at those two absent personages whose names were, respectively,
Adam and Brute.

The airlock to the tower elevator opened and a small creature--a
child?--emerged onto the roof. Distorted, humpbacked and
barrel-chested, it scuttled on reed-thin legs to Goat's side. It wore no
marsuit.

"Father!" screeched this apparition, its thin voice curiously muffled by
the tenuous air. "Petway fell in the laundry vat!"

"For the love of space!" muttered Goat in exasperation. "Is there water
in it?"

When the newcomer gave no sign of hearing, Goat realized his helmet
speaker was off. He switched it on.

"Is there water in the vat?" he repeated.

"Yes, sir. It's full of suds and clothes."

"Well, go fish him out before he soaks up all the water. The soap will
make him sick."

The messenger turned, almost tripping over its own broad feet, and went
back through the airlock. Goat returned to his northward vigil.

Miles away, Nuwell slowed the groundcar as it approached the lip of that
precipitous slope bordering the short canal which connects Juventae Fons
with the Arorae Sinus Lowland. He consulted a rough chart, and turned
the groundcar southward. A drive of about a kilometer brought them to a
wide descending ledge down which they were able to drive into the canal.

Here, on the flat lowland surface, the canal sage grew thick, a
gray-green expanse stretching unbroken to the distant cliff that was the
other side of the canal. Occasionally above its smoothness thrust the
giant barrel of a canal cactus.

Nuwell headed the groundcar straight across the canal, for the chart
showed that the nearest upward ledge on the other side was conveniently
almost opposite. The big wheels bent and crushed the canal sage, leaving
a double trail.

The canal sage brought with it the comforting feeling of surface life
once more. This feeling, for no reason that he could have determined
consciously, released Nuwell's tongue.

"Maya," he said, in a voice that betrayed determination behind its
mildness, "I don't see any real reason for waiting. When we've cleared
up this matter at Ultra Vires and get back to Mars City, I think we
should get married."

She glanced at his handsome profile and smiled affectionately.

"I'm complimented by your impatience, Nuwell," she said. "But there is a
good reason for waiting, for me. When we're married, I want to be your
wife, completely. I want to keep your home and mother your children.
Don't you understand that?"

"That's what I want, too," he said. "That's my idea of what marriage is.
But, Maya, if you insist on finishing this government assignment, that
could be a long time off."

"I know, and I don't like it any better than you do, darling," said
Maya. "But it's cost the Earth government a great deal of trouble and
money to send me here, and you know how long it would take for them to
get a replacement to Mars for me. I don't feel that I can let them
down, and I don't think it would be much of a beginning to our marriage
for me to be running around ferreting out rebels during the first months
of it."

"That's another thing I don't like, Maya," said Nuwell. "It's dangerous,
and I don't want anything to happen to you."

"It's your work, too, and it's not absolutely safe for you, either. I'll
be sharing it with you when we're married, and for you it will go on for
a long time. I have a specific mission here, to locate the rebel
headquarters, and as soon as I've done that I'll be more than happy to
become just a contented housewife and leave the rest of it to you."

Nuwell shrugged, a little disconsolately, and turned his attention to
the task of negotiating the groundcar up the ascending slope.

She was a strange creature, this little Maya of his. She had been born
on Mars and, orphaned by some unknown disaster, had been cared for
during her first years by the mysterious, grotesque native Martians.
When they took her at last to one of the dome cities, she was sent to
Earth for rearing. And now she was back on Mars as an undercover agent
of the Earth government, seeking to ferret out the rebels known to be
engaging in widespread forbidden activities.

Often he did not understand her, but he wanted her, nevertheless.

Nuwell steered the groundcar slowly up the slope, over rubble and ruts,
avoiding the largest rocks. At last they reached the top, and the
groundcar arrowed out over the desert again, picking up speed.

Far to the left and ahead of them there was another dust-cloud drifting
up, one that was not of the thin wind, but nearly stationary. Nuwell
found the binoculars in the storage compartment and handed them to Maya.

"What's that over there?" he wondered. "Another groundcar? Take a look,
Maya."

Maya trained the glasses in the direction indicated, through the
groundcar's transparent dome. It was difficult to get them focused, for
the groundcar swayed and jolted, but at last she was able to make brief
identification.

"They're Martians, Nuwell," she said. "Can we drive over that way?"

"You've seen Martians before," he said.

"But I'd like to speak with them," she said. "I talk their language, you
know."

"Yes, I do know, darling, but that's utterly foolish. They're only
animals, after all, and we have to get to Ultra Vires before night, if
we can."

He kept the groundcar on its course.

