
They did go down in history.

       *       *       *       *       *

The public response to the vaccine was little less than monumental. Of
all the ailments that have tormented mankind through history none was
ever more universal, more tenacious, more uniformly miserable than the
common cold. It was a respecter of no barriers, boundaries, or classes;
ambassadors and chambermaids snuffled and sneezed in drippy-nosed
unanimity. The powers in the Kremlin sniffed and blew and wept genuine
tears on drafty days, while senatorial debates on earth-shaking issues
paused reverently upon the unplugging of a nose, the clearing of a
rhinorrheic throat. Other illnesses brought disability, even death in
their wake; the common cold merely brought torment to the millions as it
implacably resisted the most superhuman of efforts to curb it.

Until that chill, rainy November day when the tidings broke to the world
in four-inch banner heads:

        COFFIN NAILS LID ON COMMON COLD

  "No More Coughin'" States Co-Finder of Cure

 SNIFFLES SNIPED: SINGLE SHOT TO SAVE SNEEZERS

In medical circles it was called the Coffin Multicentric Upper
Respiratory Virus-Inhibiting Vaccine; but the papers could never stand
for such high-sounding names, and called it, simply, "The Coffin Cure."

Below the banner heads, world-renowned feature writers expounded in
reverent terms the story of the leviathan struggle of Dr. Chauncey
Patrick Coffin (_et al._) in solving this riddle of the ages: how, after
years of failure, they ultimately succeeded in culturing the causative
agent of the common cold, identifying it not as a single virus or group
of viruses, but as a multicentric virus complex invading the soft mucous
linings of the nose, throat and eyes, capable of altering its basic
molecular structure at any time to resist efforts of the body from
within, or the physician from without, to attack and dispel it; how the
hypothesis was set forth by Dr. Phillip Dawson that the virus could be
destroyed only by an antibody which could "freeze" the virus-complex in
one form long enough for normal body defenses to dispose of the
offending invader; the exhausting search for such a "crippling agent,"
and the final crowning success after injecting untold gallons of
cold-virus material into the hides of a group of co-operative and
forbearing dogs (a species which never suffered from colds, and hence
endured the whole business with an air of affectionate boredom).

And finally, the testing. First, Coffin himself (who was suffering a
particularly horrendous case of the affliction he sought to cure); then
his assistants Phillip Dawson and Jacob Miles; then a multitude of
students from the University--carefully chosen for the severity of their
symptoms, the longevity of their colds, their tendency to acquire them
on little or no provocation, and their utter inability to get rid of
them with any known medical program.

They were a sorry spectacle, those students filing through the Coffin
laboratory for three days in October: wheezing like steam shovels,
snorting and sneezing and sniffling and blowing, coughing and squeaking,
mute appeals glowing in their blood-shot eyes. The researchers dispensed
the materials--a single shot in the right arm, a sensitivity control in
the left.

With growing delight they then watched as the results came in. The
sneezing stopped; the sniffling ceased. A great silence settled over the
campus, in the classrooms, in the library, in classic halls. Dr.
Coffin's voice returned (rather to the regret of his fellow workers) and
he began bouncing about the laboratory like a small boy at a fair.
Students by the dozen trooped in for checkups with noses dry and eyes
bright.

In a matter of days there was no doubt left that the goal had been
reached.

"But we have to be _sure_," Phillip Dawson had cried cautiously. "This
was only a pilot test. We need mass testing now, on an entire community.
We should go to the West Coast and run studies there--they have a
different breed of cold out there, I hear. We'll have to see how long
the immunity lasts, make sure there are no unexpected side effects...."
And, muttering to himself, he fell to work with pad and pencil,
calculating the program to be undertaken before publication.

But there were rumors. Underwood at Stanford, they said, had already
completed his tests and was preparing a paper for publication in a
matter of months. Surely with such dramatic results on the pilot tests
_something_ could be put into print. It would be tragic to lose the race
for the sake of a little unnecessary caution....

Peter Dawson was adamant, but he was a voice crying in the wilderness.
Chauncey Patrick Coffin was boss.

Within a week even Coffin was wondering if he had bitten off just a
trifle too much. They had expected that demand for the vaccine would be
great--but even the grisly memory of the early days of the Salk vaccine
had not prepared them for the mobs of sneezing, wheezing red-eyed people
bombarding them for the first fruits.

Clear-eyed young men from the Government Bureau pushed through crowds of
local townspeople, lining the streets outside the Coffin laboratory,
standing in pouring rain to raise insistent placards.

Seventeen pharmaceutical houses descended like vultures with production
plans, cost-estimates, colorful graphs demonstrating proposed yield and
distribution programs. Coffin was flown to Washington, where conferences
labored far into the night as demands pounded their doors like a tidal
wave.

One laboratory promised the vaccine in ten days; another said a week.
The first actually appeared in three weeks and two days, to be soaked up
in the space of three hours by the thirsty sponge of cold-weary
humanity. Express planes were dispatched to Europe, to Asia, to Africa
with the precious cargo, a million needles pierced a million hides, and
