The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Players, by Everett B. Cole

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Players

Author: Everett B. Cole

Illustrator: Solo

Release Date: August 29, 2007 [EBook #22426]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLAYERS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 THE
 PLAYERS

 BY EVERETT B. COLE


  _A Playboy is someone with power, too much time
   on his hands, and too little sense of a goal
   worth achieving. And if the Playboy happens to
   belong to a highly advanced culture...._


 Illustrated by Solo


Through the narrow streets leading to the great plaza of Karth, swarmed
a colorful crowd--buyers, idlers, herdsmen, artisans, traders. From all
directions they came, some to gather around the fountain, some to
explore the wineshops, many to examine the wares, or to buy from the
merchants whose booths and tents hid the cobblestones.

A caravan wound its way through a gate and stopped, the weary beasts
standing patiently as the traders sought vacant space where they might
open business. From another gate, a herdsman guided his living wares
through the crowd, his working animals snapping at the heels of the
flock, keeping it together and in motion.

Musa, trader of Karth, sat cross-legged before his shop, watching the
scene with quiet amusement. Business was good in the city, and his was
pleasingly above the average. Western caravans had come in, exchanging
their goods for those eastern wares he had acquired. Buyers from the
city and from the surrounding hills had come to him, to exchange their
coin for his goods. He glanced back into the booth, satisfied with what
he saw, then resumed his casual watch of the plaza. No one seemed
interested in him.

There were customers in plenty. Men stopped, critically examined the
contents of the displays, then moved on, or stayed to bargain. One of
these paused before Musa, his eyes dwelling on the merchant rather than
on his wares.

[Illustration]

The shopper was a man of medium height. His rather slender, finely
featured face belied the apparent heaviness of his body, though his
appearance was not actually abnormal. Rather, he gave the impression of
being a man of powerful physique and ascetic habits. His dress was that
of a herdsman, or possibly of an owner of herds from the northern
Galankar.

Musa arose, to face him.

"Some sleeping rugs, perhaps? Or a finely worked bronze jar from the
East?"

The stranger nodded. "Possibly. But I would like to look a while if I
may."

Musa stepped aside, waving a hand. "You are more than welcome, friend,"
he assented. "Perhaps some of my poor goods may strike your fancy."

"Thank you." The stranger moved inside.

Musa stood at the entrance, watching him. As the man stepped from place
to place, Musa noted that he seemed to radiate a certain confidence.
There was a definite aura of power and ability. This man, the trader
decided, was no ordinary herdsman. He commanded more than sheep.

"You own herds to the North?" he asked.

The stranger turned, smiling. "Lanko is my name," he said. "Yes, I come
from the North." He swept a hand to indicate the merchandise on display,
and directed a questioning gaze at the merchant. "It seems strange that
your goods are all of the East. I see little of the West in all your
shop."

       *       *       *       *       *

Normally, Musa kept his own council, assuming that his affairs were not
public property, but his alone. There was something about this man,
Lanko, however, which influenced him to break his usual reticence.

"I plan a trading trip to the Eastern Sea," he confided. "Of course, to
carry eastern goods again to the East would be a waste of time, so I am
reserving my western goods for the caravan and clearing out the things
of the East."

Lanko nodded. "I see." He pointed to a small case of finely worked
jewelry. "What would be the price of those earrings?"

Musa reached into the case, taking out a cunningly worked pair of shell
and gold trinkets.

"These are from Norlar, a type of jewelry we rarely see here," he said.
"For these, I must ask twenty balata."

Lanko whistled softly. "No wonder you would make a trip East. I wager
there is profit in those." He pointed. "What of the sword up there?"

Musa laughed. "You hesitate at twenty balata, then you point out that?"

He crossed the tent, taking the sword from the wall. Drawing it from its
scabbard, he pointed to the unusually long, slender blade.

"This comes from Norlar, too. But the smith who made it is still farther
to the east, beyond the Great Sea." He gripped the blade, flexing it.

"Look you," he commanded, "how this blade has life. Here is none of your
soft bronze or rough iron from the northern hills. Here is a living
metal that will sever a hair, yet not shatter on the hardest helm."

Lanko showed interest. "You say this sword was made beyond the Great
Sea? How, then, came it to Norlar and thence here?"

Musa shook his head. "I am not sure," he confessed. "It is rumored that
the priests of the sea god, Kondaro, by praying to their deity, are
guided across the sea to lands unknown."

"Taking traders with them?"

"So I have been told."

"And you plan to journey to Norlar to verify this rumor, and perhaps to
make a sea voyage?"

Musa stroked his beard, wondering if this man could actually read
thoughts.

"Yes," he admitted, "I had that in mind."

"I see." Lanko reached for the sword. As Musa handed it to him, he
extended it toward the rear of the booth, whipping it in an intricate
saber drill. Musa watched, puzzled. An experienced swordsman himself he
had thought he knew all of the sword arts. The sword flexed, singing as
it cut through the air.

"Merchant, I like this sword. What would its price be?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Musa was disappointed. Here was strange bargaining. People just didn't
walk in and announce their desire for definite articles. They feigned
indifference. They picked over the wares casually, disparagingly. They
looked at many items, asking prices. They bargained a little, perhaps,
to test the merchant. They made comments about robbery, and about the
things they had seen in other merchants' booths which were so much
better and so much cheaper.

Slowly, and with the greatest reluctance, did the normal shopper
approach the object he coveted.

Then, here was this man.

"_Well_," Musa told himself, "_make the most of it_." He shrugged.

"Nine hundred balata," he stated definitely, matching the frank
directness of this unusual shopper, and incidentally doubling his price.

Lanko was examining the hilt of the sword. He snapped a fingernail
against its blade. There was a musical _ping_.

"You must like this bit of metal far better than I," he commented
without looking up. "I only like it two hundred balata worth."

Musa felt relief at this return to familiar procedure. He held up his
hands in a horrified gesture.

"Two hundred!" he cried. "Why, that is for the craftsman's apprentices.
There is yet the master smith, and those who bring the weapon to you.
No, friend, if you want this prince of swords, you must expect to pay
for it. One does not--" He paused. Lanko was sheathing the weapon, his
whole bearing expressing unwilling relinquishment.

Musa slowed his speech. "Still," he said softly, "I am closing out my
eastern stock, after all. Suppose we make it eight hundred fifty?"

"Did you say two hundred fifty?" Lanko held the sheathed sword up,
turning to the light to inspect the leather work.

The bargaining went on. Outside, the crowds in the street thinned, as
the populace started for their evening meals. The sword was inspected
and re-inspected. It slid out of its sheath and back again. Finally,
Musa sighed.

"Well, all right. Make it five hundred, and I'll go to dinner with you."
He shook his head in a nearly perfect imitation of despair. "May the
wineshop do better than I did."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Housewife, this is Watchdog. Over."

The man at the workbench looked around. Then, he laid his tools aside,
and picked up a small microphone.

"This is Housewife," he announced.

"Coming in."

The worker clipped the microphone to his jacket, and crossed the room to
a small panel. He threw a switch, looked briefly at a viewscreen, then
snapped another switch.

"Screen's down," he reported. "Come on in, Lanko."

An opening appeared in the wall, to show a fleeting view of a bleak
landscape. Bare rocks jutted from the ice, kept clear of snow by the
shrieking wind. Extreme cold crept into the room, then a man swept in
and the wall resumed its solidity behind him.

He stood for an instant, glancing around, then shrugged off a light robe
and started shedding equipment.

"Hi, Pal," he was greeted. "How are things down Karth way?"

"Nothing exceptional." Lanko shrugged. "This area's getting so peaceful
it's monotonous." He unsnapped his accumulator and crossed to the power
generator.

"No wars, or rumors of wars," he continued. "The town's getting
moral--very moral, and it's developing into a major center of commerce
in the process." He kicked off his sandals, wriggled out of the baggy
native trousers, and tossed his shirt on top of them.

"No more shakedowns. Tax system's working the way it was originally
intended to, and the merchants are flocking in."

He walked toward the wall, flicking a hand out. An opening appeared, and
he ducked through it.

"Be with you in a minute, Banasel," he called over his shoulder. "Like
to get cleaned up."

Banasel nodded and went back to the workbench. He picked up a small
part, examined it, touched it gently a few times with a soft brush, and
replaced it in the device he was working on.

He tightened it into place, and was checking another component when a
slight shuffle announced his companion's return.

"Oh, yes," said Lanko. "Met your old pal, Musa. He's doing right well
for himself."

Banasel swung around. "Haven't seen him since we joined the Corps.
What's he doing?"

"Trading." Lanko opened a locker, glancing critically at the clothing
within. "He set up shop with the load of goods we gave him long ago, and
did some pretty shrewd merchandising. Now, he's planning a trip over the
Eastern Sea. He hinted at a rumor of a civilization out past Norlar."

"Nothing out there for several thousand kilos," growled Banasel, "except
for a few little islands." He jerked a thumb toward the workbench. "I
can't show you right now, because the scanner's down for cleaning, but
there isn't even an island for the first couple thousand K's. Currents
are all wrong, too. No one could cross without navigational equipment."
