mounted on and within their structure. There were plants, of course, as
there were on Triom, but they were unimportant.

There were viruses, too, and he had been afraid when he had discovered
this fact that he had arrived too late. But the first attempts at
establishing communication had relieved the Triomed of his fears. The
indigenous viruses were primitive; not at all like his own illustrious
ancestors of ancient Triom.

The sleeping biped relaxed and the Triomed inched forward again, a flat,
almost two dimensional smear of glistening matter on the floor in front
of the biped.

From high above the planet's night side, the Triomed had sensed the
city. He had absorbed its shape and size and meaning while his craft
settled through the heavy, oxygen-rich air. It was not enough that his
instruments told of suitable hosts. He was a scientist and believed in
absolute proof. Also, he had been in space long--without the
satisfaction of a host--and he yearned for the rapport, the domination
of a warm-blooded creature.

There had been a dark segment in the brilliant pattern of the city. An
island of solitude amid the myriad confluences. It was there that he had
landed his tiny probe ship and hidden it among the thickly wooded
glades. Almost immediately he had sensed the nearness of many creatures.
Insects, plants, warm-blooded quadrupeds and bipeds. There had been
machines and buildings and winding roadways among the trees. Darkness
had covered his progress until at last he found himself near the
sleeping creature, ready to infiltrate and take command.

       *       *       *       *       *

The glistening shape elongated, became a thread-like tendril of almost
gossamer thickness. It touched the flesh of the sleeper and thrilled
with pleasure. Cautiously, the Triomed moved up the hairy leg, an
invisible strand of alien life close to the warm skin. Presently, the
strand found the opening it sought. It slithered imperceptibly into the
moist warmth of the sleeper's nostril, moved through the tear-duct into
the space behind the eyeball. Here it probed through muscle and membrane
along the base of the brain, seeking the pineal gland.

And found it, penetrated it, coiling like a microscopic serpent within
the gland. A surge of pleasure went through the Triomed. Here was
safety. The host was large, powerful and vibrant with life. Quickly, the
Triomed established dominance. It was shockingly easy. The creature's
mind was immature, primitive. Briefly it struggled and then died as the
alien poisoned the identity centers of the brain.

New sensations poured in through unfamiliar sense organs. Sounds of the
faraway city, small sounds from the many living creatures in the
darkness. Smells and sights and pressures from all about him presented
themselves--were evaluated and recorded in the atomic structure of the
Triomed.

He was now equipped, he reflected with satisfaction, to carry out
further exploration. In the guise of the indigenous biped he could roam
among the natives at will. He remained in a sitting position, however,
while he familiarized himself with his host.

He had two articulated appendages fixed to the trunk at a point near and
below the skull-case. These ended in complex extremities consisting of
five jointed fingers. The same pattern was repeated at the lower end of
the trunk, but the extremities were suited there for the carrying of the
creature's considerable weight. Within the trunk were the customary
viscera generally associated with warm-blooded beings: lungs,
intestines, stomach, liver, bladder, reproductive organs and assorted
ducted and ductless glands. It was apparent to the Triomed that his
present body was in excellent health. He was greatly pleased.

After some careful experiments, the Triomed rose. If there was a proper
method of egress from the cubicle in which he found himself, it was not
