_d_, and so on. The energy of _a_ gives translatory motion to _b_, _b_
sets _c_ vibrating, and _c_ makes _d_ spin on some axis. Each of these
has had energy spent on it, and each has some form of energy different
from the other, but no new factor has been introduced between _a_ and
_d_, and the only factor that has gone from _a_ to _d_ has been
motion--motion that has had its direction and quality changed, but not
its nature. If we agree that energy is neither created nor annihilated,
by any physical process, and if we assume that _a_ gave to _b_ all its
energy, that is, all its motion; that _b_ likewise gave its all to _c_,
and so on; then the succession of phenomena from _a_ to _d_ has been
simply the transference of a definite amount of motion, and therefore of
energy, from the one to the other; for _motion has been the only
variable factor_. If, furthermore, we should agree to call the
translatory motion [alpha], the vibratory motion [beta], the
rotary [gamma], then we should have had a conversion of [alpha]
into [beta], of [beta] into [gamma]. If we should consider
the amount of transfer motion instead of the kind of motion, we should
have to say that the [alpha] energy had been transformed into
[beta] and the [beta] into [gamma].

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

What a given amount of energy will do depends only upon its _form_, that
is, the kind of motion that embodies it.

The energy spent upon a stone thrown into the air, giving it translatory
motion, would, if spent upon a tuning fork, make it sound, but not move
it from its place; while if spent upon a top, would enable the latter to
stand upon its point as easily as a person stands on his two feet, and
to do other surprising things, which otherwise it could not do. One can,
without difficulty, form a mechanical conception of the whole series
without assuming imponderables, or fluids or forces. Mechanical motion
only, by pressure, has been transferred in certain directions at certain
rates. Suppose now that some one should suddenly come upon a spinning
top (Fig. 3) while it was standing upon its point, and, as its motion
might not be visible, should cautiously touch it. It would bound away
with surprising promptness, and, if he were not instructed in the
mechanical principles involved, he might fairly well draw the conclusion
that it was actuated by other than simple mechanical principles, and,
for that reason, it would be difficult to persuade him that there was
nothing essentially different in the body that appeared and acted thus,
than in a stone thrown into the air; nevertheless, that statement would
be the simple truth.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

All our experience, without a single exception, enforces the proposition
that no body moves in any direction, or in any way, except when some
other body _in contact_ with it presses upon it. The action is direct.
In Newton's letter to his friend Bentley, he says--"That one body
should act upon another through empty space, without the mediation of
anything else by and through which their action and pressure may be
conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity that I
believe no man who has in philosophical matters a competent faculty of
thinking can ever fall into it."

For mathematical purposes, it has sometimes been convenient to treat a
problem as if one body could act upon another without any physical
medium between them; but such a conception has no degree of rationality,
and I know of no one who believes in it as a fact. If this be granted,
then our philosophy agrees with our experience, and every body moves
because it is pushed, and the mechanical antecedent of every kind of
phenomenon is to be looked for in some adjacent body possessing
energy--that is, the ability to push or produce pressure.

It must not be forgotten that energy is not a simple factor, but is
always a product of two factors--a mass with a velocity, a mass with a
temperature, a quantity of electricity into a pressure, and so on. One
may sometimes meet the statement that matter and energy are the two
realities; both are spoken of as entities. It is much more philosophical
to speak of matter and motion, for in the absence of motion there is no
energy, and the energy varies with the amount of motion; and
furthermore, to understand any manifestation of energy one must inquire
what kind of motion is involved. This we do when we speak of mechanical
energy as the energy involved in a body having a translatory motion;
also, when we speak of heat as a vibratory, and of light as a wave
motion. To speak of energy without stating or implying these
distinctions, is to speak loosely and to keep far within the bounds of
actual knowledge. To speak thus of a body possessing energy, or
expending energy, is to imply that the body possesses some kind of
motion, and produces pressure upon another body because it has motion.
Tait and others have pointed out the fact, that what is called potential
energy must, in its nature, be kinetic. Tait says--"Now it is impossible
to conceive of a truly dormant form of energy, whose magnitude should
depend, in any way, upon the unit of time; and we are forced to conclude
that potential energy, like kinetic energy, depends (even if unexplained
or unimagined) upon motion." All this means that it is now too late to
stop with energy as a final factor in any phenomenon, that the _form of
motion_ which embodies the energy is the factor that determines _what_
happens, as distinguished from how _much_ happens. Here, then, are to be
found the distinctions which have heretofore been called forces; here
is embodied the proof that direct pressure of one body upon another is
what causes the latter to move, and that the direction of movement
depends on the point of application, with reference to the centre
of mass.

It is needful now to look at the other term in the product we call
energy, namely, the substance moving, sometimes called matter or mass.
It has been mentioned that the idea of a medium filling space was
present to Newton, but his gravitation problem did not require that he
should consider other factors than masses and distances. The law of
gravitation as considered by him was--Every particle of matter attracts
every other particle of matter with a stress which is proportional to
the product of their masses, and inversely to the squares of the
distance between them. Here we are concerned only with the statement
that every particle of matter attracts every other particle of matter.
Everything then that possesses gravitative attraction is matter in the
sense in which that term is used in this law. If there be any other
substance in the universe that is not thus subject to gravitation, then
it is improper to call it matter, otherwise the law should read, "Some
particles of matter attract," etc., which will never do.

We are now assured that there is something else in the universe which
has no gravitative property at all, namely, the ether. It was first
imagined in order to account for the phenomena of light, which was
observed to take about eight minutes to come from the sun to the earth.
Then Young applied the wave theory to the explanation of polarization
and other phenomena; and in 1851 Foucault proved experimentally that the
velocity of light was less in water than in air, as it should be if the
wave theory be true, and this has been considered a crucial experiment
which took away the last hope for the corpuscular theory, and
demonstrated the existence of the ether as a space-filling medium
capable of transmitting light-waves known to have a velocity of 186,000
miles per second. It was called the luminiferous ether, to distinguish
it from other ethers which had also been imagined, such as electric
ether for electrical phenomena, magnetic ether for magnetic phenomena,
and so on--as many ethers, in fact, as there were different kinds of
phenomena to be explained.

It was Faraday who put a stop to the invention of ethers, by suggesting
that the so-called luminiferous ether might be the one concerned in all
the different phenomena, and who pointed out that the arrangement of
iron filings about a magnet was indicative of the direction of the
stresses in the ether. This suggestion did not meet the approval of the
mathematical physicists of his day, for it necessitated the abandonment
of the conceptions they had worked with, as well as the terminology
which had been employed, and made it needful to reconstruct all their
work to make it intelligible--a labour which was the more distasteful as
it was forced upon them by one who, although expert enough in
experimentation, was not a mathematician, and who boasted that the most
complicated mathematical work he ever did was to turn the crank of a
calculating machine; who did all his work, formed his conclusions, and
then said--"The work is done; hand it over to the computers."

It has turned out that Faraday's mechanical conceptions were right.
Every one now knows of Maxwell's work, which was to start with Faraday's
conceptions as to magnetic phenomena, and follow them out to their
logical conclusions, applying them to molecules and the reactions of the
latter upon the ether. Thus he was led to conclude that light was an
electro-magnetic phenomenon; that is, that the waves which constitute
light, and the waves produced by changing magnetism were identical in
their nature, were in the same medium, travelled with the same velocity,
were capable of refraction, and so on. Now that all this is a matter of
common knowledge to-day, it is curious to look back no further than ten
years. Maxwell's conclusions were adopted by scarcely a physicist in
the world. Although it was known that inductive action travelled with
finite velocity in space, and that an electro-magnet would affect the
space about it practically inversely as the square of the distance, and
that such phenomena as are involved in telephonic induction between
circuits could have no other meaning than the one assigned by Maxwell,
yet nearly all the physicists failed to form the only conception of it
that was possible, and waited for Hertz to devise apparatus for
producing interference before they grasped it. It was even then so new,
to some, that it was proclaimed to be a demonstration of the existence
of the ether itself, as well as a method of producing waves short enough
to enable one to notice interference phenomena. It is obvious that Hertz
himself must have had the mechanics of wave-motion plainly in mind, or
he would not have planned such experiments. The outcome of it all is,
that we now have experimental demonstration, as well as theoretical
reason for believing, that the ether, once considered as only
luminiferous, is concerned in all electric and magnetic phenomena, and
that waves set up in it by electro-magnetic actions are capable of being
reflected, refracted, polarized, and twisted, in the same way as
ordinary light-waves can be, and that the laws of optics are applicable
to both.




CHAPTER II

PROPERTIES OF MATTER AND ETHER

Properties of Matter and Ether compared--Discontinuity
    _versus_ Continuity--Size of atoms--Astronomical
    distances--Number of atoms in the universe--Ether
    unlimited--Kinds of Matter, permanent qualities
    of--Atomic structure; vortex-rings, their
    properties--Ether structureless--Matter
    gravitative, Ether not--Friction in Matter, Ether
    frictionless--Chemical properties--Energy in
    Matter and in Ether--Matter as a transformer
    of Energy--Elasticity--Vibratory rates and
    waves--Density--Heat--Indestructibility of
    Matter--Inertia in Matter and in Ether--Matter
    not inert--Magnetism and Ether waves--States
    of Matter--Cohesion and chemism affected by
    temperature--Shearing stress in Solids and in
    Ether--Ether pressure--Sensation dependent upon
    Matter--Nervous system not affected by Ether
    states--Other stresses in Ether--Transformations
    of Motion--Terminology.


A common conception of the ether has been that it is a finer-grained
substance than ordinary matter, but otherwise so like the latter that
the laws found to hold good with matter were equally applicable to the
ether, and hence the mechanical conceptions formed from experience in
regard to the one have been transferred to the other, and the properties
belonging to one, such as density, elasticity, etc., have been asserted
as properties of the other.

There is so considerable a body of knowledge bearing upon the
similarities and dissimilarities of these two entities that it will be
well to compare them. After such comparison one will be better able to
judge of the propriety of assuming them to be subject to identical laws.


1. MATTER IS DISCONTINUOUS.

Matter is made up of atoms having dimensions approximately determined to
be in the neighbourhood of the one fifty-millionth of an inch in
diameter. These atoms may have various degrees of aggregation;--they may
be in practical contact, as in most solid bodies such as metals and
rocks; in molecular groupings as in water, and in gases such as
hydrogen, oxygen, and so forth, where two, three, or more atoms cohere
so strongly as to enable the molecules to act under ordinary
circumstances like simple particles. Any or all of these molecules and
atoms may be separated by any assignable distance from each other. Thus,
in common air the molecules, though rapidly changing their positions,
are on the average about two hundred and fifty times their own diameter
apart. This is a distance relatively greater than the distance apart of
the earth and the moon, for two hundred and fifty times the diameter of
the earth will be 8000 x 250 = 2,000,000 miles, while the distance to
the moon is but 240,000 miles. The sun is 93,000,000 miles from the
earth, and the most of the bodies of the solar system are still more
widely separated, Neptune being nearly 3000 millions of miles from the
sun. As for the fixed stars, they are so far separated from us that, at
the present rate of motion of the solar system in its drift through
space--500 millions of miles in a year--it would take not less than
40,000 years to reach the nearest star among its neighbours, while for
the more remote ones millions of years must be reckoned. The huge space
separating these masses is practically devoid of matter; it is a vacuum.


THE ETHER IS CONTINUOUS.

The idea of continuity as distinguished from discontinuity may be gained
by considering what would be made visible by magnification. Water
appears to the eye as if it were without pores, but if sugar or salt be
put into it, either will be dissolved and quite disappear among the
molecules of the water as steam does in the air, which shows that there
are some unoccupied spaces between the molecules. If a microscope be
employed to magnify a minute drop of water it still shows the same lack
of structure as that looked at with the unaided eye. If the magnifying
power be the highest it may reveal a speck as small as the
hundred-thousandth part of an inch, yet the speck looks no different in
character. We know that water is composed of two different kinds of
atoms, hydrogen and oxygen, for they can be separated by chemical means
and kept in separate bottles, and again made to combine to form water
having all the qualities that belonged to it before it was decomposed.
If a very much higher magnifying power were available, we should
ultimately be able to see the individual water molecules, and recognize
their hydrogen and oxygen constituents by their difference in size, rate
of movements, and we might possibly separate them by mechanical methods.
What one would see would be something very different in structure from
the water as it appears to our eyes. If the ether were similarly to be
examined through higher and still higher magnifying powers, even up to
infinity, there is no reason for thinking that the last examination
would show anything different in structure or quality from that which
was examined with low power or with no microscope at all. This is all
expressed by saying that the ether is a continuous substance, without
interstices, that it fills space completely, and, unlike gases,
liquids, and solids, is incapable of absorbing or dissolving anything.


2. MATTER IS LIMITED.

There appears to be a definite amount of matter in the visible universe,
a definite number of molecules and atoms. How many molecules there are
in a cubic inch of air under ordinary pressure has been determined, and
is represented approximately by a huge number, something like a thousand
million million millions.

When the diameter of a molecule has been measured, as it has been
approximately, and found to be about one fifty-millionth of an inch,
then fifty million in a row would reach an inch, and the cube of fifty
million is 125,000,000000,000000,000000, one hundred and twenty-five
thousand million million millions. In a cubic foot there will of course
be 1728 times that number. One may if one likes find how many there may
be in the earth, and moon, sun and planets, for the dimensions of them
are all very well known. Only the multiplication table need be used, and
the sum of all these will give how many molecules there are in the solar
system. If one should feel that the number thus obtained was not very
accurate, he might reflect that if there were ten times as many it would
add but another cipher to a long line of similar ones and would not
materially modify it. The point is that there is a definite, computable
number. If one will then add to these the number of molecules in the
more distant stars and nebulae, of which there are visible about
100,000,000, making such estimate of their individual size as he thinks
prudent, the sum of all will give the number of molecules in the visible
universe. The number is not so large but it can be written down in a
minute or two. Those who have been to the pains to do the sum say it may
be represented by seven followed by ninety-one ciphers. One could easily
compute how many molecules so large a space would contain if it were
full and as closely packed as they are in a drop of water, but there
would be a finite and not an infinite number, and therefore there is a
limited number of atoms in the visible universe.


THE ETHER IS UNLIMITED.

The evidence for this comes to us from the phenomena of light.
Experimentally, ether waves of all lengths are found to have a velocity
of 186,000 miles in a second. It takes about eight minutes to reach us
from the sun, four hours from Neptune the most distant planet, and from
the nearest fixed star about three and a half years. Astronomers tell us
that some visible stars are so distant that their light requires not
less than ten thousand years and probably more to reach us, though
travelling at the enormous rate of 186,000 miles a second. This means
that the whole of space is filled with this medium. If there were any
vacant spaces, the light would fail to get through them, and stars
beyond them would become invisible. There are no such vacant spaces, for
