alien. For the past three nights he had not let the blaster get beyond
quick reach of his hand, even when in bed.

But whatever it was, it could not be on the ship. He had searched the
ship twice, a methodical compartment-by-compartment search that had
found nothing. It had to be the work of the natives from outside the
ship. Except....

Why, if the natives were telepathic, did the one called Throon go
through the weary pretense of trying to learn a mutually understandable
form of communication?

There was one other explanation, which he could not accept: that he was
following in the footsteps of Will Garret of Ship Nine who had
deliberately gone into a white sun two months after the death of his
twin brother.

He looked at the chair beside his own, Johnny's chair, which would
forever be empty, and his thoughts went back down the old, bitter paths.
The Exploration Board had been wrong when they thought the close bond
between identical twins would make them the ideal two-man crews for the
lonely, lifetime journeys of the Exploration Ships. Identical twins were
too close; when one of them died, the other died in part with him.

They had crossed a thousand light-years of space together, he and
Johnny, when they came to the bleak planet that he would name Johnny's
World. He should never have let Johnny go alone up the slope of the
honey-combed mountain--but Johnny had wanted to take the routine record
photographs of the black, tiger-like beasts which they had called cave
cats and the things had seemed harmless and shy, despite their ferocious
appearance.

"I'm taking them a sack of food that I think they might like," Johnny
had said. "I want to try to get some good close-up shots of them."

Ten minutes later he heard the distant snarl of Johnny's blaster. He ran
up the mountainside, knowing already that he was too late. He found two
of the cave cats lying where Johnny had killed them. Then he found
Johnny, at the foot of a high cliff. He was dead, his neck broken by the
fall. Scattered all around him from the torn sack was the food he had
wanted to give to the cats.

He buried Johnny the next day, while a cold wind moaned under a
lead-gray sky. He built a monument for him; a little mound of frosty
stones that only the wild animals would ever see--

       *       *       *       *       *

A chime rang, high and clear, and the memories were shattered. The
orange light above the hyperspace communicator was flashing; the signal
that meant the Exploration Board was calling him from Earth.

He flipped the switch and said, "Paul Jameson, Exploration Ship One."

The familiar voice of Brender spoke:

"It's been some time since your preliminary report. Is everything all
right?"

"In a way," he answered. "I was going to give you the detailed report
tomorrow."

"Give me a brief sketch of it now."

"Except for their short brown fur, the natives are humanoid in
appearance. But there are basic differences. Their body temperature is
cool, like their climate. Their vision range is from just within the
visible red on into the infrared. They'll shade their eyes from the
light of anything as hot as boiling water but they'll look square into
the ship's floodlights and never see them."

"And their knowledge of science?" Brender asked.

"They have a good understanding of it, but along lines entirely
different from what our own were at their stage of development. For
example: they power their machines with chemicals but there is no steam,
heat, or exhaust."

"That's what we want to find--worlds where branches of research unknown
to our science are being explored. How about their language?"

"No progress with it yet." He told Brender of the silence in the village
and added, "Even if Throon should show up I could not ask him what was
wrong. I've learned a few words but they have so many different
definitions that I can't use them."

"I know," Brender said. "Variable and unrelated definitions,
undetectable shades of inflection--and sometimes a language that has no
discernibly separate words. The Singer brothers of Ship Eight ran into
the latter. We've given them up as lost."

"The Singers--dead?" he exclaimed. "Good God--it's been only a month
since the Ramon brothers were killed."

"The circumstances were similar," Brender said. "They always are. There
is no way the Exploration men can tell the natives that they mean them
no harm and the suspicion of the natives grows into dangerous hostility.
The Singers reported the natives on that world to be both suspicious and
possessing powerful weapons. The Singers were proceeding warily, their
own weapons always at hand. But, somehow, the natives caught them
off-guard--their last report was four months ago."

There was a silence, then Brender added, "Their ship was the ninth--and
we had only fifteen."

