those fears by a logical comprehension of the laws governing his
environment. But in religious matters this fear has clung to man
tenaciously; and while at first serving a protective function, at the
present stage of civilization constitutes an embryonic impediment. The
assertion of ecclesiastics that without the aid of religious learning
and influence our civilization would have been retarded is a statement
that a study of the development of man shows to be directly opposed to
the facts; that religion has been the greatest impediment in the road to
progress. This will be shown in the subsequent chapters. The
oft-repeated assertion that, during the Middle Ages, ecclesiastic
influence was the saving grace is well refuted by Dr. William J.
Robinson:

"We are told by the Church apologists that during the Middle Ages the
priests and monks kept up the torch of learning, that, being the only
literate people, they brought back the study of the classics.
Historically speaking, this is about the most impudent statement that
one could imagine. It was the Church that retarded human progress at
least one thousand years, it is the Church that put a thick,
impenetrable pall over the sun of learning and science, so that humanity
was enveloped in utter darkness, and if the priests and monks later
learned to read and write (from the Arabs, Jews, and Greeks exiled from
Constantinople after 1453), it is because they wanted to keep the power
in their hands; the people they did not permit to learn either to read
or write. _Even the reading of the Bible, bear in mind, was considered a
crime._ We are told that the priests and monks built hospitals and gave
alms to the poor. Having gotten enormous tracts of the best land into
their hands, so that the people were starving, they were willing to
throw a bone occasionally to the latter. It cost them nothing and it
gave them a reputation for charity. They built enormous monasteries with
well filled cellars, and lived on the fat of the land, while the people
lived in wretched hovels, working their lives away for a crust of bread.
The beasts, the domestic animals lived a more comfortable life than did
the men, women, and children of the people. And the Church never, never
raised a finger to ameliorate their condition. It kept them in
superstitious darkness and helped the temporal lords--for a long period
the spiritual were also the temporal lords--to keep them in fear,
subjection and slavery."

The Martian being an impartial observer examined what had been done by
Christianity for the intellectual and material advancement of humanity
during her long reign, and what had been done by science and purely
secular knowledge in its brief period of activity, the period when
science and secular knowledge had partially liberated themselves from
ecclesiastical domination. He came to the conclusion that in instituting
a comparison he had established a contrast.




CHAPTER VI

RELIGION AND SCIENCE

    _Science, then, commands our respect, not on the basis that its
    present assumptions and deductions are absolutely and for all time
    true, but on the ground that its method is for all time true--the
    method of discovery, the method of observation, research,
    experimentation, comparison, examination, testing, analysis and
    synthesis._

    MAYNARD SHIPLEY, "The War on Modern Science."

    _In the bare three and one-half centuries since modern science
    began, the churches had conducted an unremitting crusade against it.
    That much of this crusade had turned into a rear-guard action was
    due less to the weakness of the defenders of the faith than to the
    invulnerability of their non-resistant victim._

    HORACE M. KALLEN, "Why Religion?"


Some sixty years ago in the "Dogmatic Constitution of the Catholic
Faith," the Church stated, "But never can reason be rendered capable of
thoroughly understanding mysteries as it does those truths which form
its proper subject. We, therefore, pronounce false every assertion which
is contrary to the enlightened truth of faith.... Hence, all the
Christian faithful are not only forbidden to defend as legitimate
conclusions of science those opinions which are known to be contrary to
the doctrine of faith, especially when condemned by the Church, but are
rather absolutely bound to hold them for errors wearing the deceitful
appearance of truth. Let him be anathema....

"Who shall say that human sciences ought to be pursued in such a spirit
of freedom that one may be allowed to hold true their assertions even
when opposed to revealed doctrine."

Can anything stronger be said to discourage research, investigation,
experiment, and retard progress? And only sixty years ago! It is but the
restatement of what the Church has uttered so many times and for so
long--that all knowledge, material as well as spiritual, is to be found
in the Bible as interpreted by the Church. It was this myth which had
stultified the mind of man for 1500 years (during the period in which
the Church was dominant); it was this that had killed the urge to search
and seek for the truth, which is the goal of all science, the means by
which humanity is set on the road to progress. This was the damnable
precept foisted on the minds of men which enslaved them throughout the
ages, and from which we are just emerging. This was the precept that
plunged the world into the Dark Ages, and retarded the advance of
mankind for centuries.

This is the reason that it is utterly impossible for the intellectually
honest scientist, and for that matter any individual, to reconcile
science with religion. On the one hand, that of religion, we have the
forces of intolerance, superstition, and the endeavor to besmirch,
repress, and ridicule every advance favorable to mankind; to cloak with
meaningless words obsolete rites, to stand in the way of human progress,
because it does not permit men to think boldly and logically. Science,
on the other hand, does not hesitate to tear down old conceptions, and
has only one motive, the ultimate truth. Religion has the purpose of
keeping the masses in the narrow and false path of only accepted
doctrines. The true scientist is the man with the open mind, one who
will discard the worthless and accept only the proven good. The
religionist closes his mind to all facts which he is unwilling to
believe, everything which will endanger his creed. Religion teaches the
individual to place all hope, all desire, in a problematical hereafter.
The stay on earth is so short compared to the everlasting life to come,
that of what interest is this life; all things are vain. The misery, the
suffering, of his fellow men leave him cold; he can only think of living
in the light of his narrow creed so that he may gain his future reward.
How well this philosophy has fitted in with the schemes of the select
few for the control of the many!

Truth to the scientific mind is something provisional, a hypothesis that
for the present moment best conforms to the recognized tests. It is an
evolving conception in a constantly changing universe. It is not that
science has attained true conclusions; not that the evidence at hand
must remain immutable; but that the scientific method of analyzing and
formulating assumptions on the basis of discovery, on ascertained facts,
is a superior method to the closed "infallible" method of "revelation."
These assumptions, based upon the known facts, lead to a working
hypothesis which in turn develops into a theory. If the theory is
adopted it must account for the facts known. But the theory is not held
as final, it is always changed or abandoned if necessary to conform to
the new discovered data. Science welcomes the critical attitude that
leads to the refinement of its theories. There may be today various
theories held by scientists in which they are mistaken, but the question
of the _method_ by which they arrive at conclusions can no longer be
under consideration with regard to its validity.

To the scientific mind, knowledge is something to be arrived at by study
and research. To the religionist, knowledge is something that is
contained in an infallible and supernatural statement or insight.
Religion exalts the transcendental; science manipulates only the
material. To the consistent religionist, his belief, as such, determine
the fact; to the scientist it is the evidence that establishes the fact.
To the religionist truth is something that is unchanging, that is fixed,
final, and heretical to question. Confronted with a constantly changing
universe, he would delude himself that his inner convictions give him a
finality concerning his evolving environment. It is therefore not so
much Science that the religionist is fighting, but the _scientific
method_. This scientific method of approach, he rightly perceives, has
so pervaded our mode of thinking that it is the subtle and most
disintegrating force that is shattering the religious foundations.

Dr. James T. Shotwell, speaking of the scientific method, concludes,
"But whatever strictures philosophy may pass upon the _conclusions_ of
science, as merely relative and provisional, there is no clearer fact in
the history of thought, that its _attitudes_ and _methods_ have been at
opposite poles from those of religion. It does no good to blink the
fact, established as it is by the most positive proofs of history and
psychology. Science has made headway by attempting to eliminate mystery
so far as it can. Religion, on the other hand, has stressed mystery and
accepted it in its own terms. Science is the product of bold adventure,
pushing into the realm of the mysterious to interpret its phenomena in
terms of the investigator; religion enters this same realm to give
itself up to the emotional reactions. Science is the embodiment of the
sense of control, religion yields the control to that power which moves
in the shadow of the woods by night, and the glory of the morning
hills....

"Science does not justify by faith, but by works. It is the living
denial of that age-long acceptance which we accord to the mystery--as
such. It renounces authority, cuts athwart custom, violates the sacred,
rejects the myths. It adjusts itself to the process of change whose
creative impulse it itself supplies. Not _semper idem_ but _semper
alterum_ is the keynote of science. Each discovery of something new
involves the discarding of something old. Above all, it progresses by
doubting rather than by believing." (_James T. Shotwell: "The Religious
Revolution of To-day."_)

_There has never been an advance in science of widespread importance
which in some manner or other endangered some mouldy religious concept,
that the Church has not bitterly opposed; an advance which in time has
proven of inestimable benefit for all mankind. A glance at the history
of human progress will reveal scores of such instances._

The two rival divisions of the Christian Church, Protestant and
Catholic, have always been in accord on one point, that is, to tolerate
no science except such as they considered to be agreeable to the
Scriptures. It was the decree of the Lateran Council of 1515 that
ordered that no books should be printed but such as had been inspected
by the ecclesiastical censors, under pain of excommunication and fine.

It is easily understood that having declared the Bible to contain all
knowledge both scientific and spiritual, and then passing a decree
ordering no books to be printed which did not agree on all points with
the Church's interpretation of the Bible, the Church was in absolute
control of all thought, both written and spoken.

It was to no advantage for the scholar to investigate any new fields,
for all knowledge which was possible for the mind to discover had
already been revealed in the Scriptures. Thus declared the Church. We
understand why it was that Copernicus did not permit his book to be
published until he was dying. We understand also that when Galileo and
Bruno had the courage of their convictions, and gave voice to their
beliefs, they were persecuted. Galileo was made to recant a discovery
that the youngest of children now takes for granted. Bruno was burnt at
the stake.

We know that astronomy was at a standstill under Church domination,
chemistry was forbidden, and the study of natural philosophy was
contradicted; while anthropology, which showed on what mythical
foundations the story of the fall of man rests, was squelched. The
attitude of the Church on geography was hostile to the truth, as witness
the persecutions of those who dared to venture that the earth was round.
Botany, mathematics, and geometry, as well as the natural sciences,
slumbered. Geology, which proved that the earth was more than 6000 years
old, was anathematized; archeologists had the greatest difficulty to
expound the truth concerning the antiquity of the human race. In purely
civil matters, the clergy opposed fire and marine insurance on the
ground that it was a tempting of Providence. Life insurance was regarded
as an act of interference with the consequence of God's will. Medicine
met the most strenuous of opposition.

It is impossible in this short study to analyze the specific forms of
retardation which the Church exhibited to all of these branches of
learning, whose only endeavor it was to search for the truth, to state
the facts, and to alleviate and make more bearable man's sojourn on this
earth. However, a few of the many instances of retardation on the part
of the Church will be pointed out.




CHAPTER VII

RELIGION AND MEDICINE

    _Now, when physiologists study the living brain of an ape, they have
    no grounds for supposing that they are dealing with a dual
    structure. The brain is not a tenement inhabited by a spirit or
    soul. The spirit or soul is but a name for the manifestations of the
    living brain. The leading neurologists of the world are agreed that
    the same is true of the human brain. It was only when they abandoned
    the dual conception--an inheritance from the dark ages of
    medicine--that they began to understand the disorders of man's mind
    and how to treat them._

    _Modern medicine thus strikes at the very root of Christian
    doctrine. For, if man is truly mortal, if death ends all, if the
    human soul is but the manifestation of the living brain, as light
    and heat are the manifestations of a glowing bar of steel, then
    there can be no resurrection of the dead. Man has the seeds of
    immortality in him, but the gift is for the race, not for the
    individual._

    SIR ARTHUR KEITH.


Medicine and religion have been closely associated from the most
pristine time. Primitive medicine had its origin in conjunction with the
most primitive of religious conceptions, namely, animism; an illusion
that made primitive man recognize in all things, and everywhere, spirits
such as his supposed spirit; a belief that the world swarms with
invisible spirits which are the cause of disease and death. And thus
primitive medicine is inseparable from primitive modes of religious
belief. All these phenomena which we consider today natural--the
rustling of leaves in a forest, the crash of thunder, the flash of
lightning, winds, clouds, storms, and earthquakes--were to primitive
man the outward and visible signs of angry gods, demons, and spirits.
Similar spirits caused disease and death, and these evil spirits that
produced disease and death were to be placated and cajoled by man, just
as he did his other deities, by magic, by burnt offerings, and
sacrifice.

The first holy man, the first priest, was the "shaman," and it was his
duty not only to placate and cajole the spirits that were thought to
control the physical well-being of the individual members of the tribe;
but it was his duty also, by the exercise of his magic, to alleviate and
cure illness by exorcism. The "shaman" was therefore the first medicine
man, the first witch doctor, the first physician. He relied chiefly upon
psychotherapy as does the modern witch doctor of Christian Science.

Medicine could not begin to be medicine until it was disassociated from
magic, religion, and theology. This struggle has been going on from the
time of the "shaman" to the present moment. Primitive medicine stands
midway between magic and religion, as an attempt to safeguard health by
control of so-called supernatural processes, and the warding off of evil
influences by appeal to the gods.

In all primitive societies, priest, magician, and medicine man were one
and the same; and medicine remained stationary until it could divorce
itself completely from religion. Primitive medicine, then, springs from
folklore, legends, credulity, and superstitions; the same forces that
give rise to all forms of religious beliefs.

Huxley has stated, "Science commits suicide when it adopts a creed," and
from the earliest of times those men who had a scientific trend of mind
realized this, however vaguely, and have attempted to divorce science
from religion. The science of medicine has been divorced from
superstition, but its twin brother religion lies as firmly bogged in
the mire of superstition today as it did in the days of the incantations
of the first theologist, the "shaman." And it is due to this close
association of religion and medicine that ideas of the greatest
scientific moment have been throttled at birth or veered into a blind
alley through some current theological lunacy. Medicine has advanced
through its disassociation with supernaturalism, while religion still
remains the last refuge of human savagery.

And so it had been that throughout those long, sterile, and barbarous
ages primitive man ascribed all diseases either to the wrath of God, or
the malice of an Evil Being. With the rise of the Greek philosophers,
the human mind for the first time began to throw off the fogs of
superstition. In Greece, 500 years before Christ, Hippocrates developed
scientific thought and laid the foundations of medical science upon
observation, experience, and reason. Under his guidance, medicine for
the first time was separated from religion. He relieved the gods of the
responsibility for disease and placed it squarely upon the shoulders of
man. His findings were passed on to the School of Alexandria, and there
medical science was further developed. At this stage of history all
advances stopped, and for the following reason:

With the coming of Christianity this science, as well as all others, was
stultified. A retrogression took place to the ideation of the most
primitive of men, namely, the conception of physical disease as the
