
It seemed to flow into the deepest part of the miniature bay. It was as
if it felt certain of a haven there. When the tormenting noise-beam
struck again, the abyssal monster flung itself about crazily. A
terrible, frustrated rage filled it. Its arms fumbled here and there,
above water and below. It hauled itself upright so that a part of its
torpedo-shaped body broke through the surface. The monster was mad with
fury. It plunged toward the _Esperance_, not swimming now, but crawling
with all its eight legs in water too shallow to submerge it. Its effort
was desperate. It lifted everything from the water, and splashed
everything down again, all the while crawling toward its enemy.

Terry saw Nick and Jug steady the aim of their bazookas. Davis ran
toward the bow with hand grenades. The huge squid came crawling, and
with every foot of advance the pain-noise grew more unendurable.
Suddenly the creature uttered a mooing cry and retreated. The cry was
like the mooing noise Terry had picked up from the depths.

It went aground. It struggled to climb ashore, to do anything to escape
its tormentors. It foamed and splashed....

Despairing, it turned to face its tormentors. Its body reared almost
entirely out of the water, now. It sagged flabbily. It reeled as its
arms strained. Its eyes rose above the surface, blinded by the light.
They were huge eyes. Squids alone, among the invertebrates, have eyes
like those of land beasts. They flamed demoniac hatred. A beak appeared,
not unlike a parrot's, but capable of rending steel plates. The beak
opened and closed with clicking sounds that were singularly horrifying.
It snapped at the yacht, which was beyond reach. One of the tentacles
wrenched violently at something. It gave. The arm rose above the water.
A thorny mass of branched coral flew through the air and splashed close
beside the _Esperance_.

"Shoot!" said Terry, somehow sickened. "Dammit, shoot!"

Nick and Tony aimed closely. The bazookas made their peculiar,
inadequate sounds. The bazooka-shells, like small rocket-missiles, sped
through the short distance. They struck. Their shaped charges detonated,
again with inadequate loudness. They did not explode in a fashion to
tear the creature to bits. Instead, they sent lancing flames a thousand
times more deadly than bullets into the squid's flesh.

It fought insanely. It uttered shrill cries. Its arms tore at its own
wounds, at the water, at the lagoon-bed as if it would rend and shatter
all the universe in its rage.

The bazookas fired again and again.

It was the eighth missile from the bazooka which ended the battle. Then
the enormous body went limp. Its horny beak ceased to try to crush all
creation. But the long, thick, sucker-disked arms thrashed aimlessly for
a long time. Even when they ceased to throw themselves about, they
quivered and rippled for a considerable period more. And when it seemed
that all life had left the gigantic beast, and the men from the
satellite-tracking station stepped on the monstrous body, it suddenly
jerked once more, in a last attempt to murder.

The squid's body, without the tentacles, was thirty-five feet long. The
largest squid, the Atlantic variety, captured before had a mantle no
longer than twenty feet. That relatively familiar creature,
_Architeuthis princeps_, came to a maximum total length of fifty-two
feet. Counting the two longest arms of this one, it reached eighty. It
could not possibly swim in water less than six yards deep. It did not
belong in a coral lagoon, but it was there.

It was close to sunset when the last tremors of the great mass of flesh
were stilled. Terry was in no mood for eating, afterward. He skipped the
evening meal altogether, and paced up and down the veranda of the dining
hall, at the satellite-tracking station. Inside, there was a clatter of
dishes and a humming of voices. Outside, there was a soft, warm, starlit
night. The surf boomed on the reef outside the lagoon.

Deirdre came out and walked quickly into Terry's arms. She kissed him
and then drew back.

"Darling!" she said softly. Her voice changed. "How is your leg? Does it
still hurt?"

"It's nothing to worry about," said Terry. "I'm worried about something
else. Two things, in fact."

"Name one!" said Deirdre, smiling.

"I'd like to get married soon," said Terry ruefully.

"To whom?" she asked, jokingly.

"But I have to have a business or an income first. I think, though, that
with a little hard work I can start up my _especialidades electronicas y
fisicas_ again, and if you don't mind skimping a little ..."

"I'll adore it," said Deirdre enthusiastically. "What else would I
want? What's the other thing you worry about?"

"That monster," said Terry with some grimness.

"Pouf!" said Deirdre. "You've killed it!"

"I don't mean that one," said Terry more grimly. "I mean the one that
sent it. I wish I knew what it is and what it intends to do!"

"You've already found out more than anybody else even dared to guess!"
she protested.

"But not enough. We've stirred it up. It sent small fish in the lagoon
here and elsewhere to report back to it. We can't guess what the fish
reported, but we know some of it was about human beings. Whatever is
down at the bottom of the sea must be interested in men. Remember? It
made a patch of foam that swallowed up one ship and all its crew. It's
interested in men, all right!"

"True, but...."

"We dropped the dredge, which implied that we were interested in it. The
bathyscaphe indicated more interest on our part. To discourage that
interest--or perhaps in self-defense--it wrecked the bathyscaphe."

"It, Terry?" asked Deirdre. "Or _ellos_, they?"

"They," he corrected himself coldly. "We killed the fish that were
reporting men's doings from here. That was insolence on our part. So the
hum at the lagoon entrance went off and, after two nights, started
again--and then this huge squid was found in the lagoon. It should have
been able to defend itself against us. It was sent up here because it
was capable of defending itself! But we've killed it just the same. So
now what will come up out of the depths? And what will it do?"

Deirdre said firmly, "You'll be ready for it when it comes!"

"Maybe," said Terry. "Your father once mentioned an instrument he'd like
to have to take a relief map of the ocean bottom. Changed around a
little, it might be something we need very badly indeed. The horn we've
got is good, but not good enough. I'll talk to the electronics men
here."

There was a noise of scraping chairs, inside the dining hall. People
came out, talking cheerfully. There was much to talk about on Thrawn
Island today. The killing of a giant squid had been preceded by a
specific guess that linked it to meteoric falls in the Luzon Deep.
Logically, the excitement had grown.

Terry found his electronics specialists, and explained to them the type
of apparatus he was interested in. He asked if it was included in the
island's technical stores. He wanted to assemble something capable of
emitting underwater noises of special quality and unprecedented power.
There is not much power involved in sound through the air. A cornet
player manages with much effort to convert four-tenths of a watt of
power into music. A public-address system for a large area may give out
fifteen watts of noise. Terry described a device which could use a small
amount of power, serving as a sonar or a depth-finding unit, and then,
with the throw of a switch, turn kilowatts into vibrations underneath
the sea. If powerful and shrill enough, such vibrations could be lethal.

A technical argument ensued. Terry's demands were toned down to fit the
equipment at hand. Then three men went with him to the island's
workshop. They took off their coats and set to work.

Three hours later someone noticed an unknown vessel making its way into
the lagoon. She was stubby and small, and had short thick masts with
heavy booms tilted up at steep angles. Her Diesel engines boomed
hollowly, louder than the surf. As she entered the lagoon, a searchlight
winked on and flicked here and there. It finally found the wharf where
the _Esperance_ was moored.

Men of the tracking station staff went down to the wharf to meet the
small row boat that was now coming ashore.

A short, stout, irate fishing boat skipper waved his arms and shouted
angrily. What had _los americanos_ done to keep _La Rubia_ from catching
fish? Why had they changed the arrangement by which the starving wives
and children of _La Rubia's_ crew were fed? He would protest to the
Philippine Government! He would expose the villainy of _los americanos_
to the world! He demanded that now, instantly, the original state of
affairs be restored!

A fish leaped out of the water nearby. Where it leaped, and where it
fell back, bright specks of luminosity appeared. Even the ripples of the
splashes glowed faintly as they spread outward. The skipper of _La
Rubia_ stared. And now the people of the island realized that the look
of the water was not altogether commonplace. Little bluish flames under
the surface showed that many fish darted there. There were more fish
than usual in the lagoon. Many more. The lagoon had suddenly become a
fine place to catch fish. Some care would be needed, of course. There
were doubtless coral heads in plenty. But still ...

The skipper of _La Rubia_ abruptly returned to his fury and his
protests. _La Rubia_ had gone to the place where she always found fish.
Always! There was a humming in the water there, and fish were to be
found in quantity. But yesterday the American ship had been there, and
also this very yacht! _La Rubia_ stayed out of sight lest the
_americanos_ learn her fishing secrets. But it was useless. When the two
American ships were gone, there was no longer a humming in the sea and
no more fish for the crew of _La Rubia_ to capture for their hungry
wives and children. And therefore he, Capitan Saavedra, demanded that
the _americanos_ restore the previous state of affairs.

Davis would have intervened, but the chubby skipper erupted into wilder
and more theatrical accusations still.

Let them not deny what they had done! Fish were always to be found where
there was a humming in the sea that _las orejas de ellos_ heard and
reported to him. But that humming was not in its former place. It was
here! At the entrance of the lagoon! The fish were here, also! _Los
americanos_ had moved the fish so the crewmen of _La Rubia_ could not
feed their wives and children. _Los americanos_ wished to take all the
fish for themselves! But fish were the property of all men, especially
fishermen with starving wives and children. So he, Capitan Saavedra,
would fish in this lagoon, and he defied anyone to stop him.

"Certainly," said Terry. "_Seguramente!_" He added in Spanish: "We'll
lend you a short-wave contact with Manila to make any complaints you
please. I'm sure all the other fishing boats will be glad to hear where
you've been catching fish, and where you've found the fish have moved
to! Calm yourself, Capitan, and help yourself to the fish of the lagoon,
and any time you want to call Manila we'll arrange it!"

He moved away. He went back to the electronics shop, while Morton and
Davis and the others talked encouragingly to Capitan Saavedra. Presently
they suggested that he accept their hospitality, and the Capitan and his
oarsmen went up to the dining hall, where they were served dinner, and a
more friendly mood developed. In time the Capitan said happily that he
would wait till sunrise to lower his nets, because he didn't want to
risk losing them on the coral heads. A few drinks later the Capitan
boasted about his own system of fishing, as practised by _La Rubia_. The
starving condition of his crew's wives and children ceased to be
mentioned.

In the presence of so accomplished a liar, nobody of the tracking
station staff mentioned a giant squid hauled partly, but only partly,
out of the water. They suspected that he would not believe it. They were
sure that he would top their real feat by an imaginary one. So the four
crew-cuts listened politely, and fed him more drinks, and learned much.

In the workshop the most unlikely device Terry'd described took form. In
effect, it was an underwater horn which was much more powerful than it
looked. Submerged, and with power from a group of amplifiers in
parallel, it would create a tremendous volume of underwater noise. That
sound would run through a tube shaped like a gun-barrel. It would travel
in a straight line, spreading only a little.

The same projection tube could also send out the tentative
beep-beep-beep of sonar gear, or the peculiar noise a depth-finder
makes. So the instrument could search out a distance or find a target,
and then fling at it a beam of humming torment equal to bullets from a
machine gun.

It would have taken Terry, alone, a long time to build. But he had
three assistants, two of whom were very competent. By dawn, they had it
ready to be mounted upon the _Esperance_. It was placed hanging from the
bow, mounted on gimbals, so that it could point in any direction. It was
firmly fixed to the yacht's planking.

There was plenty of activity on _La Rubia_, too, at daybreak. That squat
and capable fishing boat prepared to harvest the fish in the lagoon. She
got her nets over. She essayed to haul them. Some got caught on the
coral heads rising from the lagoon's bottom toward the surface. Capitan
Saavedra swore, and untangled them. He tried again. Again coral heads
baulked the enterprise. The nets tore.

A helicopter came rattling into view from the south. It grew in size and
loudness, and presently hovered over the tracking station. Then it made
a wide, deliberate circuit of the lagoon. At the inlet where the squid
lay almost entirely in the water--but fastened by ropes lest it drift
away--above that spot, the helicopter hovered for a long time. It must
have been taking photographs. Presently, it lowered one man by a line to
the ground. Obviously, the man could not endure any delay in getting at
so desirable a biological specimen. Then the helicopter went droning and
rattling to the tracking station, and landed with an air of weariness.

_La Rubia_ continued to try to catch fish. They were here in plenty. But
the coral heads were everywhere. Nets tore. Ropes parted. Capitan
Saavedra waved his arms and swore.

The _Esperance_ rumbled and circled away from the wharf, and headed for
the lagoon entrance. The singular contrivance built during the night was
in place at her bow. She passed _La Rubia_, on whose deck men
frantically mended nets.

The _Esperance_ passed between the small capes and the first of the
ocean swells raised her bow and rocked her. She proceeded beyond the
reef. The bottom of the sea dropped out of sight. Terry switched on the
submarine ear and listened. The humming sound was to be expected here.

It had stopped. It was present yesterday, and even during the night,
when _La Rubia_ came into the lagoon. But now the sea held no sound
other than the multitudinous random noises of fish and the washing,
roaring, booming of the surf.

Deirdre was aboard, of course. She watched Terry's face. He turned to
the new instrument, and then dropped his hand.

"I think," he said carefully to Davis, "that I'd like to make a sort of
sweep out to sea. It's just possible we'll find the hum farther out."

Deirdre said quickly, "I think I know what you're up to. You want to
survey a large area of the ocean while something comes up. Then you can
direct that "something" to the lagoon mouth by using your sound device,
so the ... whatever-it-is has to take refuge in the lagoon. Since we've
killed the squid...."

"That's it," said Terry. "Something like that happened when we speared
the fish. The squid took their place. Now we've killed the squid. Just
possibly...."

They found the humming sound in the water four miles off-shore. They
traced it through part of a circle. If something were being driven
upward, it could not pass through that wall of humming sound.

"That proves your point," Davis said. "Now what?"

Without realizing it, he'd yielded direction of the enterprise to Terry,
who had unconsciously assumed it.

"Let's go back to the island," said Terry thoughtfully. "I've got a
crazy idea--really crazy! I want to be where we can duck into shallow
