have said of the doing. But we speak of saints and enthusiasts for
good, as if some special gifts were made to them in middle age which are
withheld from other men. Is it not rather that some few souls keep alive
the lamp of zeal and high desire which GOD lights for most of us while
life is young?

Eleanor and I worked at our lessons by ourselves. We always had her
mother to "fall back upon," as we said. When we took up the study of
Italian in order to be able to read Dante--moved thereto by the
attractions of the long volume of Flaxman's illustrations of the 'Divina
Commedia'--we had to "fall back" a good deal on Mrs. Arkwright's
scholarship. And this in spite of all the helps the library afforded us,
the best of dictionaries, English "cribs," and about six of those
elaborate commentaries upon the poem, of which Italians have been so
prolific.

During the winter the study of languages was commonly uppermost; in
summer sketching was more favoured.

I do think sketching brings one a larger amount of pleasure than almost
any other occupation. And like "collecting," it is a very sociable
pursuit when one has fellow-sketchers as well as fellow-naturalists. And
this, I must confess, is a merit in my eyes, I being of a sociable
disposition! Eleanor could live alone, I think, and be happy; but I
depend largely on my fellow-creatures.

Jack and I were talking rather sentimentally the other day about "old
times," and I said:

"How jolly it was, that summer we used to sketch so much--all four of us
together!"

And Jack, who was rubbing some new stuff of his own compounding into his
fishing-boots, replied:

"Awfully. I vote we take to it again when the weather's warmer."

But Jack is so sympathetic, he will agree with anything one says.
Indeed, I am sure that he feels what one feels--for the time, at any
rate.

Clement is very different. He always disputes and often snubs what one
says; partly, I am sure, from a love of truth--a genuine desire to keep
himself and everybody else from talking in an unreal way, and from
repeating common ideas without thinking them out at first hand; and
partly, too, from what Keziah calls the "contradictiousness" of his
temper. He was in the room when Jack and I were talking, but he was not
talking with us. He was reading for his examination.

All the Arkwrights can work through noise and in company, having
considerable powers of mental abstraction. I think they even sometimes
combine attention to their own work with an occasional skimming of the
topics current in the room as well.

Some outlying feeler of Clement's brain caught my remark and Jack's
reply.

"My dear Margery," said he, "you are at heart one of the most unaffected
people I know. Pray be equally genuine with your head, and do not
encourage Jack in his slipshod habits of thought and conversation
by----"

"Slipshod!" interrupted Jack, holding his left arm out at full length
before him, the hand of which was shod with a fishing-boot. "Slipshod!
They fit as close as your convictions, and would be as stiff and
inexorable as logic if I didn't soften them with this newly-invented and
about-to-be-patented ointment by the warmth of a cheerful fire and
Margery's beaming countenance."

Clement had been reading during this sentence. Then he lifted his head,
and said pointedly:

"What I was going to advise _you_, Margery, is never to get into the
habit of adopting sentiments till you are quite sure you really mean
them. It is by the painful experience of my own folly that I know what
trouble it gives one afterwards. If ever the time comes when you want to
know your real opinion on any subject, the process of getting rid of
ideas you have adopted without meaning them will not be an easy one."

I am not as intellectual as the Arkwrights. I can always see through
Jack's jokes, but I am sometimes left far behind when Eleanor or Clement
"take flight," as Jack calls it, on serious subjects. I really did not
follow Clement on this occasion.

With some hesitation I said:

"I don't know that I quite understand."

"I'm sure you don't," said Jack. "I have feared for some time that your
hair was getting too thick for the finer ideas of this household to
penetrate to your brain. Allow me to apply a little of this ointment to
the parting, which in your case is more definite than with Eleanor; and
as our lightest actions should proceed from principles, I may mention
that the principle on which I propose to apply the Leather-softener to
your scalp is that on which the blacksmith's wife gave your cholera
medicine to the second girl, when she began with rheumatic fever--'it
did such a deal of good to our William.' Now, this unguent has done 'a
deal of good' to the leather of my boots. Why should it not successfully
lubricate the skin of your skull?"

Only the dread of "a row" between Jack and Clem enabled me to keep
anything like gravity.

"Don't talk nonsense, Jack!" said I, as severely as I could. (I fear
that, like the rest of the world, I snubbed Jack rather than Clement,
because his temper was sweeter, and less likely to resent it.)
"Clement, I'm very stupid, but I don't quite see how what _you_ said
applies to what _I_ said."

"You said, 'How happy we were, that summer we went sketching!' or words
to that effect. It's just like a man's writing about the careless
happiness of childhood, when he either forgets, or refuses to advert to,
the toothache, the measles, learning his letters, the heat of the
night-nursery, not being allowed to sit down in the yard whilst his
knickerbockers were new, going to bed at eight o'clock, and having a lie
on his conscience. I have striven for more accurate habits of thought,
and I remember distinctly that you cried over more than one of your
sketches."

"I got into the 'Household Album' with mine, however," said Jack; "and I
defy an A.R.A. to have had more difficulty in securing his position."

"I'm afraid your appearance in the _Phycological Quarterly_ was better
deserved," said Mrs. Arkwright, without removing her eye from the
microscope she was using at a table just opposite to Clem's.

But this demands explanation, and I must go back to the time of which
Jack and I spoke--when we used to go sketching together.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE "HOUSEHOLD ALBUM"--SKETCHING UNDER DIFFICULTIES--A NEW
SPECIES?--JACK'S BARGAIN--THEORIES.


Out of motherly affection, and also because their early attempts at
drawing were very clever, Mrs. Arkwright had, years before, begun a
scrapbook, or "Household Album," as it was called, into which she pasted
such of her children's original drawings as were held good enough for
the honour; the age of the artist being taken into account.

Jack's gift in this line was not as great as that of Clement or Eleanor,
but this was not the only reason why no drawing of his appeared in the
scrapbook. Mrs. Arkwright demanded more evidence of pains and industry
than Jack was wont to bestow on his sketches or designs. He resented his
exclusion, and made many efforts to induce his mother to accept his
hasty productions; but it was not till the summer to which I alluded
that Jack took his place in the "Household Album."

It was during a long drive, in which we were exhibiting the country to
some friends, that Eleanor and I chose the place of that particular
sketching expedition. The views it furnished had the first, and almost
the only, quality demanded by young and tyro sketchers--they were very
pretty.

There was some variety, too, to justify our choice. From the sandy road,
where a heathery bank afforded the convenience of seats, we could look
down into a valley with a winding stream, whose banks rose into
hillsides which lost themselves in finely-coloured mountains of
moorland.

Farther on, a scramble on foot over walls and gates had led us into a
wooded gorge fringed with ferns, where a group of trees of particularly
graceful form roused Eleanor's admiration.

"What a lovely view!" had burst from the lips of our friends at every
quarter of a mile; for they were of that (to me) trying order of
carriage companions who talk about the scenery as you go, as a point of
politeness.

But the views _were_ beautiful--"Sketches everywhere!" we cried.

"There's nothing to make a sketch _of_ round the Vicarage," we added.
"We've done the church, with the Deadmanstone Hills behind it, and
without the Deadmanstone Hills behind it, till we are sick of the
subject."

So, the weather being fine, and even hot, we provided ourselves with
luncheon and sketching materials, and made an expedition to the point
we had selected.

We were tired by the time we reached it. This does not necessarily damp
one's sketching ardour, but it is unfavourable to accuracy of outline,
and especially so to purity of colouring. However, we did not hesitate.
Eleanor went down to her study of birch-trees in the gorge, Clement
climbed up the bank to get the most extended view of the Ewden Valley; I
contented myself with sitting by the roadside in front of the same view,
and Jack stayed with me.

He had come with us. Not that he often went out sketching, but our
descriptions of the beauty of the scenery had roused him to make another
attempt for the "Household Album." Seldom lastingly provided, for his
own part, with apparatus of any kind, Jack had a genius for purveying
all that he required in an emergency. On this occasion he had borrowed
Mrs. Arkwright's paint-box (without leave), and was by no means ill
supplied with pencils and brushes which certainly were not his own. He
had hastily stripped a couple of sheets from my block whilst I was
dressing, and with these materials he seated himself on that side of me
which enabled him to dip into my water-pot, and began to paint.

Not half-way through my outline, I was just beginning to realize the
complexities of a bird's-eye view with your middle distance in a
valley, and your foreground sloping steeply upwards to your feet, when
Jack, washing out a large, dyed sable sky-brush in my pot, with an
amount of splashing that savoured of triumph, said:

"_That's_ done!"

I paused in a vigorous mental effort to put aside my _knowledge_ of the
relative sizes of objects, and to _see_ that a top stone of my
foreground wall covered three fields, the river, and half the river's
bank beyond.

"_Done?_" I exclaimed. Jack put his brush into his mouth, in defiance of
all rules, and deliberately sucked it dry. Then he waved his sketch
before my eyes.

"The effect's rather good," I confessed, "but oh, Jack, it's out of all
proportion! That gate really looks as big as the whole valley and the
hills beyond. The top of the gate-post ought to be up in the sky."

"It would look beastly ugly if it was," replied he complacently.

"You've got a very good tint for those hills; but the foreground is mere
scrambling. Oh, Jack, do finish it a little more! You would draw so
nicely if you had any patience."

"How imperfectly you understand my character," said Jack, packing up his
traps. "I would sit on a monument and smile at grief with any one, this
very day, if the monument were in a grove, or even if I had an umbrella
to smile under. To sit unsheltered under this roasting sun, and make
myself giddy by gauging proportions with a pencil at the end of my nose,
or smudging my mistakes with melting india-rubber, is quite another
matter. I'm off to Eleanor. I've got another sheet of paper, and I think
trees are rather in my line."

"I _thought_ my block looked smaller," said I, rapidly comparing Jack's
paper and my own, with a feeling for size developed by my labours.

"Has she got a water-pot?" asked Jack.

"She is sure to have," said I pointedly. "She always takes her own
materials with her."

"How fortunate for those who do not!" said Jack. "Now, Margery dear,
don't look sulky. I knew you wouldn't grudge me a bit of paper to get
into the 'Household Album' with. Come down into the ravine. You're as
white as a blank sheet of Whatman's hot-pressed water-colour paper!"

The increasing heat was really beginning to overpower me, but I refused
to leave my sketch. Jack pinned a large white pocket-handkerchief to my
shoulders--"to keep the sun from the spine"--and departed to the ravine.

By midday my outline was in. One is no good judge of one's own work,
but I think, on the whole, that it was a success.

It is always refreshing to complete a stage of anything. I began to feel
less hot and tired, as I passed a wash of clean water over my outline,
and laying it in the sun to dry, got out my colours and brushes.

As I did so, one of the little gusts of wind which had been an
unpleasant feature of this very fine day, and which, threatening a
change of weather, made us anxious to finish our sketches at a sitting,
came down the sandy road. In an instant the damp surface of my block
looked rough enough to strike matches on. But impatience is not my
besetting sin, and I had endured these little catastrophes before. I
waited for the block to dry before I brushed off the sand. I also waited
till the little beetle, who had crept into my sky, and was impeded in
his pace by my first wash, walked slowly down through all my distances,
and quitted the block by the gate in the foreground. This was partly
because I did not want to hurt him, and partly because a white cumulus
cloud is a bad part of your sketch to kill a black beetle on.

I washed over my paper once more, and holding it on my knee to dry just
as much and no more than was desirable, I looked my subject in the face
with a view to colour.

A long time passed. I had looked and looked again; I had washed in and
washed out; I had realized the difficulty of the subject without
flinching, and had tried hard to see and represent the colouring before
me, when Clement (having exhausted his water in a similar process) came
down the hill behind me, with a surly and sunburnt face, to replenish
his bottle at a wayside water-trough.

It was then that, as he said, he found me crying.

"It's not because it's difficult and I'm very stupid," I whimpered. "I
don't mind working on and trying to make the best of a thing. And it's
not the wind or the sand, though it has got dreadfully into the paints,
particularly the Italian Pink; but what makes me hopeless, Clement, is
that I don't believe it would look well if I could paint it perfectly.
It looked lovely as we were driving home the other evening, but now----
Just look at those fields, Clem; I _know_ they're green, but really and
truly I _see_ them just the same colour as this road, and I don't think
there is the difference of a shade between them and that gate-post. What
shall I do?"

A tear fell out of my eyelashes and dropped on to my river. Clement took
the sketch from me, and dried up the tear with a bit of blotting-paper.

Then to my amazement he gave rather a favourable verdict. It comforted
me, for Clement never says anything that he does not mean.

"It's not _half_ bad, Margery! Wait till you see mine! How did you get
the tints of that hillside? You've a very truthful mind, that's one
thing, and a very true eye as well. I do admire the way you abstain from
filling up with touches that mean nothing."

"Oh, Clement!" cried I, so gratified that I began to feel ready to go on
again. "Do you really think I can make anything of it?"

"Nothing more," said Clement. "Don't put another touch. It's unfinished,
but no finishing would do any good. We've got an outlandish subject and
a bad time of day. But keep it just as it is, and three months hence, on
a cool day, you'll be pleased when you look at it."

"Perhaps if I went on a little with the foreground," I suggested; but
even as I spoke, I put my hand to my head.

"Go to Eleanor in the ravine, at once," said Clement imperatively. "I'll
bring your things. What _did_ make us such fools as to come out without
umbrellas?"

"We came out in the cool of the morning," said I, as I staggered off;
"besides, it's almost impossible to hold one and paint too."

Once in the ravine, I dropped among the long grass and ferns, and the
damp, refreshing coolness of my resting-place was delicious.

Eleanor was not faint, neither had she been crying; but she was not much
happier with her sketch than I had been with mine. The jutting group of
birch-trees was well chosen, and she had drawn them admirably. But when
she came to add the confused background of trees and undergrowth, her
very outline had begun to look less satisfactory. When it came to
colour--and the midday sun was darting and glittering through the
interstices of the trees, without supplying any effects of _chiaroscuro_
to a subject already defective in point and contrast--Eleanor was almost
in despair.

"Where's Jack?" said I, after condoling with her.

"He tried the birches for ten minutes, and then he went up the stream to
look for _algae_."

At this moment Jack appeared. He came slowly towards us, looking at
something in his hand.

"Lend me your magnifying-glass, Eleanor," said he, when he had reached
us.

Eleanor unfastened it from her chatelaine, and Jack became absorbed in
examining some water-weed in a dock-leaf.

"What is it?" said we.

"It's a new species, I believe. Look, Eleanor!" and he gave her the leaf
and the glass with an almost pathetic anxiety of countenance.

My opinion carried no weight in the matter, but Eleanor was nearly as
good a naturalist as her mother. And she was inclined to agree with
Jack.

"It's too good to be true! But I certainly don't know it. Where did you
find it?"

"No, thank you," said Jack derisively. "I mean to keep the habitat to
myself for the present. For _a very good reason_. Margery, my child, put
that sketch of mine into the pocket of your block. (The paper is much
about the size of your own!) It is going into the 'Household Album.'"

We went home earlier than we had intended. Even the perseverance of
Eleanor and Clement broke down under their ill-success. Jack was the
only well-satisfied one of the party, and, with his usual good-nature,
he tried hard to infect me with his cheerfulness.

"I think," said I, looking dolefully at my sketch, "that a good deal of
the fault must have been in my eyes. I suspect one can't see colours
properly when one is feeling sick and giddy. But the glare of the sun
was the worst. I couldn't tell red from green on my palette, so no
