lubricates the whole surface of the skin, and the more extensive surface of
the air-vessels, which compose the lungs. These are supplied with blood by
the perpetual action of the heart and arteries, and have therefore their
motions associated with the former, and with each other, by sympathy, which
is sometimes direct, and sometimes reverse.

One branch of this association, the capillaries of the skin, are very
irritable by the increased quantities of cold and heat, another branch,
that of the lungs, has not the perception of cold and heat, but is liable
by direct sympathy to act in concert with the former, as in going into the
cold bath. And it is probable the capillaries of the internal membranes are
likewise directly affected by their sympathy with those of the skin, as
appears from the defect of secretion in ulcers during the cold fits of
agues.

The motions of this extensive system of capillaries, thus associated by
direct sympathy, are also associated with those of the heart and arteries,
sometimes by reverse and sometimes by direct sympathy; and thus constitute
simple fever. The cold paroxysm of which consists in their torpor, and the
hot one in their orgasm, or increased activity.

I. _Of the Action of Vomiting._

The manner, in which the stomach and the diaphragm and abdominal muscles
acquire their associate action in vomiting, requires some attention. It is
not probable, that this action of vomiting occurs before nativity; as the
uniform application of the nutritive liquor amnii to the mouth of the
foetus, and the uniform expenditure of its nourishment, would not seem to
give occasion to too great temporary repletion of the stomach; and would
preclude the deglutition of any improper material. After nativity the
stomach of the child may be occasionally too much distended with milk; as
previous hunger may induce it to overgorge itself; and by repeated efforts
the act of vomiting is learned, as a means of getting free from a
disagreeable sensation. Thus when any disgustful material, as a bitter
drug, is taken into the mouth; certain retrograde motions of the tongue and
lips are produced, for the purpose of putting the disagreeable material out
of the mouth again.

When the stomach is disagreeably stimulated by the distention or acrimony
of the aliment, a similar effort to regurgitate it must occur; and by
repeated trials the action of the diaphragm and abdominal muscles by
squeezing the stomach assists its retrograde exertion to disgorge its
contents. In the same manner when a piece of gravel is pushed into the
urethra, or a piece of indurated bile into the neck of the gall-bladder,
after they have been in vain pressed forward by the usual motions of those
ducts, they return into the bladders of gall and urine by the retrograde
motions of them.

That this is one mode, in which vomiting is induced, appears from the
instantaneous rejection from the stomach occasioned by some nauseous drug,
or from some nauseous idea; and lastly, from the voluntary power, which
some people have been said to have acquired, of emptying their stomachs,
much in the same manner as ruminating animals bring up the grass from their
first stomach.

There are nevertheless many modes by which these inverted motions of the
stomach and oesophagus are induced, and which it is of consequence to
distinguish from each other. The first is the mode above described, where
an effort is made to dislodge something, which stimulates the stomach into
disagreeable sensation; and which is returned by repeated exertions; as
when a nauseous drug is taken into the mouth, or a bit of sand falls into
the eye, or a drop of water into the wind-pipe. In this the peristaltic
motions of the stomach are first stopped, and then reverted by painful
sensation; and the abdominal muscles and diaphragm by repeated efforts
become associated with them. Now as less sensorial power is expended on the
retrograde actions of the stomach, and of the lymphatics, which open their
mouths on its surface, than by their natural motions, an accumulation of
sensorial power in the fibres of the stomach follows the exhibition of an
emetic, and on that account an emetic will sometimes stop a spontaneous
vomiting which was owing to sensorial deficiency. See Sect. XXXV. 1. 3. and
Art. V. 2. 1.

As bitters and metallic salts, exhibited in small doses, stimulate the
stomach into greater action, as appears by their increasing the power of
digestion, and yet become emetic, when given in larger doses; one might
suspect, that they became emetic by inducing debility, and consequent
retrograde actions of the stomach, by their previously exhausting the
sensorial power by their great stimulus; which might be effected in a
moment without producing pain, and in consequence without our perceiving
it. But on the contrary, there does not in general appear on the exhibition
of emetics to be any previous exhaustion of sensorial power; because there
is evidently an accumulation of it during the sickness, as appears from the
digestion being stronger afterwards; and from the increased action of the
cellular and cutaneous absorbents during its operation. See Art. V. 2. 1.

Another mode, by which vomiting is induced, is owing to debility or
deficiency of sensorial power, from the previous exhaustion of it; as on
the day after intoxication, or which occurs in people enfeebled with the
gout, and in dropsy, and in some fevers with debility. In these, when the
vomiting ceases, there is no appearance of accumulation of sensorial power,
as the digestion still remains weak and imperfect.

Another mode by which sickness or vomiting is induced, is by defect of
stimulus, as in great hunger; and in those, who have been habituated to
spice and spirit with their meals, who are liable to be sick after taking
food without these additional stimuli. Other means of inducing sickness by
vertigo, or by nauseous ideas, will be mentioned below.

We shall only add, that the motions of the muscular fibres of the stomach
are associated with those of the heart and arteries by direct sympathy, as
appears by the weakness of the pulse during the exhibition of an emetic;
and that the absorbents of the stomach are associated with the cellular and
cutaneous absorbents by reverse sympathy, as is shewn by the great
absorption of the mucus of the cells in anasarca during sickness; at the
same time that the absorbents of the stomach invert their actions, and pour
the mucus and water thus absorbed into that viscus.

In cold paroxysms of fever the stomach partakes of the general torpor, and
vomiting is induced by its debility, either by its association with the
torpid capillaries, or other torpid parts, or by its own torpor commencing
first, and causing the cold fit. The disordered motions of the stomach
frequently seem to be the cause or primary seat of fever, as where
contagious miasmata are swallowed with the saliva, and where fever is
produced by sea-sickness, which I once saw. Nevertheless a disorder of the
stomach does not always induce fever, as in that case it should constantly
attend indigestion, and vertigo, and sea-sickness; but is itself frequently
induced by association with the disordered movements of other parts of the
system, as when it arises from gravel in the ureter, or from a percussion
on the head.

The connexion of the motions of the stomach with irritative ideas, or
motions of the organs of sense, in vertigo, is shewn in Sect. XX. and thus
it appears, that many circles of association are either directly or
reversely associated, or catenated, with this viscus; which will much
contribute to unfold some of the symptoms of fever.

K. _Tertian Associations._

The third link of associate trains of motion is sometimes actuated by
reverse sympathy, with the second link, and that by reverse sympathy with
the first link; so that the first and third link may act by direct
sympathy, and the intermediate one by reverse sympathy. Of this instances
are given in the syngultus nephriticus, Class IV. 1. 1. 7. and IV. 2. 1. At
other times the tertian or quartan links of associate motions are actuated
by direct sympathy; and that sometimes forwards and sometimes backwards in
respect to the usual order of those trains of associate motions, as in
Class IV. 1. 2. 1.

SPECIES.

1. _Rubor vultus prandorum._ Flushing of the face after dinner is explained
in Sect. XXXV. 1. In the beginning of intoxication the whole skin becomes
florid from the association of the actions of the cutaneous arteries with
those of the stomach, because vinous spirit excites the fibres of the
stomach into more violent action than the stimulus of common food; and the
cutaneous capillaries of the face, from their more frequent exposure to the
vicissitudes of cold and heat, possess more mobility or irritability than
those of other parts of the skin, as further explained in Sect. XXXIII. 2.
10. Vinegar is liable to produce this flushing of the face, which probably
is owing to the quantity of vinous spirit it contains, as I believe the
unfermented vegetable acids do not produce this effect. In every kind of
blush the arterial blood is propelled into the capillaries faster than the
venous absorption can carry it forwards into the veins, in this respect
resembling the tensio phalli.

Can the beginning vinous or acetous fermentation of the aliment in weak
stomachs contribute to this effect? or is it to be ascribed to the greater
power of association between the arteries of the face and the fibres of the
stomach in some people than in others?

M. M. Eat and drink less at a time, and more frequently. Put 20 drops of
weak acid of vitriol into water to be drank at meals. Let the dress over
the stomach and bowels be loose. Use no fermented liquors, or vinegar, or
spice.

2. _Sudor stragulis immersorum._ Sweat from being covered in bed. In the
commencement of an epidemic fever, in which the perpetual efforts to vomit
was a distressing symptom, Dr. Sydenham discovered, that if the patient's
head was for a short time covered over with the bed clothes, warmth was
produced, and a sweat broke out upon the skin, and the tendency to vomit
ceased. In this curious fact two trains of associated motions are excited
into increased action. First, the vessels of the lungs are known to have
their motion associated with those of the skin by the difficulty of
breathing on going into the cold bath, as described in Sect. XXXII. 3. 2.
Hence, when the vessels of the lungs become excited into stronger action,
by the bad air under the bed clothes, warmed and adulterated by frequent
breathing, those of the external skin soon become excited by their
association into more energetic action, and generate more heat along with a
greater secretion of perspirable matter. Secondly, the sympathy between the
stomach and skin is evident in variety of circumstances; thus the cold air
of frosty days applied to the skin for a short time increases the action of
the stomach by reverse sympathy, but decreases it if continued too long by
direct sympathy; so in the circumstance above mentioned the action of the
stomach is increased by direct sympathy with that of the skin; and the
tendency to vomit, which was owing to its diminished action, ceases.

3. _Cessatio aegritudinis cute excitata._ The cure of sickness by
stimulating the skin. This is explained in the preceding article; and
further noticed in IV. 2. 2. 4. and in IV. 1. 1. f.

Similar to these is the effect of a blister on the back in relieving
sickness, indigestion, and heart-burn; and, on the contrary, by these
symptoms being frequently induced by coldness of the extremities. The
blister stimulates the cutaneous vessels into greater action; whence warmth
and pain are produced at the same time, and the fibres of the stomach are
excited into greater action by their association with those of the skin. It
does not appear, that the concomitant pain of the blister causes the
increased energy of the stomach, because the motions of it are not greater
than natural; though it is sometimes difficult to determine, whether the
primary part of some associated trains be connected with irritative or
sensitive motions.

In the same manner a flannel shirt, to one who has not been in the habit of
wearing one, stimulates the skin by its points, and thus stops vomiting in
some cases; and is particularly efficacious in checking some chronical
diarrhoeas, which are not attended with fever; for the absorbents of the
skin are thus stimulated into greater action, with which those of the
intestines consent by direct sympathy.

This effect cannot be ascribed to the warmth alone of the flannel shirt, as
being a covering of loose texture, and confining air in its pores, like a
sponge, which air is known to be a bad conductor of heat, since in that
case its use should be equally efficacious, if it were worn over a linen
shirt; and an increased warmth of the room of the patient would be equally
serviceable.

4. _Digestio aucta frigore cutaneo._ Digestion increased by coldness of the
skin. Every one has experienced the increase of his appetite after walking
in the cool air in frosty days; for there is at this time not only a saving
of sensorial power by the less exertion of the cutaneous vessels; but, as
these consent with those of the stomach and bowels, this saving of
sensorial power is transferred by reverse sympathy from the cutaneous
capillaries and absorbents to those of the stomach and intestines.

Hence weak people should use the cold air of winter as a cold bath; that
is, they should stay in it but a short time at once, but should immerse
themselves in it many times a day.

5. _Catarrhus a frigore cutaneo._ Catarrh from cold skin. This has been
already explained in Class I. 1. 2. 7. and is further described in Sect.
XXXV. 1. 3. In this disease the vessels of the membrane, which lines the
nostrils, are excited into greater action; when those of the skin, with
which they are associated, are excited into less action by the deficiency
of external heat, by reverse sympathy; and though the pain of cold attends
the torpor of the primary link of this association, yet the increased
motions of the membrane of the nostrils are associated with those of the
cutaneous vessels, and not with the pain of them, because no inflammation
follows.

6. _Absorptio cellularis aucta vomitu._ In the act of vomiting the
irritative motions of the stomach are inverted, and of the absorbents,
which open their mouths into it; while the cutaneous, cellular, and
pulmonary absorbents are induced, by reverse sympathy with them, to act
with greater energy. This is seen in cases of anasarca, when long sickness
and vomiting are caused by squills, or antimonial salts, or most of all by
the decoction of digitalis purpurea, foxglove; and Mr. J. Hunter mentions a
case, in which a large bubo, which was just ready to break, was absorbed in
a few days by sickness at sea. Treatise on the Blood, p. 501, which is thus
accounted for; less sensorial power is expended during sickness by the
decreased action of the fibres of the stomach, and of its absorbents; as
shewn in Sect. XXXV. 1. 3. whence an accumulation of it is produced, and
there is in consequence a greater quantity of sensorial power for the
exertion of those motions, which are associated with the absorbents of the
stomach by reverse sympathy.

The reverse sympathy between the lacteal and lymphatic branches of the
absorbent system have been produced by the one branch being less excited to
act, when the other supplies sufficient fluid or nutriment to the
sanguiferous vessels. Thus when the stomach is full, and the supply of
chyle and mucus and water is in sufficient quantity; the pulmonary,
cellular, and cutaneous lymphatics are not excited into action; whence the
urine is pale, and the skin moist, from the defect of absorption on those
surfaces.

7. _Syngultus nephriticus._ When a stone irritates the ureter, and that
even without its being attended with pain or fever, sometimes a chronical
hiccough occurs, and continues for days and weeks, instead of sickness or
vomiting; which are the common symptoms. In this case the motions of the
stomach are decreased by their sympathy with those of the ureter, which are
increased by the stimulus of the stone in it; and the increased motions of
the diaphragm seem to exist in consequence of their association with the
stomach by a second reverse sympathy. This hiccough may nevertheless admit
of another explanation, and be supposed to be a convulsive exertion of the
diaphragm to relieve the disagreeable sensation of the stomach in
consequence of its disordered irritative associations; and in that case it
would belong to Class III. 1. 1. See Class IV. 2. 1. for another example of
tertiary association.

M. M. Venesection. Emetic. Calomel. Cathartic, opium, oil of cinnamon from
two to ten drops. Aerated alcaline water. Peruvian bark.

8. _Febris irritativa._ Irritative fever, described in Class I. 1. 1. 1.
The diseases above explained in this genus are chiefly concerning the
sympathies of the absorbent system, or the alimentary canal, which are not
so much associated with the arterial system, as to throw it into disorder,
when they are slightly deranged; but when any great congeries of
conglomerate glands, which may be considered as the extremities of the
arterial system, are affected with torpor, the whole arterial system and
the heart sympathize with the torpid glands, and act with less energy;
which constitutes the cold fit of fever; which is therefore at first a
decreased action of the associate organ; but as this decrease of action is
only a temporary effect, and an increase of exertion both of the torpid
glands, and of the whole arterial system, soon follows; the hot fit of
irritative fever, or fever with strong pulse, properly belongs to this
class and genus of diseases.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Associate Motions._

GENUS II.

_Catenated with Sensitive Motions._

The primary links of the associated actions of this genus are either
produced or attended by painful or pleasurable sensation. The secondary
links of the first ten species are attended with increased motions without
inflammation, those of the remainder are attended with inflammation. All
inflammations, which do not arise in the part which was previously torpid,
belong to this genus; as the gout, rheumatism, erysipelas. It is probable
many other inflammations may, by future observation, require to be
transplanted into this class.

The circles of sensitive associate motions consist chiefly of the excretory
ducts of the capillaries and of the mouths of the absorbent vessels, which
constitute the membranes; and which have been induced into action at the
same time; or they consist of the terminations of canals; or of parts which
are endued with greater sensibility than those which form the first link of
the association. An instance of the first of those is the sympathy between
the membranes of the alveolar processes of the jaws, and the membranes
above or beneath the muscles about the temples in hemicrania. An instance
of the second is in the sympathy between the excretory duct of the lacrymal
gland, and the nasal duct of the lacrymal sack. And an instance of the
third is the sympathy between the membranes of the liver, and the skin of
the face in the gutta rosea of inebriates.

SPECIES.

1. _Lacrymarum fluxus sympatheticus._ A flow of tears from grief or joy.
When the termination of the duct of the lacrymal sac in the nostrils
becomes affected either by painful or pleasurable sensations, in
consequence of external stimulus, or by its association with agreeable or
disagreeable ideas, the motions of the lacrymal gland are at the same time
exerted with greater energy, and a profusion of tears succeeds by sensitive
association, as explained in Sect. XVI. 8. 2.

In this case there exists a chain of associated actions, the secretion of
the lacrymal gland is increased by whatever stimulates the surface of the
eye, at the same time the increased abundance of tears stimulates the
puncta lacrymalia into greater action; and the fluid thus absorbed
stimulates the lacrymal sac, and its nasal duct in the nose into greater
action. In a contrary direction of this chain of association the present
increase of action is induced. First, the nasal duct of the lacrymal sac is
excited into increased action by some pleasurable or painful idea, as
described in Sect. XVI. 8. 2.   2d. The puncta lacrymalia or other
extremity of the lacrymal sac sympathizes with it (as the two ends of all
other canals sympathize with each other).   3d. With these increased
motions of the puncta lacrymalia those of the excretory duct of the
lacrymal gland are associated from their having so perpetually acted
together. And, lastly, with the increased actions of the excretory duct of
this gland are associated those of the other end of it by their frequently
acting together; in the same manner as the extremities of other canals are
associated; and thus a greater flow of tears is poured into the eye.

When a flow of tears is produced in grief, it is believed to relieve the
violence of it, which is worthy a further inquiry. Painful sensations, when
great, excite the faculty of volition; and the person continues voluntarily
to call up or perform those ideas, which occasion the painful sensation;
that is, the afflicted person becomes so far insane or melancholy; but
tears are produced by the sensorial faculty of association, and shew that
the pain is so far relieved as not to excite the excessive power of
volition, or insanity, and are therefore a sign of the abatement of the
painful state of grief, rather than a cause of that abatement. See Class
III. 1. 2. 10.

2. _Sternutatio a lumine._ Some persons sneeze from looking up at the light
sky in a morning after coming out of a dark bedroom. The olfactory nerves
are brought into too great action by their sympathy with the optic nerves,
or by their respective sympathies with some intervening parts, as probably
with the two extremities of the lacrymal sac; that is, with the puncta
lacrymalia and the nasal duct. See Class II. 1. 1. 3.

3. _Dolor dentium Stridore._ Tooth-edge from grating sounds, and from the
touch of certain substances, and even from imagination alone, is described
and explained in Sect. XVI. 10. The increased actions of the alveolar
vessels or membranes are associated with the ideas, or sensual motions of
the auditory nerves in the first case; and of those of the sense of touch,
in the second case; and by imagination, or ideas exerted of painful
sensation alone, in the last.

4. _Risus sardonicus._ A disagreeable smile attends inflammations of the
diaphragm arising from the associations of the reiterated exertions of that
muscle with those of the lips and cheeks in laughing. See Diaphragmitis,
Class II. 1. 2. 6.

5. _Salivae fluxus cibo viso._ The flow of saliva into the mouths of hungry
animals at the sight or smell of food is seen in dogs standing round a
dinner-table. The increased actions of the salivary glands have been
usually produced by the stimulus of agreeable food on their excretory ducts
during the mastication of it; and with this increased action of their
excretory ducts the other terminations of those glands in the capillary
arteries have been excited into increased action by the mutual association
of the ends of canals; and at the same time the pleasurable ideas, or
sensual motions, of the sense of smell and of sight have accompanied this
increased secretion of saliva. Hence this chain of motions becomes
associated with those visual or olfactory ideas, or with the pleasure,
which produces or attends them.

6. _Tensio mamularum viso puerulo._ The nipples of lactescent women are
liable to become turgid at the sight of their young offspring. The nipple
has generally been rendered turgid by the titillation of the lips or gums
of the child in giving suck; the visible idea of the child has thus
frequently accompanied this pleasurable sensation of parting with the milk,
and turgescence of the tubes, which constitute the nipple. Hence the visual
idea of the child, and the pleasure which attends it, become associated
with those increased arterial actions, which swell the cells of the mamula,
and extend its tubes; which is very similar to the tensio phalli visa
muliere nuda etiam in insomnio.

7. _Tensio penis in hydrophobia._ An erection of the penis occurs in the
hydrophobia, and is a troublesome symptom, as observed by Coelius
Aurelianus, Fothergill, and Vaughn, and would seem to be produced by an
unexplained sympathy between the sensations about the fauces and the penis.
In men the hair grows about both these parts, the voice changes, and the
neck thickens at puberty. In the mumps, when the swellings about the throat
subsides, the testicles are liable to swell. Venereal infection received by
the penis is very liable to affect the throat with ulcers. Violent coughs,
with soreness or rawness about the fauces are often attended with erection
of the penis; which is also said to happen to male animals, that are
hanged; which last circumstance has generally been ascribed to the
obstruction of the circulation of the blood, but is more probably
occasioned by the stimulus of the cord in compressing the throat; since if
it was owing to impeded circulation it ought equally to occur in drowning
animals.

In men the throat becomes so thickened at the time of puberty, that a
measure of this is used to ascertain the payment of a poll-tax on males in
some of the islands of the Mediterranean, which commences at puberty; a
string is wrapped twice round the thinnest part of the neck, the ends of it
are then put into each corner of the mouth; and if, when thus held in the
teeth, it passes readily over the head, the subject is taxable.

It is difficult to point out by what circumstance the sensitive motions of
the penis and of the throat and nose become associated; I can only observe,
that these parts are subjected to greater pleasurable sensations than any
other parts of the body; one being designed to preserve ourselves by the
pleasure attending the smell and deglutition of food, and the other to
ensure the propagation of our species; and may thus gain an association of
their sensitive motion by their being eminently sensible to pleasure. See
Class I. 3. 1. 11. and III. 1. 1. 15. and Sect. XVI. 5.

In the female sex this association between the face, throat, nose, and
pubis does not exist; whence no hair grows on their chins at the time of
puberty, nor does their voices change, or their necks thicken. This happens
probably from there being in them a more exquisite sensitive sympathy
between the pubis and the breasts. Hence their breasts swell at the time of
puberty, and secrete milk at the time of parturition. And in the parotitis,
or mumps, the breasts of women swell, when the tumor of the parotitis
subsides. See Class I. 1. 2. 15. Whence it would appear, that their breasts
possess an intermediate sympathy between the pubis and the throat; as they
are the seat of a passion, which men do not possess, that of suckling
children.

8. _Tenesmus calculosus._ The sphincter of the rectum becomes painful or
inflamed from the association of its sensitive motions with those of the
sphincter of the bladder, when the latter is stimulated into violent pain
or inflammation by a stone.

9. _Polypus narium ex ascaridibus?_ The stimulation of ascarides in the
rectum produces by sensitive sympathy an itching of the nose, as explained
in IV. 2. 2. 6; and in three children I have seen a polypus in the nose,
who were all affected with ascarides; to the perpetual stimulation of
which, and the consequent sensitive association, I was led to ascribe the
inflammation and thickening of the membrane of the nostrils.

10. _Crampus surarum in cholera._ A cramp of the muscles of the legs occurs
in violent diarrhoea, or cholera, and from the use of too much acid diet in
gouty habits. This seems to sympathize with uneasy sensation in the bowels.
See Class III. 1. 1. 14. This association is not easily accounted for, but
is analogous in some degree to the paralysis of the muscles of the arms in
colica saturnina. It would seem, that the muscles of the legs in walking
get a sympathy with the lower parts of the intestines, and those of the
arms in variety of employment obtain a sympathy with the higher parts of
them. See Cholera and Ileus.

11. _Zona ignea nephritica._ Nephritic shingles. The external skin about
the loins and sides of the belly I suppose to have greater mobility in
respect to sensitive association, than the external membrane of the kidney;
and that their motions are by some unknown means thus associated. When the
torpor or beginning inflammation of this membrane ceases, the external skin
becomes inflamed, in its stead, and a kind of herpes, called the shingles,
covers the loins and sides of the belly. See Class II. 1. 5. 9.

12. _Eruptio variolarum._ After the inflammation of the inoculated arm has
spread for a quarter of a lunation, it affects the stomach by reverse
sympathy; that is, the actions of the stomach are associated with those of
the skin; and as much sensorial power is now exerted on the inflamed skin,
the other part of this sensitive association is deprived of its natural
share, and becomes torpid, or inverts its motions. After this torpor of the
stomach has continued a time, and much sensorial power is thus accumulated;
other parts of the skin, which are also associated with it, as that of the
face first, are thrown into partial inflammation; that is, the eruptions of
the small-pox appear on the face.

For that the variolous matter affects the stomach previous to its eruption
on the skin appears from the sickness at the commencement of the fever; and
because, when the morbid motions affect the skin, those of the stomach
cease; as in the gout and erysipelas, mentioned below. The consent between
the stomach and the skin appears in variety of other diseases; and as they
both consist of surfaces, which absorb and secrete a quantity of moisture,
their motions must frequently be produced together or in succession; which
is the foundation of all the sympathies of animal motions, whether of the
irritative, sensitive, or voluntary kinds.

Now as the skin, which covers the face, is exposed to greater variations of
heat and cold than any other part of the body; it probably possesses more
mobility to sensitive associations, not only than the stomach, but than any
other part of the skin; and is thence affected at the eruption of the
small-pox with violent action and consequent inflammation, by the
association of its motions with those of the stomach, a day before the
other parts of the skin; and becomes fuller of pustules, than any other
part of the body. See Class II. 1. 3. 9.

It might be supposed, that the successive swelling of the hands, when the
face subsides, at the height of the small-pox, and of the feet, when the
hands subside, were governed by some unknown associations of those parts of
the system; but these successions of tumor and subsidence more evidently
depend on the times of the eruption of the pustules on those parts, as they
appear a day sooner on the face than on the hands, and a day sooner on the
hands than on the feet, owing to the greater comparative mobility of those
parts of the skin.

13. _Gutta rosea stomatica._ Stomatic red face. On drinking cold water, or
cold milk, when heated with exercise, or on eating cold vegetables, as raw
turnips, many people in harvest-time have been afflicted with what has been
called a surfeit. The stomach becomes painful, with indigestion and
flatulency, and after a few days an eruption of the face appears, and
continues with some relief, but not with entire relief; as both the pimpled
face and indigestion are liable to continue even to old age.

M. M. Venesection. A cathartic with calomel. Then half a grain of opium
twice a day for many weeks. If saturated solution of arsenic three or five
drops twice or thrice a day for a week?

14. _Gutta rosea hepatica._ The rosy drop of the face of some drinking
people is produced like the gout described below, in consequence of an
inflamed liver. In these constitutions the skin of the face being exposed
to greater variation of heat and cold than the membranes of the liver,
possesses more mobility than those hepatic membranes; and hence by whatever
means these membranes are induced to sympathize, when this sensitive
association occurs, the cutaneous vessels of the face run into greater
degrees of those motions, which constitute inflammation, than previously
existed in the membranes of the liver; and then those motions of the liver
cease. See Class II. 1. 4. 6.

An inflammation of the liver so frequently attends the great potation of
vinous spirit, there is reason to suspect, that this viscus itself becomes
inflamed by sensitive association with the stomach; or that, when one
termination of the bile-duct, which enters the duodenum is stimulated
violently, the other end may become inflamed by sensitive association.

15. _Podagra._ The gout, except when it affects the liver or stomach, seems
always to be a secondary disease, and, like the rheumatism and erysipelas
mentioned below, begins with the torpor of some distant part of the system.

The most frequent primary seat of the gout I suppose to be the liver, which
is probably affected with torpor not only previous to the annual paroxysms
of the gout, but to every change of its situation from one limb to another.
The reasons, which induce me to suspect the liver to be first affected, are
not only because the jaundice sometimes attends the commencement of gout,
as described in Sect. XXIV. 2. 8. but a pain also over the pit of the
stomach, which I suppose to be of the termination of the bile-duct in the
duodenum, and which is erroneously supposed to be the gout of the stomach,
with indigestion and flatulency, generally attends the commencement of the
inflammation of each limb. See Arthritis ventriculi, Class I. 2. 4. 6. In
the two cases, which I saw, of the gout in the limbs being preceded by
jaundice, there was a cold shivering fit attended the inflammation of the
foot, and a pain at the pit of the stomach; which ceased along with the
jaundice, as soon as the foot became inflamed. This led me to suspect, that
there was a torpor of the liver, and perhaps of the foot also, but
nevertheless the liver might also in this case be previously inflamed, as
observed in Sect. XXIV. 2. 8.

Now as the membranes of the joints of the feet suffer greater variations of
heat and cold than the membranes of the liver, and are more habituated to
extension and contraction than other parts of the skin in their vicinity; I
suppose them to be more mobile, that is, more liable to run into extremes
of exertion or quiescence; and are thence more susceptible of inflammation,
than such parts as are less exposed to great variations of heat and cold,
or of extension and contraction.

When a stone presses into the sphincter of the bladder, the glans penis is
affected with greater pain by sympathy, owing to its greater sensibility,
than the sphincter of the bladder; and when this pain commences, that of
the sphincter ceases, when the stone is not too large, or pushed too far
into the urethra. Thus when the membrane, which covers the ball of the
great toe, sympathizes with some membranous part of a torpid or inflamed
liver; this membrane of the toe falls into that kind of action, whether of
torpor or inflammation, with greater energy, than those actions excited in
the diseased liver; and when this new torpor or inflammation commences,
that with which it sympathises ceases; which I believe to be a general law
of associated inflammations.

The paroxysms of the gout would seem to be catenated with solar influence,
both in respect to their larger annual periods, and to their diurnal
periods--See Sect. XXXVI. 3. 6.--as the former occur about the same season
of the year, and the latter commence about an hour before sun-rise;
nevertheless the annual periods may depend on the succession of great
vicissitudes of cold and heat, and the diurnal ones on our increased
sensibility to internal sensations during sleep, as in the fits of asthma,
and of some epilepsies. See Sect. XVIII. 15.

In respect to the pre-remote cause or disposition to the gout, there can be
no doubt of its individually arising from the potation of fermented or
spirituous liquors in this country; whether opium produces the same effect
in the countries, where it is in daily use, I have never been well
informed. See Sect. XXI. 10, where this subject is treated of; to which I
have to add, that I have seen some, and heard of others, who have moderated
their paroxysms of gout, by diminishing the quantity of fermented liquors,
which they had been accustomed to; and others who, by a total abstinence
from fermented liquors, have entirely freed themselves from this
excruciating malady; which otherwise grows with our years, and curtails or
renders miserable the latter half, or third, of the lives of those, who are
subject to it. The remote cause is whatever induces temporary torpor or
weakness of the system; and the proximate cause is the inirritability, or
defective irritation, of some part of the system; whence torpor and
consequent inflammation. The great Sydenham saw the beneficial effects of
the abstinence from fermented liquors in preventing the gout, and adds, "if
an empiric could give small-beer only to gouty patients as a nostrum, and
persuade them not to drink any other spirituous fluids, that he might
rescue thousands from this disease, and acquire a fortune for his
ingenuity." Yet it is to be lamented, that this accurate observer of
diseases had not resolution to practise his own prescription, and thus to
have set an example to the world of the truth of his doctrine; but, on the
contrary, recommends Madeira, the strongest wine in common use, to be taken
in the fits of the gout, to the detriment of thousands; and is said himself
to have perished a martyr to the disease, which he knew how to subdue!

As example has more forcible effect: than simple assertion, I shall now
concisely relate my own case, and that of one of my most respected friends.
E. D. was about forty years of age, when he was first seized with a fit of
the gout. The ball of his right great toe was very painful, and much
swelled and inflamed, which continued five or six days in spite of
venesection, a brisk cathartic with ten grains of calomel, and the
application of cold air and cold water to his foot. He then ceased to drink
ale or wine alone; confining himself to small beer, or wine diluted with
about thrice its quantity of water. In about a year he suffered two other
fits of the gout, in less violent degree. He then totally abstained from
all fermented liquors, not even tasting small-beer, or a drop of any kind
of wine; but eat plentifully of flesh-meat, and all kinds of vegetables,
and fruit, using for his drink at meals chiefly water alone, or lemonade,
or cream and water; with tea and coffee between them as usual.

By this abstinence from fermented liquors he kept quite free from the gout
for fifteen or sixteen years; and then began to take small-beer mixed with
water occasionally, or wine and water, or perry and water, or cyder and
water; by which indulgence after a few months he had again a paroxysm of
gout, which continued about three days in the ball of his toe; which
occasioned him to return to his habit of drinking water, and has now for
above twenty years kept in perpetual health, except accidental colds from
the changes of the seasons. Before he abstained from fermented or
spirituous liquors, he was frequently subject to the piles, and to the
gravel, neither of which he has since experienced.

In the following case the gout was established by longer habit and greater
violence, and therefore required more cautious treatment. The Rev. R. W.
was seized with the gout about the age of thirty-two, which increased so
rapidly that at the age of forty-one he was confined to his room seven
months in that year; he had some degree of lameness during the intervals,
with chalky swellings of his heels and elbows. As the disease had continued
so long and so violently, and the powers of his digestion were somewhat
weakened, he was advised not entirely to leave off all fermented liquors;
and as small-beer is of such various strength, he was advised to drink
exactly two wine glasses, about four ounces, of wine mixed with three or
four times its quantity of water, with or without lemon and sugar, for his
daily potation at dinner, and no other fermented liquor of any kind; and
was advised to eat flesh-meat with any kind of boiled vegetables, and
fruit, with or without spice. He has now scrupulously continued this
regimen for above five years, and has had an annual moderate gouty paroxysm
of a few weeks, instead of the confinement of so many months, with great
health and good spirits during the intervals.

The following is a more particular account of the history of this case;
being part of a letter which Mr. Wilmot wrote on that subject at my
entreaty.

    "I entered into the army with an excellent constitution at the age of
    fifteen. The corps I served in was distinguished by its regularity,
    that is, the regular allowance of the mess was only one pint of wine
    per man each day; unless we had company to dine with us; then, as was
    the general custom of the time, the bottle circulated without limit.
    This mode of living, though by no means considered as excess for men,
    was certainly too great for a youth of my age. This style of living I
    continued, when with the regiment, till the latter end of the year
    1769, when I had the misfortune to sleep in a damp bed at Sheffield on
    a journey to York, but arrived there before I felt the ill effects of
    it. I was then seized with a violent inflammatory rheumatism with great
    inflammation of my eyes, and was attended by Dr. Dealtry; so violent
    was the disorder, that I was bled for it eight times in less than a
    fortnight; and was three months, before I could consider my health
    perfectly re-established. Dr. Dealtry told me, that I should be subject
    to similar attacks for many years; and that he had no doubt, from the
    tendency he found in my habit to inflammation, that, when I was farther
    advanced in life, I should change that complaint for the gout. He
    predicted truly; for the three succeeding winters I had the same
    complaint, but not so violently; the fourth winter I escaped, and
    imputed my escape to the continuance of cold bathing during the whole
    of that winter; after that I never escaped it, till I had a regular and
    severe fit of the gout: after the first attack of rheumatic fever I was
    more abstemious in my manner of living, though when in company I never
    subjected myself to any great restraint. In the year 1774 I had quitted
    the army, and being in a more retired situation, was seldom led into
    any excess; in 1776 and 1777 I was in the habit of drinking a good deal
    of wine very frequently, though not constantly. After that period till
    the year 1781, I drank a larger quantity of wine regularly, but very
    seldom to any degree of intoxication. I lived much at that time in the
    society of some gentlemen, who usually drank nearly a bottle of wine
    daily after dinner. I must here however observe, that at no part of my
    life was I accustomed to drink wine in an evening, and very seldom
    drank any thing more than a single half-pint glass of some sort of
    spirits diluted with much water. Till the year 1781 I had always been
    accustomed to use very violent and continued exercise on horseback; in
    the winter months I pursued all field diversions, and in the summer
    months I rode frequent and long journeys; and with this exercise was
    liable to perspire to great excess; besides which I was subject to very
    profuse night-sweats, and had frequently boils break out all over me,
    especially in the spring and autumn; for which I took no medicine,
    except a little flour of sulphur with cream of tartar in honey.

    "You will observe I bring every thing down to the date of 1781. In the
    month of October in that year, when I was just entered into the
    thirty-second year of my age, I had the first attack of gout; that fit
    was very severe, and of many weeks continuance. I now determined upon a
    more abstemious method of living, in respect to wine; and indeed the
    society, in which I had before been accustomed to live, being
    considerably changed, I had less frequent temptations to excess. From
    this time I enjoyed the most perfect good state of health till August
    1784, when I had my second attack of gout. I never perfectly recovered
    from this attack through the succeeding winter, and in March 1785 was
    advised to try the Bath waters, and drank them under the direction of
    one of the faculty of that place. I was there soon seized with a fever,
    and a slight attack of gout in one knee. I should observe, that when I
    set out from home, I was in a weak and low state, and unequal to much
    fatigue; as appeared by my having a fainting fit one day on the road,
    after having travelled only about fifty miles; in the course of the
    summer I had two or three more slight attacks of gout of less
    consequence, till the month of October; when I was afflicted with it
    all over me in such a manner, as to be without the possibility of the
    least degree of removal for some days; and was about two months without
    being able to get into the air. This was the severest attack I had then
    experienced; though I have since had several equally severe. In the
    course of this summer I had a fall with my horse; and soon after it,
    having discovered an enlargement on one elbow, I concluded I had hurt
    it at that time; but in the course of this last attack having a similar
    enlargement on the other elbow, I found my mistake, and that they were
    collections of gouty matter; these increased to the size of pullet's
    eggs, and continue in that state. I had soon after similar enlargements
    on my heels; the right heel being severely bruised, I was under the
    necessity of having it lanced, and a large quantity of chalky matter
    was discharged from it; and have since that time frequently had chalky
    matter taken from it, and sometimes small bits of apparently perfect
    chalk. My right hand soon was afflicted in the same way, and I have
    scarcely a joint on those fingers now in a natural state. My left hand
    has escaped tolerably well. After this last attack (viz. October 1785),
    I had two or three slight attacks before the month of June 1787, when I
    had a very severe intermittent fever; from that time I continued very
    well till the latter end of the year, when I began to feel the gout
    about me very much, but was not confined by it. I was in this state
    advised to try what is called the American Recipe (gum guaiacum and
    nitre dissolved in spirits); it had apparently been of essential
    service to a friend of mine, who from the inability to walk a mile for
    some years, was believed to be restored by the use of this medicine to
    a good state of health, so as to walk ten miles a day. In addition to
    this medicine I drank, as my common beverage with my meals, spruce
    beer. I had so high an opinion of this medicine in the gout, and of
    spruce beer as an antiscorbutic, that I contemplated with much
    satisfaction, and with very little doubt, the perfect restoration of my
    health and strength; but I was miserably deceived; for in September
    1788 I was seized with the gout in a degree that none but arthritics,
    and indeed but few of those, can easily conceive. From this time till
    August 1789 I scarcely ever passed a comfortable day; seven months of
    this time I had been confined, my health seemed much impaired, my
    strength was diminished, and my appetite almost gone. In this state my
    friends pressed me to consult you. I was unwilling for some time to do
    it, as I had lost all hope of relief; however, when I had determined to
    apply to you, I likewise determined to give up every prejudice of my
    own respecting my case, and to adhere most strictly to your advice. On
    the 20th of August 1789 I consulted you, on the 25th I entered upon the
    regimen, which you prescribed, and which was as follows.

    "Drink no malt liquor on any account. Let your beverage at dinner
    consist of two glasses of wine diluted with three half-pints of water.
    On no account drink any more wine or spirituous liquors in the course
    of the day; but, if you want more liquid, take cream and water, or milk
    and water, or lemonade, with tea, coffee, chocolate. Use the warm bath
    twice a week for half an hour before going to bed, at the degree of
    heat which is most grateful to your sensations. Eat meat constantly at
    dinner, and with it any kind of tender vegetables you please. Keep the
    body open by two evacuations daily, if possible without medicine, if
    not take the size of a nutmeg of lenitive electuary occasionally, or
    five grains of rhubarb every night. Use no violent exercise, which may
    subject yourself to sudden changes from heat to cold; but as much
    moderate exercise as may be, without being much fatigued or starved
    with cold. Take some supper every night; a small quantity of animal
    food is preferred; but if your palate refuses this, take vegetable
    food, as fruit pie, or milk; something should be eaten, as it might be
    injurious to you to fast too long." To the whole of this I adhered most
    scrupulously, and soon found my appetite improve, and with it my
    strength and spirits. I had in December a fevere attack, and two or
    three slight ones in the course of twelve months; but the improvement
    in the general state of my health induced me to persevere. On the 18th
    of August 1790 I had another severe attack, but it went off easier than
    before, and I soon recovered sufficiently to go to Buxton, which you
    advised me to, and from which I reaped great benefit; nevertheless on
    the 29th of December I had a slight attack in comparison of some that I
    had before experienced, and from that time I was free from gout, and
    enjoyed my health perfectly well till the fourth week in October 1791;
    from that till the third week in October 1792; from that till the third
    week in October 1793; and from that till June 1794. From what happened
    for the last three years I dreaded the month of October; but I escaped
    then, and have enjoyed my health most perfectly ever since till within
    the last week, that I have had a slight attack in one knee, which is
    nearly gone, without any symptom to lead me to suppose that it will go
    further.

    "I adhered to your advice most scrupulously for the first year; and in
    regard to the not drinking malt liquor, and taking only the two glasses
    of wine with water, I have never deviated but two days; and then the
    first day I only drank one glass of ale and one glass of Champaigne; on
    the second only one glass of Champaigne. With regard to the warm bath,
    I only use it now when I have gouty symptoms upon me, and in such
    situations I find it of infinite service; and in other respects I
    continue to live according to your direction.

    "Many persons have laughed at the idea of my perseverance in a system,
    which has not been able to _cure_ the gout after five years trial; but
    such persons are either ignorant of what I before suffered, or totally
    unacquainted with the nature of the disorder. Under the blessing of
    Providence, by an adherence to your advice, I am reaping all the
    benefit you flattered me I might expect from it, viz. my attacks less
    frequent, my sufferings less acute, and an improvement in the general
    state of my health.

    "I have been particular in this account of myself at your request, and
    am, Sir, &c.

      MORLEY, near DERBY,
      February 10th, 1795.
      ROBERT WILMOT."

There are situations nevertheless in which a paroxysm of gout has been
believed to be desirable, as relieving the patient from other disagreeable
diseases, or debilities, or sensations. Thus when the liver is torpid, a
perpetual uneasiness and depression of spirits occur; which a fit of gout
is supposed to cure by a metastasis of the disease. Others have acquired
epileptic fits, probably from the disagreeable sensation of a chronically
inflamed liver; which they suppose the pain and inflammation of gout would
