"Ready, present, then," cried Peterkin, with a recklessness of manner
that surprised me.

We threw forward our rifles, and discharged them simultaneously.

The effect was tremendous.  The whole band--men, women, and children--
uttered an overwhelming shriek, and turning round, fled in mad confusion
from the spot.  Some of the warriors turned, however, ere they had gone
far, and sent a shower of spears at us, one of which went close past my
cheek.

"We have acted rashly, I fear," said I, as we each sought shelter behind
a tree.

No doubt the savages construed this act of ours into an admission that
we did not consider ourselves invulnerable, and plucked up courage
accordingly, for they began again to advance towards us, though with
hesitation.  I now saw that we should be compelled to fight for our
lives, and deeply regretted my folly in advising Peterkin to fire over
their heads; but happily, before blood was drawn on either side,
Makarooroo and Jack came running towards us.  The former shouted an
explanation of who and what we were to our late enemies, and in less
than ten minutes we were mingling together in the most amicable manner.

We found that these poor creatures were starving, having failed to
procure any provisions for some time past, and they were then on their
way to another region in search of game.  We gave them as much of our
provisions as we could spare, besides a little tobacco, which afforded
them inexpressible delight.  Then rubbing noses with the chief, we
parted and went on our respective ways.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

HOW WE MET WITH OUR FIRST GORILLA, AND HOW WE SERVED HIM.

"It never rains but it pours," is a true proverb.  I have often noticed,
in the course of my observations on sublunary affairs, that events
seldom come singly.  I have often gone out fishing for trout in the
rivers of my native land, day after day, and caught nothing, while at
other times I have, day after day, returned home with my basket full.

As it was in England, so I found it in Africa.  For many days after our
arrival in the gorilla country, we wandered about without seeing a
single creature of any kind.  Lions, we ascertained, were never found in
those regions, and we were told that this was in consequence of their
having been beaten off the field by gorillas.  But at last, after we had
all, severally and collectively, given way to despair, we came upon the
tracks of a gorilla, and from that hour we were kept constantly on the
_qui vive_, and in the course of the few weeks we spent in that part of
the country, we "bagged," as Peterkin expressed it, "no end of
gorillas"--great and small, young and old.

I will never forget the powerful sensations of excitement and anxiety
that filled our breasts when we came on the first gorilla footprint.  We
felt as no doubt Robinson Crusoe did when he discovered the footprint of
a savage in the sand.  Here at last was the indubitable evidence of the
existence and presence of the terrible animal we had come so far to see.
Here was the footstep of that creature about which we had heard so many
wonderful stories, whose existence the civilised world had, up to within
a very short time back, doubted exceedingly, and in regard to which,
even now, we knew comparatively very little.

Makarooroo assured us that he had hunted this animal some years ago, and
had seen one or two at a distance, though he had never killed one, and
stated most emphatically that the footprint before us, which happened to
be in a soft sandy spot, was undoubtedly caused by the foot of a
gorilla.

Being satisfied on this head, we four sat down in a circle round the
footprint to examine it, while our men stood round about us, looking on
with deep interest expressed in their dark faces.

"At last!" said I, carefully brushing away some twigs that partly
covered the impression.

"Ay, at last!" echoed Jack, while his eyes sparkled with enthusiasm.

"Ay," observed Peterkin, "and a pretty big _last_ he must require, too.
I shouldn't like to be his shoemaker.  What a thumb, or a toe.  One
doesn't know very well which to call it."

"I wonder if it's old?" said I.

"As old as the hills," replied Peterkin; "at least 50 I would judge from
its size."

"You mistake me.  I mean that I wonder whether the footprint is old, or
if it has been made recently."

"Him's quite noo," interposed our guide.

"How d'ye know, Mak?"

"'Cause me see."

"Ay; but what do you see that enables you to form such an opinion?"

"O Ralph, how can you expect a nigger to understand such a sentence as
that?" said Jack, as he turned to Mak and added, "What do you see?"

"Me see one leetle stick brok in middel.  If you look to him you see him
white and clean.  If hims was old, hims would be mark wid rain and
dirt."

"There!" cried Peterkin, giving me a poke in the side, "see what it is
to be a minute student of the small things in nature.  Make a note of
it, Ralph."

I did make a note of it mentally on the spot, and then proposed that we
should go in search of the gorilla without further delay.

We were in the midst of a dark gloomy wood in the neighbourhood of a
range of mountains whose blue serrated peaks rose up into the clouds.
Their sides were partly clothed with wood.  We were travelling--not
hunting--at the time we fell in with the track above referred to, so we
immediately ordered the men to encamp where they were, while we should
go after the gorilla, accompanied only by Mak, whose nerves we could
depend on.

Shouldering our trusty rifles, and buckling tight the belts of our heavy
hunting-knives, we sallied forth after the manner of American Indians,
in single file, keeping, as may well be supposed, a sharp lookout as we
went along.  The fact was that long delay, frequent disappointment, and
now the near prospect of success, conspired together to fill us with a
species of nervous excitement that caused us to start at every sound.

The woods here were pretty thick, but they varied in their character so
frequently that we were at one time pushing slowly among dense, almost
impenetrable underwood, at another walking briskly over small plains
which were covered in many places with large boulders.  It was
altogether a gloomy, savage-looking country, and seemed to me well
suited to be the home of so dreadful an animal.  There were few animals
to be seen here.  Even birds were scarce, and a few chattering monkeys
were almost the only creatures that broke the monotonous silence and
solitude around us.

"What a dismal place!" said Peterkin, in a low tone.  "I feel as if we
had got to the fag-end of the world, as if we were about plunging into
ancient chaos."

"It is, indeed," I replied, "a most dreary region.  I think that the
gorillas will not be disturbed by many hunters with white faces."

"There's no saying," interposed Jack.  "I should not wonder, now, if
you, Ralph, were to go home and write a book detailing our adventures in
these parts, that at least half the sportsmen of England would be in
Africa next year, and the race of gorillas would probably become
extinct."

"If the sportsmen don't come out until I write a book about them, I fear
the gorillas will remain undisturbed for all time to come."

At that time, reader, I was not aware of the extreme difficulty that
travellers experience in resisting the urgent entreaties of admiring and
too partial friends!

Presently we came to a part of the forest where the underwood became so
dense that we could scarcely make our way through it at all, and here we
began for the first time to have some clearer conception of the immense
power of the creature we were in pursuit of; for in order to clear its
way it had torn down great branches of the trees, and in one or two
places had seized young trees as thick as a man's arm, and snapped them
in two as one would snap a walking-cane.

Following the track with the utmost care for several miles, we at length
came to a place where several huge rocks lay among the trees.  Here,
while we were walking along in silence, Makarooroo made a peculiar noise
with his tongue, which we knew meant that he had discovered something
worthy of special attention, so we came to an abrupt pause and looked at
him.

"What is it, Mak?" inquired Jack.

The guide put his finger on his mouth to impose silence, and stood in a
listening attitude with his eyes cast upon the ground, his nostrils
distended, and every muscle of his dusky frame rigid, as if he were a
statue of black marble.  We also listened attentively, and presently
heard a sound as of the breaking of twigs and branches.

"Dat am be gorilla," said the guide, in a low whisper.

We exchanged looks of eager satisfaction.

"How shall we proceed, Mak?" inquired Jack.

"We mus' go bery slow, dis way," said the guide, imitating the process
of walking with extreme caution.  "No break leetle stick.  If you break
leetle stick hims go right away."

Promising Mak that we would attend to his injunctions most carefully, we
desired him to lead the way, and in a few minutes after came so near to
where the sound of breaking sticks was going on that we all halted,
fearing that we should scare the animal away before we could get a sight
of it amongst the dense underwood.

"What can he be doing?" said I to the guide, as we stood looking at each
other for a few seconds uncertain how to act.

"Him's breakin' down branches for git at him's feed, s'pose."

"Do you see that?" whispered Peterkin, as he pointed to an open space
among the bushes.  "Isn't that a bit o' the hairy brute?"

"It looks like it," replied Jack eagerly.

"Cluck!" ejaculated Makarooroo, making a peculiar noise with his tongue.
"Dat him.  Blaze away!"

"But it may not be a mortal part," objected Peterkin.  "He might escape
if only wounded."

"Nebber fear.  Hims come at us if hims be wound.  Only we mus' be ready
for him."

"All ready," said Jack, cocking both barrels of his rifle.--"Now,
Peterkin, a good aim.  If he comes here he shall get a quietus."

All this was said in the lowest possible whispers.  Peterkin took a
steady aim at the part of the creature that was visible, and fired.

I have gone through many wild adventures since then.  I have heard the
roar of the lion and the tiger in all circumstances, and the laugh of
the hyena, besides many other hideous sounds, but I never in all my life
listened to anything that in any degree approached in thundering
ferocity the appalling roar that burst upon our ears immediately after
that shot was fired.  I can compare it to nothing, for nothing I ever
heard was like it.  If the reader can conceive a human fiend endued with
a voice far louder than that of the lion, yet retaining a little of the
intonation both of the man's voice and of what we should suppose a
fiend's voice to be, he may form some slight idea of what that roar was.
It is impossible to describe it.  Perhaps Mak's expression in regard to
it is the most emphatic and truthful: it was absolutely "_horriboble_!"
Every one has heard a sturdy, well-grown little boy, when being
thrashed, howling at the very top of his bent.  If one can conceive of a
full-grown male giant twenty feet high pouring forth his whole soul and
voice with similarly unrestrained fervour, he may approximate to a
notion of it.

And it was not uttered once or twice, but again and again, until the
whole woods trembled with it, and we felt as if our ears could not
endure more of it without the tympanums being burst.

For several moments we stood motionless with our guns ready, expecting
an immediate attack, and gazing with awe, not unmingled--at least on my
part--with fear, at the turmoil of leaves and twigs and broken branches
that was going on round the spot where the monster had been wounded.

"Come," cried Jack at length, losing patience and springing forward; "if
he won't attack us we must attack him."

We followed close on his heels, and next moment emerged upon a small and
comparatively open space, in the midst of which we found the gorilla
seated on the ground, tearing up the earth with its hands, grinning
horribly and beating its chest, which sent forth a loud hollow sound as
if it were a large drum.  We saw at once that both its thighs had been
broken by Peterkin's shot.

Of all the hideous creatures I had ever seen or heard of, none came up
in the least degree to this.  Apart altogether from its gigantic size,
this monster was calculated to strike terror into the hearts of
beholders simply by the expression of its visage, which was quite
satanic.  I could scarcely persuade myself that I was awake.  It seemed
as if I were gazing on one of those hideous creatures one beholds when
oppressed with nightmare.

But we had little time to indulge in contemplation, for the instant the
brute beheld us it renewed its terrible roar, and attempted to spring
up; but both its legs at once gave way, and it fell with a passionate
growl, biting the earth, and twisting and tearing bunches of twigs and
leaves in its fury.  Suddenly it rushed upon us rapidly by means of its
fore legs or arms.

"Look out, Jack!" we cried in alarm.

Jack stood like a rock and deliberately levelled his rifle.  Even at
this moment of intense excitement I could not help marvelling at the
diminutive appearance of my friend when contrasted with the gorilla.  In
height, indeed, he was of course superior, and would have been so had
the gorilla been able to stand erect, but his breadth of shoulder and
chest, and his length and size of arm, were strikingly inferior.  Just
as the monster approached to within three yards of him, Jack sent a ball
into its chest, and the king of the African woods fell dead at our feet!

It is impossible to convey in words an idea of the gush of mingled
feelings that filled our breasts as we stood beside and gazed at the
huge carcass of our victim.  Pity at first predominated in my heart,
then I felt like an accomplice to a murder, and then an exulting
sensation of joy at having obtained a specimen of one of the rarest
animals in the world overwhelmed every other feeling.

The size of this animal--and we measured him very carefully--was as
follows:--

Height, 5 feet 6 inches; girth of the chest, 4 feet 2 inches; spread of
its arms, 7 feet 2 inches.  Perhaps the most extraordinary measurement
was that of the great thumb of its hind foot, which was 5 and a half
inches in circumference.  When I looked at this and at the great bunches
of hard muscles which composed its brawny chest and arms, I could almost
believe in the stories told by the natives of the tremendous feats of
strength performed by the gorilla.  The body of this brute was covered
with grey hair, but the chest was bare and covered with tough skin, and
its face was intensely black.  I shuddered as I looked upon it, for
there was something terribly human-like about it, despite the
brutishness of its aspect.

"Now, I'll tell you what we shall do," said Jack, after we had completed
our examination of the gorilla.  "We will encamp where we are for the
night, and send Makarooroo back to bring our fellows up with the packs,
so that you, Ralph, will be able to begin the work of skinning and
cleaning the bones at once.  What say you?"

"Agreed, with all my heart," I replied.

"Well, then," observed Peterkin, "here goes for a fire, to begin with,
and then for victuals to continue with.  By the way, what say you to a
gorilla steak?  I'm told the niggers eat him.--Don't they, Mak?"

"Yis, massa, dey does.  More dan dat, de niggers in dis part ob country
eat mans."

"Eat mans!" echoed Peterkin in horror.

"Yis, eat mans, and womins, an' childerdens."

"Oh, the brutes!  But I don't believe you, Mak.  What are the villains
called?"

"Well, it not be easy for say what dem be called.  Miss'naries calls dem
canibobbles."

"Ho!" shouted Peterkin, "canibobbles? eh! well done.  Mak, I must get
you to write a new dictionary; I think it would pay!"

"It won't pay to go on talking like this, though," observed Jack.
"Come, hand me the axe.  I'll fell this tree while you strike a light,
Peterkin.--Be off with you, Mak.--As for Ralph, we must leave him to his
note-book; I see there is no chance of getting him away from his beloved
gorilla till he has torn its skin from its flesh, and its flesh from its
bones."

Jack was right.  I had now several long hours' work before me, which I
knew could not be delayed, and to which I applied myself forthwith most
eagerly, while my comrades lit the fire and prepared the camp, and
Makarooroo set off on his return journey to bring up the remainder of
our party.
