say a natural deformity, very rarely met with.  Conseil was just
dragging, and his net came up filled with divers ordinary shells, when,
all at once, he saw me plunge my arm quickly into the net, to draw out
a shell, and heard me utter a cry.

"What is the matter, sir?" he asked in surprise.  "Has master been
bitten?"

"No, my boy; but I would willingly have given a finger for my
discovery."

"What discovery?"

"This shell," I said, holding up the object of my triumph.

"It is simply an olive porphyry, genus olive, order of the
pectinibranchidae, class of gasteropods, sub-class mollusca."

"Yes, Conseil; but, instead of being rolled from right to left, this
olive turns from left to right."

"Is it possible?"

"Yes, my boy; it is a left shell."

Shells are all right-handed, with rare exceptions; and, when by chance
their spiral is left, amateurs are ready to pay their weight in gold.

Conseil and I were absorbed in the contemplation of our treasure, and I
was promising myself to enrich the museum with it, when a stone
unfortunately thrown by a native struck against, and broke, the
precious object in Conseil's hand.  I uttered a cry of despair!
Conseil took up his gun, and aimed at a savage who was poising his
sling at ten yards from him.  I would have stopped him, but his blow
took effect and broke the bracelet of amulets which encircled the arm
of the savage.

"Conseil!" cried I. "Conseil!"

"Well, sir! do you not see that the cannibal has commenced the attack?"

"A shell is not worth the life of a man," said I.

"Ah! the scoundrel!" cried Conseil; "I would rather he had broken my
shoulder!"

Conseil was in earnest, but I was not of his opinion.  However, the
situation had changed some minutes before, and we had not perceived.  A
score of canoes surrounded the Nautilus.  These canoes, scooped out of
the trunk of a tree, long, narrow, well adapted for speed, were
balanced by means of a long bamboo pole, which floated on the water.
They were managed by skilful, half-naked paddlers, and I watched their
advance with some uneasiness.  It was evident that these Papuans had
already had dealings with the Europeans and knew their ships.  But this
long iron cylinder anchored in the bay, without masts or chimneys, what
could they think of it?  Nothing good, for at first they kept at a
respectful distance.  However, seeing it motionless, by degrees they
took courage, and sought to familiarise themselves with it.  Now this
familiarity was precisely what it was necessary to avoid.  Our arms,
which were noiseless, could only produce a moderate effect on the
savages, who have little respect for aught but blustering things.  The
thunderbolt without the reverberations of thunder would frighten man
but little, though the danger lies in the lightning, not in the noise.

At this moment the canoes approached the Nautilus, and a shower of
arrows alighted on her.

I went down to the saloon, but found no one there.  I ventured to knock
at the door that opened into the Captain's room.  "Come in," was the
answer.

I entered, and found Captain Nemo deep in algebraical calculations of
_x_ and other quantities.

"I am disturbing you," said I, for courtesy's sake.

"That is true, M. Aronnax," replied the Captain; "but I think you have
serious reasons for wishing to see me?"

"Very grave ones; the natives are surrounding us in their canoes, and
in a few minutes we shall certainly be attacked by many hundreds of
savages."

"Ah!" said Captain Nemo quietly, "they are come with their canoes?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, sir, we must close the hatches."

"Exactly, and I came to say to you----"

"Nothing can be more simple," said Captain Nemo.  And, pressing an
electric button, he transmitted an order to the ship's crew.

"It is all done, sir," said he, after some moments.  "The pinnace is
ready, and the hatches are closed.  You do not fear, I imagine, that
these gentlemen could stave in walls on which the balls of your frigate
have had no effect?"

"No, Captain; but a danger still exists."

"What is that, sir?"

"It is that to-morrow, at about this hour, we must open the hatches to
renew the air of the Nautilus.  Now, if, at this moment, the Papuans
should occupy the platform, I do not see how you could prevent them
from entering."

"Then, sir, you suppose that they will board us?"

"I am certain of it."

"Well, sir, let them come.  I see no reason for hindering them.  After
all, these Papuans are poor creatures, and I am unwilling that my visit
to the island should cost the life of a single one of these wretches."

Upon that I was going away; But Captain Nemo detained me, and asked me
to sit down by him.  He questioned me with interest about our
excursions on shore, and our hunting; and seemed not to understand the
craving for meat that possessed the Canadian.  Then the conversation
turned on various subjects, and, without being more communicative,
Captain Nemo showed himself more amiable.

Amongst other things, we happened to speak of the situation of the
Nautilus, run aground in exactly the same spot in this strait where
Dumont d'Urville was nearly lost.  Apropos of this:

"This D'Urville was one of your great sailors," said the Captain to me,
"one of your most intelligent navigators.  He is the Captain Cook of
you Frenchmen.  Unfortunate man of science, after having braved the
icebergs of the South Pole, the coral reefs of Oceania, the cannibals
of the Pacific, to perish miserably in a railway train!  If this
energetic man could have reflected during the last moments of his life,
what must have been uppermost in his last thoughts, do you suppose?"

So speaking, Captain Nemo seemed moved, and his emotion gave me a
better opinion of him.  Then, chart in hand, we reviewed the travels of
the French navigator, his voyages of circumnavigation, his double
detention at the South Pole, which led to the discovery of Adelaide and
Louis Philippe, and fixing the hydrographical bearings of the principal
islands of Oceania.

"That which your D'Urville has done on the surface of the seas," said
Captain Nemo, "that have I done under them, and more easily, more
completely than he.  The Astrolabe and the Zelee, incessantly tossed
about by the hurricane, could not be worth the Nautilus, quiet
repository of labour that she is, truly motionless in the midst of the
waters.

"To-morrow," added the Captain, rising, "to-morrow, at twenty minutes
to three p.m., the Nautilus shall float, and leave the Strait of Torres
uninjured."

Having curtly pronounced these words, Captain Nemo bowed slightly.
This was to dismiss me, and I went back to my room.

There I found Conseil, who wished to know the result of my interview
with the Captain.

"My boy," said I, "when I feigned to believe that his Nautilus was
threatened by the natives of Papua, the Captain answered me very
sarcastically.  I have but one thing to say to you: Have confidence in
him, and go to sleep in peace."

"Have you no need of my services, sir?"

"No, my friend.  What is Ned Land doing?"

"If you will excuse me, sir," answered Conseil, "friend Ned is busy
making a kangaroo-pie which will be a marvel."

I remained alone and went to bed, but slept indifferently.  I heard the
noise of the savages, who stamped on the platform, uttering deafening
cries.  The night passed thus, without disturbing the ordinary repose
of the crew.  The presence of these cannibals affected them no more
than the soldiers of a masked battery care for the ants that crawl over
its front.

At six in the morning I rose.  The hatches had not been opened.  The
inner air was not renewed, but the reservoirs, filled ready for any
emergency, were now resorted to, and discharged several cubic feet of
oxygen into the exhausted atmosphere of the Nautilus.

I worked in my room till noon, without having seen Captain Nemo, even
for an instant.  On board no preparations for departure were visible.

I waited still some time, then went into the large saloon.  The clock
marked half-past two.  In ten minutes it would be high-tide: and, if
Captain Nemo had not made a rash promise, the Nautilus would be
immediately detached.  If not, many months would pass ere she could
leave her bed of coral.

However, some warning vibrations began to be felt in the vessel.  I
heard the keel grating against the rough calcareous bottom of the coral
reef.

At five-and-twenty minutes to three, Captain Nemo appeared in the
saloon.

"We are going to start," said he.

"Ah!" replied I.

"I have given the order to open the hatches."

"And the Papuans?"

"The Papuans?" answered Captain Nemo, slightly shrugging his shoulders.

"Will they not come inside the Nautilus?"

"How?"

"Only by leaping over the hatches you have opened."

"M. Aronnax," quietly answered Captain Nemo, "they will not enter the
hatches of the Nautilus in that way, even if they were open."

I looked at the Captain.

"You do not understand?" said he.

"Hardly."

"Well, come and you will see."

I directed my steps towards the central staircase.  There Ned Land and
Conseil were slyly watching some of the ship's crew, who were opening
the hatches, while cries of rage and fearful vociferations resounded
outside.

The port lids were pulled down outside.  Twenty horrible faces
appeared.  But the first native who placed his hand on the stair-rail,
struck from behind by some invisible force, I know not what, fled,
uttering the most fearful cries and making the wildest contortions.

Ten of his companions followed him.  They met with the same fate.

Conseil was in ecstasy.  Ned Land, carried away by his violent
instincts, rushed on to the staircase.  But the moment he seized the
rail with both hands, he, in his turn, was overthrown.

"I am struck by a thunderbolt," cried he, with an oath.

This explained all.  It was no rail; but a metallic cable charged with
electricity from the deck communicating with the platform.  Whoever
touched it felt a powerful shock--and this shock would have been mortal
if Captain Nemo had discharged into the conductor the whole force of
the current.  It might truly be said that between his assailants and
himself he had stretched a network of electricity which none could pass
with impunity.

Meanwhile, the exasperated Papuans had beaten a retreat paralysed with
terror.  As for us, half laughing, we consoled and rubbed the
unfortunate Ned Land, who swore like one possessed.

But at this moment the Nautilus, raised by the last waves of the tide,
quitted her coral bed exactly at the fortieth minute fixed by the
Captain.  Her screw swept the waters slowly and majestically.  Her
speed increased gradually, and, sailing on the surface of the ocean,
she quitted safe and sound the dangerous passes of the Straits of
Torres.



CHAPTER XXII

"AEGRI SOMNIA"

The following day 10th January, the Nautilus continued her course
between two seas, but with such remarkable speed that I could not
estimate it at less than thirty-five miles an hour.  The rapidity of
her screw was such that I could neither follow nor count its
revolutions.  When I reflected that this marvellous electric agent,
after having afforded motion, heat, and light to the Nautilus, still
protected her from outward attack, and transformed her into an ark of
safety which no profane hand might touch without being thunderstricken,
my admiration was unbounded, and from the structure it extended to the
engineer who had called it into existence.

Our course was directed to the west, and on the 11th of January we
doubled Cape Wessel, situation in 135 deg. long. and 10 deg. S. lat.,
which forms the east point of the Gulf of Carpentaria.  The reefs were
still numerous, but more equalised, and marked on the chart with
extreme precision.  The Nautilus easily avoided the breakers of Money
to port and the Victoria reefs to starboard, placed at 130 deg. long.
and on the 10th parallel, which we strictly followed.

On the 13th of January, Captain Nemo arrived in the Sea of Timor, and
recognised the island of that name in 122 deg. long.

From this point the direction of the Nautilus inclined towards the
south-west. Her head was set for the Indian Ocean.  Where would the
fancy of Captain Nemo carry us next?  Would he return to the coast of
Asia or would he approach again the shores of Europe?  Improbable
conjectures both, to a man who fled from inhabited continents.  Then
would he descend to the south?  Was he going to double the Cape of Good
Hope, then Cape Horn, and finally go as far as the Antarctic pole?
Would he come back at last to the Pacific, where his Nautilus could
sail free and independently?  Time would show.

After having skirted the sands of Cartier, of Hibernia, Seringapatam,
and Scott, last efforts of the solid against the liquid element, on the
14th of January we lost sight of land altogether.  The speed of the
Nautilus was considerably abated, and with irregular course she
sometimes swam in the bosom of the waters, sometimes floated on their
surface.

During this period of the voyage, Captain Nemo made some interesting
experiments on the varied temperature of the sea, in different beds.
Under ordinary conditions these observations are made by means of
rather complicated instruments, and with somewhat doubtful results, by
means of thermometrical sounding-leads, the glasses often breaking
under the pressure of the water, or an apparatus grounded on the
variations of the resistance of metals to the electric currents.
Results so obtained could not be correctly calculated.  On the
contrary, Captain Nemo went himself to test the temperature in the
depths of the sea, and his thermometer, placed in communication with
the different sheets of water, gave him the required degree immediately
and accurately.

It was thus that, either by overloading her reservoirs or by descending
obliquely by means of her inclined planes, the Nautilus successively
attained the depth of three, four, five, seven, nine, and ten thousand
yards, and the definite result of this experience was that the sea
preserved an average temperature of four degrees and a half at a depth
of five thousand fathoms under all latitudes.

On the 16th of January, the Nautilus seemed becalmed only a few yards
beneath the surface of the waves.  Her electric apparatus remained
inactive and her motionless screw left her to drift at the mercy of the
currents.  I supposed that the crew was occupied with interior repairs,
rendered necessary by the violence of the mechanical movements of the
machine.

My companions and I then witnessed a curious spectacle.  The hatches of
the saloon were open, and, as the beacon light of the Nautilus was not
in action, a dim obscurity reigned in the midst of the waters.  I
observed the state of the sea, under these conditions, and the largest
fish appeared to me no more than scarcely defined shadows, when the
Nautilus found herself suddenly transported into full light.  I thought
at first that the beacon had been lighted, and was casting its electric
radiance into the liquid mass.  I was mistaken, and after a rapid
survey perceived my error.

The Nautilus floated in the midst of a phosphorescent bed which, in
this obscurity, became quite dazzling.  It was produced by myriads of
luminous animalculae, whose brilliancy was increased as they glided
over the metallic hull of the vessel.  I was surprised by lightning in
the midst of these luminous sheets, as though they had been rivulets of
lead melted in an ardent furnace or metallic masses brought to a white
heat, so that, by force of contrast, certain portions of light appeared
to cast a shade in the midst of the general ignition, from which all
shade seemed banished.  No; this was not the calm irradiation of our
ordinary lightning.  There was unusual life and vigour: this was truly
living light!

In reality, it was an infinite agglomeration of coloured infusoria, of
veritable globules of jelly, provided with a threadlike tentacle, and
of which as many as twenty-five thousand have been counted in less than
two cubic half-inches of water.

During several hours the Nautilus floated in these brilliant waves, and
our admiration increased as we watched the marine monsters disporting
themselves like salamanders.  I saw there in the midst of this fire
that burns not the swift and elegant porpoise (the indefatigable clown
of the ocean), and some swordfish ten feet long, those prophetic
heralds of the hurricane whose formidable sword would now and then
strike the glass of the saloon.  Then appeared the smaller fish, the
balista, the leaping mackerel, wolf-thorn-tails, and a hundred others
which striped the luminous atmosphere as they swam.  This dazzling
spectacle was enchanting!  Perhaps some atmospheric condition increased
the intensity of this phenomenon.  Perhaps some storm agitated the
surface of the waves.  But at this depth of some yards, the Nautilus
was unmoved by its fury and reposed peacefully in still water.

So we progressed, incessantly charmed by some new marvel.  The days
passed rapidly away, and I took no account of them.  Ned, according to
habit, tried to vary the diet on board.  Like snails, we were fixed to
our shells, and I declare it is easy to lead a snail's life.

Thus this life seemed easy and natural, and we thought no longer of the
life we led on land; but something happened to recall us to the
strangeness of our situation.

On the 18th of January, the Nautilus was in 105 deg. long. and 15 deg.
S. lat.  The weather was threatening, the sea rough and rolling.  There
was a strong east wind.  The barometer, which had been going down for
some days, foreboded a coming storm.  I went up on to the platform just
as the second lieutenant was taking the measure of the horary angles,
and waited, according to habit till the daily phrase was said.  But on
this day it was exchanged for another phrase not less incomprehensible.
Almost directly, I saw Captain Nemo appear with a glass, looking
towards the horizon.

For some minutes he was immovable, without taking his eye off the point
of observation.  Then he lowered his glass and exchanged a few words
with his lieutenant.  The latter seemed to be a victim to some emotion
that he tried in vain to repress.  Captain Nemo, having more command
over himself, was cool.  He seemed, too, to be making some objections
to which the lieutenant replied by formal assurances.  At least I
concluded so by the difference of their tones and gestures.  For
myself, I had looked carefully in the direction indicated without
seeing anything.  The sky and water were lost in the clear line of the
horizon.

However, Captain Nemo walked from one end of the platform to the other,
without looking at me, perhaps without seeing me.  His step was firm,
but less regular than usual.  He stopped sometimes, crossed his arms,
and observed the sea.  What could he be looking for on that immense
expanse?

The Nautilus was then some hundreds of miles from the nearest coast.

The lieutenant had taken up the glass and examined the horizon
steadfastly, going and coming, stamping his foot and showing more
nervous agitation than his superior officer.  Besides, this mystery
must necessarily be solved, and before long; for, upon an order from
