besought the other's forgiveness; and having, done so, the trouble of
their hearts vanished away like a dream.

"I am glad! I am so glad!" said Emily, in a low, earnest voice. "Now I
shall sleep quietly to-night."

"My sweet child," thought Mrs. Temple, as she kissed her, "mayest thou
never know how much strife there is on earth! It would cost thee many a
night's rest."




Chapter VI


About this period, Mr. Temple found it necessary to take a journey, which
interrupted the series of Biographical Stories for several evenings. In
the interval, Edward practised various methods of employing and amusing
his mind.

Sometimes he meditated upon beautiful objects which he had formerly seen,
until the intensity of his recollection seemed to restore him the gift of
sight, and place every thing anew before his eyes. Sometimes he repeated
verses of poetry, which he did not know to be in his memory, until he
found them there, just at the time of need. Sometimes he attempted to
solve arithmetical questions, which had perplexed him while at school.

Then, with his mother's assistance, he learned the letters of the
string-alphabet, which is used in some of the Institutions for the Blind,
in Europe. When one of his friends gave him a leaf of Saint Mark's Gospel,
printed in embossed characters, he endeavored to read it by passing his
fingers over the letters, as blind children do.

His brother George was now very kind, and spent so much time in the
darkened chamber, that Edward often insisted upon his going out to play.
George told him all about the affairs at school, and related many amusing
incidents that happened among his comrades, and informed him what sports
were now in fashion, and whose kite soared the highest, and whose little
ship sailed fleetest on the Frog Pond. As for Emily, she repeated stories
which she had learned from a new book, called THE FLOWER PEOPLE, in which
the snow-drops, the violets, the columbines, the roses, and all that
lovely tribe, are represented as telling their secrets to a little girl.
The flowers talked sweetly, as flowers should; and Edward almost fancied
that he could behold their bloom and smell their fragrant breath.

Thus, in one way or another, the dark days of Edward's confinement passed
not unhappily. In due time, his father returned; and the next evening,
when the family were assembled, he began a story.

"I must first observe, children," said he, "that some writers deny the
truth of the incident which I am about to relate to you. There certainly
is but little evidence in favor of it. Other respectable writers, however,
tell it for a fact; and, at all events, it is an interesting story, and
has an excellent moral."

So Mr. Temple proceeded to talk about the early days of



OLIVER CROMWELL


BORN 1599. DIED 1658.

Not long after King James the First took the place of Queen Elizabeth on
the throne of England, there lived an English knight at a place called
Hinchinbrooke. His name was Sir Oliver Cromwell. He spent his life, I
suppose, pretty much like other English knights and squires in those days,
hunting hares and foxes, and drinking large quantities of ale and wine.
The old house in which he dwelt, had been occupied by his ancestors before
him, for a good many years. In it there was a great hall, hung round with
coats of arms, and helmets, cuirasses and swords which his forefathers had
used in battle, and with horns of deer and tails of foxes, which they or
Sir Oliver himself had killed in the chase.

This Sir Oliver Cromwell had a nephew, who had been called Oliver, after
himself, but who was generally known in the family by the name of little
Noll. His father was a younger brother of Sir Oliver. The child was often
sent to visit his uncle, who probably found him a troublesome little
fellow to take care of. He was forever in mischief, and always running
into some danger or other from which he seemed to escape only by miracle.

Even while he was an infant in the cradle a strange accident had befallen
him. A huge ape which was kept in the family, snatched up little Noll in
his forepaws and clambered with him to the roof of the house. There this
ugly beast sat grinning at the affrighted spectators, as if he had done
the most praiseworthy thing imaginable. Fortunately, however, he brought
the child safe down again; and the event was afterwards considered an omen
that Noll would reach a very elevated station in the world.

One morning, when Noll was five or six years old, a royal messenger
arrived at Hinchinbrooke, with tidings that King James was coming to dine
with Sir Oliver Cromwell. This was a high honor to be sure, but a very
great trouble; for all the lords and ladies, knights, squires, guards, and
yeomen, who waited on the king, were to be feasted as well as himself; and
more provisions would be eaten, and more wine drunk, in that one day, than
generally in a month. However, Sir Oliver expressed much thankfulness for
the king's intended visit, and ordered his butler and cook to make the
best preparations in their power. So a great fire was kindled in the
kitchen; and the neighbors knew by the smoke which poured out of the
chimney, that boiling, baking, stewing, roasting, and frying, were going
on merrily.

By and by the sound of trumpets was heard, approaching nearer and nearer;
and a heavy, old-fashioned coach, surrounded by guards on horseback, drove
up to the house. Sir Oliver, with his hat in his hand, stood at the gate
to receive the king. His Majesty was dressed in a suit of green, not very
new; he had a feather in his hat, and a triple ruff round his neck; and
over his shoulder was slung a hunting horn, instead of a sword.
Altogether, he had not the most dignified aspect in the world; but the
spectators gazed at him as if there was something superhuman and divine in
his person. They even shaded their eyes with their hands, as if they were
dazzled by the glory of his countenance.

"How are ye, man?" cried King James, speaking in a Scotch accent; for
Scotland was his native country. "By my crown, Sir Oliver, but I am glad
to see ye!"

The good knight thanked the king, at the same time kneeling down, while
his Majesty alighted. When King James stood on the ground, he directed Sir
Oliver's attention to a little boy, who had come with him in the coach. He
was six or seven years old, and wore a hat and feather, and was more
richly dressed than the king himself. Though by no means an ill-looking
child; he seemed shy, or even sulky; and his cheeks were rather pale, as
if he had been kept moping within doors, instead of being sent out to play
in the sun and wind.

"I have brought my son Charlie to see ye," said the king. "I hope, Sir
Oliver, ye have a son of your own, to be his playmate?"

Sir Oliver Cromwell made a reverential bow to the little prince, whom one
of the attendants had now taken out of the coach. It was wonderful to see
how all the spectators, even the aged men, with their gray beards, humbled
themselves before this child. They bent their bodies till their beards
almost swept the dust. They looked as if they were ready to kneel down and
worship him.

The poor little prince! From his earliest infancy not a soul had dared to
contradict him; everybody around him had acted as if he were a superior
being; so that, of course, he had imbibed the same opinion of himself. He
naturally supposed that the whole kingdom of Great Britain and all its
inhabitants, had been created solely for his benefit and amusement. This
was a sad mistake; and it cost him dear enough after he had ascended his
father's throne.

"What a noble little prince he is!" exclaimed Sir Oliver, lifting his
hands in admiration. "No, please your Majesty, I have no son to be the
playmate of his Royal Highness; but there is a nephew of mine, somewhere
about the house. He is near the prince's age, and will be but too happy to
wait upon his Royal Highness."

"Send for him, man! send for him!" said the king.

But, as it happened, there was no need of sending for Master Noll. While
King James was speaking, a rugged, bold-faced, sturdy little urchin thrust
himself through the throng of courtiers and attendants, and greeted the
prince with a broad stare. His doublet and hose (which had been put on new
and clean in honor of the king's visit) were already soiled and torn with
the rough play in which he had spent the morning. He looked no more
abashed than if King James were his uncle, and the prince one of his
customary playfellows.

This was little Noll himself.

"Here, please your Majesty, is my nephew," said sir Oliver, somewhat
ashamed of Noll's appearance and demeanor. "Oliver, make your obeisance to
the king's Majesty!"

The boy made a pretty respectful obeisance to the king; for, in those
days, children were taught to pay reverence to their elders. King James,
who prided himself greatly on his scholarship, asked Noll a few questions
in the Latin Grammar, and then introduced him to his son. The little
prince in a very grave and dignified manner, extended his hand, not for
Noll to shake, but that he might kneel down and kiss it.

"Nephew," said Sir Oliver, "pay your duty to the prince."

"I owe him no duty," cried Noll, thrusting aside the prince's hand, with a
rude laugh. "Why should I kiss that boy's hand?"

All the courtiers were amazed and confounded, and Sir Oliver the most of
all. But the king laughed heartily, saying that little Noll had a stubborn
English spirit, and that it was well for his son to learn betimes what
sort of a people he was to rule over.

So King James and his train entered the house; and the prince, with Noll
and some other children, was sent to play in a separate room while his
Majesty was at dinner. The young people soon became acquainted; for boys,
whether the sons of monarchs or of peasants, all like play, and are
pleased with one another's society. What games they diverted themselves
with, I cannot tell. Perhaps they played at ball--perhaps at blindman's
buff--perhaps at leap-frog--perhaps at prison-bars. Such games have been in
use for hundreds of years; and princes as well as poor children have spent
some of their happiest hours in playing at them.

Meanwhile, King James and his nobles were feasting with Sir Oliver, in the
great hall. The king sat in a gilded chair, under a canopy, at the head of
a long table. Whenever any of the company addressed him, it was with the
deepest reverence. If the attendants offered him wine, or the various
delicacies of the festival, it was upon their bended knees. You would have
thought, by these tokens of worship, that the monarch was a supernatural
being; only he seemed to have quite as much need of those vulgar matters,
food and drink, as any other person at the table. But fate had ordained
that good King James should not finish his dinner in peace.

All of a sudden, there arose a terrible uproar in the room where the
children were at play. Angry shouts and shrill cries of alarm were mixed
up together; while the voices of elder persons were likewise heard, trying
to restore order among the children. The king, and everybody else at
table, looked aghast; for perhaps the tumult made them think that a
general rebellion had broken out.

"Mercy on us!" muttered Sir Oliver; "that graceless nephew of mine is in
some mischief or other. The naughty little whelp!"

Getting up from table, he ran to see what was the matter, followed by many
of the guests, and the king among them. They all crowded to the door of
the play-room.

On looking in, they beheld the little Prince Charles, with his rich dress
all torn, and covered with the dust of the floor. His royal blood was
streaming from his nose in great abundance. He gazed at Noll with a
mixture of rage and affright, and at the same time a puzzled expression,
as if he could not understand how any mortal boy should dare to give him a
beating. As for Noll, there stood his sturdy little figure, bold as a
lion, looking as if he were ready to fight not only the prince, but the
king and kingdom too.

"You little villain!" cried his uncle. "What have you been about? Down on
your knees, this instant, and ask the prince's pardon. How dare you lay
your hands on the king's Majesty's royal son?"

"He struck me first," grumbled the valiant little Noll; "and I've only
given him his due."

Sir Oliver and the guests lifted up their hands in astonishment and
horror. No punishment seemed severe enough for this wicked little varlet,
who had dared to resent a blow from the king's own son. Some of the
courtiers were of opinion that Noll should be sent prisoner to the Tower
of London, and brought to trial for high treason. Others, in their great
zeal for the king's service, were about to lay hands on the boy, and
chastise him in the royal presence.

But King James, who sometimes showed a good deal of sagacity, ordered them
to desist.

"Thou art a bold boy," said he, looking fixedly at little Noll; "and, if
thou live to be a man, my son Charlie would do wisely to be friends with
thee."

"I never will!" cried the little prince, stamping his foot.

"Peace, Charlie, peace!" said the king; then addressing Sir Oliver and the
attendants, "Harm not the urchin; for he has taught my son a good lesson,
if Heaven do but give him grace to profit by it. Hereafter, should he be
tempted to tyrannize over the stubborn race of Englishmen, let him
remember little Noll Cromwell, and his own bloody nose!"

So the king finished his dinner and departed; and, for many a long year,
the childish quarrel between Prince Charles and Noll Cromwell was
forgotten. The prince, indeed, might have lived a happier life, and have
met a more peaceful death, had he remembered that quarrel, and the moral
which his father drew from it. But, when old King James was dead, and
Charles sat upon his throne, he seemed to forget that he was but a man,
and that his meanest subjects were men as well as he. He wished to have
the property and lives of the people of England entirely at his own
disposal. But the Puritans, and all who loved liberty, rose against him,
and beat him in many battles, and pulled him down from his throne.

Throughout this war between the king and nobles on one side, and the
people of England on the other, there was a famous leader, who did more
towards the ruin of royal authority, than all the rest. The contest seemed
like a wrestling-match between King Charles and this strong man. And the
king was overthrown.

When the discrowned monarch was brought to trial, that warlike leader sat
in the judgment-hall. Many judges were present, besides himself; but he
alone had the power to save King Charles, or to doom him to the scaffold.
After sentence was pronounced, this victorious general was entreated by
his own children, on their knees, to rescue his Majesty from death.

"No!" said he sternly. "Better that one man should perish, than that the
whole country should be ruined for his sake. It is resolved that he shall
die!"

When Charles, no longer a king, was led to the scaffold, his great enemy
stood at a window of the royal palace of Whitehall. He beheld the poor
victim of pride, and an evil education, and misused power, as he laid his
head upon the block. He looked on, with a steadfast gaze, while a
black-veiled executioner lifted the fatal axe, and smote off that anointed
head at a single blow.

"It is a righteous deed," perhaps he said to himself. "Now Englishmen may
enjoy their rights."

At night, when the body of Charles was laid in the coffin, in a gloomy
chamber, the general entered, lighting himself with a torch. Its gleam
showed that he was now growing old; his visage was scarred with the many
battles in which he had led the van; his brow was wrinkled with care, and
with the continual exercise of stern authority. Probably there was not a
single trait, either of aspect or manner, that belonged to the little
Noll, who had battled so stoutly with Prince Charles. Yet this was he!

He lifted the coffin-lid, and caused the light of his torch to fall upon
the dead monarch's face. Then, probably, his mind went back over all the
marvellous events, that had brought the hereditary king of England to this
dishonored coffin, and had raised himself, an humble individual, to the
possession of kingly power. He was a king, though without the empty title,
or the glittering crown.

"Why was it," said Cromwell to himself--or might have said--as he gazed at
the pale features in the coffin,--"Why was it, that this great king fell,
and that poor Noll Cromwell has gained all the power of the realm?"

And, indeed, why was it?

King Charles had fallen, because, in his manhood the same as when a child,
he disdained to feel that every human creature was his brother. He deemed
himself a superior being, and fancied that his subjects were created only
for a king to rule over. And Cromwell rose, because, in spite of his many
faults, he mainly fought for the rights and freedom of his fellow-men; and
therefore the poor and the oppressed all lent their strength to him.



"Dear father, how I should hate to be a king!" exclaimed Edward.

"And would you like to be a Cromwell?" inquired his father.

"I should like it well," replied George, "only I would not have put the
poor old king to death. I would have sent him out of the kingdom, or
perhaps have allowed him to live in a small house, near the gate of the
royal palace. It was too severe, to cut off his head."

"Kings are in such an unfortunate position," said Mr. Temple, "that they
must either be almost deified by their subjects, or else be dethroned and
beheaded. In either case it is a pitiable lot."

"Oh, I had rather be blind than be a king!" said Edward.

"Well, my dear Edward," observed his mother, with a smile, "I am glad you
are convinced that your own lot is not the hardest in the world."




Chapter VII


It was a pleasant sight (for those who had eyes) to see how patiently the
blinded little boy now submitted to what he had at first deemed an
intolerable calamity. The beneficent Creator has not allowed our comfort
to depend on the enjoyment of any single sense. Though he has made the
world so very beautiful, yet it is possible to be happy without ever
beholding the blue sky, or the green and flowery earth, or the kind faces
of those whom we love. Thus it appears that all the external beauty of the
universe is a free gift from God, over and above what is necessary to our
comfort. How grateful, then, should we be to that Divine Benevolence,
which showers even superfluous bounties upon us!

One truth, therefore, which Edward's blindness had taught him, was, that
his mind and soul could dispense with the assistance of his eyes.
Doubtless, however, he would have found this lesson far more difficult to
learn, had it not been for the affection of those around him. His parents,
and George and Emily, aided him to bear his misfortune; if possible, they
would have lent him their own eyes. And this, too, was a good lesson for
him. It taught him how dependent on one another God has ordained us to be;
insomuch that all the necessities of mankind should incite them to mutual
love.

So Edward loved his friends, and perhaps all the world, better than he
ever did before. And he felt grateful towards his father for spending the
evenings in telling him stories--more grateful, probably, than any of my
little readers will feel towards me for so carefully writing those same
stories down.

"Come, dear father," said he, the next evening, "now tell us all about
some other little boy, who was destined to be a famous man."

"How would you like a story of a Boston boy?" asked his father.

"Oh, pray let us have it!" cried George eagerly. "It will be all the
better if he has been to our schools, and has coasted on the Common, and
sailed boats in the Frog Pond. I shall feel acquainted with him then."

"Well, then," said Mr. Temple, "I will introduce you to a Boston boy, whom
all the world became acquainted with, after he grew to be a man."

The story was as follows:--



BENJAMIN FRANKLIN


BORN 1706. DIED 1790.

In the year 1716, or about that period, a boy used to be seen in the
streets of Boston, who was known among his schoolfellows and playmates by
the name of Ben Franklin. Ben was born in 1706; so that he was now about
ten years old. His father, who had come over from England, was a
soap-boiler and tallow-chandler, and resided in Milk Street, not far from
the old South Church.

Ben was a bright boy at his book, and even a brighter one when at play
with his comrades. He had some remarkable qualities which always seemed to
give him the lead, whether at sport or in more serious matters. I might
tell you a number of amusing anecdotes about him. You are acquainted, I
suppose, with his famous story of the WHISTLE, and how he bought it with a
whole pocketful of coppers, and afterwards repented of his bargain. But
Ben had grown a great boy since those days, and had gained wisdom by
experience; for it was one of his peculiarities, that no incident ever
happened to him without teaching him some valuable lesson. Thus he
generally profited more by his misfortunes, than many people do by the
most favorable events that could befall them.

Ben's face was already pretty well known to the inhabitants of Boston. The
selectmen, and other people of note, often used to visit his father, for
the sake of talking about the affairs of the town or province. Mr.
Franklin was considered a person of great wisdom and integrity, and was
respected by all who knew him, although he supported his family by the
humble trade of boiling soap, and making tallow-candles.

While his father and the visitors were holding deep consultations about
public affairs, little Ben would sit on his stool in a corner, listening
with the greatest interest, as if he understood every word. Indeed, his
features were so full of intelligence, that there could be but little
doubt, not only that he understood what was said, but that he could have
expressed some very sagacious opinions out of his own mind. But, in those
days, boys were expected to be silent in the presence of their elders.
However, Ben Franklin was looked upon as a very promising lad, who would
talk and act wisely by and by.

"Neighbor Franklin," his father's friends would sometimes say, "you ought
to send this boy to college and make a minister of him."

"I have often thought of it," his father would reply; "and my brother
Benjamin promises to give him a great many volumes of manuscript sermons
in case he should be educated for the church. But I have a large family to
support, and cannot afford the expense."

In fact, Mr. Franklin found it so difficult to provide bread for his
family, that, when the boy was ten years old, it became necessary to take
him from school. Ben was then employed in cutting candlewicks into equal
