slipping back of the portiere folds into the little writing-room, as
Polly rushed out through the other doorway into the hall. "A fortunate
thing it was that I left Dick, to see what had become of Polly. Now,
Cousin Eunice, you move from my house!" and descending the stairs, he
called determinedly, "Polly, Polly, child!"

Polly, off in her own room now, heard him, and for the first time in
her life, wished she need not answer.

"Polly--Polly!" the determined call rang down the passage, causing her
to run fast with a "Yes, Grandpapa, I'm coming."

"Now, I should just like to inquire," began Mr. King, taking her by her
two young shoulders and looking down into the flushed face, "what she
has been saying to you." "Oh, Grandpapa!" down went Polly's brown head,
"don't make me tell. Please don't, Grandpapa."

"I shall!" declared Mr. King; "every blessed word. Now begin!"

"She--she wanted me to go out of the room," said Polly, in a reluctant
gasp.

"Indeed!" snorted Mr. King. "Well, she will soon go out of that room.
Indeed, I might say, out of the house."

"Oh, Grandpapa!" exclaimed Polly, in great distress, and raising the
brown eyes--he was dismayed to find them filling with tears--"don't,
don't send her away! It is all my fault; indeed it is, Grandpapa!"

"Your fault," cried Mr. King irately; "you must not say such things,
child; that's silly; you don't know the woman."

"Grandpapa," cried Polly, holding back the storm of tears to get the
words out, "I never told you--I couldn't--but I said perfectly dreadful
words to her a week ago. Oh, Grandpapa! I did, truly."

"That's right," said the old gentleman in a pleased tone. "What were
they, pray tell? Let us know."

"Oh, Grandpapa, don't!" begged Polly, with a shiver; "I want to forget
them."

"If you would only follow them up with more," said Mr. King
meditatively; "when it comes to tears, she must march, you know."

"I won't cry," said Polly, swallowing the lump in her throat, "if you
will only let her stay."

She turned to him such a distressed and white face that Mr. King stood
perplexedly looking down at her, having nothing to say.

"I'm tired of her," at last he said; "we are all tired of her; she has
about worn us out."

"Grandpapa," cried Polly, seeing her advantage in his hesitation, "if
you will only let her stay, I will never beg you for anything again."

"Well, then she goes," cried Mr. King shortly. "Goodness me, Polly, if
you are going to stop asking favors, Cousin Eunice marches instanter!"

"Oh! I'll beg and tease for ever so many things," cried Polly
radiantly, her color coming back. "Will you let her stay,
Grandpapa--will you?" She clasped his arm tightly and would not let him
go.

"Well," said Mr. King slowly, "I'll think about it, Polly."

"Will you?" cried Polly. "Dear Grandpapa, please say yes."

Mr. King drew a long breath. "Yes," he said at last.




XIII

A PIECE OF NEWS


"Collect the whole bunch of Peppers and send them into my writing-room,
Marian." Old Mr. King mounting the stairs, turned to see that his
command was heard.

"You want Mother Pepper too, I presume?" said Mrs. Whitney, pausing at
the foot.

"Mother Pepper? No, indeed; the last person in the world I wish to
see," cried her father irritably. "The bunch of Pepper children, I
want, and at once; see that they all report to me directly." With that
he redoubled his efforts and was soon at the top of the long oaken
steps.

Polly and Ben closely followed by Joel, David and Phronsie soon rushed
over the same ascending thoroughfare, and presented themselves, flushed
and panting, at the writing-room door.

"Come in," called Mr. King from within.

"Here we are, sir," said Ben, spokesman by virtue of being the eldest.

"Yes, yes," said Mr. King nervously, and turning away from some papers
he was fumbling to occupy the waiting moments. "Well, do sit down, all
of you. I sent for you to have a talk about something that you--that
you--well, do sit down."

So all the Peppers deposited themselves in various resting-places; all
but Joel. He immediately marched up to the old gentleman's chair.

"If it's good news," he said abruptly, "please let us have it right
this minute. But if it's bad, why," a gathering alarm stole over his
chubby countenance, as he scanned the face before him, "I'm going
out-doors."

"It's good or bad news according as you take it," said the old
gentleman. "It ought to be good. But there," pushing back his chair to
look at the row of anxious figures the other side of the table, "do sit
down with the rest, Joe, and stop staring me out of countenance."

Polly at that, pushed a chair over toward Joel, who persuading himself
into it, sat uncomfortably perched on its edge, where he stared harder
than ever.

"Hum! well, children, now you are all remarkably sensible boys and
girls. Remarkably sensible. I've always said so, and I see no reason to
change my opinion of you now. And so, although at first my news may not
be quite to your liking, why, you'll quickly make it so, and be very
happy about it in the end. Hem! well, did you ever think that--that
your mother might possibly marry again?"

The last words were brought out so abruptly, that to the five pairs of
ears strained to catch their import, it seemed as if the news had shot
by harmlessly. But after a breathing space the dreadful "marry," and
"your mother," came back to them, bringing the several owners of the
ears out of their chairs at one bound.

"Our mother!" Ben hoarsely exclaimed.

"Oh! how can you?" cried Polly passionately, a little white line
showing around her mouth, "say such perfectly dreadful things, sir!"

Phronsie clasped her hands in silent terror, and raised big eyes to his
face. David began to walk helplessly down the apartment. "See here!"
said Joel, turning to the others, "wait a minute, and hold on. Perhaps
it's you, sir," whirling back to question, with piercing eyes, the old
gentleman, "who's going to marry our mother. Then it's all right!"

"Me!" roared the old gentleman. "Oh! bless my soul, what should I want
to marry for at my time of life? Oh! my goodness me."

His distress was now so frightful to see, that it brought the Peppers
in a measure out of theirs; and they began at once to endeavor to
soothe him.

"Don't--oh! don't," they cried, and a common trouble overwhelming them,
they rushed around the table, seized his hands, and patted his
shoulders and hair. "Oh! this is very dreadful," gasped Polly, "but
don't you feel badly, dear, dear Grandpapa."

"I should think it was," said Mr. King. "Phronsie, here, child, get
into my lap. I'll come to myself then. There, now, that's something
like," as Phronsie, with a low cry, hopped into her usual nest. "Now
perhaps I can communicate the rest of my news, when I get my breath."

The Peppers held theirs, and he began once more. "Now, children, it
isn't in the course of nature for such a fine bright woman as your
mother to remain single the rest of her life; somebody would be sure to
come and carry her off. I'm glad it's to be in my lifetime, for now I
can be easy in my mind, and feel that you have a protector when I am
gone. There, there, we won't talk about that," as the young faces
turned dark with sudden pain, while Joel rushed convulsively to the
window, "you can see how I feel about it."

"Are you glad?" cried Ben hoarsely. Polly for her life could not speak.
The whole world seemed turning round, and sinking beneath her feet.

"Yes, I am," said the old gentleman, "and it won't alter the existing
state of things, for he will live here with us, and things will be just
the same, if only you children will take it rightly. But I've no doubt
you will in the end; no doubt at all," he added, brightening up, "for
you are very sensible young people. I've always said so."

"Who is he?" The dreadful question trembled on all the lips; but no one
asked it. Seeing this, Mr. King broke out, "Well, now of course you
want to know who is going to marry your mother, that is, if you are
willing. For she won't have him unless you are to be happy about it.
Would you like Dr. Fisher for a father?"

Joel broke away from the window with a howl, while Polly tumultuously
threw herself within the kind arms encircling Phronsie.

"Next to you," cried the boy, "why, he's a brick, Dr. Fisher is!"

"Why didn't you tell us before that it was he?" sobbed Polly, with
joyful tears running over her face. Davie, coming out of his gloomy
walk, turned a happy face towards the old man's chair, while Ben said
something to himself that sounded like "Thank God!"

Phronsie alone remained unmoved. "What is Dr. Fisher going to do?" she
asked presently, amid the chatter that now broke forth.

"He's going to live here," said old Mr. King, looking down at her, and
smoothing her yellow hair. "Won't that be nice, Phronsie?"

"Yes," said Phronsie, "it will. And he'll bring his funny old gig,
won't he, and Ill drive sometimes, I suppose?" she added with great
satisfaction.

"Yes; you will," said the old gentleman, winking furiously to keep back
the excited flow of information that now threatened the child. "Well,
Phronsie, you love Dr. Fisher, don't you?"

"Yes, I do," said the child, folding her hands in her lap, "love him
very much indeed."

"Well, he's going to be your father," communicated Mr. King, cautiously
watching her face at each syllable.

"Oh, no!" cried Phronsie, "he couldn't be; he's Dr. Fisher." She
laughed softly at the idea. "Why, Grandpapa, he couldn't be my father."

"Listen, Phronsie," and Mr. King took both her hands in his, "and I'll
tell you about it so that you will understand. Dr. Fisher loves your
mother; he has loved her for many years--all those years when she was
struggling on in the little brown house. But he couldn't tell her so,
because he had others depending on him for support. They don't need him
now, and as soon as he is free, he comes and tells your mother and me,
like a noble good man as he is, all about it. He's a gentleman,
children," he declared, turning to the others, "and you will be glad to
call him father."

"I don't know what you mean," said Phronsie, with puzzled eyes. "Dear
Grandpapa, please tell me."

"Why, he is going to marry your mother, child, and we are all to live
here together just the same, and everything is going to be just as
happy as possible."

Phronsie gave a sharp and sudden cry of distress. "But Mamsie, my
Mamsie will be gone!" and then she hid her face in the old gentleman's
breast.

"O dear, dear! get a glass of water, Polly," cried Mr. King. "One of
you run and open the window. Phronsie, Phronsie--there, child, look up
and let me tell you." But Phronsie burrowed yet deeper in the
protecting nest, regardless of his spotless linen.

"Polly, speak to her," he cried in despair; "where is she? gone for the
water? O dear! Here, Ben, you try. Dear, dear, what a blunderer I am."

"Phronsie," said Ben, leaning over the shaking figure, "you are making
Grandpapa sick."

Up came Phronsie's yellow head. "Oh, Grandpapa!" she wailed, putting
out an unsteady little hand, "I didn't mean to, dear Grandpapa,
only--only Mamsie will be gone now."

"Bless your heart, you'll have Mamsie more than ever," cried Mr. King
heartily. "Here, you children, tell her. Polly, we don't want the water
now, she's come to," as Polly came rushing in with a glassful. "Make
her understand; I can't."

So Polly, setting down her glass, the others crowding around, took up
the task of making the piece of news as delightful as possible, and
presently Phronsie came out of her despair, to ask questions.

"Are you really and truly very glad, Polly?" she asked.

"Really and truly I am so glad I don't know what to do," said Polly,
kneeling down by the chair-side. "Don't you see we are so much the
richer, Phronsie? We have lost nothing, and we gain Dr. Fisher. Dear
splendid Dr. Fisher!"

"You've always wanted to repay Dr. Fisher for his kindness," said Mr.
King, "and now's your chance, Polly."

"I guess he'll get his pay back for his stove," cried Joel in a burst;
"Polly will wait on him, and kill herself doing things for him."

"And for your new eyes," sang Phronsie in a pleased way. "Oh, Polly!"
She jumped out of the old gentleman's lap, and began to dance around
the room, softly clapping her hands and exclaiming, "Oh, Polly!"

"Well, now, children," said Mr. King, as the excitement ran low, "you
just run and tell your mother, every one of you, how happy she will
make you by bringing Dr. Fisher here as your father. Scamper, now!"

No need to urge them. On the wings of the wind ran the five Peppers up
into Mamsie's own room. Mrs. Pepper for once turning aside from the
claim of her pressing duties, was standing by the work table. Here
stood the mending basket before her, piled to the brim with the weekly
installment of stockings big and little, clamoring for attention. But
the usually busy needle lay idle, and the busier hands were folded, as
the mother-heart went over the words she knew were being rehearsed
downstairs by the kind friend who had made a home for them. He was
pleading her cause with her children.

"They shall be happy, anyway," she said softly to herself, "bless their
hearts!" as they burst in.

"Mother," said Ben--How the boy's cheek glowed! And what a world of joy
rang in the usually quiet tones!--"we want to thank you for giving us
Dr. Fisher for a father."

"Mamsie," Polly hid her happy face on the dear neck, "I've always loved
him, you know; oh! I'm so glad."

Joel whooped out something incoherent, but his face told the words,
while Davie clasped one of the firm, closely folded hands.

"If you'll take me in your lap as much as ever," said Phronsie
deliberately, and patting the other hand, "why I shall be really and
truly glad, Mamsie."

"Bless your dear heart!" cried Mother Pepper, clasping her tightly,
"and you children, all of you," and she drew them all within her arms.
"Now I want you to understand, once for all, that it isn't to be unless
you all wish it. You are sure Mr. King hasn't persuaded you to like it?"

