_Colon_, and each had suffered much. Both were doing their best to get
out of reach of our guns and the marvellous accuracy of our gunners.

"Don't let 'em get away!" was the cry. "Give 'em what Dewey did!"
Forward went the war-ships of Uncle Sam, the powerful _Oregon_ leading,
with the _Brooklyn_ and _Texas_ not far behind. The rain of steel
continued, and at last, burning like her sister ships, the _Vizcaya_
turned shoreward, and many of her crew leaped overboard to save their
lives.

Only the _Colon_ now remained. She was still in fair condition, and it
was the Spaniards' ardent hope to save at least one ship from the dire
calamity that had overtaken them. But this was not to be, and after a
run of a few miles, during which the _Oregon_ and _Brooklyn_ continued
to pound her with shot and shell, the Spanish flag was lowered, and the
_Colon_ also ran ashore.

It was assuredly a mighty victory, a fitting mate to the great victory
won by Admiral Dewey, and when the news reached our country there was
such a Fourth of July celebration everywhere as will never be forgotten.
Twice had our navy met the ships of Spain, and each time we had sunk
every vessel without losing any of our own. More than this, while the
Spaniards had lost many men through shot and fire and drowning, our
total loss was but one man killed and a handful wounded.

The loss of her second fleet was a bitter blow to Spain, and many
predicted that the war would not continue much longer, and this
prediction proved correct.

During the rush made by the Rough Riders and our other soldiers, they
had gone right through several bodies of Spanish guerillas who were
secreted in the trees of the jungle. These guerillas, really lawless
fellows belonging to no particular command, could not get back into
Santiago because of the strong American guard at the intrenchments, and
consequently they contented themselves with remaining out of sight and
peppering our soldiers whenever the opportunity offered.

"This will not do," said Theodore Roosevelt. "They are shooting down our
men without giving them a chance to fire back. We'll have to get after
them." And without delay he sent out a detachment of the best Rough
Rider shots to be found. These sharpshooters searched the jungle back of
the intrenchments thoroughly, and as a result killed eleven of the
guerillas and wounded many more. After that the guerillas kept their
distance, satisfied that the Yankees could beat them at their own game.




CHAPTER XVII

DEVOTION OF THE ROUGH RIDERS TO THEODORE ROOSEVELT--HIS KINDNESS TO HIS
MEN--LAST OF THE FIGHTING--THE TRUCE AND TREATY OF PEACE


With the defeat of Admiral Cervera's fleet, a flag of truce was sent
into Santiago by the commander of our army, demanding the surrender of
the city. While these negotiations were pending, all fighting came to an
end, and the Rough Riders had but little to do outside of making
themselves comfortable and caring for the many who were getting sick
because of the lack of shelter and proper food. Food was now coming in
more rapidly, and soon all were supplied with tents and blankets. During
this time Theodore Roosevelt's personal baggage appeared, and he
celebrated the arrival by treating himself to a shave and a change of
linen, something impossible to do since the fighting had begun.

In his own writings, Mr. Roosevelt has spoken at great length of the
devotion which all of the Rough Riders displayed toward him. They were
anxious to wait on him at all hours of the day and night. Some would
pitch his tent, others would clean his weapons, and still others would
go hunting and bring in such game as the vicinity afforded. When ordered
to do anything, there was rarely a grumble. Those in the hospital bore
their sufferings with remarkable fortitude.

In return for this, Theodore Roosevelt did all he could to make life
less hard for those under him. The game that was brought to him he sent
to the hospital, that the wounded might have proper nourishment; and he
either went himself or sent somebody to the seacoast, to purchase food
which the commissary department possessed, but which, through lack of
organization, it was slow in distributing. When no shelter was to be
had, he slept on the ground with his men, and when they had to work on
the trenches at night, he was up and around superintending the labor.

"He was one of us, and he let us know it," was said by one of the Rough
Riders. "He ate the same food we did, and he was mighty good to the
sick and the wounded. He paid for lots of things out of his own pocket,
and I don't believe he has ever asked Uncle Sam to pay him back."

There was no telling how soon the truce would come to an end and
fighting would begin again, and night after night the Rough Riders were
kept on guard. There was a standing order that each fourth man should
keep awake while the others slept, and no matter how dark or rainy the
night, Theodore Roosevelt tramped around from one trench to another,
seeing to it that this order was obeyed. He also visited the
intrenchments of other commands, to compare them and make certain that
the grade of service was equally high among the Rough Riders. This shows
distinctly that he was a natural-born military commander.

The truce lasted a week, and while all operations were supposed to have
come to an end, both the Americans and the Spaniards spent the time in
strengthening their positions. At one time the Americans constructed a
fairly good defence, in which they placed two Gatling guns and two
automatic Colt guns, and this was named Fort Roosevelt, in honor of the
Rough Rider commander.

On the tenth of July the fighting began once more, and again the
batteries on both sides sent shot and shell into the camps of the enemy.
It was largely fighting at long range, and the only Rough Riders who
took part were those who manned the Colt's guns, and a small body of
sharpshooters stationed in a trench well to the front.

On the next day the Rough Riders were ordered northward, to guard the
road running from Santiago to El Caney. Here some fighting was in
progress, and the troopers expected to get into battle once more. But
the skirmish came to an end before they arrived, very much to their
disappointment.

Hardly had the Rough Riders settled in their new position than a storm
came up which proved to be the heaviest yet experienced during the
campaign. While Theodore Roosevelt was sleeping in his tent, the shelter
was blown down and away, and all of his personal effects were scattered
in the mud and wet. As best he could, he donned his clothing, saw to it
that his men were safe, and then betook himself to a kitchen tent,
where he finished the sleep of that night on a rude table recently taken
from an abandoned Spanish home in that vicinity.

"On that night it rained cats and dogs and hammer-handles," said one of
the soldiers afterward. "It was inky dark--darker than I have ever known
it to be anywhere on the plains. The water made a muddy pond of the
whole camp, and the trenches were half filled in no time. Everything was
blown helter-skelter by the furious wind, and some of our outfits we
never recovered. In the midst of the confusion some fellows reported
that the Spaniards were trying to break through our lines, but the
report was false,--the outsiders were starving Cubans who had come in
looking for shelter and something to eat. We gave them what we
could--which was precious little, for we had next to nothing
ourselves--and then got them to help us get things together again. One
of the Cubans was an old man, who could speak a little English. He said
he had lost two daughters and three grandchildren by starvation since
the war between Spain and Cuba had started. He himself was little more
than a skeleton."

That Theodore Roosevelt was warmhearted enough to look out for other
soldiers besides those of his own command is proven by what took place
on the day following the big storm. Next to the Rough Riders were
located a regiment of Illinois Volunteers. Because of the muddy roads
and swollen streams, they could get no rations, and scant as were their
own supplies, Colonel Roosevelt had the Rough Riders furnish them with
beans, coffee, and a few cases of hardtack, for which they were
extremely grateful. Later in the day the commander of the Rough Riders
also got to them part of a mule train of provisions.

The American position had been greatly strengthened, and many additional
troops were now at the front. It was felt that an advance upon Santiago
would surely result in victory, although the losses might be large. But
the Spaniards were no longer in a position to continue the struggle, and
on July 17 the city formally surrendered. The surrendered territory
covered many miles, and the Spanish soldiers to lay down their arms
numbered upward of twenty thousand.

There was great cheering in the American trenches when the glad news was
brought in, and soon Old Glory was planted on every height, while the
trumpets sounded out triumphantly. Possession of Santiago was immediate,
and in a few hours the Stars and Stripes floated from the flagstaff of
the civil government buildings. Our gallant army had won on the land
just as our gallant navy had won on the sea. The war had been, for us,
one of triumph from start to finish.

In foreign countries the news was received with an astonishment that can
scarcely be described. After Dewey's wonderful victory in Manila Bay,
many naval experts said that such a fight could not be duplicated, yet
it was duplicated two months later off Santiago Bay in a manner that
left no doubt of American supremacy on the sea. Then when it came to
fighting on land, our army was designated as "paper" soldiers, that is,
soldiers on paper or in name only, and it was said that their guns would
be found of little use against the Mausers of Spain. But this was
likewise false; and to-day the army and navy of the United States are
respected everywhere. And more than this, foreign powers have come to
our country for many of their war-ships, asking us to build and equip
them, and also asking us to make cannon and rifles for them.

While the war was on in Cuba, a part of the United States army under
General Miles was sent to Porto Rico, another island belonging to Spain.
Here the inhabitants hailed the Americans with delight, and the
resistance by the Spanish soldiers was only half-hearted.

With the downfall of the navy and Santiago, Spain knew not what to do
next, and gladly received the terms of peace offered by President
McKinley and his advisers. The terms were accepted on August 9, and thus
the short but sharp war came to a termination. By the treaty of peace
Cuba was given her liberty, and Porto Rico and the Philippines passed
into the possession of the United States.




CHAPTER XVIII

LAST DAYS IN CUBA--THE DEPARTURE FOR HOME--ARRIVAL AT MONTAUK--CARING
FOR THE SICK AND WOUNDED--PRESENTATION TO THEODORE ROOSEVELT BY HIS
MEN--MUSTERING-OUT OF THE ROUGH RIDERS


Four days after the surrender of Santiago the Rough Riders found
themselves in the hills four or five miles back from the intrenchments
they had occupied during the last fight. Other commands were scattered
in various directions, for to let them go into the wretched city would
have been out of the question. Santiago was dirty in the extreme; the
fever was there, and hundreds were on the verge of starvation.

It was a trying time for everybody, and equally so for Theodore
Roosevelt, who did all in his power, as before, to make his men
comfortable. When it did not rain, the sun came out fiercely, causing a
rapid evaporation that was thoroughly exhausting to the soldiers. The
locality was not a healthy one, and soon scores of Rough Riders and
others were down with malaria or fever. Doctors and surgeons were
scarce, and hospital accommodations were scanty, and again and again did
Colonel Roosevelt send down on his own account to the seacoast and to
Santiago for food and medicines of which his command were in dire need.
He was now colonel of the Rough Riders in reality, his promotion having
been granted to him just one week after the heroic charge up San Juan
Hill. His old colonel, Wood, was installed at Santiago as military
governor. This, for the time being, left Colonel Roosevelt in command of
the cavalry brigade, no small honor to one who had been, but a few
months before, a stranger to military duties.

During this time in camp, Theodore Roosevelt visited Santiago and the
forts at the entrance to the harbor, and with the pen of a skilled
author he has, in one of his books, given us vivid pictures of the
sights to be seen there at that time--the crooked streets with their
queer shops, the wretched inhabitants, the grim and frowning forts, all
hemmed in by the towering mountains and the sea. He likewise tells of
his trips to the mountains, and how his companions were usually
exhausted by the climbing done. For one who in his youth had been so
delicate, he stood the exposure remarkably well, for which he was
thankful.

For some time the authorities at Washington did not know what to do with
the troops in Cuba. It was suggested that they move up to higher ground,
or to another neighborhood. But General Shafter knew, and so did all of
the officers under him, that to keep the army in the island would only
mean more sickness and death.

"I will go to the general with a protest," said Colonel Roosevelt. And
he did so. Meanwhile the other head officers drew up a letter of
protest, and this was signed by all, including the commander of the
Rough Riders. In his own letter Roosevelt protested against the
treatment of his men in the matter of rations, clothing, and hospital
accommodations, and in the other letter, called by the officers a Round
Robin, there was a protest about remaining in Cuba longer, with the
fever getting worse every day. These letters were made public through
the press of the United States, with the result that the troops were
ordered home without further delay.

The Rough Riders left Cuba on August 7, just six weeks and a half after
landing. The time spent in the island had been short, but to many it
seemed an age. None were sorry to depart, although sad to think that
some of the sick had to be left behind.

The transport used this time was the _Miami_, and Mr. Roosevelt tells us
that, taken as a whole, the accommodations were better than they had
been on the _Yucatan_. But on the trip much trouble was had with some of
the stokers and engineers, who insisted upon drinking some liquor
smuggled aboard.

"I will not permit this," said Colonel Roosevelt. And he read the
disorderly ones a strong lecture and made them give up their liquor.
After that, as there was much grumbling, he set a guard; and that was
the end of that trouble.

The destination of the transport was Montauk, on the extreme eastern
shore of Long Island. The trip took nine days,--rather a dreary time to
those anxious to see their native land once more. When an anchorage was
gained, a gunboat came out to the transport with the welcome news that
Spain had agreed to our terms.

The sick had still to be cared for; yet, taken as a whole, the month
spent at the camp at Montauk was pleasant enough. Here Colonel Roosevelt
met that part of the regiment that had been left behind in Florida, and
all the stories of the fights had to be told over and over again.

"It was good to meet the rest of the regiment," says Mr. Roosevelt, in
his book. "They all felt dreadfully at not having been in Cuba. Of
course those who stayed had done their duty precisely as did those who
went." Which was true; yet, as he adds, those who had been left behind
could not be comforted.

Colonel Roosevelt was still in charge of the brigade while at Montauk,
and much of his time was taken up in getting out necessary reports, and
seeing to it that the entire camp was kept in first-class sanitary
condition.

"And he was up to the mark," said one of those who were there. "He
didn't allow the least bit of dirt, and everything had to be as
shipshape as if we were at West Point. And it was a good thing, too, for
it kept the sickness from spreading."

The sea-breeze is strong at Montauk, and this soon began to tell upon
all who were sick, putting in them new life and vigor. Here every
possible attention was given to those who were down, so that ere long
many were up again and as well as ever.

When he had a little time to himself, Theodore Roosevelt would gather a
few friends around him, and either go to the beach to bathe or go off on
a long horseback ride. War was to him a thing of the past, and he was
once more willing to become a private citizen as of old.

In those days the camp at Montauk was constantly crowded with visitors
from New York City and elsewhere, who poured in upon every train. All of
the soldiers who had been to Cuba were hailed as heroes, and had to tell
their stories many times.

"Every soldier had a crowd following him," said one private. "The
visitors wanted to know how we had fought, how we had been treated by
the government, how things looked in Cuba, and a hundred and one
other things. Most of the visitors, especially the ladies, wanted our
autographs, and I had to write mine as many as forty times a day. I
remember one of the men, a cowboy from Oklahoma, couldn't write, and he
got so upset over this that every time somebody asked him for his
autograph he would run away, saying he had forgotten to do something
that he had been ordered to do. When I and some chums went down to New
York to look around, all the folks stared at us, and many insisted on
shaking hands and treating."

[Illustration: COLONEL ROOSEVELT AT MONTAUK POINT. (_Photograph by Pach
Bros., New York._)]

The uniforms the Rough Riders had worn in Cuba were in rags, and many
had boarded the transport barefooted. The rags were saved as trophies of
the occasion, and many are still in existence.

At Camp Wykoff, as the place was called, there was a large hospital for
the sick, and to this many came to do what they could for the sufferers,
who were now given every possible attention. Among the visitors was Miss
Helen Gould, who had used her ample means for the benefit of the sick
all through the war, and who now continued to play the good Samaritan.
President McKinley and many of his cabinet likewise visited the camp,
and saw to it that everything in the hospital and out of it was as it
should be. The sick were presented with the best of fruits and other
things, and many ladies assisted the nurses by reading to the patients
and by writing letters for them.

Now that they had nothing to do in the shape of fighting, many of the
Rough Riders were anxious to get back to the wild West. Life in an
ordinary camp did not suit them, and at every available opportunity they
indulged in "horse play," working off many practical jokes upon each
other.

One day a report went the rounds that a member of another cavalry
organization could not master a certain horse that had been assigned to
him. The report was true, for the horse was what is called by ranchmen a
"bad bucker."

"I think Sergeant Darnell can master him," said Colonel Roosevelt.

He referred to one of the best "bronco busters" among the Rough Riders,
a man who had never yet allowed a steed to get the best of him.

"All right, let Darnell try him," said others. And a test was arranged
for the day following.

At that time Secretary of War Alger was in camp, and a great crowd of
visitors, military men and others, gathered before Colonel Roosevelt's
quarters to watch the contest. At the proper time the vicious horse was
brought forth, and watching his chance, Sergeant Darnell leaped upon his
