Project Gutenberg's The Fantasy Fan December 1933, by Charles D. Hornig

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Fantasy Fan December 1933
       The Fans' Own Magazine

Author: Charles D. Hornig

Release Date: August 8, 2014 [EBook #46535]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FANTASY FAN DECEMBER 1933 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






THE FANTASY FAN

THE FANS' OWN MAGAZINE

Editor: Charles D. Hornig
(Managing Editor: Wonder Stories)

Published                     10 cents a copy
Monthly                       $1.00 per year

137 West Grand Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey

Volume 1      December, 1933      Number 4




OUR READERS SAY


"The November issue beats the first two by a mile! If this keeps up, I
wonder what the tenth issue will be like? Sorry that I cannot send an
English science-fiction column this month, as I haven't heard from the
other side yet. Have written to South Africa on the stf situation
there, but won't promise you anything on it. Will we have a story in
the December issue? 'The Other Gods' beat 'The Kingdom of the
Worm.'"--Bob Tucker

We cannot tell what the tenth issue of TFF will be like, but
you can get a good idea of what the fifth will be like by reading
our editorial. We are sorry we did not receive your foreign
science-fiction column this month, and would be pleased to hear about
South Africa. You will notice three stories in this issue of TFF.
Which of the stories so far published is the best, is a matter of
opinion. Further on in this department you will learn the varied
opinions of their merit.

"What might be called the 'Anti-Ackerman' issue has just arrived. It
looks to me like you ought to have advertised it as that, or run a
streamer across the top. I think it would have doubled your
subscriptions, so many people, it seems, would like to read something
against me. Will you please tone down the remarks about my being the
'most active fan,' etc? That started with you. You can't say I ever
had anything to do with it. Many people reading such statements will
become antagonistic 'just because,' and though I'm going around
begging people to like me, still there's no virtue in unnecessarily
tipping away from you neutral parties."--Forrest J. Ackerman

The editor wishes to drop formalities for a brief paragraph in order
to make a personal confession, and will therefore speak in the
singular. Yes, Forrie, it has all been my fault. I was the one that
called you "the world's most active fan," etc., and really had
something to do with the animosity some of my readers have had toward
you. Let me say that I want to apologize--I am very sorry for it. I
meant well, but it didn't seem to have been interpreted the way it was
intended. All those laudatory remarks were really said to let other
readers know how much you have done to advance science fiction, but
for certain peculiar reasons which can never be foretold, they weren't
taken in the proper light. Frankly, this should teach us both a
lesson--you and I. I should consider carefully every remark I make
about anyone or his work, and you should become less prejudiced and
vehement on any particular subject, and consider the question: "What's
one man's opinion?" Your controversy with C. A. Smith is continued in
this issue's "Boiling Point."

"I am highly pleased with your publication, and hope you can make a
success of it. Glad to see you are printing Lovecraft's excellent
article on 'Supernatural Horror in Literature,' and also his 'Other
Gods.' Smith's tale was most entertaining."--R. H. Barlow (author of
the 'Annals' series)

"TFF continues to improve, the November issue marking a new high, what
with Lovecraft and Smith in the same number."--Allen Glasser

"I find the _Fantasy Fan_ very interesting and think it has a
good future. Anybody ought to be willing to pay a dollar for the
privilege of reading, for a whole year, the works of Lovecraft, Smith,
and Derleth. I am glad to see that you announce a poem by Smith in the
next issue. He is a poet second to none. Weird poetry possesses an
appeal peculiar to itself and the careful use of it raises the quality
of any magazine. I liked very much the department of 'True Ghost
Stories,' and hope you will continue it. The world is full of
unexplained incidents and peculiar circumstances, the logical reasons
for which are often so obscure and hidden that they are lent an
illusion of the supernatural."--Robert E. Howard

We wish there were more authors and fans that were enthusiastic over
the future of weird fiction and _The Fantasy Fan_ as you and our
other readers are, and were willing to support it. Yes, anyone should
be willing to pay a dollar to read the works of the authors you
mention for a whole year--and you are certainly included in that list,
although you, of course, would not mention that fact. The opinions of
such a popular weird author as yourself carry weight, and it is a
supreme pleasure to have you as a subscriber and contributor. Our
gratitude is unbounded.

"Delighted to see the November Issue. All the items and departments
seem well calculated to interest the weird fiction devotee; and since
there is no other magazine in this field, TFF ought certainly to be
able to build up a solid clientele in the course of time."--H. P.
Lovecraft

"Weisinger has done himself proud in both TFF and SFD. If he can only
keep going! I wonder what would happen if Schwartz fell down?!!
Lovecraft is O.K., and so is the whole issue; it is interesting. All
I'm doing is praising your mag, but what else can I do?"--Kenneth
Pritchard

Without Schwartz and Weisinger, science fiction fan material would
receive a terrific blow from which it would never recover. We are glad
to see that you are boosting our magazine; thanks for your enthusiasm.

"One is inclined to believe that H. P. Lovecraft's 'The Other Gods'
should now have cause to look down upon 'The Kingdom of the Worm,' as
