"Then," said the princess, growing pale, "I will speak to the Witan
myself, and learn their will."

"The Witan has broken up," answered Alsi, "and the good thanes are miles
on their way homewards by this time. You are too late."

"I will call them up again."

"Certainly--that is, if I let my men run hither and thither to fetch
them. But after all, in this matter I am master. Whom you wed lies with me."

Goldberga saw that she was in the hands of the king, and maybe as much a
prisoner as at Dover. So her spirits fled, and she asked what the king
willed.

Alsi knew now that nothing but his utmost plan would be of any avail to
save that kingdom for himself, and so he broke out into wrath, working
up his fury that he might not go back.

"My will is that you obey me in this carrying out of the oath I took on
the holy ring, [10] and on the Gospels also to please
your mother. You shall marry the man whom I choose, so that he be
according to the words of that oath."

"So that he be king or son of a king, I will obey you," answered Goldberga.

"Then you defy me. For that I have told you that I will not have. Now
shall we see who is master. You mind yon kitchen knave of last night?
There can be none in all England mightier or more goodly than he is to
look on, and him shall you wed. So will my oath be well kept. Then if
your precious Witan will have him, well and good, for his master shall I
be."

Thereat the princess said that it were better that she should die; but
now Alsi had set out all his plan to her, and he did not mean to flinch
from carrying it out. There was no doubt that the Norfolk people would
hold that she had disgraced herself by the marriage, and so would refuse
to have her as queen. And that was all he needed.

But Goldberga had no more to say, for she was past speaking, and the
king was fain to call her ladies. And when they came he went away
quickly, and gave orders for the safe keeping of the princess, lest she
should try to fly, or to get any message to Ragnar or other of the
Norfolk thanes.

Now he must go through with this marriage, for he had shown himself too
plainly, and never would the princess trust him again. I have heard that
he sent for Griffin at this time; but, as I found, he was gone; and if
the king thought that perhaps the princess would wed him now to escape
from the kitchen knave, he had no chance to bring him forward. I suppose
he could have made out that Griffin, or for that matter any one else he
chose, was such a one as his oath to Ethelwald demanded.

Sore wept Goldberga when she was back in her own place, and at first it
was hard for her to believe that Alsi could mean what he had threatened.
But then she could not forget her dream, and in that she had most
certainly seen the very form of him who stood before her at the high
place last night; and that perhaps troubled her more than aught, for it
seemed to say that him she must wed. But no king's son could he be, so
that there must be yet such another mighty man to be found.

And then in her heart she knew that there could not be two such men,
both alike in all points to him of the vision. And she knew also, though
maybe she would not own it, that if this Curan had been but a thane of
little estate, she could have had naught to say against the matter.

And so at last she found that in her trouble and doubt and wish for
peace she was thinking, "Would that he were not the kitchen knave!"

Now, it chanced that the old nurse had gone out into the town, and was
away all this while, so that she knew nothing of this new trouble; and
presently she was coming back with her arms full of what she had bought,
and there met her Havelok and Withelm, who had been to the widow's, and
were on their way to find me at the gate.

"Mother," said Havelok, "let me help you up with these things."

That frightened the old lady, for she had been looking at him, and had
made up her mind that he was some mighty noble, as did most strangers.

"Nay, lord," she said; "that is not fitting for you."

"Less fitting is it that a strong man should see you thus burdened and
not help. No lord am I, but only the cook's man. So I am going to the
palace."

But this she would not believe at first, and still refused. However,
Lincoln Hill is very steep, and she was not sorry when Havelok laughed
and took the things from her so soon as she had to halt for breath.

"Curan will carry you up also, if you will, mother," said Withelm.

The nurse tossed her head at him and made no answer, being on her
dignity at once. Moreover, she had heard of Curan by this time, though
she had not seen him before. So she said no more, and went on proudly
enough, with her mighty attendant after her; but all the while it was in
her mind that there was some jest, or maybe wager, between the two.

Now Withelm stopped at the gate; but I was not there, for I had been
sent to the palace, where guards were to be at each door. The word was
that some plot had been found out against the princess, and that
therefore we had to be careful. One easily believed that with all the
talk about the attack made on her party that was flying about. So he
came on to the palace kitchens, for Berthun knew him well, having so
often bought fish from him in the market; and there he sat down to talk
with the steward, for there was nothing much going on at the time, and I
was on guard.

Now, the old nurse went to her mistress; and Goldberga sat in the
shadow, and was weeping no longer, seeing that it would not help at all.

"There is a wonder down yonder," said the old lady, not seeing that
there had been any trouble yet--"such a man as I never saw in all my
days; and he even carried my goods up all the hill for me, old and ugly
as I am. That is not what every young man would do nowadays. Maybe it
was different when I was young, or else my being young made the
difference. The youth with him called him Curan, which is the name of
the strong porter they prate of, but doubtless that was a jest. This is
the most kingly man that could be; and I ween that those two made a
wager that he dared not carry a bundle up to the palace, whereby I was
the gainer, for breath grows short up that pitch. And when I thanked him
he bowed in that wise that can only come of being rightly taught when
one is young. Now, I am going to ask Berthun who he is, for he spoke to
him when he saw him, and that humbly, as it seemed."

So talked the nurse, and to all Goldberga answered never a word, for all
the trouble came back again, and with it the thought that she hated,
that if only--

Then, as the nurse was leaving her, she called her back.

"Nurse," she said, "I am in sore trouble about the dream. It bides with
me, and will not cease to puzzle me until I weary for some one to read
it plainly. I would that Queen Bertha's good chaplain were here, for I
might have been helped by him."

Then the nurse came back, quick to hear the sad tone in the voice of her
whom she had tended and loved since she was a child.

"Why, my pretty, have you been weeping?" she said. "There was naught in
a dream like that to fray you thus."

"Nay, but it has come to me that this place is altogether heathen; and
it may have come from the hand of Freya, the false fiend that they
worship as a goddess, so that I may be ready to wed a heathen. Is there
no Christian in all this place?"

"There are Welsh folk yet left in the marsh," said the nurse, pondering;
"and where there is a Briton there is a Christian, and there, also, will
be a hidden priest. But it would be as much as his life is worth to come
here, even could we find one."

Then Goldberga said, "Alsi is not altogether heathen. If I asked he
would surely grant this."

For she thought that she knew how to gain consent.

"If one can be found, and that is not likely. Well, then, I will ask
Berthun, who is good-natured enough, and most likely will not trouble
about a Christian coming here; and if so, we need not even ask Alsi."

So she went, not thinking for a moment that there was a priest of the
faith to be heard of. Mostly she wanted to hear more of Havelok, but she
would honestly do her other errand.

But on her way across the courtyard she met Mord, and he was a great
friend of hers.

"Whither now, nurse? They will not let you go out of the palace. They
say that there is trouble on hand with those folk that fell on us, and
we have to bide in shelter for a day or two."

"Well, I have been down the town this hour, and all is quiet enough.
This Alsi is an over-timid man. But I was seeking Berthun with a strange
message from the princess, and one that is not over safe here."

"Let me give it then."

"Well, it is nothing more or less than to ask if he can find a Christian
priest. Our mistress has had a strange dream, and it is true that it
sorely troubles her. So she wants one to whom she may tell it, that it
may be read aright. But though I must ask, I do not hope to find one."

"Why," said Mord, "there is not one Christian in all Lindsey."

"I would not say that. When I was first here with Orwenna the queen,
before she married Ethelwald, there were some in the marsh; for one day
I heard my own tongue spoken there, hunting with my mistress; and so she
stayed and talked with these poor folk, though the Welsh they spoke was
bad enough. But they were Christians, as they told her in fear and
trembling. They have not so much need to fear now."

"Then I can help you," said Mord gladly. "Say nothing to the cook, for I
have found old friends who come from far in the marsh, and they will
tell me at once if they have heard of any priest. Why, when I think,
they know Welsh, and one has called himself by a Welsh name, and you
have seen him--Curan the porter."

"Ay; then do you ask these friends, and tell them that the sooner they
can bring a priest the better shall they be rewarded. I would give much
to have Goldberga's mind set at rest."

So Mord said that he would go at once; and glad he was to see Withelm
sitting with Berthun,

"Well," said the steward, "I have known Withelm of Grimsby for the last
ten years or so, and I do not suppose that it matters if you speak with
him."

"Why should it matter if I speak with any one I choose?" asked Mord,
somewhat angrily.

"That you must ask the king; for his orders are that the people of the
princess have no dealings with outsiders for two days."

"Mighty careful of us is Alsi all of a sudden," said Mord. "I suppose he
thinks that someone will stick a seax into some of us in all friendly
wise while we are talking."

But Berthun only laughed, and went to where the nurse was beckoning to
him. He told her his own thoughts of Havelok, being glad to have a ready
hearer.

At once Withelm was able to tell Mord that the old priest who was his
friend was in Lincoln at this time by good chance, and that he would
surely come to the princess at need. But when they came to talk of when
and how, it did not seem all so easy; and Mord went to the nurse to tell
her all.

Then they had to speak to Berthun about it, and he was kindly and
willing to help; but he said that none might come to speak with the
princess without leave from the king. No doubt he would grant it easily,
if asked by Goldberga herself.

"I will go and tell her," said the old lady. "Keep your man here till I
return."

Now she brought this good news to the princess, and one need not say how
she rejoiced. And now a thought had come to her, and she was eager to
send a message to Alsi.

"Surely," she thought, "he does but threaten me with the kitchen knave,
that he may make me change my will. And, therefore, if I say that I am
ready to obey him, he will be pleased; and then time is gained at the
least, and it is not possible that he will choose so badly for me after
all."

So when the nurse asked her what she would do about getting the priest
to her presence, she said, "Go and tell my uncle first that I am willing
to obey him in the matter of which we spoke this morning."

"So that was what has troubled you after all, and not the dream? I
thought it should not have made all these tear marks," said the nurse
quickly. "Now, why did you not tell me? I dare give Alsi a talking to if
he needs it."

"Nay, nurse, but it was the dream. My uncle and I did but disagree on
somewhat, and maybe I was wrong. By-and-by I will tell you."

"Tell me now, and then I shall know better how to ask for what you need."

But Goldberga could not bring herself to say what Alsi had threatened,
and now felt sure that she would hear no more of that. So she told the
nurse that she had vowed only to marry a king, and that Alsi had been
angry, saying that kings were not so easily found. Also, that he was the
man who had to find her a husband.

"That is the best sense that this king ever spoke," said the nurse.
"Many a long year might you wait if you had your way thus. You are wise
in sending that message. Well, after that I will ask him to let you see
the priest, saying, if he is cross-grained, that a talk with him will
make your mind even better fitted to obey. Many things like that I can
say. We shall have him here presently."

Now, all that seemed very good to both of them, and the nurse went her
way. And when she came to Alsi, she gave the message plainly.

"That will save a great deal of trouble," said the king. "Tell her that
I am glad to hear it. She says this of her own accord, and not at your
advice?"

"She told me before I had heard a word of what the trouble was between
you. It was no word of mine."

"I am glad of it. But I will say that I am somewhat surprised."

And that was true, for this message seemed to Alsi to be nothing more or
less than that Goldberga would marry his man. When he thought for a
moment, however, he saw that it could not be thus; and also, it was
plain to him what the poor girl had in her mind. And now he chuckled to
think what a weapon he had against her. Nor would he be slow to use it.

Then the nurse said that he need have no surprise, for Goldberga was
ever gentle and willing to be led, though sometimes the pride of her
race came uppermost for a time. And then she asked if a certain priest
of the faith might come and speak with her.

Now, Alsi knew that only one could be meant--namely, the hermit who
bided at Cabourn. He had heard of him often, and would not suffer him to
be hurt, for his sister Orwenna had protected him. The heathen English
minded him not at all by this time, for he was the best leech in the
land, and so useful to them. So Alsi said pleasantly that he was quite
willing that the priest should come, deeming that he was at Cabourn, and
that it would be a day or two before he would be brought.

So he called the housecarl from outside the door, and when he came he
said, "Pass the word that when one who calls himself David comes and
asks for the princess, he is to be admitted to her."

So that was made easy, and the nurse thanked him and withdrew; and when
he was alone, Alsi grinned evilly and rubbed his hands.

"Now is East Anglia mine in truth," he said; and with that he bade the
housecarl fetch Curan, the cook's porter, to him. And then he sent one
to Ragnar with such a message that he rode out that night and away to
Norwich.


    CHAPTER XV. THE FORTUNE OF CURAN THE PORTER.

While the nurse told Withelm to fetch the priest when Alsi was in the
hall that evening, the housecarl came for Havelok; and much wondering,
he followed the man to the king, and presently stood before him and saluted.

"Where did you get that salute?" said Alsi sharply, seeing at once that
it was not English; and, indeed, it was that of Gunnar's courtmen.

"I cannot tell," answered my brother. "It seems to be there when needed."

"Well, it is not that used here. Get the housecarls to teach you better
manners."

Then Havelok bowed a little, in token that he would do so; and when Alsi
spoke to him next it was in Welsh.

"You are a marshman, as I hear?"

Now Havelok had learned fairly well from the poor folk who loved him,
but carelessly, so that when he answered Alsi frowned at his way of
speaking.

"I am from the marsh," he said simply.

"We had better get back to English!" the king said; "you people forget
your own tongue. Now, are you married?"
