Connel fumed and ranted, threatened and cajoled, begged and pleaded, but
it was no use. There was not a man in the Academy who would set foot
inside the "jinxed" ship. Finally, in a last desperate attempt, he
ignored Hemmingwell's order and appealed to Commander Walters.

"No, Lou. I cannot order men to take that ship up," Commander Walters
replied, "and you know it!"

"Why not?" argued Connel. "You're the commander, aren't you?"

"I most certainly am," asserted Walters, "and if I want to get other
things done in the Solar Guard, I can't order men to take a jinxed ship
off the ground." He looked at Connel narrowly. "Do you remember the old
freighter, the _Spaceglow_?" he asked.

Connel frowned but didn't reply.

"You were mate on that ship before you enlisted in the Solar Guard,"
persisted Walters. "And I read the log of your first trip when you
wrote, and I quote, 'There seems to be some mysterious and unanswerable
condition aboard this vessel that makes her behave as if she had human
intelligence....'"

"That has nothing to do with _this_ situation!" roared Connel.

"They're alike! You couldn't get a crew on that wagon in any port of
call from Venus to Jupiter!"

"But we found out what was wrong with her eventually!"

"Yes, but the legend still exists that the _Spaceglow_ had intelligence
of its own!" asserted Walters.

"All right," snorted Connel. "So we have to fight superstition! But,
blast it, Commander, we're faced with a saboteur. There's nothing
supernatural or mysterious about a man with a bomb!"

Connel turned abruptly and walked out of the commander's office, more
furious than Walters had ever seen him.

Back at the hangar, Connel faced the professor. It was a tough thing to
tell the elderly man, and Connel, for all his hard exterior, could
easily appreciate the professor's feelings. After many years of struggle
to convince die-hard bankers of the soundness of his Space Projectile
plan, followed by sabotage and costly work stoppages, it was
heart-rending to have a "jinx" finally stop him.

"I'm sorry," said Connel, "but that's the way things are, Professor."

"I understand, Major," replied Hemmingwell wearily. He turned away,
shoulders slumping, and walked back to his tiny office in the shadow of
the mighty ship that was anchored on the ground.

"May I speak to you a moment, Major?" a voice broke the silence in the
hangar.

Connel turned around slowly. "You!" he exclaimed. "If it hadn't been for
you and your big mouth, this ship might be in space right now!"

"Stop blowing your jets!" snapped Dave Barret. "I want to see this ship
in space as badly as you do. Perhaps even more so. But listen, I'm not
afraid of the jinx. Neither are you, nor is Professor Hemmingwell. We're
spacemen. And we know the operation of every piece of equipment on that
ship. What's to prevent us from taking her up?"

Connel looked at the young man, immediately recognizing the value of his
suggestion. He nodded his head curtly. "All right," he said. "I'll take
you up on that."

Barret grinned, stuck out his hand, and after a friendly shake turned
and ran to the professor's office. Connel walked back to the outside of
the hangar and began bellowing orders for the giant ship to be brought
out to the blast ramp and prepared for the blast-off.

[Illustration]

But Dave Barret did not go directly to Professor Hemmingwell's office.
He made one stop. Looking around quickly to make sure that he was not
observed, he slipped into the teleceiver booth and made a hurried call
to an Atom City number. When a gruff voice answered, he merely said
three words:

"It's all set!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Roger and Astro were some distance away from the main gang, working at
the tunnel mouth overlooking the hangar area.

"Look, Astro," said Roger. "They're bringing out the ship. They must be
ready to blast off!"

[Illustration]

Astro stopped his work momentarily and stared as the huge ship was
inched out of the hangar, resting on her tail fins, her nose pointing
skyward.

"I'd sure like to be bucking the power deck on that baby," sighed Astro.

"Yeah, and I'd give my eyeteeth to see that radar deck," said Roger. "It
must be really something with all the gear to control those projectiles
when they're released."

"Do you believe any of that talk about her being jinxed?" asked Astro.

"Stop being a Venusian lunkhead!" snorted Roger. "The only thing wrong
with that ship is a rocket-blasting clever saboteur."

"You know," said Astro, "I've been thinking."

"Don't strain yourself," snorted Roger. But when Astro failed to reply
in kind, the blond-haired cadet realized he was serious. "What is it?"
he asked.

"Why, in the name of the moons of Mars, would Barret want to do the
things he did to us?"

"Simple," said Roger, beginning to sweep industriously as he saw the
guard walking toward them. "He didn't like the way we manhandled him."

"You think he was just getting even with us?" asked Astro, also resuming
work.

"What else?" asked Roger. "We made him look pretty silly. And that was
no love tap I gave him that night we caught him in the hangar."

"That's what I mean," said Astro. "I know Major Connel said he was
supposed to be there. But with that teleceiver conversation I overheard
and all the rest--well, I just don't get it," he concluded lamely.

"You'll get it in the neck if you don't watch out," said Roger. "Here
comes Spike and he doesn't like to see us loafing!"

The two cadets worked steadily for ten minutes, and when the guard
finally walked away, they paused to watch the big ship again.

"I wonder what Tom is up to?" said Roger thoughtfully. "He said he knew
who the saboteur was, but he needed help to prove it."

"I'd give a full year's leave just to get my hands on that guy for ten
minutes," said Astro.

"Yeah," grunted Roger. "Well, come on, hot-shot, we still got a lot of
cleaning to do."

They returned to their work, but even then, as they watched the
preparations for the take-off of the big ship, they both thought about
Tom. They knew his problems were as difficult as their own, and with
much more at stake. If Tom failed in his efforts to catch the saboteur,
it could very well mean the end of the _Polaris_ unit.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 16


"_Bump-ty--bump-ty--bump-ty--_"

Tom Corbett's heart beat with such rapid, heavy drumming that the young
cadet felt as though it was going to tear itself right out of his chest.

For nearly six hours Tom had lain in wait in Galaxy Hall, the museum of
Space Academy, on the second floor of the Tower building. He was hiding
in the tail section of the _Space Queen_, the first rocket ship to
breach space safely, blasting from Earth to Luna and back again. He had
kept watch through a crack in the hull of the old ship, waiting for the
lights to go out, a signal that the Academy had bedded down for the
night.

Now, in the silence of the museum, surrounded by the ancient objects
that traced man's progress to the stars, Tom felt like crying. For as
long as he had been at the Academy, he had revered these crude, frail
objects and wondered if he would ever match the bravery of the men who
used them. Now, unless his plan was successful, he would be finished as
a cadet and the dream of being an officer in the Solar Guard would
vanish forever.

The Tower building had been quiet for over an hour. Tom had not heard
any voices or movement other than the evenly paced steps of the guards
patrolling their lonely beats outside.

[Illustration]

He slipped out of the antiquated ship, and staying well in the shadows,
moved out into the corridor to the head of the slidestairs. He peered
over the railing to the main floor below and saw Warrant Officer Mike
McKenny through the open door of a small office, seated at his desk,
watching an evening stereo program. The young cadet jumped on the stairs
quickly and rode the moving belt of plastic to the upper floors where
the officers' quarters were located.

Tom was in great danger of discovery. No civilian was allowed on Academy
grounds after taps. And he was still wearing the civilian clothes he had
taken from the suitcase on the passenger ship from Mars. Silently but
swiftly, he made his way from level to level toward the seventy-fifth
floor.

He knew that there would be a guard stationed in the halls outside the
officers' apartments and it would be impossible to elude him. He would
simply have to brazen it out.

At the seventy-fifth floor the young cadet stepped off the slidestairs
noisily, his heels clicking on the dark crystal floor, and strode down
the hall. He was immediately seen by the guard who advanced to meet him,
his ray gun at the ready. Tom was prepared.

"Guard!" he yelled.

The guard stopped in front of him, a puzzled look on his face. "Yes?" he
replied.

"Sir!" snapped Tom. "Show me where Captain Strong's quarters are and be
quick about it!"

"But who are--?" The guard started to protest, but Tom did not give him
the chance to finish.

"Don't stand there like an idiot, man! _Move!_"

"Uhh--yes, sir," stammered the guard, obviously taken aback.

"Lead the way," continued Tom loudly. "I haven't much time."

"Yes, sir, but would you mind lowering your voice, sir? Some of the
officers are asleep, sir."

"Well, get on then and stop jabbering!"

The guard turned quickly and started down the hall. Tom followed,
hardly able to keep from smiling at the man's frustration and confusion.

They stopped at the door to Captain Strong's quarters and the guard
rapped softly.

"Yes?" came a muffled voice from inside.

"Someone to see you, sir," called the guard.

"Just a moment."

The guard stepped to one side and stood at rigid attention. When the
door opened and Captain Strong was revealed, Tom brushed past the guard
and stepped into the room, talking quickly.

"My name is Hinkleworth, Captain," he announced. "I am here at the
request of Commissioner Jessup to discuss the installation of new radar
equipment on all Solar Guard rocket cruisers!"

Tom slammed the door closed behind him and turned to face the astonished
Solar Guard officer.

"What in the star-blazing--?" Strong began angrily.

"It's me, Captain Strong!" Tom said quickly, pulling his hat off and
lowering his collar.

"Corbett!" gasped Strong, taking an involuntary step back, his face
mirroring his disbelief.

"Sh!" whispered the boy, motioning to the door. Recovering his
composure, Strong swept past him, opened the door, and found the guard
still standing there at attention.

"All right, Corporal," said Strong. "Resume your station."

"Yes, sir," replied the guard and walked down the hall. Strong watched
him for a moment, then turned back into his room, closing and locking
the door behind him. He faced the young cadet, who grinned back at him
weakly.

"All right, spaceboy," said Strong, flopping in the nearest chair.
"Start at the beginning and give it to me. _All of it!_"

Tom began his story with the incident of the runaway truck at Marsport,
told of his abduction and escape from the two truckers, Cag and Monty,
his efforts to reach Space Academy, and finally revealed the identity of
the man he thought was responsible for the whole effort to stop the
projectile operation.

At this, Strong jumped to his feet. "That's the most fantastic thing
I've ever heard, Corbett!" he snapped. "What kind of proof do you have?"

"None, sir," replied Tom. "The only reason I came here tonight is to ask
you to help me get that proof."

When Strong was silent, shaking his head, Tom tried again.

"Sir, you do believe me, don't you?" asked the boy with a sinking
feeling in his heart. "What about all the things that have happened to
me and to Roger and Astro?"

"I can explain them away just as easily as you can explain your theory,"
replied Strong. He walked over and patted the cadet on the shoulder
sympathetically. "I'm sorry, Tom," he said gently. "Your story is just
too fantastic and you haven't even the slightest shred of evidence. Just
a few words an unreliable witness said under duress."

"I realize that, sir," replied the cadet. "But don't you see? This is
the only way to clear my name."

Strong turned to the window, looked out thoughtfully for a moment, and
then turned back to the boy. "How do you think I can help you?" he said,
a more sympathetic note in his voice.

His eyes bright with hope again, Tom spoke quickly and eagerly. The
Solar Guard captain calmly packed his pipe and lighted it, stopping the
boy now and then to ask a question. Finally, when Tom was finished,
Strong nodded and silently puffed at his pipe.

"Well, sir?" asked Tom eagerly.

"I don't know, Tom," replied Strong. "It's a pretty wild idea. And it
leaves me way out on a limb."

"Only if we fail, sir," said Tom.

"Which is more than likely," Strong commented dryly.

"Captain Strong," said Tom, "if you really don't think it can work, then
I suggest that you call the guard and turn me in. I've put you in enough
trouble already." Tom moved to the door.

"Stop playing the hero, Corbett," said Strong. "I didn't say I wouldn't
help you. But we have to think this thing out."

Tom sat down, eying Strong hopefully.

"Now, let me get this straight," said Strong. "First you want me to help
Astro and Roger escape from the work gang. All right, that may work
easily enough. But why?"

"So we can get aboard the projectile ship and go through her tests with
her."

"I suppose you've heard that Connel, Professor Hemmingwell, and Dave
Barret are going to take her up."

