pleasure all through the time we were in the school together. He left
long before I did, and went to learn his trade of a joiner in the city.
He came home very often, however, so that I never really lost sight of
him; and when my husband bought this piece of land and we were married,
it happened, also, that Andrew bought property, and wished to be
settled. He had lost his parents, and was quite by himself, and a
first-rate workman. He wanted the little house with the neat, pretty
garden down there half-way to the church; but was not able to purchase
it, because the owner wished for full payment at once, and Andrew could
only pay in instalments, as he earned the money.

"But we knew all about him and his work. My husband purchased the place
for him, and he has never had the least reason to regret it."

"No, indeed I have not," added the colonel. "Andrew has long ago paid
for his house, and now he always brings me the yearly amount of his
labor; and a very pretty sum it is, too. I invest it well for him, and
have a sincere satisfaction in the welfare of the sturdy fellow. He is
already a very well-to-do man, and adds to his property every year, and
can make his little house into a big one if he have a mind to do so, the
good Andrew. It is too bad that he is such a hermit, and cannot,
therefore, properly enjoy his home and his possessions."

"Has he, then, neither wife nor family?" asked Max. "And what has become
of his disagreeable brother Jorg?"

"No; he has really nobody," replied his sister. "He lives entirely
alone, and really like a hermit. He has had a long and very sad history
that I have been witness to, and which has taken away all the desire he
once might have felt to look for a wife. His brother Jorg wandered about
here in a disreputable way for several years, never working, but in the
hope of getting something, by his infamous behavior, out of his family,
who were respectable people, quite unlike himself. But, at last, he saw
that there was no chance of this, and even the kind Andrew refused to
pay any more of his debts, or to help him out of any more scrapes, so he
disappeared, nobody knows where; but everybody rejoiced that he was out
of the way."

"What was the sad story of which you spoke, Marie?" asked her brother.
"I want to hear that, too."

"So do I," said the colonel; and lighted another cigar, in order to
enjoy the tale more thoroughly.

"But, my dear husband," objected his wife, "I have at least told you
this story ten times over."

"Really," said the colonel, quietly, "it seems that it pleases me then,
if I ask for it again."

"Oh, do begin!" said her brother.

"You cannot have forgotten the child, Max," began his sister, "of whom I
was speaking yesterday, who lived quite near to us. She belonged to the
pale, thin weaver, whose shuttle we could always hear moving back and
forth when we stood in our garden. The child always looked clean and
neat, and had great lively, sparkling eyes, and beautiful brown hair.
Her name was Aloise."

"I never knew anybody by the name of Aloise in my life," interrupted Max
at this point.

"Oh! to be sure not," said his sister. "We never called her so, you
especially. 'Wisi' we called her, to the horror of our dear departed
mother. Don't you remember, now, how often you said yourself that we
must get Wisi to sing with us when mamma played songs for us on the
piano, and we could not make it go at all without Wisi's help?"

At last Max seemed to remember about it, and laughed at the
recollection. "Oh, yes! I remember Wisi," he cried. "Yes, certainly that
was Wisi. I can see her now, before my eyes, with her bright face, as
she stood by the piano and sang so cheerily. I was very fond of her. I
was very fond of her,--of Wisi. She was very pretty, too. I remember,
too, what a shock it always seemed to mamma when I said, 'Wisi.' I
really never knew her proper name."

"Oh, yes, you did," replied his sister; "because mamma always said
it was perfectly barbarous to change the pretty name of Aloise
into 'Wisi.'"

"I certainly never heard it each time," said Max. "But pray what has
become of this Wisi?"

"You remember she was in my class at school, and we kept along together;
and I often think of how Andrew always befriended and stood up for the
girl through thick and thin, and that she knew well how to turn his
friendship to good account.

"When she came with her slate full of examples, like the rest of us, her
figures were not often correct; but she put the slate, with a merry
laugh, on her desk, and lo! soon the sums were all rightly set down, for
Andrew had put them in order. It often happened that she smashed a pane
in the schoolroom window, or shook down the schoolmaster's plums in the
garden; and yet Andrew was always the one who took the blame of these
misdeeds,--not that anybody accused him, but he himself used to say,
half aloud, that he believed it was his fault that the glass was broken,
or the plums shaken down, and so he got the punishment. We children all
knew well enough who was to blame; but we let it go, we were so used to
it, and were so fond of the merry Wisi, that we all were pleased when
she escaped punishment.

"Wisi had always pocketfuls of apples, pears, and nuts, that all came
from Andrew; for every thing that he had, or could procure, he used to
stuff into Wisi's satchel. I used often to wonder how it happened that
the quiet Andrew liked the very most unruly and gayest girl in the
school, and I also wondered whether she returned his affection. She was
always very friendly with him, but she was the same with others; and as
I once asked our mother how it could be, she shook her head a little,
and said, 'I am afraid,--I am afraid that the nice little Aloise is a
trifle heedless, and may have to suffer for it.' These words gave me
much food for thought, and recurred to me again and again.

"We went together to the Bible-class; and every Sunday evening Wisi used
to come regularly to our house, and we sang hymns together to the piano.
She particularly enjoyed this. She knew all the lovely songs by heart,
and sang them clearly and well; and mamma and I were very much pleased
to know that Wisi liked to sing, and went gladly to the Bible-class, and
seemed to take the religious teaching very much to heart. She had grown
into a fine large girl now, with bright eyes; and, although she did not
look very strong, like the peasant girls in the villages, still she had
a fine color, and was far prettier than any of them.

"At this time Andrew was learning his trade in the town, but invariably
came home on Sundays. He always came up to the parsonage to call, and
was inclined to talk to me about our former schooldays; and gradually
we worked round to Wisi, and talked about her most of the time. Andrew
spoke most eloquently and feelingly on this subject; and, although
everybody else had adopted the name 'Wisi' for Aloise, he never called
her so, but said 'Wiseli' so softly and prettily, that it was very
sweet to hear.

"But one Sunday (we were not quite eighteen years old, Wisi and
I,--mamma was with us that evening) Wisi came in looking very rosy, and
said that she had come to tell us that she was betrothed to a young
workman who had come lately to live in the village, and that they would
soon be married, as he had a good position, and it was arranged that
they could be married in about twelve days. I was so surprised, and so
sorry, that I could not say a word. Neither did my mother speak for a
long time, but looked very much troubled.

"After a time she talked very seriously with Wisi,--told her that it was
foolish in her to have taken up so quickly with a workman of whom she
really could know very little, and especially when there was another who
had sought her for long years, and plainly shown her how much he loved
her; and, at last, she asked her if it could not be broken off, this
engagement,--or, at least, put off for a while, Wisi was still so young,
and ought to remain with her father. Then Wisi began to cry, and said
that it was all arranged; that she had given her promise, and that her
father was pleased. So my mother said no more about it; but poor Wisi
cried bitterly, until my mother took her by the hand, and led her to the
piano, and said kindly, 'Dry your tears: we will sing together.' And she
played the accompaniment, and we sang,--

  "'To God you must confide
    Your sorrow and your pain;
  He will true care provide,
    And show you heaven again.

  "'For clouds and air and wind
    He points the path and way;
  Your road He'll also find,
    Nor let your footsteps stray.'

"After this, Wisi left us apparently comforted, and my mother spoke
kindly to her at parting; but I felt very sadly about the whole affair.
I had a conviction that poor Wisi had passed her happiest days, and
would never be light-hearted again; and I could not express my sorrow
for Andrew. What would he say? He said nothing,--not one word,--but went
about for several years like a shadow, and became more silent than ever,
and had no longer the quietly happy expression that formerly
distinguished him."

"Poor fellow!" cried Max. "And did he never marry?"

"Oh, no, Max!" replied his sister, rather reproachfully. "How could he
do so? How can you ask such a question? He is faithfulness personified."

"How could I know that, dearest sister?" said Max soothingly. "I could
not be expected to know that your gifted and inestimable friend
possessed also the quality of steadfastness. But tell me some more about
Wisi. I hope, truly, that the merry creature was not unfortunate. It
would grieve me sadly to think that."

"I see plainly, brother, that all your sympathies are secretly with
Wisi; and that you are not sorry for the faithful Andrew, whose heart
was nearly broken when he found that he had lost her."

"Yes, yes," said Max. "I have the greatest sympathy for the good fellow.
But do tell me how it was with Wisi: did she cry her pretty eyes out?"

"Almost, I believe," replied Marie. "I did not see her very often, and
she had a great deal of work to do. I believe that her husband was not a
bad fellow; but there was something very rough about him, and he was
rude and unkind even to his own little children. Wisi had a hard time of
it. She had a good many pretty children; but they were very delicate,
and she lost them one after the other. Five she buried, and has only now
one tender little girl,--a little Wiseli,--who is not much larger than
our Pussy, though she is several years older. Naturally Wisi's health
has been sadly tried with all this, and it is plainly visible now that
it has almost reached the end with her. She is rapidly wasting away in
consumption. I fear that there is no hope for her."

"Oh!" cried Max, "is this possible? Is it really so bad as that? Can
nothing be done, Marie? Let us look after her, and try if we cannot mend
matters somewhat."

"Oh, no! there is no chance for her," said his sister, sadly. "From the
very beginning Wisi was too delicate for all the work and care that came
upon her."

"And what became of her husband?"

"Oh! I quite forgot the sad trouble that poor Wisi had to endure
with him also.

"About a year ago, he broke an arm and a leg in the workshop, and was
brought home half dead. He was very ill, and could not work, and
certainly was not a patient sufferer. Wisi had the care of him in his
sickness, in addition to every thing else, and he died about six
months after the accident. Wisi has lived alone with her child since
that time."

"Then there will soon be nothing left but a little Wiseli, and what will
become of her? But, no; it will not turn out so sadly, I am sure. Wisi
will get well, and every thing be right again, as it should have been in
the beginning."

"No, not so, Max; it is too late for that," replied his sister,
decidedly. "Poor Wisi had to suffer sadly for her folly. But it is too
late indeed!" she said, rising, almost frightened to see that it was
after midnight, and that the colonel, who had been silent for some time
past, was now sleeping in his arm-chair.

Max was not in the least sleepy, however. All this story of poor Wisi
had awakened in him such lively recollections of his childhood, that
he wanted to talk about many other events and people; but his sister
was not to be persuaded. She took her bed-candle, and insisted upon
going to bed.

There was nothing to be done but to awaken his brother-in-law, which he
did with such a tremendous thump on the back, that the colonel sprang up
with the feeling that he had been struck by an enemy's bomb-shell. But
Max tapped him kindly on the shoulder, saying, "It is only a gentle
warning from your wife that we must all beat a retreat." This was
accomplished, and soon the house on the height stood quietly in the
moonlight; and half way down the hill stood another house, where it
would soon be silent, too, though a still feeble light glimmered there,
casting a pale shadow through the little window out into the brilliant
moonlit night.




CHAPTER III.

ALSO AT HOME.


At the same time that the colonel's children were going home, the
little Wiseli ran along down the hill as fast as she could scamper, for
she knew she had remained away longer than her mother liked that she
should, and she very rarely did any thing of the kind. This evening had
been one of such unusual pleasure for her that she had quite forgotten
to go home at the usual time, and therefore ran all the faster, and so
almost fell against a man, in her haste, who came out of the door of
their cottage as she was rushing in. He stepped quietly to one side,
and Wiseli hastened into the room, and went to her mother's side. To
her great surprise, she found no light in the room,--her mother was
sitting in the twilight, on a low chair by the window. "Mother," said
the child, "are you angry because I was away such a long time?" and she
put her arms around her mother's neck as she spoke. "No, no, Wiseli,"
said her mother, kindly; "but I am glad that you have come at last."
The girl began at once to tell her mother about the delightful coast
she had had on Otto's pretty sled,--how she had gone twice down the
hill, and how pleasant it was. When she had finished her little story,
she noticed, for the first time, how very quiet her mother was,--much
more so than usual,--and she asked anxiously, "Why have you not lighted
the lamp, mother?"

[Illustration: WISELI HASTENED INTO THE ROOM, AND WENT TO HER
MOTHER'S SIDE]

"I feel so weary this evening, Wiseli," replied her mother, "that I
could not get up to light it. Go get it now, my child, and bring me a
little water to drink at the same time, I am so very thirsty." Wiseli
hastened to the kitchen, and soon returned with the light in one hand,
and in the other a bottle filled with red syrup, that looked so
temptingly clear and good, that the thirsty invalid called out eagerly,
"What is that you are bringing me? It looks so good!"

"I do not know," said the child; "it was standing on the kitchen-table.
See how it sparkles!" Her mother took the bottle, and smelled at it.
"Oh!" she said, smelling again, "it is like fresh, wild strawberries.
Give me some water, quickly, Wiseli; I must drink." The child poured
some of the red syrup into a glass, and filled it with water, which her
mother swallowed eagerly, as one parched with thirst. "You do not know
how refreshing it is, child," as she handed back the empty glass. "Put
it away, Wiseli, but not far. It seems to me as if I could drink it all
the time, I am so thirsty. Who brought me this refreshment, Wiseli: do
you know? It must be from Trine: she brought it from the colonel's."

"Did Trine come in here, mother?" asked the child.

"No; I have not seen her at all," said her mother.

"Then it is not Trine, I am sure," said Wiseli, decidedly. "She always
comes into the room when she brings anything for you. But Andrew the
carpenter came today: did not he bring this with him?"

"What, Wiseli," said her mother, very eagerly, "what are you saying?
Andrew the carpenter never came to see me: what made you think of that?"

"He was here, certainly; certainly he was here within this house. He
went out of the door so quickly that I almost ran into him. Did you not
hear him at all?"

Her mother was quiet for a long time without speaking; then she said, "I
did hear the kitchen door softly opened. At first I thought it might be
you, and--it is true, I did not hear you enter until later. Are you
sure, Wiseli, that Andrew the carpenter was the person who went out from
our door?"

Wiseli was sure of her affair, and told her mother exactly how the coat
and how the cap looked that Andrew wore, and how frightened he was when
she almost ran into him; so that, at last, she convinced the good woman,
who said softly, as if to herself, "Yes, it must be Andrew; he knows
what I like best."

"Now I remember something else, mother," cried Wiseli, quite excitedly.
"Now I know for sure who once placed a big pot of honey in the
kitchen,--you remember how much you liked that,--and then the
apple-cakes a day or two ago,--do not you remember? You wished to send
your thanks by Trine when she brought you something from the colonel's
kitchen, and she said that she knew nothing at all about them. Now I am
sure that Andrew the carpenter brought them, and secretly placed them in
the kitchen for you."

"Now I believe so, also," said her mother, and softly wiped her eyes.

"There is nothing sad about it, mother," said Wiseli, rather shocked to
see how often her mother kept wiping her eyes.

"You must thank him for me, Wiseli: I cannot. Tell him that I send him
my thanks for all the goodness he has shown me,--he has always been kind
to me. Come, sit down here by me a little," said she, softly. "Give me
some more of the syrup, and then come and repeat the verse that I taught
you the other day."

Wiseli brought more water, and mixed it with the syrup again, and her
mother drank of it eagerly; then she laid her head wearily upon the low
window-sill, and beckoned her little daughter to come to her side. It
seemed to the child that her mother could not be comfortable, and she
fetched a pillow from the bed, and placed it carefully under her
mother's head. Then she sat down close to her side on a footstool, and
held her mother's hand in her own, and complied with her request to
repeat the verses, thus,--

  "'To God you must confide
    Your sorrow and your pain;
  He will true care provide,
    And show you heaven again.

  "'For clouds and air and wind
    He points the path and way;
  Your road He'll also find,
    Nor let your footsteps stray.'"

As Wiseli finished, she observed that her mother was almost asleep; but
