"You know damned well what I said."

Taber opened the door. He stood aside. Crane walked in and stopped dead.
He again whirled on Crane.

"It's empty."

"That's right. I could have told you downstairs but you wouldn't have
believed me. What were you looking for? New quarters?"

"Taber, I'll break you for this! If you think you can thwart the will of
the United States Senate--"

"You've been doing a pretty good job of breaking already."

"I haven't even begun!"

"That still doesn't tell me what you thought you'd find."

"Quit being cute. This time yesterday there were cadavers in here. This
was a laboratory!"

Brent looked wearily at his watch. "You're wrong, Senator. This place
was vacated exactly an hour and fifteen minutes after your stooge used
his court order to locate the cadavers."

"Then you admit you defied a court order--"

"Oh, come off of it. The court order said nothing about leaving things
as they were. But that's not important. The important thing is that you
give me some understanding and sympathy."

This obviously astounded Crane. "From you? That from the cocky,
self-sufficient Brent Taber? That's a little different tune from the one
you sang in your office, not too long ago."

"All right. I'll concede that. Let's say you've got me licked. I'll
admit I should have reacted a little less arrogantly. My nerves were
shot. I'd been up late too often. Now I'm ready to be reasonable."

Crane was scowling. "This isn't like you, Taber--not like you at all.
I'm suspicious. Why are you suddenly so agreeable?"

"Because I believe the nation--the world--is in great danger. I think we
should all realize that danger and work together."

"Then why have you been fighting me?"

"Because I honestly felt it was the best thing to do. I've changed my
mind. I'm willing to tell you the whole story."

"I've heard the whole story. I--"

"Then it was you who had my office taped."

"Exactly. I'm not ashamed of it. When I'm fighting for my constituents I
use every weapon at my command."

Brent Taber regarded Crane narrowly. "I underestimated your abilities,
Senator. That was fast work. Twenty minutes after I refused you
permission to attend that meeting, you had your man briefed and in
action. It was the waiter who brought in the coffee, wasn't it?"

Before Crane could answer, Taber gestured and said, "Never mind. That's
not important. You've heard the tape, so tell me--what do you want from
me? How can I earn your co-operation?"

"Quite simply, Taber. By recognizing my authority as a United States
Senator. By keeping me briefed on your progress against this terrible
thing that menaces our people. By accepting my active co-operation in
destroying it."

"What exactly do you mean by _active_?"

"Just what the word implies. Have the men on the senatorial committee
you briefed been at all active in helping you?"

"Frankly, no."

"Then what right have they to expect any rewards--shall we say?--for
their efforts?"

"You may have a point."

"I believe in rewards where rewards are due."

"And you want--?"

"In plain terms, the right to association in the public mind with the
effort to protect the nation."

"You want favorable publicity if and when this matter makes headlines?"

"Is that too much to ask?"

Brent Taber suddenly seemed lost and, in truth, he was wondering why in
hell he'd approached Crane in this way. He felt ashamed for even
considering the possibility of bending to the will of a windbag like
Crane. _Good Lord_, he thought, _I must be tired. I was on the point of
playing the jellyfish._

Abruptly his voice sharpened. "I'm sorry, I can't promise you that."

"Taber, you're a fool! I'll get it anyhow. I told you I'd break you if
you got in my way, and you've been almost discredited already. Don't you
know when to quit?"

"Maybe that's my trouble, Senator. Maybe I'm bull-headed. Anyhow, right
or wrong, I'll play out this string to the end. Good day--and I hope you
enjoy your new offices."

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, back at his own phone, Taber got a second call from
Callahan. "There's another one."

"Another one? I don't follow you."

"A photographer from New York City. He's being real cagey, this one, but
I know the breed. The kind that's so stupid-clever he outsmarts
himself."

"What's he after?"

"Sounds to me like he wants the same thing as the Senator."

"Hmmm," Taber mused. "Those are mighty popular cadavers, aren't they,
Callahan?"

"I'm blessed if they aren't."

"All right. You tell Mr. King--that is his name, isn't it?"

"You've got good eyesight--reading a blasted press card from clear
across town."

"I'm clairvoyant, Callahan. Tell you what you do--give me fifteen
minutes to make a phone call and then send him after the bodies."

"To the right place?"

"To the right place. And hold out for a good price. Get what the traffic
will bear. I'd say maybe fifty dollars. Allow yourself to be bribed real
good."

"I'll do that."




11


As with Rhoda Kane's mind, Les King's seemed to be divided into two
sections. One of these kept him in a state of perpetual uneasiness at
what the other was forcing him to do. He realized that venting your
frustrations against bureaucrats was one thing, but actively engaging in
dangerous snooping was quite another.

In the moments of uncertainty after John Dennis sent him to Washington,
D.C. with orders to get his hands on certain data, Les King bolstered
his courage by telling himself that, what the hell, he'd planned all
along to go right ahead and dig out the complete android through
whatever means possible. Therefore, meeting and teaming up with Dennis
had been a big break.

The rationalization wasn't too comforting, though, because he knew he
could never have gone ahead on his own. Also, he realized he and Dennis
weren't a team at all. Dennis ordered; he obeyed. Still, the sense of
excitement Dennis generated in him had its effect on the other part of
his mind, and this was the stronger; this held sway. Somehow, there was
the certainty that Dennis did not make mistakes; that everything would
work out.

This conviction was jarred a little when he got past the lobby man in
the Washington building--a feat easily accomplished--climbed ten flights
of stairs, and found room ten twenty-eight empty. Obviously, Dennis had
goofed.

King's first instinct was to retreat as quietly as he'd advanced; to get
away from the place and report failure to Dennis. But as he went back
downstairs, the thought of Dennis' disapproval began weighing more
heavily. Maybe something unforeseen had happened. Maybe he could still
pull this one out of the fire.

With this hope foremost in his mind, he went into the lobby, assumed a
bold front, and demanded: "Where in the hell did the people in ten
twenty-eight go?"

And the front worked. The lobby man, a big Irishman, was so impressed he
didn't even ask King how he'd gotten into the building. He blinked
politely and said, "Blessed if I'm not new here myself. This is my first
day. What room was it?"

Then the big Irishman went to a phone to check, and came back with a
Georgetown address written out on a slip of paper. Georgetown seemed
like an unlikely place to find cadavers and, under normal conditions,
King would have been highly suspicious of the whole thing. But what the
hell? Nothing was normal about this project, so why not follow through?

_King, you're crazy. You're out of your stupid mind._

He raised his hand and a cab cut in toward the curb.

When he arrived at the address, he found himself standing on the walk in
front of a large, imposing house. The place still seemed unlikely but
you never could tell. The way things were these days, any house in
whatever neighborhood was a potential location for almost anything. The
way this one was laid out, there could possibly have been a laboratory
in the back. A narrow walk led in that direction and, instead of
climbing the front steps, King followed it around the corner and found a
basement door at the foot of a flight of steps.

He hesitated before ringing the bell. What kind of an approach would he
use? The idea was to get inside and see the layout--spot the office, the
file cabinets. The feature-story bit? It might work, but who the hell
lived here? He'd checked the mailbox beside the front porch but there'd
been no name.

Deciding he could only play it by ear, he pulled in his diaphragm and
rang the bell.

The door opened quickly--too quickly, it seemed--and King realized he'd
struck a pay lode in the myopic-looking little jerk who stood peering
out at him. The guy wore a white laboratory coat with two bloodstains on
it and was holding a scalpel in his hand.

"I'm Doctor Entman. Can I help you?"

Entman--Entman--for Christ sake. Oh, sure, a neurologist. Had to be the
same guy. International authority. The _Times_ once did a feature on his
arrival at Idlewild. UN stuff.

"I'm King of the _Herald Tribune_," Les said, lying easily.
"We're shaping up a feature on the more advanced neurological
techniques--Sunday supplement material. They sent me down to see if
you'd give us some of your views."

"I'd be delighted. Come in. Come in."

"I'm not imposing on your time, I hope."

"Not at all!"

The guy was almost too cordial, but what the hell? All their noses
twitched at the smell of publicity.

Entman led him down a cement-floored corridor, the smell of formaldehyde
thickening as they went, then into a small office with an open door, on
the far side through which Les King was confronted with a frankly
gruesome sight--a dissecting room with parts of cadavers lying around
like orders in a meat packer's shipping room.

"Won't you sit down, please? There by the desk."

As Entman gestured, he noted King's reaction to the sight and the smell
of the dissecting room.

"Just a moment. I'll close that door."

"No, don't bother, Doctor. I'd better get the authentic atmosphere. It
makes a better story."

"I admire your courage, young man."

King pointed toward the room. "Something important?"

"Routine--only routine."

Then, to Les King's practiced eye, Entman proved it wasn't routine at
all by entering the laboratory and gathering up a loose pile of notes
lying there on a table. He seemed to momentarily forget King's presence
as he went through the notes, sorted them carefully, and brought them
back into the office.

King watched as Entman then deposited them in a small safe. He closed
the safe but didn't lock it. Then he turned, beamed myopically at his
visitor, and said, "Now I'm at your service, young man."

"Fine, Doctor. Now, this series we're planning will highlight modern
techniques with an eye to illustrating ..."

While King asked questions and Entman answered, another part of King's
mind was busy with the real problem at hand. Entman would, no doubt,
lock the safe before he left the office. Burglary--a risk King was
willing to take--would get him back into the office when no one was
around, but how could he open the safe? Walking straight to the thing he
was after had been fine. Having been put in a position to get to know
what the notes looked like was another astounding piece of good fortune.
All this, however, could turn out to mean nothing because he didn't know
how to crack a safe.

He would have to report failure after being so close.

"As I said," Entman prattled on happily, "when I was at Johns Hopkins
I--"

The desk phone rang. Entman picked it up, answered it and then hung up.
"Would I impose if I asked you for a fifteen-minute break? Some people
are calling that I must see--an appointment I forgot."

"Not at all," Les King assured him. "I'd like to do a little work on
these notes to see if I left out anything."

"So good of you. Boring people, really. I'll get rid of them as soon as
possible."

Entman left through an inner door and King was stunned by his good luck.
He called it that even while experience and judgment shrieked warnings.
This was too pat--too easy. Something was phony in the setup.

But he didn't even have to fight what common sense was telling him. He
was too busy opening the safe, spreading the data out on the desktop,
and using a small camera he carried in the side pocket of his jacket.

Then, he put the data back in the safe and felt the hot, excitement
surge up through his body.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm afraid I owe you a drink," Entman said ruefully.

"You were right. When I got back to the office, he was gone."

Brent Taber grinned, but only with his mouth--his eyes remained somber
and weary. "The data was back in the safe?"

"Right where I put it. I'll swear it hadn't been moved."

"He was photographing it thirty seconds after you left."

"But how can you be sure?"

Brent Taber pulled at his ear and stared at a Renoir on the wall of
Entman's drawing room without seeing it. "I can't, of course. We can't
be sure of anything. It's all based on an idea you gave me."
