an eery chaos of a dozen different dimensions blending to form a Space
in which there was no known dimension.

As they flashed on out to the surface Blake had one hazy glimpse of
Manhattan's glowing lights spread all about them. Then the speed of
their progress leaped into a new and terrible acceleration that blotted
out every tangible sensation from Blake's brain.

Time and Space alike seemed to vanish as their hurtling flight sent them
rocketing on for distances inconceivably vast through a bleak and
appalling Nothingness, where neither sight nor sound existed.

Then abruptly the speed of their flight seemed to be lessening.
Sensation returned to Blake. He again heard the thin high-pitched
metallic wail, now swiftly deepening to the familiar growl of rolling
bass. He again noted the presence of the glowing green ribbons of the
net that still encircled them.

       *       *       *       *       *

A blindingly brilliant purple mist was now closing in upon them from
every direction, bringing with it a nameless and agonizing force that
seemed to be shaking the very atoms in Blake's body asunder. Then they
dropped swiftly down out of the purple mists, and the strange agony at
once vanished. Blake felt their downward progress come to an end with
the gentle arrival of his feet upon firm ground.

The encircling net of green flame glowed dazzlingly brighter for a brief
moment, then swiftly vanished into thin air, while the mutter of bass
vibrations simultaneously died away into silence. Blake staggered and
nearly fell as the sudden release from the net's strands again left his
body free.

He looked down at Helen as she stood huddled close beside him, still in
the shelter of his arms. The girl's face was white with terror as she
looked back up at him.

"Bob, what happened--and where on earth are we?" Her voice trembled a
little in spite of her plucky effort to keep it steady.

Blake's bewildered gaze was already roving around them trying to
comprehend the incredible details of their surroundings. "I've no idea
what happened, dear," he answered slowly. "As to where we are now, I'm
very much afraid it's nowhere on Earth!"

"Then where is this hopped-up layout anyway, fellah, if it ain't on
Earth?" broke in a voice with a decided East Side twang. Blake quickly
turned and saw that the gangster had remained with them in that eery
flight in the green net. There was an expression of dumfounded amazement
upon the man's heavy face, and he was obviously anxious to be friendly
with the two who now represented the only link with the familiar world
he had known.

"Gee, for a minute I thought they had me on the spot in some new way,
sure!" he chattered excitedly as he came quickly over to join Helen and
Blake. "There's plenty of guys wantin' to turn the heat on me there in
the Big Town. I'm Gil Mapes, see? But this ain't no frame-up like any I
ever heard of. What happened anyway, fellah?"

       *       *       *       *       *

For the moment Blake did not answer. The three of them were silent as
they stared about them with eyes that were dazed by the startlingly
unfamiliar aspect of every detail in their surroundings.

From the twin purple suns that blazed down through the tenuous mists
overhead to the barren blue-gray ground underfoot, there was not a
single object familiar to Earthly eyes. The huge enclosure in which the
three of them stood was obviously the work of intelligent beings of some
kind, but its mechanical details were products of a science different
from any known to Blake.

The purpose of the enclosure seemed to be to maintain an area of clear
air in the midst of the swirling purple vapors that pressed in against
it from the top and from every side. In shape it was a great oblong
cell, some fifty feet high, two hundred yards long, and about one
hundred yards wide. The three captives stood near the center.

Fencing in the enclosure at twenty-yard intervals and reaching upward to
the ceiling were slender posts of some lusterless black metal. Between
these posts streamed unbroken, nearly transparent sheets of some unknown
force, the only visible sign of which was the presence of countless
millions of tiny shimmering golden flecks which danced like dust motes
in a ray of sunlight. It was obviously this thin sheet of unknown force
that was keeping the purple mists at bay, for fan-like antennae at the
top of each post spread a similar shimmering sheet that formed a ceiling
for the clear-aired area.

       *       *       *       *       *

The three Earthlings were facing one of the side walls of the big
enclosures. The purple mists outside made it hard to see clearly for
any distance, but Blake had an impression that the surrounding terrain
was featured by the same barren, nearly desert bleakness that
characterized the interior of the enclosure, where scattered clumps of
dead, spiky black branches of shrub-like vegetation were the only sign
of plant life.

Just within the distant end wall at their right there was a low platform
surmounted by a wide arch some ten feet in height, both constructed of
silver-colored metal. There was nothing between them and the end wall to
their left, but they could see that the ground sloped sharply upward
from the barrier-sheet, and on the crest of the ridge a gigantic
cone-shaped structure of solid black could be seen dimly through the
intervening mists.

The cone-building seemed to be the source of the power that kept the
enclosure intact. Slender cables of black metal ran down the slope from
it into the clear-aired space, spreading out over the dusty gray-blue
ground to the base of each of the tall posts, with a heavier
copper-colored cable running on the silver arch. From within the
windowless interior of the cone there was audible a low hum as of
tremendous power being generated there.

"Gee, what a rummy joint this place is!" There was frank awe in the
gangster's voice as he at last broke the silence. "That guy with the
green net sure took us for one sweet ride. Mebbe we're on the Moon now,
or on Mars, huh?"

Blake shook his head. "No, we're completely out of our entire solar
system. Those twin purple suns up there prove that. We may even be in
another universe, or another dimension from our own. A piece of
apparatus that could whisk us up through fifty feet of earth and masonry
as that green net did obviously works in dimensions of which we've
never dreamed. The only thing we're sure of is that we were brought to
this purple world deliberately and intentionally by an intelligent being
of some kind, scooped up like tadpoles from a mud-puddle and dumped here
in this elaborate enclosure It had already prepared for us."

       *       *       *       *       *

Blake nodded to where the black cone-building loomed through the purple
mists outside the end wall. "Whoever or whatever the thing was that
brought us here, I have a hunch It's there in that power-house watching
us. I'd suggest that we walk down toward that end of the enclosure for a
closer look. We may at least find out whether we're guests or
prisoners."

