able to reach it. On account of the danger from their enemies on Ceres,
the Martians have fortified it strongly on all sides, and have even
surrounded it and covered it overhead with a great electrical network,
to touch which would be instant death."

"Ah," said Mr. Edison, "they have got an electric shield, have they?
Well, I think we shall be able to manage that."

"Anyhow," he continued, "we have got to get into that power house, and
we have got to close those gates, and we must not lose much time in
making up our minds how it is to be done. Evidently this is our only
chance. We have not force enough to contend in open battle with the
Martians, but if we can flood them out, and thereby render the engines
contained in their fortifications useless, perhaps we shall be able to
deal with the airships, which will be all the means of defense that will
then remain to them."

This idea commended itself to all the leaders of the expedition. It was
determined to make a reconnaissance at once.

But it would not do for us to approach the planet too hastily, and we
certainly could not think of landing upon it in broad daylight. Still,
as long as we were yet a considerable distance from Mars, we felt that
we should be safe from observation because so much time had elapsed
while we were hidden behind Deimos that the Martians had undoubtedly
concluded that we were no longer in existance.

So we boldly quitted the little satellite with our entire squadron and
once more rapidly approached the red planet of war. This time it was to
be a death grapple and our chances of victory still seemed good.

As soon as we arrived so near the planet that there was danger of our
being actually seen, we took pains to keep continually in the shadow of
Mars, and the more surely to conceal our presence all lights upon the
ships were extinguished. The precaution of the commander even went so
far as to have the smooth metallic sides of the cars blackened over so
that they should not reflect light, and thus become visible to the
Martians as shining specks, moving suspiciously among the stars.

The precise location of the great power house on the shores of the
Syrtis Major having been carefully ascertained, the squadron dropped
down one night into the upper limits of the Martian atmosphere, directly
over the gulf.

Then a consultation was called on the flagship and a plan of campaign
was quickly devised.

It was deemed wise that the attempt should be made with a single
electric ship, but that the others should be kept hovering near, ready
to respond on the instant to any signal for aid which might come from
below. It was thought that, notwithstanding the wonderful defences,
which, according to Aina's account surrounded the building, a small
party would have a better chance of success than a large one.

Mr. Edison was certain that the electrical network which was described
as covering the power house would not prove a serious obstruction to us,
because by carefully sweeping the space where we intended to pass with
the disintegrators before quitting the ship, the netting could be
sufficiently cleared away to give us uninterrupted passage.

At first the intention was to have twenty men, each armed with two
disintegrators (that being the largest number one person could carry to
advantage) descend from the electrical ship and make the venture. But,
after further discussion, this number was reduced; first to a dozen, and
finally, to only four. These four consisted of Mr. Edison, Colonel
Smith, Mr. Sydney Phillips and myself.

Both by her own request and because we could not help feeling that her
knowledge of the locality would be indispensable to us, Aina was also
included in our party, but not, of course, as a fighting member of it.

It was about an hour after midnight when the ship in which we were to
make the venture parted from the remainder of the squadron and dropped
cautiously down. The blaze of electric lights running away in various
directions indicated the lines of innumerable canals with habitations
crowded along their banks, which came to a focus at a point on the
continent of Aeria, westward from the Syrtis Major.

We stopped the electrical ship at an elevation of perhaps three hundred
feet above the vast roof of a structure which Aina assured us was the
building of which we were in search.

Here we remained for a few minutes, cautiously reconnoitering. On that
side of the power house which was opposite to the shore of the Syrtis
Major there was a thick grove of trees, lighted beneath, as was apparent
from the illumination which here and there streamed up through the cover
of leaves, but, nevertheless, dark and gloomy above the tree tops.

"The electric network extends over the grove as well as over the
building," said Aina.

This was lucky for us, because we wished to descend among the trees,
and, by destroying part of the network over the tree tops, we could
reach the shelter we desired and at the same time pass within the line
of electric defenses.

With increased caution, and almost holding our breath lest we should
make some noise that might reach the ears of the sentinels below, we
caused the car to settle gently down until we caught sight of a metallic
net stretched in the air between us and the trees.

After our first encounter with the Martians on the asteroid, where, as I
have related, some metal which was included in their dress resisted the
action of the disintegrators, Mr. Edison had readjusted the range of
vibrations covered by the instruments, and since then we had found
nothing that did not yield to them. Consequently, we had no fear that
the metal of the network would not be destroyed.

There was danger, however, of arousing attention by shattering holes
through the tree tops. This could be avoided by first carefully
ascertaining how far away the network was and then with the adjustable
mirrors attached to the disintegrators focusing the vibratory discharge
at that distance.

So successful were we that we opened a considerable gap in the network
without doing any perceptible damage to the trees beneath.

The ship was cautiously lowered through the opening and brought to rest
among the upper branches of one of the tallest trees. Colonel Smith, Mr.
Phillips, Mr. Edison and myself at once clambered out upon a strong
limb.

For a moment I feared our arrival had been betrayed on account of the
altogether too noisy contest that arose between Colonel Smith and Mr.
Phillips as to which of them should assist Aina. To settle the dispute I
took charge of her myself.

At length we were all safely in the tree.

Then followed the still more dangerous undertaking of descending from
this great height to the ground. Fortunately, the branches were very
close together and they extended down within a short distance of the
soil. So the actual difficulties of the descent were not very great
after all. The one thing that we had particularly to bear in mind was
the absolute necessity of making no noise.

At length the descent was successfully accomplished, and we all five
stood together in the shadow at the foot of the great tree. The grove
was so thick around that while there was an abundance of electric lights
among the trees, their illumination did not fall upon us where we stood.

Peering cautiously through the vistas in various directions, we
ascertained our location with respect to the wall of the building. Like
all the structures which we had seen on Mars, it was composed of
polished red metal.

"Where is the entrance?" inquired Mr. Edison, in a whisper.

"Come softly this way, and look out for the sentinel," replied Aina.

Gripping our disintegrators firmly, and screwing up our courage, with
noiseless steps we followed the girl among the shadows of the trees.

We had one-very great advantage. The Martians had evidently placed so
much confidence in the electric network which surrounded the power house
that they never dreamed of enemies being able to penetrate it--at least,
without giving warning of their coming.

But the hole which we had blown in this network with the disintegrators
had been made noiselessly, and Mr. Edison believed, since no enemies had
appeared, that our operations had not been betrayed by any automatic
signal to watchers inside the building.

Consequently, we had every reason to think that we now stood within the
line of defense, in which they reposed the greatest confidence, without
their having the least suspicion of our presence.

Aina assured us that on the occasion of her former visit to the power
house there had been but two sentinels on guard at the entrance. At the
inner end of a long passage leading to the interior, she said, there
were two more. Besides these there were three or four Martian engineers
watching the machinery in the interior of the building. A number of
airships were supposed to be on guard around the structure, but possibly
their vigilance had been relaxed, because not long ago the Martians had
sent an expedition against Ceres which had been so successful that the
power of that planet to make any attack upon Mars had, for the present
been destroyed.

Supposing us to have been annihilated in the recent battle among the
clouds, they would have no fear or cause for vigilance on our account.

The entrance to the great structure was low--at least, when measured by
the stature of the Martians. Evidently the intention was that only one
person at a time should find room to pass through it.

Drawing cautiously near, we discerned the outlines of two gigantic
forms, standing in the darkness, one on either side of the door. Colonel
Smith whispered to me:

"If you will take the fellow on the right, I will attend to the other
one."

Adjusting our aim as carefully as was possible in the gloom, Colonel
Smith and I simultaneously discharged our disintegrators, sweeping them
rapidly up and down in the manner which had become familiar to us when
endeavoring to destroy one of the gigantic Martians with a single
stroke. And so successful were we that the two sentinels disappeared as
if they were ghosts of the night.

Instantly we all hurried forward and entered the door. Before us
extended a long, straight passage, brightly illuminated by a number of
electric candles. Its polished sides gleamed with blood-red reflections,
and the gallery terminated, at a distance of two or three hundred feet,
with an opening into a large chamber beyond, on the further side of
which we could see part of a gigantic and complicated mass of machinery.

Making as little noise as possible, we pushed ahead along the passage,
but when we had arrived within the distance of a dozen paces from the
inner end, we stopped, and Colonel Smith, getting down upon his knees,
crept forward, until he had reached the inner end of the passage. There
he peered cautiously around the edge into the chamber, and, turning his
head a moment later, beckoned us to come forward. We crept to his side,
and, looking out into the vast apartment, could perceive no enemies.

What had become of the sentinels supposed to stand at the inner end the
passage we could not imagine. At any rate, they were not at their posts.

The chamber was an immense square room at least a hundred feet in height
and 400 feet on a side, and almost filling the wall opposite to us was
an intricate display of machinery, wheels, levers, rods and polished
plates. This we had no doubt was one end of the engine which opened and
shut the great gates that could dam an ocean.

"There is no one in sight," said Colonel Smith.

"Then we must act quickly," said Mr. Edison.

"Where," he said, turning to Aina, "is the handle by turning which you
saw the Martian close the gates?"

Aina looked about in bewilderment. The mechanism before us was so
complicated that even an expert mechanic would have been excusable for
finding himself unable to understand it. There were scores of knobs and
handles, all glistening in the electric light, any one of which, so far
as the uninstructed could tell, might have been the master key that
controlled the whole complex apparatus.

"Quick," said Mr. Edison, "where is it?"

The girl in her confusion ran this way and that, gazing hopelessly upon
the machinery, but evidently utterly unable to help us.

To remain here inactive was not merely to invite destruction for
ourselves, but was sure to bring certain failure upon the purpose of the
expedition. All of us began instantly to look about in search of the
proper handle, seizing every crank and wheel in sight and striving to
turn it.

"Stop that!" shouted Mr. Edison, "you may set the whole thing wrong.
Don't touch anything until we have found the right lever."

But to find that seemed to most of us now utterly beyond the power of
man.

It was at this critical moment that the wonderful depth and reach of Mr.
Edison's mechanical genius displayed itself. He stepped back, ran his
eyes quickly over the whole immense mass of wheels, handles, bolts, bars
and levers, paused for an instant, as if making up his mind, then said
decidedly, "There it is," and stepping quickly forward, selected a small
wheel amid a dozen others, all furnished at the circumference with
handles like those of a pilot's wheel, and giving it a quick wrench,
turned it half-way around.

At this instant, a startling shout fell upon our ears. There was a
thunderous clatter behind us, and, turning, we saw three gigantic
Martians rushing forward.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

_VENGEANCE IS OURS_


"Sweep them! sweep them!" shouted Colonel Smith, as he brought his
disintegrator to bear. Mr. Phillips and I instantly followed his
example, and thus we swept the Martians into eternity, while Mr. Edison
coolly continued his manipulations of the wheel.

The effect of what he was doing became apparent in less than half a
minute. A shiver ran through the mass of machinery and shook the entire
building.

"Look! Look!" cried Sydney Phillips, who had stepped a little apart from
the others.

We all ran to his side and found ourselves in front of a great window
which opened through the side of the engine, giving a view of what lay
in front of it. There, gleaming in the electric lights, we saw Syrtis
Major, its waters washing high against the walls of the vast power
house. Running directly out from the shore, there was an immense
metallic gate at least 400 yards in length and rising three hundred feet
above the present level of the water.

This great gate was slowly swinging upon an invisible hinge in such a
manner that in a few minutes it would evidently stand across the current
of the Syrtis Major at right angles.

Beyond was a second gate, which was moving in the same manner. Further
on was a third gate, and then another, and another, as far as the eye
could reach, evidently extending in an unbroken series completely across
the great strait.

As the gates, with accelerated motion when the current caught them,
clanged together, we beheld a spectacle that almost stopped the beating
of our hearts.

The great Syrtis seemed to gather itself for a moment, and then it
leaped upon the obstruction and buried its waters into one vast foaming
geyser that seemed to shoot a thousand feet skyward.

But the metal gates withstood the shock, though buried from our sight in
the seething white mass, and the baffled waters instantly swirled around
in ten thousand gigantic eddies, rising to the level of our window and
beginning to inundate the power house before we fairly comprehended our
peril.

"We have done the work," said Mr. Edison, smiling grimly. "Now we had
better get out of this before the flood bursts upon us."

The warning came none too soon. It was necessary to act upon it at once
if we would save our lives. Even before we could reach the entrance to
the long passage through which we had come into the great engine room,
the water had risen half-way to our knees. Colonel Smith, catching Aina
under his arm, led the way. The roar of the maddened torrent behind
deafened us.

As we ran through the passage the water followed us, with a wicked
swishing sound, and within five seconds it was above our knees; in ten
seconds up to our waists.

The great danger now was that we should be swept from our feet, and once
down in that torrent there would have been little chance of our ever
getting our heads above its level. Supporting ourselves as best we could
with the aid of the walls, we partly ran, and were partly swept along,
until when we reached the outer end of the passage and emerged into the
open air, the flood was swirling about our shoulders.

Here there was an opportunity to clutch some of the ornamental work
surrounding the doorway, and thus we managed to stay our mad progress,
and gradually to work out of the current until we found that the water,
having now an abundance of room to spread, had fallen again as low as
our knees.

But suddenly we heard the thunder of the banks tumbling behind us, and
to the right and left, and the savage growl of the released water as it
sprang through the breaches.

To my dying day, I think, I shall not forget the sight of a great fluid
column that burst through the dike at the edge of the grove of trees,
and, by the tremendous impetus of its rush, seemed turned into a solid
thing.

Like an enormous ram, it plowed the soil to a depth of twenty feet,
uprooting acres of the immense trees like stubble turned over by the
plowshare.

The uproar was so awful that for an instant the coolest of us lost our
self-control. Yet we knew that we had not the fraction of a second to
waste. The breaking of the banks had caused the water again rapidly to
rise about us. In a little while it was once more as high as our waists.

In the excitement and confusion, deafened by the noise and blinded by
the flying foam, we were in danger of becoming separated in the flood.
We no longer knew certainly in what direction was the tree by whose aid
we had ascended from the electrical ship. We pushed first one way and
then another, staggering through the rushing waters in search of it.
Finally we succeeded in locating it, and with all our strength hurried
toward it.

Then there came a noise as if the globe of Mars had been split asunder,
and another great head of water hurled itself down upon the soil before
us, and, without taking time to spread, bored a vast cavity in the
ground, and scooped out the whole of the grove before our eyes as easily
as a gardener lifts a sod with his spade.

Our last hope was gone. For a moment the level of the water around us
sank again, as it poured into the immense excavation where the grove had
stood, but in an instant it was reinforced from all sides and began once
more rapidly to rise.

We gave ourselves up for lost, and, indeed, there did not seem any
possible hope of salvation.

Even in the extremity I saw Colonel Smith lifting the form of Aina, who
had fainted, above the surface of the surging water, while Sydney
Phillips stood by his side and aided him in supporting the unconscious
girl.

"We stayed a little too long," was the only sound I heard from Mr.
Edison.

The huge bulk of the power house partially protected us against the
force of the current, and the water spun us around in great eddies.
These swept us this way and that, but yet we managed to cling together,
determined not to be separated in death if we could avoid it.

Suddenly a cry rang out directly above our heads:

"Jump for your lives, and be quick!"

At the same instant the ends of several ropes splashed into the water.

We glanced upward, and there, within three or four yards of our heads,
hung the electrical ship, which we had left moored at the top of the
tree.

Tom, the expert electrician from Mr. Edison's shop, who had remained in
charge of the ship, had never once dreamed of such a thing as deserting
us. The moment he saw the water bursting over the dam, and evidently
flooding the building which we had entered, he cast off his moorings, as
we subsequently learned, and hovered over the entrance to the power
house, getting as low down as possible and keeping a sharp watch for us.

But most of the electric lights in the vicinity had been carried down by
the first rush of water, and in the darkness he did not see us when we
emerged from the entrance. It was only after the sweeping away of the
grove of trees had allowed a flood of light to stream upon the scene
from a cluster of electric lamps on a distant portion of the bank on the
Syrtis that had not yet given way that he caught sight of us.
