The Project Gutenberg EBook of Four Young Explorers, by Oliver Optic

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Four Young Explorers
       Sight-Seeing in the Tropics

Author: Oliver Optic

Illustrator: A. Burnham Shute

Release Date: January 11, 2008 [EBook #24252]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOUR YOUNG EXPLORERS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain material produced by
Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)







ALL OVER THE WORLD LIBRARY


OLIVER OPTIC

[Illustration]

FOUR YOUNG EXPLORERS




ALL-OVER-THE-WORLD LIBRARY

By OLIVER OPTIC

       *       *       *       *       *

_Illustrated, Price per Volume $1.25_

FIRST SERIES

        A MISSING MILLION
          Or THE ADVENTURES OF LOUIS BELGRAVE

        A MILLIONAIRE AT SIXTEEN
          Or THE CRUISE OF THE GUARDIAN MOTHER

        A YOUNG KNIGHT-ERRANT
          Or CRUISING IN THE WEST INDIES

        STRANGE SIGHTS ABROAD
          Or A VOYAGE IN EUROPEAN WATERS

SECOND SERIES

        AMERICAN BOYS AFLOAT
          Or CRUISING IN THE ORIENT

        THE YOUNG NAVIGATORS
          Or THE FOREIGN CRUISE OF THE MAUD

        UP AND DOWN THE NILE
          Or YOUNG ADVENTURERS IN AFRICA

        ASIATIC BREEZES
          Or STUDENTS ON THE WING

THIRD SERIES

        ACROSS INDIA
          Or LIVE BOYS IN THE FAR EAST

        HALF ROUND THE WORLD
          Or AMONG THE UNCIVILIZED

        FOUR YOUNG EXPLORERS
          Or SIGHT-SEEING IN THE TROPICS

_OTHER VOLUMES IN PREPARATION_ ANY VOLUME SOLD SEPARATELY

LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston

[Illustration: "YOUR FIRST SHOT, LOUIS," SAID SCOTT.

_Page 30._]





_All-Over-the-World Library--Third Volume of Third Series_


FOUR YOUNG EXPLORERS

OR

SIGHT-SEEING IN THE TROPICS

BY

OLIVER OPTIC

        AUTHOR OF
        "THE ARMY AND NAVY SERIES" "YOUNG AMERICA ABROAD, FIRST AND SECOND
        SERIES" "THE BOAT-CLUB STORIES" "THE ONWARD AND UPWARD SERIES"
        "THE GREAT WESTERN SERIES" "THE WOODVILLE STORIES" "THE
        LAKE SHORE SERIES" "THE YACHT-CLUB SERIES" "THE RIVERDALE
        STORIES" "THE BOAT-BUILDER SERIES" "THE BLUE AND THE GRAY
        AFLOAT" "THE BLUE AND THE GRAY--ON LAND" "THE STARRY
        FLAG SERIES" "ALL-OVER-THE-WORLD LIBRARY, FIRST SECOND
        AND THIRD SERIES" COMPRISING "A MISSING MILLION" "A
        MILLIONAIRE AT SIXTEEN" "A YOUNG KNIGHT-ERRANT"
        "STRANGE SIGHTS ABROAD" "AMERICAN BOYS AFLOAT"
        "THE YOUNG NAVIGATORS" "UP AND DOWN THE
        NILE" "ASIATIC BREEZES" "ACROSS INDIA"
        "HALF ROUND THE WORLD" ETC., ETC., ETC.



        BOSTON
        LEE AND SHEPARD PUBLISHERS
        10 MILK STREET
        1896




        COPYRIGHT, 1896, BY LEE AND SHEPARD

        _All Rights Reserved_

        FOUR YOUNG EXPLORERS


        TYPOGRAPHY BY C. J. PETERS & SON, BOSTON.


        PRESSWORK BY BERWICK & SMITH.




        TO
        MY APPRECIATIVE AND VALUED FRIEND

        FREDERICK D. RUGGLES, ESQ.

        RESIDING ON A HISTORIC HILL IN
        HARDWICK, MASS.

        This Volume

        IS RESPECTFULLY AND CORDIALLY
        DEDICATED.




PREFACE


"FOUR YOUNG EXPLORERS" is the third volume of the third series of the
"All-Over-the-World Library." When the young millionaire and his three
companions of about his own age, with a chosen list of near and dear
friends, had made the voyage "Half Round the World," the volume with
this title left them all at Sarawak in the island of Borneo. The four
young explorers, as they became, were permitted to spend three weeks
there hunting, fishing, and ascending some of the rivers, while the rest
of the party proceeded in the Guardian-Mother to Siam. The younger
members of the ship's company believed they had seen enough of temples,
palaces, and fine gardens in the great cities of the East, and desired
to live a wilder life for a brief period.

They were provided with a steam-launch, prepared for long trips; and
they ascended the Sarawak, the Sadong, and the Simujan Rivers, and had
all the hunting, fishing, and exploring they desired. They visited the
villages of the Sea and Hill Dyaks, and learned what they could of their
manners and customs, penetrating the island from the sea to the
mountains. They studied the flora and the fauna of the forests, and were
exceedingly interested in their occupation for about a week, when they
came to the conclusion that "too much of a good thing" became wearisome;
and, more from the love of adventure than for any other reason, they
decided to proceed to Bangkok, and to make the voyage of nine hundred
miles in the Blanchita, as they had named the steam-launch, which voyage
was accomplished without accident.

After the young explorers had looked over the capital of Siam, the
Guardian-Mother and her consort made the voyage to Saigon, the capital
of French Cochin-China, where the visit of the tourists was a general
frolic, with "lots of fun," as the young people expressed it; and then,
crossing the China Sea, made the port of Manila, the capital of the
Philippine Islands, where they explored the city, and made a trip up the
Pasig to the Lake of the Bay. From this city they made the voyage to
Hong-Kong, listening to a very long lecture on the way in explanation of
the history, manners, and customs, and the peculiarities of the people
of China. They were still within the tropics, and devoted themselves to
the business of sight-seeing with the same vigor and interest as before.
But most of them had read so much about China, as nearly every American
has, that many of the sights soon began to seem like an old story to
them.

Passing out of the Torrid Zone, the two steamers proceeded to the north,
obtaining a long view of Formosa, and hearing a lecture about it. Their
next port of call was Shang-hai, reached by ascending the Woo-Sung. From
this port they made an excursion up the Yang-tsze-Chiang, which was an
exceedingly interesting trip to them. The ships then made the voyage to
Tien-tsin, from which they ascended by river in the steam-launch to a
point thirteen miles from Pekin, going from there to the capital by the
various modes of conveyance in use in China. They visited the sights of
the great city under the guidance of a mandarin, educated at Yale
College. Some of the party made the trip to the loop-wall, near Pekin.
Returning to Tien-tsin, with the diplomatic mandarin, who had accepted
an invitation to go to Japan in the Guardian-Mother, they sailed for
that interesting country, where the next volume of the series will take
them.

It may be necessary to say that the Guardian-Mother, now eighteen months
from New York, and half round the world, reached Tien-tsin May 25, 1893;
and therefore nothing relating to the late war between China and Japan
is to be found in this volume. Possibly the four young explorers would
have found more sights to see, and more adventures to enjoy, if they had
struck either of the belligerent nations during the war; but the ship
sailed for the United States before hostilities were begun.

Of course the writer has been compelled to consult many volumes in
writing this book; and he takes great pleasure in mentioning among them
the very interesting and valuable work of Mr. W. T. Hornaday, the
accomplished traveller and scientist, "Two Years in the Jungle." This
book contains all that one need know about Borneo, to say nothing of the
writer's trip in India among the elephants. His researches in regard to
the orang-outang appear to have exhausted the subject; though I do not
believe he has found the "missing link," if he is looking for it.
Professor Legge contributed several articles to "Chambers's
Encyclopaedia," which contain the most interesting and valuable matter
about China to be derived from any work; for he lived for years in that
country, travelled extensively, and learned the language. I am under
great obligations to these authors.

The author is under renewed obligations to his readers, young and old,
who have been his constant friends during more than forty years, for the
favor with which they have received a whole library of his books, and
for the kind words they have spoken to him, both verbally and by letter.

        WILLIAM T. ADAMS.

        DORCHESTER, MASS.




CONTENTS


        CHAPTER I.
                                                  PAGE
        THE BORNEO HUNTERS AND EXPLORERS             1

        CHAPTER II.
        A VOYAGE UP THE SARAWAK RIVER               10

        CHAPTER III.
        SOMETHING ABOUT BORNEO AND ITS PEOPLE       19

        CHAPTER IV.
        A SPECULATION IN CROCODILES                 29

        CHAPTER V.
        A HUNDRED AND EIGHT FEET OF CROCODILE       39

        CHAPTER VI.
        THE VOYAGE UP THE SADONG TO SIMUJAN         48

        CHAPTER VII.
        A SPIRITED BATTLE WITH ORANG-OUTANGS        58

        CHAPTER VIII.
        A PERFORMANCE OF VERY AGILE GIBBONS         67

        CHAPTER IX.
        A VISIT TO A DYAK LONG-HOUSE                77

        CHAPTER X.
        THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE DYAKS        87

        CHAPTER XI.
        STEAMBOATING THROUGH A GREAT FOREST         96

        CHAPTER XII.
        A FORMIDABLE OBSTRUCTION REMOVED           106

        CHAPTER XIII.
        THE CAPTAIN'S ASTOUNDING PROPOSITION       115

        CHAPTER XIV.
        DOWN THE SIMUJAN AND UP THE SARAWAK        125

        CHAPTER XV.
        ON THE VOYAGE TO POINT CAMBODIA            134

        CHAPTER XVI.
        AN EXCITING RACE IN THE CHINA SEA          143

        CHAPTER XVII.
        THE END OF THE VOYAGE TO BANGKOK           153

        CHAPTER XVIII.
        LOUIS'S DOUBLE-DINNER ARGUMENT             163

        CHAPTER XIX.
        A HASTY GLANCE AT BANGKOK                  172

        CHAPTER XX.
        A VIEW OF COCHIN-CHINA AND SIAM            181

        CHAPTER XXI.
        ON THE VOYAGE TO SAIGON                    191

        CHAPTER XXII.
        IN THE DOMINIONS OF THE FRENCH             201

        CHAPTER XXIII.
        A LIVELY EVENING AT THE HOTEL              211

        CHAPTER XXIV.
        TONQUIN AND SIGHTS IN CHOLON               221

        CHAPTER XXV.
        SEVERAL HILARIOUS FROLICS                  231

        CHAPTER XXVI.
        THE VOYAGE ACROSS THE CHINA SEA            241

        CHAPTER XXVII.
        SOME ACCOUNT OF THE PHILIPPINES            250

        CHAPTER XXVIII.
        THE DESCRIPTION OF AN EARTHQUAKY CITY      260

        CHAPTER XXIX.
        GOING ON SHORE IN MANILA                   270

        CHAPTER XXX.
        EXCURSIONS ON SHORE AND UP THE PASIG       280

        CHAPTER XXXI.
        HALF A LECTURE ON CHINESE SUBJECTS         290

