to your master, if you had one, when you have been struck or reviled
by him, or received some other evil at his hands? You would not say
this? And because we think right to destroy you, do you think that you
have any right to destroy us in return, and your country as far as in
you lies? And will you, O professor of true virtue, say that you are
justified in this? Has a philosopher like you failed to discover that
our country is more to be valued and higher and holier far than mother
or father or any master, and more to be regarded in the eyes of the
gods and of men of understanding; also to be soothed, and gently and
reverently entreated when angry, even more than a father, and if not
persuaded, obeyed? And when we are punished by her, whether with
imprisonment or stripes, the punishment is to be endured in silence;
and if she lead us to wounds or death in battle, thither we follow as
is right; neither may any one yield or retreat or leave his rank, but
whether in battle, or in a court of law, or in any other place, he
must do what his city and his country order him, or he must change
their view of what is just; and if he may do no violence to his father
or mother, much less may he do violence to his country." What answer
shall we make to this, Crito? Do the laws speak truly, or do they not?

_Crito_: I think that they do.

_Socrates_: Then the laws will say: "Consider, Socrates, if this is
true, that in your present attempt you are going to do us wrong. For,
after having brought you into the world, and nurtured and educated
you, and given you and every other citizen a share in every good that
we had to give, we further proclaim and give the right to every
Athenian that if he does not like us when he has come of age and has
seen the ways of the city, and made our acquaintance, he may go where
he pleases and take his goods with him; and none of our laws will
forbid him or interfere with him. Any of you who does not like us and
the city, and who wants to go to a colony or to any other city, may go
where he likes and take his goods with him. But he who has experience
of the manner in which we order justice and administer the state, and
still remains, has entered into an implied contract that he will do as
we command him. And he who disobeys us is, as we maintain, thrice
wrong; first, because in disobeying us he is disobeying his parents;
secondly, because we are the authors of his education; thirdly,
because he had made an agreement with us that he will duly obey our
commands; and he neither obeys them nor convinces us that our commands
are wrong; and we do not rudely impose them, but give him the
alternative of obeying or convincing us; that is what we offer, and he
does neither. These are the sort of accusations to which, as we were
saying, you, Socrates, will be exposed if you accomplish your
intentions; you above all other Athenians." Suppose I ask, why is
this? They will justly retort upon me that I above all other men have
acknowledged the agreement. "There is clear proof," they will say,
"Socrates, that we and the city were not displeasing to you. Of all
Athenians you have been the most constant resident in the city, which,
as you never leave, you may be supposed to love. For you never went
out of the city either to see the games, except once when you went to
the Isthmus, or to any other place unless when you were on military
service; nor did you travel as other men do. Nor have you any
curiosity to know other states or their laws; your affections did not
go beyond us and our state; we were your special favorites, and you
acquiesced in our government of you; and this is the state in which
you begot your children, which is a proof of your satisfaction.
Moreover, you might, if you had liked, have fixt the penalty at
banishment in the course of the trial--the state which refuses to let
you go now would have let you go then. But you pretended that you
preferred death to exile, and that you were not grieved at death. And
now you have forgotten these fine sentiments, and pay no respect to us
the laws, of which you are the destroyer, and are doing what only a
miserable slave would do, running away and turning your back upon the
compacts and agreements which you made as a citizen. And first of all
answer this very question: Are we right in saying that you agreed to
be governed according to us in deed, and not in word only? Is that
true or not?" How shall we answer that, Crito? Must we not agree?

_Crito_: There is no help, Socrates.

_Socrates_: Then will they not say: "You, Socrates, are breaking the
covenants and agreements which you made with us at your leisure, not
in any haste or under any compulsion or deception, but having had
seventy years to think of them, during which time you were at liberty
to leave the city, if we were not to your mind, or if our covenants
appeared to you to be unfair. You had your choice, and might have gone
either to Lacedaemon or Crete, which you often praise for their good
government, or to some other Hellenic or foreign state. Whereas you,
above all other Athenians, seemed to be so fond of the state, or, in
other words, of us her laws (for who would like a state that has no
laws?), that you never stirred out of her; the halt, the blind, the
maimed were not more stationary in her than you were. And now you run
away and forsake your agreements. Not so, Socrates, if you will take
our choice; do not make yourself ridiculous by escaping out of the
city.

"For just consider, if you transgress and err in this sort of way,
what good will you do either to yourself or to your friends? That your
friends will be driven into exile and deprived of citizenship, or will
lose their property, is tolerably certain; and you yourself if you fly
to one of the neighboring cities, as, for example, Thebes or Megara,
both of which are well-governed cities, will come to them as an
enemy, Socrates, and their government will be against you, and all
patriotic citizens will cast an evil eye upon you as a subverter of
the laws, and you will confirm in the minds of the judges the justice
of their own condemnation of you. For he who is a corrupter of the
laws is more than likely to be a corrupter of the young and foolish
portion of mankind. Will you then flee from well-ordered cities and
virtuous men? and is existence worth having on these terms?...

"Listen, then, Socrates, to us who have brought you up. Think not of
life and children first, and of justice afterward, but of justice
first, that you may be justified before the princes of the world
below. For neither will you nor any that belong to you be happier or
holier or juster in this life, or happier in another, if you do as
Crito bids. Now you depart in innocence, a sufferer and not a doer of
evil; a victim, not of the laws, but of men. But if you go forth,
returning evil for evil, and injury for injury, breaking the covenants
and agreements which you have made with us, and wronging those whom
you ought least to wrong--that is to say, yourself, your friends, your
country, and us--we shall be angry with you while you live, and our
brethren, the laws in the world below, will receive you as an enemy;
for they will know that you have done your best to destroy us. Listen,
then, to us and not to Crito."

This is the voice which I seem to hear murmuring in my ears, like the
sound of the flute in the ears of the mystic; that voice, I say, is
humming in my ears, and prevents me from hearing any other. And I know
that anything more which you may say will be vain. Yet speak, if you
have anything to say.

_Crito_: I have nothing to say, Socrates.

_Socrates_: Then let me follow the intimations of the will of God.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 71: From the "Crito," translated by Benjamin Jowett. Crito
was an influential and well-to-do citizen of Athens and a friend of
Socrates; but nothing more definite about him is known.]




VI

THE DEATH OF SOCRATES[72]


"Me, already, as the tragic poet would say, the voice of fate calls.
Soon I must drink the poison; and I think that I had better repair to
the bath first, in order that the women may not have the trouble of
washing my body after I am dead."

When he had done speaking, Crito said: "And have you any commands for
us, Socrates--anything to say about your children or any other matter
in which we can serve you?"

"Nothing particular," he said; "only, as I have always told you, I
would have you to look to yourselves; that is a service which you may
always be doing to me and mine as well as to yourselves. And you need
not make professions; for if you take no thought for yourselves, and
walk not according to the precepts which I have given you, not now for
the first time, the warmth of your professions will be of no avail."

"We will do our best," said Crito. "But in what way would you have us
bury you?"

"In any way that you like; only you must get hold of me, and take care
that I do not walk away from you." Then he turned to us, and added
with a smile: "I can not make Crito believe that I am the same
Socrates who has been talking and conducting the argument; he fancies
that I am the other Socrates whom he will soon see a dead body--and he
asks, How shall he bury me? And tho I have spoken many words in the
endeavor to show that when I have drunk the poison I shall leave you
and go to the joys of the blest--these words of mine, with which I
comforted you and myself, have had, as I perceive, no effect upon
Crito. And therefore I want you to be surety for me now, as he was
surety for me at the trial: but let the promise be of another sort;
for he was my surety to the judges that I would remain, but you must
be my surety to him that I shall not remain, but go away and depart;
and then he will suffer less at my death, and not be grieved when he
sees my body being burned or buried. I would not have him sorrow at my
hard lot, or say at the burial, 'Thus we lay out Socrates,' or, 'Thus
we follow him to the grave or bury him'; for false words are not only
evil in themselves, but they infect the soul with evil. Be of good
cheer then, my dear Crito, and say that you are burying my body only,
and do with that as is usual, and as you think best."

When he had spoken these words, he arose and told us to wait until he
went into the bath-chamber with Crito; and we waited, talking and
thinking of the subject of discourse, and also of the greatness of
our sorrow: he was like a father of whom we were being bereaved, and
we were about to pass the rest of our lives as orphans. When he had
taken the bath, his children were brought to him--(he had two young
sons and an elder one); and the women of his family also came, and he
talked to them and gave them a few directions in the presence of
Crito; and he then dismissed them and returned to us.

Now the hour of sunset was near, for a good deal of time had passed
while he was within. When he came out, he sat down with us again after
his bath, but not much was said. Soon the jailer, who was the servant
of the eleven, entered and stood by him, saying: "To you, Socrates,
whom I know to be the noblest and gentlest and best of all who ever
came to this place, I will not impute the angry feelings of other men,
who rage and swear at me when, in obedience to the authorities, I bid
them drink the poison--indeed, I am sure that you will not be angry
with me; for others, as you are aware, and not I, are the guilty
cause. And so fare you well, and try to bear lightly what must needs
be; you know my errand." Then bursting into tears, he went out.

Socrates looked at him and said, "I return your good wishes, and will
do as you bid." Then turning to us, he said, "How charming the man is;
since I have been in prison he has always been coming to see me, and
at times he would talk to me, and was as good as could be, and now see
how generously he sorrows for me. But we must do as he says, Crito;
let the cup be brought if the poison is prepared; if not, let the
attendant prepare some."

"Yet," said Crito, "the sun is still upon the hilltops, and I know
that many a one has taken the draft late; and after the announcement
had been made to him, he has eaten and drunk, and enjoyed the society
of his beloved; do not hasten then; there is still time."

Socrates said: "Yes, Crito, and they of whom you speak are right in
doing thus, for they think that they will gain by the delay; but I am
right in not doing thus, for I do not think that I should gain
anything by drinking the poison a little later; I should be sparing
and saving a life which is already gone; I could only laugh at myself
for this. Please then to do as I say, and not to refuse me."

Crito made a sign to the servant, who was standing by; and he went
out, and after being absent for some time returned with the jailer
carrying the cup of poison. Socrates said: "You, my good friend, who
are experienced in these matters, shall give me the directions how I
am to proceed." The man answered: "You have only to walk about until
your legs are heavy, and then to lie down, and the poison will act."
At the same time he handed the cup to Socrates, who in the easiest and
gentlest manner, without the least fear or change of color or feature,
looking at the man with all his eyes, Echecrates,[73] as his manner
was, took the cup and said: "What do you say about making a libation
out of this cup to any god? May I or not?" The man answered: "We only
prepare, Socrates, just so much as we deem enough." "I understand,"
he said; "yet I may and must ask the gods to prosper my journey from
this to that other world--even so--and so be it according to my
prayer." Then holding the cup to his lips, quite readily and
cheerfully he drank off the poison. And hitherto most of us had been
able to control our sorrow; but now when we saw him drinking, and saw
too that he had finished the draft, we could no longer forbear, and in
spite of myself my own tears were flowing fast; so that I covered my
face and wept over myself, for certainly I was not weeping over him,
but at the thought of my own calamity in having lost such a friend.
Nor was I the first, for Crito, when he found himself unable to
restrain his tears, had got up and moved away, and I followed; and at
that moment, Apollodorus, who had been weeping all the time, broke out
into a loud and passionate cry which made cowards of us all. Socrates
alone retained his calmness: "What is this strange outcry?" he said.
"I sent away the women mainly in order that they might not offend in
this way, for I have heard that a man should die in peace. Be quiet
then, and have patience." When we heard that, we were ashamed, and
refrained our tears; and he walked about until, as he said, his legs
began to fail, and then he lay on his back, according to the
directions, and the man who gave him the poison now and then looked at
his feet and legs; and after a while he prest his foot hard and asked
him if he could feel; and he said, "No"; and then his leg, and so
upward and upward, and showed us that he was cold and stiff. And he
felt them himself, and said: "When the poison reaches the heart, that
will be the end." He was beginning to grow cold about the groin, when
he uncovered his face, for he had covered himself up, and said (they
were his last words)--"Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepius; will you
remember to pay the debt?" "The debt shall be paid," said Crito; "is
there anything else?" There was no answer to this question; but in a
minute or two a movement was heard, and the attendants uncovered him;
his eyes were set, and Crito closed his eyes and mouth.

Such was the end, Echecrates, of our friend, whom I may truly call the
wisest, and justest, and best of all the men whom I have ever known.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 72: From the "Phaedo." Translated by Benjamin Jowett.
Probably the "Phaedo" is, of all Plato's writings, the most famous. Its
importance is ascribed by Mahaffy not only to what is said of
immortality, in passages which have "fascinated the thoughtful men of
all ages," but to the touching story of the last hours of Socrates.]

[Footnote 73: Echecrates seems to have been the Locrian philosopher to
whom Plato is believed to have gone for some of his early
instruction.]




ARISTOTLE


Born in Stagira in 384 B.C.; died at Chalcis in Euboea in 322; the
most famous of Greek philosophers; went to Athens in his eighteenth
year as a pupil of Plato and remained there for twenty years; in 343
went to the Court of Macedon, where he undertook the education of
Alexander the Great, then thirteen years old; in 335 returned to
Athens and produced the greater part of his writings; afterward forced
to flee from Athens to Chalcis during an uprising against the
Macedonians; his numerous writings deal with all branches of science
known to his times; the first edition of the Greek text, that of Aldus
Manutius, published in 1495-98.[74]




I

WHAT THINGS ARE PLEASANT[75]


Let it be laid down by us, that pleasure is a certain motion of the
soul, and a settlement of it, at once rapid and perceptible, into its
own proper nature; and that pain is the contrary. If then pleasure be
a thing of this nature, it is plain that whatever is productive of the
disposition I have described is pleasant; while everything of a
nature to destroy it, or produce a disposition the opposite to it, is
painful.

Generally speaking, therefore, it is necessary, both that the being in
progress toward a state conformable to nature should be pleasant; and
that, in the highest degree, when those feelings, whose original is
conformable to it, shall have recovered that their nature; and habits,
because that which is habitual becomes by that time natural, as it
were; for, in a certain way, custom is like nature, because the idea
of frequency is proximate to that of always; now nature belongs to the
idea of always, custom to that of often. What is not compulsory, also,
is pleasant; for compulsion is contrary to nature. Wherefore acts of
necessity are painful; and it has been truly remarked, "Every act of
necessity is in its nature painful." It must be also that a state of
sedulous attention, anxiety, the having the mind on the stretch, are
painful, for they all are acts of necessity, and constrained, unless
they have become habitual; but it is custom which, under such
circumstances, renders them pleasant. The contraries of these must
also be pleasant; wherefore, relaxation of mind, leisure,
listlessness, amusements, and intervals of rest, rank in the class of
things pleasant; for none of these has anything to do with necessity.
Everything of which there is an innate appetite, is pleasant; for
appetite is a desire of what is pleasant.

Now, of appetites, some are irrational, others attended by reason. I
call all those irrational which men desire, not from any conception
which they form: of this kind are all which are said to exist
naturally, as those of the body; thirst or hunger, for instance, in
the case of sustenance; and the appetite of sustenance in every kind.
And the appetites connected with objects of taste, and of lust, and,
in fact, objects of touch generally; the appetite of fragrant odors,
too, as connected with smelling, and hearing, and sight. Appetites
attended by reason are all those whatsoever which men exercise from a
persuasion: for many things there are which they desire to behold, and
possess, on hearsay and persuasion. Now, as the being pleased stands
in the perception of a certain affection, and as imagination is a kind
of faint perception, there will attend on him who exercises either
memory or hope a kind of imagination of that which is the object of
his memory or hope; but if so, it is plain that they who exercise
memory or hope, certainly feel pleasure, since they have also a
perception. So that everything pleasant consists either in the
perception of present objects, or in the remembrance of those which
have already been, or in the hope of such as are yet to be; for men
exercise perception on present, memory on past, and hope on future
objects. Now the objects of memory are pleasant, not only such as at
the moment while present were pleasant, but some even which were not
pleasant, should their consequence subsequently be honorable and good;
and hence this saying, "But it is indeed pleasant for a man, when
preserved, to remember his toils"; and this, "For after his
sufferings, a man who has suffered much, and much achieved, is
gladdened at the recollection." But the reason of this is, that to be
exempt from evil is pleasant. And all objects are pleasant in hope,
which appear by their presence either to delight or benefit in a great
degree; or to benefit, without giving pain. In a word, whatever
objects by their presence delight us, do so, generally speaking, as we
hope for, or remember them. On which account, too, the feeling of
anger is pleasant; just as Homer has remarked of anger in his poem,
"That which with sweetness far greater than distilling honey as it
drops"; for there is no one who feels anger where the object seems
impracticable to his revenge; nor with those far their superiors in
power do men feel anger at all, or if they do, it is in a less degree.

There is also a kind of pleasure consequent on most appetites; for
either in the recollection that they have enjoyed them, or in the hope
that they shall enjoy them, men are affected and delighted by a
certain pleasure: thus men possest by fevers feel delight, amid their
thirst, as well at the remembrance how they used to drink, as at the
hope of drinking yet again. Lovers, too, feel delight in conversing,
writing, and composing something, ever about the object beloved;
because, in all those energies, they have a perception, as it were, of
the object they love. And this is in all cases a criterion of the
commencement of love, when persons feel pleasure not only in the
presence of the object, but are enamored also of it when absent, on
memory; wherefore, even when pain arises at absence, nay in the midst
of mourning, and the very dirge of death, there yet arises within us a
certain pleasure. For the pain is felt because the object is not
present; but the pleasure consists in remembering and seeing, as it
were, both the person, and what he used to do, and the kind of
character of which he was. Whence has it been said, and with
probability enough, "Thus spake he, and excited within them all a
desire of lamentation." Also the avenging oneself is pleasant; for the
getting of that is pleasant, the failing to get which is painful: now
the angry do feel pain in an excessive degree if they be not avenged;
but in the hope of revenge they take pleasure.

Again, to overcome is pleasant, not to the ambitious only, but even to
all; for there arises an imagination of superiority, for which all,
either in a faint or more violent degree, have an appetite. But since
to overcome is pleasant, it must follow, of course, that amusements
where there is field for rivalry, as those of music and disputations,
are pleasant; for it frequently occurs, in the course of these, that
we overcome; also chess, ball, dice, and drafts.

Again, it is the same with respect to amusements where a lively
interest is taken; for, of these, some become pleasant as accustomed
to them; others are pleasant at first; for instance, hunting and every
kind of sporting; for where there is rivalry, there is also victory;
on which principle the disputations of the bar and of the schools are
pleasant to those who have become accustomed to them, and have
abilities. Also honor and good character are most pleasant, by reason
that an idea arises, that one is such as is the good man; and this in
a greater degree should those people pronounce one such who he thinks
