of mine--the Brende secret--"

She frowned. "No one knows better than you, Tarrano, that my father's
secret does not bestow immortality. To cure disease, in a measure--"

He checked her; his smile was ironical. "You and I know that, Lady Elza.
We know that on this plane we would not want everlasting life if we
could have it. But the public does not know that--let us not discuss it.
I was telling you--confessing to you--I have lost Mars. Temporarily, of
course. Meanwhile, I have been preparing to invade the Earth." His
gesture was expansive. "I have been planning, from here in the Cold
Country, to send armies to your Earth."

He paused an instant. "I think now I shall wait until the next
opposition--we are far from Earth now, but all in good time we shall be
closer.... Strange is it not, that I should like to tell you my plans?"

She did not answer; she watched his smile fading into a look of
grimness. "In the Great City, here on Venus, they are getting ready to
attack me. Did you know that?"

"No," she said.

"You supposed they were? Your brother, and that Jac Hallen?"

"Yes."

"And you hoped they were, of course?"

"Yes," she repeated.

He frowned. "You are disconcertingly frank, Lady Elza. Well, let me tell
you this--it would come to nothing. The _Rhaals_ are with them--all the
resources of the Central State are to be thrown against me. Yet it will
come to nothing."

Her heart leaped. Tarrano was making his last stand. Beyond the logical
sense of his words, she could see it in his eyes. He knew he was making
his last stand. He knew too that she was now aware of it; and that
behind the confidence of his words--that was the confession he was
making.

Tarrano's last stand! There seemed to her then something illogically
pathetic in it all. This man of genius--so short a time ago all but the
Emperor of three worlds. And now, with them slipping from his grasp,
reduced to this last stronghold in the bleak fastnesses of the Cold
Country, awaiting the inevitable attack upon him. Something pathetic....

"I'm sorry, Tarrano."

As though mirrored from her own expression, a wistful look had come to
him. Her words drove it away.

"Sorry? There is nothing to be sorry about. Their attack will come to
nothing ... yet--" He stopped short, and then as though deciding to say
what he had begun, he added:

"Yet, Lady Elza, I am no fool to discard possibilities. I may be
defeated." He laughed harshly. "To what depths has Tarrano fallen that
he can voice such a possibility!"

He leaned toward her and into his tone came a greater earnestness than
she ever heard in it before.

"Lady Elza, if they should be successful, they would not capture me--for
I would die fighting. You understand that, don't you?"

She met his eyes; the gleam in them held her. Forgetful of herself, she
had allowed the fur to drop from her: she sat bolt upright, the dim red
light tinting the scarf that lay like gossamer around her white
shoulders. His hand came out and touched her arm, slipped up to her
shoulder and rested there, but she did not feel it.

"I will die fighting," he repeated. "You understand that?"

"Yes," she breathed.

"And you would be sorry?"

"Oh--"

"Would you?"

"Yes, I--"

He did not relax. His eyes burned her: but deep in them she saw that
quality of wistfulness, of pleading.

"You, my Elza, they would rescue--unless I killed you."

She did not move, but within her was a shudder.

"You know I would kill you, my Elza, rather than give you up?"

"Yes," she murmured.

"I--wonder. Sometimes I think I would." Suddenly he cast aside all
restraint. "Oh, my Elza--that we should have to plan such things as
these! You, sitting there--you are so beautiful! Your eyes--limpid pools
with terror lurking in them when I would have them misty with love! My
Elza--"

The woman in her responded. A wave of color flooded her throat and face.
But she drew away from him.

"My Elza! Can you not tell me that even in defeat I may be victorious?
It is you more than all else that I desire."

Without warning his arms were around her, holding her fiercely to him,
his face close to hers.

"Elza! With you, defeat would be victory. And with you--now--if you
would but say the word--together we will surmount every obstacle.--"

He was kissing her, bending back her head, and his grip upon her
shoulder was bruising the flesh. No longer Tarrano, Conqueror of the
universe, just Tarrano the man. Terror surged within Elza's heart.

"Tarrano!"

"Elza dear--my Elza--"

"Tarrano!" She fought with him. "Tarrano, do you dare--I tell you--"

The frightened pleading of a woman at bay. And then abruptly he cast her
off. His laugh was grim.

"What a fool I am! Tarrano the weakling!" He leaped from the couch and
began pacing the room. "Tarrano the weakling! To what depths has Tarrano
fallen!"

He stopped before her. "I ask your pardon, Lady Elza. This has been
madness. Forget my words--all madness."

His tone was crisp. "Human weakness to which I did not realize I was so
prone made me talk like a fool. Desire you above the conquest of the
universe? Absurd! Lies that men whisper into women's ears! All lies!"

Was he telling the real truth now? Or was this a mood of recrimination?
Bitterness that his love was scorned. Again his gaze held her, but in it
now she could see nothing but a cruel inflexible purpose.

"Tarrano in defeat! That is impossible, Lady Elza. You will very shortly
realize that, for I am going to show you how, single-handed, I can make
it impossible. Show you with your own eyes. It was my purpose in coming
to waken you--my purpose, when your beauty led me into weakness
incredible.... Get up, Lady Elza."

She stared. With folded arms he stood emotionless regarding her.

"Get up, I tell you. Put on those garments you wore when we arrived. We
are going travelling again."

He stood waiting; and beneath his gaze she shrank back, drawing the fur
rug over her.

A smile of contempt parted his lips. "You hesitate? You think I am still
a weakling? You over-rate your beauty, Lady Elza.... Make haste, I
command you. We must start very soon."

She summoned her voice. "Start? Where? What are you--"

"No questions, Lady Elza. Not now. Make haste--"

He jerked from her the fur covering, flung it across the room, and with
the same gesture turned away impersonally. Trembling, she rose from the
couch and donned the garments he had indicated, while he stood brooding
by the window, gazing through its transparent pane at the glistening
frozen city which was all that remained of his empire.




CHAPTER XXVIII

_Thing in the Forest_


"All in good time, Lady Elza, you will know where we are."

Alone, unnoticed, they had departed from the City of Ice on a small
flying platform similar to the one they had used before. The night had
passed; day, with a new warmth to the sun, came again. Flying low, with
Tarrano in a grim, moody silence, and Elza staring downward.

The aural lights were overhead when at the last Tarrano brought the
platform to rest. A thick, luxuriant forest. Huge trees with rope-like
roots and heavy vines. Others with leaves like the ears of an elephant.
And the ground hidden by almost impenetrable underbrush.

They had landed in a tiny glade beside a dank marsh of water, where
ferns shoulder high were embanked. It was dark, the stars and the tints
of the auroral lights were barely distinguishable through the mass of
foliage overhead. Elza gazed around her fearsomely. The air was heavy,
oppressive. Redolent with the perfume of wild flowers and the smell of
mouldering, steaming soil.

"All in good time. Lady Elza," Tarrano repeated. "You will know where we
are presently; we are closer to human habitation than you would think."

Elza's heart pounded. As they were descending she had noticed a glow of
light in the sky ahead. As though by intuition now, she seemed to
realize that they were not far from the Great City. Her thoughts leaped
to me--Jac Hallen--there in Maida's palace. Tarrano's grim, sinister
purpose was as yet unknown to her. But she guessed that in it, danger
impended for me--for all of us in the Great City.

_"Jac! Danger! Jac! Danger!"_

Her thoughts instinctively reiterated the two words uppermost in her
mind. And I think that it was just about then when they awakened me.

Leaving the vehicle, Tarrano commanded Elza to follow him; and he began
picking his way through the jungle. A light was in his hand; it
penetrated but a short distance. A quivering beam of yellow light; then
Elza saw that upon occasion, as Tarrano's finger slid a lever, the beam
narrowed, intensified to a bright lavender. And now where it struck, the
vegetation withered. Blackened, sometimes burst into tiny flame, and
parted thus before them as they advanced.

The jungle was silent; yet, as Elza listened, beneath the crackle of the
burning twigs she could hear the tiny myriad voices of insect life.
Startled voices as the heat of Tarrano's beam struck them. Rustling
leaves; breaking twigs; things scurrying and sliding away, unseen in the
darkness.

Once or twice a crashing--some monster disturbed in his rest plunging
away. Again, a slithering bulk of something, undulating its path through
the thickets. All unseen. Save once. Looking upward, Elza caught a gleam
of green eyes overhead. A triangle of three baleful spots of
phosphorescent green. Her murmur of fright caused Tarrano to glance
upward. His lavender, beam, grown suddenly larger, swung there with a
hiss. Falling from above came a pink body. A bloated body, square, with
squat, twisted legs; a thing larger than a man. A grotesque naked
monstrosity almost in human form. A travesty--gruesome mockery of
mankind. A face, three-eyed...

The thing lay writhing in the underbrush, mouthing, mumbling and then
screaming--the shrill scream of death agony. And the horrible smell of
burning flesh as Tarrano's light played upon it...

"Come away, Lady Elza. I'm sorry. I had hoped to avoid an affair such as
this."

Sickened, shuddering, Elza clung close to Tarrano as he led her onward.

An hour or more; and now Elza could see in the distance the lights of
the Great City.

_"Jac! Danger! Jac! Danger!"_

The idea of thought-transference had come to her. With all the power of
her mind she was thinking her warning to me, praying that it might reach
me.

"Single-handed, Lady Elza. You shall see now how, single-handed, I make
impossible any attack upon Tarrano."

In her abstraction Elza had almost forgotten herself and Tarrano; his
voice reached her--his voice grim and with a gloating, sinister triumph
in it. He was bending to the ground. Elza saw that they had come to an
open space--an eminence rising above the forest. Underfoot was a stony
soil; in places, bare black rock with an outcropping of red, like the
cinnabar from which on Earth we melt the _Heavy-metal_.[23]

[Footnote 23: Quicksilver.]

Tarrano faced her. "Nature, my Lady Elza, is fair to my purpose. I knew
I would find some such deposit as this." He turned his face to one side
attentively, and darted his light--harmlessly yellow now--to where a
lone tree showed its great leaves beginning to waver in a night breeze.

"Nature is with us! See there, my Elza! A wind is coming--a wind from us
to--them!"

The breeze grew--a breeze blowing directly over the forest to where in
the distance the lights of the Great City showed plainly. Tarrano added:

"I had thought to create the wind." He tapped his belt. "Create the wind
to carry our onslaught. But you see, it is unnecessary. Nature is kind,
and far more efficacious than our man-made devices."

_"Jac! Danger!"_ She stood there in the breeze, watching Tarrano--his
purpose as yet no more than guessed--praying that I might receive her
warning.

Tarrano selected his spot--a tiny little cone of rock no bigger than his
thumb. He beckoned Elza.

"Stand close, and watch. You shall see how from the merest spark, a
conflagration may ensue."

The cylinder in his hand darted forth a needle-like shaft--a light of
intense purple. It touched the tiny cone of rock, and he held it there.

"A moment. Be patient, my Elza."

The point of rock seemed presently to melt. Like a tiny volcano, at
their feet, lava from it was flowing down. A little stream of melted
rock, viscous, bubbling a trifle; red at the edges, white within, and
with wisps of smoke curling up from it.

Elza stared with the fascination of horror, for now tiny tongues of
flame were licking about. Blue tongues, licking the air, vanishing into
wisps of black smoke.

Tarrano snapped off his ray. But the tongues of flame stayed alive.
Spreading slowly, soundlessly, their heat now melting the ground.

A breath of the smoke touched Elza's face. Pungent, acrid. It stopped
her breathing. She choked, coughed heavily to expel it.

"Come away, Lady Elza. Let us watch from a safer distance."

He led her from the hillock, up the wind to where at the edge of the
forest they stood gazing.

The blue fire had spread over a distance of several feet. A sluggish,
boiling, bubbling area of flame. Tongues now the height of a man. And
from them, rolling upward, a heavy black cloud--deadly fumes thick,
blacker than the night, spreading out, welling forward over the forest
toward the Great City slumbering in its falsely peaceful security.

At last Elza knew. Stood there, cold, shuddering, thinking with all the
power of her mind and being:

_"Death, Jac! Death to all the City! The black cloud of death!"_

Oblivious to Tarrano she stood until at last the rocky eminence was one
great mass of the surging blue fire. And the black cloud, compact as a
thunder-head, rolled onward.

_"You can see it coming! Death Jac! Death to all the City!"_

A sudden madness descended upon Elza. She felt abruptly that her warning
was futile, felt an overpowering desire to run. Run somewhere--anywhere,
away from the lurid sight she was facing. Or run perhaps, to the Great
City; to race with that black cloud of death; to run fast and far, and
burst into our palace to warn us.

Tarrano himself lost in triumphant contemplation of what he had done,
for the moment was heedless of Elza's presence. With white face upon
which the blue glare had settled like a mask of death, Elza turned
silently from him. Forgetful of that horrible thing they had
encountered--others of its kind which might be lurking about--she turned
silently and plunged into the black depths of the forest.




CHAPTER XXIX

_A Woman's Scream_


"The black Cloud of Death!"

We stood there at the casement of the palace, gazing with a growing
terror at the visible evidence of the tragedy which threatened. A black
cloud off there in the distance, spreading out, rolling inexorably
toward us. And then came the wind, and with it a breath of the black
monster--a choking, horrible suggestion of the death rolling already
over the city.

We must have been fascinated at the casement for some considerable time.
Elza's thought messages had ceased. Abruptly I came to myself.

"The Black Cloud of Death!" I turned to Georg and Maida. "Alarm the
city! Arouse them all! Alarm--"

Maida's face was white: she flung off Georg's arm which had been
protectingly around her. "The siren--"

Terrible moments, those that followed. Confusion; panic; death!

The public siren in the tower by the lagoon entrance shrilled its
warning. The danger lights blazed out. The city came to life. Lights
sprang up everywhere. People--with the daze of sleep still upon
them--appeared at the casements; on the roof-tops; on the canal steps
they appeared, fumbling with their boats. Panic!

A pandemonium. Aircraft, such as could so hastily be mustered, swept
overhead. A glare of lights everywhere. The shrill voice of the siren
stilled, to make audible the broadcast warnings--stentorian tones
screaming: "The Black Cloud of Death! Escape from the city! Escape to
Industriana!"

Warning, advice, command! But over it all, the breath of the black cloud
now lay heavy. The lights were dimmed by it. Everywhere--to every
deepest recess of the city--to every inner room where to escape it many
had fled--its deadly choking breath was penetrating.

Within the palace was turmoil. We had an air-vehicle on a landing-stage
nearby; but Georg and Maida would not leave at once. Rulers of the
Central State, as a Director might stick to his crumbling Tower, they
stayed now in the Great City. Encouraging the people. Maida's voice,
futilely attempting to broadcast over the uproar. Georg commanding the
official air-vessels to load with refugees; himself struggling to direct
the jam of boats toward the embarking stages.

We were in the instrument room of the palace. The air was pale-blue,
though I had closed every casement. Ourselves, choking already; then
gasping; and with no time or thought to procure a mask. The chemical
room, from whence we might have secured apparatus to purify our air, had
been abandoned before we thought to seek it out. I dashed into it, my
breath held. Its casements were open; its air thick-blue with the fumes;
its staff long since fled. I ran back to Georg and Maida, gasping, my
lungs on fire, my head roaring.

"No use! Abandoned!"

The department of weather control where--had we been forewarned--we
might have found means to divert the wind by another of our own
creation--was deserted by its staff at the first alarm.

"No use! Georg--Maida--let us go!"

The mirrors all about us in the instrument room were going dark; the
horrible scenes of death throughout the city which they pictured were
vanishing. The public lights were going out; the broadcast voices were
ceasing.

