Carefully setting the transmitter on the frequency of the rebel
army, he sent out a call to Hys. There was no answer. When he
switched to receive all he heard was static.

There was always a chance the set was broken. He quickly twisted the
transmitter to the frequency of his personal radio, then whistled in
the microphone. The received signal was so loud that it hurt his
ears. He tried to call Hys again, and was relieved to get a response
this time.

"Brion Brandd here. Can you read me? I want to talk to Hys at once."

It came as a shock that it was Professor-Commander Krafft who answered.

"I'm sorry, Brion, but it's impossible to talk to Hys. We are
monitoring his frequency and your call was relayed to me. Hys and
his rebels lifted ship about half an hour ago, and are already on
the way back to Nyjord. Are you ready to leave now? It will soon
become dangerous to make any landings. Even now I will have to ask
for volunteers to get you out of there."

Hys and the rebel army gone! Brion assimilated the thought. He had
been thrown off balance when he realized he was talking to Krafft.

"If they're gone--well, then there's nothing I can do about it," he
said. "I was going to call you, so I can talk to you now. Listen and
try to understand. You must cancel the bombing. I've found out about
the magter, found what causes their mental aberration. If we can
correct that, we can stop them from attacking Nyjord--"

"Can they be corrected by midnight tonight?" Krafft broke in. He was
abrupt and sounded almost angry. Even saints get tired.

"No, of course not." Brion frowned at the microphone, realizing the
talk was going all wrong, but not knowing how to remedy it. "But it
won't take too long. I have evidence here that will convince you
that what I say is the truth."

"I believe you without seeing it, Brion." The trace of anger was
gone from Krafft's voice now, and it was heavy with fatigue and
defeat. "I'll admit you are probably right. A little while ago
I admitted to Hys too that he was probably right in his original
estimation of the correct way to tackle the problem of Dis. We have
made a lot of mistakes, and in making them we have run out of time.
I'm afraid that is the only fact that is relevant now. The bombs
fall at twelve, and even then they may drop too late. A ship is
already on its way from Nyjord with my replacement. I exceeded my
authority by running a day past the maximum the technicians gave me.
I realize now I was gambling the life of my own world in the vain
hope I could save Dis. They can't be saved. They're dead. I won't
hear any more about it."

"You must listen--"

"I must destroy the planet below me, that is what I must do.
That fact will not be changed by anything you say. All the
offworlders--other than your party--are gone. I'm sending a ship
down now to pick you up. As soon as that ship lifts I am going to
drop the first bombs. Now--tell me where you are so they can come
for you."

"Don't threaten me, Krafft!" Brion shook his fist at the radio in an
excess of anger. "You're a killer and a world destroyer--don't try
to make yourself out as anything else. I have the knowledge to avert
this slaughter and you won't listen to me. And I know where the
cobalt bombs are--in the magter tower that Hys raided last night.
Get those bombs and there is no need to drop any of your own!"

"I'm sorry, Brion. I appreciate what you're trying to do, but at the
same time I know the futility of it. I'm not going to accuse you of
lying, but do you realize how thin your evidence sounds from this
end? First, a dramatic discovery of the cause of the magters'
intransigency. Then, when that had no results, you suddenly remember
that you know where the bombs are. The best-kept magter secret."

"I don't know for sure, but there is a very good chance it is so,"
Brion said, trying to repair his defenses. "Telt made readings, he
had other records of radioactivity in this same magter keep--proof
that something is there. But Telt is dead now, the records
destroyed. Don't you see--" He broke off, realizing how vague and
unprovable his case was. This was defeat.

The radio was silent, with just the hum of the carrier wave as
Krafft waited for him to continue. When Brion did speak his voice
was empty of all hope.

"Send your ship down," he said tiredly. "We're in a building that
belonged to the Light Metals Trust, Ltd., a big warehouse of some
kind. I don't know the address here, but I'm sure you have someone
there who can find it. We'll be waiting for you. You win, Krafft."

He turned off the radio.




XVII


"Do you mean what you said, about giving up?" Lea asked. Brion
realized that she had stopped talking to Ulv some time ago, and had
been listening to his conversation with Krafft. He shrugged, trying
to put his feeling into words.

"We've tried--and almost succeeded. But if they won't listen, what
can we do? What can one man possibly do against a fleet loaded with
H-bombs?"

As if in answer to the question, Ulv's voice drowned him out,
the harsh Disan words slashing the silence of the room.

"Kill you, the enemy!" he said. "Kill you _umedvirk_!"

He shouted the last word and his hand flashed to his belt. In a
single swift motion he lifted his blowgun and placed it to his lips.
A tiny dart quivered in the already dead flesh of the creature in
the magter's skull. The action had all the symbolism of a broken
lance, the declaration of war.

"Ulv understands it a lot better than you might think," Lea said.
"He knows things about symbiosis and mutualism that would get him
a job as a lecturer in any university on Earth. He knows just what
the brain-symbiote is and what it does. They even have a word for it,
one that never appeared in our Disan language lessons. A life form
that you can live with or cooperate with is called _medvirk_. One
that works to destroy you is _umedvirk_. He also understands that
life forms can change, and be _medvirk_ or _umedvirk_ at different
times. He has just decided that the brain symbiote is _umedvirk_
and he is out to kill it. So will the rest of the Disans as soon as
he can show them the evidence and explain."

"You're sure of this?" Brion asked, interested in spite of himself.

"Positive. The Disans have an absolute attitude towards survival;
you should realize that. Not the same as the magter, but not much
different in the results. They will kill the brain-symbiotes, even
if it means killing every magter who harbors one."

"If that is the case we can't leave now," Brion said. With these
words it suddenly became clear what he had to do. "The ship is
coming down now from the fleet. Get in it and take the body of
the magter. I won't go."

"Where will you be?" she asked, shocked.

"Fighting the magter. My presence on the planet means that Krafft
won't keep his threat to drop the bombs any earlier than the
midnight deadline. That would be deliberately murdering me. I doubt
if my presence past midnight will stop him, but it should keep the
bombs away at least until then."

"What will you accomplish besides committing suicide?" Lea pleaded.
"You just told me how a single man can't stop the bombs. What will
happen to you at midnight?"

"I'll be dead--but in spite of that I can't run away. Not now.
I must do everything possible right up until the last instant. Ulv
and I will go to the magter tower, try to find out if the bombs are
there. He will fight on our side now. He may even know more about
the bombs, things that he didn't want to tell me before. We can get
help from his people. Some of them must know where the bombs are,
being native to this planet."

Lea started to say something, but he rushed on, drowning out her words.

"You have just as big a job. Show the magter to Krafft, explain the
significance of the brain-parasite to him. Try to get him to talk to
Hys about the last raid. Try to get him to hold off the attack. I'll
keep the radio with me and as soon as I know anything I'll call in.
This is all last resort, finger in the dike kind of stuff, but it is
all we can do. Because if we do nothing, it means the end of Dis."

Lea tried to argue with him, but he wouldn't listen to her. He only
kissed her, and with a lightness he did not feel tried to convince
her that everything would be all right. In their hearts they both
knew it wouldn't be but they left it that way because it was the
least painful solution.

A sudden rumbling shook the building and the windows darkened as
a ship settled in the street outside. The Nyjord crew came in with
guns pointed, alert for anything.

After a little convincing they took the cadaver, as well as Lea,
when they lifted ship. Brion watched the spacer become a pinpoint in
the sky and vanish. He tried to shake off the feeling that this was
the last time he would see any of them.

"Let's get out of here fast," he told Ulv, picking up the radio,
"before anyone comes around to see why the ship landed."

"What will you do?" Ulv asked as they went down the street towards
the desert. "What can we do in the few hours we have left?" He
pointed at the sun, nearing the horizon. Brion shifted the weight
of the radio to his other hand before replying.

"Get to the magter tower we raided last night, that's the best chance.
The bombs might be there.... Unless you know where the bombs are?"

Ulv shook his head. "I do not know, but some of my people may.
We will capture a magter, then kill him, so they can all see
the _umedvirk_. Then they will tell us everything they know."

"The tower first then, for bombs or a sample magter. What's the
fastest way we can get there?"

Ulv frowned in thought. "If you can drive one of the cars the
offworlders use, I know where there are some locked in buildings
in this city. None of my people know how they are made to move."

"I can work them--let's go."

Chance was with them this time. The first sand car they found still
had the keys in the lock. It was battery-powered, but contained
a full charge. Much quieter than the heavy atomic cars, it sped
smoothly out of the city and across the sand. Ahead of them the sun
sank in a red wave of color. It was six o'clock. By the time they
reached the tower it was seven, and Brion's nerves felt as if they
were writhing under his skin.

Even though it looked like suicide, attacking the tower brought
blessed relief. It was movement and action, and for moments at
a time he forgot the bombs hanging over his head.

The attack was nerve-rackingly anticlimactic. They used the main
entrance, Ulv ranging soundlessly ahead. There was no one in sight.
Once inside, they crept down towards the lower rooms where the
radiation had been detected. Only gradually did they realize that
the magter tower was completely empty.

"Everyone gone," Ulv grunted, sniffing the air in every room that
they passed. "Many magter were here earlier, but they are gone now."

"Do they often desert their towers?" Brion asked.

"Never. I have never heard of it happening before. I can think of
no reason why they should do a thing like this."

"Well, I can," Brion told him. "They would leave their home if they
took something with them of greater value. The bombs. If the bombs
were hidden here, they might move them after the attack." Sudden
fear hit him. "Or they might move them because it is time to take
them--to the launcher! Let's get out of here, the quickest way we
can."

"I smell air from outside," Ulv said, "coming from down there. This
cannot be, because the magter have no entrances this low in their
towers."

"We blasted one in earlier--that could be it. Can you find it?"

Moonlight shone ahead as they turned an angle of the corridor,
and stars were visible through the gaping opening in the wall.

"It looks bigger than it was," Brion said, "as if the magter had
enlarged it." He looked through and saw the tracks on the sand
outside. "As if they had enlarged it to bring something bulky up
from below--and carried it away in whatever made those tracks!"

Using the opening themselves, they ran back to the sand car. Brion
ground it fiercely around and turned the headlights on the tracks.
There were the marks of a sand car's treads, half obscured by thin,
unmarked wheel tracks. He turned off the lights and forced himself
to move slowly and to do an accurate job. A quick glimpse at his
watch showed him there were four hours left to go. The moonlight was
bright enough to illuminate the tracks. Driving with one hand, he
turned on the radio transmitter, already set for Krafft's wave
length.

When the operator acknowledged his signal Brion reported what they
had discovered and his conclusions. "Get that message to Commander
Krafft now. I can't wait to talk to him--I'm following the tracks."
He killed the transmission and stamped on the accelerator. The sand
car churned and bounced down the track.

"They are going to the mountains," Ulv said some time later, as the
tracks still pointed straight ahead. "There are caves there and many
magter have been seen near them; that is what I have heard."

The guess was correct. Before nine o'clock the ground humped into a
range of foothills, and the darker masses of mountains could be seen
behind them, rising up to obscure the stars.

"Stop the car here," Ulv said, "The caves begin not too far ahead.
There may be magter watching or listening, so we must go quietly."

Brion followed the deep-cut grooves, carrying the radio. Ulv came
and went on both sides, silently as a shadow, scouting for hidden
watchers. As far as he could discover there were none.

By nine-thirty Brion realized they had deserted the sand car too
soon. The tracks wound on and on, and seemed to have no end. They
passed some caves which Ulv pointed out to him, but the tracks never
stopped. Time was running out and the nightmare stumbling through
the darkness continued.

"More caves ahead," Ulv said, "Go quietly."

They came cautiously to the crest of a hill, as they had done so
many times already, and looked into the shallow valley beyond. Sand
covered the valley floor, and the light of the setting moon shone
over the tracks at a flat angle, marking them off sharply as lines
of shadow. They ran straight across the sandy valley and disappeared
into the dark mouth of a cave on the far side.

Sinking back behind the hilltop, Brion covered the pilot light with
his hand and turned on the transmitter. Ulv stayed above him,
staring at the opening of the cave.

"This is an important message," Brion whispered into the mike.
"Please record." He repeated this for thirty seconds, glancing at
his watch to make sure of the time, since the seconds of waiting
stretched to minutes in his brain. Then, as clearly as possible
without raising his voice above a whisper, he told of the discovery
of the tracks and the cave.

"... The bombs may or may not be in here, but we are going in to
find out. I'll leave my personal transmitter here with the broadcast
power turned on, so you can home on its signal. That will give you
a directional beacon to find the cave. I'm taking the other radio
in--it has more power. If we can't get back to the entrance I'll try
a signal from inside. I doubt if you will hear it because of the
rock, but I'll try. End of transmission. Don't try to answer me
because I have the receiver turned off. There are no earphones on
this set and the speaker would be too loud here."

He switched off, held his thumb on the button for an instant, then
flicked it back on.

"Good-by Lea," he said, and killed the power for good.

They circled and reached the rocky wall of the cliff. Creeping
silently in the shadows, they slipped up on the dark entrance of the
cave. Nothing moved ahead and there was no sound from the entrance
of the cave. Brion glanced at his watch and was instantly sorry.

Ten-thirty.

The last shelter concealing them was five metres from the cave. They
started to rise, to rush the final distance, when Ulv suddenly waved
Brion down. He pointed to his nose, then to the cave. He could smell
the magter there.

A dark figure separated itself from the greater darkness of the cave
mouth. Ulv acted instantly. He stood up and his hand went to his
mouth; air hissed faintly through the tube in his hand. Without a
