The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sabotage in Space, by Carey Rockwell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Sabotage in Space

Author: Carey Rockwell

Illustrator: Louis Glanzman

Release Date: June 6, 2006 [EBook #18520]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SABOTAGE IN SPACE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










SABOTAGE IN SPACE




THE TOM CORBETT SPACE CADET STORIES

By Carey Rockwell


STAND BY FOR MARS!

DANGER IN DEEP SPACE

ON THE TRAIL OF THE SPACE PIRATES

THE SPACE PIONEERS

THE REVOLT ON VENUS

TREACHERY IN OUTER SPACE

SABOTAGE IN SPACE

THE ROBOT ROCKET

[Illustration: Frontispiece]




A TOM CORBETT Space Cadet Adventure


SABOTAGE IN SPACE

By CAREY ROCKWELL

WILLY LEY _Technical Adviser_


GROSSET & DUNLAP _Publishers_ New York




COPYRIGHT, 1955, BY
ROCKHILL RADIO


COPYRIGHT ROCKHILL RADIO 1955


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
ILLUSTRATIONS BY LOUIS GLANZMAN


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Transcriber's Note                                           |
|                                                              |
| Extensive search has failed to uncover any evidence of       |
| renewal of copyright of this work.                           |
|                                                              |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+




ILLUSTRATIONS


_Frontispiece_

Tom shot a hard right to his opponent's stomach               13

Tom swerved the jet car in front of the runaway truck         81

The men inside were tough-looking and steely-eyed             89

Tom saw that the Space Marines were watching the passengers
very closely                                                 137

"He's hanging on to the cleat over the main tube!"           185

"The projectiles blew Devers' ship into rocket dust!"        209




SABOTAGE IN SPACE




CHAPTER 1


"_Bong-g-g! Bong-g-g! Bong-g-g!--_"

With a hollow booming sound reminiscent of old eighteenth-and
nineteenth-century clock towers, the electronic time tone rang out from
the Tower of Galileo, chiming the hour of nine. As the notes
reverberated over the vast expanse of Space Academy, U.S.A., the lights
in the windows of the cadet dormitories began to wink out and the
slidewalks that crisscrossed the campus, connecting the various
buildings, rumbled to a halt. When the last mournful note had rolled
away to die in the distant hills, the school was dark and still. The
only movement to be seen was the slow pacing of the cadet watch
officers, patrolling their beats; the only sound, the measured clicking
of their boots on the metal strips of the slidewalks.

On the north side of the quadrangle near the Tower, a young watch
officer paused in front of one of the dormitories and scanned the
darkened windows of the durasteel and crystal building. Satisfied that
all was in order, he continued on his lonely way. A moment later a
shadowy figure rose out of the bushes opposite the dormitory entrance
and stepped forward quickly and cautiously. Pausing on the slidewalk to
stare after the disappearing watch officer, the figure was illuminated
by the dim light from the entrance hall. He was a young man wearing the
royal-blue uniform of a Space Cadet. Tall and wiry, with square features
topped by a shock of close-cropped blond hair, he stood poised on the
balls of his feet, ready to move quickly should another watch officer
appear.

After a quick glance at his wrist chronometer, the young cadet darted
across the slidewalk toward the transparent crystal portal of the
dormitory. Hesitating only long enough to make certain that the inner
hallway was clear, he slid the portal open, ducked inside, and sprinted
down the hall toward a large black panel on the wall near the foot of
the slidestairs. On the panel, in five long columns, were the name
plates of every cadet quartered in the dormitory and beside each plate
were two words, IN and OUT, with a small tab that fitted over one of the
words.

Out of the one hundred and fifty cadets in the dormitory, one hundred
and forty-nine were marked IN. The slender, blond-haired cadet quickly
made it unanimous, reaching up to the tab next to the name of Roger
Manning and sliding it over to cover the word OUT. With a last final
look around, he raced up the slidestairs, smiling in secret triumph.

In Room 512 on the fifth floor of the dormitory, Tom Corbett and Astro,
the two other cadets who, with Roger Manning, made up the famed
_Polaris_ unit of the Space Cadet Corps, were deep in their studies.
Though the lights-out order had been given over the dormitory
loud-speaker system, the desk lamp burned brightly and there was a
blanket thrown over the window. The boys of the _Polaris_ unit weren't
alone in their disobedience. All over the dormitory, lights were on and
cadets were studying secretly. But they all felt fairly safe, for the
cadet watch officers on each floor were anxious to study themselves and
turned a blind eye. Even the Solar Guard officer of the day, in charge
of the entire dormitory, was sympathetic to their efforts and made a
great deal of unnecessary noise while on his evening rounds.

His brown curly hair falling over his forehead, Tom Corbett frowned in
concentration as he kept the earphones of his study machine clamped
tightly to his ears and listened to a recorded lecture on astrophysics
as it unreeled from the spinning study spool. As command cadet of the
_Polaris_ unit, Tom was required to know more than merely his particular
duty as pilot of a rocket ship. He had to be familiar with every phase
of space travel, with a working knowledge of the duties of all his unit
mates.

Astro, the power-deck officer of the unit, paced back and forth between
the bunks like a huge, hulking bear, muttering to himself as he tried to
memorize the table of reaction times for rocket motors. Though the huge
Venusian cadet was a genius at all mechanical tasks, and able to work
with tools the way a surgeon worked with instruments, he had great
difficulty in learning the theories and scientific reasons for all the
things he did instinctively. Suddenly Astro stopped, looked at his
chronometer, then turned to Tom.

"Hey, Tom!" he called. "Where's that jerk, Manning?"

"Huh?" replied Tom, lifting one of the earphones from his ears. "What
did you say, Astro?"

"Where's Manning?" reiterated Astro. "It's ten minutes after lights
out."

"He was going to get those study spools for us, wasn't he?" mused Tom.

"He should've been back by now," grunted the Venusian. "The library
closed an hour ago. Besides, he couldn't have gotten those spools. Every
other cadet in the Academy is after them."

"Well, he's a pretty resourceful joker," sighed Tom, turning back to the
study machine. "When he goes after something, he gets it by hook or
crook."

"It's the crook part that bothers me," grumbled Astro. "Besides, if the
O.D. catches him out of quarters, he'll be doing his studying while he's
polishing up the mess hall."

Suddenly the door to the room burst open and slammed closed. Tom and
Astro whirled to see their missing unit mate lounging against the
doorframe, grinning broadly.

"Roger!"

"Where've you been, blast you?"

Tom and Astro both jumped forward and spoke at the same time. The
blond-haired cadet merely looked at them lazily and then sauntered
forward, pulling six small study spools from his pockets.

"You wanted these study spools, didn't you?" he drawled, giving his unit
mates three apiece. "Be my guest and study like mad."

Tom and Astro quickly read the titles of the spools and then looked at
Roger in amazement. They were the ones the unit needed for their
end-term exams, the ones all the cadets needed.

"Roger," Tom demanded, "how did you get these spools? The library was
out of them this afternoon. Did you take them from another unit's
quarters?"

"I did not!" said Roger stoutly. "And I don't like your insinuations
that I would." He grinned. "Relax! We have them and we can breeze
through them in the morning and have them back where they belong by noon
tomorrow."

"Where they belong!" Tom exclaimed. "Then you have no right to them."

"Listen, hot-shot!" growled Astro. "I want to know where you got these
spools and how."

"Well, if that isn't gratitude for you!" muttered Roger. "I go out and
risk my neck for my dear beloved unit mates and they stand around
arguing instead of buckling down to study."

"This is no joke, Roger," said Tom seriously. "Now for the last time,
will you tell us how you got them?"

Roger thought a moment and then shrugged his shoulders. "All right," he
said finally. "When I went down to the library to see if it was our turn
for them yet, I found that we were still twenty-seventh in line."

"Twenty-seventh?" gasped Astro.

"That's right, spaceboy!" snorted Roger. "So I tried to con that little
space doll of a librarian into moving our names up on the list, but just
then an Earthworm cadet came in with an order from Tony Richards of the
_Capella_ unit, an order for the very spools we needed."

"You mean, you took them from an Earthworm?" queried Tom.

"Well, I didn't take them exactly," replied Roger. "I waited for him out
on the quadrangle and I told him he was wanted in the cadet dispatcher's
office right away and that I would take the spools on up to Tony."

"And you brought them here!" howled Astro.

"Yup." Roger grinned. "Do you think that squirt will know who I am? Not
in a million years. And by the time Tony and the others do find out who
has them, we'll be finished. Get it?"

"I get it, all right, you crummy little chiseler," growled Astro. "Tom,
we gotta give these back to Tony."

Tom nodded. "You're right," he said.

"Now wait a minute!" said Roger angrily. "I went to a lot of trouble to
get these things for you--"

"Look, Roger," Tom interrupted, "I would rather have one night with
those spools than a two-week leave in Atom City right now. But the
_Capella_ unit is having a tough time making the Spring passing lists.
They need those spools more than we do."

"Yeah," said Astro. "We could probably take the tests now and pass, but
they really have to study. I'm for getting them back to the _Capella_
unit right now. How about you, Tom?"

The young cadet nodded and turned to Roger who stood there, frowning.
"Roger," said Tom, "both Astro and I really appreciate it. But you
wouldn't want the _Capella_ unit to flunk out of the Academy, would
you?"

Roger gnawed at his thumbnail and then looked at his two unit mates
sheepishly. "You're right, fellas," he said. "It was kind of a dirty
trick. Give me the spools. I'll take them back to Tony right now."

"Wait a minute!" exclaimed Astro. "It's after hours. We're not supposed
to be out of the dorm."

For a second the three boys looked at each other hesitantly. Then, as
though they had telepathically conveyed their individual decisions to
each other, they turned toward the door. Tom opened it and stepped out
into the hall cautiously, then turned back and nodded. Roger and Astro
followed him quickly.

As Roger closed the door behind him, he murmured, "There's no reason for
all of us to go. I was the one who took the spools, so I should bring
them back. Why should you two guys risk getting caught?"

Astro punched him in the shoulder fondly. "We always work together,
don't we?" he declared. "If one's gonna get into trouble, we all
should."

"Let's go," urged Tom in a sharp whisper, and they all raced silently
