mechanical efficiency.  The curving prow of Dreadnought, insane
metallic smile, pushed forward at the mark, and was wrapped in a clear
sheen of brilliance.

To a suddenly humbled engineering vessel that viewed this passage from
the side (though itself a work of successive human genius), it appeared
indeed a magician's trick:  the monstrous vessel was reduced by small
fractions.  Length was seduced, and did not reappear.  And then the
thrusting phallus was gone.  The framework was all that remained.

Aboard the carrier the rush of scintillating motion had begun.  Even
those crews aboard ships within the great ship, their minds bent
forward in preparation for combat, could feel the sudden thrill of
weightless, bodiless movement, and taste the ghoulish hum that began at
low, convulsive pitch, then rose through noteless octaves, whirling,
then whining high and unbearable, then gone beyond the range of hearing.

Aboard the vessel only Hayes seemed unmoved by the lightless passage,
like falling down a colossal well to the heart of a venomous, robotoid
planet.  All ship's power was lost, and in that phantom black those who
did not already grip at chair and support-beam bent to their knees as
if in prayer for deliverance.

But not Hayes.  In his mind, he descended into Hell like the crucified
Christ, whose lanced breast had flowed blood and water of forgiveness.
Except that Hayes did not forgive.  For soon he would rise again,
invincible.

True to the hollow-world metaphor, the ship, upon reaching the center
of its plunge, passed through and slowed gradually, and sensation
became more bearable.  The witch-sound returned with its screeching
whine; but soon the worst was passed.  And like the short-lived fright
of the daring child, who has pumped and pulled the playground swing to
its highest arc and is suddenly weightless, cast loose from the normal
laws of earth, feels a moment's fear, but then with the rush of
downward motion again feels himself a conqueror, who has faced the
darkness unafraid, so the men of the Third Fleet, once more surviving
the nightmare world, felt themselves strong and hard, little boys
afraid of nothing, marching boldly toward their moment of destiny and
schoolyard fight.

And all at once their power returned.  On the re-lighted bridge men
quickly assumed martial attitudes, and those whose functions allowed it
watched the screens.  Another silvery sheet appeared before them.

Soon this, too, was parted.  Stars returned to the sky, along with the
gold-orangish hue of a nearby planet.  And behind and to one side of
them, though still far off, a detachment of the Coalition Fleet whirled
about and began to pursue.  From the orbit of the planet as well, rose
a small and desperate defense.

Hayes' voice boomed on the intercom, superceding sectarian commanders.
"All vessels prepare to attack.  Chutes one through twelve lower and
discharge.  Enemy at five o'clock, bearing 3 - 4 Mark.  Outward
batteries key on planetary forces.  Give 'em hell boys; this one's for
real!"

Within minutes over two hundred fighters, cruisers and destroyers had
emerged from the death-womb of the Carrier, formed into squadrons and
flotillas, turned to face the enemy and begun to move forward.  That
number again, including the four titanic battleships, were held in
reserve.

The straggle of fighters and destroyers from the planet's last line of
defense the launched ships ignored altogether, these being handled
easily by the multitude of blazing turrets aboard the Dreadnought.  One
or two handfuls managed to elude fire long enough to harry the rear of
the advancing ranks; but these were little more than beetles biting at
the legs of wolves.  A single heavy cruiser would turn its guns in
their direction, and end forever the one-sided argument.

The ships that advanced to meet them were more formidable.  Suspecting
a move of this kind (but needing to suspect a dozen other possibilities
as well), the Coalition had detached eighty vessels, nearly a quarter
of its strength, to patrol the area, and defend Friedrich Schiller, the
beloved and irreplaceable East German home planet.  And when the time
came, though sleep had been scarce and tension high, they were ready to
fight.  Consisting mainly of German forces, they needed no
high-sounding words to give blood in defense of their homeland.

In open Space battles of this kind, where there was no constricting
lattice of energy fields to hinder movement (as at the Battle of
Athena), the aggressor held the decided advantage.  For here there was
no barricades or tactically advantageous points, only a three
dimensional sea of emptiness in all directions, here and there pricked
by planet islands, themselves destructible and a hindrance to mobility.
 For this reason both sides had attempted to charge, and the resulting
collision of forces at once split the conflagration into a dissipated
struggle without borders, boundaries or points of reference.

And for the Coalition pilots and vessel commanders, this proved to be
fatal.  Outnumbered nearly three to one by more modern, swifter craft,
needing to be watchful of every quarter at once, aware that soon the
Dreadnought would add its considerable firepower to the fray, and thus
needing an early knockout. . .it was impossible.  They fought with
courage and intensity, but so did the Americans.  And though they knew
it was no game (some of the Americans did also), and though they fought
for home and family, this could not make them react quicker or shoot
straighter than their more youthful counterparts, whose duel
ambition---to stay alive and cover themselves with glory---combined
with simply better equipment to give them the clear and early upper
hand.

There would be no repeat of the Battle of Britain.

After ninety minutes of butchery, the bravest socialist pilots had had
enough.  Those who could, turned and fled into warp.  Those who could
not, were cut to pieces by the Dreadnought.

There were no prisoners taken.


*


While at the conclusion of this skirmish some faces among the ranks of
the Commonwealth force beamed with confidence and victory, Hayes' was
not one of them.  He allowed his men roughly three minutes to exchange
war hoops and congratulations, then ordered  his next deployment.  And
he ordered his new Communications Officer, stationed on the bridge, to
make contact with Schiller, which now lay exposed.

At first the planet refused to acknowledge the attempt, feigning
interference.  It was obvious they were trying to buy time.  But when
the Dreadnought, which continued to advance, began to lower its four
great battleships, and Hayes, on an uncoded channel ordered them, once
deployed, to take up pseudo-orbital positions around it and begin
planetary destruct sequence, the East German leadership dropped its
futile ploy. On the large central screen of the bridge, the erect
figure of the Prime Minister appeared, seated at the head of a long
table surrounded by military advisors.  His face was gray and stern.
Though his English was good, he chose for the moment to make it harsh
and clipped.

"Yes, Mr. Secretary."

"Good morning, Schultz.  I won't banter.  I want your planetary shields
lowered, and your orbiting Artillery Stations---yes, I know about
them---silenced and evacuated.  They will be destroyed in one hour's
time.  Also, I want you to relay my signal to General Itjes."

"First let me be sure I understand you.  Are you offering terms for our
surrender?"

"I'm doing nothing of the kind and you know it.  Your planet and your
people are, for the moment, my hostage.  I will reestablish contact in
one hour and ten minutes.  At that time I will expect a patch-through
to Itjes.  In the meantime my ships will continue to take up positions
around you.  If they are fired upon, even once, I'll turn the
battleships loose on the cities."  He signaled his Com Officer to end
the transmission.

The Third Fleet, three quarters of which was now discharged from the
carrier, began to form up into fully operational task forces, each with
a battleship in its center, and to move into place in a wide belt
encircling the planet, then turned facing outward like a bristle of
spears.  Or more aptly, since the guns of the battleships faced inward
as well, like a crown of thorns.

Hayes' plan was cruelly simple:  to put a gun to the head of Schiller,
and force General Itjes and the remainder of the Coalition fleet into a
fight they couldn't win.  His deepest concern was for the passage of
time, which might bring enemies and forces unlooked-for.  By recent
intelligence the nearest significant Soviet presence was at least a
week distant.  But how many of the smaller nations of the Coalition
might be willing to risk their own national forces, it was impossible
to say.  But here Hayes held to the confidence of the bully, believing
that each would be more concerned with their own personal survival, and
thus bring them all into peril.

The allotted time passed.  The task forces stood at the ready.  Itjes
continued to move swiftly toward the system, and the entire planet
scrambled into plans of evacuation that few had believed would ever be
used.

And when they received news of the plight of fully half their
space-bound population, and of their dearest home save earth, the East
German forces of other Coalition patrols, near and  far, with leave or
without it, broke off and began to converge on Schiller.  Were it not
for the time factor ---the majority of these would not arrive (or even
receive the message) for days---Hayes might have had a problem.

And even in the coming duel with Itjes' divided force, the scales might
have been more evenly balanced, but for the simple disparity in the
weapons-systems of a wealthy superpower, and those of a group of
nations which had to live, buy, and protect within their means.  The
four Commonwealth battleships were of a class possessed by only three
Powers in the galaxy---themselves, the Soviet Space Republics (which
didn't deal them out), and the German States, who had no apparent love
for their sundered countrymen.  Also added to the equation:

The two remaining Coalition carriers, ten years old and of a lesser
Soviet series, could fit together inside the Dreadnought, and had not
one-third the long-range firepower.  Neither was capable of extended
warp; and needless to say, they had no star gate, and thus no surprise
capability.  They were built for defense, and the Coalition defenses
had been breached.  How Hayes (or anyone else) could take pleasure in
the prospect of a battle at such clearly unequal odds, remained a
mystery.

He was connected to Helmut Itjes.

"Yes, General Hayes.  You have our people by the throat; what do you
want?"  Itjes had lived too long.....

At this point Hayes blanked out his own visual transmission.  He then
wrote out his replies on paper, to be read by the Communications
Officer.  He was going to leave the enemy no proof of the conversation
about to follow.  A short pause, then the young man read:

"I want you, General Itjes.  If the First Combat Fleet will engage us,
to the death, the civilians may go free---afterwards."

"And if we refuse?"

"I will blanket the planet with microwaves.  It would be a shame to
destroy. . .such beautiful architecture."

"What kind of animal are you?" snapped Itjes.  He now saw, beyond all
doubt, that he was dealing with a madman.  The written notes, read by a
young voice without malice or understanding, had sent a chill straight
through him.  They reminded him strangely, uncannily, of the techniques
employed by Adolph Eichmann and the Hitler S.S.

...   "The one who's going to see you in Hell."

"I will attack when the Dresden detachment joins us.  Then God HELP
you."

"You have twelve hours, Helmut."

"My name is ITJES!"

The screen went blank.



*                        *                        *



The Coalition First Combat Fleet, both detachments, stood fast at a
safe distance from the hornet's nest that surrounded Schiller, and
formed into a single front to face them.

Itjes stood among his officers and technicians on the bridge of the
carrier 'Smolensk', staring at the blank communications screen.  Five
minutes before he had told Hayes flatly that there would be no
engagement without his recordable promise---both visual and vocal---of
the free evacuation of the planet, regardless of the outcome of the
battle.  This helpless waiting, for a reply so paramount, and yet so
utterly beyond his control, was an agony of the human spirit.

The request was perfectly reasonable, and Hayes had every intention of
granting it.  He merely wanted the extra time to study his opponent's
weaponry and deployment.  There was something to be learned even from
the loser of a given confrontation, and Itjes had the reputation of
being a tough and resourceful foe.  So he watched, and made mental
notes:  two-hundred and sixty lesser craft against his three-hundred
deployed, and the superior guns of the Dreadnought.  This should teach
his boys to fight.

The Commonwealth forces began to move forward.  Hayes appeared on the
screen, flanked by Admiral Frank.  "You have your promise, General.
Win or lose, utterly, and the population goes free."

Utterly.

Itjes bit his lip till it bled, ordered his forces to attack.


*


The main battle went much the same as the skirmish which had preceded
it.  The Coalition's flyers were, on the whole more experienced, more
disciplined, in some ways better trained; and for a time they did
fairly well.  They kept their forces together, found cracks in the
fences of their enemies, and were able to weed out and destroy the
greener of the American combatants.

But soon the blows were raining hard and heavy upon them, and coming
from every direction at once.  Squadrons and formations were broken up,
strategies broken down.  And after a time, good and lesser soldiers
alike, veterans and younger men, husbands, heroes and cowards, were
killed by shots that did not discriminate.  No magical God-force
protected the just and perseverant; no hand of Providence reached down.
 Men and women died, adding their silent numbers to the ancient mass of
corpses piled in an endless grave in the name of War, because men had
not yet learned that name was foul.

The Coalition forces kept fighting for five hours, fighting and dying,
waiting for an order to retreat that never came, fighting and dying and
waiting for an order to retreat that never came, then a surrender that
never came, fighting and dying and waiting for an order to retreat and
then a surrender, and an end to the carnage that never came, fighting
and dying and waiting for an order to retreat and then a surrender and
an end to the carnage, and some kind of sanity that never came,
fighting and dying and waiting for an order to retreat and then a
surrender and some kind of sanity, then simple deliverance, that never
came---except in death.

The Commonwealth lost eighty ships, mostly fighters and destroyers, in
annihilating the entire Coalition Fleet.  Ten hours later the last
evacuation vessels left the planet, though many inhabitants remained
behind of their own volition.  The four Battleships took up their
equidistant points about the equator of the Friedrich Schiller, firing
a long and continuous heat and shock laser burst into its core.  The
planet's surface writhed and convulsed with earthquakes and eruptions
for perhaps two hours, till the outer crust was broken into crumbling
islands in a molten sea, and what was left of the face fell apart.  The
Battleships ceased their barrage, leaving it to die its final death of
fire, lava and smoke.  The Secretary chose to leave it thus, rather
than blow it apart, to further anger the Soviets and goad them into
reprisals.  That such a decision might have other consequences he knew,
but at that moment his mind was driven by a single impulse only.  He
wanted, with all his soul, a full-scale World War.

Several hours later in prearranged rendezvous, the Third Fleet's
engineering vessels followed the earlier course of the Dreadnought
through the star gate.  Immediately upon arrival (and finding that
things had gone their way), they turned about and began to construct a
second entrance, leading back the way they had come.  Since the
corridor itself was already in existence, needing only a return inlet,
this took less than forty-eight hours.  Then, all Commonwealth vessels
tucked up safe inside the mother, the Third Fleet returned to the
limits of the Athena system, destroying the further gate, dismantling
the nearer, behind them.  The Dreadnought then proceeded, at just above
tracking speed, to a new and untraceable location.

Hayes had won again.





VI

        News of the Battle of Schiller did not reach Earth (those
portions controlled by the United Commonwealth) until July 3, one week
after the fact, and one day before the annual celebration of the
nation's Independence.  The President received from Hayes at that time
a three line, uncoded message:

THE COALITION FIRST COMBAT FLEET IS NEUTRALIZED AND THE PLANET SCHILLER
DESTROYED.  THE PUPPET GOVERMENTS OF THE POST-EUROPEAN COMMUNIST PACT
ARE COWED AND IN DISARRAY.  WE HAVE DEALT ANOTHER SERIOUS BLOW TO
SOVIET HOPES OF EXPANSIONISM.

In the same pouch came Admiral Frank's report to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, giving a detailed account of the battle, and of the performance
of the Third Fleet.  For the first time a list of casualties was
included.

The third item contained within the high-speed bullet-pouch, was a
carefully edited audio-visual program intended for consumption by the
public and the press.  This two-hour propaganda masterpiece consisted
of selected scenes from the confrontation, a supposed eyewitness
account of East German atrocities, and a visual 'letter' from a young
Texas pilot to his wife and baby son.  Sitting on his bunk aboard the
Dreadnought, his handsome face, drawling voice and simple,
straightforward manner were an enchantment of rugged innocence and male
American charm.


*


"Donna, Jimmy.  I just wanted to tell you that I love you and I miss
you, and I think of you every day.  I also wanted you to know that I
believe in what we're fighting for way out here, and that someday I
hope to make you as proud of me, as I am proud to be a part of this
great cause.

"Because ya know, truth and freedom may sound like just words, to some
folks who don't appreciate what they have, or don't feel the emptiness
and suffering of those forced to live without them.  But being out
here, and seeing what I've seen, you come to realize that not
everyone's as lucky as we are in America.  You learn that there are
governments who so fear God's truth, that they'll subject their own
brothers to a police-state existence, just to insure that the Christian
message of freedom and hope is never heard.

"Now I'm not pretending to know everything there is to know about life
or politics, and it's a terrible tragedy to have to go to war just to
give back to people rights and dignities that never should have been
taken away from them.  And I won't lie to you, Donna.  Despite the
advantages God's given us, in weaponry and leadership, I may be hurt,
or even killed, before the fighting is over.

"But if that's so then I'll die proud, knowing that I served my country
as well as any man could, whether some faint-hearted politicians in
Washington stood behind me or not.  And Jimmy, if something should
happen and you have to grow up without a papa, I can only hope that
someday, God willing, you'll have the same chance that I do now, to fly
and fight for the greatest nation in the galaxy, the United
Commonwealth of America.

