The Project Gutenberg EBook of Three Translations of The Koran (Al-Qur'an)
side by side

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Three Translations of The Koran (Al-Qur'an) side by side

Translator: Abdullah Yusuf Ali

Translator: Marmaduke Pickthall

Translator: Mohammad Habib Shakir

Release Date: October 27, 2005 [EBook #16955]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSLATIONS OF THE KORAN ***




This text originates from a file whose origins we don't
know, found in many places on the Internet. It was
re-proofed and corrected for Project Gutenberg against
paper copies of the translations by Irfan Ali.







Y: = Qur'an Translation by Abdullah Yusuf Ali

P: = Qur'an Translation by Marmaduke Pickthall

S: = Qur'an Translation by Mohammad Habib Shakir



---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 1:

                          AL-FATIHA (THE OPENING)
 Total Verses: 7 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

001.001
Y: In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

P: In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

S: In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

001.002
Y: Praise be to Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds;

P: Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds,

S: All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.

001.003
Y: Most Gracious, Most Merciful;

P: The Beneficent, the Merciful.

S: The Beneficent, the Merciful.

001.004
Y: Master of the Day of Judgment.

P: Master of the Day of Judgment,

S: Master of the Day of Judgment.

001.005
Y: Thee do we worship, and Thine aid we seek.

P: Thee (alone) we worship; Thee (alone) we ask for help.

S: Thee do we serve and Thee do we beseech for help.

001.006
Y: Show us the straight way,

P: Show us the straight path,

S: Keep us on the right path.

001.007
Y: The way of those on whom Thou hast bestowed Thy Grace, those whose
(portion) is not wrath, and who go not astray.

P: The path of those whom Thou hast favoured; Not the (path) of those
who earn Thine anger nor of those who go astray.

S: The path of those upon whom Thou hast bestowed favors. Not (the path)
of those upon whom Thy wrath is brought down, nor of those who go
astray.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 2:

                            AL-BAQARA (THE COW)
 Total Verses: 286 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

002.001
Y: A.L.M.

P: Alif. Lam. Mim.

S: Alif Lam Mim.

002.002
Y: This is the Book; in it is guidance sure, without doubt, to those who
fear Allah;

P: This is the Scripture whereof there is no doubt, a guidance unto
those who ward off (evil).

S: This Book, there is no doubt in it, is a guide to those who guard
(against evil).

002.003
Y: Who believe in the Unseen, are steadfast in prayer, and spend out of
what We have provided for them;

P: Who believe in the Unseen, and establish worship, and spend of that
We have bestowed upon them;

S: Those who believe in the unseen and keep up prayer and spend out of
what We have given them.

002.004
Y: And who believe in the Revelation sent to thee, and sent before thy
time, and (in their hearts) have the assurance of the Hereafter.

P: And who believe in that which is revealed unto thee (Muhammad) and
that which was revealed before thee, and are certain of the Hereafter.

S: And who believe in that which has been revealed to you and that which
was revealed before you and they are sure of the hereafter.

002.005
Y: They are on (true) guidance, from their Lord, and it is these who
will prosper.

P: These depend on guidance from their Lord. These are the successful.

S: These are on a right course from their Lord and these it is that
shall be successful.

002.006
Y: As to those who reject Faith, it is the same to them whether thou
warn them or do not warn them; they will not believe.

P: As for the Disbelievers, Whether thou warn them or thou warn them not
it is all one for them; they believe not.

S: Surely those who disbelieve, it being alike to them whether you warn
them, or do not warn them, will not believe.

002.007
Y: Allah hath set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing, and on
their eyes is a veil; great is the penalty they (incur).

P: Allah hath sealed their hearing and their hearts, and on their eyes
there is a covering. Theirs will be an awful doom.

S: Allah has set a seal upon their hearts and upon their hearing and
there is a covering over their eyes, and there is a great punishment
for them.

002.008
Y: Of the people there are some who say: "We believe in Allah and the
Last Day;" but they do not (really) believe.

P: And of mankind are some who say: We believe in Allah and the Last
Day, when they believe not.

S: And there are some people who say: We believe in Allah and the last
day; and they are not at all believers.

002.009
Y: Fain would they deceive Allah and those who believe, but they only
deceive themselves, and realise (it) not!

P: They think to beguile Allah and those who believe, and they beguile
none save themselves; but they perceive not.

S: They desire to deceive Allah and those who believe, and they deceive
only themselves and they do not perceive.

002.010
Y: In their hearts is a disease; and Allah has increased their disease:
And grievous is the penalty they (incur), because they are false (to
themselves).

P: In their hearts is a disease, and Allah increaseth their disease. A
painful doom is theirs because they lie.

S: There is a disease in their hearts, so Allah added to their disease
and they shall have a painful chastisement because they lied.

002.011
Y: When it is said to them: "Make not mischief on the earth," they say:
"Why, we only Want to make peace!"

P: And when it is said unto them: Make not mischief in the earth, they
say: We are peacemakers only.

S: And when it is said to them, Do not make mischief in the land, they
say: We are but peace-makers.

002.012
Y: Of a surety, they are the ones who make mischief, but they realise
(it) not.

P: Are not they indeed the mischief-makers? But they perceive not.

S: Now surely they themselves are the mischief makers, but they do not
perceive.

002.013
Y: When it is said to them: "Believe as the others believe:" They say:
"Shall we believe as the fools believe?" Nay, of a surety they are the
fools, but they do not know.

P: And when it is said unto them: believe as the people believe, they
say: shall we believe as the foolish believe? are not they indeed the
foolish? But they know not.

S: And when it is said to them: Believe as the people believe they say:
Shall we believe as the fools believe? Now surely they themselves are
the fools, but they do not know.

002.014
Y: When they meet those who believe, they say: "We believe;" but when
they are alone with their evil ones, they say: "We are really with you:
We (were) only jesting."

P: And when they fall in with those who believe, they say: We believe;
but when they go apart to their devils they declare: Lo! we are with
you; verily we did but mock.

S: And when they meet those who believe, they say: We believe; and when
they are alone with their Shaitans, they say: Surely we are with you,
we were only mocking.

002.015
Y: Allah will throw back their mockery on them, and give them rope in
their trespasses; so they will wander like blind ones (To and fro).

P: Allah (Himself) doth mock them, leaving them to wander blindly on in
their contumacy.

S: Allah shall pay them back their mockery, and He leaves them alone in
their inordinacy, blindly wandering on.

002.016
Y: These are they who have bartered Guidance for error: But their
traffic is profitless, and they have lost true direction,

P: These are they who purchase error at the price of guidance, so their
commerce doth not prosper, neither are they guided.

S: These are they who buy error for the right direction, so their
bargain shall bring no gain, nor are they the followers of the right
direction.

002.017
Y: Their similitude is that of a man who kindled a fire; when it lighted
all around him, Allah took away their light and left them in utter
darkness. So they could not see.

P: Their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindleth fire, and when
it sheddeth its light around him Allah taketh away their light and
leaveth them in darkness, where they cannot see,

S: Their parable is like the parable of one who kindled a fire but when
it had illumined all around him, Allah took away their light, and left
them in utter darkness--they do not see.

002.018
Y: Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not return (to the path).

P: Deaf, dumb and blind; and they return not.

S: Deaf, dumb (and) blind, so they will not turn back.

002.019
Y: Or (another similitude) is that of a rain-laden cloud from the sky:
In it are zones of darkness, and thunder and lightning: They press
their fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning thunder-clap, the
while they are in terror of death. But Allah is ever round the
rejecters of Faith!

P: Or like a rainstorm from the sky, wherein is darkness, thunder and
the flash of lightning. They thrust their fingers in their ears by
reason of the thunder-claps, for fear of death, Allah encompasseth the
disbelievers (in His guidance, His omniscience and His omnipotence).

S: Or like abundant rain from the cloud in which is utter darkness and
thunder and lightning; they put their fingers into their ears because
of the thunder peal, for fear of death, and Allah encompasses the
unbelievers.

002.020
Y: The lightning all but snatches away their sight; every time the light
(Helps) them, they walk therein, and when the darkness grows on them,
they stand still. And if Allah willed, He could take away their faculty
of hearing and seeing; for Allah hath power over all things.

P: The lightning almost snatcheth away their sight from them. As often
as it flasheth forth for them they walk therein, and when it darkeneth
against them they stand still. If Allah willed, He could destroy their
hearing and their sight. Lo! Allah is able to do all things.

S: The lightning almost takes away their sight; whenever it shines on
them they walk in it, and when it becomes dark to them they stand
still; and if Allah had pleased He would certainly have taken away
their hearing and their sight; surely Allah has power over all things.

002.021
Y: O ye people! Adore your Guardian-Lord, who created you and those who
came before you, that ye may have the chance to learn righteousness;

P: O mankind! worship your Lord, Who hath created you and those before
you, so that ye may ward off (evil).

S: O men! serve your Lord Who created you and those before you so that
you may guard (against evil).

002.022
Y: Who has made the earth your couch, and the heavens your canopy; and
sent down rain from the heavens; and brought forth therewith Fruits for
your sustenance; then set not up rivals unto Allah when ye know (the
truth).

P: Who hath appointed the earth a resting-place for you, and the sky a
canopy; and causeth water to pour down from the sky, thereby producing
fruits as food for you. And do not set up rivals to Allah when ye know
(better).

S: Who made the earth a resting place for you and the heaven a canopy
and (Who) sends down rain from the cloud then brings forth with it
subsistence for you of the fruits; therefore do not set up rivals to
Allah while you know.

002.023
Y: And if ye are in doubt as to what We have revealed from time to time
to Our servant, then produce a Sura like thereunto; and call your
witnesses or helpers (If there are any) besides Allah, if your (doubts)
are true.

P: And if ye are in doubt concerning that which We reveal unto Our slave
(Muhammad), then produce a surah of the like thereof, and call your
witness beside Allah if ye are truthful.

S: And if you are in doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our
servant, then produce a Chapter like it and call on your witnesses
besides Allah if you are truthful.

002.024
Y: But if ye cannot- and of a surety ye cannot- then fear the Fire whose
fuel is men and stones,- which is prepared for those who reject Faith.

P: And if ye do it not- and ye can never do it - then guard yourselves
against the Fire prepared for disbelievers, whose fuel is of men and
stones.

S: But if you do (it) not and never shall you do (it), then be on your
guard against the fire of which men and stones are the fuel; it is
prepared for the unbelievers.

002.025
Y: But give glad tidings to those who believe and work righteousness,
that their portion is Gardens, beneath which rivers flow. Every time
they are fed with fruits therefrom, they say: "Why, this is what we
were fed with before," for they are given things in similitude; and
they have therein companions pure (and holy); and they abide therein
(for ever).

P: And give glad tidings (O Muhammad) unto those who believe and do good
works; that theirs are Gardens underneath which rivers flow; as often
as they are regaled with food of the fruit thereof, they say: this is
what was given us aforetime; and it is given to them in resemblance.
There for them are pure companions; there forever they abide.

S: And convey good news to those who believe and do good deeds, that
they shall have gardens in which rivers flow; whenever they shall be
given a portion of the fruit thereof, they shall say: This is what was
given to us before; and they shall be given the like of it, and they
shall have pure mates in them, and in them, they shall abide.

002.026
Y: Allah disdains not to use the similitude of things, lowest as well as
highest. Those who believe know that it is truth from their Lord; but
those who reject Faith say: "What means Allah by this similitude?" By
it He causes many to stray, and many He leads into the right path; but
He causes not to stray, except those who forsake (the path),-

P: Lo! Allah disdaineth not to coin the similitude even of a gnat. Those
who believe know that it is the truth from their Lord; but those who
disbelieve say: What doth Allah wish (to teach) by such a similitude?
He misleadeth many thereby, and He guideth many thereby; and He
misleadeth thereby only miscreants;

S: Surely Allah is not ashamed to set forth any parable-- (that of) a
gnat or any thing above that; then as for those who believe, they know
that it is the truth from their Lord, and as for those who disbelieve,
they say: What is it that Allah means by this parable: He causes many
to err by it and many He leads aright by it! but He does not cause to
err by it (any) except the transgressors,

002.027
Y: Those who break Allah's Covenant after it is ratified, and who sunder
what Allah has ordered to be joined, and do mischief on earth: These
cause loss (only) to themselves.

P: Those who break the covenant of Allah after ratifying it, and sever
that which Allah ordered to be joined, and (who) make mischief in the
earth: Those are they who are the losers.

S: Who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation and cut
asunder what Allah has ordered to be joined, and make mischief in the
land; these it is that are the losers.

002.028
Y: How can ye reject the faith in Allah?- seeing that ye were without
life, and He gave you life; then will He cause you to die, and will
again bring you to life; and again to Him will ye return.

P: How disbelieve ye in Allah when ye were dead and He gave life to you!
Then He will give you death, then life again, and then unto Him ye will
return.

S: How do you deny Allah and you were dead and He gave you life? Again
He will cause you to die and again bring you to life, then you shall be
brought back to Him.

002.029
Y: It is He Who hath created for you all things that are on earth;
Moreover His design comprehended the heavens, for He gave order and
perfection to the seven firmaments; and of all things He hath perfect
knowledge.

P: He it is Who created for you all that is in the earth. Then turned He
to the heaven, and fashioned it as seven heavens. And He is knower of
all things.

S: He it is Who created for you all that is in the earth, and He
directed Himself to the heaven, so He made them complete seven heavens,
and He knows all things.

002.030
Y: Behold, thy Lord said to the angels: "I will create a vicegerent on
earth." They said: "Wilt Thou place therein one who will make mischief
therein and shed blood?- whilst we do celebrate Thy praises and glorify
Thy holy (name)?" He said: "I know what ye know not."

P: And when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo! I am about to place a
viceroy in the earth, they said: Wilt thou place therein one who will
do harm therein and will shed blood, while we, we hymn Thy praise and
sanctify Thee? He said: Surely I know that which ye know not.

S: And when your Lord said to the angels, I am going to place in the
earth a khalif, they said: What! wilt Thou place in it such as shall
make mischief in it and shed blood, and we celebrate Thy praise and
extol Thy holiness? He said: Surely I know what you do not know.

002.031
Y: And He taught Adam the names of all things; then He placed them
before the angels, and said: "Tell me the names of these if ye are
right."

P: And He taught Adam all the names, then showed them to the angels,
saying: Inform Me of the names of these, if ye are truthful.

S: And He taught Adam all the names, then presented them to the angels;
then He said: Tell me the names of those if you are right.

002.032
Y: They said: "Glory to Thee, of knowledge We have none, save what Thou
Hast taught us: In truth it is Thou Who art perfect in knowledge and
wisdom."

P: They said: Be glorified! We have no knowledge saving that which Thou
hast taught us. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Knower, the Wise.

S: They said: Glory be to Thee! we have no knowledge but that which Thou
hast taught us; surely Thou art the Knowing, the Wise.

002.033
Y: He said: "O Adam! Tell them their names." When he had told them,
Allah said: "Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of heaven and
earth, and I know what ye reveal and what ye conceal?"

P: He said: O Adam! Inform them of their names, and when he had informed
them of their names, He said: Did I not tell you that I know the secret
of the heavens and the earth? And I know that which ye disclose and
which ye hide.

S: He said: O Adam! inform them of their names. Then when he had
informed them of their names, He said: Did I not say to you that I
surely know what is ghaib in the heavens and the earth and (that) I
know what you manifest and what you hide?

002.034
Y: And behold, We said to the angels: "Bow down to Adam" and they bowed
down. Not so Iblis: he refused and was haughty: He was of those who
reject Faith.

P: And when We said unto the angels: Prostrate yourselves before Adam,
they fell prostrate, all save Iblis. He demurred through pride, and so
became a disbeliever.

S: And when We said to the angels: Make obeisance to Adam they did
obeisance, but Iblis (did it not). He refused and he was proud, and he
was one of the unbelievers.

002.035
Y: We said: "O Adam! dwell thou and thy wife in the Garden; and eat of
the bountiful things therein as (where and when) ye will; but approach
not this tree, or ye run into harm and transgression."

P: And We said: O Adam! Dwell thou and thy wife in the Garden, and eat
ye freely (of the fruits) thereof where ye will; but come not nigh this
tree lest ye become wrong-doers.

S: And We said: O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the garden and eat
from it a plenteous (food) wherever you wish and do not approach this
tree, for then you will be of the unjust.

002.036
Y: Then did Satan make them slip from the (garden), and get them out of
the state (of felicity) in which they had been. We said: "Get ye down,
all (ye people), with enmity between yourselves. On earth will be your
dwelling-place and your means of livelihood- for a time."

P: But Satan caused them to deflect therefrom and expelled them from the
(happy) state in which they were; and We said: Fall down, one of you a
foe unto the other! There shall be for you on earth a habitation and
provision for a time.

S: But the Shaitan made them both fall from it, and caused them to
depart from that (state) in which they were; and We said: Get forth,
some of you being the enemies of others, and there is for you in the
earth an abode and a provision for a time.

002.037
Y: Then learnt Adam from his Lord words of inspiration, and his Lord
Turned towards him; for He is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

P: Then Adam received from his Lord words (of revelation), and He
relented toward him. Lo! He is the relenting, the Merciful.

S: Then Adam received (some) words from his Lord, so He turned to him
mercifully; surely He is Oft-returning (to mercy), the Merciful.

002.038
Y: We said: "Get ye down all from here; and if, as is sure, there comes
to you Guidance from me," whosoever follows My guidance, on them shall
be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

P: We said: Go down, all of you, from hence; but verily there cometh
unto you from Me a guidance; and whoso followeth My guidance, there
shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve.

S: We said: Go forth from this (state) all; so surely there will come to
you a guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, no fear shall
come upon them, nor shall they grieve.

002.039
Y: "But those who reject Faith and belie Our Signs, they shall be
companions of the Fire; they shall abide therein."

P: But they who disbelieve, and deny Our revelations, such are rightful
Peoples of the Fire. They will abide therein.

S: And (as to) those who disbelieve in and reject My communications,
they are the inmates of the fire, in it they shall abide.

002.040
Y: O Children of Israel! call to mind the (special) favour which I
bestowed upon you, and fulfil your covenant with Me as I fulfil My
Covenant with you, and fear none but Me.

P: O Children of Israel! Remember My favour wherewith I favoured you,
and fulfil your (part of the) covenant, I shall fulfil My (part of the)
covenant, and fear Me.

S: O children of Israel! call to mind My favor which I bestowed on you
and be faithful to (your) covenant with Me, I will fulfill (My)
covenant with you; and of Me, Me alone, should you be afraid.

002.041
Y: And believe in what I reveal, confirming the revelation which is with
you, and be not the first to reject Faith therein, nor sell My Signs
for a small price; and fear Me, and Me alone.

P: And believe in that which I reveal, confirming that which ye possess
already (of the Scripture), and be not first to disbelieve therein, and
part not with My revelations for a trifling price, and keep your duty
unto Me.

S: And believe in what I have revealed, verifying that which is with
you, and be not the first to deny it, neither take a mean price in
exchange for My communications; and Me, Me alone should you fear.

002.042
Y: And cover not Truth with falsehood, nor conceal the Truth when ye
know (what it is).

P: Confound not truth with falsehood, nor knowingly conceal the truth.

S: And do not mix up the truth with the falsehood, nor hide the truth
while you know (it).

002.043
Y: And be steadfast in prayer; practise regular charity; and bow down
your heads with those who bow down (in worship).

P: Establish worship, pay the poor-due, and bow your heads with those
who bow (in worship).

S: And keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who
bow down.

002.044
Y: Do ye enjoin right conduct on the people, and forget (To practise it)
yourselves, and yet ye study the Scripture? Will ye not understand?

P: Enjoin ye righteousness upon mankind while ye yourselves forget (to
practise it)? And ye are readers of the Scripture! Have ye then no
sense?

S: What! do you enjoin men to be good and neglect your own souls while
you read the Book; have you then no sense?

002.045
Y: Nay, seek (Allah's) help with patient perseverance and prayer: It is
indeed hard, except to those who bring a lowly spirit,-

P: Seek help in patience and prayer; and truly it is hard save for the
humble-minded,

S: And seek assistance through patience and prayer, and most surely it
is a hard thing except for the humble ones,

002.046
Y: Who bear in mind the certainty that they are to meet their Lord, and
that they are to return to Him.

P: Who know that they will have to meet their Lord, and that unto Him
they are returning.

S: Who know that they shall meet their Lord and that they shall return
to Him.

002.047
Y: Children of Israel! call to mind the (special) favour which I
bestowed upon you, and that I preferred you to all other (for My
Message).

P: O Children of Israel! Remember My favour wherewith I favoured you and
how I preferred you to (all) creatures.

S: O children of Israel! call to mind My favor which I bestowed on you
and that I made you excel the nations.

002.048
Y: Then guard yourselves against a day when one soul shall not avail
another nor shall intercession be accepted for her, nor shall
compensation be taken from her, nor shall anyone be helped (from
outside).

P: And guard yourselves against a day when no soul will in aught avail
another, nor will intercession be accepted from it, nor will
compensation be received from it, nor will they be helped.

S: And be on your guard against a day when one soul shall not avail
another in the least, neither shall intercession on its behalf be
accepted, nor shall any compensation be taken from it, nor shall they
be helped.

002.049
Y: And remember, We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh: They set
you hard tasks and punishments, slaughtered your sons and let your
women-folk live; therein was a tremendous trial from your Lord.

P: And (remember) when We did deliver you from Pharaoh's folk, who were
afflicting you with dreadful torment, slaying your sons and sparing
your women: that was a tremendous trial from your Lord.

S: And when We delivered you from Firon's people, who subjected you to
severe torment, killing your sons and sparing your women, and in this
there was a great trial from your Lord.

002.050
Y: And remember We divided the sea for you and saved you and drowned
Pharaoh's people within your very sight.

P: And when We brought you through the sea and rescued you, and drowned
the folk of Pharaoh in your sight.

S: And when We parted the sea for you, so We saved you and drowned the
followers of Firon and you watched by.

002.051
Y: And remember We appointed forty nights for Moses, and in his absence
ye took the calf (for worship), and ye did grievous wrong.

P: And when We did appoint for Moses forty nights (of solitude), and
then ye chose the calf, when he had gone from you, and were
wrong-doers.

S: And when We appointed a time of forty nights with Musa, then you took
the calf (for a god) after him and you were unjust.

002.052
Y: Even then We did forgive you; there was a chance for you to be
grateful.

P: Then, even after that, We pardoned you in order that ye might give
thanks.

S: Then We pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks.

002.053
Y: And remember We gave Moses the Scripture and the Criterion (Between
right and wrong): There was a chance for you to be guided aright.

P: And when We gave unto Moses the Scripture and the criterion (of right
and wrong), that ye might be led aright.

S: And when We gave Musa the Book and the distinction that you might
walk aright.

002.054
Y: And remember Moses said to his people: "O my people! Ye have indeed
wronged yourselves by your worship of the calf: So turn (in repentance)
to your Maker, and slay yourselves (the wrong-doers); that will be
better for you in the sight of your Maker." Then He turned towards you
(in forgiveness): For He is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

P: And when Moses said unto his people: O my people! Ye have wronged
yourselves by your choosing of the calf (for worship) so turn in
penitence to your Creator, and kill (the guilty) yourselves. That will
be best for you with your Creator and He will relent toward you. Lo! He
is the Relenting, the Merciful.

S: And when Musa said to his people: O my people! you have surely been
unjust to yourselves by taking the calf (for a god), therefore turn to
your Creator (penitently), so kill your people, that is best for you
with your Creator: so He turned to you (mercifully), for surely He is
the Oft-returning (to mercy), the Merciful.

002.055
Y: And remember ye said: "O Moses! We shall never believe in thee until
we see Allah manifestly," but ye were dazed with thunder and lighting
even as ye looked on.

P: And when ye said: O Moses! We will not believe in thee till we see
Allah plainly; and even while ye gazed the lightning seized you.

S: And when you said: O Musa! we will not believe in you until we see
Allah manifestly, so the punishment overtook you while you looked on.

002.056
Y: Then We raised you up after your death: Ye had the chance to be
grateful.

P: Then We revived you after your extinction, that ye might give thanks.

S: Then We raised you up after your death that you may give thanks.

002.057
Y: And We gave you the shade of clouds and sent down to you Manna and
quails, saying: "Eat of the good things We have provided for you:" (But
they rebelled); to us they did no harm, but they harmed their own
souls.

P: And We caused the white cloud to overshadow you and sent down on you
the manna and the quails, (saying): Eat of the good things wherewith We
have provided you- they wronged Us not, but they did wrong themselves.

S: And We made the clouds to give shade over you and We sent to you
manna and quails: Eat of the good things that We have given you; and
they did not do Us any harm, but they made their own souls suffer the
loss.

002.058
Y: And remember We said: "Enter this town, and eat of the plenty therein
as ye wish; but enter the gate with humility, in posture and in words,
and We shall forgive you your faults and increase (the portion of)
those who do good."

P: And when We said: Go into this township and eat freely of that which
is therein, and enter the gate prostrate, and say: "Repentance." We
will forgive you your sins and will increase (reward) for the
right-doers.

S: And when We said: Enter this city, then eat from it a plenteous
(food) wherever you wish, and enter the gate making obeisance, and say,
forgiveness. We will forgive you your wrongs and give more to those who
do good (to others).

002.059
Y: But the transgressors changed the word from that which had been given
them; so We sent on the transgressors a plague from heaven, for that
they infringed (Our command) repeatedly.

P: But those who did wrong changed the word which had been told them for
another saying, and We sent down upon the evil-doers wrath from heaven
for their evil-doing.

S: But those who were unjust changed it for a saying other than that
which had been spoken to them, so We sent upon those who were unjust a
pestilence from heaven, because they transgressed.

002.060
Y: And remember Moses prayed for water for his people; We said:

"Strike the rock with thy staff." Then gushed forth therefrom twelve
springs. Each group knew its own place for water. So eat and drink of
the sustenance provided by Allah, and do no evil nor mischief on the
(face of the) earth.

P: And when Moses asked for water for his people, We said: Smite with
thy staff the rock. And there gushed out therefrom twelve springs (so
that) each tribe knew their drinking-place. Eat and drink of that which
Allah hath provided, and do not act corruptly, making mischief in the
earth.

S: And when Musa prayed for drink for his people, We said: Strike the
rock with your staff So there gushed from it twelve springs; each tribe
knew its drinking place: Eat and drink of the provisions of Allah and
do not act corruptly in the land, making mischief.

002.061
Y: And remember ye said: "O Moses! we cannot endure one kind of food
(always); so beseech thy Lord for us to produce for us of what the
earth groweth,- its pot-herbs, and cucumbers, its garlic, lentils, and
onions." He said: "Will ye exchange the better for the worse? Go ye
down to any town, and ye shall find what ye want!" They were covered
with humiliation and misery; they drew on themselves the wrath of
Allah. This because they went on rejecting the Signs of Allah and
slaying His Messengers without just cause. This because they rebelled
and went on transgressing.

P: And when ye said: O Moses! We are weary of one kind of food; so call
upon thy Lord for us that He bring forth for us of that which the earth
groweth - of its herbs and its cucumbers and its corn and its lentils
and its onions. He said: Would ye exchange that which is higher for
that which is lower? Go down to settled country, thus ye shall get that
which ye demand. And humiliation and wretchedness were stamped upon
them and they were visited with wrath from Allah. That was because they
disbelieved in Allah's revelations and slew the prophets wrongfully.
That was for their disobedience and transgression.

S: And when you said: O Musa! we cannot bear with one food, therefore
pray Lord on our behalf to bring forth for us out of what the earth
grows, of its herbs and its cucumbers and its garlic and its lentils
and its onions. He said: Will you exchange that which is better for
that which is worse? Enter a city, so you will have what you ask for.
And abasement and humiliation were brought down upon them, and they
became deserving of Allah's wrath; this was so because they disbelieved
in the communications of Allah and killed the prophets unjustly; this
was so because they disobeyed and exceeded the limits.

002.062
Y: Those who believe (in the Qur'an), and those who follow the Jewish
(scriptures), and the Christians and the Sabians,- any who believe in
Allah and the Last Day, and work righteousness, shall have their reward
with their Lord; on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

P: Lo! Those who believe (in that which is revealed unto thee,
Muhammad), and those who are Jews, and Christians, and Sabaeans -
whoever believeth in Allah and the Last Day and doeth right - surely
their reward is with their Lord, and there shall no fear come upon them
neither shall they grieve.

S: Surely those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the
Christians, and the Sabians, whoever believes in Allah and the Last day
and does good, they shall have their reward from their Lord, and there
is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve.

002.063
Y: And remember We took your covenant and We raised above you (The
towering height) of Mount (Sinai) (Saying): "Hold firmly to what We
have given you and bring (ever) to remembrance what is therein:
Perchance ye may fear Allah."

P: And (remember, O Children of Israel) when We made a covenant with you
and caused the mount to tower above you, (saying): Hold fast that which
We have given you, and remember that which is therein, that ye may ward
off (evil).

S: And when We took a promise from you and lifted the mountain over you:
Take hold of the law (Tavrat) We have given you with firmness and bear
in mind what is in it, so that you may guard (against evil).

002.064
Y: But ye turned back thereafter: Had it not been for the Grace and
Mercy of Allah to you, ye had surely been among the lost.

P: Then, even after that, ye turned away, and if it had not been for the
grace of Allah and His mercy ye had been among the losers.

S: Then you turned back after that; so were it not for the grace of
Allah and His mercy on you, you would certainly have been among the
losers.

002.065
Y: And well ye knew those amongst you who transgressed in the matter of
the Sabbath: We said to them: "Be ye apes, despised and rejected."

P: And ye know of those of you who broke the Sabbath, how We said unto
them: Be ye apes, despised and hated!

S: And certainly you have known those among you who exceeded the limits
of the Sabbath, so We said to them: Be (as) apes, despised and hated.

002.066
Y: So We made it an example to their own time and to their posterity,
and a lesson to those who fear Allah.

P: And We made it an example to their own and to succeeding generations,
and an admonition to the Allah-fearing.

S: So We made them an example to those who witnessed it and those who
came after it, and an admonition to those who guard (against evil).

002.067
Y: And remember Moses said to his people: "Allah commands that ye
sacrifice a heifer." They said: "Makest thou a laughing-stock of us?"
He said: "Allah save me from being an ignorant (fool)!"

P: And when Moses said unto his people: Lo! Allah commandeth you that ye
sacrifice a cow, they said: Dost thou make game of us? He answered:
Allah forbid that I should be among the foolish!

S: And when Musa said to his people: Surely Allah commands you that you
should sacrifice a cow; they said: Do you ridicule us? He said: I seek
the protection of Allah from being one of the ignorant.

002.068
Y: They said: "Beseech on our behalf Thy Lord to make plain to us what
(heifer) it is!" He said; "He says: The heifer should be neither too
old nor too young, but of middling age. Now do what ye are commanded!"

P: They said: Pray for us unto thy Lord that He make clear to us what
(cow) she is. (Moses) answered: Lo! He saith, Verily she is a cow
neither with calf nor immature; (she is) between the two conditions; so
do that which ye are commanded.

S: They said: Call on your Lord for our sake to make it plain to us what
she is. Musa said: He says, Surely she is a cow neither advanced in age
nor too young, of middle age between that (and this); do therefore what
you are commanded.

002.069
Y: They said: "Beseech on our behalf Thy Lord to make plain to us Her
colour." He said: "He says: A fawn-coloured heifer, pure and rich in
tone, the admiration of beholders!"

P: They said: Pray for us unto thy Lord that He make clear to us of what
colour she is. (Moses) answered: Lo! He saith: Verily she is a yellow
cow. Bright is her colour, gladdening beholders.

S: They said: Call on your Lord for our sake to make it plain to us what
her color is. Musa said: He says, Surely she is a yellow cow; her color
is intensely yellow, giving delight to the beholders.

002.070
Y: They said: "Beseech on our behalf Thy Lord to make plain to us what
she is: To us are all heifers alike: We wish indeed for guidance, if
Allah wills."

P: They said: Pray for us unto thy Lord that He make clear to us what
(cow) she is. Lo! cows are much alike to us; and Lo! if Allah wills, we
may be led aright.

S: They said: Call on your Lord for our sake to make it plain to us what
she is, for surely to us the cows are all alike, and if Allah please we
shall surely be guided aright.

002.071
Y: He said: "He says: A heifer not trained to till the soil or water the
fields; sound and without blemish." They said: "Now hast thou brought
the truth." Then they offered her in sacrifice, but not with good-will.

P: (Moses) answered: Lo! He saith: Verily she is a cow unyoked; she
plougheth not the soil nor watereth the tilth; whole and without mark.
They said: Now thou bringest the truth. So they sacrificed her, though
almost they did not.

S: Musa said: He says, Surely she is a cow not made submissive that she
should plough the land, nor does she irrigate the tilth; sound, without
a blemish in her. They said: Now you have brought the truth; so they
sacrificed her, though they had not the mind to do (it).

002.072
Y: Remember ye slew a man and fell into a dispute among yourselves as to
the crime: But Allah was to bring forth what ye did hide.

P: And (remember) when ye slew a man and disagreed concerning it and
Allah brought forth that which ye were hiding.

S: And when you killed a man, then you disagreed with respect to that,
and Allah was to bring forth that which you were going to hide.

002.073
Y: So We said: "Strike the (body) with a piece of the (heifer)." Thus
Allah bringeth the dead to life and showeth you His Signs: Perchance ye
may understand.

P: And We said: Smite him with some of it. Thus Allah bringeth the dead
to life and showeth you His portents so that ye may understand.

S: So We said: Strike the (dead body) with part of the (Sacrificed cow),
thus Allah brings the dead to life, and He shows you His signs so that
you may understand.

002.074
Y: Thenceforth were your hearts hardened: They became like a rock and
even worse in hardness. For among rocks there are some from which
rivers gush forth; others there are which when split asunder send forth
water; and others which sink for fear of Allah. And Allah is not
unmindful of what ye do.

P: Then, even after that, your hearts were hardened and became as rocks,
or worse than rocks, for hardness. For indeed there are rocks from out
which rivers gush, and indeed there are rocks which split asunder so
that water floweth from them. And indeed there are rocks which fall
down for the fear of Allah. Allah is not unaware of what ye do.

S: Then your hearts hardened after that, so that they were like rocks,
rather worse in hardness; and surely there are some rocks from which
streams burst forth, and surely there are some of them which split
asunder so water issues out of them, and surely there are some of them
which fall down for fear of Allah, and Allah is not at all heedless of
what you do.

002.075
Y: Can ye (O ye men of Faith) entertain the hope that they will believe
in you?- Seeing that a party of them heard the Word of Allah, and
perverted it knowingly after they understood it.

P: Have ye any hope that they will be true to you when a party of them
used to listen to the word of Allah, then used to change it, after they
had understood it, knowingly?

S: Do you then hope that they would believe in you, and a party from
among them indeed used to hear the Word of Allah, then altered it after
they had understood it, and they know (this).

002.076
Y: Behold! when they meet the men of Faith, they say: "We believe": But
when they meet each other in private, they say: "Shall you tell them
what Allah hath revealed to you, that they may engage you in argument
about it before your Lord?"- Do ye not understand (their aim)?

P: And when they fall in with those who believe, they say: We believe.
But when they go apart one with another they say: Prate ye to them of
that which Allah hath disclosed to you that they may contend with you
before your Lord concerning it? Have ye then no sense?

S: And when they meet those who believe they say: We believe, and when
they are alone one with another they say: Do you talk to them of what
Allah has disclosed to you that they may contend with you by this
before your Lord? Do you not then understand?

002.077
Y: Know they not that Allah knoweth what they conceal and what they
reveal?

P: Are they then unaware that Allah knoweth that which they keep hidden
and that which they proclaim?

S: Do they not know that Allah knows what they keep secret and what they
make known?

002.078
Y: And there are among them illiterates, who know not the Book, but (see
therein their own) desires, and they do nothing but conjecture.

P: Among them are unlettered folk who know the Scripture not except from
hearsay. They but guess.

S: And there are among them illiterates who know not the Book but only
lies, and they do but conjecture.

002.079
Y: Then woe to those who write the Book with their own hands, and then
say: "This is from Allah," to traffic with it for miserable price!- Woe
to them for what their hands do write, and for the gain they make
thereby.

P: Therefore woe be unto those who write the Scripture with their hands
and then say, "This is from Allah," that they may purchase a small gain
therewith. Woe unto them for that their hands have written, and woe
unto them for that they earn thereby.

S: Woe, then, to those who write the book with their hands and then say:
This is from Allah, so that they may take for it a small price;
therefore woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them
for what they earn.

002.080
Y: And they say: "The Fire shall not touch us but for a few numbered
days:" Say: "Have ye taken a promise from Allah, for He never breaks
His promise? or is it that ye say of Allah what ye do not know?"

P: And they say: The Fire (of punishment) will not touch us save for a
certain number of days. Say: Have ye received a covenant from Allah -
truly Allah will not break His covenant - or tell ye concerning Allah
that which ye know not?

S: And they say: Fire shall not touch us but for a few days. Say: Have
you received a promise from Allah, then Allah will not fail to perform
His promise, or do you speak against Allah what you do not know?

002.081
Y: Nay, those who seek gain in evil, and are girt round by their sins,-
they are companions of the Fire: Therein shall they abide (For ever).

P: Nay, but whosoever hath done evil and his sin surroundeth him; such
are rightful owners of the Fire; they will abide therein.

S: Yea, whoever earns evil and his sins beset him on every side, these
are the inmates of the fire; in it they shall abide.

002.082
Y: But those who have faith and work righteousness, they are companions
of the Garden: Therein shall they abide (For ever).

P: And those who believe and do good works: such are rightful owners of
the Garden. They will abide therein.

S: And (as for) those who believe and do good deeds, these are the
dwellers of the garden; in it they shall abide.

002.083
Y: And remember We took a covenant from the Children of Israel (to this
effect): Worship none but Allah; treat with kindness your parents and
kindred, and orphans and those in need; speak fair to the people; be
steadfast in prayer; and practise regular charity. Then did ye turn
back, except a few among you, and ye backslide (even now).

P: And (remember) when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel,
(saying): Worship none save Allah (only), and be good to parents and to
kindred and to orphans and the needy, and speak kindly to mankind; and
establish worship and pay the poor-due. Then, after that, ye slid back,
save a few of you, being averse.

S: And when We made a covenant with the children of Israel: You shall
not serve any but Allah and (you shall do) good to (your) parents, and
to the near of kin and to the orphans and the needy, and you shall
speak to men good words and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate. Then
you turned back except a few of you and (now too) you turn aside.

002.084
Y: And remember We took your covenant (to this effect): Shed no blood
amongst you, nor turn out your own people from your homes: and this ye
solemnly ratified, and to this ye can bear witness.

P: And when We made with you a covenant (saying): Shed not the blood of
your people nor turn (a party of) your people out of your dwellings.
Then ye ratified (Our covenant) and ye were witnesses (thereto).

S: And when We made a covenant with you: You shall not shed your blood
and you shall not turn your people out of your cities; then you gave a
promise while you witnessed.

002.085
Y: After this it is ye, the same people, who slay among yourselves, and
banish a party of you from their homes; assist (Their enemies) against
them, in guilt and rancour; and if they come to you as captives, ye
ransom them, though it was not lawful for you to banish them. Then is
it only a part of the Book that ye believe in, and do ye reject the
rest? but what is the reward for those among you who behave like this
but disgrace in this life?- and on the Day of Judgment they shall be
consigned to the most grievous penalty. For Allah is not unmindful of
what ye do.

P: Yet ye it is who slay each other and drive out a party of your people
from their homes, supporting one another against them by sin and
transgression? - and if they came to you as captives ye would ransom
them, whereas their expulsion was itself unlawful for you - Believe ye
in part of the Scripture and disbelieve ye in part thereof? And what is
the reward of those who do so save ignominy in the life of the world,
and on the Day of Resurrection they will be consigned to the most
grievous doom. For Allah is not unaware of what ye do.

S: Yet you it is who slay your people and turn a party from among you
out of their homes, backing each other up against them unlawfully and
exceeding the limits; and if they should come to you, as captives you
would ransom them-- while their very turning out was unlawful for you.
Do you then believe in a part of the Book and disbelieve in the other?
What then is the re ward of such among you as do this but disgrace in
the life of this world, and on the day of resurrection they shall be
sent back to the most grievous chastisement, and Allah is not at all
heedless of what you do.

002.086
Y: These are the people who buy the life of this world at the price of
the Hereafter: their penalty shall not be lightened nor shall they be
helped.

P: Such are those who buy the life of the world at the price of the
Hereafter. Their punishment will not be lightened, neither will they
have support.

S: These are they who buy the life of this world for the hereafter, so
their chastisement shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped.

002.087
Y: We gave Moses the Book and followed him up with a succession of
messengers; We gave Jesus the son of Mary Clear (Signs) and
strengthened him with the holy spirit. Is it that whenever there comes
to you a messenger with what ye yourselves desire not, ye are puffed up
with pride?- Some ye called impostors, and others ye slay!

P: And verily We gave unto Moses the Scripture and We caused a train of
messengers to follow after him, and We gave unto Jesus, son of Mary,
clear proofs (of Allah's sovereignty), and We supported him with the
Holy spirit. Is it ever so, that, when there cometh unto you a
messenger (from Allah) with that which ye yourselves desire not, ye
grow arrogant, and some ye disbelieve and some ye slay?

S: And most certainly We gave Musa the Book and We sent messengers after
him one after another; and We gave Isa, the son of Marium, clear
arguments and strengthened him with the holy spirit, What! whenever
then a messenger came to you with that which your souls did not desire,
you were insolent so you called some liars and some you slew.

002.088
Y: They say, "Our hearts are the wrappings (which preserve Allah's Word:
we need no more)." Nay, Allah's curse is on them for their blasphemy:
Little is it they believe.

P: And they say: Our hearts are hardened. Nay, but Allah hath cursed
them for their unbelief. Little is that which they believe.

S: And they say: Our hearts are covered. Nay, Allah has cursed them on
account of their unbelief; so little it is that they believe.

002.089
Y: And when there comes to them a Book from Allah, confirming what is
with them,- although from of old they had prayed for victory against
those without Faith,- when there comes to them that which they (should)
have recognised, they refuse to believe in it but the curse of Allah is
on those without Faith.

P: And when there cometh unto them a scripture from Allah, confirming
that in their possession - though before that they were asking for a
signal triumph over those who disbelieved - and when there cometh unto
them that which they know (to be the truth) they disbelieve therein.
The curse of Allah is on disbelievers.

S: And when there came to them a Book from Allah verifying that which
they have, and aforetime they used to pray for victory against those
who disbelieve, but when there came to them (Prophet) that which they
did not recognize, they disbelieved in him; so Allah's curse is on the
unbelievers.

002.090
Y: Miserable is the price for which they have sold their souls, in that
they deny (the revelation) which Allah has sent down, in insolent envy
that Allah of His Grace should send it to any of His servants He
pleases: Thus have they drawn on themselves Wrath upon Wrath. And
humiliating is the punishment of those who reject Faith.

P: Evil is that for which they sell their souls: that they should
disbelieve in that which Allah hath revealed, grudging that Allah
should reveal of His bounty unto whom He will of His slaves. They have
incurred anger upon anger. For disbelievers is a shameful doom.

S: Evil is that for which they have sold their souls-- that they should
deny what Allah has revealed, out of envy that Allah should send down
of His grace on whomsoever of His servants He pleases; so they have
made themselves deserving of wrath upon wrath, and there is a
disgraceful punishment for the unbelievers.

002.091
Y: When it is said to them: "Believe in what Allah Hath sent down,"
they say, "We believe in what was sent down to us": yet they reject all
besides, even if it be Truth confirming what is with them. Say: "Why
then have ye slain the prophets of Allah in times gone by, if ye did
indeed believe?"

P: And when it is said unto them: Believe in that which Allah hath
revealed, they say: We believe in that which was revealed unto us. And
they disbelieve in that which cometh after it, though it is the truth
confirming that which they possess. Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Why
then slew ye the prophets of Allah aforetime, if ye are (indeed)
believers?

S: And when it is said to them, Believe in what Allah has revealed, they
say: We believe in that which was revealed to us; and they deny what is
besides that, while it is the truth verifying that which they have.
Say: Why then did you kill Allah's Prophets before if you were indeed
believers?

002.092
Y: There came to you Moses with clear (Signs); yet ye worshipped the
calf (Even) after that, and ye did behave wrongfully.

P: And Moses came unto you with clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty),
yet, while he was away, ye chose the calf (for worship) and ye were
wrong-doers.

S: And most certainly Musa came to you with clear arguments, then you
took the calf (for a god) in his absence and you were unjust.

002.093
Y: And remember We took your covenant and We raised above you (the
towering height) of Mount (Sinai): (Saying): "Hold firmly to what We
have given you, and hearken (to the Law)": They said: "We hear, and we
disobey": And they had to drink into their hearts (of the taint) of the
calf because of their Faithlessness. Say: "Vile indeed are the behests
of your Faith if ye have any faith!"

P: And when We made with you a covenant and caused the Mount to tower
above you, (saying): Hold fast by that which We have given you, and
hear (Our Word), they said: We hear and we rebel. And (worship of) the
calf was made to sink into their hearts because of their rejection (of
the covenant). Say (unto them): Evil is that which your belief
enjoineth on you, if ye are believers.

S: And when We made a covenant with you and raised the mountain over
you: Take hold of what We have given you with firmness and be obedient.
They said: We hear and disobey. And they were made to imbibe (the love
of) the calf into their hearts on account of their unbelief Say: Evil
is that which your belief bids you if you are believers.

002.094
Y: Say: "If the last Home, with Allah, be for you specially, and not for
anyone else, then seek ye for death, if ye are sincere."

P: Say (unto them): If the abode of the Hereafter in the providence of
Allah is indeed for you alone and not for others of mankind (as ye
pretend), then long for death (for ye must long for death) if ye are
truthful.

S: Say: If the future abode with Allah is specially for you to the
exclusion of the people, then invoke death if you are truthful.

002.095
Y: But they will never seek for death, on account of the (sins) which
their hands have sent on before them. And Allah is well-acquainted with
the wrong-doers.

P: But they will never long for it, because of that which their own
hands have sent before them. Allah is aware of evil-doers.

S: And they will never invoke it on account of what their hands have
sent before, and Allah knows the unjust.

002.096
Y: Thou wilt indeed find them, of all people, most greedy of life,-even
more than the idolaters: Each one of them wishes He could be given a
life of a thousand years: But the grant of such life will not save him
from (due) punishment. For Allah sees well all that they do.

P: And thou wilt find them greediest of mankind for life and (greedier)
than the idolaters. (Each) one of them would like to be allowed to live
a thousand years. And to live (a thousand years) would be no means
remove him from the doom. Allah is Seer of what they do.

S: And you will most certainly find them the greediest of men for life
(greedier) than even those who are polytheists; every one of them loves
that he should be granted a life of a thousand years, and his being
granted a long life will in no way remove him further off from the
chastisement, and Allah sees what they do.

002.097
Y: Say: Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel-for he brings down the
(revelation) to thy heart by Allah's will, a confirmation of what went
before, and guidance and glad tidings for those who believe,-

P: Say (O Muhammad, to mankind): Who is an enemy to Gabriel! For he it
is who hath revealed (this Scripture) to thy heart by Allah's leave,
confirming that which was (revealed) before it, and a guidance and glad
tidings to believers;

S: Say: Whoever is the enemy of Jibreel-- for surely he revealed it to
your heart by Allah's command, verifying that which is before it and
guidance and good news for the believers.

002.098
Y: Whoever is an enemy to Allah and His angels and messengers, to
Gabriel and Michael,- Lo! Allah is an enemy to those who reject Faith.

P: Who is an enemy to Allah, and His angels and His messengers, and
Gabriel and Michael! Then, lo! Allah (Himself) is an enemy to the
disbelievers.

S: Whoever is the enemy of Allah and His angels and His messengers and
Jibreel and Meekaeel, so surely Allah is the enemy of the unbelievers.

002.099
Y: We have sent down to thee Manifest Signs (ayat); and none reject them
but those who are perverse.

P: Verily We have revealed unto thee clear tokens, and only miscreants
will disbelieve in them.

S: And certainly We have revealed to you clear communications and none
disbelieve in them except the transgressors.

002.100
Y: Is it not (the case) that every time they make a covenant, some party
among them throw it aside?- Nay, most of them are faithless.

P: Is it ever so that when they make a covenant a party of them set it
aside? The truth is, most of them believe not.

S: What! whenever they make a covenant, a party of them cast it aside?
Nay, most of them do not believe.

002.101
Y: And when there came to them a messenger from Allah, confirming what
was with them, a party of the people of the Book threw away the Book of
Allah behind their backs, as if (it had been something) they did not
know!

P: And when there cometh unto them a messenger from Allah, confirming
that which they possess, a party of those who have received the
Scripture fling the Scripture of Allah behind their backs as if they
knew not,

S: And when there came to them a Messenger from Allah verifying that
which they have, a party of those who were given the Book threw the
Book of Allah behind their backs as if they knew nothing.

002.102
Y: They followed what the evil ones gave out (falsely) against the power
of Solomon: the blasphemers Were, not Solomon, but the evil ones,
teaching men Magic, and such things as came down at Babylon to the
angels Harut and Marut. But neither of these taught anyone (Such
things) without saying: "We are only for trial; so do not blaspheme."
They learned from them the means to sow discord between man and wife.
But they could not thus harm anyone except by Allah's permission. And
they learned what harmed them, not what profited them. And they knew
that the buyers of (magic) would have no share in the happiness of the
Hereafter. And vile was the price for which they did sell their souls,
if they but knew!

P: And follow that which the devils falsely related against the kingdom
of Solomon. Solomon disbelieved not; but the devils disbelieved,
teaching mankind magic and that which was revealed to the two angels in
Babel, Harut and Marut. Nor did they (the two angels) teach it to
anyone till they had said: We are only a temptation, therefore
disbelieve not (in the guidance of Allah). And from these two (angles)
people learn that by which they cause division between man and wife;
but they injure thereby no-one save by Allah's leave. And they learn
that which harmeth them and profiteth them not. And surely they do know
that he who trafficketh therein will have no (happy) portion in the
Hereafter; and surely evil is the price for which they sell their
souls, if they but knew.

S: And they followed what the Shaitans chanted of sorcery in the reign
of Sulaiman, and Sulaiman was not an unbeliever, but the Shaitans
disbelieved, they taught men sorcery and that was sent down to the two
angels at Babel, Harut and Marut, yet these two taught no man until
they had said, "Surely we are only a trial, therefore do not be a
disbeliever." Even then men learned from these two, magic by which they
might cause a separation between a man and his wife; and they cannot
hurt with it any one except with Allah's permission, and they learned
what harmed them and did not profit them, and certainly they know that
he who bought it should have no share of good in the hereafter and evil
was the price for which they sold their souls, had they but known this.

002.103
Y: If they had kept their Faith and guarded themselves from evil, far
better had been the reward from their Lord, if they but knew!

P: And if they had believed and kept from evil, a recompense from Allah
would be better, if they only knew.

S: And if they had believed and guarded themselves (against evil),
reward from Allah would certainly have been better; had they but known
(this).

002.104
Y: O ye of Faith! Say not (to the Messenger) words of ambiguous import,
but words of respect; and hearken (to him): To those without Faith is a
grievous punishment.

P: O ye who believe, say not (unto the Prophet): "Listen to us" but say
"Look upon us," and be ye listeners. For disbelievers is a painful
doom.

S: O you who believe! do not say Raina and say Unzurna and listen, and
for the unbelievers there is a painful chastisement.

002.105
Y: It is never the wish of those without Faith among the People of the
Book, nor of the Pagans, that anything good should come down to you
from your Lord. But Allah will choose for His special Mercy whom He
will - for Allah is Lord of grace abounding.

P: Neither those who disbelieve among the people of the Scripture nor
the idolaters love that there should be sent down unto you any good
thing from your Lord. But Allah chooseth for His mercy whom He will,
and Allah is of Infinite Bounty.

S: Those who disbelieve from among the followers of the Book do not
like, nor do the polytheists, that the good should be sent down to you
from your Lord, and Allah chooses especially whom He pleases for His
mercy, and Allah is the Lord of mighty grace.

002.106
Y: None of Our revelations do We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, but
We substitute something better or similar: Knowest thou not that Allah
Hath power over all things?

P: Nothing of our revelation (even a single verse) do we abrogate or
cause be forgotten, but we bring (in place) one better or the like
thereof. Knowest thou not that Allah is Able to do all things?

S: Whatever communications We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, We
bring one better than it or like it. Do you not know that Allah has
power over all things?

002.107
Y: Knowest thou not that to Allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens
and the earth? And besides Him ye have neither patron nor helper.

P: Knowest thou not that it is Allah unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty
of the heavens and the earth; and ye have not, beside Allah, any
guardian or helper?

S: Do you not know that Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the
earth, and that besides Allah you have no guardian or helper?

002.108
Y: Would ye question your Messenger as Moses was questioned of old? but
whoever changeth from Faith to Unbelief, Hath strayed without doubt
from the even way.

P: Or would ye question your messenger as Moses was questioned
aforetime? He who chooseth disbelief instead of faith, verily he hath
gone astray from a plain road.

S: Rather you wish to put questions to your Messenger, as Musa was
questioned before; and whoever adopts unbelief instead of faith, he
indeed has lost the right direction of the way.

002.109
Y: Quite a number of the People of the Book wish they could Turn you
(people) back to infidelity after ye have believed, from selfish envy,
after the Truth hath become Manifest unto them: But forgive and
overlook, Till Allah accomplish His purpose; for Allah Hath power over
all things.

P: Many of the people of the Scripture long to make you disbelievers
after your belief, through envy on their own account, after the truth
hath become manifest unto them. Forgive and be indulgent (toward them)
until Allah give command. Lo! Allah is Able to do all things.

S: Many of the followers of the Book wish that they could turn you back
into unbelievers after your faith, out of envy from themselves, (even)
after the truth has become manifest to them; but pardon and forgive, so
that Allah should bring about His command; surely Allah has power over
all things.

002.110
Y: And be steadfast in prayer and regular in charity: And whatever good
ye send forth for your souls before you, ye shall find it with Allah:
for Allah sees Well all that ye do.

P: Establish worship, and pay the poor-due; and whatever of good ye send
before (you) for your souls, ye will find it with Allah. Lo! Allah is
Seer of what ye do.

S: And keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send
before for yourselves, you shall find it with Allah; surely Allah sees
what you do.

002.111
Y: And they say: "None shall enter Paradise unless he be a Jew or a
Christian." Those are their (vain) desires. Say: "Produce your proof if
ye are truthful."

P: And they say: None entereth paradise unless he be a Jew or a
Christian. These are their own desires. Say: Bring your proof (of what
ye state) if ye are truthful.

S: And they say: None shall enter the garden (or paradise) except he who
is a Jew or a Christian. These are their vain desires. Say: Bring your
proof if you are truthful.

002.112
Y: Nay,- whoever submits His whole self to Allah and is a doer of good,-
He will get his reward with his Lord; on such shall be no fear, nor
shall they grieve.

P: Nay, but whosoever surrendereth his purpose to Allah while doing
good, his reward is with his Lord; and there shall no fear come upon
them neither shall they grieve.

S: Yes! whoever submits himself entirely to Allah and he is the doer of
good (to others) he has his reward from his Lord, and there is no fear
for him nor shall he grieve.

002.113
Y: The Jews say: "The Christians have naught (to stand) upon"; and the
Christians say: "The Jews have naught (To stand) upon." Yet they
(Profess to) study the (same) Book. Like unto their word is what those
say who know not; but Allah will judge between them in their quarrel on
the Day of Judgment.

P: And the Jews say the Christians follow nothing (true), and the
Christians say the Jews follow nothing (true); yet both are readers of
the Scripture. Even thus speak those who know not. Allah will judge
between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they
differ.

S: And the Jews say: The Christians do not follow anything (good) and
the Christians say: The Jews do not follow anything (good) while they
recite the (same) Book. Even thus say those who have no knowledge, like
to what they say; so Allah shall judge between them on the day of
resurrection in what they differ.

002.114
Y: And who is more unjust than he who forbids that in places for the
worship of Allah, Allah's name should be celebrated? - whose zeal is (in
fact) to ruin them? It was not fitting that such should themselves
enter them except in fear. For them there is nothing but disgrace in
this world, and in the world to come, an exceeding torment.

P: And who doth greater wrong than he who forbiddeth the approach to the
sanctuaries of Allah lest His name should be mentioned therein, and
striveth for their ruin. As for such, it was never meant that they
should enter them except in fear. Theirs in the world is ignominy and
theirs in the Hereafter is an awful doom.

S: And who is more unjust than he who prevents (men) from the masjids of
Allah, that His name should be remembered in them, and strives to ruin
them? (As for) these, it was not proper for them that they should have
entered them except in fear; they shall meet with disgrace in this
world, and they shall have great chastisement in the hereafter.

002.115
Y: To Allah belong the east and the West: Whithersoever ye turn, there
is the presence of Allah. For Allah is All-Pervading, All-Knowing.

P: Unto Allah belong the East and the West, and whithersoever ye turn,
there is Allah's Countenance. Lo! Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.

S: And Allah's is the East and the West, therefore, whither you turn,
thither is Allah's purpose; surely Allah is Amplegiving, Knowing.

002.116
Y: They say: "Allah hath begotten a son": Glory be to Him.-Nay, to Him
belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth: everything renders
worship to Him.

P: And they say: Allah hath taken unto Himself a son. Be He glorified!
Nay, but whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth is His. All are
subservient unto Him.

S: And they say: Allah has taken to himself a son. Glory be to Him;
rather, whatever is in the heavens and the earth is His; all are
obedient to Him.

002.117
Y: To Him is due the primal origin of the heavens and the earth: When He
decreeth a matter, He saith to it: "Be," and it is.

P: The Originator of the heavens and the earth! When He decreeth a
thing, He saith unto it only: Be! and it is.

S: Wonderful Originator of the heavens and the earth, and when He
decrees an affair, He only says to it, Be, so there it is.

002.118
Y: Say those without knowledge: "Why speaketh not Allah unto us? or why
cometh not unto us a Sign?" So said the people before them words of
similar import. Their hearts are alike. We have indeed made clear the
Signs unto any people who hold firmly to Faith (in their hearts).

P: And those who have no knowledge say: Why doth not Allah speak unto
us, or some sign come unto us? Even thus, as they now speak, spake
those (who were) before them. Their hearts are all alike. We have made
clear the revelations for people who are sure.

S: And those who have no knowledge say: Why does not Allah speak to us
or a sign come to us? Even thus said those before them, the like of
what they say; their hearts are all alike. Indeed We have made the
communications clear for a people who are sure.

002.119
Y: Verily We have sent thee in truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a
warner: But of thee no question shall be asked of the Companions of the
Blazing Fire.

P: Lo! We have sent thee (O Muhammad) with the truth, a bringer of glad
tidings and a warner. And thou wilt not be asked about the owners of
hell-fire.

S: Surely We have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and
as a warner, and you shall not be called upon to answer for the
companions of the flaming fire.

002.120
Y: Never will the Jews or the Christians be satisfied with thee unless
thou follow their form of religion. Say: "The Guidance of Allah,-that
is the (only) Guidance." Wert thou to follow their desires after the
knowledge which hath reached thee, then wouldst thou find neither
Protector nor helper against Allah.

P: And the Jews will not be pleased with thee, nor will the Christians,
till thou follow their creed. Say: Lo! the guidance of Allah (Himself)
is Guidance. And if thou shouldst follow their desires after the
knowledge which hath come unto thee, then wouldst thou have from Allah
no protecting guardian nor helper.

S: And the Jews will not be pleased with you, nor the Christians until
you follow their religion. Say: Surely Allah's guidance, that is the
(true) guidance. And if you follow their desires after the knowledge
that has come to you, you shall have no guardian from Allah, nor any
helper.

002.121
Y: Those to whom We have sent the Book study it as it should be studied:
They are the ones that believe therein: Those who reject faith
therein,- the loss is their own.

P: Those unto whom We have given the Scripture, who read it with the
right reading, those believe in it. And whoso disbelieveth in it, those
are they who are the losers.

S: Those to whom We have given the Book read it as it ought to be read.
These believe in it; and whoever disbelieves in it, these it is that
are the losers.

002.122
Y: O Children of Israel! call to mind the special favour which I
bestowed upon you, and that I preferred you to all others (for My
Message).

P: O Children of Israel! Remember My favour wherewith I favoured you and
how I preferred you to (all) creatures.

S: O children of Israel, call to mind My favor which I bestowed on you
and that I made you excel the nations.

002.123
Y: Then guard yourselves against a-Day when one soul shall not avail
another, nor shall compensation be accepted from her nor shall
intercession profit her nor shall anyone be helped (from outside).

P: And guard (yourselves) against a day when no soul will in aught avail
another, nor will compensation be accepted from it, nor will
intercession be of use to it; nor will they be helped.

S: And be on your guard against a day when no soul shall avail another
in the least neither shall any compensation be accepted from it, nor
shall intercession profit it, nor shall they be helped.

002.124
Y: And remember that Abraham was tried by his Lord with certain
commands, which he fulfilled: He said: "I will make thee an Imam to the
Nations." He pleaded: "And also (Imams) from my offspring!" He
answered:

"But My Promise is not within the reach of evil-doers."
P: And (remember) when his Lord tried Abraham with (His) commands, and
he fulfilled them, He said: Lo! I have appointed thee a leader for
mankind. (Abraham) said: And of my offspring (will there be leaders)?
He said: My covenant includeth not wrong-doers.

S: And when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain words, he fulfilled
them. He said: Surely I will make you an Imam of men. Ibrahim said: And
of my offspring? My covenant does not include the unjust, said He.

002.125
Y: Remember We made the House a place of assembly for men and a place of
safety; and take ye the station of Abraham as a place of prayer; and We
covenanted with Abraham and Isma'il, that they should sanctify My House
for those who compass it round, or use it as a retreat, or bow, or
prostrate themselves (therein in prayer).

P: And when We made the House (at Makka) a resort for mankind and
sanctuary, (saying): Take as your place of worship the place where
Abraham stood (to pray). And We imposed a duty upon Abraham and
Ishmael, (saying): Purify My house for those who go around and those
who meditate therein and those who bow down and prostrate themselves
(in worship).

S: And when We made the House a pilgrimage for men and a (place of)
security, and: Appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the
standing-place of Ibrahim. And We enjoined Ibrahim and Ismail saying:
Purify My House for those who visit (it) and those who abide (in it)
for devotion and those who bow down (and) those who prostrate
themselves.

002.126
Y: And remember Abraham said: "My Lord, make this a City of Peace, and
feed its people with fruits,-such of them as believe in Allah and the
Last Day." He said: "(Yea), and such as reject Faith,-for a while will
I grant them their pleasure, but will soon drive them to the torment of
Fire,- an evil destination (indeed)!"

P: And when Abraham prayed: My Lord! Make this a region of security and
bestow upon its people fruits, such of them as believe in Allah and the
Last Day, He answered: As for him who disbelieveth, I shall leave him
in contentment for a while, then I shall compel him to the doom of Fire
- a hapless journey's end!

S: And when Ibrahim said: My Lord, make it a secure town and provide its
people with fruits, such of them as believe in Allah and the last day.
He said: And whoever disbelieves, I will grant him enjoyment for a
short while, then I will drive him to the chastisement of the fire; and
it is an evil destination.

002.127
Y: And remember Abraham and Isma'il raised the foundations of the House
(With this prayer): "Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us: For Thou
art the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing."

P: And when Abraham and Ishmael were raising the foundations of the
House, (Abraham prayed): Our Lord! Accept from us (this duty). Lo!
Thou, only Thou, art the Hearer, the Knower.

S: And when Ibrahim and Ismail raised the foundations of the House: Our
Lord! accept from us; surely Thou art the Hearing, the Knowing:

002.128
Y: "Our Lord! make of us Muslims, bowing to Thy (Will), and of our
progeny a people Muslim, bowing to Thy (will); and show us our place
for the celebration of (due) rites; and turn unto us (in Mercy); for
Thou art the Oft-Returning, Most Merciful."

P: Our Lord! And make us submissive unto Thee and of our seed a nation
submissive unto Thee, and show us our ways of worship, and relent
toward us. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Relenting, the Merciful.

S: Our Lord! and make us both submissive to Thee and (raise) from our
offspring a nation submitting to Thee, and show us our ways of devotion
and turn to us (mercifully), surely Thou art the Oft-returning (to
mercy), the Merciful.

002.129
Y: "Our Lord! send amongst them a Messenger of their own, who shall
rehearse Thy Signs to them and instruct them in scripture and wisdom,
and sanctify them: For Thou art the Exalted in Might, the Wise."

P: Our Lord! And raise up in their midst a messenger from among them who
shall recite unto them Thy revelations, and shall instruct them in the
Scripture and in wisdom and shall make them grow. Lo! Thou, only Thou,
art the Mighty, Wise.

S: Our Lord! and raise up in them a Messenger from among them who shall
recite to them Thy communications and teach them the Book and the
wisdom, and purify them; surely Thou art the Mighty, the Wise.

002.130
Y: And who turns away from the religion of Abraham but such as debase
their souls with folly? Him We chose and rendered pure in this world:
And he will be in the Hereafter in the ranks of the Righteous.

P: And who forsaketh the religion of Abraham save him who befooleth
himself? Verily We chose him in the world, and lo! in the Hereafter he
is among the righteous.

S: And who forsakes the religion of Ibrahim but he who makes himself a
fool, and most certainly We chose him in this world, and in the
hereafter he is most surely among the righteous.

002.131
Y: Behold! his Lord said to him: "Bow (thy will to Me):" He said: "I bow
(my will) to the Lord and Cherisher of the Universe."

P: When his Lord said unto him: Surrender! he said: I have surrendered
to the Lord of the Worlds.

S: When his Lord said to him, Be a Muslim, he said: I submit myself to
the Lord of the worlds.

002.132
Y: And this was the legacy that Abraham left to his sons, and so did
Jacob; "Oh my sons! Allah hath chosen the Faith for you; then die not
except in the Faith of Islam."

P: The same did Abraham enjoin upon his sons, and also Jacob, (saying):
O my sons! Lo! Allah hath chosen for you the (true) religion; therefore
die not save as men who have surrendered (unto Him).

S: And the same did Ibrahim enjoin on his sons and (so did) Yaqoub. O my
sons! surely Allah has chosen for you (this) faith, therefore die not
unless you are Muslims.

002.133
Y: Were ye witnesses when death appeared before Jacob? Behold, he said
to his sons: "What will ye worship after me?" They said: "We shall
worship Thy god and the god of thy fathers, of Abraham, Isma'il and
Isaac,- the one (True) Allah: To Him we bow (in Islam)."

P: Or were ye present when death came to Jacob, when he said unto his
sons: What will ye worship after me? They said: We shall worship thy
god, the god of thy fathers, Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac, One Allah,
and unto Him we have surrendered.

S: Nay! were you witnesses when death visited Yaqoub, when he said to
his sons: What will you serve after me? They said: We will serve your
God and the God of your fathers, Ibrahim and Ismail and Ishaq, one
Allah only, and to Him do we submit.

002.134
Y: That was a people that hath passed away. They shall reap the fruit of
what they did, and ye of what ye do! Of their merits there is no
question in your case!

P: Those are a people who have passed away. Theirs is that which they
earned, and yours is that which ye earn. And ye will not be asked of
what they used to do.

S: This is a people that have passed away; they shall have what they
earned and you shall have what you earn, and you shall not be called
upon to answer for what they did.

002.135
Y: They say: "Become Jews or Christians if ye would be guided (To
salvation)." Say thou: "Nay! (I would rather) the Religion of Abraham
the True, and he joined not gods with Allah."

P: And they say: Be Jews or Christians, then ye will be rightly guided.
Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Nay, but (we follow) the religion of
Abraham, the upright, and he was not of the idolaters.

S: And they say: Be Jews or Christians, you will be on the right course.
Say: Nay! (we follow) the religion of Ibrahim, the Hanif, and he was
not one of the polytheists.

002.136
Y: Say ye: "We believe in Allah, and the revelation given to us, and to
Abraham, Isma'il, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and that given to Moses
and Jesus, and that given to (all) prophets from their Lord: We make no
difference between one and another of them: And we bow to Allah (in
Islam)."

P: Say (O Muslims): We believe in Allah and that which is revealed unto
us and that which was revealed unto Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and the tribes, and that which Moses and Jesus received, and
that which the prophets received from their Lord. We make no
distinction between any of them, and unto Him we have surrendered.

S: Say: We believe in Allah and (in) that which had been revealed to us,
and (in) that which was revealed to Ibrahim and Ismail and Ishaq and
Yaqoub and the tribes, and (in) that which was given to Musa and Isa,
and (in) that which was given to the prophets from their Lord, we do
not make any distinction between any of them, and to Him do we submit.

002.137
Y: So if they believe as ye believe, they are indeed on the right path;
but if they turn back, it is they who are in schism; but Allah will
suffice thee as against them, and He is the All-Hearing, the
All-Knowing.

P: And if they believe in the like of that which ye believe, then are
they rightly guided. But if they turn away, then are they in schism,
and Allah will suffice thee (for defence) against them. He is the
Hearer, the Knower.

S: If then they believe as you believe in Him, they are indeed on the
right course, and if they turn back, then they are only in great
opposition, so Allah will suffice you against them, and He is the
Hearing, the Knowing.

002.138
Y: (Our religion is) the Baptism of Allah: And who can baptize better
than Allah? And it is He Whom we worship.

P: (We take our) colour from Allah, and who is better than Allah at
colouring. We are His worshippers.

S: (Receive) the baptism of Allah, and who is better than Allah in
baptising? and Him do we serve.

002.139
Y: Say: Will ye dispute with us about Allah, seeing that He is our Lord
and your Lord; that we are responsible for our doings and ye for yours;
and that We are sincere (in our faith) in Him?

P: Say (unto the People of the Scripture): Dispute ye with us concerning
Allah when He is our Lord and your Lord? Ours are our works and yours
your works. We look to Him alone.

S: Say: Do you dispute with us about Allah, and He is our Lord and your
Lord, and we shall have our deeds and you shall have your deeds, and we
are sincere to Him.

002.140
Y: Or do ye say that Abraham, Isma'il Isaac, Jacob and the Tribes were
Jews or Christians? Say: Do ye know better than Allah? Ah! who is more
unjust than those who conceal the testimony they have from Allah? but
Allah is not unmindful of what ye do!

P: Or say ye that Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the
tribes were Jews or Christians? Say: Do ye know best, or doth Allah?
And who is more unjust than he who hideth a testimony which he hath
received from Allah? Allah is not unaware of what ye do.

S: Nay! do you say that Ibrahim and Ismail and Yaqoub and the tribes
were Jews or Christians? Say: Are you better knowing or Allah? And who
is more unjust than he who conceals a testimony that he has from Allah?
And Allah is not at all heedless of what you do.

002.141
Y: That was a people that hath passed away. They shall reap the fruit of
what they did, and ye of what ye do! Of their merits there is no
question in your case:

P: Those are a people who have passed away; theirs is that which they
earned and yours that which ye earn. And ye will not be asked of what
they used to do.

S: This is a people that have passed away; they shall have what they
earned and you shall have what you earn, and you shall not be called
upon to answer for what they did.

002.142
Y: The fools among the people will say: "What hath turned them from the
Qibla to which they were used?" Say: To Allah belong both east and
West: He guideth whom He will to a Way that is straight.

P: The foolish of the people will say: What hath turned them from the
qiblah which they formerly observed? Say: Unto Allah belong the East
and the West. He guideth whom He will unto a straight path.

S: The fools among the people will say: What has turned them from their
qiblah which they had? Say: The East and the West belong only to Allah;
He guides whom He likes to the right path.

002.143
Y: Thus, have We made of you an Ummat justly balanced, that ye might be
witnesses over the nations, and the Messenger a witness over
yourselves; and We appointed the Qibla to which thou wast used, only to
test those who followed the Messenger from those who would turn on
their heels (From the Faith). Indeed it was (A change) momentous,
except to those guided by Allah. And never would Allah Make your faith
of no effect. For Allah is to all people most surely full of kindness,
Most Merciful.

P: Thus We have appointed you a middle nation, that ye may be witnesses
against mankind, and that the messenger may be a witness against you.
And We appointed the qiblah which ye formerly observed only that We
might know him who followeth the messenger, from him who turneth on his
heels. In truth it was a hard (test) save for those whom Allah guided.
But it was not Allah's purpose that your faith should be in vain, for
Allah is Full of Pity, Merciful toward mankind.

S: And thus We have made you a medium (just) nation that you may be the
bearers of witness to the people and (that) the Messenger may be a
bearer of witness to you; and We did not make that which you would have
to be the qiblah but that We might distinguish him who follows the
Messenger from him who turns back upon his heels, and this was surely
hard except for those whom Allah has guided aright; and Allah was not
going to make your faith to be fruitless; most surely Allah is
Affectionate, Merciful to the people.

002.144
Y: We see the turning of thy face (for guidance) to the heavens: now
Shall We turn thee to a Qibla that shall please thee. Turn then Thy
face in the direction of the sacred Mosque: Wherever ye are, turn your
faces in that direction. The people of the Book know well that that is
the truth from their Lord. Nor is Allah unmindful of what they do.

P: We have seen the turning of thy face to heaven (for guidance, O
Muhammad). And now verily We shall make thee turn (in prayer) toward a
qiblah which is dear to thee. So turn thy face toward the Inviolable
Place of Worship, and ye (O Muslims), wheresoever ye may be, turn your
faces (when ye pray) toward it. Lo! Those who have received the
Scripture know that (this revelation) is the Truth from their Lord. And
Allah is not unaware of what they do.

S: Indeed We see the turning of your face to heaven, so We shall surely
turn you to a qiblah which you shall like; turn then your face towards
the Sacred Mosque, and wherever you are, turn your face towards it, and
those who have been given the Book most surely know that it is the
truth from their Lord; and Allah is not at all heedless of what they
do.

002.145
Y: Even if thou wert to bring to the people of the Book all the Signs
(together), they would not follow Thy Qibla; nor art thou going to
follow their Qibla; nor indeed will they follow each other's Qibla. If
thou after the knowledge hath reached thee, Wert to follow their (vain)
desires,-then wert thou Indeed (clearly) in the wrong.

P: And even if thou broughtest unto those who have received the
Scripture all kinds of portents, they would not follow thy qiblah, nor
canst thou be a follower of their qiblah; nor are some of them
followers of the qiblah of others. And if thou shouldst follow their
desires after the knowledge which hath come unto thee, then surely wert
thou of the evil-doers.

S: And even if you bring to those who have been given the Book every
sign they would not follow your qiblah, nor can you be a follower of
their qiblah, neither are they the followers of each other's qiblah,
and if you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to
you, then you shall most surely be among the unjust.

002.146
Y: The people of the Book know this as they know their own sons; but
some of them conceal the truth which they themselves know.

P: Those unto whom We gave the Scripture recognise (this revelation) as
they recognise their sons. But lo! a party of them knowingly conceal
the truth.

S: Those whom We have given the Book recognize him as they recognize
their sons, and a party of them most surely conceal the truth while
they know (it).

002.147
Y: The Truth is from thy Lord; so be not at all in doubt.

P: It is the Truth from thy Lord (O Muhammad), so be not thou of those
who waver.

S: The truth is from your Lord, therefore you should not be of the
doubters.

002.148
Y: To each is a goal to which Allah turns him; then strive together (as
in a race) Towards all that is good. Wheresoever ye are, Allah will
bring you Together. For Allah Hath power over all things.

P: And each one hath a goal toward which he turneth; so vie with one
another in good works. Wheresoever ye may be, Allah will bring you all
together. Lo! Allah is Able to do all things.

S: And every one has a direction to which he should turn, therefore
hasten to (do) good works; wherever you are, Allah will bring you all
together; surely Allah has power over all things.

002.149
Y: From whencesoever Thou startest forth, turn Thy face in the direction
of the sacred Mosque; that is indeed the truth from the Lord. And Allah
is not unmindful of what ye do.

P: And whencesoever thou comest forth (for prayer, O Muhammad) turn thy
face toward the Inviolable Place of Worship. Lo! it is the Truth from
thy Lord. Allah is not unaware of what ye do.

S: And from whatsoever place you come forth, turn your face towards the
Sacred Mosque; and surely it is the very truth from your Lord, and
Allah is not at all heedless of what you do.

002.150
Y: So from whencesoever Thou startest forth, turn Thy face in the
direction of the sacred Mosque; and wheresoever ye are, Turn your face
thither: that there be no ground of dispute against you among the
people, except those of them that are bent on wickedness; so fear them
not, but fear Me; and that I may complete My favours on you, and ye May
(consent to) be guided;

P: Whencesoever thou comest forth turn thy face toward the Inviolable
Place of Worship; and wheresoever ye may be (O Muslims) turn your faces
toward it (when ye pray) so that men may have no argument against you,
save such of them as do injustice - Fear them not, but fear Me! - and
so that I may complete My grace upon you, and that ye may be guided.

S: And from whatsoever place you come forth, turn your face towards the
Sacred Mosque; and wherever you are turn your faces towards it, so that
people shall have no accusation against you, except such of them as are
unjust; so do not fear them, and fear Me, that I may complete My favor
on you and that you may walk on the right course.

002.151
Y: A similar (favour have ye already received) in that We have sent
among you a Messenger of your own, rehearsing to you Our Signs, and
sanctifying you, and instructing you in Scripture and Wisdom, and in
new knowledge.

P: Even as We have sent unto you a messenger from among you, who
reciteth unto you Our revelations and causeth you to grow, and teacheth
you the Scripture and wisdom, and teacheth you that which ye knew not.

S: Even as We have sent among you a Messenger from among you who recites
to you Our communications and purifies you and teaches you the Book and
the wisdom and teaches you that which you did not know.

002.152
Y: Then do ye remember Me; I will remember you. Be grateful to Me, and
reject not Faith.

P: Therefore remember Me, I will remember you. Give thanks to Me, and
reject not Me.

S: Therefore remember Me, I will remember you, and be thankful to Me,
and do not be ungrateful to Me.

002.153
Y: O ye who believe! seek help with patient perseverance and prayer; for
Allah is with those who patiently persevere.

P: O ye who believe! Seek help in steadfastness and prayer. Lo! Allah is
with the steadfast.

S: O you who believe! seek assistance through patience and prayer;
surely Allah is with the patient.

002.154
Y: And say not of those who are slain in the way of Allah: "They are
dead." Nay, they are living, though ye perceive (it) not.

P: And call not those who are slain in the way of Allah "dead." Nay,
they are living, only ye perceive not.

S: And do not speak of those who are slain in Allah's way as dead; nay,
(they are) alive, but you do not perceive.

002.155
Y: Be sure we shall test you with something of fear and hunger, some
loss in goods or lives or the fruits (of your toil), but give glad
tidings to those who patiently persevere,

P: And surely We shall try you with something of fear and hunger, and
loss of wealth and lives and crops; but give glad tidings to the
steadfast,

S: And We will most certainly try you with somewhat of fear and hunger
and loss of property and lives and fruits; and give good news to the
patient,

002.156
Y: Who say, when afflicted with calamity: "To Allah We belong, and to
Him is our return":-

P: Who say, when a misfortune striketh them: Lo! we are Allah's and lo!
unto Him we are returning.

S: Who, when a misfortune befalls them, say: Surely we are Allah's and
to Him we shall surely return.

002.157
Y: They are those on whom (Descend) blessings from Allah, and Mercy, and
they are the ones that receive guidance.

P: Such are they on whom are blessings from their Lord, and mercy. Such
are the rightly guided.

S: Those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their Lord, and
those are the followers of the right course.

002.158
Y: Behold! Safa and Marwa are among the Symbols of Allah. So if those
who visit the House in the Season or at other times, should compass
them round, it is no sin in them. And if any one obeyeth his own
impulse to good,- be sure that Allah is He Who recogniseth and knoweth.

P: Lo! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwah are among the indications
of Allah. It is therefore no sin for him who is on pilgrimage to the
House (of Allah) or visiteth it, to go around them (as the pagan custom
is). And he who doeth good of his own accord, (for him) lo! Allah is
Responsive, Aware.

S: Surely the Safa and the Marwa are among the signs appointed by Allah;
so whoever makes a pilgrimage to the House or pays a visit (to it),
there is no blame on him if he goes round them both; and whoever does
good spontaneously, then surely Allah is Grateful, Knowing.

002.159
Y: Those who conceal the clear (Signs) We have sent down, and the
Guidance, after We have made it clear for the people in the Book,-on
them shall be Allah's curse, and the curse of those entitled to curse,-

P: Lo! Those who hide the proofs and the guidance which We revealed,
after We had made it clear to mankind in the Scripture: such are
accursed of Allah and accursed of those who have the power to curse.

S: Surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that We
revealed after We made it clear in the Book for men, these it is whom
Allah shall curse, and those who curse shall curse them (too).

002.160
Y: Except those who repent and make amends and openly declare (the
Truth): To them I turn; for I am Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

P: Except those who repent and amend and make manifest (the truth).
These it is toward whom I relent. I am the Relenting, the Merciful.

S: Except those who repent and amend and make manifest (the truth),
these it is to whom I turn (mercifully); and I am the Oft-returning (to
mercy), the Merciful.

002.161
Y: Those who reject Faith, and die rejecting,- on them is Allah's curse,
and the curse of angels, and of all mankind;

P: Lo! Those who disbelieve, and die while they are disbelievers; on
them is the curse of Allah and of angels and of men combined.

S: Surely those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers,
these it is on whom is the curse of Allah and the angels and men all;

002.162
Y: They will abide therein: Their penalty will not be lightened, nor
will respite be their (lot).

P: They ever dwell therein. The doom will not be lightened for them,
neither will they be reprieved.

S: Abiding in it; their chastisement shall not be lightened nor shall
they be given respite.

002.163
Y: And your Allah is One Allah: There is no god but He, Most Gracious,
Most Merciful.

P: Your Allah is One Allah; there is no God save Him, the Beneficent,
the Merciful.

S: And your Allah is one Allah! there is no god but He; He is the
Beneficent, the Merciful.

002.164
Y: Behold! in the creation of the heavens and the earth; in the
alternation of the night and the day; in the sailing of the ships
through the ocean for the profit of mankind; in the rain which Allah
Sends down from the skies, and the life which He gives therewith to an
earth that is dead; in the beasts of all kinds that He scatters through
the earth; in the change of the winds, and the clouds which they Trail
like their slaves between the sky and the earth;- (Here) indeed are
Signs for a people that are wise.

P: Lo! In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the difference
of night and day, and the ships which run upon the sea with that which
is of use to men, and the water which Allah sendeth down from the sky,
thereby reviving the earth after its death, and dispersing all kinds of
beasts therein, and (in) the ordinance of the winds, and the clouds
obedient between heaven and earth: are signs (of Allah's Sovereignty)
for people who have sense.

S: Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day, and the ships that run in the sea
with that which profits men, and the water that Allah sends down from
the cloud, then gives life with it to the earth after its death and
spreads in it all (kinds of) animals, and the changing of the winds and
the clouds made subservient between the heaven and the earth, there are
signs for a people who understand.

002.165
Y: Yet there are men who take (for worship) others besides Allah, as
equal (with Allah): They love them as they should love Allah. But those
of Faith are overflowing in their love for Allah. If only the
unrighteous could see, behold, they would see the penalty: that to
Allah belongs all power, and Allah will strongly enforce the penalty.

P: Yet of mankind are some who take unto themselves (objects of worship
which they set as) rivals to Allah, loving them with a love like (that
which is the due) of Allah (only) - those who believe are stauncher in
their love for Allah - Oh, that those who do evil had but known, (on
the day) when they behold the doom, that power belongeth wholly to
Allah, and that Allah is severe in punishment!

S: And there are some among men who take for themselves objects of
worship besides Allah, whom they love as they love Allah, and those who
believe are stronger in love for Allah and O, that those who are unjust
had seen, when they see the chastisement, that the power is wholly
Allah's and that Allah is severe in requiting (evil).

002.166
Y: Then would those who are followed clear themselves of those who
follow (them): They would see the penalty, and all relations between
them would be cut off.

P: (On the day) when those who were followed disown those who followed
(them), and they behold the doom, and all their aims collapse with
them.

S: When those who were followed shall renounce those who followed
(them), and they see the chastisement and their ties are cut asunder.

002.167
Y: And those who followed would say: "If only We had one more chance, We
would clear ourselves of them, as they have cleared themselves of us."
Thus will Allah show them (The fruits of) their deeds as (nothing but)
regrets. Nor will there be a way for them out of the Fire.

P: And those who were but followers will say: If a return were possible
for us, we would disown them even as they have disowned us. Thus will
Allah show them their own deeds as anguish for them, and they will not
emerge from the Fire.

S: And those who followed shall say: Had there been for us a return,
then we would renounce them as they have renounced us. Thus will Allah
show them their deeds to be intense regret to them, and they shall not
come forth from the fire.

002.168
Y: O ye people! Eat of what is on earth, Lawful and good; and do not
follow the footsteps of the evil one, for he is to you an avowed enemy.

P: O mankind! Eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth,
and follow not the footsteps of the devil. Lo! he is an open enemy for
