
"If it is Osmund the jarl, I think I know why he comes.--Let him
come in here and speak before you, ealdorman."

"Why, do you know him?"

"I cannot rightly say that I do, but I nearly came to do so."

Then Odda wondered, and answered:

"Forgive me; one grows suspicious about these Danes. I will go
hence, and you shall speak with him alone. Maybe he wants your word
with the king, because you know the ways of the viking hosts."

"No," said I; "stay here. Whatever it is he has to say cannot be
private; nor would I hear anything from him that you might not."

"As you will. Let him come here," Odda said; and the man went out.

Then entered Jarl Osmund, richly dressed for the king's feast, and
he looked from one of us to the other as we rose to greet him.
Suddenly he smiled grimly.

"I looked to find strangers, and was about to ask for King Ranald.
However, Odda the ealdorman and I have met before, as I am
certain."

"Faith, we have," said Odda. "Nor am I likely to forget it. It was
at Ashdown fight."

"And elsewhere," said the jarl. "But it was ever fair fighting
between us."

"Else had you slain me when I was down," said Odda frankly, and
with a smile coming into his face.

"The score is even on that count," said Osmund, and with that, with
one accord their hands met, and they laughed at each other.

That was good to see, and ever should things be so between brave
foes and honest.

Then Osmund looked at me.

"Now have I met with two men whom I have longed to see," he said,
"for you must be King Ranald Vemundsson. Two foes I have--if it
must be so said--of whom I have nought but good to say."

"So," laughed Odda. "When fought you twain, and which let the other
go?"

"We have not fought," the jarl answered. "But I have deeper reason
for thanking Ranald than for sparing my own life, or for staying a
blow in time out of sheer love of fair play."

Then he took my hand and looked me in the face.

"It was a good deed and noble that you wrought for me but the other
day," he said earnestly. "I do not know how to thank you enough. My
daughter laid command on me that I should seek you and tell you
this; but indeed I needed no bidding when I heard how she escaped."

"I had been nidring had I not helped a lady in need," I said, being
in want of better words.

"What is all this?" said Odda; for I had told him nought of the
matter, not seeing any reason to do so.

Then Osmund must needs tell him of what Kolgrim and I had done; and
the ealdorman laughed at me, though one might see that the affair
pleased him.

"This king," he said, "having no kingdom of his own, as he says,
goes about helping seasick ealdormen and lonely damsels, whereby he
will end with more trouble on his hands than any kingdom would give
him."

"I am only one," I said; "Kolgrim and Thord are in this also."

Then Osmund took a heavy gold bracelet from his arm.

"This is for Kolgrim, your comrade," he said, half doubtfully, "if
I may give it him in remembrance of a brave deed well done. Will he
be too proud to accept it?"

"I may give it him, certainly," I said, taking the gift.

Then Odda would not be behindhand, and he pulled off his own
armlet.

"If Kolgrim is to be remembered, Thord will never be forgotten.
Give this to him in sheer gratitude for swearing at me in such wise
that he overcame the sore sickness that comes of the swaying of the
deck that will not cease."

"Give it him yourself, ealdorman," I said. "You know him over well
to send it by another. It would not be so good a gift."

"As you will," he answered. "But I fear that viking terribly. Black
grows his face, and into his beard he blows, and the hard Norse
words grumble like thunder from his lips. Then know I that Odda the
ealdorman has been playing the land lubber again, and wonder what
is wrong. Nor is it long ere I find out, and I and my luckless crew
are flying to mind what orders are howled at us. In good truth, if
Alfred ever needs me to hurry in aught, let him send Thord the
viking to see that I do so. One may know how I fear him, since I
chose rather to risk battle with Jarl Osmund on shore than to bide
near him in my own ship any longer."

Then the jarl and I laughed till our sides ached, and Odda joined
us when he could not help it, so doleful was his face and solemn
were his words when he told his tale. But I knew that he and Thord
were the best of friends after those few days in the ship together,
and that the rough old viking had given every man of the crew
confidence. Nevertheless he was apt to rage somewhat when things
went in slovenly wise.

So Odda helped me through with Osmund's thanks, and I was glad. I
was glad also that the horns blew for the feast, so that no more
could be said about the Wareham doings.

Now I sat close to King Alfred at the feast, and saw much of his
ways with men. I thought it plain that he had trouble at times in
keeping back the pride and haughtiness which I had heard had been
the fault in both Neot and himself, for now and then they showed
plainly. Then he made haste to make amends if one was hurt by what
he had said in haste. But altogether I thought him even more kingly
than the mighty Harald Fairhair in some ways.

Truly he had not the vast strength and stature of Norway's king,
but Alfred's was the kingliness of wisdom and statecraft.

Once I said to Odda:

"Can your king fight?"

"Ay, with head as well as with hand," he answered. "His skill in
weapon play makes up for lack of weight and strength. He is maybe
the best swordsman and spearman in England."

I looked again at him, and I saw that since last I turned my eyes
on him he had grown pale, and now his face was drawn, and was
whitening under some pain, as it would seem; and I gripped Odda's
arm.

"See!" I said, "the king dies! he is poisoned!"

And I was starting up, but the ealdorman held me back.

"I pray you pay no heed," he said urgently. "It is the king's dark
hour; he will be well anon."

But nevertheless Alfred swayed in his seat, and two young thanes
who stood waiting on him came to either side and helped him up, and
together they took him, tottering, into the smaller tent that
opened behind the throne; while all the guests were silent, some in
fear, like myself, but others looking pityingly only.

Then a tall man in a dress strange to me--a bishop, as I knew
presently--rose up, and said to those who knew not what was the
matter:

"Doubtless all know that our good king is troubled with a strange
illness that falls on him from time to time. This is such a time.
Have no fear therefore, for the pain he suffers will pass. He does
not will that any should be less merry because of him."

So the feast went on, though the great empty chair seemed to damp
the merriment sadly. I asked Odda if this trouble often befell the
king.

"Ay, over often," he said, "and one knows not when it will come. No
leech knows what it is, and all one can say is that it seems to
harm him not at all when it has gone."

I asked no more, but the king did not come back to the feast, as he
would at times when things happened thus. It seemed that often the
trouble fell on him when feasting, and some have said that it was
sent to prevent him becoming over proud, at his own prayer
{vii}.

Soon the Danes rose up, and would go. Some of the great thanes set
them forth with all honour, and the feast ended. There was no long
sitting over the wine cup at Alfred's board, though none could
complain that he stinted them.

Then the tall bishop who had spoken just now came to me.

"The king will speak with you now, King Ranald, if you will come,"
he said.

So I went with him, and Odda came also. The king was lying on a
couch without his heavy state robes, and when we entered the small
tent the attendants left him. He was very pale, but the pain seemed
to have gone, and he looked up pleasantly at me.

"My people are used to this, cousin," he said, "but I fear I put
you out sorely."

"I thought you poisoned," I said; "but Odda told me not to fear."

"Ay, that has been the thought of others before this," he said.
"Have you ever seen the like in any man? I ask every stranger, in
hopes that I may hear of relief."

"No, I have not, lord king," I answered; "but I can grave runes
that will, as I think, keep away such pain if you bear them on you.
Thord, whom you know, taught me them. Maybe it would be better for
him to grave them, for runes wrongly written are worse than none,
and these are very powerful."

"That is a kindly thought, cousin," Alfred answered; "but I am sure
that no runes will avail when the prayers of my people, from holy
Neot to the little village children, do not. And I fear that even
would they heal me, I must sooner bear the pain than seek to magic
spells."

"Nay, but try them, King Alfred," I said; "there is no ill magic in
them."

Now he saw that I was in earnest, and put me by very kindly.

"I must ask Sigehelm, our bishop here, who is my best leech next to
Neot.

"What say you, father?"

"Even as you have said, my king."

"Maybe, bishop," said I, "you have never tried the might of runes?"

Whereat the good man held up his hands in horror, making no answer,
and I laughed a little at him.

"Well, then," said the king, "we will ask Neot, for mostly he seems
to say exactly what I do not."

"Neot has gone to Cornwall, and I had forgotten to give you that
message from him. He says he will be there for a time," I said,
rather ashamed at having let slip the message from my mind.

"So you saw him?" said Alfred.

"I knew he went to the ships yesterday after Godred came back," he
added, laughing.

"He read my letter for me, and after that I had a good deal of talk
with him," I said.

"Then," said Sigehelm, "you have spoken with the best man in all
our land."

Now the king said that he would let the question of the runes, for
which he thanked me, stand over thus; and then he asked me to sit
down and hear what he would ask me to do for him, if I had no plans
already made for myself.

I said that I had nothing so certainly planned but that I and my
men would gladly serve him.

"Then," he said, "I would ask you to winter with me, and set my
ships in order. There will be work for you and all your men, for
you shall give them such command in any ship of mine as you know
they are best fitted for. I would ask you to help me carry out that
plan of which you spoke to me when I was Godred."

When Odda heard that, he rubbed his hands together, saying:

"Ay, lord king, you have found the right man at last."

"Then in the spring you shall take full command of the fleet we
will build and the men we shall raise; and you shall keep the seas
for me, if by that time we know that we can work well together."

He looked hard at me, waiting my answer.

"Lord king," I said at last, "this is a great charge, and they say
that I am always thought older than I am, being given at least five
winters beyond the two-and-twenty that I have seen;" for I thought
it likely that the king held that I had seen more than I had.

"I was but twenty when I came to the throne," he answered. "I have
no fear for you. More than his best I do not look for from any man;
nor do I wonder if a man makes mistakes, having done so many times
myself."

Here Sigehelm made some sign to the king, to which he paid no heed
at the time, but went on:

"As for your men, I will give them the same pay that Harald of
Norway gives to his seamen, each as you may choose to rank them for
me. You may know what that is."

"Harek the scald knows," I said. "They will be well pleased, for
the pay is good, and places among Harald's courtmen are much sought
for."

Then Alfred smiled, and spoke of myself.

"As for King Ranald himself, he will be my guest."

"I am a wandering viking, and I seem to have found great honour," I
said. "What I can do I will, in this matter. Yet there is one thing
I must say, King Alfred. I would not be where men are jealous of
me."

"The only man likely to be so is Odda," the king answered. "You
must settle that with him. It is the place that he must have held
that you are taking. No man in all England can be jealous of a
viking whose business is with ships. But Odda put this into my mind
at first, and then Godred found out that he was right."

"Lord king," said I, "had I known who you were at that time, I
should have spoken no differently. We Northmen are free in speech
as in action."
