
Quite pleased that his remarks should afford amusement, Quashy was about
to launch out extensively on the "great-gran'moder" theme, when an
exclamation from the guide checked him.

"Look, Senhor Armstrong," he said, arresting the progress of the canoe
by a slight turn of his paddle.  "Yonder is a mode of fishing which no
doubt is new to you."

Pedro pointed as he spoke to a canoe which a sharp bend of the stream
had just revealed to them.  Its occupants were Indians.  They were
almost naked, and so intent on their occupation that the arrival of our
travellers had not been observed.  One of the Indians, a splendid
specimen of muscular strength, stood up in the canoe with a bow and
arrow in his hands and one foot on the gunwale, quite motionless.
Suddenly he drew the bow, the arrow pierced the water without causing a
ripple, and next moment a transfixed fish was struggling on the surface.

The fish was barely secured when the presence of strangers was
discovered.  An exclamation followed.  Instantly the dark savage bent
his bow, with the arrow pointed this time full at the breast of Pedro.

That worthy did not, however, seem much alarmed.  He at once pushed out
into the stream, and gave a shout which induced the savage not only to
lower his bow, but to fling it into his canoe and throw up his arms with
exclamations of surprise and joy.

"He knows you?" said Lawrence, looking back at Pedro, who sat in the
stern of their canoe.

"Yes, he knows me.  I am pretty well-known to most people in these
regions.  This is the tiger-hunter of whom I have spoken.  His dwelling
is not far-off."

The meeting of the two friends was remarkably cordial, and it was
evident to both Lawrence and Quashy that the white man and the brown
were not only old friends, but more than usually fond of each other.

After the first salutations, both canoes were run to the bank of the
stream, and when they had all landed, Pedro presented his friend to
Lawrence, who shook hands with him in the English fashion.

"You have not mentioned your friend's name," said Lawrence.

"His name!" replied Pedro, with a laugh, "well, it is almost
unpronounceable.  Perhaps you had better call him by the name he goes by
among his friends--Spotted Tiger, or, more briefly--Tiger."

"Tell Spotted Tiger, then," said Lawrence, "that I am happy to make his
acquaintance."

When the guide had translated this, and the Indian had returned a
complimentary rejoinder, they continued to converse in the Indian tongue
with much animation, and, on the part of Spotted Tiger, with some
excitement.  Of course Lawrence understood nothing, but he continued to
watch the expressive features of the savage with interest, and observed,
when their glances showed they were talking of Manuela, that Tiger first
raised his eyebrows in surprise, and then smiled peculiarly.

"Strange," thought Lawrence, "what can he mean by that?  Perhaps he
knows the chief, her father, but why look surprised and smile on that
account?  I wish Pedro was not so secretive.  However, it's his
business, not mine!"

Consoling himself with this philosophic thought, Lawrence re-embarked
with his friends, and, accompanied by Tiger, proceeded down stream till
they came to a beautiful spot where the banks widened out into a small
lake or pond.  On its shores, under the cool shade of many trees, stood
the hut of the savage.

The scenery here was more than usually beautiful, being diversified not
only in form, but in its wealth and variety of trees, and twining
parasites and graceful ferns, with, in one place, groves of tall trees
covered with balls of wild cotton, as large as an orange, and,
elsewhere, inextricable entanglements of gorgeously flowering creepers,
such as the most vivid imagination would fail to invent or conceive.
Behind one part of the scene the setting sun shone with intense light,
turning all into dark forms, while in other parts the slanting rays fell
upon masses of rich foliage, and intensified its colour.

In front of the hut a handsome Indian woman stood awaiting the arrival
of her husband.  She held in her arms a naked little ball of
whitey-brown fat, which represented the youngest Tiger-cub of the
family.  Other cubs, less whitey, and more brown, romped around,
while up in the trees several remembrancers of Quashy's
great-great-grandmother sat grinning with delight, if not indignation,
at the human beings below.

After being hospitably entertained by the Indian with fish, alligator
soup, roast parrot, and young monkey, the party assembled round a fire,
kindled outside the hut more for the purpose of scaring away wild beasts
than cooking, though the little Tiger-cubs used it for the latter
purpose.

Then Pedro said to Lawrence--

"Now, Senhor Armstrong, I am going to ask you to exercise a little
patience at this point in our journey.  The business I have in hand
requires that I should leave you for two or three days.  I fully expect
to be back by the end of that time, and meanwhile I leave you and Quashy
and Manuela in good company, for my friend Spotted Tiger is true as
steel, though he _is_ an Indian, and will perhaps show you a little
sport to prevent your wearying."

"Very good, Pedro.  I am quite willing to wait," said Lawrence.  "You
know I am not pressed for time at present.  I shall be very glad to
remain and see what is to be seen here, and learn Spanish from Manuela."

"Or teach her Angleesh," suggested the girl, bashfully.

"Certainly.  Whichever pleases you best, Manuela," returned Lawrence.

"But s'pose," said Quashy, with a look of awful solemnity at
Pedro--"s'pose you nebber comes back at all!  S'pose you gits drownded,
or killed by a tiger, or shot by a Injin.  What den?"

"Suppose," retorted the guide, "that an earthquake should swallow up
South America, or that the world should catch fire--what then?"

"Why den, we no care a buttin for not'ing arter _dat_," replied the
negro, promptly, "but if you don' return, we nebber reach Buenos Ayres."

"Never fear, Quashy.  If I don't return, Spotted Tiger will guide you
safely there."

That night Pedro and his friend left the hut in a canoe, lighted by a
brilliant moon.  Before morning the latter returned alone.

Meanwhile Lawrence had slung Manuela's hammock between two trees, with a
fire on either side, yet screened from the chief camp-fire by a thick
bush, so that though close at hand, and under his protection, she
occupied, as it were, a separate chamber of her own.  His own hammock
and that of Quashy--for they all used hammocks--were hung side by side a
little nearer to the large fire.

Mr and Mrs Tiger, with all the little Tigers, finding their hut rather
warm, came outside, and also made their beds beside their visitors.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

DEALS WITH SPOTTED TIGER'S HOME, AND A HUNTING EXPEDITION.

In spite of howling jaguars, and snarling pumas, and buzzing mosquitoes,
and the whole host of nocturnal abominations peculiar to those regions,
our weary travellers lay peacefully in their hammocks, and slept like
humming-tops.  In regard to Quashy, we might more appropriately say like
a buzzing-top.

Once or twice during the night Quashy rose to replenish the fires, for
the jaguars kept up a concert that rendered attention to this protection
advisable; but he did it with half-closed eyes, and a sort of
semi-wakefulness which changed into profound repose the instant he
tumbled back into his hammock.  Lawrence, not being so well accustomed
to the situation, lay awake a short time at first, having his loaded
pistols under his pillow; but, as we have said, he soon slumbered, and
it is probable that all the jaguars, pumas, peccaries, tapirs,
alligators, and wild cats in that district might have walked in
procession under his hammock without disturbing him in the least, had
they been so minded.  As for Manuela, with that quiet indifference to
mere prospective danger that usually characterises her race, she laid
her head on her tiger-skin pillow, and slept the sleep of innocence--
having absolute faith, no doubt, in the vigilance and care of her
protectors.

It might have been observed, however, that before lying down the Indian
maiden knelt beside her hammock and hid her face in her hands.  Indeed
from the first it had been seen by her fellow-travellers that Manuela
thus communed with her God, and on one occasion Lawrence, remarking on
the fact, had asked Pedro if she were a Christian.

"She is a Christian," was Pedro's reply, but as he manifested an evident
intention not to be communicative on the subject, Lawrence forbore to
put further questions, although he felt his interest in the girl as well
as his curiosity increasing, and he longed to know how and when she had
been turned from heathen worship to the knowledge of Christ.

When daylight began to glimmer in the east, the bird, beast, and insect
worlds began to stir.  And a wonderful stir do these worlds make at that
hour in the grand regions of Central South America; for although
nocturnal birds and beasts retire and, at least partially, hide their
diminished heads at daylight, the myriad denizens of the forests bound
forth with renewed life and vigour to sing a morning hymn of praise to
their Maker--involuntarily or voluntarily, who can tell which, and what
right has man to say dogmatically that it cannot be the latter?
Thousands of cooing doves, legions of chattering parrots, made the air
vocal; millions of little birds of every size and hue twittered an
accompaniment, and myriads of mosquitoes and other insects filled up the
orchestra with a high pitched drone, while alligators and other aquatic
monsters beat time with flipper, fin, and tail.

Breakfast, consisting of excellent fish, eggs, maize, jaguar-steak,
roast duck, alligator-ragout, and chocolate, was prepared outside the
Indian hut.  The hut itself was unusually clean, Tiger being a peculiar
and eccentric savage, who seemed to have been born, as the saying is, in
advance of his generation.  He was a noted man among his brethren, not
only for strength and prowess, but for strange ideas and practices,
especially for his total disregard of public opinion.

In respect of cleanliness, his hut differed from the huts of all other
men of his tribe.  It was built of sun-dried mud.  The furniture
consisted of two beds, or heaps of leaves and skins, and several rude
vessels of clay.  The walls were decorated with bows, arrows,
blow-pipes, lances, game-bags, fishing-lines, and other articles of the
chase, as well as with miniature weapons and appliances of a similar
kind, varying its size according to the ages of the little Tigers.
Besides these, there hung from the rafters--if we may so name the sticks
that stretched overhead--several network hammocks and unfinished
garments, the handiwork of Mrs Tiger.

That lady herself was a fat and by no means uncomely young woman, simply
clothed in a white tunic, fastened at the waist with a belt--the arms
and neck being bare.  Her black hair was cut straight across the
forehead, an extremely ugly but simple mode of freeing the face from
interference, which we might say is peculiar to all savage nations had
not the highly civilised English of the present day adopted it, thus
proving the truth of the proverb that "extremes meet"!  The rest of her
hair was gathered into one long heavy plait, which hung down behind.
Altogether, Madame Tiger was clean and pleasant looking--for a savage.
This is more than could be said of her progeny, which swarmed about the
place in undisguised contempt of cleanliness or propriety.

Stepping into the hut after kindling the fire outside, Quashy proceeded
to make himself at home by sitting down on a bundle.

The bundle spurted out a yell, wriggled violently, and proved itself to
be a boy!

Jumping up in haste, Quashy discommoded a tame parrot on the rafters,
which, with a horrible shriek in the Indian tongue, descended on his
head and grasped his hair, while a tame monkey made faces at him and a
tame turtle waddled out of his way.

Having thus as it were established his footing in the family, the negro
removed the parrot to his perch, receiving a powerful bite of gratitude
in the act, and invited the wife of Spotted Tiger to join the
breakfast-party.  This he did by the express order of Lawrence, for he
would not himself have originated such a piece of condescension.  Not
knowing the dialect of that region, however, he failed to convey his
meaning by words and resorted to pantomime.  Rubbing his stomach gently
with one hand, he opened his mouth wide, pointed down his throat with
the forefinger of the other hand, and made a jerky reference with his
thumb to the scene of preparations outside.

Madame Tiger declined, however, and pointed to a dark corner, where a
sick child claimed her attention.

"O poor t'ing! what's de matter wid it?" asked Quashy, going forward and
taking one of the child's thin hands in his enormous paw.

The little girl must have been rather pretty when in health, but there
was not much of good looks left at that time, save the splendid black
eyes, the lustre of which seemed rather to have improved with sickness.
The poor thing appeared to know that she had found in the negro a
sympathetic soul, for she not only suffered her hand to remain in his,
but gave vent to a little squeak of contentment.

"Stop!  You hold on a bit, Poppity," said Quashy, whose inventive
capacity in the way of endearing terms was great, "I'll fetch de
doctor."

He ran out and presently returned with Lawrence, who shook his head the
moment he set eyes on the child.

"No hope?" inquired Quashy, with solemnity unspeakable on his
countenance.

"Well, I won't say that.  While there is life there is hope, but it
would have been more hopeful if I had seen the child a week or two
sooner."

After a careful examination, during which the father, who had come in,
and the mother looked on with quiet patience, and Manuela with some
anxiety, he found that there was still room for hope, but, he said,
turning to Quashy, "she will require the most careful and constant
nursing, and as neither Tiger nor his wife understands what we say, and
Pedro may not be back for some days, it will be difficult to explain to
them what should be done.  Can you not speak their dialect even a
little?" he added in Spanish to Manuela.

She shook her head, but said quietly--

"Me will nurse."

"That's very kind of you, and it will really be a charity, for the child
is seriously ill.  She is a strangely attractive little thing," he
continued, bending over her couch and stroking her hair gently.  "I feel
quite as if I had known her a long time.  Now, I will give you
instructions as well as I can as to what you have to do.  Shall I give
them in Spanish or English?"

Quite gravely the Indian girl replied, "Angleesh."

"Very well," said he, and proceeded to tell Manuela how to act as
sick-nurse.  When he had finished, the girl at once stepped up to
Tiger's wife with a winning smile, patted her shoulder, kissed her
forehead, and then, pointing to the little invalid with a look of
profound intelligence, went out of the hut.  Presently she returned with
some of the gravy of the alligator-ragout, sat down beside the little
one, and began to administer it in small quantities.  Evidently the
child was pleased both with the food and the angel of mercy who had
found her, for she nestled in a comfortable way close to Manuela's side.
Lawrence observed, when the latter looked round for something she
wanted, that her eyes were full of tears.

"I knew I was right," he muttered to himself as he returned to the fire,
where Quashy had already spread out the breakfast, "she certainly _must_
be a princess of the Incas.  They were notoriously celebrated for their
gentle and amiable qualities, even at the time of Pizarro's conquest."

What more passed in his mind we cannot tell, for he ceased to mutter,
and never revealed his subsequent thoughts to any one.

"Now, Quashy," said Lawrence, when breakfast was over, "we are left here
in what we may style difficulties.  The Indians don't understand Spanish
or English, so until Pedro returns we shall have to get along as best we
can by signs."

"Bery well, massa, I hope you knows how to talk by signs, for its more
dan dis nigger do."

As he spoke he threw an ear of maize at a monkey which sat on a branch
overhead gazing at the party with an expression of the most woebegone
resignation.  He missed his aim, but none the less did that monkey
change its look into a glare of intense indignation, after which it fled
shrieking, with hurt feelings, into the woods.

"I'm not much up in the language of signs," said Lawrence, "but we must
try our best."

Saying which he arose, and, touching Tiger on the shoulder, beckoned him
to follow.

With the lithe, easy motions of the animal after which he was named, the
Indian rose.  Lawrence led him a few paces from the fire, and then,
putting himself in the attitude of a man discharging an arrow from a
bow, suddenly let the imaginary arrow fly, looked at the savage, touched
his own breast, and smiled.

So did Quashy, with compound interest.  Spotted Tiger looked puzzled,
shook his head, and also smiled.

"He t'ink you wants him to shoot you," said Quashy.

"No, no, that's not it," said Lawrence, with a somewhat abashed look at
the Indian.  "I want you to take us out shooting--hunting, you
know--_hunting_."

As Tiger did _not_ know the word "hunting" he continued to shake his
head with a puzzled air.

Every one who has tried it knows what a silly, almost imbecile, feeling
comes over one when one attempts the communication of ideas in dumb
show.  Feelings of this sort affected our hero very keenly.  He
therefore, while continuing the pantomime, kept up a running or
interjectional accompaniment in the English language.

"Look here, Tiger," he said, impressively, taking up two sticks which he
made to represent a bow and arrow, and placing them in position, "I want
to go hunting with you--hunting--shooting the jaguar."

"Yes, de jaguar--tiger, you know," said Quashy, who, in his anxiety to
get the savage to understand, imitated his master's actions, and could
not refrain from occasionally supplementing his speech.

As a tiger-skin chanced to be hanging on a bush near to the fire,
Lawrence completed his pantomime by throwing his mimic arrow against
that.

A gleam of intelligence suffused the face of the savage.  Stalking into
his hut, he returned with a bow considerably longer than himself, and an
arrow, also of great length.  Retiring to a distance from the
