would naturally be unwelcome to an impenitent heart; whereas, the devout
Arndt found nothing in it but animating and heavenly truth. Hence he
desired to be regarded as simply an Evangelical Lutheran Christian,--an
adherent of the Formula of Concord.

§ 26. Religion assumed an unusually attractive and beautiful form in
Arndt, and is strikingly shadowed forth in his "True Christianity;" this
work is an admirable portraiture of his inner man. He was naturally of a
grave, but not by any means of an unsocial or gloomy disposition; he would
not otherwise have been styled "the Fenelon of Protestantism." Dr.
Wildenhahn, whose charming work (entitled _Johannes Arndt_) embodies
strictly accurate historical notices, and derives only subordinate matter,
such as incidents in domestic life, conversations, etc., from analogy and
a fruitful imagination, exhibits him in the true light, as an affectionate
husband, a cheerful companion, a generous and self-sacrificing friend of
the sick and the poor--in short, as a model in all the relations of life.
There is no exaggeration in this language. He possessed great firmness of
character; indeed, a truly heroic spirit dwelt in him. He manifested this
trait on many trying occasions--not only when he preferred poverty and
exile to a denial of a single Gospel truth or Lutheran usage, but also in
many other scenes of conflict. The ravages of the pestilence could not
alarm his heroic soul; the open and violent denunciations of enemies he
always encountered in the spirit of Him who said: "If I have spoken evil,
bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me?" (John 18:23.)
There was a certain calmness or gentleness in his manner of treating his
enemies, which, combined with his earnestness and candor in repelling
their calumnies, invariably subdued them. Love--love, not to the amiable
and good, or to the poor and sorrowing alone, but also to his enemies--was
too often and too variously manifested, to leave the spectator in doubt
respecting its true source--a genuine faith in Christ, and deep, ardent
love to Him. In truth, it is here that the peculiar type of his religion
is seen; he lived more in heaven than on earth. The sacerdotal prayer of
Christ (John, Chap. 17) was an unfailing source of light, of hope, of
peace and joy to his soul. Expressions like these, "As thou, Father, art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us" (ver. 21)--"I in
them, and thou in me, etc." (ver. 23), and language like that of Paul:
"Christ in you, etc." (Col. 1:27), furnished him virtually with the
formula: "Christ in me, and I in Christ." Such was his faith in Christ,
and such was his love to Him, that he was always calm and hopeful. Hence
features appeared in his religious character which his worldly-minded
contemporaries could not fully appreciate; they were formed by two
different series of Gospel doctrines, which cannot come in conflict, but
which relate to two entirely different objects--Christ, the Saviour, and
fallen man. No one more sincerely embraced the doctrine of Original Sin,
as held by the Lutheran Church, than Arndt did; of this his writings
furnish the evidence. His own searching self-examination, constantly
maintained in the light of Scripture, revealed to him the utter corruption
of his own heart by nature; he found nothing in himself but sin. He was
conscious that he could do nothing without Christ, and deeply felt that
grace--nothing but grace--could renew his nature, and save him. These
convictions induced him to insist with such earnestness, in his Four
Books, on the true and genuine repentance of the sinner. At the same time,
there was nothing like sternness, gloom, or despondency connected with his
sincere and profound self-abasement. For he received with equal strength
of faith another series of truths--he believed with all his heart that
"after the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man appeared, not
by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy
he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour;
that being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to
the hope of eternal life." Tit. 3:4-7. Here a new tide of emotions flowed
through his soul. Wonder, joy, gratitude, love, took possession of him.
His large heart was full of happiness that the lost could be found and
saved--that "where sin abounded, grace did much more abound." Rom. 5:20.
And now, when these two distinct principles appear in him in their
practical union, the type of his religion is clearly developed. He was
grave and earnest, humble, and free from all confidence in himself, for he
was "by nature a child of wrath." Eph. 2:3. But, on the other hand, God
had, in pity and in love, given him a Saviour, engrafted him in that
Saviour through Holy Baptism, bestowed on him the fulness of grace, and
invited him, as a repentant, believing, pardoned child of Adam, to enter
heaven. If sin abounded through the first Adam, grace did, through the
second Adam (1 Cor. 15:45), much more abound. His writings, therefore, now
assume a very cheerful character--_love_ is the prevailing theme. Nothing
morose appears in them--sorrow for sin and repentance--faith in Christ and
love to him, are his soul-inspiring themes, and a cheerful spirit, a sense
of fervent, joyful gratitude to God, a heavenly calm, pervade alike his
heart and its language as uttered in the "True Christianity."

§ 27. The essential features of vital godliness are always the same; yet
"there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit." 1 Cor. 12:4. Paul
insists on faith; John, on love. Luther's religion was, like that of
Arndt, earnest, and yet cheerful. Both were enabled by their personal
experience to understand the nature of these Christian virtues, and also
the distinction between them. Luther dwells with wonderful power on
_faith_. Arndt delights to speak of God's _love_. There is something very
beautiful in these different developments of true godliness in the
servants of Christ, while the influences of the same divine Spirit
controls them alike.

§ 28. It would be an error to suppose that the whole world had risen up in
arms against Arndt, after he had assumed his position as an humble and
devout Christian. Vast numbers received his First Book on True
Christianity with gratitude and joy. It enlightened their minds; it
controlled the conscience; it diffused the warmth of life through their
souls; and they thanked God that such a book, so full of love, had been
given to the world. A comparatively small number of men rose up against
him. Certain individuals, such as his colleague, Denecke, a co-pastor of
the same congregation in Brunswick, were, no doubt, influenced by envy and
personal dislike. But others who opposed him, were by no means governed
solely by unworthy personal considerations. Some of them were so much
concerned about "questions and strifes of words" (1 Tim. 6:4), that they
overlooked and misconceived the heavenly-mindedness of Arndt. Others, who
did him injustice, were led astray by the infelicity of the times. We have
already referred to the disastrous influences of the mysticism and
fanaticism which, in addition to other corruptions of the true faith, had
appeared about, and after, the period of the birth of Arndt. For instance,
the Swiss physician, Paracelsus (who died as a Roman Catholic in 1541),
had published various fantastic and mystical writings, in which he
professed that he understood both mundane and supermundane mysteries. Now
a certain Lutheran pastor in Saxony, named Weigel, who died in 1588, and
who had been confessedly a man of an upright walk and conversation, had
yielded to a tendency to the mysticism and theosophy of Paracelsus. He was
thus led theoretically to undervalue the doctrines of the church, and to
represent them as merely allegorical forms, involving truths not known to
ordinary men. The natural results of his theory, if its folly had not been
exposed, would unquestionably have seriously affected the authority of the
written Word. Before his writings were published, a friend had
communicated to Arndt a short extract from them, which contained none of
his errors; the author's name had been withheld. Arndt, in his innocence,
inserted the passage in his book, and was thus burdened with the odium of
all the Weigelian errors; but he was subsequently released from all
censure, and his freedom from anything like the mysticism of Weigel was
generally conceded.

§ 29. Another ground of the charge of mysticism which his opponents
advanced, was found in his repeated references in the "True Christianity"
to Tauler. Here, too, Arndt made a brilliant defence, by quoting the great
Luther as his authority. The latter had obtained possession of a
manuscript without a title or an author's name, which deeply interested
him. It dwelt entirely on the communion of the soul with God, and on
kindred topics. Luther, whose godliness was healthy and sound, was so much
charmed with the work, that he published a part of it at Wittenberg in
1516, and prefixed the title: "A spiritual, noble little work, explaining
the distinction between the old and the new man; showing, also, who are
the children of Adam and the children of God, and how Adam must die in us,
and Christ live in us." During the course of the next year he published
the whole work, with an extended Preface of his own, and adopted the
title: "A German Theology"; this general title it has since retained. It
was received with unbounded favor, and circulated rapidly throughout
Europe, for instance, in three English, seven Latin, four French, etc.,
translations, besides numerous editions of the original German. It was
supposed to have been written by Tauler, a very devout man, who was born
in the year 1290. His religious tendencies led him, like Luther, to enter
a monastery. The sermons and other writings which he left behind, while
their general character assign to him a place among those who are
denominated "Mystics," nevertheless abound in holy and devout aspirations,
and were dictated by a spirit that sought and found peace in the grace of
God alone.--Arndt entertained the opinion that the "German Theology" was a
production of his pen, and so represents the case in his "True
Christianity." It is now, however, generally conceded, in consequence of
an allusion in the work itself to Tauler as a religious teacher of an
earlier day, that another person, belonging to a later period, was the
writer; his name is still involved in impenetrable darkness.--So, too, it
is by no means certain that Thomas a Kempis (born in 1380), was the author
of the popular book "On the Imitation of Christ," of which more than two
thousand editions in the original language, more than one thousand in
French, besides innumerable others in German, English, etc., have been
published. The historical arguments, adduced chiefly by French writers,
intended to support the claims of the eminent Gerson (born in 1363), as
the author, although not entirely conclusive, are still possessed of great
weight.--Arndt incidentally remarks in a brief statement respecting the
"German Theology," that his copy, printed at Wittenberg in 1520, contained
simply the remark that the book had been written by a devout priest of the
city of Frankfort, for devotional purposes, but the author's name was
withheld. If Luther sanctioned the publication of the "German Theology,"
Arndt could calmly listen to those who censured him for adopting a similar
course. Those extracts at least, which he furnishes in the "True
Christianity," are, unquestionably, evangelical and truly edifying.

§ 30. It will, perhaps, gratify the reader to observe the skill with which
Wildenhahn, to whom we have already referred, illustrates the childlike
simplicity of Arndt's character, by combining fiction with truth. During
his Brunswick pastorate, the City Council of Halberstadt sent him an
urgent call to become the successor of the deceased Rev. D. Sachse, as
pastor of the church of St. Martin in that city. After he had consulted
with his intelligent wife, who, like himself, was anxious to withdraw to
any spot where peace could be found, he resolved to accept the call; and,
in accordance with custom and law, applied to the Brunswick City Council
for letters of honorable dismission. When the question was to be decided,
Arndt appeared in the presence of the burgomaster, Kale, the syndic, Dr.
Roerhand, and other members of the Council, and renewed his request. These
details are historically true. Wildenhahn now subjoins the following:
"Tell me honestly," said the syndic to him, "have you really, as you
allege, taken no steps whatever, in order to obtain this call from
Halberstadt?" "Not a single step," said Arndt, in a solemn manner, with
his right hand on his heart, "the whole is altogether and exclusively a
work of God." But at the moment when he pronounced this solemn
declaration, it became evident to those who were present, that a sudden
thought had startled him; he changed color; he began to tremble; he
suddenly covered his eyes with his left hand. Then, with a voice betraying
deep emotion, he added: "Gentlemen, I have borne false witness! I really
did do something to obtain this call." "Ah!" said Kale quickly, delighted,
as it seemed, to find an opportunity for displaying his official dignity,
"You did? Pray, tell us what it was." "I prayed to the blessed Lord with
tears, that he would assign to me some other spot in his vineyard, no
matter how insignificant, if I could only there preach his word in peace."
"And was _that_ all?" inquired the burgomaster, much surprised, and
speaking in more gentle tones. "That was all," replied Arndt, "and this is
true, as God lives! But, doubtless, I erred here, in impatiently
attempting to dictate to God, etc." Such simplicity of character, such
perfect ingenuousness, such a wonderful freedom from artifice and
disguise, completely disarmed the members of the Council. They now
understood better than previously the artlessness and spirituality of the
man before them, and, after that scene, they accorded to him entire esteem
and confidence.

§ 31. The great work of Arndt--the "True Christianity," has probably never
had its equal as a popular book of devotion. Tholuck relates the following
anecdote as an illustration of the manner in which even Papists could
appreciate the merits of the work. When Prof. Anton, of Halle, visited
Madrid in 1687, he examined the library of the Jesuits, and incidentally
inquired of the librarian respecting the ascetic writer whom they esteemed
more than other authors of devotional works. The latter exhibited a Latin
book, the title-page and last leaves of which were wanting, and declared
that it was the most edifying work which they possessed. When Anton
examined it, he discovered that it was a translation of Arndt's "_True
Christianity_"! It is only common justice to allow the author to state the
objects which he had in view, in preparing the work. The following passage
occurs in a letter which he addressed in the last year of his life to Duke
Augustus the Younger, of Brunswick: "In the first place, I wished to
withdraw the minds of students and preachers from an inordinate
controversial and polemic theology, which has well-nigh assumed the form
of an earlier scholastic theology. Secondly, I purposed to conduct
Christian believers from lifeless thoughts to such as might bring forth
fruit. Thirdly, I wished to guide them onward from mere science and
theory, to the actual practice of faith and godliness; and, fourthly, to
show them wherein a truly Christian life consists, which accords with the
true faith, as well as to explain the apostle's meaning when he says: 'I
live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me,' etc." (Gal. 2:20.)

§ 32. The Rev. Dr. Seiss, the author of "Ecclesia Lutherana, etc.," to
whose endeavors the religious public is mainly indebted for the appearance
of the present edition, remarks in a recent notice of the work: "This is
one of the very greatest and most useful practical books produced by
Protestantism. Though written more than two hundred and fifty years ago,
it is still unsurpassed in its department. It stands out with marked and
superior distinction in the modern ages. Next to the Bible and Luther's
Small Catechism, it has been more frequently printed, more widely read,
and more influential for good, than any other book, perhaps, that has ever
been written. Boehm has not exaggerated, when he says that its effects, in
the conversion of souls, has been such, that an account of them would make
a history in itself. Nor can any one candidly read it, without finding on
every page, scintillations of the sunlike splendors of a mind bathed in
the purity, wisdom, and love of heaven." Mr. Boehm, in the Preface to his
translation (which is the basis both of the revision of Mr. Jacques, and
of the present edition), remarks, that among the learned men in Great
Britain, who had read the Latin translation, the distinguished Dr.
Worthington had assigned the first rank among devotional writers to Arndt,
and quotes the enthusiastic terms in which he extols that "faithful
servant of God, John Arndt." And Mr. Jacques closes the Preface to his
revision with the following words: "Divines of all communions and
persuasions, have united in their admiration of this delightful
production. The late learned Dr. Edward Williams has inserted it in his
valuable Appendix to the Christian Preacher: and the Rev. John Wesley made
a most copious extract from it, comprised in Vol. I. and II. of his
Christian Library."

§ 33. And truly God did not design this great work solely for the comfort
and aid of the German nation during the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648), but
for all nations and all times. It has been translated into the Latin,
Danish, Swedish, Bohemian, Polish, Low Dutch, English, French, Turkish,
Russian, Malabar, Tamul, etc., languages. At least two editions of the
work in a Latin translation were published in England; the last appeared
in 1708, with the following title: "Joannis Arndtii, Theologici, etc.: De
vero Christianismo. Libri IV. Cura et studio A. W. Boemi. Lond. 1708." 2
vols. 8vo.--Another Latin edition was published in Germany in 1624. The
Tamul translation had the following Latin title: "De vero Christianismo,
in Tamulicum convertit Benjamin Schulzius, Missionarius Evangelicus."(2)

§ 34. The work had made so deep an impression on learned British
Christians, who read it in Latin, that the wish was repeatedly and
earnestly expressed that it might be made accessible to English readers.
At this period, that is, during the reign of Queen Anne of England (who
died in 1714), large numbers of German emigrants from the Palatinate
passed through England on their way to the provinces of New York and
Pennsylvania. The Rev. Anthony William Boehm, a German Lutheran clergyman,
had previously been appointed as the court chaplain of Prince George of
Denmark, the consort of Queen Anne. His enlightened zeal and devout heart
led him to take a deep interest, not only in the temporal, but also in the
spiritual welfare of these pilgrims, who were on their way to the wilds of
North America. He accordingly supplied them, by the aid of certain
like-minded friends, with German Bibles and Hymn Books, and also with
German copies of Arndt's "True Christianity," as well as with other books
of devotion. This interesting fact is mentioned in the letters of Dr.
Muhlenberg, published in the well-known _Halle Reports_ (_Hallische
Nachrichten_, pp. 665, 793). But Mr. Boehm also resolved to furnish the
people, in the midst of whom he lived, with the great work of his favorite
author, in their own language, and accordingly prepared an English
translation, which was first printed in London in 1712.

§ 35. It would be unjust to the memory of this excellent man, if we should
fail to refer to his literary labors. His high office at the royal court
of England, is an evidence of his personal merit. He was not only a devout
and faithful preacher of the Gospel, but also an author who acquired
distinction. In 1734 he published a very valuable work in the German
language, entitled: "Eight Books, on the Reformation of the Church in
England, extending from the year 1526, under Henry VIII., to the reign of
Charles II." In a very beautiful eulogy, in manuscript, found in the
volume before us, the writer refers to the successful efforts of Mr. Boehm
to provide for the education of the children of the poor in his vicinity.
He died May 27, 1722, in his fiftieth year, after having faithfully
labored in the service of Christ. He sustained, with eminent success, the
Danish Lutheran missionaries in Tranquebar, by sending pecuniary aid
obtained in London, as well as religious publications. Besides his great
German historical work, which is the complement of Burnet's "History of
the Reformation of the Church of England," he also published several
English compositions, such as a "Sermon on the doctrine of Original Sin,
Eph. 4:22," printed in London, 1711, and a "Sermon on the Duty of the
Reformation (Jubilee), Rev. 18:4," London, 1718, besides various religious
works in the German language.

§ 36. About the beginning of the present century, the Rev. Calvin
Chaddock, who resided in Hanover, Massachusetts, obtained a copy of Mr.
Boehm's translation, "accidentally," as he says, and found it to be so
valuable, that he resolved to issue an American edition, which accordingly
appeared in 1809, Boston. In his short Preface he remarks, with great
truth, that the language of the translation "appears to be somewhat
ancient, and the sentiments in some few instances obscure." He adds, in
reference to his own agency: "The only alterations which have been made,
are such as respect redundant and obsolete words, orthography, the
addition of some words, and the transposition of some sentences; that the
ideas of the translator might appear more conspicuous." He might have,
with great advantage, been even more liberal than he was, in correcting
the style; it still remained in numerous passages heavy and obscure. As
the style, even of the original German, is somewhat antiquated, and as,
besides, occasional obscurities and repetitions occur, a later successor
in one of Arndt's pastoral charges, the Rev. J. F. Fedderson, assumed the
task of revising and abridging the whole of the original German, improving
or modernizing the style, and occasionally adding new matter. The result
of his labors does not appear to have received the entire approbation of
the German religious world; the original and unaltered work continues so
popular, that no permanent place has been secured for the substitute. A
portion of Fedderson's production was translated and published in
Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, in 1834, by the Rev. John N. Hoffman, Pastor
of the Evangelical Lutheran congregation of that place. The translation
was never completed. The part which was given, consisting mainly of Book
I., has long since been out of print.

§ 37. In the year 1815, a new edition of Mr. Boehm's English translation
was issued in London (evidently without any reference to Mr. Chaddock's
American edition), by William Jacques, A.M., who had already distinguished
himself by his translation, from the Latin, of A. H. Francke's "Guide to
the Reading and Study of the Holy Scriptures," of which a reprint, in a
very unattractive form, and with omissions, appeared in Philadelphia, in
1823. He took Mr. Boehm's translation as the "ground-work," which, as he
states in his Preface, he did not "edit either hastily or negligently.
There is not a single page, nor a single paragraph," he continues, "which
has not been subjected to scrutiny," etc. Nevertheless, Mr. Jacques, who
does not appear to have compared the translation with the original German,
made only verbal changes, which, as it is evident, materially improve the
style. But he allowed all the additions of Mr. Boehm, which are generally
quite tautological, and various inaccuracies in thought and expression to
remain. So many antiquated expressions were retained, that it would have
been inexpedient to reprint the work precisely as Mr. Jacques allowed the
text to remain. Besides, he curtailed the full titles of the several
chapters, and, with very few exceptions, omitted the important and
appropriate texts which Arndt had prefixed respectively to the latter.
These circumstances, in connection with others, such as numerous
typographical errors, especially in the Scripture references, plainly
indicated that a revision of the whole was necessary, before the present
edition could be presented to the public.

§ 38. The editor of the present American edition took that of Mr. Jacques
as the basis of the translation, but compared every sentence with the
original German. He found some cases in which valuable matter had been
omitted, and was occasionally required to supply sentences that had been
mutilated or suppressed. But he erased all the verbal additions, and the
clauses, or sentences, inserted by Mr. Boehm, where it seemed to have been
the object of the latter only to explain remarks that were already
perfectly lucid, or to add emphasis by the insertion of adjectives, etc.,
or else to impart beauty by the adoption of poetical terms or phrases,
which were inconsistent with the severe simplicity of Arndt's style. He
even represents the author, on one occasion, as quoting from the
"Homilies" of the Church of England, which Arndt undoubtedly never read,
and certainly does not mention in the original. The American editor has,
also, at the request of several friends, who took an interest in securing
the publication of the present edition, prepared a somewhat copious INDEX.
One of the Latin editions (London, 1708) contains an index, adapted only
to its own pages. Another, in German, is found in some of the German
editions, for instance, in that of Nuremberg, 1762, also adapted to the
pages of the particular edition only. As the American editor found none in
English, and preferred to adapt the new Index, prepared by him, to the
work itself (specifying the Book, Chapter, and Section), he accordingly
completed his task on this plan, after a considerable expenditure of time
and labor. It is somewhat difficult to prepare an Index for a work which
is so exclusively devotional in its character as the present, and in which
the author does not intend to discuss subjects in a strictly scientific
manner. Arndt, for instance, employs terms which, when defined with
precision, indicate different shades of thought, almost as if they were
synonymous (_e. g._, the _grace_, _mercy_, _goodness_, _love_, etc., of
God), and often repeats the same thought in different language. For this
we can easily account, when we recollect that the materials of the work
were taken from a series of popular sermons of the author, delivered at
intervals. The editor allows himself to hope that the Index which he has
prepared, may occasionally be of service to the reader.

§ 39. But even after having made numerous changes on _every page_ of the
old translation before him, the American editor is conscious that a
critical eye will discover many imperfections in the style. It is often
antiquated and heavy, and sometimes even quaint. Nevertheless, in all
these instances he allowed the English text to remain as he found it,
contenting himself with the correction of orthographical and syntactical
inaccuracies, the rectification of Scripture references, the errors in
which he found to be unusually numerous, the correction of quotations in
accordance with the authorized English version of the Bible, in the many
cases in which Mr. Boehm, or one of his assistants, translated from
Luther's German version, or quoted the English version from memory, etc.,
etc.

§ 40. It is eminently proper that a new edition of Arndt's "True
Christianity" should appear during the present Jubilee year of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church, and that it should be undertaken and
conducted to a successful issue by members of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Pennsylvania. The deep spirituality of Arndt, and his active and
pure faith, can be fully understood and appreciated only when we reflect
on the doctrinal system to which he had given his heart, and to which we
have referred above. This orthodox system found no favor, at a later
period, among the Rationalists; they rejected the doctrines of the Bible
respecting the depravity of human nature, the divinity of Christ, the
efficacy of the divinely appointed means of grace, and similar truths, and
grievously complained of the violence which, as they treacherously
alleged, was offered to their conscience, when the demand was made, that
if they claimed to belong to the Lutheran Church, to occupy its pulpits,
and to receive their support from it, they ought also to adopt its faith.
Their influence is happily decaying in Europe, and the restoration of the
doctrines of the Symbolical Books of the Evangelical Lutheran Church to
authority, is coincident with the new and healthy religious life of the
Lutheran Church in Germany, Hungary, Scandinavia, and Russia. The sincere
Christian, John Arndt, whom we heard protesting before God, with his last
breath, as described above, that he believed only the doctrines of the
Symbolical Books of the Lutheran Church, and _all_ those doctrines, little
thought that more than two centuries afterwards, in the remote Western
continent of America, men would arise who would not only reject with scorn
"all the other Symbolical Books," which he revered, but also speak
contemptuously of the Augsburg Confession and its holy doctrines.

§ 41. The doctrinal system which Arndt so sincerely revered, was brought
to this country by the Lutheran pastors who visited our shores at a very
early period. Dr. Henry Melchior Muhlenberg, an eminently enlightened and
holy man, was enabled, by his well-disciplined mind and great
administrative powers, to create order among the scattered Lutherans whom
he found in this country. He was exceedingly zealous in maintaining the
purity of the Lutheran faith, to which he owed all his peace and his
hopes. He gave unusual prominence to the Symbolical Books--to _all_ of
them, mentioned by name--in the various constitutions of congregations
organized or influenced by him, and very properly claimed that none who
rejected them could honestly bear the name of _Lutherans_. We will give
only one illustration, of many which might be adduced, to show the
fidelity with which he held to the Lutheran Symbolical Books, as
enumerated by Arndt in the last paragraph of his Preface to Book I., in
this volume. Dr. Muhlenberg states in an official Report for the year
1747, which he transmitted to Halle (_Hall. Nachr._, pp. 234, 235), that
he had visited a congregation in Maryland, in which great dissensions
prevailed at the time, occasioned by efforts made by certain individuals
to alienate the Lutherans from their faith and church. He says, "Before we
commenced public worship, I asked for the Church Record, and wrote certain
propositions and articles in it in the English language, and among other
statements, made the following: That our German Lutherans held to the holy
Word of God, in the prophetic and apostolical writings; further, to the
unaltered Augsburg Confession, and the other Symbolical Books, etc.(3) I
then read the same publicly to the congregation, and explained it to them
in the German language, and added, that every one who desired to be, and
to remain, _such_ a Lutheran, should subscribe his name." He informs us
that the genuine Lutherans readily subscribed; the rest, who had
unlutheran sympathies, withheld their names.

§ 42. An unhappy change occurred after Dr. Muhlenberg's day. The
Symbolical Books, which he and his contemporaries received, believed, and
sustained in their whole extent, with religious veneration, existed at
that time only in Latin and German. They gradually receded from the view
of many pastors of the church; individuals were received into the ranks of
the ministry, who had never studied them; doctrines and usages, hitherto
unknown to the church, were introduced into many Lutheran congregations.
At one period several of the most intelligent pastors yielded, to a
certain extent, to rationalistic influences; then, the opposite extreme,
of fanaticism, gained adherents; both rationalism and fanaticism were
alike hostile to "the unaltered Augsburg Confession and the other
Symbolical Books," and a strange combination of elements, derived partly
from rationalism, and partly from fanaticism, temporarily held sway.
Dependence was now placed on human measures and inventions, designed for
the conversion of sinners and the edification of believers, rather than on
the divinely appointed means of grace, which men like Arndt and Muhlenberg
recognized as the only channels through which the Divine Spirit exercises
his influence. If they had lived among us during the second, third, and
fourth decades of this century, when their doctrines, and their mode of
preaching, were regarded by many as antiquated, or unsuited to a supposed
higher grade of religious development, they would have readily predicted
the results--fanaticism, latitudinarianism in doctrine, an evanescent
emotional religion, and, by consequence, the rejection, in whole or in
part, of the Augsburg Confession and the other Symbolical Books.

§ 43. God, in his mercy, has interposed. The doctrines which Arndt,
Muhlenberg, and men of the old faith, regarded as the life-blood of a
healthy, scriptural religion, are regaining their authority. Many still
reject them; the old faith of the church--Bible truth, is unwelcome to an
ignorant, rationalistic, and unconverted heart. But others have been
taught by observation and experience that mere human measures and
inventions cannot conduct to a healthy and permanent religion, and that
divine truth, as taught in the Scriptures, and set forth in our Symbolical
Books, and the other means of grace given to the Church by its divine
Head, are the only sources from which such a healthy religion can proceed.
In this spirit Arndt wrote the "True Christianity," and by this spirit the
Synod of Pennsylvania is animated. This ecclesiastical body desires to
take away all glory from man, and to give it all to Christ. One of the
results of its attachment to our ancient and holy faith, is the
publication of the present volume, in which the author so eloquently and
affectionately urges all men to repent, to believe in Christ, and to lead
a holy life.

§ 44. The divine blessing has so remarkably attended the use of Arndt's
"True Christianity," in the original language, and in its various
translations, that the present editor humbly entertains the hope that the
time and labor expended by him in preparing this new edition, may also be
of avail. And he prays that the "True Christianity" may continue the work
which it has already performed, and instruct, guide, and comfort anew the
souls of its readers, to the praise and glory of God.

C. F. S.

PHILADELPHIA, August, 1868.





BOOK I.


Wherein True Christianity, Sincere Sorrow For Sin, Repentance, Faith, And
           The Holy Life Of The True Christian, Are Considered.




The Author's Preface To The First Book.


Christian Reader! That the holy Gospel is subjected, in our age, to a
great and shameful abuse, is fully proved by the ungodly and impenitent
life of those who loudly boast of Christ and of his word, while their
unchristian life resembles that of persons who dwell in a land of heathens
and not of Christians. Such an ungodly course of conduct furnished me with
an occasion for writing this Treatise; it was my object to show to plain
readers wherein true Christianity consists, namely, in the exhibition of a
true, living, and active faith, which manifests itself in genuine
godliness and the fruits of righteousness. I desired to show that we bear
the name of _Christians_, not only because we ought to believe in Christ,
but also because the name implies that we live in Christ, and that He
lives in us. I further desired to show that true repentance proceeds from
the inmost centre of the heart; that the heart, mind, and affections must
be changed; that we must be conformed to Christ and His holy Gospel; and
that we must be renewed by the word of God, and become new creatures. For
even as every seed produces fruit of a like nature, so the word of God
must daily produce in us new spiritual fruits. If we become new creatures
by faith, we must live in accordance with our new birth. In a word, Adam
must die, and Christ must live, in us. It is not sufficient to acquire a
knowledge of the word of God; it is also our duty to obey it practically,
with life and power.

2. There are many who suppose that Theology is merely a science, or an art
of words, whereas it is a living experience and practical exercise.--Every
one now aims at acquiring eminence and distinction in the world; but no
one is willing to learn how to be devout. Every one now seeks out men of
great learning, who can teach arts, languages, and wisdom; but no one is
willing to learn from our only Teacher, Jesus Christ, how to become meek
and sincerely humble; and yet His holy and living example is the true rule
for our life and conduct, and, indeed, constitutes the highest wisdom and
knowledge; so that we can with truth declare, "The pure life of Christ
opens all knowledge to us."

3. Every one is very willing to be a servant of Christ; but no one will
consent to be His follower. And yet He says: "If any man serve me, let him
follow me." John 12:26. Hence, he who truly serves and loves Christ, will
also follow him; and he who loves Christ, will also love the example of
His holy life, His humility, meekness, patience, as well as the cross,
shame, and contempt which He endured, although the flesh may thereby
suffer pain. And although we cannot, in our present weakness, perfectly
imitate the holy and exalted life of Christ (which, indeed, is not
intended in my Book), nevertheless, we ought to love it, and long to
imitate it more fully; for thus we live in Christ, and Christ lives in us,
according to the words of St. John: "He that saith he abideth in him ought
himself also so to walk, even as he walked." 1 John 2:6. It is now the
disposition of the world to acquire a knowledge of all things; but that
which is better than all other knowledge, namely, "to know the love of
Christ" (Eph. 3:19), no one desires to acquire. But no man can love
Christ, who does not imitate his holy life. There are many--a majority,
indeed, of men in this world--who are ashamed of the holy example of
Christ, namely, of his humility and lowly condition; that is, they are
ashamed of the Lord Jesus Christ; of them he says: "Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation,
of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed," etc. Mark 8:38. Christians
now desire a Christ of imposing appearance, who is magnificent, rich, and
conformed to the world; but no one desires to receive, to confess, and to
follow the poor, meek, despised, and lowly Christ. He will, therefore,
hereafter say: "I never knew you" (Matt. 7:23); ye were not willing to
know me in my humility, and therefore I do not know you in your pride.

4. Not only, however, is ungodliness, in all its forms, at variance with
Christ and true Christianity, but it is also the cause of the daily
accumulation of the displeasure of God, and of the penalties which he
inflicts; insomuch that he fits all creatures to be avengers, and that
heaven and earth, fire and water, are made to contend against us; so that
all nature is thereby sorely distressed, and well-nigh overwhelmed. Hence,
a season of affliction must be expected; war, famine, and pestilence; yea,
the last plagues are coming in with such violence, that we are exposed to
the assaults of nearly every creature. For even as the terrible plagues of
the Egyptians overtook them before the redemption and departure of the
children of Israel from Egypt, so, too, before the redemption of the
children of God occurs, dreadful and unheard-of plagues will overtake the
ungodly and impenitent. It is therefore high time to repent, to begin
another course of life, to turn from the world to Christ, to believe truly
in him, and to lead a Christian life in him, so that we may securely
"dwell in the secret place of the Most High, and abide under the shadow of
the Almighty." Ps. 91:1. Such is also the exhortation of the Lord: "Watch
ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape
all these things." Luke 21:36. The same is also testified in Ps. 112:7.

5. Now, to this end, my Christian reader, this book may, to a certain
extent, serve thee as a guide, showing thee not only how thou mayest,
through faith in Christ, obtain the remission of thy sins, but also how
thou mayest avail thyself of the grace of God, in order to lead a holy
life; and how thou mayest demonstrate and adorn thy faith by a Christian
walk and conversation. For true Christianity consists, not in words, nor
in any external show, but in a living faith, from which proceed fruits
meet for repentance, and all manner of Christian virtues, as from Christ
himself. For as faith is hidden from human view, and is invisible, it must
be manifested by its fruits; inasmuch as faith derives from Christ all
that is good, righteous, and blessed.

6. Now, when faith waits for the blessings which are promised to it, the
offspring of this faith is _hope_. For what else is hope but a constant
and persevering expectation, in faith, of the blessings which are
promised? But when faith communicates to a neighbor the blessings which it
has itself received, _love_ is the offspring of such a faith, imparting to
the neighbor that which it has itself received from God; and when faith
endures the trial of the cross, and submits to the will of God, it brings
forth _patience_. But when it sighs under the burden of the cross, or
offers thanks to God for mercies which it has received, it gives birth to
_prayer_. When it compares the power of God, on the one hand, with the
misery of man, on the other, and submits unresistingly to the will of God,
_humility_ is the fruit. And when this faith diligently labors that it may
not lose the grace of God, or, as St. Paul says: "worketh out salvation
with fear and trembling" (Phil. 2:12), then the _fear of God_ is the
result.

7. Thus thou seest that all the Christian virtues are the offspring of
faith, proceed from faith, and cannot be separated from faith, their
common source, if they are indeed genuine, living, and Christian virtues,
proceeding ultimately from God, from Christ, and from the Holy Spirit.
Hence no work can be acceptable to God without faith in Christ. For how
can true hope, sincere love, persevering patience, earnest prayer,
Christian humility, and a childlike fear of God, exist without faith? All
must be drawn from Christ, the well of salvation (Isa. 12:3), through
faith, as well righteousness, as all the fruits of righteousness. But take
great care, my reader, that thou do not connect thy works, the virtues
which thou hast commenced to practise, or the gifts of the new life, with
thy justification before God. For in this matter, man's works, merit,
gifts, and virtue, however lovely these may appear to be, have no
efficacy; our justification depends solely on the exalted and perfect
merit of Jesus Christ, apprehended by faith, even as it is set forth in
chap. V, XIX, XXXIV, and XLI, of this book, and in the first three
chapters of Book II. Take great care, therefore, not to confound the
righteousness of faith, on the one hand, and the righteousness of a
Christian life, on the other; but rather to make a clear distinction
between them; for here the whole foundation of our Christian religion is
involved. Still, thy repentance must be the great concern of thy life, for
otherwise thou hast no true faith, such as daily purifies, changes, and
amends the heart. Thou must, moreover, know that the consolations of the
Gospel cannot be effectually applied, unless they have been preceded by a
genuine godly sorrow, the result of which is a bruised and contrite heart;
for we read that "to the poor the gospel is preached." Luke 7:22. How,
indeed, can faith give life to the heart, unless that heart has been
previously put to death by sincere sorrow and a thorough knowledge of sin?
Do not, therefore, imagine that repentance is a slight and easy work.
Remember the solemn and severe language of the Apostle Paul, when he
commands us to mortify and crucify the flesh, with the affections and
lusts, to offer the body as a sacrifice, to die unto sin, to be crucified
unto the world. Col. 3:5; Rom. 6:6; 12:1; 1 Pet. 2:24; Gal. 5:24; 6:14.
Truly, none of these things can result, when we gratify the flesh. Nor do
the holy prophets employ cheerful terms when they call for a contrite and
broken heart, and say: "Rend your heart--weep and lament." Joel 2:13, 17;
Jer. 4:8. But where is such repentance now exhibited? The Lord Jesus
Christ, when alluding to it, demands that we should deny ourselves, and
renounce all that we have, if we desire to be his disciples. Luke 9:23;
Matt. 16:24. Verily, all this can never proceed from a gay, trifling, and
light mind; of this the evidence may be found in the seven Penitential
Psalms of David. The Scriptures abound in illustrations of the jealousy of
God, who demands both repentance and its fruits, without which eternal
salvation cannot be obtained. But afterwards the consolations of the
Gospel manifest their power. And both such repentance, and such
consolation, are solely the work of the Spirit of God, through the Word.

8. Now this Book which I have written, specially treats of such sincere
and earnest repentance of the heart, of the exhibition of faith in the
life and conduct, and of the spirit of love which should animate all the
acts of the Christian; for that which proceeds from Christian love, is, at
the same time, the fruit of faith. It is true that I have referred to some
earlier writers, such as Tauler, Thomas a Kempis, and others, who may seem
to ascribe more than is due to human ability and works; but my whole Book
is designed to counteract such an error. I would, therefore, kindly
request the Christian reader to remember the great object for which I
wrote this Book. He will find that its main purpose is this: To teach the
reader how to perceive the hidden and connate abomination of Original Sin;
to set forth distinctly our misery and helplessness; to teach us to put no
trust in ourselves or our ability; to take away everything from ourselves,
and to ascribe all to Christ, so that He alone may dwell in us, work all
things in us, alone live in us, and create all things in us, because he is
the beginning, middle, and end, of our conversion and salvation. All this
has been plainly and abundantly explained in many passages of this Book;
and, at the same time, the doctrines of the Papists, Synergists, and
Majorists, have been expressly refuted and rejected. The doctrine,
moreover, of justification by faith, has been set forth in this Book, and
especially in Book II., in the most pointed and explicit manner. In order,
however, to obviate all misapprehensions, I have subjected the present
edition to a very careful revision, and I beg the reader to receive the
editions which have appeared in Frankfort and other places, in the sense
in which the present Magdeburg edition is to be received. I also affirm,
that this Book, as well in all other articles and points, as also in the
articles of Free Will, and of the Justification of a poor sinner before
God, is not to be understood in any other manner than in accordance with
the Symbolical Books of the churches of the Augsburg Confession, namely,
the first UNALTERED AUGSBURG CONFESSION, the APOLOGY, the SMALCALD
ARTICLES, the TWO CATECHISMS of Luther, and the FORMULA OF CONCORD.

May God enlighten us all by his Holy Spirit, so that we may be sincere and
without offence, both in our faith and in our life, till the day of Christ
(which is near at hand), being filled with the fruits of righteousness,
unto the glory and praise of God! Amen.




Chapter I.


                 Showing What The Image Of God In Man Is.


    _Be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and ... put on the new
    man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
    holiness._--EPH. 4:23, 24.


The image of God in man, is the conformity of the soul of man, of his
spirit and mind, of his understanding and will, and of all his faculties
and powers, both bodily and mental, to God and the Holy Trinity. For the
decree of the Holy Trinity was thus expressed: "_Let us_ make man in our
image, after our likeness," etc. Gen., 1:26.

2. It is evident, therefore, that, when man was created, the image of the
Trinity was impressed on him, in order that the holiness, righteousness,
and goodness of God, might shine forth in his soul; diffuse abundant light
through his understanding, will, and affections; and visibly appear even
in his life and conversation: that, consequently, all his actions, both
inward and outward, might breathe nothing but divine love, purity, and
power, and, in short, that the life of man upon earth might resemble that
of the angels in heaven, who are always engaged in doing the will of their
Heavenly Father. In thus impressing his image on man, God designed to
delight and rejoice in him, just as a father rejoices in a child born
after his own image: for as a parent, beholding himself, or _another
self_, in his offspring, cannot but feel the greatest complacency and
delight; so, when God beheld the express character of his own Person
reflected in an image of himself, his "delights were with the sons of
men." Prov. 8:31. Thus it was God's chief pleasure to look on man, in whom
he rejoiced, and rested, as it were, from all his labor; considering him
as the great _masterpiece_ of his creation, and knowing that in the
perfect innocence and beauty of man, the excellency of his own glory would
be fully set forth. And this blessed communion our first parents and their
posterity were always to have enjoyed, had they continued in the likeness
of God, and rested in him and in his will; who, as he was their author,
was also to be their end.

3. It undoubtedly is the essential property of every image, that it be a
just representation of the object which it is intended to express; and as
the reflection in a mirror is vivid in a degree proportioned to the
clearness of the mirror itself, so the image of God becomes more or less
visible, according to the purity of the soul in which it is beheld.

4. Hence God originally created man perfectly pure and undefiled; that so
the divine image might be beheld in him, not as an empty, lifeless shadow
in a glass, but as a true and living image of the invisible God, and as
the likeness of his inward, hidden, and unutterable beauty. There was an
image of the wisdom of God, in the _understanding_ of man; of his
goodness, gentleness, and patience, in the _spirit_ of man; of his divine
love and mercy, in the _affections_ of man's heart. There was an image of
the righteousness and holiness, the justice and purity of God, in the
_will_ of man; of his kindness, clemency, and truth, in all the _words_
and _actions_ of man; of his almighty power, in man's _dominion_ over the
earth, and inferior creatures; and lastly, there was an image of God's
eternity, in the _immortality_ of the human soul.

5. From the divine image thus implanted in him, man should have acquired
the knowledge both of _God_ and of _himself_. Hence he might have learned,
that God, his Creator, is all in all, the Being of beings, and the chief
and only BEING, from whom all created beings derive their existence, and
in whom, and by whom, all things that are, subsist. Hence, also, he might
have known, that God, as the Original of man's nature, is all that
_essentially_, of which he himself was but the image and representation.
For since man was to bear the image of the divine goodness, it follows
that God is the sovereign and universal goodness _essentially_ (Matt.
19:17); and, consequently, that God is essential love, essential life, and
essential holiness, to whom alone (because he is all this _essentially_),
worship and praise, honor and glory, might, majesty, dominion, and virtue,
are to be ascribed: whereas these do not appertain to the creature, nor
belong to anything but God alone.

6. From this image of the Divine Being, man should further have acquired
the knowledge of _himself_. He should have considered what a vast
difference there was between God and himself. Man is not God, but God's
_image_; and the image of God ought to represent nothing but God. He is a
portraiture of the Divine Being; a character, an image, in which God alone
should be seen and glorified. Nothing therefore ought to live in man,
besides God. Nothing but the Divinity should stir, will, love, think,
speak, act, or rejoice in him. For if anything besides God live or work in
man, he ceases to be the image of God; and becomes the image of that which
thus lives and acts within him. If therefore a man would become, and
continue to be, the image of God, he must wholly surrender himself to the
Divine Being, and submit entirely to his will; he must suffer God to work
in him whatsoever he pleases; so that, by denying his own will, he may do
the will of his Heavenly Father without reserve, being entirely resigned
to God, and willing to become a holy instrument in his hands, to do his
will and his work. Such a man follows not his _own_ will, but the will of
God; he loves not himself, but God; seeks not his own honor, but the honor
of God. He covets no estates nor affluence for himself, but refers all to
the Supreme Good; and so being contented to possess him, rises above the
love of the creature and the world. And thus ought man to divest himself
of all love of himself and the world, that God alone may be all in him,
and work all in him, by his Holy Spirit. Herein consisted the perfect
innocence, purity, and holiness of man. For, what greater innocence can
there be, than that a man should do, not his own will, but the will of his
Heavenly Father? Or what greater purity, than that man should suffer God
to work in him, and to do everything according to His pleasure? Or, what
greater holiness, than to become an instrument in the hands of the Spirit
of God? To resemble a child, in whose breast self-love and self-honor do
not yet prevail, is, in truth, the highest simplicity.

7. Of this entire devotedness to the Divine will, our Lord Jesus Christ,
while he sojourned in our world, was a _perfect_ example. He sacrificed
his own will to God his Father, in blameless obedience, humility, and
meekness; readily depriving himself of all honor and esteem, of all
self-interest and self-love, of all pleasure and joy; and leaving God
alone, to think, speak, and act, in him, and by him. In short, he
invariably made the will and pleasure of God his own, as the Father
himself testified by a voice from Heaven: "This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased." Matt. 3:17. The Lord Jesus Christ, blessed forever, is
the true Image of God, in whom nothing appears but God himself, and such
manifestations as are agreeable to his nature; namely, love, mercy,
long-suffering, patience, meekness, gentleness, righteousness, holiness,
consolation, life, and everlasting blessedness: for by him, the invisible
God was willing to be discovered and made known to man. He is indeed the
image of God in a more sublime sense; that is, according to his
_Divinity_, by virtue of which, he is himself very God, the express and
essential image of his Father's glory, in the infinite splendor of the
uncreated light. Heb. 1:3. But of this point no more can at present be
said: our design being to speak of him only as he lived and conversed in
his holy _humanity_, while he tabernacled upon the earth.

8. It was in such a holy innocence as this, that the image of God was, in
the beginning, conferred on Adam, which he should have preserved in true
humility and obedience. Sufficient it surely was for him, that he was made
capable of all the benefits of the divine image; of sincere and unmixed
love and delight; of undisturbed and solid tranquillity of mind; of power,
fortitude, peace, light, and life. But not duly reflecting that he himself
was not the _chief good_, but merely a mirror of the Godhead, formed
purposely to receive the reflection of the divine nature, he erected
himself into a _God_; and thus choosing to be the highest _good_ to
himself, he was precipitated into the greatest of all evils, being
deprived of this inestimable image, and alienated from that communion with
God, which, by virtue of it, he before enjoyed.

9. Had self-will, self-love, and self-honor, been excluded, the image of
God could not have departed from man; but the Divine Being would have
continued to be his sole glory, honor, and praise. As everything is
capable of its like and not of its contrary, and in its like acquiesces
and delights, so man, being in the similitude of God, was thereby prepared
to receive God into himself, who was also ready to communicate himself to
man, with all the treasures of his goodness; goodness being of all things
the most communicative of itself.

10. Finally, man ought to have learned from the image of God, that by
means of it he is united to God; and that in this union, his true and
everlasting tranquillity, his rest, peace, joy, life, and happiness alone
consist. He should have learned that all restlessness of mind and vexation
of spirit, arise from nothing but a breach of this union, by which he
ceases to be the image of God; for man no sooner turns to the creature,
than he is deprived of that eternal good which is to be derived from God
alone.




Chapter II.


                           Of The Fall Of Adam.


    _As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
    obedience of one shall many be made righteous._--ROM. 5:19.


The fall of Adam was disobedience to God, by which man turned away from
the Divine Being to himself, and robbed God of the honor due to him alone,
in that he _himself_ thought to be _as God_. But while he thus labored to
advance himself, he was stripped of that divine image, which the Creator
had so freely conferred on him; divested of hereditary righteousness; and
bereaved of that holiness with which he was originally adorned; becoming,
as it regards his _understanding_, dark and blind; as to his _will_,
stubborn and perverse; and as to all the powers and faculties of the soul,
entirely alienated from God. This evil has infected the whole mass of
mankind, by means of a fleshly generation; and has been inherited by all
men. The obvious consequence arising from this is, that man is become
spiritually dead and the child of wrath and damnation, until redeemed from
this miserable state by Jesus Christ. Let not then any who are called
Christians deceive themselves with regard to Adam's fall. Let them be
cautious, how they attempt to extenuate or lessen the transgression of
Adam, as though it were a small sin, a thing of little consequence, and,
at the worst, but the eating of an apple. Let them rather be assured, that
the guilt of Adam was that of Lucifer, namely, _he would be as God_: and
that it was the same most grievous, heinous, and hateful sin in both.

2. This apostasy (for it was nothing less), was, at first, generated in
the heart, and then made manifest by the eating of the forbidden fruit.
Though man was numbered with the sons of God; though he came forth from
the hands of the Almighty spotless both in body and in soul, and was the
most glorious object in the creation; though, to crown all, he was not
only a son, but the _delight_ of God; yet not knowing how to rest
satisfied with these high privileges, he attempted to invade Heaven, that
he might be yet higher; and nothing less would suffice him, than to exalt
himself like unto God. Hence, he conceived in his heart enmity and hatred
against the Divine Being, his Creator and Father, whom, had it been in his
power, he was disposed utterly to undo. Who could commit a sin more
detestable than this? or what greater abomination is there, that it was
possible to meditate?

3. Hence it was, that man became inwardly like Satan himself, bearing his
likeness in the heart; since both had now committed the same sin, both
having rebelled against the majesty of Heaven. Man no more exhibits an
image of God, but rather that of the Devil; he no longer is an instrument
in the hands of God, but is become an organ of Satan, and is thereby
rendered capable of every species of diabolical wickedness: so that,
having lost that image which was heavenly, spiritual, and divine, he is
altogether earthly, sensual, and brutish. For the devil, designing to
imprint his own image upon man, fascinated him so entirely by a train of
enticing and deceitful words, that man permitted him to sow that hateful
seed in his soul, which is hence termed the seed of the serpent; and by
which is chiefly meant, self-love, self-will, and the ambition of being as
God. On this account it is, that the Scriptures term those who are
intoxicated with self-love, "a generation of vipers." Matt. 3:7. And all
those who are of a proud and devilish nature, "the seed (progeny) of the
serpent." So the Almighty, addressing the serpent, says, "I will put
enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed."
Gen. 3:15.

4. From this seed of the serpent nothing but deadly and horrible fruit can
possibly proceed; namely, Satan's image, the children of Belial, the
children of the devil. John 8:44. As in every natural seed, how minute
soever it may be, are contained, in a most wonderful and hidden manner,
the nature and properties of the future plant, all its parts and
proportions, its branches, leaves, and flowers, in miniature; so in that
seed of the serpent, Adam's self-love and disobedience (which has passed
unto all his posterity by a fleshly generation), there lies, as it were in
embryo, the tree of death, with its branches, leaves, and flowers, and
those innumerable fruits of unrighteousness which grow upon it. In short,
the whole image of Satan is secretly traced out there, with all its marks,
characters, and properties.
