The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Light Princess, by George MacDonald

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Light Princess

Author: George MacDonald

Posting Date: July 26, 2008 [EBook #697]
Release Date: October, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIGHT PRINCESS ***




Produced by Jo Churcher.  HTML version by Al Haines.








THE LIGHT PRINCESS


by

GEORGE MACDONALD



Contents

   1.  What! No Children?
   2.  Won't I, Just?
   3.  She Can't Be Ours.
   4.  Where Is She?
   5.  What Is to Be Done?
   6.  She Laughs Too Much.
   7.  Try Metaphysics.
   8.  Try a Drop of Water.
   9.  Put Me in Again.
  10.  Look at the Moon.
  11.  Hiss!
  12.  Where Is the Prince?
  13.  Here I Am.
  14.  This Is Very Kind of You.
  15.  Look at the Rain!




1.  What! No Children?


Once upon a time, so long ago that I have quite forgotten the date,
there lived a king and queen who had no children.

And the king said to himself, "All the queens of my acquaintance have
children, some three, some seven, and some as many as twelve; and my
queen has not one.  I feel ill-used."  So he made up his mind to be
cross with his wife about it.  But she bore it all like a good patient
queen as she was.  Then the king grew very cross indeed.  But the queen
pretended to take it all as a joke, and a very good one too.

"Why don't you have any daughters, at least?" said he.  "I don't say
sons; that might be too much to expect."

"I am sure, dear king, I am very sorry," said the queen.

"So you ought to be," retorted the king; "you are not going to make a
virtue of that, surely."

But he was not an ill-tempered king, and in any matter of less moment
would have let the queen have her own way with all his heart.  This,
however, was an affair of state.

The queen smiled.

"You must have patience with a lady, you know, dear king," said she.

She was, indeed, a very nice queen, and heartily sorry that she could
not oblige the king immediately.



2.  Won't I, Just?

The king tried to have patience, but he succeeded very badly.  It was
more than he deserved, therefore, when, at last, the queen gave him a
daughter--as lovely a little princess as ever cried.

The day drew near when the infant must be christened.  The king wrote
all the invitations with his own hand.  Of course somebody was
forgotten.  Now it does not generally matter if somebody is forgotten,
only you must mind who.  Unfortunately, the king forgot without
intending to forget; and so the chance fell upon the Princess
Makemnoit, which was awkward.  For the princess was the king's own
sister; and he ought not to have forgotten her.  But she had made
herself so disagreeable to the old king, their father, that he had
forgotten her in making his will; and so it was no wonder that her
brother forgot her in writing his invitations.  But poor relations
don't do anything to keep you in mind of them.  Why don't they?  The
king could not see into the garret she lived in, could he?

She was a sour, spiteful creature.  The wrinkles of contempt crossed
the wrinkles of peevishness, and made her face as full of wrinkles as a
pat of butter.  If ever a king could be justified in forgetting
anybody, this king was justified in forgetting his sister, even at a
christening.  She looked very odd, too.  Her forehead was as large as
all the rest of her face, and projected over it like a precipice.  When
she was angry, her little eyes flashed blue.  When she hated anybody,
they shone yellow and green.  What they looked like when she loved
anybody, I do not know; for I never heard of her loving anybody but
herself, and I do not think she could have managed that if she had not
somehow got used to herself.  But what made it highly imprudent in the
king to forget her was that she was awfully clever.  In fact, she was a
witch; and when she bewitched anybody, he very soon had enough of it;
for she beat all the wicked fairies in wickedness, and all the clever
ones in cleverness.  She despised all the modes we read of in history,
in which offended fairies and witches have taken their revenges; and
therefore, after waiting and waiting in vain for an invitation, she
made up her mind at last to go without one, and make the whole family
miserable, like a princess as she was.

So she put on her best gown, went to the palace, was kindly received by
the happy monarch, who forgot that he had forgotten her, and took her
place in the procession to the royal chapel.  When they were all
gathered about the font, she contrived to get next to it, and throw
something into the water; after which she maintained a very respectful
demeanour till the water was applied to the child's face.  But at that
moment she turned round in her place three times, and muttered the
following words, loud enough for those beside her to hear:--

  "Light of spirit, by my charms,
  Light of body, every part,
  Never weary human arms--
  Only crush thy parents' heart!"


They all thought she had lost her wits, and was repeating some foolish
nursery rhyme; but a shudder went through the whole of them
notwithstanding.  The baby, on the contrary, began to laugh and crow;
while the nurse gave a start and a smothered cry, for she thought she
was struck with paralysis: she could not feel the baby in her arms.
But she clasped it tight and said nothing.  The mischief was done.



3.  She Can't Be Ours.

Her atrocious aunt had deprived the child of all her gravity.  If you
ask me how this was effected, I answer, "In the easiest way in the
world.  She had only to destroy gravitation."  For the princess was a
philosopher, and knew all the ins and outs of the laws of gravitation
as well as the ins and outs of her boot-lace.  And being a witch as
well, she could abrogate those laws in a moment; or at least so clog
their wheels and rust their bearings, that they would not work at all.
But we have more to do with what followed than with how it was done.

The first awkwardness that resulted from this unhappy privation was,
that the moment the nurse began to float the baby up and down, she flew
from her arms towards the ceiling.  Happily, the resistance of the air
brought her ascending career to a close within a foot of it.  There she
remained, horizontal as when she left her nurse's arms, kicking and
laughing amazingly.  The nurse in terror flew to the bell, and begged
the footman, who answered it, to bring up the house-steps directly.
Trembling in every limb, she climbed upon the steps, and had to stand
upon the very top, and reach up, before she could catch the floating
tail of the baby's long clothes.

When the strange fact came to be known, there was a terrible commotion
in the palace.  The occasion of its discovery by the king was naturally
a repetition of the nurse's experience.  Astonished that he felt no
weight when the child was laid in his arms, he began to wave her up and
not down, for she slowly ascended to the ceiling as before, and there
remained floating in perfect comfort and satisfaction, as was testified
by her peals of tiny laughter.  The king stood staring up in speechless
amazement, and trembled so that his beard shook like grass in the wind.
At last, turning to the queen, who was just as horror-struck as
himself, he said, gasping, staring, and stammering,--

"She can't be ours, queen!"

Now the queen was much cleverer than the king, and had begun already to
suspect that "this effect defective came by cause."

"I am sure she is ours," answered she.  "But we ought to have taken
better care of her at the christening.  People who were never invited
ought not to have been present."

"Oh, ho!" said the king, tapping his forehead with his forefinger, "I
have it all.  I've found her out.  Don't you see it, queen?  Princess
Makemnoit has bewitched her." "That's just what I say," answered the
queen.

"I beg your pardon, my love; I did not hear you.--John! bring the steps
I get on my throne with."

For he was a little king with a great throne, like many other kings.

The throne-steps were brought, and set upon the dining-table, and John
got upon the top of them.  But he could not reach the little princess,
who lay like a baby-laughter-cloud in the air, exploding continuously.
"Take the tongs, John," said his Majesty; and getting up on the table,
he handed them to him.

