before he could make another move, Professor Prescott gasped out:

"The Cossacks! Quick!"

And jumping down, he wheeled to face the two leering Russians, not
forty feet down the road. Pistols levelled, they were advancing
stolidly.

Stoddard half-raised his own weapon, then turned to see if the car was
within range of the return fire it would bring. It was--but not for
long.

With a furious chattering of bands, as Henry gave it the gas, the
decrepit vehicle gained the top of the hill and disappeared from view
down the far slope, and the last thing he saw of it was a dusty plate
flapping under its tail-light.

It was a Texas license!

Then, turning back, he lifted his automatic; but it was too late. The
Cossacks were on them.

In answer to a guttural command, he dropped the weapon and raised his
hands, as the professor had already done.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later, they were back at the rocket.

Led into the shack--which was furnished inside like an Oriental
hunting-lodge--they were confronted at once by Prince Krassnov.

Though his aristocratic features were immobile, it was obvious that he
was in no amiable frame of mind.

"So, my friends!" he exclaimed. "I leave you in India, and meet you
again in America, all within a matter of hours. It is but an example
of our modern progress, is it not?"

They made no reply.

"Ha! You are not sociable, after enjoying my hospitality, my
transportation? Then suppose we--as you Americans so quaintly
say--call a spade a spade! I gave you your chance. You declined it.
And what is the result? My beautiful Diamond Thunderbolt, my
immeasurable treasure, is buried forever."

"Through no fault of ours!" put in Stoddard.

"But buried nevertheless, and my adopted kingdom in revolt. Yet do not
think I mourn too much, my friends. Though the game is what you call
up, my plans shall go on. Here and elsewhere in the world, where we
have sub-headquarters, are billions of dollars' worth of
diamonds--supplies for years ahead. We shall not suffer. But
you--Professor Prescott and Doctor Stoddard--I have a very interesting
fate in store for you. How would you care to make a little scientific
expedition to Mars, say?"

"Mars?" gasped the professor.

"Yes, or Venus, or even Jupiter, not to mention the moon! Or how about
the sun? That would be an interesting sphere for exploration."

"We don't know what you're talking about," said Stoddard growing
nettled. "Why mince matters? Call a spade a spade, if you're going to!
What do you propose to do with us, now that you have us in your
power?"

The prince paused, drew forth a long Russian cigarette from an
exquisite platinum case.

"I propose," he smiled, when he had lit it, "to turn over my rocket to
you, my fellow scientists, since I shall have no further use for it
and it might be embarrassing to be found with it in my possession."

And the way he proposed to turn it over to them, as they had already
suspected, was to lock them in it and fire it off into space.

       *       *       *       *       *

Within the hour, the man's diabolical plan had been put into
operation.

Led to the rocket, the luckless pair were locked within a small metal
room somewhere within its recesses. There sounded again the peculiar
rasping that told them its doors were being sealed. And then came the
roar of that mighty exhaust beating down.

There followed the lifting, rushing sensation they had experienced
before, and again they were flung violently to the flooring by the
force of the upward impulse.

When the pressure slacked, they staggered to their feet and groped
around the dark, stuffy little room.

"Well, this is the end, I guess," sighed Professor Prescott. "I had
never thought," with a grim attempt at humor, "that I would meet quite
such a scientific fate as this!"

"Nor had I!" Stoddard agreed. "But I'm not quite ready to cash in my
checks yet. The game isn't over!" He was pacing around the room,
knocking on the metal walls with something that gave back a strident
ring. "Have you any idea what composition this stuff is?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The professor rapped on one of the panels; felt of it.

"Aluminum, I would say."

"Nothing so lucky! If it were, I could cut it like cheese. But
duralumin, probably, a very light, strong alloy; and what I have here
is a hunting knife with a can-opener on one end! If I'm not mistaken,
we'll be out of this sardine box before long."

Whereupon he applied himself to the thin metal wall of their cell,
working determinedly, while Professor Prescott held his cigarette
lighter for a torch.

"You see, duralumin yields to heat, like aluminum," he exclaimed, as
finally his knife thrust through. "Now then, let's get the can opener
working."

The progress was slow but sure. Within an hour, he had cut out a
jagged section some two feet square, through which they squeezed into
an equally dark corridor.

"Now then!" Stoddard's mood was exultant. "There must be switches
around here somewhere. There were lights, I remember, so let's find
them. Once we get a little light on the subject--"

"Here!" called the professor, who had groped down the corridor with
the cigarette lighter. "How's that?"

As he pressed a switch, a row of small bulbs glowed overhead.

"Fine!" was the answer. "Now let's see if we can find the engine-room,
or whatever they call it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jubilant now, they continued on down the corridor, which ended in a
flight of stairs.

"I fancy it must be below," said Professor Prescott. "From what I have
seen of experimental models, the propulsion impulse must originate
from the base."

So they descended the stairs, entered another dark corridor, found
another switch and pressed it, and thus they proceeded, lighting the
interior of the rocket as they went. And as they descended, the roar
of the exhaust increased in volume, indicating that they were nearing
its source.

Presently they entered a large, circular room with an illuminated dial
at the far end. Drawing near, they saw a confusion of instruments that
for a moment left them dazed.

While Stoddard studied them in bewilderment, Prescott circled the room
till he found a switch. Pressing it, he produced a brilliant flood of
illumination.

"Now then, let me have a look at this," he said, returning to the
dial. "Professor Goddard once explained to me the workings of one of
his experimental models. The motive force must be some liquefied
mixture, possibly oxygen and hydrogen. Some of these instruments--most
of them, in fact--must be valves."

He touched one, turned it, and the rocket responded with a sickening
burst of speed.

"No, that won't do! We're going plenty fast enough now!"

He touched another, and they slacked off dizzyingly.

"Well, there are two controls, anyway. Now then, how do they steer
this thing? That is the next problem we must solve."

But though he touched this instrument and that, producing weird
effects, their course continued in the direction set. And meanwhile,
they were hurtling outward through space at a rate of speed he knew
would presently carry them beyond the gravitational pull of the earth.

Then, as he grasped and swung down a curious lever that worked in a
quadrant, they felt a violent lunge to the left, and for a moment it
seemed they would shoot to the ceiling.

"Good God!" gasped Stoddard. "What's happened?"

"Nothing--only that I've found how to steer this wild steed!" cried
the professor, exultantly.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was really quite simple, he explained, as he eased up on the lever.
In application, it was a development of the gyroscope principle, that
a wheel revolving freely within a freely suspended frame tends to make
the frame revolve in the other direction.

"You see, the rocket is the freely suspended frame," he went on,
"while this lever controls a gyroscopic wheel somewhere. To set it
spinning to the right causes us to turn to the left, and vice versa."

"But you almost stood us on our heads, a moment ago! How did that
happen?"

"Simply because I threw the lever too far to the right. We are in
interstellar space, obviously, where every change of direction
involves an adjustment of equilibrium."

And if Stoddard didn't exactly understand, being first a secret
service man and only secondarily a scientist, at least he showed his
ignorance no further. If the professor could bring this astounding
machine back to Earth, that was all he wanted.

Prescott said he could, he thought, providing they had fuel enough
left. So for the next few minutes, while the younger man held his
breath, the professor labored with the various instruments on that
complicated dial.

"Now then, I think we're headed back," he said at length, relaxing.
"But we've got to have visibility, otherwise we will land with a
velocity of about twenty thousand miles an hour, which is what I
figure we're making at the present time."

"Good Lord!" gasped Stoddard. "I'll say we've got to have visibility!
Wait a minute! Let me look around!"

He searched the room for further instruments--to find nothing that in
any way met the purpose.

But even as he returned dejected, the professor cried out:

"Here--I've got it! Take a look at this!"

Bending over a small table beside the dial, Stoddard saw mirrored, in
its ground-glass surface a hazy circular panorama that at first had no
significance. But as he continued to peer down upon the scene, certain
familiar aspects loomed out. It was the Earth--and what he was looking
at was a view of the North and South American continents!

       *       *       *       *       *

For some moments Stoddard stared at this amazing panorama in silence;
saw it grow rapidly clearer, as the careening rocket plunged like a
giant shell toward the earth.

"My God!" he whispered at length in awe. "Do you think you can ever
check our speed?"

"I think so," the professor replied, busy over his instruments. "But
where do we want to land? How do we know what state we were in?"

Whereupon Stoddard told him of that Texas license plate.

"But we don't want to land anywhere near that fiend Krassnov," he
added, with a shudder. "I suggest, if it's possible, that you pick out
some aerodrome, preferably in the western part of the state--for if I
remember my geography, Texas isn't mountainous in the east."

"I will do the best I can," said Prescott, grimly.

There followed tense minutes as the panorama in that ground-glass
narrowed and grew more intense. Now they could see only North America,
now only the United States and a portion of Mexico, and now only
Texas.

"Back--_back!_" cried Stoddard, as the rugged land loomed up, spread
into a panorama of towns and ranches. "We're descending too fast!
We're bound to crash, unless--"

But already the professor had touched the ascending valve and swung
the steering lever.

Up they zoomed again. Once more a portion of Mexico was visible on the
glass, and along the international border now they could see a winding
thread of silver.

"The Rio Grande!" exclaimed the young geologist. "Just follow it up
toward its source till we come to El Paso. There'll be a landing-field
there."

"Yes, undoubtedly." The professor was working in abstraction over the
unfamiliar controls. "Now if I can just hold us on our course...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He succeeded, and presently a white city gleamed over the curving rim
of the horizon to the northwest, the tall chimneys of its smelters
throwing long shadows from the lowering sun beyond.

In a minute or two they were over it, at a height of perhaps twelve
miles--and now, as they began descending, its patchwork of buildings
and plazas unfolded like some great quilt below.

"There's the field!" cried Stoddard, pointing in the glass to a wide
clear space on the outskirts. "Can you make it, do you think?"

"We'll know soon!" was the grim answer, as Prescott worked frantically
now with his valves and levers. "It's a matter of balancing off our
flow of gases, of holding up buoyancy to the very last. A little too
much, or not enough, and--"

Breathlessly, as they descended, Stoddard peered into the glass. Now a
scene of excitement was visible below. Figures could be seen gazing
up, waving their arms, running about this way and that.

"They must think they're getting a visit from another planet," said
Stoddard. "Or that the end of the world has come!"

"Maybe it has, for us!" agreed the professor, gravely. "I'm afraid
we're going to crash. I can't seem to--"

Whatever he was going to add was lost in a sudden, rending concussion
that flung them violently down, and plunged the room into darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Staggering to his feet a moment later, bruised and shaken, Stoddard
gasped out:

"Professor are you there? Are you all right?"

A groan answered him, and for a moment his heart sank, but then came
the reassuring call:

"Yes--all right, I guess. And you?"

"O.K. Let's get out of here, quick!"

An ominous hissing sound beat on their ears, as they groped their way
toward the door. Evidently escaping gases from the deranged mechanism,
thought Stoddard. The floor rose at an angle, indicating that the
rocket was half over on its side.

They found the door, and struggled along the twisted corridor toward a
flight of stairs that would lead below; found it, descended, and
groped along another dark corridor, seeking an exit; when suddenly,
around a bend, daylight confronted them, and to their joy they saw
that one of the main doors had been burst open by the impact.

Approaching it, they peered out--to be greeted by an awed group of
officials and mechanics from the field.

As they climbed through, dropped to the ground, the group retreated,
taking no chances.

"Back!" called Professor Prescott, warning and reassuring them with a
word. Then, turning to his companion: "Come on, Jack--run! This thing
is likely to explode at any moment."
