
He had wondered about the air, but he found that it seeped through
from that central shaft, although Loah told him that in some deeper
passages the air was bad. Here, although it was moving gently, it
seemed wet as if charged with moisture. Rawson, staring upward, felt a
drop strike him in the face, dripping from the rocks above.

"It's a gamble," he said, "just a gamble. But the stakes are worth
while. And now, Loah-San, we will return."

       *       *       *       *       *

He made crude work with the flame-throwers at first but finally he got
the knack, and the mouth of the tunnel beyond the big room was sealed.
Then, with the help of Loah and some few of the others, he brought in
more and more weapons of the Reds. He was curious as to their
construction, but his curiosity had to go unsatisfied. They were only
cylinders, so far as he could see, cylinders a foot long and six
inches through, of some metal with the dull lustre of aluminum. But
they were sealed, and he dared not cut one open with another
flame-thrower for fear of what might come forth.

On the top of each cylinder a tube was connected that ended in a lava
tip; but at the base of the tube, where it joined the cylinder, was a
sliding sleeve that checked the flame to nothing when it was moved, or
opened it to the full blast.

He had a hundred of them in the room when at last he was through--one
hundred fearful instruments of destruction. And still he told no one
of his plans; he only told Gor what he wanted done later on. "It may
not work," he had to admit to himself. "I'm just guessing at the
thickness of the rock and the power of these machines. It's a gamble,
nothing but a gamble."

He arranged the flame-throwers in a circle along the outer wall. The
tops of the cylinders were curved, but the bottoms were flat and they
set solidly on the rock. But he tipped them backward and braced them
firmly with fragments of stone until every crooked-neck tube was
pointed upward and toward the center. Finally he was done.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was only a matter of a few hours later when Rawson stood on the
island's end by the mouth of the shaft. In his ears was the ceaseless
rush of the air as it entered the pit; it was the only sound in a
silent world. And for the first time there came overwhelmingly upon
him a realization of what this moment meant.

The time had come. Loah was beside him, her lovely eyes unnaturally
bright in her face from which all the blood seemed to have flowed. He
felt the slight trembling of her body as she pressed against him; he
knew she was struggling to keep back the tears. Then Rawson half
turned with one final entreaty that she let him go alone; but he left
the words unsaid--he had argued it several times before.

Before them stood Gor, then the Wise Ones, the Servants of the
Mountain, deserting their post for the first time since the Mountain
had been given a voice. Beyond them all the people of this little
world were gathered.

It had seemed only a fanciful dream, this thought of going; in fact,
he had been too busy, too pressed with his own preparations, to give
it thought. Now he was learning to his own surprise how closely he had
identified himself with this world and its people. It had given him
Loah; it had been a haven, a sanctuary.

He let his eyes slowly take in the full splendor of that emerald sea,
the shining land under a green-gold sun, the Mountain in white,
crystal purity against a green-blue sky. And he was leaving it, he and
Loah; they were going to--death!

       *       *       *       *       *

"You will remember," he said to Gor. His voice sounded dull and heavy;
it hardly seemed himself who was speaking. "You know the day and the
hour. This is the nineteenth. It is now noon--twelve o'clock in my
world. When the Voice of the Mountain says that noon again has come
you will do as I said."

"The Mountain speaks without ceasing now," said Gor, "telling always
of what the Red Ones do. We will count the hours as they pass. In
twenty-four of those hours Gor will descend in the _jana_ of the Reds
to do as Dean Rah-Sun has commanded."

Rawson held out his hand. He was suddenly wordless. Then Loah threw
herself into Gor's arms in one last passionate embrace--but it was she
who entered the _jana_ first.

"Come," she said to Dean. "Oh, come quickly, Dean-San!" Then he, too
stepped inside and made the heavy door fast.

Men of the White Ones had been holding the big cylinder down. But
Rawson, staring through the window, saw that it was Gor's own hands
that swung them out at last above the pit.

Their craft hung quivering for an instant in the rushing air; then
Loah moved one of the levers a trifle and the blackness took them, and
only the little bull's-eyes in the metal ceiling showed the fading
glow of the Inner World, the home of the People of the Light, which
their eyes never again would see.




CHAPTER XXIV

_The Bargain_


Rawson had taken one flame-thrower with him. He tied it securely
inside the shell so it could not shift with the changing gravity, or
be accidentally turned on. Again he clung to the curved bar against
the wall. Loah stood at the center, directing the craft.

Once again he floated in air, then found himself standing on what had
been the ceiling of the room. The girl had released a considerable
quantity of the lifting element in the _jana's_ end, and now the black
powder in the other end of the central tube was dragging them at
terrific speed as it rushed away from the earth's center.

Over six hundred miles, Rawson had figured, from that inner surface to
the neutral zone where the red substance of the earth, that was
neither rock nor metal, under terrific pressures, glowed with fervent
heat or formed pools like the Lake of Fire.

Perhaps a hundred miles thick, that zone of incessant energy, and
their little craft tore through it at tremendous speed. Even so, he
was gasping for breath in the heated room when the glow faded and
again he swung over and down upon the floor as Loah checked the speed
of the flying projectile and the little ship crept slowly up into the
room where first he had seen it.

The first that he noticed was the absence of the roar. The _jana_
drifted slowly to one side, and Loah let it come to rest upon the
floor. Staring from the open door, Rawson saw the same familiar red
walls and floor and the black opening of the shaft from which they had
come. But the reverberating roar of the great organ-pipe was gone. He
knew that the air, for the greater part, was driving on past through
the upper shaft that was now open. The way was clear for them to
ascend. He turned to the girl.

       *       *       *       *       *

"If my figures are right, it's some thirteen hundred miles from here
on. How did you get up there before?"

Loah pointed to the passage where the _jana_, on that other excursion,
had been hidden. "We went through there," she said, "taking the _jana_
with us. We went up many miles through a great crack, but it was not
straight; we had to go carefully till another passage opened through
to the shaft far above where it was sealed."

"And the mole-men never found it?"

"Oh, yes," said Loah, "they must have known of the crack, but they did
not know where it led. Its air was bad--a gas that choked; one could
not breathe it and live. But in our little _jana_ we were safe. They
could not use theirs; it was too large. Besides, only the priests came
down. They had their Lake of Fire, where they did horrible things.
They did not know that the shaft began again below."

"O. K.," said Rawson, and closed the door.

"But I wish to get out," Loah protested, "to gather more of the Oro.
We may need more, should we return."

"We will never need it," Rawson spoke softly. "From the time we left
Gor we had just twenty-four hours to live. We must go on, and go
fast."

       *       *       *       *       *

They had no way of measuring time, and Rawson could only guess at the
hours that passed while their little ship tore swiftly upward through
the dark. He wondered if the occasional shrill shriek that followed
the touching of their metal guides on the glassy walls could be heard
up above.

Then, at last, Loah was driving the _jana_ slowly while she held her
light so it would shine through a window. Rawson had to restrain
himself to keep from pacing the little room like a caged animal while
the precious minutes slipped by. Now that the enemy was near he wanted
nothing but to drive on up to the end of the shaft, come out into that
world wherever the shaft ended, then try to fight his way through to
the great hall where he hoped to find Phee-e-al. And his haste made
him overestimate the passing time; their journey had been swifter than
he knew.

"I may have passed it," Loah was saying doubtfully. "I may have come
too far." Then she interrupted herself and sprang to the controls.

They drifted slowly back. "It is different now," Loah said; "the air
rises more swiftly than before." She stared from the windows while she
drove the _jana_ slowly up and down, trying to bring it to equilibrium
in the strong up-draft.

The air entered the shell through a little opening with the same
pungent tang Rawson had noticed before. He had wondered about the air.
Down near the neutral zone it was dense, yet he had not minded the
pressure too greatly--and that had been puzzling.

"Rock pressure and air pressure," he had reasoned; "they are two
different things. If the rock flowed, any air that it trapped would be
squeezed to a liquid. But it doesn't flow--that red stuff is solid; so
the air pressure is only the weight of the air column itself. But even
that should be enormous."

He could only conclude that the lessened pressure came from that
strange counter-gravitation, the repelling force from the center of
the earth. Perhaps it tended to dissipate the molecules, held them
farther apart, prevented their squeezing in together, and battering
with a thousand little impacts on a point where one had hit before.

Their _jana_ swayed gently as if the smooth air currents were
disturbed and were drifting them sideways; and then, at last, Loah,
peering from a window, sprang back and moved a lever. Beneath them was
the softly-cushioned thud of the shell seating itself on firm rock.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were in another of the interminable caves, Rawson found when he
opened the door. The _jana_ was resting a few feet in from the edge of
the shaft. Cautiously they got out, but even without their weight it
had a slight negative buoyancy.

"Oro is pulling more strongly than Grah," Dean said, and smiled.
Already the names seemed familiar to him.

The two lifted the _jana_ and carried it back some twenty feet more
before Rawson realized how unnecessary this was.

"We'll never be using it again," he said. "If I've guessed right it
will stay here as long as the rocks; if not--but we'll never know the
difference anyway."

He took the flame-thrower from the car in sudden haste. "Quick,
dear," he told Loah. "God knows when the end will come. Quick, show me
the way."

Loah knew every step of the route that took them on and upward through
a maze of twisting passages, and Rawson marveled at her sense of
direction. She flashed her light at times--the little bar of metal
that had in one hollow end a substance which absorbed the light-energy
of the Central Sun. Rawson knew how it worked. Even the lights in the
mountain room were taken out from time to time and exposed to the
sunlight that brought them back into glowing life. He had seen similar
phenomena on earth. But, for the most part, Loah kept the little metal
cap in place on the end of her torch, and they moved cautiously
through the dark.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sounds of the Red Ones came to them at times. And once they hid in a
narrow branching cleft that came abruptly to a dead end, while a force
of red warriors marched hurriedly through the passage they had just
left. Back in their hiding place Rawson stood tense and ready, with
his weapon till the last of the enemy was gone.

Always he was frantic at thought of the time that was slipping
past--until, at last, the narrow passage that they followed cut
transversely through another large runway that glowed faintly from
some distant light.

With that first gleam of light there came over Dean Rawson an odd
change. Something within him had been cold with fear. Fear of the
flying minutes. Fear that Loah might have lost her way in this tangled
labyrinth of winding ways. And now, suddenly, he was care-free, filled
with an absurd joy. Nothing mattered. They were to die, but what of
that? Loah had chosen death; he would see that when it came to her,
it would be quickly and without pain. And as for himself, if before he
died he could remove this ruler of an enemy race....

So when Loah leaned close and whispered, "The light--it shines from
the council room of Phee-e-al," Dean replied almost gaily; "I've got
to hand it to you--you sure do know all the back alleys." Then he
stuck his head cautiously out into the dimly-lighted corridor.

It was broad. He saw where their own little passageway went on from
the opposite side. But the light--the light! At his left, not a
hundred steps away, was a room, brilliantly lighted. And across it, in
gleaming splendor, stretched a low wall--a barrier of gold. It was the
council room, where once before he had faced Phee-e-al in all that
savage's hideous splendor.

       *       *       *       *       *

He listened. All was silent. Then Loah whispered: "Phee-e-al comes
this way when he goes to the council room. But when he comes, or how
often, I do not know."

Dean pressed her back into the narrow way with his hands. "Wait here!"
he said, and gave her the flame-thrower. "I've an idea!" He stepped
softly out into the broad passage and on naked, noiseless feet, moved
swiftly toward the lighted room.

It was empty. Beyond the barrier were no red figures, nor were there
whistling voices to echo as he had heard them before. Here was the
throne where Phee-e-al had sat; here the priests had stood; there,
along the wall, were the chests.

Fully twenty of them, each eight feet long, they stood ranged along
the three walls of that part of the room protected by the barrier. No
two of them alike; all of them were oddly carved and studded with
jewels.

The chests were ranged in a straight row a foot or more out from the
wall. He crossed to them swiftly. About here was where that priest
must have gone. He raised one of the heavy lids till the light struck
within.

Bones! Only fragments of a skeleton, blackened by age; a necklace of
teeth from some animal's jaw; worthless trifles for the mummery of the
priests. Then, beneath them, he saw two great fangs, a foot in length.
They were curved, sharply pointed and yellow as old ivory.

What was it Gor had said of legends that told of ancestors coming from
the outer world? Rawson knew that he was looking at priceless relics
of the tribe, at the tusks of man's long extinct enemy, the great
sabre-toothed tiger.

       *       *       *       *       *

But he had neither time nor thoughts to spare for marvels new or
old--he must find his gun. Yet, even then, he wondered what
undreamed-of treasures the other chests might hold--what jewels, what
paraphernalia of ancient kings.

He must be silent! Perhaps the next great glittering container might
hold the blue gleam of his gun. And this time as the gem-studded lid
was swung upward and back to rest noiselessly against the rock wall,
Dean could not repress the audible gasp that came to his lips.

His own pistol! He had expected to find the one weapon, but, instead,
the chest was filled with all it would hold of rifles and side arms
and cartridge belts, all mingled in one indiscriminate heap.

They were twisted, some of them, and bent; discolored, too, evidently
by flames. On some the stocks had been burned off.

Rawson's hands were suddenly trembling. There was one rifle that
seemed unharmed; he brought it out, and hardly heard the little
clatter that it made among the other weapons. An ammunition belt--he
slipped out a clip of cartridges, made sure they fitted his gun, and
threw one up into the firing chamber. He was fumbling for more of the
clips when there pierced through his tumultuous thoughts the
realization that he was hearing sounds not made by his own suddenly
clumsy hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

Marching feet, whistling voices--they came from beyond the room's
farther end, beyond the entrance through which he had once been
brought a captive. He took one step back toward the broad tunnel, then
knew there were others coming there.

There was no possible avenue of escape. He threw himself in one wild
dive into the narrow space between the chests and the wall, and pulled
himself forward under the shelter of the one back-turned lid. The
rifle was still gripped in his hands.

By the sounds that came to him, he knew that the outer room had filled
with red warriors, and that another smaller group had come scuffing
from the passage where he had just entered. And, by the echoing cry of
shrill voices that shouted, "Phee-e-al! Phee-e-al!" he knew that the
