rippling over the delicate ear and gathered into a knot behind, her
large violet eyes and blooming white skin, her Grecian profile and
stately yet flowing form, might have become an Aphrodite of Xeuxis or
Praxiteles; but her serene and gracious countenance beamed with a pure
seraphic light which is wanting to the classical goddess, and must be
sought in the Madonnas of Raphael. Moreover, she had an indescribable
look of girlish innocence, winsome sweetness, and pitiful tenderness,
which belonged to none of these ideals, and marked her as a simple,
loving, perishable child of earth.

I gazed upon her marvellous beauty with a kind of religious veneration,
at once attracted by her womanly charm and awed by her god-like dignity,
yet with a strange, a divine state of repose and pure rapture in my
heart for which there is no name.

Would that the happiness, the bliss of looking upon her, of being near
her, might have lasted for ever!

I knew, however, that she would soon enter the grotto and be lost to me.
Should I speak? In this fraternal community what was there to prevent
it? Something held me back. Otare had said that the priestess was
isolated from the outer world during her year of office; but that was
only a general statement. Mine was a peculiar case. I was a stranger. I
did not belong to their world, and was not supposed to know the ins and
outs of their customs. Besides, why should custom stand between such a
love as mine and its object? Conventional propriety was for the pitiful
earth and its wretched abortive passions. Perhaps I should frighten her?
No, I did not believe it. In this golden land even the birds seemed
fearless. As well think to frighten an angel in Heaven.

While I was debating the question within myself she glanced into the
foliage where I was hidden. How my heart throbbed! I fancied that she
saw me, and trembled with emotion; but I was mistaken, for she turned
and walked towards the cavern.

Suddenly I remembered the alarming sound within the cave, and breaking
through the covert, called after her.

"Take care, take care! There is a wild beast in the grotto. I heard it
cry."

She looked round and started when she saw me. The surprise, visible on
her face, seemed to melt into recognition.

"It is kind of you to warn me," she responded with a frank smile, "but I
am not in danger. There is no wild animal inside."

Her low sweet voice was quite in keeping with her beauty. Every note
rung clear and melodious as a bell.

"But the awful cry?" I rejoined with a puzzled air.

"Was that of a particular pet of mine," she answered laughingly.

"Pardon me," said I smiling for company, "I am a stranger here, as you
can see, and did not know any better."

"You are one of the travellers from another world, are you not?"

"Ah! you have heard of our arrival."

"Oh yes! An event so important was not kept from me. I saw you sitting
beside my father on the day of the Flower, and I knew you again. I am
afraid our country will seem very odd to you. Have you enjoyed your
stay?"

"So much. I cannot tell you how much."

"I hope you will remain with us a long time."

"I should like to stop here for ever."

She blushed and smiled with pleasure at these words, then, raising her
arms in a noble salute, inclined her head, and entered the cavern.

I returned to the car in a delirium of happiness. I had seen her again,
I had actually spoken with her. _She knew me!_ Every detail of her look
and accent was indelibly printed on my memory. All next day I wandered
about in a kind of transport, feasting on the recollection of what had
passed between us, and revolving over my future course of action. In two
days the holy time would end, and I should have an opportunity of
meeting her at home; but with the chance of seeing her again at the
grotto, I could not wait. I was allured towards her by the most
delicious fascination. Such a love as mine looked down upon the petty
proprieties which keep lovers apart, yet are sometimes so needful in our
wicked world. In this noble planet life was free and simple, because it
was beautiful and good. I determined to revisit the cove that evening,
and if I should see her again, to declare my secret.

Had I counted the cost? With such a passion it is not a question of
cost. I was well aware that if she did not reciprocate my affection she
would never marry me. Nor did I wish it otherwise. I would not ask her
to sacrifice herself for my sake. If, as my heart fondly hoped, she
accepted me, I would not allow anything to stand between us for a
moment. I would abandon the expedition if necessary, and remain in
Venus. If, on the other hand, she refused me as my judgment feared, I
would return to the earth as a new man, ennobled by a glorious love,
reverencing myself that I was capable of it, cherishing her image in my
heart as the ideal of womanhood, and grateful for having seen and known
her. Surely a rich reward for all the perils of the journey.

Sunset found me in the cove, not hidden by the leaves as before, but
sitting in the boat astrand. She came. To-night her veil was of a golden
yellow shading into dark green. A beautiful smile of recognition passed
over her face when she saw me, and we greeted one another in the
graceful fashion of the country.

I did not speak of the weather or give an excuse for my presence there,
as I might have done to a woman of the world. With Alumion I felt that
all such artificial forms were idle, and that I could reveal my inmost
soul without disguise, in all its naked sincerity.

"I have brought you some flowers," said I, offering her a nosegay which
I had picked. "Will you accept them?"

"I thank you," she replied with a beaming smile as she came and took
them from my hand. "They are very beautiful, and I shall keep them for
your sake."

"For my sake!"

Inspired by love I continued in a voice trembling with emotion,

"Alumion--can you not guess what brings me here?"

A blush rose to her cheek as she bent over the flowers.

"It is because I love you," said I; "because I have loved you ever since
I saw you on the day you cut the sacred lily; because I love
you--worship you--with all my heart and soul."

She was silent.

"If I am wrong, forgive me," I went on in a pleading tone. "Blame the
spell your beauty has cast over me, but do not banish me from your
presence, which is life and light to me."

"Wrong!" she murmured, lifting her wondrous eyes to mine. "Can it be
wrong to love, or to speak of love? Why should I send you away from me
because you love me? Is not love the glory of the heart, as the sun is
the glory of the world? Rejoice, then, in your love as I do in mine."

"As you do?"

"Yes, as I do. I should have spoken sooner, but my heart was full of
happiness. For I also love you. I have loved you from the beginning."

With a cry of unspeakable joy I sprang from the boat, and would have
flung myself at her feet to kiss her hand or the hem of her garment, but
she drew back with a look of apprehension.

"Touch me not," she said gravely, "for by the custom of our land I am
holy. Until to-morrow at sunset I am consecrated to The Giver."

"Pardon my ignorance," I responded rather crestfallen. "Your will shall
be my law. I only wished to manifest my eternal gratitude and devotion
to you."

"Kneel not to me," she rejoined, "but rather to The Giver, who has so
strangely brought us together. How many ages we might have wandered
from world to world without finding each other again!"

"You think we have met before then?" I enquired eagerly, for the same
thought had been haunting my own mind. It seemed to me that I had known
Alumion always.

"Assuredly," she replied, "for you and I are kindred souls who have been
separated in another world, by death or evil; and now that we have met
again, let us be faithful and loving to each other."

"Nothing shall separate us any more."

The words had scarcely passed my lips when the same terrible cry which I
had heard once before sounded from the interior of the grotto.

Alumion called or rather sang out a response to the cry, which I did not
understand, then said to me in her ordinary voice,

"It is Siloo. I must go now and give him food."

I was curious to know who or what was Siloo, but did not dare to ask.
She raised her arms gracefully and smiled a sweet farewell.

"Are you going to leave me like that?" said I.

"What would you have?" she answered, turning towards the cave.

"In my country lovers bind themselves by mutual vows."

"What need of vows? Have we not confessed our loves?"

"Will you not tell me when I shall see you again? Will you not say when
you will be mine--when you will marry me?"

A blush mounted to her cheek as she answered with a divine glance,

"Meet me at sunset to-morrow, and I will be yours."

As yet I had not mentioned my adventure with Alumion to any of my
companions, but that night I said to Gazen, as we smoked our cigars
together,

"Wish me joy, old fellow! I am going to be married."

He seemed quite dumbfounded, and I rather think he fancied that I must
have come to an understanding with Miss Carmichael.

"Really!" said he with the air of a man plucking up heart after an
unexpected blow. "May I ask who is the lady?"

"The Priestess of the Lily."

"The Priestess!" he exclaimed utterly astonished, but at the same time
vastly relieved. "The Priestess! Come, now, you are joking."

"Never was more serious in my life."

Then I told him what had happened, how I had met her, and my engagement
to marry her.

"If you will take my advice," said he dryly, "you'll do nothing of the
kind."

"Why?"

"Have you considered the matter?" he replied significantly.

"Considered the matter! A love like mine does not 'consider the matter'
as though it were a problem in Euclid. With such a woman as Alumion a
lover does not stop to 'consider the matter,' unless he is a fool."

"A woman--yes; but remember that she is a woman of another planet. She
might not make a suitable wife for you."

"I love her. I love her as I can never love a woman of our world. She is
a thousand times more beautiful and good than any woman I have ever
known. She is an ideal woman--a perfect woman--an angel in human form."

"That may be; but what will her family say?"

"My dear Gazen, don't you know they manage these things better here.
Thank goodness, the 'family' does not interfere with love affairs in
this happy land! We love each other, we have agreed to be married, and
that is quite sufficient. No need to get the 'consent of the parents,'
or make a 'settlement,' or give out the banns, or buy a government
license as though a wife were contraband goods, or hire a string of
four-wheelers, or tip the pew-opener. What has love to do with
pew-openers? Why should the finest thing in life become the prey of such
vulgar parasites? Why should our heavenliest moments be profaned and
spoiled by needless worries--hateful to the name of love? Our wedding
will be very simple. We shall not even want you as groomsman or Miss
Carmichael as bridesmaid. I daresay we shall get along without cake and
speeches, and as for the rice and old boots, upon my word, I don't think
we shall miss them."

"And if it is a fair question, when will the--the simple ceremony take
place?"

"To-morrow evening."

"To-morrow evening!" exclaimed the professor, taken by surprise. "I
thought a priestess could not marry."

"To-morrow at sunset she will be a free woman. Her priesthood will come
to an end."

"And--pardon me--but what are you going to do with her when you've got
her? Will you bring her home to the car--there is very little room here,
as you know. Do you propose to take her to the earth, where I'm afraid
she will probably die like a tender plant or a bird of paradise in a
cage? Do you think her father would consent to that?"

"We are not going away just yet. There will be time enough to arrange
about that."

"Well, we can't stay here much longer. I must get back to my work--and
you know we intended to pay a flying visit to Mercury, and if possible
to get a closer look at the sun."

"All right. You can go as soon as you like. I shall remain behind.
Carmichael will take you to the earth, and then come back here for me."

"You talk as if it were merely a question of a drive."

"I think we have proved that it is not more dangerous to go from one
planet to another than it is to get about town."

"If an accident _should_ occur. If Carmichael cannot return--"

"I shall be much happier here than I should be on the earth. Even if I
had never met Alumion I think I should come back and stay on Venus."

"It is certainly a better world, as far as we have seen, but remember
your own words, 'Man was made for the earth.' Don't you think this
eternal summer--these Elysian Fields--would pall upon you in course of
time? Constant bliss, like everlasting honey, might cloy your earthly
palate, and make you sigh for our poor, old, wicked, miserable world,
that in spite of all its faults and crimes, is yet so interesting, so
variable, so dramatic--so dear."

"Never. With Alumion even Hades would be an Elysium."

"Think of your friends at home, and what you owe to them; how they will
miss you."

"I cannot be of much service to them. They will soon forget me."
