  important; therefore, dear aunt, don't delay.  I think you know
  Baldwin's address, as I've been told he lives in the district of the
  town which you are wont to visit.  Excuse this shabby scrawl, and the
  trouble I ask you to take, and believe me to be your loving nephew,
  Edgar Berrington."

Miss Pritty was a prompt little woman.  Instead of finishing her tea she
postponed that meal to an indefinite season, threw on her bonnet and
shawl, and left her humble abode abruptly.

Joe Baldwin was enjoying a quiet pipe at his own fireside--in company
with his buxom wife and his friends Mr and Mrs Rooney Machowl--when
Miss Pritty tripped up to his door and knocked.

She was received warmly, for Joe sympathised with her affectionate and
self-denying spirit, and Mrs Joe believed in her.  Woe to the
unfortunate in whom Mrs Joe--_alias_ Susan--did _not_ believe.

"Come away, Miss,--glad to see you--always so," said Joe, wiping a chair
with his cap and extinguishing his pipe out of deference; "sit down,
Miss."

Miss Pritty bowed all round, wished each of the party good-evening by
name, and seating herself beside the little fire as easily and
unceremoniously as though it had been her own, drew forth her letter.

"This is for you, Mr Baldwin," she said; "it came enclosed in one to
me, and is from my nephew, Edgar Berrington, who says it is important."

"Thank you, ma'am," said Joe, taking the letter, opening it, and looking
at it inquiringly.

"Now Miss," said he, "it's of no manner o' use my tryin' to make it out.
You mustn't suppose, Miss, that divers can't read.  There's many of 'em
who have got a good education in the three R's, an' some who have gone
further.  For the matter of that I can read print easy enough, as you
know, but I never was good at pot-hooks and hangers, d'ee see; therefore
I'll be obliged, Miss, if you'll read it to me."

Miss Pritty graciously acceded to the request, and read:--

  "Dear Baldwin,--My aunt, Miss Pritty, who will hand this letter to
  you, will tell you about our being wrecked.  Now, in regard to that I
  have a proposal to make.  First, let me explain.  The wreck of the
  _Warrior_, after slipping off the ledge on which she struck, sank in
  twenty fathoms water.  On our arrival at Hong-Kong, the agent of the
  owners sent off to see what could be done in the way of recovering the
  treasure on board--there being no less than fifty thousand pounds
  sterling in gold in her treasure-room, besides valuables belonging to
  passengers.  A Lloyds' agent also visited the place, and both came to
  the conclusion that it was utterly impossible to recover anything from
  such a depth by means of divers.  This being so, and I happening to be
  on the spot, offered to purchase the right to recover and appropriate
  all the gold I could fish up.  They laughed at me as a wild
  enthusiast, but, regarding the thing as hopeless themselves, were
  quite willing to let me have the wreck, etcetera, for what you would
  call `an old song.'  Now, although nominally a `penniless man,' I do
  happen to possess a small property, in the form of a block of old
  houses in Newcastle, which were left to me by an uncle, and which I
  have never seen.  On these I have raised sufficient money for my
  purpose, and I intend to make the venture, being convinced that with
  the new and almost perfect apparatus now turned out in London by our
  submarine engineers, bold divers may reach even a greater depth than
  twenty fathoms.  My proposal then is, that you should come to my aid.
  I will divide all we bring up into three equal portions.  One of these
  you shall have, one I'll keep to myself, and the third shall be shared
  equally by such divers as you think it advisable to employ.  What say
  you?  Do the prospects and terms suit, and will you come without
  delay?  If so, reply at once, and send all the requisite material to
  this place.  Be particular to bring dresses made by the first makers
  in London.  I wish this to be a sort of semi-scientific experiment--to
  recover property from a great depth, to test the powers and properties
  of the various apparatus now in use and recently invented, and, while
  so doing, to make my fortune as well as yours, and that of all
  concerned!  Perhaps you think the idea a wild one.  Well, it may be
  so, but wilder ideas than this have been realised.  Remember the noble
  house of Mulgrave!--Yours truly,--

  "Edgar Berrington."

The last sentence in the letter referred to a fact in the history of
diving which is worthy of mention.  In or about the year 1683 a man
named Phipps, the son of an American blacksmith, was smitten with a
mania, then prevalent, for recovering treasure from sunken wrecks by
means of diving.  He succeeded in fishing up a small amount from the
wreck of a Spanish galleon off the coast of Hispaniola, which, however,
did not pay expenses.  Being a man of indomitable perseverance as well
as enthusiasm, Phipps continued his experiments with varying success,
and on one occasion--if not more--succeeded in reducing himself to
poverty.  But the blacksmith's son was made of tough material--as though
he had been carefully fashioned on his father's anvil.  He was a man of
strong faith, and this, in material as well as spiritual affairs, can
remove mountains.  He was invincibly convinced of the practicability of
his schemes.  As is usual in such men, he had the power to impart his
faith to others.  He had moved Charles the Second to assist him in his
first efforts, which had failed, but was unable to similarly influence
the cautious--not to say close-fisted--James the Second.  The Duke of
Albemarle, however, proved more tractable.  Through his aid and
influence, and with funds obtained from the public, Phipps was enabled
in 1687 once more to try his fortune.  He set sail in a 200-ton vessel,
and after many fruitless efforts succeeded in raising from a depth of
between six and seven fathoms, (considered but a small depth now-a-days)
property to the value of about 300,000 pounds.  Of this sum the usurious
Earl obtained as his share 90,000 pounds while Phipps received 20,000
pounds.  Although James the Second had refused to aid in the expedition,
he had the wisdom to recognise the good service done to mankind in the
saving of so much valuable property at so great personal risk.  He
knighted Phipps, who thus became the founder of the house of Mulgrave--
now represented by the Marquis of Normanby.

When Miss Pritty had concluded the letter, Joe Baldwin turned to Rooney
Machowl:--

"What think you, lad," he said, "would you venture down to twenty
fathom?"

"To twenty thousand fathom, if you'll consint to watch the pumps and
howld the life-line," replied the daring son of Erin.

"Will you let me go, Susan?" said Baldwin, turning to his wife.

"How could I hinder you, Joe?" answered Mrs Baldwin, with a face
reddened by suppressed emotion at the bare idea.

"And will you go with me, Susan?"

"I'd sooner go to the--" she stopped, unable to decide as to what part
of earth she would not sooner go to than China, but not being versed in
geography she finished by asserting that she'd sooner go to the moon!

Pretty little Mrs Machowl, on the contrary, vowed that no power on
earth should separate between her and her Rooney, and that if he went
she should go, and the baby too.

"Well then, Miss," said Baldwin to his visitor, "if you'll be so kind as
to write for me I'll be obliged.  Say to Mister Eddy--I can't forget the
old name, you see--that I'm agreeable; that I'll undertake the job,
along with Rooney Machowl here, and mayhap another man or two.  I'll get
all the dresses and apparatus he requires, and will set sail as soon as
I can; but, you see, I can't well start right off, because I've a job or
two on hand.  I've a well to go down an' putt right, an' I've some dock
repairs to finish.  However, to save time I'll send Rooney off at once
with one dress and apparatus, so that they can be tryin' experiments
till I arrive--which will be by the following steamer.  _Now_, Miss,
d'you think you can tell him all that?"

"I will try," said Miss Pritty, making rapid entries in a small
note-book, after completing which and putting a few more questions she
hurried home.

Meanwhile Rooney's wife went off to make arrangements for a long voyage,
and a probably prolonged residence in foreign parts, and Joe Baldwin
went to visit the well he had engaged to descend, taking Rooney as his
assistant.  During his visit to this well, Joe underwent some
experiences, both physical and mental, which tried his nerve and courage
more severely than any descent he had ever made in the open sea.

It is a well-known fact among divers that various temperaments are
suited to various works, and that, among other things, many men who are
bold enough in open water lose courage in confined places such as wells.
They say--so powerful is imagination!--that they "cannot breathe" down
in a well, though, of course, the means of breathing is the same in all
cases.  Joe Baldwin, being gifted with cool blood and strong nerves, and
possessing very little imagination, was noted among his fellows for his
readiness and ability to venture anywhere under water and do anything.

The well in question was connected with the waterworks of a neighbouring
town.  Having got himself and his apparatus conveyed thither he spent
the night in the town and proceeded on the following morning at
day-break to inspect the scene of his operations.

The well was an old one and very deep--about fifteen fathoms.  That,
however, was a matter of small importance to our diver.  What concerned
him most was the narrowness of the manhole or entrance at the top, and
the generally dilapidated state of the whole affair.

The well, instead of being a circular hole in the ground lined with
brick, like ordinary wells, was composed of huge iron cylinders four
feet in diameter, fitted together and sunk ninety feet into the ground.
This vast tube or circular iron well rested on a foundation of
brick-work.  When sunk to its foundation its upper edge was just level
with the ground.  Inside of this tube there were a variety of
cross-beams, and a succession of iron ladders zigzagging from top to
bottom, so that it could be descended when empty.  At the time of Joe's
visit it was found nearly full of water.  Down the centre of the well
ran two iron pipes, or pumps, each having a "rose" at its lower end,
through which the water could be sucked and pumped up to a reservoir a
hundred feet high for the supply of the town.  These two pumps were
worked by an engine whose distinguishing features were noise and
rickets.  It could, however, just do its work; but, recently, something
had gone wrong with one of the pumps--no water was thrown up by it.  Two
results followed.  On the one hand the water-supply to the town became
insufficient, and, on the other, the surplus water in the well could not
be pumped out so as to permit of a man descending to effect repairs.  In
these circumstances a diver became absolutely necessary.  Hence the
visit of Baldwin and Machowl.

"Now then, diver," said the managing engineer of the works to Joe, after
he had examined everything above ground with care, "you see it is
impossible to pump the well dry, because of the defective pump and the
strength of the spring which feeds it.  Water is admitted into the great
cylinder through a number of holes in the bottom.  These holes therefore
must be stopped.  In order to this, you will have to descend in the
water with a bag of wooden pegs and a hammer--all of which are ready for
you--and plug up these holes.  You see, the work to be done is simple
enough."

"Ay," asserted Baldwin, "but the way how to set about it ain't so simple
or clear.  How, for instance, is a man of my size to squeeze through
that hole at the top?"

"You _are_ large," said the engineer, regarding the diver for a moment,
"but not too large, I should think, to squeeze through."

"What!  With a divin' dress on?"

"Ah, true; I fear that is a puzzling difficulty at the outset, for you
see the well is frail, and we dare not venture to enlarge the hole by
cutting the beams that support the pumps."

While he was speaking the diver put his head through the hole in
question, and gazed down into darkness visible where water was dripping
and gurgling, and hissing a sort of accompaniment to the discordant
clanking and jarring of the pump-rods.  The rickety engine that worked
them kept puffing close alongside--grinding out a horrible addition to
the din.  As his eyes became more accustomed to the subdued light,
Baldwin could see that there was an empty space between the surface of
the water and the top of the well, great part of the first length of
_zigzag_ ladder being visible, and also the cross-beams on which its
foot rested.  He also observed various green slimy beams, which being
perpetually moistened by droppings from the pumps, seemed alive like
water snakes.

"Well," said the diver, withdrawing his head, "I'll try it.  I'll dress
inside there.  You're sure o' the old ingine, I fancy?"

"It has not yet failed us," answered the engineer, with a smile.

"What would happen if it broke or stopped working?" asked Joe.

"The well would fill to the brim and overflow in a minute or two."

"So that," rejoined the diver, "if it caught me in the middle o'
dressin', me and my mate would be drownded."

"You'd stand a good chance of coming to that end," replied the engineer,
with a laugh.  "Your mate might get out in time, but as you say the
dress would prevent you getting back through the hole, there would be no
hope for _you_."

"Well then, we'll begin," said Baldwin; "come, Rooney, get the gear in
order."  So saying, the adventurous man went to work with his wonted
energy.  The air-pumps were set up, and two men of the works instructed
in the use of them.  Then Baldwin squeezed himself with difficulty
through the manhole, and the dress was passed down to him.  Rooney then
squeezed himself through, and both went a few steps down the iron ladder
until they stood on the cross-beams behind and underneath it.  The
position was exceedingly awkward, for the ladder obliged them to stoop,
and they did not dare to move their feet except with caution, for fear
of slipping off the beams into the water--in which, even as it was, they
were ankle-deep while standing on the beams.  They were soon soaked to
the skin by the drippings and spirtings from the pipes, and almost
incapable of hearing each other speak, owing to the din.  If Rooney had
dropped the lead-soled boots or the shoulder-weights, they would have
sunk at once beyond recovery, and have rendered the descent of the diver
very difficult if not impossible.

Realising all this, the two comrades proceeded with great care and
slowness.  Dressing a diver in the most favourable circumstances
involves a considerable amount of physical exertion and violence of
action.  It may therefore be well believed that in the case of which we
write, a long time elapsed before Baldwin got the length of putting on
his helmet.  At last it was screwed on.  Then a hammer and a bagful of
wooden pins were placed in his hands.

"Now, Joe, are ye aisy?" asked Rooney, holding the front-glass in his
hand, preparatory to sealing his friend up.

"All right," answered Baldwin.

"Set a-goin' the air-pumps up there," shouted Rooney, from whose face
the perspiration flowed freely, as much from anxiety about his friend as
from prolonged exertion in a constrained attitude.

In a few seconds the air came hissing into the helmet, showing that the
two men who wrought it were equal to their duty, though inexperienced.

"All right?" asked Rooney a second time.

The reply was given, "Yes," and the bull's-eye was screwed on.

Rooney then sprang up the ladder and through the manhole; took his
station at the signal-line and air-pipe, while the engineer of the works
watched the air-pump.  The rickety steam-engine was then stopped, and,
as had been predicted, the water rose quickly.  It rose over Baldwin's
knees, waist, and head, and, finally, rushed out at the manhole,
deluging Rooney's legs.

Our diver was now fairly imprisoned; an accident, however trifling in
itself, that should stop the air-pump would have been his death-knell.
Fully impressed with this uncomfortable assurance, he felt his way
slowly down the second ladder, knocking his head slightly against
cross-beams as he went, holding on tightly to his bag and hammer, and
getting down into darkness so profound as to be "felt."  He soon reached
the head of the third ladder, and then the fourth.

But here, at a depth of about thirty feet, an unexpected difficulty
occurred which had well-nigh caused a failure.  The head of the fourth
ladder was covered with wood, through which a square manhole led to the
bottom of the well.  Of course Joe Baldwin discovered this only by
touch, and great was his anxiety when, passing his hand round it, he
found the hole to be too small for his broad shoulders to pass.  At this
point, he afterwards admitted, he "felt rather curious," the whole
structure being very frail.  However, with characteristic determination
he muttered to himself, "never mind, Joe, do it if you can," and down he
went through the hole, putting one arm down with his body, and holding
the other up and drawing it down after him, by which process he squeezed
his shoulders through at an angle.  After reaching the bottom of the
well, a feeling of alarm seized him lest he should be unable to force
his way upwards through the hole.  To settle this question at once he
ascended to it, forced himself through, and then, being easy in mind, he
redescended to the bottom and went to work with the hammer and wooden
pegs.

At first he had some difficulty in finding the holes in the great
cylinder, but after a dozen of them had been plugged it became easier,
as the water rushed in through the remaining holes with greater force.
While thus engaged his foot suddenly slipped.  To save himself from
falling--he knew not whither--he let go the bag of pegs and the hammer--
the first of which went upwards and the latter down.  To find the hammer
in total darkness among the brick-work at the bottom was hopeless,
therefore Joe signalled that he was coming up, and started for the top
after the bag, but failed to find it.  In much perplexity he went to the
upper manhole and put up one of his hands.

To those who were inexperienced it was somewhat alarming to see the hand
of an apparently drowning man with the fingers wriggling violently, but
Rooney understood matters.

"Arrah, now," said he, giving the hand a friendly shake, "it's somethin'
you're wantin', sure.  What a pity it is wan can't spake wid his
fingers!"

Presently the hand shut itself as if grasping something, and moved in a
distinct and steady manner.

"Och!  It's a hammer he wants.  He's gone an' lost it.  Here you are,
boy--there's another."

The hand disappeared, transferred the implement to the left hand, and
reappeared, evidently asking for more.

"What now, boy?" muttered Rooney, with a perplexed look.

"Doubtless he wants more pegs," said the engineer of the works, coming
up at the moment.

