
God indignant.--Finally, when the Shang dynasty sank into the lowest
depths of moral abasement, King Wu, who charged himself with its
overthrow, and who subsequently became the first sovereign of the Chou
dynasty, offered sacrifices to Almighty God, and also to Mother Earth.
"The King of Shang," he said in his address to the high officers who
collected around him, "does not reverence God above, and inflicts
calamities on the people below. Almighty God is moved with indignation."
On the day of the final battle he declared that he was acting in the
matter of punishment merely as the instrument of God; and after his
great victory and the establishment of his own line, it was to God that
he rendered thanks.

No Devil, No Hell.--In this primitive monotheism, of which only scanty,
but no doubt genuine, records remain, no place was found for any being
such as the Buddhist Mara or the Devil of the Old and New Testaments.
God inflicted His own punishments by visiting calamities on mankind,
just as He bestowed His own rewards by sending bounteous harvests in due
season. Evil spirits were a later invention, and their operations were
even then confined chiefly to tearing people's hearts out, and so forth,
for their own particular pleasure; we certainly meet no cases of evil
spirits wishing to undermine man's allegiance to God, or desiring to
make people wicked in order to secure their everlasting punishment. The
vision of Purgatory, with all its horrid tortures, was introduced into
China by Buddhism, and was subsequently annexed by the Taoists, some
time between the third and sixth centuries A.D.

Chinese Terms for God.--Before passing to the firmer ground,
historically speaking, of the Chou dynasty, it may be as well to state
here that there are two terms in ancient Chinese literature which seem
to be used indiscriminately for God. One is _T'ien_, which has come
to include the material heavens, the sky; and the other is _Shang Ti_,
which has come to include the spirits of deceased Emperors. These two
terms appear simultaneously, so to speak, in the earliest documents
which have come down to us, dating back to something like the twentieth
century before Christ. Priority, however, belongs beyond all doubt to
_T'ien_, which it would have been more natural to find meaning, first
the visible heavens, and secondly the Deity, whose existence beyond the
sky would be inferred from such phenomena as lightning, thunder, wind,
and rain. But the process appears to have been the other way, so far at
any rate as the written language is concerned. The Chinese script, when
it first came into existence, was purely pictorial, and confined to
visible objects which were comparatively easy to depict. There does not
seem to have been any attempt to draw a picture of the sky. On the other
hand, the character _T'ien_ was just such a representation of a human
being as would be expected from the hand of a prehistoric artist;
and under this unmistakable shape the character appears on bells and
tripods, as seen in collections of inscriptions, so late as the sixth
and seventh centuries B.C., after which the head is flattered to a line,
and the arms are raised until they form another line parallel to that of
the head.

Distinction between T'ien and Shang Ti.--The term _Shang Ti_ means
literally Supreme Ruler. It is not quite so vague as _T'ien_, which
seems to be more of an abstraction, while _Shang Ti_ is a genuinely
personal God. Reference to _T'ien_ is usually associated with fate or
destiny, calamities, blessings, prayers for help, etc. The commandments
of _T'ien_ are hard to obey; He is compassionate, to be feared, unjust,
and cruel. _Shang Ti_ lives in heaven, walks, leaves tracks on the
ground, enjoys the sweet savour of sacrifice, approves or disapproves
of conduct, deals with rewards and punishments in a more particular way,
and comes more actually into touch with the human race.

Thus _Shang Ti_ would be the God who walked in the garden in the cool of
the day, the God who smelled the sweet savour of Noah's sacrifice, and
the God who allowed Moses to see His back. _T'ien_ would be the God of
Gods of the Psalms, whose mercy endureth for ever; the everlasting God
of Isaiah, who fainteth not, neither is weary.

Roman Catholic Dissensions.--These two, in fact, were the very terms
favoured by the early Jesuit missionaries to China, though not with the
limitations above suggested, as fit the proper renderings for God; and
of the two terms the great Manchu Emperor K'ang Hsi chose _T'ien_. It
has been thought that the conversion of China to Christianity under the
guiding influence of the Jesuits would soon have become an accomplished
fact, but for the ignorant opposition to the use of these terms by the
Franciscans and Dominicans, who referred this question, among others, to
the Pope. In 1704 Clement XI published a bull declaring that the Chinese
equivalent for God was _T'ien Chu_=Lord of Heaven; and such it has
continued to be ever since, so far as the Roman Catholic church is
concerned, in spite of the fact that _T'ien Chu_ was a name given at the
close of the third century B.C. to one of the Eight Spirits.

The two Terms are One.--That the two terms refer in Chinese thought to
one and the same Being, though possibly with differing attributes, even
down to modern times, may be seen from the account of a dream by the
Emperor Yung Lo, A.D. 1403-1425, in which His Majesty relates that an
angel appeared to him, with a message from _Shang Ti_; upon which the
Emperor remarked, "Is not this a command from _T'ien_?" A comparison
might perhaps be instituted with the use of "God" and "Jehovah" in
the Bible. At the same time it must be noted that this view was not
suggested by the Emperor K'ang Hsi, who fixed upon _T'ien_ as the
appropriate term. It is probable that, vigorous Confucianist as he was,
he was anxious to appear on the side rather of an abstract than of
a personal Deity, and that he was repelled by the overwrought
anthropomorphism of the Christian God. His conversion was said to have
been very near at times; we read, however, that, when hard pressed by
the missionaries to accept baptism, "he always excused himself by saying
that he worshipped the same God as the Christians."

God in the "Odes."--The Chou dynasty lasted from B.C. 1122 to B.C.
255. It was China's feudal age, when the empire, then included between
latitude 34-40 and longitude 109-118, was split up into a number of
vassal States, which owned allegiance to a suzerain State. And it is to
the earlier centuries of the Chou dynasty that must be attributed the
composition of a large number of ballads of various kinds, ultimately
collected and edited by Confucius, and now known as the _Odes_. From
these _Odes_ it is abundantly clear that the Chinese people continued
to hold, more clearly and more firmly than ever, a deep-seated belief in
the existence of an anthropomorphic and personal God, whose one care was
the welfare of the human race:--

     There is Almighty God;
     Does He hate any one?

He reigns in glory.--The soul of King Wen, father of the King Wu below,
and posthumously raised by his son to royal rank, is represented as
enjoying happiness in a state beyond the grave:--

     King Wen is on high,
     In glory in heaven.
     His comings and his goings
     Are to and from the presence of God.

He is a Spirit.--Sometimes in the _Odes_ there is a hint that God, in
spite of His anthropomorphic semblance, is a spirit:--

     The doings of God
     Have neither sound nor smell.

Spiritual Beings.--Spirits were certainly supposed to move freely among
mortals:--

     Do not say, This place is not public;
     No one can see me here.
     The approaches of spiritual Beings
     Cannot be calculated beforehand;
     But on no account should they be ignored.

The God of Battle.--In the hour of battle the God of ancient China was
as much a participator in the fight as the God of Israel in the Old
Testament:--

     God is on your side!

was the cry which stimulated King Wu to break down the opposing ranks
of Shang. To King Wu's father, and others, direct communications had
previously been made from heaven, with a view to the regeneration of the
empire:--

     The dynasties of Hsia and Shang
     Had not satisfied God with their government;
     So throughout the various States
     He sought and considered
     For a State on which He might confer the rule.

     God said to King Wen,
     I am pleased with your conspicuous virtue,
     Without noise and without display,
     Without heat and without change,
     Without consciousness of effort,
     Following the pattern of God.

     God said to King Wen,
     Take measures against hostile States,
     Along with your brethren,
     Get ready your grappling-irons,
     And your engines of assault,
     To attack the walls of Ts'ung.

God sends Famine.--The _Ode_ from which the following extract is taken
carries us back to the ninth century B.C., at the time of a prolonged
and disastrous drought:--

     Glorious was the Milky Way,
     Revolving brightly in the sky,
     When the king said, Alas!
     What crime have my people committed now,
     That God sends down death and disorder,
     And famine comes upon us again?
     There is no spirit to whom I have not sacrificed;
     There is no victim that I have grudged;
     Our sacrificial symbols are all used up;--
     How is it that I am not heard?

The Confucian Criterion.--The keystone of the Confucian philosophy, that
man is born good, will be found in the following lines:--

     How mighty is God!
     How clothed in majesty is God,
