associations are praiseworthy and philanthropic. They often include
vegetarianism and abstinence from alcohol and drugs. The weakness of
the religion to-day is no doubt the want of intelligence and energy
among the clergy. There are not a few learned and devout monks, but
even devotion is not a characteristic of the majority. On the other
hand, those of the laity who take their religion seriously generally
attain a high standard of piety and there have been attempts to
reform Buddhism, to connect it with education and to spread a
knowledge of the more authentic scriptures.[894]

When one begins to study Buddhism in China, one fears it may be
typified by the neglected temples on the outskirts of Peking, sullen
and mouldering memorials of dynasties that have passed away. But later
one learns not only that there are great and nourishing monasteries in
the south, but that even in Peking one may often step through an
archway into courtyards of which the prosaic streets outside give no
hint and find there refreshment for the eye and soul, flower gardens
and well-kept shrines tended by pious and learned guardians.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 855: [Chinese: ] For a specimen of devotional literature
about the heart see the little tract translated in China Branch,
_R.A.S._ XXIII. pp. 9-22.]

[Footnote 856: [Chinese: ] For text translation and commentary, see
De Groot, _Code du Mahayana en Chine_, 1893, see also Nanjio, No.
1087.]

[Footnote 857: De Groot, p. 81.]

[Footnote 858: The identity of name seems due to a similarity of
metaphor. The Brahmajala sutta is a net of many meshes to catch all
forms of error. The Fan-wang-ching compares the varieties of Buddhist
opinion to the meshes of a net (De Groot, _l.c._ p. 26), but the net
is the all-inclusive common body of truth.]

[Footnote 859: See, however, sections 20 and 39.]

[Footnote 860: See especially De Groot, _l.c._ p. 58, where the
reading of the Abhidharma is forbidden. Though this name is not
confined to the Hinayana, A-pi-t'an in Chinese seems to be rarely used
as a title of Mahayanist books.]

[Footnote 861: The Indian words are transliterated in the Chinese
text.]

[Footnote 862: More accurately reading the sutras on their behalf, but
this exercise is practically equivalent to intercessory prayer.]

[Footnote 863: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 864: The full title is [Chinese: ] Pai Chang is apparently
to be taken as the name of the author, but it is the designation of a
monastery used as a personal name. See Hackmann in _T'oung Pao_, 1908,
pp. 651-662. It is No. 1642 in Nanjio's Catalogue. He says that it has
been revised and altered.]

[Footnote 865: See _T'oung Pao_, 1904, pp. 437 ff.]

[Footnote 866: It is probable that the older Chinese monasteries
attempted to reproduce the arrangement of Nalanda and other Indian
establishments. Unfortunately Hsuan Chuang and the other pilgrims give
us few details as to the appearance of Indian monasteries: they tell
us, however, that they were surrounded by a wall, that the monks'
quarters were near this wall, that there were halls where choral
services were performed and that there were triads of images. But the
Indian buildings had three stories. See Chavannes, _Memoire sur les
Religieux Eminents_, 1894, p. 85.]

[Footnote 867: [Chinese: ] or [Chinese: ] For this personage see the
article in _B.E.F.E.O._ 1916. No. 3, by Peri who identifies him with
Wei, the general of the Heavenly Kings who appeared to Tao Hsuan the
founder of the Vinaya school and became popular as a protecting deity
of Buddhism. The name is possibly a mistaken transcription of
Skandha.]

[Footnote 868: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 869: [Chinese: ] See Levi and Chavannes' two articles in
_J.A._ 1916, I and II, and Watters in _J.R.A.S._ 1898, p. 329, for an
account of these personages. The original number, still found in a few
Chinese temples as well as in Korea, Japan and Tibet was sixteen.
Several late sutras contain the idea that the Buddha entrusted the
protection of his religion to four or sixteen disciples and bade them
not enter Nirvana but tarry until the advent of Maitreya. The
Ta-A-lo-han-nan-t'i-mi-to-lo-so-shuo-fa-chu-chi (Nanjio, 1466) is an
account of these sixteen disciples and of their spheres of influence.
The Buddha assigned to each a region within which it is his duty to
guard the faith. They will not pass from this life before the next
Buddha comes. Pindola is the chief of them. Nothing is known of
the work cited except that it was translated in 654 by Hsuan Chuang,
who, according to Watters, used an earlier translation. As the Arhats
are Indian personalities, and their spheres are mapped out from the
point of view of Indian geography, there can be no doubt that we have
to do with an Indian idea, imported into Tibet as well as into China
where it became far more popular than it had ever been in India. The
two additional Arhats (who vary in different temples, whereas the
sixteen are fixed) appear to have been added during the T'ang dynasty
and, according to Watters, in imitation of a very select order of
merit instituted by the Emperor T'ai Tsung and comprising eighteen
persons. Chavannes and Levi see in them spirits borrowed from the
popular pantheon.

Chinese ideas about the Lohans at the present day are very vague.
Their Indian origin has been forgotten and some of them have been
provided with Chinese biographies. (See Dore, p. 216.) One popular
story says that they were eighteen converted brigands.

In several large temples there are halls containing 500 images of
Arhats, which include many Chinese Emperors and one of them is often
pointed out as being Marco Polo. But this is very doubtful. See,
however, Hackmann, _Buddhismus_, p. 212.]

[Footnote 870: Generally they consist of Sakya-muni and two
superhuman Buddhas or Bodhisattvas, such as O-mi-to (Amitabha) and
Yo-shih-fo (Vaidurya): Pi-lu-fo (Vairocana) and Lo-shih-fo (Lochana):
Wen-shu (Manjus-ri) and P'u-hsien (Samantabhadra). The common
European explanation that they are the Buddhas of the past, present
and future is not correct.]

[Footnote 871: [Chinese: ] and [Chinese: ] For the importance of
Ti-tsang in popular Buddhism, which has perhaps been underestimated,
see Johnston, chap. VII.]

[Footnote 872: I speak of the Old Imperial Government which came to an
end in 1911.]

[Footnote 873: [Chinese: ]]

[Footnote 874: De Groot, _l.c._ p.51.]

[Footnote 875: See Kern's translation, especially pp. 379 and 385.]

[Footnote 876: See Nanjio, Nos. 138 and 139. The practice is not
entirely unknown in the legends of Pali Buddhism. In the Lokapannatti,
a work existing in Burma but perhaps translated from the Sanskrit,
Asoka burns himself in honour of the Buddha, but is miraculously
preserved. See _B.E.F.E.O._ 1904, pp. 421 and 427.]

[Footnote 877: See I-Tsing, _Records of the Buddhist Religion_, trans.
Takakusu, pp. 195 ff., and for Tibet, Waddell, _Buddhism of Tibet_, p.
178, note 3, from which it appears that it is only in Eastern Tibet
and probably under Chinese influence that branding is in vogue. For
apparent instances in Central Asian art, see Grunwedel, _Budd.
Kultst._ p. 23, note 1.]

[Footnote 878: Branding is common in many Hindu sects, especially the
Madhvas, but is reprobated by others.]

[Footnote 879: It is condemned as part of the superstition of Buddhism
in a memorial of Han Yu, 819 A.D.]

[Footnote 880: See those cited by De Groot, _l. c_. p. 228, and the
article of MacGowan (_Chinese Recorder_, 1888) there referred to. See
also Hackmann, _Buddhism as a Religion_, p. 228. Chinese sentiment
often approves suicide, for instance, if committed by widows or the
adherents of defeated princes. For a Confucian instance, see Johnston,
p. 341.]

[Footnote 881: See _e.g._ Du Bose, _The Dragon, Image and Demon_, p.
265. I have never seen such practices myself. See also _Paraphrase of
the Sacred Edict_, VII. 8.]

[Footnote 882: [Chinese: ] This word, which has no derivation in
Chinese, is thought to be a corruption of some vernacular form of the
Sanskrit Upadhyaya current in Central Asia. See I-tsing, transl.
Takakusu, p. 118. Upadhyaya became Vajjha (as is shown by the modern
Indian forms Ojha or Jha and Tamil Vaddyar). See Bloch in
_Indo-Germanischen Forschungen_, vol. XXV. 1909, p. 239. Vajjha might
become in Chinese Ho-sho or Ho-shang for Ho sometimes represents the
Indian syllable _va_. See Julien, _Methode_, p. 109, and Eitel,
_Handbook of Chinese Buddhism_, p. 195.]

[Footnote 883: For details see Hackmann in _T'oung Pao_, 1908.]

[Footnote 884: They apparently correspond to the monastic lay servants
or "pure men" described by I-Ching, chap. XXXII, as living as
Nalanda.]

[Footnote 885: _A Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the Chinese_, pp.
339 ff.]

[Footnote 886: The abbot and several upper priests wear robes, which
are generally red and gold, during the service. The abbot also carries
a sort of sceptre. The vestments of the clergy are said to be derived
from the robes of honour which used to be given to them when they
appeared at Court.]

[Footnote 887: II. 16. Cf. the rituals in De la Vallee Poussin's
_Bouddhisme et Materiaux_, pp. 214 ff. Taranatha frequently mentions
burnt offerings as part of worship in medieval Magadha.]

[Footnote 888: I do not refer to the practice of turning disused
temples into schools which is frequent. In some monasteries the monks,
while retaining possession, have themselves opened schools.]

[Footnote 889: It is not clear to me what is really meant by the
_birthdays_ of beings like Maitreya and Amitabha.]

[Footnote 890: _Actes du Sixieme Congres des Orientalistes_, Leide,
1883, sec. IV. pp. 1-120.]

[Footnote 891: _E.g._ in Dipavamsa, XIII; Mahav. XIV. Mahinda is
represented as converting Ceylon by accounts of the terrors of the
next world.]

[Footnote 892: The merit of good deeds can be similarly utilized. The
surviving relatives feed the poor or buy and maintain for the rest of
its life an animal destined to slaughter. The merit then goes to the
deceased.]

[Footnote 893: It may possibly be traceable to Manichaeism which taught
that souls are transferred from one sphere to another by a sort of
cosmic water wheel. See Cumont's article, "La roue A puiser les ames
du Manicheisme" in _Rev. de l'Hist, des Religions_, 1915, p. 384.
Chavannes and Pelliot have shown that traces of Manichaeism lingered
long in Fu-Kien. The metaphor of the endless chain of buckets is also
found in the Yuan Jen Lun.]

[Footnote 894: See Francke, "Ein Buddhistischer Reformversuch in
China," _T'oung Pao_, 1909, pp. 567-602.]




CHAPTER XLVII

KOREA[895]


The Buddhism of Korea cannot be sharply distinguished from the
Buddhism of China and Japan. Its secluded mountain monasteries have
some local colour, and contain halls dedicated to the seven stars and
the mountain gods of the land. And travellers are impressed by the
columns of rock projecting from the soil and carved into images
(miriok), by the painted walls of the temples and by the huge
rolled-up pictures which are painted and displayed on festival days.
But there is little real originality in art: in literature and
doctrine none at all. Buddhism started in Korea with the same
advantages as in China and Japan but it lost in moral influence
because the monks continually engaged in politics and it did not win
temporal power because they were continually on the wrong side. Yet
Korea is not without importance in the annals of far-eastern Buddhism
for, during the wanderings and vicissitudes of the faith, it served as
a rest-house and depot. It was from Korea that Buddhism first entered
Japan: when, during the wars of the five dynasties the T'ien-t'ai
school was nearly annihilated in China, it was revived by a Korean
priest and the earliest extant edition of the Chinese Tripitaka is
known only by a single copy preserved in Korea and taken thence to
Japan.

For our purposes Korean history may be divided into four periods:

      I. The three States (B.C. 57-A.D. 668).
     II. The Kingdom of Silla (668-918).
    III. The Kingdom of Korye (918-1392).
     IV. The Kingdom of Chosen (1392-1910).

The three states were Koguryu in the north, Pakche in the south-west
and Silla in the south-east.[896] Buddhism, together with Chinese
writing, entered Koguryu from the north in 372 and Pakche from the
south a few years later. Silla being more distant and at war with the
other states did not receive it till about 424. In 552 both Japan and
Pakche were at war with Silla and the king of Pakche, wishing to make
an alliance with the Emperor of Japan sent him presents which included
Buddhist books and images. Thus Korea was the intermediary for
introducing Buddhism, writing, and Chinese culture into Japan, and
Korean monks played an important part there both in art and religion.
But the influence of Korea must not be exaggerated. The Japanese
submitted to it believing that they were acquiring the culture of
China and as soon as circumstances permitted they went straight to the
fountain head. The principal early sects were all imported direct from
China.

The kingdom of Silla, which became predominant in the seventh century,
had adopted Buddhism in 528, and maintained friendly intercourse with
the T'ang dynasty. As in Japan Chinese civilization was imitated
wholesale. This tendency strengthened Buddhism at the time, but its
formidable rival Confucianism was also introduced early in the eighth
century, although it did not become predominant until the
thirteenth.[897]

In the seventh century the capital of Silla was a centre of Buddhist
culture and also of trade. Merchants from India, Tibet and Persia are
said to have frequented its markets and several Korean pilgrims
visited India.

In 918 the Wang dynasty, originating in a northern family of humble
extraction, overthrew the kingdom of Silla and with it the old Korean
aristocracy. This was replaced by an official nobility modelled on
that of China: the Chinese system of examinations was adopted and a
class of scholars grew up. But with this attempt to reconstruct
society many abuses appeared. The number of slaves greatly
increased,[898] and there were many hereditary low castes, the
members of which were little better than slaves. Only the higher
castes could compete in examinations or hold office and there were
continual struggles and quarrels between the military and civil
classes. Buddhism flourished much as it flourished in the Hei-an
period of Japan, but its comparative sterility reflected the inferior
social conditions of Korea. Festivals were celebrated by the Court
with great splendour: magnificent monasteries were founded: the bonzes
kept troops and entered the capital armed: the tutor of the heir
apparent and the chancellor of the kingdom were often ecclesiastics,
and a law is said to have been enacted to the effect that if a man had
three sons one of them must become a monk. But about 1250 the
influence of the Sung Confucianists began to be felt. The bonzes were
held responsible for the evils of the time, for the continual feuds,
exactions and massacres, and the civil nobility tended to become
Confucianist and to side against the church and the military. The
inevitable outburst was delayed but also rendered more disastrous when
it came by the action of the Mongols who, as in China, were patrons of
Buddhism. The Yuan dynasty invaded Korea, placed regents in the
principal towns and forced the Korean princes to marry Mongol wives.
It was from Korea that Khubilai despatched his expeditions against
Japan, and in revenge the Japanese harried the Korean coast throughout
the fourteenth century. But so long as the Yuan dynasty lasted the
Korean Court which had become Mongol remained faithful to it and to
Buddhism; when it was ousted by the Ming, a similar movement soon
followed in Korea. The Mongolized dynasty of Korye was deposed and
another, which professed to trace its lineage back to Silla, mounted
the throne and gave the country the name of Chosen.

This revolution was mainly the work of the Confucianist party in the
nobility and it was not unnatural that patriots and reformers should
see in Buddhism nothing but the religion of the corrupt old regime of
the Mongols. During the next century and a half a series of
restrictive measures, sometimes amounting to persecution, were applied
to it. Two kings who dared to build monasteries and favour bonzes were
deposed. Statues were melted down, Buddhist learning was forbidden:
marriages and burials were performed according to the rules of
Chu-hsi. About the beginning of the sixteenth century (the date is
variously given as 1472 and 1512 and perhaps there was more than
one edict) the monasteries in the capital and all cities were closed
and this is why Korean monasteries are all in the country and often in
almost inaccessible mountains. It is only since the Japanese
occupation that temples have been built in towns.

At first the results of the revolution were beneficial. The great
families were compelled to discharge their body-guards whose
collisions had been a frequent cause of bloodshed. The public finances
and military forces were put into order. Printing with moveable type
and a phonetic alphabet were brought into use and vernacular
literature began to flourish. But in time the Confucian literati
formed a sort of corporation and became as troublesome as the bonzes
had been. The aristocracy split into two hostile camps and Korean
politics became again a confused struggle between families and
districts in which progress and even public order became impossible.
For a moment, however, there was a national cause. This was when
Hideyoshi invaded Korea in 1592 as part of his attack on China. The
people rose against the Japanese troops and, thanks to the death of
Hideyoshi rather than to their own valour, got rid of them. It is said
that in this struggle the bonzes took part as soldiers fighting under
their abbots and that the treaty of peace was negotiated by a Korean
and a Japanese monk.[899]

Nevertheless it does not appear that Buddhism enjoyed much
consideration in the next three centuries. The Hermit Kingdom, as it
has been called, became completely isolated and stagnant nor was there
any literary or intellectual life except the mechanical study of the
Chinese classics. Since the annexation by Japan (1910) conditions have
changed and Buddhism is encouraged. Much good work has been done in
collecting and reprinting old books, preserving monuments and copying
inscriptions. The monasteries were formerly under the control of
thirty head establishments or sees, with somewhat conflicting
interests. But about 1912 these thirty sees formed a union under a
president who resides in Seoul and holds office for a year. A
theological seminary also has been founded and a Buddhist magazine is
published.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 895: See various articles in the _Trans. of the Korean
Branch of the R.A.S._, and F. Starr, _Korean Buddhism_. Also M.
Courant, _Bibliographie coreenne_, especially vol. III. chap. 2.]

[Footnote 896: The orthography of these three names varies
considerably. The Japanese equivalents are Koma, Kudara and Shiragi.
There are also slight variations in the dates given for the
introduction of Buddhism into various states. It seems probable that
Marananda and Mukocha, the first missionaries to Pakche and Silla were
Hindus or natives of Central Asia who came from China and some of the
early art of Silla is distinctly Indian in style. See Starr, _l.c._
plates VIII and IX.]

[Footnote 897: These dates are interesting, as reflecting the changes
of thought in China. In the sixth century Chinese influence meant
Buddhism. It is not until the latter part of the Southern Sung, when
the philosophy of Chu-hsi had received official approval, that
Chinese influence meant Confucianism.]

[Footnote 898: The reasons were many, but the upper classes were
evidently ready to oppress the lower. Poor men became the slaves of
the rich to obtain a livelihood. All children of slave women were
declared hereditary slaves and so were the families of criminals.]

[Footnote 899: These statements are taken from Maurice Courant's
Epitome of Korean History in Madrolle's _Guide to North China_, p.
428. I have not been successful in verifying them in Chinese or
Japanese texts. See, however, Starr, _Korean Buddhism_, pp. 29-30.]




CHAPTER XLVIII

ANNAM


The modern territory called Annam includes the ancient Champa, and it
falls within the French political sphere which includes Camboja. Of
Champa I have treated elsewhere in connection with Camboja, but Annam
cannot be regarded as the heir of this ancient culture. It represents
a southward extension of Chinese influence, though it is possible that
Buddhism may have entered it in the early centuries of our era either
by sea or from Burma.

At the present day that part of the French possessions which occupies
the eastern coast of Asia is divided into Tonkin, Annam and Cochin
China. The Annamites are predominant in all three provinces and the
language and religion of all are the same, except that Cochin China
has felt the influence of Europe more strongly than the others. But
before the sixteenth century the name Annam meant rather Tonkin and
the northern portion of modern Annam, the southern portion being the
now vanished kingdom of Champa.

Until the tenth century A.D.[900] Annam in this sense was a part of
the Chinese Empire, although it was occasionally successful in
asserting its temporary independence. In the troubled period which
followed the downfall of the T'ang dynasty this independence became
more permanent. An Annamite prince founded a kingdom called
Dai-co-viet[901] and after a turbulent interval there arose the Li
dynasty which reigned for more than two centuries (1009-1226 A.D.). It
was under this dynasty that the country was first styled An-nam:
previously the official designation of the land or its inhabitants was
Giao-Chi.[902] The Annamites were at this period a considerable
military power, though their internal administration appears to have
been chaotic. They were occasionally at war with China, but as a rule
were ready to send complimentary embassies to the Emperor. With
Champa, which was still a formidable antagonist, there was a continual
struggle. Under the Tran dynasty (1225-1400) the foreign policy of
Annam followed much the same lines. A serious crisis was created by
the expedition of Khubilai Khan in 1285, but though the Annamites
suffered severely at the beginning of the invasion, they did not lose
their independence and their recognition of Chinese suzerainty
remained nominal. In the south the Chams continued hostilities and,
after the loss of some territory, invoked the aid of China with the
result that the Chinese occupied Annam. They held it, however, only
for five years (1414-1418).

In 1428 the Li dynasty came to the throne and ruled Annam at least in
name until the end of the eighteenth century. At first they proved
vigorous and capable; they organized the kingdom in provinces and
crushed the power of Champa. But after the fifteenth century the kings
became merely titular sovereigns and Annamite history is occupied
entirely with the rivalry of the two great families, Trinh and Nguyen,
who founded practically independent kingdoms in Tonkin and
Cochin-China respectively. In 1802 a member of the Nguyen family made
himself Emperor of all Annam but both he and his successors were
careful to profess themselves vassals of China.

Thus it will be seen that Annam was at no time really detached from
China. In spite of political independence it always looked towards the
Chinese Court and though complimentary missions and nominal vassalage
seem unimportant, yet they are significant as indicating admiration
for Chinese institutions. Between Champa and Annam on the other hand
there was perpetual war: in the later phases of the contest the
Annamites appear as invaders and destroyers. They seem to have
disliked the Chams and were not disposed to imitate them. Hence it is
natural that Champa, so long as it existed as an independent kingdom,
should mark the limit of _direct_ Indian influence on the mainland of
Eastern Asia, though afterwards Camboja became the limit. By direct, I
do not mean to exclude the possibility of transmission through Java or
elsewhere, but by whatever route Indian civilization came to
Champa, it brought its own art, alphabet and language, such
institutions as caste and forms of Hinduism and Buddhism which had
borrowed practically nothing from non-Indian sources. In Annam, on the
other hand, Chinese writing and, for literary purposes, a form of the
Chinese language were in use: the arts, customs and institutions were
mainly Chinese: whatever Buddhism can be found was imported from China
and is imperfectly distinguished from Taoism: of Hinduism there are
hardly any traces.[903]

The Buddhism of Annam is often described as corrupt and decadent.
Certainly it would be vain to claim for it that its doctrine and
worship are even moderately pure or primitive, but it cannot be said
to be moribund. The temples are better kept and more numerously
attended than in China and there are also some considerable
monasteries. As in China very few except the monks are exclusive
Buddhists and even the monks have no notion that the doctrines of
Lao-tzu and Confucius are different from Buddhism. The religion of
the ordinary layman is a selection made according to taste from a mass
of beliefs and observances traceable to several distinct sources,
though no Annamite is conscious that there is anything incongruous in
this heterogeneous combination. This fusion of religions, which is
more complete even than in China, is illustrated by the temples of
Annam which are of various kinds.[904] First we have the Chua or
Buddhist temples, always served by bonzes or nuns. They consist of
several buildings of which the principal contains an altar bearing a
series of images arranged on five or six steps, which rise like the
tiers of a theatre. In the front row there is usually an image of the
infant Sakyamuni and near him stand figures of Atnan (Ananda)
and Muc-Lien (Maudgalyayana). On the next stage are Taoist deities
(the Jade Emperor, the Polar Star, and the Southern Star) and on the
higher stages are images representing (_a_) three Buddhas[905] with
attendants, (_b_) the Buddhist Triratna and (_c_) the three
religions, Buddhism, Confucianism and Taoism. But the arrangement of
the images is subject to much variation and the laity hardly know who
are the personages represented. At side altars there are generally
statues of Quan-Am, guardian deities, eminent bonzes and other
worthies. Representations of hell are also common. Part of the temple
is generally set apart for women who frequent it in the hope of
obtaining children by praying to Quan-Am and other goddesses. Buddhist
literature is sometimes printed in these Chua and such works as the
Amitayurdhyanasutra and collections of Dharanis are commonly placed
on the altars.

Quan-Am (Kuan-Yin) is a popular deity and the name seems to be given
to several goddesses. They would probably be described as incarnations
of Avalokita, if any Annamite were to define his beliefs (which is not
usual), but they are really legendary heroines who have left a
reputation for superhuman virtue. One was a daughter of the Emperor
Chuang of the Chou dynasty. Another (Quan-Am-Thi-Kinh), represented as
sitting on a rock and carrying a child in her arms, was a much
persecuted lady who passed part of her life disguised as a bonze. A
third form, Quan-Am-Toa-Son, she who dwells on the mountains, has an
altar in nearly every temple and is specially worshipped by women who
wish for sons. At Hanoi there is a small temple, rising on one column
out of the water near the shore of a lake, like a lotus in a tank,
and containing a brass image of Quan-Am with eight arms, which is
evidently of Indian origin. Sometimes popular heroines such as Cao
Tien, a princess who was drowned, are worshipped without (it would
seem) being identified with Quan-Am.

But besides the Chua there are at least three other kinds of religious
edifices: (i) Dinh. These are municipal temples dedicated to beings
commonly called genii by Europeans, that is to say, superhuman
personages, often, but not always, departed local worthies, who for
one reason or another are supposed to protect and supervise a
particular town or village. The Dinh contains a council room as well
as a shrine and is served by laymen. The genius is often represented
by an empty chair and his name must not be pronounced within the
temple. (ii) Taoist deities are sometimes worshipped in special
temples, but the Annamites do not seem to think that such worship is
antagonistic to Buddhism or even distinct from it. (iii) Temples
dedicated to Confucius (Van mien) are to be found in the towns, but
are generally open only on certain feast days, when they are visited
by officials. Sometimes altars dedicated to the sage may be found in
natural grottoes or other picturesque situations. Besides these
numerous elements, Annamite religion also includes the veneration of
ancestors and ceremonies such as the worship of Heaven and Earth
performed in imitation of the Court of Peking. To this must be added
many local superstitions in which the worship of animals, especially
the tiger, is prominent. But a further analysis of this composite
religion does not fall within my province.

There is little to be said about the history of Buddhism in Annam, but
native tradition places its introduction as late as the tenth
century.[906] Buddhist temples usually contain a statue of Phat
To[907] who is reported to have been the first adherent of the faith
and to have built the first pagoda. He was the tutor of the Emperor
Li-Thai-To who came to the throne in 1009. Phat-To may therefore have
been active in the middle of the tenth century and this agrees with
the statement that the Emperor Dinh Tien-Hoang De (968-979) was a
fervent Buddhist who built temples and did his best to make
converts.[908] One Emperor, Li Hue-Ton, abdicated and retired to a
monastery.

The Annals of Annam[909] record a discussion which took place before
the Emperor Thai-Ton (1433-1442) between a Buddhist and a sorcerer.
Both held singularly mixed beliefs but recognized the Buddha as a
deity. The king said that he could not decide between the two sects,
but gave precedence to the Buddhists.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 900: The dates given are 111 B.C.-939 A.D.]

[Footnote 901: French scholars use a great number of accents and even
new forms of letters to transcribe Annamite, but since this language
has nothing to do with the history of Buddhism or Hinduism and the
accurate orthography is very difficult to read, I have contented
myself with a rough transcription.]

[Footnote 902: This is the common orthography, but Chiao Chih would be
the spelling according to the system of transliterating Chinese
adopted in this book.]

[Footnote 903: It is said that the story of the Ramayana is found in
Annamite legends (_B.E.F.E.O._ 1905, p. 77), and in one or two places
the Annamites reverence statues of Indian deities.]

[Footnote 904: The most trustworthy account of Annamite religion is
perhaps Dumoutier, _Les Cultes Annamites_, Hanoi, 1907. It was
published after the author's death and consists of a series of notes
rather than a general description. See also Diguet, _Les Annamites_,
1906, especially chap. VI.]

[Footnote 905: Maitreya is called Ri-lac = Chinese Mi-le. The
equivalence of the syllables _ri_ and _mi_ seems strange, but certain.
Cf. A-ri-da = Amida or O-mi-to.]

[Footnote 906: Pelliot (Meou-Tseu, traduit et annote, in _T'oung Pao_,
vol. XIX. p. 1920) gives reasons for thinking that Buddhism was
prevalent in Tonkin in the early centuries of our era, but, if so, it
appears to have decayed and been reintroduced. Also at this time
Chiao-Chih may have meant Kuang-tung.]

[Footnote 907: Diguet, _Les Annamites_, p. 303.]

[Footnote 908: Maybon et Russier, _L'Histoire d'Annam_, p. 45.]

[Footnote 909: Dumoutier, _Les Cultes Annamites_, p. 58.]




CHAPTER XLIX

TIBET

INTRODUCTORY


The religion of Tibet and Mongolia, often called Lamaism, is probably
the most singular form of Buddhism in existence and has long attracted
attention in Europe on account of its connection with politics and its
curious resemblance to the Roman Church in ritual as well as in
statecraft. The pontiffs and curia of Lhasa emulated the authority of
the medieval papacy, so that the Mings and Manchus in China as well as
the British in India had to recognize them as a considerable power.

Tibet had early relations with Kashmir, Central Asia and China which
may all have contributed something to its peculiar civilization, but
its religion is in the main tantric Buddhism imported from Bengal and
invigorated from time to time by both native and Indian reformers. But
though almost every feature of Lamaism finds a parallel somewhere in
India, yet too great insistence on its source and historical
development hardly does justice to the originality of the Tibetans.
They borrowed a foreign faith wholesale, but still the relative
emphasis which they laid on its different aspects was something new.
They had only a moderate aptitude for asceticism, meditation and
metaphysics, although they manfully translated huge tomes of Sanskrit
philosophy, but they had a genius for hierarchy, discipline and
ecclesiastical polity unknown to the Hindus. Thus taking the common
Asiatic idea that great and holy men are somehow divine, they made it
the principle of civil and sacerdotal government by declaring the
prelates of the church to be deities incarnate. Yet in strange
contrast to these practical talents, a certain innate devilry made
them exaggerate all the magical, terrifying and demoniac elements to
be found in Indian Tantrism.

The extraordinary figures of raging fiends which fill Tibetan shrines
suggest at first that the artists simply borrowed and made more
horrible the least civilized fancies of Indian sculpture, yet the
majesty of Tibetan architecture (for, judging by the photographs of
Lhasa and Tashilhumpo, it deserves no less a name) gives another
impression. The simplicity of its lines and the solid, spacious walls
unadorned by carving recall Egypt rather than India and harmonize not
with the many-limbed demons but with the calm and dignified features
of the deified priests who are also portrayed in these halls.

An atmosphere of mystery and sorcery has long hung about the
mountainous regions which lie to the north of India. Hindus and
Chinese alike saw in them the home of spirits and wizards, and the
grand but uncanny scenery of these high plateaux has influenced the
art and ideas of the natives. The climate made it natural that priests
should congregate in roomy strongholds, able to defy the cold and
contain the stores necessary for a long winter, and the massive walls
seem to imitate the outline of the rocks out of which they grow. But
the strange shapes assumed by mists and clouds, often dyed many
colours by the rising or setting sun, suggest to the least imaginative
mind an aerial world peopled by monstrous and magical figures. At
other times, when there is no fog, distant objects seem in the still,
clear atmosphere to be very near, until the discovery that they are
really far away produces a strange feeling that they are unreal and
unattainable.

In discussing this interesting faith, I shall first treat of its
history and then of the sacred books on which it professes to be
based. In the light of this information it will be easier to
understand the doctrines of Lamaism and I shall finally say something
about its different sects, particularly as there is reason to think
that the strength of the Established Church, of which the Grand Lama
is head, has been exaggerated.




CHAPTER L

TIBET (_continued_)

HISTORY


It is generally stated that Buddhism was first preached in Tibet at
the instance of King Srong-tsan-gam-po[910] who came to the throne in
629 A.D. Some legendary notices of its earlier appearance[911] will
bear the natural interpretation that the Tibetans (like the Chinese)
had heard something about it from either India or Khotan before they
invited instructors to visit them.[912]

At this time Tibet played some part in the politics of China and
northern India. The Emperor Harsha and the T'ang Emperor T'ai Tsung
exchanged embassies but a second embassy sent from China arrived after
Harsha's death and a usurper who had seized the throne refused to
receive it. The Chinese with the assistance of the kings of Tibet and
Nepal dethroned him and carried him off captive. There is therefore
nothing improbable in the story that Srong-tsan-gam-po had two wives,
who were princesses of Nepal and China respectively. He was an active
ruler, warlike but progressive, and was persuaded by these two ladies
that Buddhism was a necessary part of civilization. According to
tradition he sent to India a messenger called Thonmi Sanbhota, who
studied there for several years, adapted a form of Indian writing to
the use of his native language and translated the Karanda Vyuha.
Recent investigators however have advanced the theory that the Tibetan
letters are derived from the alphabet of Indian origin used in Khotan
and that Sanbhota made its acquaintance in Kashmir.[913] Though the
king and his two wives are now regarded as the first patrons of
Lamaism and worshipped as incarnations of Avalokita and Tara, it does
not appear that his direct religious activity was great or that he
built monasteries. But his reign established the foundations of
civilization without which Buddhism could hardly have flourished, he
to some extent unified Central Tibet, he chose the site of Lhasa as
the capital and introduced the rudiments of literature and art. But
after his death in 650 we hear little more of Buddhism for some
decades.

About 705 King Khri-gtsug-lde-btsan is said to have built monasteries,
caused translations to be made, and summoned monks from Khotan. His
efforts bore little fruit, for no Tibetans were willing to take the
vows, but the edict of 783 preserved in Lhasa mentions his zeal for
religion, and he prepared the way for Khri-sron-lde-btsan in whose
reign Padma-Sambhava, the real founder of Lamaism, arrived in
Tibet.[914]

This event is said to have occurred in 747 and the epoch is
noticeable for two reasons. Firstly Tibet, which had become an
important military power, was now brought into contact both in peace
and war with China and Central Asia. It was predominant in the Tarim
Basin and ruled over parts of Ssu-chuan and Yunnan. China was
obliged to pay tribute and when it was subsequently refused the
Tibetans sacked the capital, Chang-an. In 783 China made a treaty of
peace with Tibet. The king was the son of a Chinese princess and thus
blood as well as wide experience disposed him to open Tibet to foreign
ideas. But in 747 relations with China were bad, so he turned towards
India and invited to his Court a celebrated Pandit named
Santarakshita, who advised him to send for Padma-Sambhava.

Secondly this was the epoch when Amogha flourished in China and
introduced the Mantrayana system or Chen Yen. This was the same form
of corrupt Buddhism which was brought to Tibet and was obviously the
dominant sect in India in the eighth century. It was pliant and
amalgamated easily with local observances, in China with funeral
rites, in Tibet with demonolatry.

At this time Padma-Sambhava was one of the most celebrated exponents
of Tantric Buddhism, and in Tibet is often called simply the Teacher
(Guru or Mahacarya). His portraits represent him as a man of strongly
marked and rather angry features, totally unlike a conventional monk.
A popular account of his life[915] is still widely read and may
contain some grains of history, though the narrative as a whole is
fantastic. It describes him as born miraculously in Udyana but as
having studied at Bodhgaya and travelled in many regions with the
intention of converting all the world. According to his plan, the
conversion of his native land was to be his last labour, and when he
had finished his work in Tibet he vanished thither miraculously. Thus
Udyana is not represented as the source and home of Tantric Buddhism
but as being like Tibet a land of magic and mystery but, like
Tibet, needing conversion: both are disposed to welcome Tantric ideas
but those ideas are elaborated by Padma-Sambhava not in Udyana but in
Bengal which from other sources we know to have been a centre of
Tantrism.

Some other points of interest in these legends may be noticed.
Padma-Sambhava is not celibate but is accompanied by female
companions. He visits many countries which worship various deities and
for each he has a new teaching suited to its needs. Thus in Tibet,
where the older religion consisted of defensive warfare against the
attacks of evil spirits,[916] he assumes the congenial character of a
victorious exorcist, and in his triumphant progress subdues local
demons as methodically as if he were suppressing the guerilla warfare
of native tribes. He has new revelations called Terma which he hides
in caves to be discovered by his successors. These revelations are
said to have been in an unknown language.[917] Those at present
existing are in Tibetan but differ from the canonical scriptures in
certain orthographical peculiarities. The legend thus admits that
Padma-Sambhava preached a non-celibate and magical form of Buddhism,
ready to amalgamate with local superstitions and needing new
revelations for its justification.

He built the monastery of Samye[918] about thirty miles from Lhasa on
the model of Odantapuri in Bengal. Santarakshita became abbot and
from this period dates the foundation of the order of Lamas.[919] Mara
(Thse Ma-ra) was worshipped as well as the Buddhas, but however
corrupt the cultus may have been, Samye was a literary centre where
many translations were made. Among the best known translators was a
monk from Kashmir named Vairocana.[920] It would appear however that
there was considerable opposition to the new school not only from
the priests of the old native religion but from Chinese
Buddhists.[921]

Numerous Tibetan documents discovered in the Tarim basin[922] date
from this period. The absence in them of Buddhist personal names and
the rarity of direct references to Buddhism indicate that though known
in Tibet it was not yet predominant. Buddhist priests (ban-de) are
occasionally mentioned but the title Lama has not been found. The
usages of the Bonpo religion seem familiar to the writers and there
are allusions to religious struggles.

When Padma-Sambhava vanished from Tibet, the legend says that he left
behind him twenty-five disciples, all of them magicians, who
propagated his teaching. At any rate it flourished in the reign of
Ralpachan (the grandson of Khri-sron-lde-btsan). Monasteries
multiplied and received land and the right to collect tithes. To each
monk was assigned a small revenue derived from five tenants and the
hierarchy was reorganized.[923] Many translators were at work in this
period and a considerable part of the present canon was then rendered
into Tibetan. The king's devotion to Buddhism was however unpopular
and he was murdered[924] apparently at the instigation of his brother
and successor Lang-dar-ma,[925] who endeavoured to extirpate Lamaism.
Monasteries were destroyed, books burnt, Indian monks were driven out
of the country and many Lamas were compelled to become hunters or
butchers. But the persecution only lasted three years,[926] for the
wicked king was assassinated by a Lama who has since been canonized by
the Church and the incident of his murder or punishment is still acted
in the mystery plays performed at Himis and other monasteries.

After the death of Lang-dar-ma Tibet ceased to exist as a united
kingdom and was divided among clans and chieftains. This was
doubtless connected with the collapse of Tibetan power in the Tarim
basin, but whether as effect or cause it is hard to say. The
persecution may have had a political motive: Lang-dar-ma may have
thought that the rise of monastic corporations, and their right to own
land and levy taxes were a menace to unity and military efficiency.
But the political confusion which followed on his death was not due to
the triumphant restoration of Lamaism. Its recovery was slow. The
interval during which Buddhism almost disappeared is estimated by
native authorities as from 73 to 108 years, and its subsequent revival
is treated as a separate period called phyi-dar or later diffusion in
contrast to the sna-dar or earlier diffusion. The silence of
ecclesiastical history during the tenth century confirms the gravity
of the catastrophe.[927] On the other hand the numerous translations
made in the ninth century were not lost and this indicates that there
were monasteries to preserve them, for instance Samye.

At the beginning of the eleventh century we hear of foreign monks
arriving from various countries. The chronicles[928] say that the chief
workers in the new diffusion were La-chen, Lo-chen, the royal Lama Yeses
Hod and Atisa. The first appears to have been a Tibetan but the pupil of
a teacher who had studied in Nepal. Lo-chen was a Kashmiri and several
other Kashmiri Lamas are mentioned as working in Tibet. Yeses Hod was a
king or chieftain of mNa-ris in western Tibet who is said to have been
disgusted with the debased Tantrism which passed as Buddhism. He
therefore sent young Lamas to study in India and also invited thence
learned monks. The eminent Dharmapala, a monk of Magadha who was on a
pilgrimage in Nepal, became his tutor. Yeses Hod came to an unfortunate
end. He was taken captive by the Raja of Garlog, an enemy of Buddhism,
and died in prison. It is possible that this Raja was the ruler of
Garhwal and a Mohammedan. The political history of the period is far from
clear, but evidently there were numerous Buddhist schools in Bengal,
Kashmir and Nepal and numerous learned monks ready to take up their
residence in Tibet. This readiness has been explained as due to fear of
the rising tide of Islam, but was more probably the result of the revival
of Buddhism in Bengal during the eleventh century. The most illustrious
of these pandits was Atisa[929] (980-1053), a native of Bengal, who was
ordained at Odontapuri and studied in Burma.[930] Subsequently he was
appointed head of the monastery of Vikramasila and was induced to visit
Tibet in 1038.[931] He remained there until his death fifteen years
later; introduced a new calendar and inaugurated the second period of
Tibetan Buddhism which is marked by the rise of successive sects
described as reforms. It may seem a jest to call the teaching of Atisa a
reform, for he professed the Kalacakra, the latest and most corrupt form
of Indian Buddhism, but it was doubtless superior in discipline and
coherency to the native superstitions mixed with debased tantrism, which
it replaced.

As in Japan during the eleventh and twelfth centuries many monasteries
were founded and grew in importance, and what might have happened in
Japan but for the somewhat unscrupulous prescience of Japanese
statesmen actually did happen in Tibet. Among the numerous contending
chiefs none was pre-eminent: the people were pugnacious but
superstitious. They were ready to build and respect when built the
substantial structures required to house monastic communities during
the rigorous winter. Hence the monasteries became the largest and
safest buildings in the land, possessing the double strength of walls
and inviolability. The most important was the Sakya monastery. Its
abbots were of royal blood and not celibate, and this dynasty of
ecclesiastical statesmen practically ruled Tibet at a critical period
in the history of eastern Asia and indeed of the world, namely, the
conquests of Chinggiz[932] and the rise of the Mongol Empire.

There is no evidence that Chinggiz was specially favourable to
Buddhism. His principle was one King and one God[933] and like other
princes of his race he thought of religions not as incompatible
systems but as different methods of worship of no more importance than
the different languages used in prayer. The destruction wrought by the
Mongol conquerors has often been noticed, but they had also an ample,
unifying temper which deserves recognition. China, Russia and Persia
all achieved a unity after the Mongol conquest which they did not
possess before, and though this unification may be described as a
protest and reaction, yet but for the Mongols and their treatment of
large areas as units it would not have been possible. The Mings could
not have united China before the Yuan dynasty as they did after it.

In spite of some statements to the contrary there is no proof that the
early Mongols invaded or conquered central Tibet, but Khubilai subdued
the eastern provinces and through the Lamaist hierarchy established a
special connection between Tibet and his dynasty. This connection
began even in the time of his predecessor, for the head Lama of the
Sakya monastery commonly known as Sakya Pandita (or Sa-skya-pan-cen)
was summoned to the Mongol Court in 1246-8, and cured the Emperor of
an illness.[934] This Lama was a man of great learning and influence.
He had received a double education both secular and religious, and was
acquainted with foreign languages. The favourable impression which he
created no doubt facilitated the brilliant achievements of his nephew
and successor, who is commonly known as Bashpa or Pagspa.[935]

Khubilai Khan was not content with the vague theism of Central Asia
and wished to give his rude Mongols a definite religion with some
accessories of literature and manners. Confucianism was clearly too
scholastic for a fighting race and we may surmise that he rejected
Christianity as distant and unimportant, Mohammedanism as
inconveniently mixed with politics. But why did he prefer Lamaism to
Chinese Buddhism? The latter can hardly have been too austerely pure
to suit his ends, and Tibetan was as strange as Chinese to the
Mongols. But the Mongol Court had already been favourably impressed by
Tibetan Lamas and the Emperor probably had a just feeling that the
intellectual calibre of the Mongols and Tibetans was similar and also
that it was politic to conciliate the uncanny spiritual potentates who
ruled in a land which it was difficult to invade. At any rate he
summoned the abbot of Sakya to China in 1261 and was initiated by him
into the mysteries of Lamaism.[936]

It is said that before Pagspa's birth the God Ganesa showed his
father all the land of Tibet and told him that it would be the kingdom
of his son. In later life when he had difficulties at the Chinese
Court Mahakala appeared and helped him, and the mystery which he
imparted to Khubilai is called the Hevajravasita.[937] These
legends indicate that there was a large proportion of Sivaism in the
religion first taught to the Mongols, larger perhaps than in the
present Lamaism of Lhasa.

The Mongol historian Sanang Setsen relates[938] that Pagspa took a
higher seat than the Emperor when instructing him and on other
occasions sat on the same level. This sounds improbable, but it is
clear that he enjoyed great power and dignity. In China he received
the title of Kuo-Shih or instructor of the nation and was made the
head of all Buddhists, Lamaists and other. In Tibet he was recognized
as head of the Church and tributary sovereign, though it would appear
that the Emperor named a lay council to assist him in the government
and also had a commissioner in each of the three provinces. This was a
good political bargain and laid the foundations of Chinese influence
in a country which he could hardly have subdued by force.

Pagspa was charged by the Emperor to provide the Mongols with an
alphabet as well as a religion. For this purpose he used a square
form of the Tibetan letters,[939] written not in horizontal but in
vertical lines. But the experiment was not successful. The characters
were neither easy to write nor graceful, and after Pagspa's death his
invention fell into disuse and was replaced by an enlarged and
modified form of the Uigur alphabet. This had already been employed
for writing Mongol by Sakya Pandita and its definitive form for that
purpose was elaborated by the Lama Chos-kyi-hod-zer in the reign of
Khubilai's successor. This alphabet is of Aramaic origin, and had
already been utilized by Buddhists for writing religious works, so its
application to Mongol was merely an extension of its general currency
in Asia.[940]

Pagspa also superintended the preparation of a new edition of the
Tripitaka, not in Mongol but in Chinese. Among the learned editors
were persons acquainted with Sanskrit, Chinese, Tibetan and Uigur. An
interesting but natural feature of this edition is that it notes
whether the various Chinese texts are found in the Tibetan Canon or
not.

Khubilai further instituted a bureau of fine arts, the head of which
was a Lama called Aniko, skilled in both sculpture and painting. He
and his Chinese pupil Liu Yuan introduced into Peking various branches
of Tibetan art such as Buddhist images of a special type, ornamental
ironwork and gold tapestry. The Chinese at this period appear to have
regarded Tibetan art as a direct importation from India.[941] And no
doubt Tibetan art was founded on that of Nepal which in its turn came
from Bengal. Miniature painting is a characteristic of both. But in
later times the individuality of Tibet, shown alike in its monstrous
deities and its life-like portraits of Lamas, imposed itself on Nepal.
Indian and Tibetan temples are not alike. In the former there is
little painting but the walls and pillars are covered with a
superabundance of figures carved in relief: in Tibet pictures and
painted banners are the first thing to strike the eye, but carvings in
relief are rare.

It is hard to say to what extent the Mongols beyond such parts of
northern China as felt the direct influence of the imperial court were
converted to Lamaism. At any rate their conversion was only temporary
for, as will be related below, a reconversion was necessary in the
sixteenth century. It looks as if the first growth of Mongolian
Buddhism was part of a political system and collapsed together with
it. But so long as the Yuan dynasty reigned, Lamaist influence was
strong and the downfall of the Yuan was partly caused by their
subservience to the clergy and extravagant expenditure on religious
buildings and ceremonies. After the departure of Pagspa, other Lamas
held a high position at the Court of Peking such as Chos-kyi-hod-zer
and gYun-ston rDo-rje-dpal. The latter was a distinguished exponent
of the Kalacakra system and the teacher of the historian Bu-ston who
is said to have arranged the Tibetan Canon.

Although the Yuan dynasty heaped favours upon priests and monasteries,
it does not appear that religion flourished in Tibet during the
fourteenth century for at the end of that period the grave abuses
prevalent provoked the reforming zeal of Tsong-kha-pa. Prom 1270 to
1340 the abbots of Sakya were rulers of both Church and State, and we
hear that in 1320 they burned the rival monastery of Dikung. The
language of Sanang Setsen implies that each abbot was appointed or
invested by the Emperor[942] and their power declined with the Yuan
dynasty. Other monasteries increased in importance and a chief known
as Phagmodu[943] succeeded, after many years of fighting, in founding
a lay dynasty which ruled parts of Tibet until the seventeenth
century.

In 1368 the Ming superseded the Yuan. They were not professed
Buddhists to the same extent and they had no preference for Lamaism
but they were anxious to maintain good relations with Tibet and to
treat it as a friendly but vassal state. They accorded imperial
recognition (with an implication of suzerainty) to the dynasty of
Phagmodu and also to the abbots of eight monasteries. Though they were
doubtless glad to see Tibet a divided and contentious house, it does
not appear that they interfered actively in its affairs or did more
than recognize the _status quo_. In the time of Khubilai the
primacy of Sakya was a reality: seventy years later Sakya was only one
among several great monasteries.

