The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vedanta-Sutras with the Commentary by
Sankaracarya

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Vedanta-Sutras with the Commentary by Sankaracarya
       Sacred Books of the East, Volume 1

Author:

Translator: George Thibaut

Release Date: July 15, 2005 [EBook #16295]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VEDANTA-SUTRAS ***




Produced by Srinivasan Sriram, David King, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team





VEDANTA-SUTRAS

_With the Commentary by_

SA@NKARACHARYA

_Translated by_
GEORGE THIBAUT

_Part I_




CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION

VEDANTA-SUTRAS WITH THE COMMENTARY BY SA@NKARACHARYA.

ADHYAYA I.

  Pada I.

  Pada II.

  Pada III.

  Pada IV.

ADHYAYA II.

  Pada I.

  Pada II.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Translations of
the Sacred Books of the East.

[Transcriber's Note: This book contains many words with one or two
letters in the word printed in italics; those letters are transcribed by
enclosing them in slashes, e.g. "karmaka/nd/a" has the letters "nd" in
italics.  Also, the symbol "@" is used before the letter "n" to indicate
a horizontal bar across the top.]




INTRODUCTION.


To the sacred literature of the Brahmans, in the strict sense of the
term, i.e. to the Veda, there belongs a certain number of complementary
works without whose assistance the student is, according to Hindu
notions, unable to do more than commit the sacred texts to memory. In
the first place all Vedic texts must, in order to be understood, be read
together with running commentaries such as Saya/n/a's commentaries on
the Sa/m/hitas and Brahma/n/as, and the Bhashyas ascribed to Sa@nkara on
the chief Upanishads. But these commentaries do not by themselves
conduce to a full comprehension of the contents of the sacred texts,
since they confine themselves to explaining the meaning of each detached
passage without investigating its relation to other passages, and the
whole of which they form part; considerations of the latter kind are at
any rate introduced occasionally only. The task of taking a
comprehensive view of the contents of the Vedic writings as a whole, of
systematising what they present in an unsystematical form, of showing
the mutual co-ordination or subordination of single passages and
sections, and of reconciling contradictions--which, according to the
view of the orthodox commentators, can be apparent only--is allotted to
a separate sastra or body of doctrine which is termed Mima/m/sa, i.e.
the investigation or enquiry [Greek: kat ezochaen], viz. the enquiry
into the connected meaning of the sacred texts.

Of this Mima/m/sa two branches have to be distinguished, the so-called
earlier (purva) Mima/m/sa, and the later (uttara) Mima/m/sa. The former
undertakes to systematise the karmaka/nd/a, i.e. that entire portion of
the Veda which is concerned with action, pre-eminently sacrificial
action, and which comprises the Sa/m/hitas and the Brahma/n/as exclusive
of the Ara/n/yaka portions; the latter performs the same service with
regard to the so-called j/n/anaka/nd/a, i.e. that part of the Vedic
writings which includes the Ara/n/yaka portions of the Brahma/n/as, and
a number of detached treatises called Upanishads. Its subject is not
action but knowledge, viz. the knowledge of Brahman.

At what period these two /s/astras first assumed a definite form, we are
unable to ascertain. Discussions of the nature of those which constitute
the subject-matter of the Purva Mima/m/sa must have arisen at a very
early period, and the word Mima/m/sa itself together with its
derivatives is already employed in the Brahma/n/as to denote the doubts
and discussions connected with certain contested points of ritual. The
want of a body of definite rules prescribing how to act, i.e. how to
perform the various sacrifices in full accordance with the teaching of
the Veda, was indeed an urgent one, because it was an altogether
practical want, continually pressing itself on the adhvaryus engaged in
ritualistic duties. And the task of establishing such rules was moreover
a comparatively limited and feasible one; for the members of a certain
Vedic sakha or school had to do no more than to digest thoroughly their
own brahma/n/a and sa/m/hita, without being under any obligation of
reconciling with the teaching of their own books the occasionally
conflicting rules implied in the texts of other sakhas. It was assumed
that action, as being something which depends on the will and choice of
man, admits of alternatives, so that a certain sacrifice may be
performed in different ways by members of different Vedic schools, or
even by the followers of one and the same sakha.

The Uttara Mima/m/sa-/s/astra may be supposed to have originated
considerably later than the Purva Mima/m/sa. In the first place, the
texts with which it is concerned doubtless constitute the latest branch
of Vedic literature. And in the second place, the subject-matter of
those texts did not call for a systematical treatment with equal
urgency, as it was in no way connected with practice; the mental
attitude of the authors of the Upanishads, who in their lucubrations on
Brahman and the soul aim at nothing less than at definiteness and
coherence, may have perpetuated itself through many generations without
any great inconvenience resulting therefrom.

But in the long run two causes must have acted with ever-increasing
force, to give an impulse to the systematic working up of the teaching
of the Upanishads also. The followers of the different Vedic sakhas no
doubt recognised already at an early period the truth that, while
conflicting statements regarding the details of a sacrifice can be got
over by the assumption of a vikalpa, i.e. an optional proceeding, it is
not so with regard to such topics as the nature of Brahman, the relation
to it of the human soul, the origin of the physical universe, and the
like. Concerning them, one opinion only can be the true one, and it
therefore becomes absolutely incumbent on those, who look on the whole
body of the Upanishads as revealed truth, to demonstrate that their
teaching forms a consistent whole free from all contradictions. In
addition there supervened the external motive that, while the
karmaka/nd/a of the Veda concerned only the higher castes of
brahmanically constituted society, on which it enjoins certain
sacrificial performances connected with certain rewards, the
j/n/anaka/nd/a, as propounding a certain theory of the world, towards
which any reflecting person inside or outside the pale of the orthodox
community could not but take up a definite position, must soon have
become the object of criticism on the part of those who held different
views on religious and philosophic things, and hence stood in need of
systematic defence.

At present there exists a vast literature connected with the two
branches of the Mima/m/sa. We have, on the one hand, all those works
which constitute the Purva Mima/m/sa-/s/astra--or as it is often,
shortly but not accurately, termed, the Mima/m/sa-/s/astra--and, on the
other hand, all those works which are commonly comprised under the name
Vedanta-/s/astra. At the head of this extensive literature there stand
two collections of Sutras (i.e. short aphorisms constituting in their
totality a complete body of doctrine upon some subject), whose reputed
authors are Jainini and Badaraya/n/a. There can, however, be no doubt
that the composition of those two collections of Sutras was preceded by
a long series of preparatory literary efforts of which they merely
represent the highly condensed outcome. This is rendered probable by the
analogy of other /s/astras, as well as by the exhaustive thoroughness
with which the Sutras perform their task of systematizing the teaching
of the Veda, and is further proved by the frequent references which the
Sutras make to the views of earlier teachers. If we consider merely the
preserved monuments of Indian literature, the Sutras (of the two
Mima/m/sas as well as of other /s/astras) mark the beginning; if we,
however, take into account what once existed, although it is at present
irretrievably lost, we observe that they occupy a strictly central
position, summarising, on the one hand, a series of early literary
essays extending over many generations, and forming, on the other hand,
the head spring of an ever broadening activity of commentators as well
as virtually independent writers, which reaches down to our days, and
may yet have some future before itself.

The general scope of the two Mima/m/sa-sutras and their relation to the
Veda have been indicated in what precedes. A difference of some
importance between the two has, however, to be noted in this connexion.
The systematisation of the karmaka/nd/a of the Veda led to the
elaboration of two classes of works, viz. the Kalpa-sutras on the one
hand, and the Purva Mima/m/sa-sutras on the other hand. The former give
nothing but a description as concise as possible of the sacrifices
enjoined in the Brahma/n/as; while the latter discuss and establish the
general principles which the author of a Kalpa-sutra has to follow, if
he wishes to render his rules strictly conformable to the teaching of
the Veda. The j/n/anaka/nd/a of the Veda, on the other hand, is
systematised in a single work, viz. the Uttara Mima/m/sa or
Vedanta-sutras, which combine the two tasks of concisely stating the
teaching of the Veda, and of argumentatively establishing the special
interpretation of the Veda adopted in the Sutras. This difference may be
accounted for by two reasons. In the first place, the contents of the
karmaka/nd/a, as being of an entirely practical nature, called for
summaries such as the Kalpa-sutras, from which all burdensome
discussions of method are excluded; while there was no similar reason
for the separation of the two topics in the case of the purely
theoretical science of Brahman. And, in the second place, the
Vedanta-sutras throughout presuppose the Purva Mima/m/sa-sutras, and may
therefore dispense with the discussion of general principles and methods
already established in the latter.

The time at which the two Mima/m/sa-sutras were composed we are at
present unable to fix with any certainty; a few remarks on the subject
will, however, be made later on. Their outward form is that common to
all the so-called Sutras which aims at condensing a given body of
doctrine in a number of concise aphoristic sentences, and often even
mere detached words in lieu of sentences. Besides the Mima/m/sa-sutras
this literary form is common to the fundamental works on the other
philosophic systems, on the Vedic sacrifices, on domestic ceremonies, on
sacred law, on grammar, and on metres. The two Mima/m/sa-sutras occupy,
however, an altogether exceptional position in point of style. All
Sutras aim at conciseness; that is clearly the reason to which this
whole species of literary composition owes its existence. This their aim
they reach by the rigid exclusion of all words which can possibly be
spared, by the careful avoidance of all unnecessary repetitions, and, as
in the case of the grammatical Sutras, by the employment of an
arbitrarily coined terminology which substitutes single syllables for
entire words or combination of words. At the same time the manifest
intention of the Sutra writers is to express themselves with as much
clearness as the conciseness affected by them admits of. The aphorisms
are indeed often concise to excess, but not otherwise intrinsically
obscure, the manifest care of the writers being to retain what is
essential in a given phrase, and to sacrifice only what can be supplied,
although perhaps not without difficulty, and an irksome strain of memory
and reflection. Hence the possibility of understanding without a
commentary a very considerable portion at any rate of the ordinary
Sutras. Altogether different is the case of the two Mima/m/sa-sutras.
There scarcely one single Sutra is intelligible without a commentary.
The most essential words are habitually dispensed with; nothing is, for
instance, more common than the simple ommission of the subject or
predicate of a sentence. And when here and there a Sutra occurs whose
words construe without anything having to be supplied, the phraseology
is so eminently vague and obscure that without the help derived from a
commentary we should be unable to make out to what subject the Sutra
refers. When undertaking to translate either of the Mima/m/sa-sutras we
therefore depend altogether on commentaries; and hence the question
arises which of the numerous commentaries extant is to be accepted as a
guide to their right understanding.

The commentary here selected for translation, together with
Badaraya/n/a's Sutras (to which we shall henceforth confine our
attention to the exclusion of Jaimini's Purva Mima/m/sa-sutras), is the
one composed by the celebrated theologian /S/a@nkara or, as he is
commonly called, /S/a@nkara/k/arya. There are obvious reasons for this
selection. In the first place, the /S/a@nkara-bhashya represents the
so-called orthodox side of Brahminical theology which strictly upholds
the Brahman or highest Self of the Upanishads as something different
from, and in fact immensely superior to, the divine beings such as
Vish/n/u or Siva, which, for many centuries, have been the chief objects
of popular worship in India. In the second place, the doctrine advocated
by /S/a@nkara is, from a purely philosophical point of view and apart
from all theological considerations, the most important and interesting
one which has arisen on Indian soil; neither those forms of the Vedanta
which diverge from the view represented by /S/a@nkara nor any of the
non-Vedantic systems can be compared with the so-called orthodox Vedanta
in boldness, depth, and subtlety of speculation. In the third place,
/S/a@nkara's bhaashya is, as far as we know, the oldest of the extant
commentaries, and relative antiquity is at any rate one of the
circumstances which have to be taken into account, although, it must be
admitted, too much weight may easily be attached to it. The
/S/a@nkara-bhashya further is the authority most generally deferred to
in India as to the right understanding of the Vedanta-sutras, and ever
since /S/a@nkara's time the majority of the best thinkers of India have
been men belonging to his school. If in addition to all this we take
into consideration the intrinsic merits of /S/a@nkara's work which, as a
piece of philosophical argumentation and theological apologetics,
undoubtedly occupies a high rank, the preference here given to it will
be easily understood.

But to the European--or, generally, modern--translator of the
Vedanta-sutras with /S/a@nkara's commentary another question will of
course suggest itself at once, viz. whether or not /S/a@nkara's
explanations faithfully render the intended meaning of the author of the
Sutras. To the Indian Pandit of /S/a@nkara's school this question has
become an indifferent one, or, to state the case more accurately, he
objects to it being raised, as he looks on /S/a@nkara's authority as
standing above doubt and dispute. When pressed to make good his position
he will, moreover, most probably not enter into any detailed comparison
of /S/a@nkara's comments with the text of Badaraya/n/a's Sutras, but
will rather endeavour to show on speculative grounds that /S/a@nkara's
philosophical view is the only true one, whence it of course follows
that it accurately represents the meaning of Badaraya/n/a, who himself
must necessarily be assured to have taught the true doctrine. But on the
modern investigator, who neither can consider himself bound by the
authority of a name however great, nor is likely to look to any Indian
system of thought for the satisfaction of his speculative wants, it is
clearly incumbent not to acquiesce from the outset in the
interpretations given of the Vedanta-sutras--and the Upanishads--by
/S/a@nkara and his school, but to submit them, as far as that can be
done, to a critical investigation.

This is a task which would have to be undertaken even if /S/a@nkara's
views as to the true meaning of the Sutras and Upanishads had never been
called into doubt on Indian soil, although in that case it could perhaps
hardly be entered upon with much hope of success; but it becomes much
more urgent, and at the same time more feasible, when we meet in India
itself with systems claiming to be Vedantic and based on interpretations
of the Sutras and Upanishads more or less differing from those of
/S/a@nkara. The claims of those systems to be in the possession of the
right understanding of the fundamental authorities of the Vedanta must
at any rate be examined, even if we should finally be compelled to
reject them.

It appears that already at a very early period the Vedanta-sutras had
come to be looked upon as an authoritative work, not to be neglected by
any who wished to affiliate their own doctrines to the Veda. At present,
at any rate, there are very few Hindu sects not interested in showing
that their distinctive tenets are countenanced by Badaraya/n/a's
teaching. Owing to this the commentaries on the Sutras have in the
course of time become very numerous, and it is at present impossible to
give a full and accurate enumeration even of those actually existing,
much less of those referred to and quoted. Mr. Fitz-Edward Hall, in his
Bibliographical Index, mentions fourteen commentaries, copies of which
had been inspected by himself. Some among these (as, for instance,
Ramanuja's Vedanta-sara, No. XXXV) are indeed not commentaries in the
strict sense of the word, but rather systematic expositions of the
doctrine supposed to be propounded in the Sutras; but, on the other
hand, there are in existence several true commentaries which had not
been accessible to Fitz-Edward Hall. It would hardly be practical--and
certainly not feasible in this place--to submit all the existing
bhashyas to a critical enquiry at once. All we can do here is to single
out one or a few of the more important ones, and to compare their
interpretations with those given by /S/a@nkara, and with the text of the
Sutras themselves.

The bhashya, which in this connexion is the first to press itself upon
our attention, is the one composed by the famous Vaish@nava theologian
and philosopher Ramanuja, who is supposed to have lived in the twelfth
century. The Ramanuja or, as it is often called, the /S/ri-bhashya
appears to be the oldest commentary extant next to /S/a@nkara's. It is
further to be noted that the sect of the Ramanujas occupies a
pre-eminent position among the Vaishnava, sects which themselves, in
their totality, may claim to be considered the most important among all
Hindu sects. The intrinsic value of the /S/ri-bhashya moreover is--as
every student acquainted with it will be ready to acknowledge--a very
high one; it strikes one throughout as a very solid performance due to a
writer of extensive learning and great power of argumentation, and in
its polemic parts, directed chiefly against the school of /S/a@nkara, it
not unfrequently deserves to be called brilliant even. And in addition
to all this it shows evident traces of being not the mere outcome of
Ramanuja's individual views, but of resting on an old and weighty
tradition.

This latter point is clearly of the greatest importance. If it could be
demonstrated or even rendered probable only that the oldest bhashya
which we possess, i.e. the /S/a@nkara-bhashya, represents an
uninterrupted and uniform tradition bridging over the interval between
Badaraya/n/a, the reputed author of the Sutras, and /S/a@nkara; and if,
on the other hand, it could be shown that the more modern bhashyas are
not supported by old tradition, but are nothing more than bold attempts
of clever sectarians to force an old work of generally recognised
authority into the service of their individual tenets; there would
certainly be no reason for us to raise the question whether the later
bhashyas can help us in making out the true meaning of the Sutras. All
we should have to do in that case would be to accept /S/a@nkara's
interpretations as they stand, or at the utmost to attempt to make out,
if at all possible, by a careful comparison of /S/a@nkara's bhashya with
the text of the Sutras, whether the former in all cases faithfully
represents the purport of the latter.

In the most recent book of note which at all enters into the question as
to how far we have to accept /S/a@nkara as a guide to the right
understanding of the Sutras (Mr. A. Gough's Philosophy of the
Upanishads) the view is maintained (pp. 239 ff.) that /S/a@nkara is the
generally recognised expositor of true Vedanta doctrine, that that
doctrine was handed down by an unbroken series of teachers intervening
between him and the Sutrakara, and that there existed from the beginning
only one Vedanta doctrine, agreeing in all essential points with the
doctrine known to us from /S/a@nkara's writings. Mr. Gough undertakes to
prove this view, firstly, by a comparison of /S/a@nkara's system with
the teaching of the Upanishads themselves; and, secondly, by a
comparison of the purport of the Sutras--as far as that can be made out
independently of the commentaries--with the interpretations given of
them by /S/a@nkara. To both these points we shall revert later on.
Meanwhile, I only wish to remark concerning the former point that, even
if we could show with certainty that all the Upanishads propound one and
the same doctrine, there yet remains the undeniable fact of our being
confronted by a considerable number of essentially differing theories,
all of which claim to be founded on the Upanishads. And with regard to
the latter point I have to say for the present that, as long as we have
only /S/a@nkara's bhashya before us, we are naturally inclined to find
in the Sutras--which, taken by themselves, are for the greater part
unintelligible--the meaning which /S/a@nkara ascribes to them; while a
reference to other bhashyas may not impossibly change our views at
once.--Meanwhile, we will consider the question as to the unbroken
uniformity of Vedantic tradition from another point or view, viz. by
enquiring whether or not the Sutras themselves, and the
/S/a@nkara-bhashya, furnish any indications of there having existed
already at an early time essentially different Vedantic systems or lines
of Vedantic speculation.

Beginning with the Sutras, we find that they supply ample evidence to
the effect that already at a very early time, viz. the period antecedent
to the final composition of the Vedanta-sutras in their present shape,
there had arisen among the chief doctors of the Vedanta differences of
opinion, bearing not only upon minor points of doctrine, but affecting
the most essential parts of the system. In addition to Badaraya/n/a
himself, the reputed author of the Sutras, the latter quote opinions
ascribed to the following teachers: Atreya, A/s/marathya, Au/d/ulomi,
Karsh/n/agini, Ka/s/ak/ri/tsna, Jaimini, Badari. Among the passages
where diverging views of those teachers are recorded and contrasted
three are of particular importance. Firstly, a passage in the fourth
pada of the fourth adhyaya (Sutras 5-7), where the opinions of various
teachers concerning the characteristics of the released soul are given,
and where the important discrepancy is noted that, according to
Au/d/ulomi, its only characteristic is thought (/k/aitanya), while
Jaimini maintains that it possesses a number of exalted qualities, and
Badaraya/n/a declares himself in favour of a combination of those two
views.--The second passage occurs in the third pada of the fourth
adhyaya (Sutras 7-14), where Jaimini maintains that the soul of him who
possesses the lower knowledge of Brahman goes after death to the highest
Brahman, while Badari--whose opinion is endorsed by /S/a@nkara--teaches
that it repairs to the lower Brahman only--Finally, the third and most
important passage is met with in the fourth pada of the first adhyaya
(Sutras 20-22), where the question is discussed why in a certain passage
of the Brhadara/n/yaka Brahman is referred to in terms which are
strictly applicable to the individual soul only. In connexion therewith
the Sutras quote the views of three ancient teachers about the relation
in which the individual soul stands to Brahman. According to
A/s/marathya (if we accept the interpretation of his view given by
/S/a@nkara and /S/a@nkara's commentators) the soul stands to Brahman in
the bhedabheda relation, i.e. it is neither absolutely different nor
absolutely non-different from it, as sparks are from fire. Audulomi, on
the other hand, teaches that the soul is altogether different from
Brahman up to the time when obtaining final release it is merged in it,
and Ka/s/ak/ri/tsna finally upholds the doctrine that the soul is
absolutely non-different from Brahman; which, in, some way or other
presents itself as the individual soul.

That the ancient teachers, the ripest outcome of whose speculations and
discussions is embodied in the Vedanta-sutras, disagreed among
themselves on points of vital importance is sufficiently proved by the
three passages quoted. The one quoted last is specially significant as
showing that recognised authorities--deemed worthy of being quoted in
the Sutras--denied that doctrine on which the whole system of /S/a@nkara
hinges, viz. the doctrine of the absolute identity of the individual
soul with Brahman.

Turning next to the /S/a@nkara-bhashya itself, we there also meet with
indications that the Vedantins were divided among themselves on
important points of dogma. These indications are indeed not numerous:
/S/a@nkara, does not on the whole impress one as an author particularly
anxious to strengthen his own case by appeals to ancient authorities, a
peculiarity of his which later writers of hostile tendencies have not
failed to remark and criticise. But yet more than once /S/a@nkara also
refers to the opinion of 'another,' viz., commentator of the Sutras, and
in several places /S/a@nkara's commentators explain that the 'other'
meant is the V/ri/ttikara (about whom more will be said shortly). Those
references as a rule concern minor points of exegesis, and hence throw
little or no light on important differences of dogma; but there are two
remarks of /S/a@nkara's at any rate which are of interest in this
connexion. The one is made with reference to Sutras 7-14 of the third
pada of the fourth adhyaya; 'some,' he says there, 'declare those
Sutras, which I look upon as setting forth the siddhanta view, to state
merely the purvapaksha;' a difference of opinion which, as we have seen
above, affects the important question as to the ultimate fate of those
who have not reached the knowledge of the highest Brahman.--And under I,
3, 19 /S/a@nkara, after having explained at length that the individual
soul as such cannot claim any reality, but is real only in so far as it
is identical with Brahman, adds the following words, 'apare tu vadina/h/
paramarthikam eva jaiva/m/ rupam iti manyante asmadiya/s/ /k/a ke/k/it,'
i.e. other theorisers again, and among them some of ours, are of opinion
that the individual soul as such is real.' The term 'ours,' here made
use of, can denote only the Aupanishadas or Vedantins, and it thus
appears that /S/a@nkara himself was willing to class under the same
category himself and philosophers who--as in later times the Ramanujas
and others--looked upon the individual soul as not due to the fictitious
limitations of Maya, but as real in itself; whatever may be the relation
in which they considered it to stand to the highest Self.

From what precedes it follows that the Vedantins of the school to which
/S/a@nkara himself belonged acknowledged the existence of Vedantic
teaching of a type essentially different from their own. We must now
proceed to enquire whether the Ramanuja system, which likewise claims to
be Vedanta, and to be founded on the Vedanta-sutras, has any title to be
considered an ancient system and the heir of a respectable tradition.

It appears that Ramanuja claims--and by Hindu writers is generally
admitted--to follow in his bhashya the authority of Bodhayana, who had
composed a v/ri/tti on the Sutras. Thus we read in the beginning of the
/S/ri-bhashya (Pandit, New Series, VII, p. 163),
'Bhagavad-bodhayanak/ri/ta/m/ vistirna/m/ brahmasutra-v/ri/tti/m/
purva/k/arya/h/ sa/m/kikshipus tanmatanusare/n/a sutrakshara/n/i
vyakhyasyante.' Whether the Bodhayana to whom that v/ri/tti is ascribed
is to be identified with the author of the Kalpa-sutra, and other works,
cannot at present be decided. But that an ancient v/ri/tti on the Sutras
connected with Bodhayana's name actually existed, there is not any
reason to doubt. Short quotations from it are met with in a few places
of the /S/ri-bhashya, and, as we have seen above, /S/a@nkara's
commentators state that their author's polemical remarks are directed
against the V/ri/ttikara. In addition to Bodhayana, Ramanuja appeals to
quite a series of ancient teachers--purva/k/aryas--who carried on the
true tradition as to the teaching of the Vedanta and the meaning of the
Sutras. In the Vedarthasa@ngraha--a work composed by Ramanuja
himself--we meet in one place with the enumeration of the following
authorities: Bodhayana, /T/a@nka, Drami/d/a, Guhadeva, Kapardin,
Bharu/k/i, and quotations from the writings of some of these are not
unfrequent in the Vedarthasa@ngraha, as well as the /S/ri-bhashya. The
author most frequently quoted is Drami/d/a, who composed the
Drami/d/a-bhashya; he is sometimes referred to as the bhashyakara.
Another writer repeatedly quoted as the vakyakara is, I am told, to be
identified with the /T/a@nka mentioned above. I refrain from inserting
in this place the information concerning the relative age of these
writers which may be derived from the oral tradition of the Ramanuja
sect. From another source, however, we receive an intimation that
Drami/d/a/k/arya or Dravi/d/a/k/arya preceded /S/a@nkara in point of
time. In his /t/ika on /S/a@nkara's bhashya to the Chandogya Upanishad
III, 10, 4, Anandagiri remarks that the attempt made by his author to
reconcile the cosmological views of the Upanishad with the teaching of
Sm/ri/ti on the same point is a reproduction of the analogous attempt
made by the Dravi/d/a/k/arya.

It thus appears that that special interpretation of the Vedanta-sutras
with which the /S/ri-bhashya makes us acquainted is not due to
innovating views on the part of Ramanuja, but had authoritative
representatives already at a period anterior to that of /S/a@nkara. This
latter point, moreover, receives additional confirmation from the
relation in which the so-called Ramanuja sect stands to earlier sects.
What the exact position of Ramanuja was, and of what nature were the
reforms that rendered him so prominent as to give his name to a new
sect, is not exactly known at present; at the same time it is generally
acknowledged that the Ramanujas are closely connected with the so-called
Bhagavatas or Pa/nk/aratras, who are known to have existed already at a
very early time. This latter point is proved by evidence of various
kinds; for our present purpose it suffices to point to the fact that,
according to the interpretation of the most authoritative commentators,
the last Sutras of the second pada of the second adhyaya
(Vedanta-sutras) refer to a distinctive tenet of the Bhagavatas--which
tenet forms part of the Ramanuja system also--viz. that the highest
being manifests itself in a fourfold form (vyuha) as Vasudeva,
Sa@nkarsha/n/a, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, those four forms being identical
with the highest Self, the individual soul, the internal organ (manas),
and the principle of egoity (aha@nkara). Whether those Sutras embody an
approval of the tenet referred to, as Ramanuja maintains, or are meant
to impugn it, as /S/a@nkara thinks; so much is certain that in the
opinion of the best commentators the Bhagavatas, the direct forerunners
of the Ramanujas, are mentioned in the Sutras themselves, and hence must
not only have existed, but even reached a considerable degree of
importance at the time when the Sutras were composed. And considering
the general agreement of the systems of the earlier Bhagavatas and the
later Ramanujas, we have a full right to suppose that the two sects were
at one also in their mode of interpreting the Vedanta-sutras.

The preceding considerations suffice, I am inclined to think, to show
that it will by no means be wasted labour to enquire how Ramanuja
interprets the Sutras, and wherein he differs from /S/a@nkara. This in
fact seems clearly to be the first step we have to take, if we wish to
make an attempt at least of advancing beyond the interpretations of
scholiasts to the meaning of the Sutras themselves. A full and
exhaustive comparison of the views of the two commentators would indeed
far exceed the limits of the space which can here he devoted to that
task, and will, moreover, be made with greater ease and advantage when
the complete Sanskrit text of the /S/ri-bhashya has been printed, and
thus made available for general reference. But meanwhile it is possible,
and--as said before--even urged upon a translator of the Sutras to
compare the interpretations, given by the two bhashyakaras, of those
Sutras, which, more than others, touch on the essential points of the
Vedanta system. This will best be done in connexion with a succinct but
full review of the topics discussed in the adhikara/n/as of the
Vedanta-sutras, according to /S/a@nkara; a review which--apart from the
side-glances at Ramanuja's comments--will be useful as a guide through
the Sutras and the /S/a@nkara-bhashya. Before, however, entering on that
task, I think it advisable to insert short sketches of the philosophical
systems of /S/a@nkara as well as of Ramanuja, which may be referred to
when, later on discrepancies between the two commentators will be noted.
In these sketches I shall confine myself to the leading features, and
not enter into any details. Of /S/a@nkara's system we possess as it is
more than one trustworthy exposition; it may suffice to refer to
Deussen's System of the Vedanta, in which the details of the entire
system, as far as they can be learned from the Sutra-bhashya, are
represented fully and faithfully, and to Gough's Philosophy of the
Upanishads which, principally in its second chapter, gives a lucid
sketch of the /S/a@nkara Vedanta, founded on the Sutra-bhashya, the
Upanishad bhashyas, and some later writers belonging to /S/a@nkara's
school. With regard to Ramanuja's philosophy our chief source was,
hitherto, the Ramanuja chapter in the Sarvadar/s/a/n/asa/m/graha; the
short sketch about to be given is founded altogether on the
/S/ri-bhashya itself.

What in /S/a@nkara's opinion the Upanishads teach, is shortly as
follows.--Whatever is, is in reality one; there truly exists only one
universal being called Brahman or Paramatman, the highest Self. This
being is of an absolutely homogeneous nature; it is pure 'Being,' or,
which comes to the same, pure intelligence or thought (/k/aitanya,
j/n/ana). Intelligence or thought is not to be predicated of Brahman as
its attribute, but constitutes its substance, Brahman is not a thinking
being, but thought itself. It is absolutely destitute of qualities;
whatever qualities or attributes are conceivable, can only be denied of
it.--But, if nothing exists but one absolutely simple being, whence the
appearance of the world by which we see ourselves surrounded, and, in
which we ourselves exist as individual beings?--Brahman, the answer
runs, is associated with a certain power called Maya or avidya to which
the appearance of this entire world is due. This power cannot be called
'being' (sat), for 'being' is only Brahman; nor can it be called
'non-being' (asat) in the strict sense, for it at any rate produces the
appearance of this world. It is in fact a principle of illusion; the
undefinable cause owing to which there seems to exist a material world
comprehending distinct individual existences. Being associated with this
principle of illusion, Brahman is enabled to project the appearance of
the world, in the same way as a magician is enabled by his
incomprehensible magical power to produce illusory appearances of
animate and inanimate beings. Maya thus constitutes the upadana, the
material cause of the world; or--if we wish to call attention to the
circumstance that Maya belongs to Brahman as a /s/akti--we may say that
the material cause of the world is Brahman in so far as it is associated
with Maya. In this latter quality Brahman is more properly called
I/s/vara, the Lord.

Maya, under the guidance of the Lord, modifies itself by a progressive
evolution into all the individual existences (bheda), distinguished by
special names and forms, of which the world consists; from it there
spring in due succession the different material elements and the whole
bodily apparatus belonging to sentient Beings. In all those apparently,
individual forms of existence the one indivisible Brahman is present,
but, owing to the particular adjuncts into which Maya has specialised
itself, it appears to be broken up--it is broken up, as it were--into a
multiplicity, of intellectual or sentient principles, the so-called
jivas (individual or personal souls). What is real in each jiva is only
the universal Brahman itself; the whole aggregate of individualising
bodily organs and mental functions, which in our ordinary experience
separate and distinguish one jiva from another, is the offspring of Maya
and as such unreal.

The phenomenal world or world of ordinary experience (vyavahara) thus
consists of a number of individual souls engaged in specific cognitions,
volitions, and so on, and of the external material objects with which
those cognitions and volitions are concerned. Neither the specific
cognitions nor their objects are real in the true sense of the word, for
both are altogether due to Maya. But at the same time we have to reject
the idealistic doctrine of certain Bauddha schools according to which
nothing whatever truly exists, but certain trains of cognitional acts or
ideas to which no external objects correspond; for external things,
although not real in the strict sense of the word, enjoy at any rate as
much reality as the specific cognitional acts whose objects they are.

The non-enlightened soul is unable to look through and beyond Maya,
which, like a veil, hides from it its true nature. Instead of
recognising itself to be Brahman, it blindly identifies itself with its
