The Project Gutenberg EBook of True Christianity by Johann Arndt



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: True Christianity

Author: Johann Arndt

Release Date: December 23, 2010 [Ebook #34736]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRUE CHRISTIANITY***





                            True Christianity

                                A Treatise

 On Sincere Repentance, True Faith, The Holy Walk of the True Christian,
                                   Etc.

                             By the Venerable

                               Johann Arndt

 General Superintendant of Ecclesiastical Affairs in the Principality of
                                 Lueneberg

Originally Translated Into English By Rev. A. W. Boehm, German Chaplain at
       the Court of St. James, and Published in London, A.D. 1712.

                         A New American Edition,

Revised, Corrected, and Furnished with Additional Matter From The Original
                                 German,

                             Together With A

                          General Introduction,

                      By Charles F. Schaeffer, D.D.,

   Professor of Theology in the Theological Seminary of the Evangelical
                     Lutheran Church, at Philadelphia

                               Philadelphia

                         The Lutheran Book Store,

                           No. 807 Vine Street.

              Smith, English & Co., No. 23 N. Sixth Street.

                                   1868





CONTENTS


Introduction By The American Editor.
Book I.
   The Author's Preface To The First Book.
   Chapter I.
   Chapter II.
   Chapter III.
   Chapter IV.
   Chapter V.
   Chapter VI.
   Chapter VII.
   Chapter VIII.
   Chapter IX.
   Chapter X.
   Chapter XI.
   Chapter XII.
   Chapter XIII.
   Chapter XIV.
   Chapter XV.
   Chapter XVI.
   Chapter XVII.
   Chapter XVIII.
   Chapter XIX.
   Chapter XX.
   Chapter XXI.
   Chapter XXII.
   Chapter XXIII.
   Chapter XXIV.
   Chapter XXV.
   Chapter XXVI.
   Chapter XXVII.
   Chapter XXVIII.
   Chapter XXIX.
   Chapter XXX.
   Chapter XXXI.
   Chapter XXXII.
   Chapter XXXIII.
   Chapter XXXIV.
   Chapter XXXV.
   Chapter XXXVI.
   Chapter XXXVII.
   Chapter XXXVIII.
   Chapter XXXIX.
   Chapter XL.
   Chapter XLI.
   Chapter XLII.
Book II.
   Preface To The Second Book.
   Chapter I.
   Chapter II.
   Chapter III.
   Chapter IV.
   Chapter V.
   Chapter VI.
   Chapter VII.
   Chapter VIII.
   Chapter IX.
   Chapter X.
   Chapter XI.
   Chapter XII.
   Chapter XIII.
   Chapter XIV.
   Chapter XV.
   Chapter XVI.
   Chapter XVII.
   Chapter XVIII.
   Chapter XIX.
   Chapter XX.
   Chapter XXI.
   Chapter XXII.
   Chapter XXIII.
   Chapter XXIV.
   Chapter XXV.
   Chapter XXVI.
   Chapter XXVII.
   Chapter XXVIII.
   Chapter XXIX.
   Chapter XXX.
   Chapter XXXI.
   Chapter XXXII.
   Chapter XXXIII.
   Chapter XXXIV.
   Chapter XXXV.
   Chapter XXXVI.
   Chapter XXXVII.
   Chapter XXXVIII.
   Chapter XXXIX.
   Chapter XL.
   Chapter XLI.
   Chapter XLII.
   Chapter XLIII.
   Chapter XLIV.
   Chapter XLV.
   Chapter XLVI.
   Chapter XLVII.
   Chapter XLVIII.
   Chapter XLIX.
   Chapter L.
   Chapter LI.
   Chapter LII.
   Chapter LIII.
   Chapter LIV.
   Chapter LV.
   Chapter LVI.
   Chapter LVII.
   Conclusion Of The Second Book.
Book III.
   Preface To The Third Book.
   Chapter I.
   Chapter II.
   Chapter III.
   Chapter IV.
   Chapter V.
   Chapter VI.
   Chapter VII.
   Chapter VIII.
   Chapter IX.
   Chapter X.
   Chapter XI.
   Chapter XII.
   Chapter XIII.
   Chapter XIV.
   Chapter XV.
   Chapter XVI.
   Chapter XVII.
   Chapter XVIII.
   Chapter XIX.
   Chapter XX.
   Chapter XXI.
   Chapter XXII.
   Chapter XXIII.
Book IV.
   Preface To The Fourth Book.
   Part I.
      Chapter I.
      Chapter II.
      Chapter III.
      Chapter IV.
      Chapter V.
      Chapter VI.
   Part II.
      Chapter I.
      Chapter II.
      Chapter III.
      Chapter IV.
      Chapter V.
      Chapter VI.
      Chapter VII.
      Chapter VIII.
      Chapter IX.
      Chapter X.
      Chapter XI.
      Chapter XII.
      Chapter XIII.
      Chapter XIV.
      Chapter XV.
      Chapter XVI.
      Chapter XVII.
      Chapter XVIII.
      Chapter XIX.
      Chapter XX.
      Chapter XXI.
      Chapter XXII.
      Chapter XXIII.
      Chapter XXIV.
      Chapter XXV.
      Chapter XXVI.
      Chapter XXVII.
      Chapter XXVIII.
      Chapter XXIX.
      Chapter XXX.
      Chapter XXXI.
      Chapter XXXII.
      Chapter XXXIII.
      Chapter XXXIV.
      Chapter XXXV.
      Chapter XXXVI.
      Chapter XXXVII.
      Chapter XXXVIII.
      Chapter XXXIX.
      Chapter XL.
      Conclusion.
Index.
Footnotes






INTRODUCTION BY THE AMERICAN EDITOR.


Both the general purpose of the venerable Johann Arndt in writing his
"TRUE CHRISTIANITY," and also his own character and spirit, will be best
exhibited by submitting to the reader a statement referring to his
personal history. He was born, December 27th, 1555, in Ballenstaedt, a town
in the Duchy of Anhalt, where his father, Rev. Jacob Arndt, long labored
as the chaplain of Duke Wolfgang, and the pastor of one of the Evangelical
Lutheran congregations of the place. The latter was a devout and faithful
minister of the Gospel, and a wise and affectionate father. He had, from
the earliest period, devoted much attention to the religious education of
his son, in the performance of which holy duty he was faithfully sustained
by his excellent wife. Their efforts were abundantly blessed. The son,
even in his early years, took great pleasure in reading the writings of
Luther, and also acquired a fondness for those of Thomas a Kempis, of
Tauler, and of others who breathed the same spirit of devotion. That this
feature of his religious character did not undergo any essential change in
his riper years, appears from the circumstance that he was one of the
first who collected, arranged, and republished the religious tracts of
Stephen Praetorius, a Lutheran divine of an eminently devout spirit. These
were subsequently re-edited by Martin Statius, who prefixed the title:
_Spiritual Treasury_ (Geistliche Schatzkammer), to the collection. This
book of devotion was highly prized by Spener, has often been reprinted, is
found in many German households, and well deserves to be translated, and
thus made accessible to the English religious public.

§ 2. In his tenth year Arndt lost his father, but the orphan soon found
friends who, in the good providence of God, enabled him to continue the
studies which he had commenced with distinguished success under the
guidance of his father. After completing his preparatory education in the
schools of Halberstadt and Magdeburg, he proceeded, in the year 1576, to
the university of Helmstedt, which had recently been established. In the
course of the following year, 1577, he went as a student to the university
of Wittenberg, soon after the official recognition of the principles
embodied in the Formula of Concord (published in 1580), by which that
institution received a strictly Lutheran character, and every tendency to
any other doctrinal system was successfully arrested. It was here that he
formed a very close union, first as a student, and then as a personal
friend, with the eminent Polycarp Leyser, the elder of that name, whose
firmness and devotion in sustaining the distinctive features of
Lutheranism have assigned to him a high position in the history of his
Church.--After Arndt had, even at this early age, acquired distinction as
an accomplished private lecturer on Natural Philosophy, etc., as well as
on the Epistle to the Romans, Leyser furnished him with an unusually
favorable recommendation to the professors in Strasburg. This city, the
government and population of which were exclusively Lutheran, had not yet
been subjected to that great calamity which afterwards befell it, when the
despot and bigot, Louis XIV., incorporated it with the French monarchy,
and by assigning undue privileges to papists, and adopting other
tyrannical measures, opened an avenue for the introduction, not merely of
an inferior Romanic language, but also of the errors and superstitions of
the Church of Rome.

§ 3. Arndt continued his theological studies in Strasburg, under the
direction of Prof. Pappus, who was also distinguished for his devotion to
the genuine Lutheran faith. In the year 1579 he proceeded to Basel, where,
under the gentle sway of Sulcer, the Lutheran faith had acquired influence
and authority. In this city he was temporarily engaged as the tutor of a
young Polish nobleman; the latter, on one of their excursions, when Arndt
had accidentally fallen into the Rhine, succeeded in seizing his sinking
preceptor by the hair of his head, and thus became the means, in the hands
of God, of saving a life of incalculable value, designed to prove an
ever-flowing source of blessings to the Church.

§ 4. During this whole period Arndt occupied himself with the study of
medicine, in connection with his strictly theological studies; it is
possible that he would have ultimately chosen the practice of medicine as
the business of his life, if a severe illness had not intervened. After
his recovery, he believed it to be his duty to renounce his personal
tastes, and he thenceforth consecrated himself entirely to the service of
the Church. His medical and chemical occupations, although not abandoned,
were afterwards regarded by him only as a recreation.

§ 5. He returned, in 1581 or 1582, to his native place, and labored for
some time as a teacher, until he was called by his prince, Joachim Ernest,
to be the pastor of the congregation in Badeborn, a village in the Duchy
of Anhalt; he was, accordingly, ordained in the month of October of the
same year. It was here, too, that he was married, October 31, 1583, to
Anna Wagner, the daughter of an eminent jurist, with whom he passed the
remaining thirty-eight years of his life in unclouded domestic happiness.
She was a devout Christian woman, who cheered and encouraged Arndt amid
his many cares, alleviated every burden to the extent of her ability, and
was always regarded by him with tenderness and gratitude. They were
childless; but many an orphan found that their hearts could overflow with
love towards the young and destitute--a love as full of warmth as beloved
children have ever experienced parental love to be.

§ 6. In this first pastoral charge of Arndt, the unhappy state of affairs
subjected him, particularly during the latter part of the seven years
which he spent in it, to a "Lutheran martyrdom," as Tholuck expresses
himself (Herzog. Encyk. I., 536). The duke, John George, who now reigned
(a relative of the palsgrave, or count palatine, Casimir, a zealous
Calvinist), after various inward struggles, abandoned the Lutheran faith,
and, in the year 1596, publicly adopted the Reformed faith, a few years
after the transactions to which we now refer. Even Protestant rulers, who
had not yet learned the theory that a union of church and state can
operate only perniciously, perpetually interfered in the internal affairs
of the church.--At this period it was the custom of Lutheran pastors, when
they administered the rite of Baptism, to follow the liturgical form which
prescribed "exorcism." This feature of the whole baptismal form, which was
introduced as early as the third century, or even earlier (before the days
of Tertullian and Origen), consisted simply in a sentence adjuring the
evil spirit to depart from the subject of Baptism. The early practice had,
like others, been gradually associated, after the rise and development of
popery, with superstitious ideas, such as was also the case with the
Lord's Supper, until it assumed an absurd and even revolting form. At the
period of the Reformation, Zwingli and Calvin (Inst. IV., c. 15, 19; c.
19, 24) rejected the whole form of exorcism. Luther and Melanchthon, on
the other hand, after discarding the popish excrescences, believed that
the scriptural doctrine which the early form involved or suggested,
authorized the retention of the practice, when restricted to a very plain
and simple formula, expressive of a scriptural truth.--Now, at that period,
as it is well known, unfriendly feelings, engendered by various causes,
existed to a certain extent, between the heads respectively of the
Reformed and the Lutheran churches, in consequence of which even harmless
customs which none would, under ordinary circumstances, either advocate or
condemn with partisan feeling, assumed a confessional character. Such was
the case with the purified and simple Lutheran baptismal sentence
containing the "exorcism."

§ 7. Arndt's course in this matter has often been misunderstood; as it,
however, demonstrates him to have been alike a very firm and conscientious
man, and also an uncompromising supporter of the distinctive doctrines and
usages of the Lutheran Church, the following details may be appropriately
furnished.--The language which Luther retained in his form for Baptism
(_Taufbuechlein_), after omitting all popish and superstitious practices,
was the following. Between the prayer and the reading of Mark 10:13-16,
the pastor says: "I adjure thee, thou unclean spirit, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that thou go out and depart
from this servant of Jesus Christ, Amen."--Luther understood the form to be
a declaration or distinct confession of the doctrine of Original Sin, and
a renunciation of Satan. Still, the Lutheran Church, as such, never
recognized the _necessity_ of this ancient form, and its confessional
writings never allude to it. After the excitement of feeling peculiar to
Arndt's age, had been allayed by time, the Lutheran Church regarded the
whole as a mere _adiaphoron_, that is, a "thing indifferent," not
essentially involving any principle whatever, inasmuch as the doctrine of
Original Sin had already been very explicitly set forth and confessed in
her Symbolical Books. Such was the opinion of the eminent Lutheran
dogmatical writers, Gerhard, Quenstedt, Hollaz, etc.; and men like Baier
and Baumgarten even advocated the discontinuance of the practice. It is no
longer retained in any prominent manner in the Lutheran Church.--But in the
age in which Arndt lived, who was not a man that would obstinately cling
to a mere form, the _rejection_ of the formula of Exorcism _did_ involve a
principle; for, under the peculiar circumstances, that rejection might be
understood to be, first, a rejection of the doctrine of Original Sin, and,
secondly, an affirmation that the children of believing parents were in
the kingdom of heaven, even before they had received Baptism. But all this
seemed to conflict with the Pauline doctrine that all are "by nature the
children of wrath." Eph. 2:3. While, then, J. Ben. Carpzov, the
distinguished interpreter of the Symbolical Books, who died in 1557,
decides that the "Exorcism" is in itself a matter of indifference, and may
without scruple be dropped, he nevertheless holds that if the omission of
it should be understood as a denial of the Scripture doctrine of the
corruption of human nature (Original Sin), it becomes, in such a case, a
matter of principle to retain the formula. (_Isagoge_, etc., p. 1122
_ff._; 1608.) Walch, the other eminent interpreter of the Symbolical Books
(_Introductio_, etc.), does not refer to the matter at all, as it is no
essential part of the Lutheran Creed. But Arndt, who was a calm,
sagacious, and conscientious observer, and who may justly be considered as
claiming that, in forming a judgment respecting him, we should not
overlook the spirit of his times, apprehended that the suppression of the
"exorcism" was secretly designed to be the forerunner of the suppression
of the entire Lutheran faith, which constituted the life of his soul; he
could not, under such circumstances, consent to endanger his most precious
treasure.

§ 8. Now the duke, John George, after his virtual adoption of the Reformed
faith and practice, issued a peremptory order that the formula of Exorcism
should no longer be employed in his dominions at the baptism of any
infant. Arndt, who was characterized by a childlike submission to those in
authority, as long as matters of principle were not involved, could not
renounce his faith in God's word, and, especially, his personal conviction
of the natural depravity of the human heart. He might have consented to
drop a mere form; but he saw here an entering wedge, which justly alarmed
him. His apprehensions were subsequently proved to have been only too well
founded, when, soon afterwards, Luther's Catechism was suppressed, and
another substituted in its place. Hence, as he could not renounce a
prominent feature of the Lutheran creed, he firmly and positively refused
to obey the ducal command. He remarked, in the written statement which
embodied his reasons for refusing to obey, and which was submitted to the
civil authorities, that his conscience would not allow him to comply with
such a demand of the secular authority--that the orthodox fathers, who had,
during thirteen centuries, connected "exorcism" with Baptism, understood
it in accordance with the mind and true sense of the Scriptures (_ex mente
et vero sensu Scripturae_)--that it was, therefore, by no means "an impious
ceremony" (as the civil ruler, a layman, had thought proper to designate
it),--that he must necessarily abide by the decision of his conscience--and,
that he would humbly submit to any sentence which his prince might
pronounce in the case. The date which he affixed to the document, is Sept.
10, 1590. That sentence, which was soon afterwards proclaimed, deposed
Arndt from his office, and banished him from the ducal territories. The
reader of Book I. of the "True Christianity," will now understand, after
observing the earnestness with which the author insists on the doctrine of
Original Sin, or the depravity of human nature, that he could not
conscientiously take any step which would, even indirectly, involve a
denial of that sad truth of the Bible,--a truth to which his knowledge of
his own heart daily testified.

§ 9. But the Divine Head of the Church did not depose this faithful
minister. At the very time when Arndt seemed to be homeless and
friendless, two important posts were offered to him--one in Mansfeld, the
other in Quedlinburg, an important city, which, after belonging to various
rulers, has at last been incorporated with the monarchy of Prussia. The
city adopted the Lutheran faith in 1539. Arndt decided to make this place
his home, and he labored here with eminent success, during a period of
seven years, as the pastor of the church of St. Nicholas. However, he also
endured much affliction in this new charge, and his holy zeal and devout
spirit, while fully appreciated by intelligent and enlightened believers,
were misunderstood and even hated by others, so that he longed to be
transferred to another field of labor.

§ 10. He was at length permitted to depart, and removed to the city of
Brunswick, situated in the territory of the duke of Brunswick; it aspired
at that time to become a "free city," subject directly to the German
emperor. The warfare between the duke and the city, during Arndt's
residence in the latter, subjected him to many sore trials. His abode in
it, extending from 1590 to 1608, is specially interesting, as he then
presented to the religious community Book I. of his "True Christianity."
Dr. A. Wildenhahn, who has, in recent times, furnished us with various
charming volumes, descriptive of the times, respectively, of Luther,
Spener, Paul Gerhardt, etc., in which he combines "fiction and truth," has
selected this period of Arndt's history, as the one to which he dedicates
his two delightful volumes, entitled "Johannes Arndt" (Leipzig, 1861).
This author complains that he found it a difficult task to collect full
and authentic accounts of Arndt's life. Still, he obtained access to
various documents in the archives of the city of Brunswick, and in the
royal library in Dresden, which had not been previously examined even by
Arndt's best biographer, the Rev. Frederick Arndt, of Berlin; and these
materially assisted him in preparing his own work.(1)

§ 11. During the earlier years of Arndt's residence in Brunswick, as a
co-pastor of the church of St. Martin, his life was comparatively peaceful
and happy. The purity of his character, the soundness and power of his
doctrine, and the diligence and fidelity manifested in his pastoral
labors, could not fail to command the respect, and attract the love of all
candid persons. But he was at length subjected to trials of a new and
painful character, and became the victim of the hostile and persecuting
spirit of men from whom a very different course of conduct might have
reasonably been expected. The origin of these new difficulties has not
always been clearly understood; while some have regarded Arndt as worthy
of the censures of those who assailed him, others are disposed to condemn
those assailants in unqualified terms. It is strange that, even at this
comparatively remote period, such judgments are sometimes expressed in
language which betrays personal feeling rather than it announces the calm
judgment of a later and disinterested generation.

§ 12. It is here necessary to cast a glance at the history of the times
which preceded and followed the eventful year 1555, in which Arndt was
born, a year ever memorable as the one in which the signing of the
articles of the Peace of Augsburg secured a temporary external repose for
the Lutheran Church. This "Peace" terminated at least the horrors which
had followed the introduction, in 1548, of the _Augsburg Interim_, by
which the newly-established Protestant doctrine was seriously endangered.
The provisions of this _Interim_ were enforced with such merciless tyranny
by popish authorities, that in South Germany alone about four hundred
faithful Lutheran pastors, who could not conscientiously accede to an
arrangement which might possibly restore the full authority of the errors
and superstitions of Rome, were driven, as exiles, with their families,
from their homes. The spirit of the Christian martyrs of the early ages of
the Church revived in these heroic men, and they clung with undying
tenacity to their holy faith.

§ 13. That faith now encountered new enemies, who did not resort to fire
and the sword, but who adopted more insidious means for corrupting divine
truth; and again, assaults like theirs, only increased the jealousy with
which the genuine Lutherans guarded the purity of their doctrinal system.
It was the only gift of heaven, which sin and Satan could not touch, and
which retained all its unsullied holiness. The soul of man had become
corrupt; the body was subject to disease and death; the world, fair as it
was, and rich in the gifts of God, had nevertheless been made by sin to
bring forth thorns and thistles. But the Gospel truth, which conducted men
to Christ and heaven, remained in all its purity and power. These men were
willing to suffer and die, but while they did live, they could not relax
the grasp with which they held fast to evangelical truth. Now, amid the
political and religious commotions of that stormy age, could we expect
that devout men should say, "Peace, peace;" when there was no peace?
(Jerem. 6:14.)

§ 14. Let us illustrate this subject. Schwenkfeldt, for instance (born in
1490; died, 1561), an opponent of both the Lutherans and the Reformed, as
well as of the Papists, and, accordingly, constantly engaged in
controversies with all parties, declared that Luther's uncompromising
determination to maintain the authority of the written word of revelation,
the Bible, was equivalent to a worship of the letter. He assigned, in his
fanaticism and morbid mysticism, a rank to an inner and direct word of the
Divine Spirit, which he asserted that he received, far above that of the
written word of God. He refused to make any distinction between the divine
act of the justification of the believer, on the one hand, and the
progressive sanctification of the believer, on the other. He taught that
the two natures of Christ, the divine and the human, were so fused
together, or, rather, that the flesh of Christ was so absolutely deified
or converted into God himself, that no distinction between them
remained,--that the regenerate could live without sin, etc. He succeeded,
in spite of the crudeness, one-sidedness, and unsoundness of his
doctrines, in attracting many disciples. His death, which occurred in
1561, a few years after Arndt's birth, did not terminate the widespread
confusion which he had created in the Protestant Church; the dread of that
sickly form of mysticism which he attempted to establish, long remained.
The fear was naturally entertained that it might lead many astray, who,
while they did not otherwise fraternize with Schwenkfeldt in his wild and
absurd course, might be deluded by his claims to superior religious
intelligence and holiness.

§ 15. The disastrous influences of the demagogue Thomas Muenzer (born in
1490), and of his fanatical party, the Zwickau prophets, on sound doctrine
and sound morals, as well as the blood which they had shed, were still
vividly remembered.--Servetus, the Unitarian, had perished, but he left a
seed behind; the doctrine of Christ's deity still remained a point of
attack. And besides these false teachers, several others, who were
originally connected in various modes with the Lutheran Church,
promulgated at various times opinions which seemed to be subversive of all
Scripture doctrine.--Agricola, who had originally been an active adherent
of Luther, gradually departed from the faith. He unquestionably betrayed
the interests of Protestantism by sanctioning the Augsburg Interim of
1548. He engaged in a controversy, at first with Melanchthon, and then
with Luther himself, on the subject of the proper "Use of the law"--the
Antinomistic controversy--maintaining that the law was no longer of
importance to the believer, and that the Gospel alone should be preached.
He died in 1566, when Arndt was about eleven years old. The confusion in
the church, which he created by his dangerous sentiments on several
points, was long painfully felt.--The Osiandrian controversy, respecting
Justification, and its relation to Sanctification, began in 1549, and
closed only when Arndt was already a student.--The Majoristic controversy
originated in the public declaration made by G. Major, that "good works
are _necessary to salvation_." The fears which such a doctrine, that
savored of popery, produced among orthodox and devout Lutherans, were
excessive. Those who opposed Major, were alarmed by his unguarded
expressions, and apprehended that the Gospel doctrine of _Justification by
faith in Christ alone, without human works or merit_, would be endangered,
unless they silenced him. The controversy, in its most energetic form,
terminated about seven years after Arndt's birth, but the indirect effects
of the misconceptions connected with the great topic of this controversy,
were deeply felt by him.--The Synergistic controversy, relating to the
question whether man could co-operate with the Holy Spirit in the work of
his conversion, began in the year in which Arndt was born, and was
maintained with great energy during several years.--The so-called
Cryptocalvinistic controversy, referring mainly to the doctrine of the
Lord's Supper, and involving certain important questions respecting the
Person of Christ, commenced about three years before Arndt's birth, and
agitated the church during many years.--These, and other subjects on which
also controversies had arisen, were, in the good providence of God, at
length calmly considered by learned and devout Lutheran theologians,
conscientiously examined in the light of the divine Word, impartially
decided, and set forth, in the year 1580, in the FORMULA OF CONCORD, the
last of the special Lutheran creeds, all the doctrines of which Arndt
cordially received, as he repeatedly declared in an official manner on
various occasions, in his writings, in his last will and testament, and on
his death-bed. (See below §§ 24, 25.) The very great reverence with which
he regarded this noble creed, and his attachment to it, are to be ascribed
not only to the spotless purity of the doctrines which it sets forth, but
also to the good work which it performed in successfully and permanently
deciding several very important questions which had latterly arisen, and
on which the preceding creeds had not authoritatively and fully
pronounced. It is, however, obvious, that even after these storms
subsided, the waves would long remain in commotion, and it was precisely
in these troublous times that Arndt labored in the ministry.

§ 16. The catalogue of the difficulties which awaited him, is not yet
exhausted. We have to add, as a part of the history of the times, when an
extraordinary number of political and ecclesiastical contentions
prevailed, the excitement of feeling which certain differences of doctrine
between the Lutherans and the Reformed engendered, and which would never
have risen to the fearful height in which history now exhibits it to us,
if political power, controlled alternately by the two religious parties in
some of the German principalities, had not been invoked by them. The awful
death by fire, which terminated the career of Servetus (Oct. 27, 1553, two
years before the birth of Arndt, and more than six years after the death
of Luther), was decreed by the civil authorities of Geneva, but was
sanctioned by Calvin and even the gentle Melanchthon--a sad example of the
clouded views of men at that time respecting religious liberty and the
right of civil rulers to punish men for their errors in the faith.

§ 17. In the Palatinate (the ancient _Pfalz_, the territories of which are
now distributed among Bavaria, Prussia, etc.) the Lutheran Church had been
established, and popery ceased to exist. But in 1560, a few years after
Arndt's birth, the Elector, Frederick III., withdrew from the church, and
adopted the Reformed faith and usages. His successor, Lewis VI.,
endeavored to restore the ascendency of Lutheranism; but after his brief
reign, the authorities which succeeded, established "Calvinism" (the term
employed in Church History) on a permanent basis. A similar
ecclesiastico-civil revolution occurred in Bremen in 1562; fourteen
Lutheran pastors and the Lutheran members of the City Council were
expelled, and the city became Reformed. Such changes occurred elsewhere.
Both parties were undoubtedly more or less honest in adhering to their
doctrinal views; and both claimed the right to depose and exile those of
an opposite faith, whenever the civil and political power was, in either
case, directed by them.

§ 18. Let it now be remembered that these contending Protestants, Lutheran
and Reformed or Calvinistic, were led by men respectively, who were
confessedly intelligent, learned, and endowed with great abilities, many
of whom were not only honest in expressing their convictions, but also
conscientious in their conduct, whether they were governed by an erring or
an enlightened conscience. That the latter is historically true, is
demonstrated by their readiness, when they lost power, to submit to
imprisonment or exile, rather than to renounce their respective creeds.
They were all too well acquainted with Bible truth to look with other
feelings than with horror on the popish creed. But while their own
Protestant creed was very precious to their souls, they could not tolerate
any departure from it, even if that departure was _not_ in the direction
"towards Rome." That departure must, as they judged, necessarily be
equivalent to a denial of God's truth, as they believed that they had
found it in the Bible. Thus all were alike sensitive--all seemed to feel
that if they tolerated any error, _that_ error could not be trivial--it
was, as far as it extended, a denial of God's truth. Could they safely
assume the shame and guilt of such a sin? We may add, that we are here
speaking only of the _honest_ leaders of the Lutherans and the Reformed,
of whom each man judged and acted for himself, as one who was accountable
to God. No honest Reformed theologian would have screened a Reformed
heretic from condemnation; and no honest Lutheran would, for a moment,
have tolerated a nominal Lutheran, who rejected any part of the creed of
the church.

§ 19. At the same time, all these men were fallible creatures, subject to
all the errors of judgment, and to all the passions and infirmities
incident to fallen man. They often supposed that their intentions were
pure, when selfish motives governed them, and their jealous guardianship
of God's truth was combined with a jealous love for their personal
opinions. It was under these circumstances, when each party watched with
extreme jealousy over the purity of the faith, as adopted by it, and when,
besides, many private interests--personal, political, and
pecuniary--exercised vast influence, that Arndt entered on his labors.--We
have introduced the above details, in order to explain his declarations in
the preface to Book I. § 8, that he rejects the Synergistic, Majoristic,
etc., errors, and entertains no other views except those which are set
forth in the Lutheran Symbolical Books.

§ 20. When he commenced his labors in Brunswick, he was the youngest
member of the "ministerium" of the city, that is, of the college composed
of the pastors of the several city churches, all of which at that time
strictly adhered to the Lutheran creed. He had long lamented that, in
consequence of the infelicity of the times, which caused endless doctrinal
controversies, the parties of which were many, Papists, Mystics,
Unitarians, Reformed, Lutherans, etc., the attention of many persons was
diverted from the practical duties of a Christian life, and directed
exclusively to controversies on points of doctrine; the result was, that
the understanding was actively exercised, but the heart was not properly
affected. Such considerations induced him to write Book I. of his "True
Christianity." It was his object to show that God demands a holy life,
proceeding from faith in Christ, and that no jealousy concerning the
purity of the creed will atone for the absence of the fruits of the
Spirit, as exhibited in the life and conduct of the individual. Hence he
insists with a warmth unusual in that excited and controversial age, on
repentance, on faith in Christ, and on a holy life. Possibly, the
apparently sweeping assertions which occasionally occur in his writings,
to the effect that the majority of his contemporaries lacked a heavenly
spirit, acquired their sombre hue in consequence of the publicity given to
human frailties, and the retirement and shade in which vast numbers of
holy men preferred to dwell. His Book I., which constitutes the principal
part of the work, was first published in Jena, in the year 1605; a second
and improved edition appeared in 1607.

§ 21. It consisted principally of the matter which he had introduced in a
course of practical sermons previously delivered by him on week-days. It
attracted great attention, and was rapidly circulated throughout Germany.
The modest and retiring author, without expecting such a result, at once
became a celebrity. Nevertheless, new trials now commenced. An envious
feeling seems to have been engendered in the hearts of several of his
colleagues in the "ministerium" of the city, when they noticed the honor
which the author had undesignedly gained. Perhaps, too, the controversial
spirit of the times, and the jealousy of good men respecting the faith,
which was assailed on all sides--by Papists, Calvinists, Unitarians,
fanatics, etc.,--may have led them to scrutinize the book with too
suspicious eyes. All held firmly to the Gospel doctrine of Justification
by faith alone, without works. Now, when they found that Arndt insisted
with such earnestness on the evidences of faith, as furnished by a holy
life, they were morbidly affected, and apprehended that the doctrine of
justification by faith _alone_, which their bitter enemies, the Papists,
denounced, had not been guarded with sufficient care by Arndt. Other
expressions, again, which they did not interpret impartially, led them to
fear that he was introducing mysticism and other morbid religious systems
into the Church. The reproaches which he was compelled to hear, deterred
him for some time from fulfilling his promise of adding three other
"Books" to Book I. The complete work may be regarded as consisting of
_Four_ Books, as published in 1609. At a considerably later period a
fifth, and then a sixth book, were added. The former was designed as an
explanation and recapitulation of the Four Books, and the latter,
consisting in part of letters addressed to various eminent theologians,
besides having the same object in view, was intended also to defend the
doctrinal and ethical positions assumed in the Four Books. As they partake
of the nature of an appendix, and refer, to some extent, to
misunderstandings belonging to an earlier age, the Latin versions omit
them, and this example was followed by the English translator.

§ 22. Arndt was freed from the unpleasant relations in which he stood to
his colleagues in Brunswick, in which city he had spent about ten years,
by a call which he received in 1608 to enter a new field of labor in
Eisleben. This city, which, as in the days of Luther (who was born and
baptized, and who also died there), still belonged to the territory of the
Counts of Mansfeld, is at present incorporated with the kingdom of Prussia
(Province of Saxony). It was here that Arndt ventured to publish the whole
of the Four Books of his "True Christianity." In this new position, his
admirable character and spirit were justly appreciated alike by his
patrons, the Counts of Mansfeld, by his colleagues, and by the people. The
fidelity with which he remained at his post during the prevalence of an
epidemic that carried off many of the inhabitants, his self-sacrificing
spirit in the discharge of his pastoral duties, and his judicious course
as an assessor of the local consistory, demonstrated the true nobility of
his soul--the spirit of the divine Redeemer. However, even though his
relations with all who surrounded him were of the most friendly character,
he did not remain longer than about two years and a half in Eisleben. He
had been repeatedly invited to assume important charges, which he declined
to accept; for while he had often found opponents, his great personal
merit, his eminent services, both as a preacher of the Gospel and as an
author of devotional works, and his godly spirit, had secured for him the
respect, confidence, and love of the whole religious public. Duke George
of Brunswick-Lueneburg, who at that time resided in Celle (Zelle), invited
him, in the year 1611, to accept the two offices of court-preacher and of
General Superintendent of ecclesiastical affairs in the principalities of
Brunswick and Lueneburg. (Celle was subsequently attached to the kingdom of
Hanover, but has, in the most recent times, been absorbed, with the
contiguous territories, by Prussia.) The Count of Mansfeld very
reluctantly consented to Arndt's removal; the latter, however, believed
that it had become his duty to enter the wide and inviting field of labor
which Providence had opened to him. The reigning duke, who was deeply
interested in the welfare of the Lutheran Church, judiciously and
vigorously sustained his new court-preacher in all his labors. The latter,
in addition to his ordinary pastoral duties, visited the congregations of
the whole territory, introduced various ecclesiastical reforms, and
continued till his death, which occurred May 11, 1621, to enjoy the divine
blessing himself, and to be a blessing to all whom his influence reached.
If he was born during a stormy period, and lived in an age of
controversies which wounded his soul, he was, nevertheless, like Luther,
very happy in being permitted to terminate his labors precisely at the
time when he was called away. For, as Luther closed his eyes in peace
during the year which preceded the disastrous battle of Muehlberg (April
24, 1547), so Arndt fell asleep soon after the Thirty Years' War began,
before the world saw those horrors which language fails to describe in
their awful extent. He had contracted a disease of the throat, which was
subsequently aggravated by a violent fever; and his exhausted frame at
length yielded to the assault of disease. He sent for his friend and
brother, the Rev. William Storch, early in the morning of May 9. After
being placed on a chair, he humbly made a general confession of his sins,
declared once more that he adhered as heretofore to the pure doctrine of
God's word and rejected every error, and then, with all the cheerfulness
of Christian faith, received the Lord's Supper. Dr. Morris, in the work
referred to, in a note above, quotes from his authorities the following:
"Mr. Storch then addressed him (in language similar to that which Dr.
Jonas used in speaking to the dying Luther) as follows: 'I do not doubt,
that as you have never entertained any doctrine contrary to God's word,
but have always continued firm and steadfast in the pure, unadulterated
word, the Scriptures of the prophets and apostles, the Augsburg
Confession, and other Symbolical Books of the Lutheran Church, and most
heartily and sincerely despised and rejected all contrary doctrines, so
you will also by God's grace maintain to the end the same doctrines and
faith which you have publicly preached and professed.' Arndt replied
several times, in a weak but intelligible voice, most decisively, 'Yes,
yes, that I will, even to the end.' " On the 11th of May he began to sink
rapidly, but was still able to repeat many of his favorite texts, such as
Ps. 143:2, and John 5:24. After having slept a short time, he awoke,
looked upward, and exclaimed with a comparatively loud voice: "We beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth." John 1:14. His wife asked him when he had seen that "glory."
He replied: "I saw it just now. O what a glory it is! It is the glory
which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the
heart of man to conceive of. This is the glory which I saw."--When he heard
the clock striking at eight in the evening, he asked what the hour was.
When it struck again, he repeated the question. On being told that it was
striking nine, he said: "Now I have overcome all." These were the last
words of this "good soldier of Jesus Christ." 2 Tim. 2:3. He lay perfectly
still until after midnight, when he breathed his last. God had given him a
peaceful death. The serenity of his soul in his last hours seemed to
linger on his features, even after the spirit had departed.

§ 23. Two dukes of Brunswick-Lueneburg followed him to the grave (May
15th), as a testimony of their sense of the great worth of their revered
spiritual guide. The text of the funeral sermon, delivered by Rev. Mr.
Storch, consisted of the words, "I have fought a good fight," etc. 2 Tim.
4:7, 8. His remains were deposited in the church at Celle. The tomb
exhibits the following inscription:


    Qui Jesum vidit, qui mundum et daemona vicit,
        Arndius in scriptis vivit ovatque suis.


(That is: _Arndt, who saw Jesus, and conquered the world and the devil,
lives and triumphs in his writings_.)

§ 24. Nothing could be more unjust than any charge affecting the purity of
the faith of Arndt as a Lutheran Christian. His general orthodoxy was
always readily admitted; a few unreasonable and prejudiced men, however,
who suspected that mysticism and other errors were concealed in the "True
Christianity," although the existence of such matter could not be
established, nevertheless alleged, with a certain morbid feeling, that
Arndt did not adopt the entire creed of the Lutheran Church, as set forth
in "all her symbolical books." This circumstance accounts for the
frequency and earnestness with which he declares his _unconditional_
acceptance of, and hearty belief in, _all_ the details of the Lutheran
faith. Thus the reader will find, at the close of the Preface to Book I.,
an emphatic declaration of his recognition of the doctrines of _all the
Symbolical Books_, the names of which he enumerates in full. See, also,
the conclusion of Book II., and the conclusion of the Preface to Book IV.,
where similar declarations occur. He repeats them in his Preface to Book
VI., where he employs the following language: "My dear reader, inasmuch as
our holy Christian faith, the pure evangelical doctrine, has, for about
one hundred years, been elucidated, purified, and sufficiently explained,
in accordance with the rule of the holy Word of God, and also been
cleansed from many errors through the means of two glorious and
praiseworthy confessions of faith, namely, the Augsburg Confession, and
the Formula of Concord, which have hitherto been, and still continue to
be, my own confession of faith; and, inasmuch as some have, at the same
time, uttered complaints respecting the ungodly manner of life of the
present world, with which the Christian faith cannot coexist; therefore, I
wrote, some years ago, Four Books on TRUE CHRISTIANITY, in which I have
depicted the internal, and, also, the external Christian life. For
although the pure _doctrine is the foremost point of true Christianity_, I
have, nevertheless, not wished to treat of it in a special manner, as this
has been copiously and superabundantly done by others, and is still daily
done; and I have taken only the Christian _life_ as my subject." This Book
VI. appeared somewhat less than a year before his death, and gives special
prominence to the last of the Lutheran confessions of faith--the FORMULA OF
CONCORD--in which the doctrines concerning the Person of Christ, the Lord's
Supper, etc., are set forth in all their details; he thus repeats anew his
cordial acceptance of the doctrines contained therein. In a letter of
thanks addressed to Dr. Mentzer, of Giessen (Book VI., Part II., Letter
7), he expressly rejects the serious doctrinal errors of Schwenkfeldt
respecting the Scriptures, the Person of Christ, the two Sacraments, etc.,
and adds: "These errors have been publicly condemned and rejected, partly
in the Augsburg Confession, and partly in the Formula of Concord, after
the pure doctrine was firmly established." He concurs, of course, in the
condemnation of such errors.--In Letter 8, of the same Book, addressed to
Dr. Piscator, of Jena, he says: "I call on the great God, the Searcher of
hearts, as my witness, that it was not in my mind, in anything which I
have written, to depart from the true religion of the Augsburg Confession
and the Formula of Concord, and that I had no intention to disseminate
erroneous opinions, much less to defend any which conflicted with the
Symbolical Books of our Church."

§ 25. On his death-bed he repeated anew, as we have seen, that he
continued, as heretofore, to adhere faithfully to the pure evangelical
doctrine. In the two copies of his last will and testament, of the years
1610 and 1616, he solemnly declares that he had always held with full
consciousness and understanding the doctrines of the Augsburg Confession
and the Formula of Concord, and never departed from their contents either
in his public teaching or his private views, that he never would adopt any
other faith, and that he prayed that the grace of God might sustain him in
this frame of mind until his last hour should come. The singularly
emphatic manner in which, on every appropriate occasion--and many of such
occurred--he declared his sincere belief in the peculiar and distinctive
doctrines of the Lutheran Church, in all their details, as set forth in
her SYMBOLICAL BOOKS, by no means proceeded from a narrow-minded sectarian
feeling. "Christ is all, and in all" (Col. 3:11)--these apostolic words
indicate the spirit of Arndt's religion. He could not sympathize with the
Papist, who robs Christ of the glory which belongs exclusively to his
atoning work--not with the Unitarian, who attempts to dethrone Him--not with
the fanatic, who, even when honest, is misguided by passion and spiritual
pride--not with the unbeliever, who flees from the shame of the cross--not
even with his Reformed fellow-Christians, whose merits he readily
acknowledged, but whose rejection of the Lutheran doctrine respecting the
Person of Christ and the Lord's Supper, as set forth especially in the
Formula of Concord, grieved his soul. He had found the precious Gospel
truth, which constituted his life, to be identical with the creed of his
Church, and with _that_ creed alone, in all its glorious fulness. He could
not consent to sacrifice one jot or one tittle of the Augsburg Confession,
nor could he assign to it an isolated position, even though Zwingli and
his associates readily adopted it, with the single exception of Article X.
Nor did his heart or his conscience allow him to ignore the other Lutheran
Symbols. The _Augsburg Confession_ undoubtedly contained the pure truth of
the Gospel, without any admixture of errors; but, owing to the
circumstances and the times in which it originated, when it was the great
object of Luther and his associates to justify their course in withdrawing
from antichristian Rome, it confined itself to those principles which were
then specially debated. Hence Calvin, who differed so widely on some
points from the fully developed Lutheran creed, readily adopted and
subscribed it at Strasburg.--The _Apology_, or Vindication of the Augsburg
Confession, set forth, among others, the cardinal doctrine of the Lutheran
faith, namely, Justification by faith alone, with extraordinary power and
purity. Its full, lucid, and strictly scriptural character has never been
successfully controverted. For this very reason the Apology was rejected
by Papists, as it now is practically by Rationalists and others who depend
on human merit, and are unwilling to give all honor to the Saviour
alone.--The _Smalcald Articles_, which Luther prepared in order to set
forth the points on which no Protestant or Bible Christian could make any
concession to Popery, are also offensive to Papists, to Rationalists, and
to the unbelieving and impenitent generally, as they contain the pure
evangelical truth, which humbles man, while it exalts God.--_The Two
Catechisms (the Large and the Small)_ furnish materials for popular
instruction in revealed truth, which have never been equalled by other
manuals, in their adaptation to the object, their fulness, and their
purity. Hence, a friend of divine truth, like Arndt, who took so deep an
interest in the religious education of the young, could not do otherwise
than regard them as of inestimable value. An enemy of the truth would
naturally disavow them.--The _Formula of Concord_--the last of the series of
Lutheran Confessions of Faith, and the one which Arndt appears to have
prized most highly--was intended, as we have shown above, to determine
various important points involved in the controversies which had arisen in
the bosom of the Lutheran Church before or at the time when he was born.
The very circumstance that this Symbol was demanded by the exigencies of
the Church, demonstrates that the Augsburg Confession was _not originally
designed to be a full and complete confession of faith_, but only a
statement of points discussed during the infancy of the Reformation. While
it excludes every error which might dishonor God, and confirm the
impenitent sinner in his evil course, it completes the previous Symbols,
and forms with them an undivided and harmonious whole, exhibiting with
brilliancy, power, and spotless purity the Person of the God-Man, Jesus
Christ, and glorifies God alone. A confession of faith which so
unreservedly unveils the fearful character of Original Sin, while it so
fully explains and establishes the true doctrine of the Lord's Supper,
