brisk tenor. "Snookums is safe in his own room. I have outlined what has
happened, and they're trying to get information from Snookums now.
Lieutenant Mellon is still missing."

"One down," said Chief Multhaus. There was relief in his voice.

"Let's see if we can find the other one," said Mike the Angel.

They went down perhaps three more steps, and the speakers came to life
again. "Will the Chief Physician's Mate report to Commander Jeffers in
the maintenance tool room? Lieutenant Keku, dismiss your men to quarters
and report to the bridge. Commander Gabriel, dismiss your men to
quarters and report to Commander Jeffers in maintenance. All chief
non-coms report to the ordnance room to turn in your weapons. All
enlisted men return to your posts or to quarters."

Mike the Angel holstered his stun gun. "That's two down," he said to
Chief Multhaus.

"Looks like we missed all the fun," said Multhaus.

"Okay, men," Mike said, "you got the word. Take those spanners back to
the tool room in Power Section, and then get back to your quarters.
Chief, you go with them and secure everything, then take that stun gun
back to ordnance."

"Yessir."

Multhaus threw Mike a salute; Mike returned it and headed toward
maintenance. He knew Multhaus and the others were curious, but he was
just as curious himself. He had the advantage of being in a position to
satisfy his curiosity.

The maintenance tool room was big and lined with tool lockers. One of
them was open. Sprawled in front of it was Lieutenant Mellon. Over to
one side was Commander Jeffers, standing next to a white-faced Ensign
Vaneski. Nearby were a chief non-com and three enlisted men.

"Hullo, Mike," Pete Jeffers said as Mike the Angel came in.

"What happened, Pete?" Mike asked.

Jeffers gestured at the sprawled figure on the floor. "We came in here
to search. We found him. Mister Vaneski opened the locker, there, for a
look-see, and Mellon jumped out at him. Vaneski fired his stun gun.
Mellon collapsed to the deck. He's in bad shape; his pulse is so weak
that it's hard to find."

Mike the Angel walked over and looked down at the fallen Medical
Officer. His face was waxen, and he looked utterly small and harmless.

"What happened?" asked another voice from the door. It was Chief
Physician's Mate Pierre Pasteur. He was a smallish man, well rounded,
pleasant-faced, and inordinately proud of his name. He couldn't actually
prove that he was really descended from the great Louis, but he didn't
allow people to think otherwise. Like most C. Phys. M.'s, he had a
doctor of medicine degree but no internship in the Space Service. He was
working toward his commission.

"We've got a patient for you," said Jeffers. "Better look him over,
Chief."

Chief Pasteur walked over to where Mellon lay and took his stethoscope
out of his little black bag. He listened to Mellon's chest for a few
seconds. Then he pried open an eyelid and looked closely at an eye.
"What happened to him?" he asked, without looking up.

"Got hit with a beam from a stun gun," said Jeffers.

"How did he fall? Did he hit his head?"

"I don't know--maybe." He looked at Ensign Vaneski. "Did he, Mister
Vaneski? He was right on top of you; I was across the room."

Vaneski swallowed. "I don't know. He--he just sort of--well, he _fell_."

"You didn't catch him?" asked the chief. He was a physician on a case
now and had no time for sirring his superiors.

"No. No. I jumped away from him."

"Why? What's the trouble?" Jeffers asked.

"He's dead," said the Chief Physician's Mate.




17


Leda Crannon was standing outside the cubicle that had been built for
Snookums. Her back and the palms of her hands were pressed against the
door. Her head was bowed, and her red hair, shining like a hellish flame
in the light of the glow panels, fell around her shoulders and cheeks,
almost covering her face.

"Leda," said Mike the Angel gently.

She looked up. There were tears in her blue eyes.

"Mike! Oh, Mike!" She ran toward him, put her arms around him, and tried
to bury her face in Mike's chest.

"What's the matter, honey? What's happened?" He was certain she couldn't
have heard about Mellon's death yet. He held her in his arms, carefully,
tenderly, not passionately.

"He's crazy, Mike. He's completely crazy." Her voice had suddenly lost
everything that gave it color. It was only dead and choked.

Mike the Angel knew it was an emotional reaction. As a psychologist, she
would never have used the word "crazy." But as a woman ... as a human
being....

"Fitz is still in there talking to him, but he's--he's--" Her voice
choked off again into sobs.

Mike waited patiently, holding her, caressing her hair.

"Eight years," she said after a minute or so. "Eight years I spent. And
now he's gone. He's broken."

"How do you know?" Mike asked.

She lifted her head and looked at him. "Mike--did he really hit you? Did
he refuse to stop when you ordered him to? What _really_ happened?"

Mike told her what had happened in the darkened companionway just
outside his room.

When he finished, she began sobbing again. "He's lying, Mike," she said.
"_Lying!_"

Mike nodded silently and slowly. Leda Crannon had spent all of her adult
life tending the hurts and bruises and aches of Snookums the Child. She
had educated him, cared for him, taken pleasure in his triumphs, worried
about his health, and watched him grow mentally.

And now he was sick, broken, ruined. And, like all parents, she was
asking herself: "What did I do wrong?"

Mike the Angel didn't give her an answer to that unspoken question, but
he knew what the answer was in so many cases:

The grieving parent has not necessarily done anything wrong. It may
simply be that there was insufficient or poor-quality material to work
with.

With a human child, it is even more humiliating for a parent to admit
that he or she has contributed inferior genetic material to a child than
it is to admit a failure in upbringing. Leda's case was different.

Leda had lost her child, but Mike hesitated to point out that it wasn't
her fault in the first place because the material wasn't up to the task
she had given it, and in the second place because she hadn't really
lost anything. She was still playing with dolls, not human beings.

"Hell!" said Mike under his breath, not realizing that he was
practically whispering in her ear.

"Isn't it?" she said. "Isn't it Hell? I spent eight years trying to make
that little mind of his tick properly. I wanted to know what was the
right, proper, and logical way to bring up children. I had a theory, and
I wanted to test it. And now I'll never know."

"What sort of theory?" Mike asked.

She sniffled, took a handkerchief from her pocket, and began wiping at
her tears. Mike took the handkerchief away from her and did the wiping
job himself. "What's this theory?" he said.

"Oh, it isn't important now. But I felt--I still feel--that everybody is
born with a sort of Three Laws of Robotics in him. You know what I
mean--that a person wouldn't kill or harm anyone, or refuse to do what
was right, in addition to trying to preserve his own life. I think
babies are born that way. But I think that the information they're given
when they're growing up can warp them. They still think they're obeying
the laws, but they're obeying them wrongly, if you see what I mean."

Mike nodded without saying anything. This was no time to interrupt her.

"For instance," she went on, "if my theory's right, then a child would
never disobey his father--unless he was convinced that the man was not
really his father, you see. For instance, if he learned, very early,
that his father never spanks him, that becomes one of the identifying
marks of 'father.' Fine. But the first time his father _does_ spank him,
doubt enters. If that sort of thing goes on, he becomes disobedient
because he doesn't believe that the man is his father.

"I'm afraid I'm putting it a little crudely, but you get the idea."

"Yeah," said Mike. For all he knew, there might be some merit in the
girl's idea; he knew that philosophers had talked of the "basic goodness
of mankind" for centuries. But he had a hunch that Leda was going about
it wrong. Still, this was no time to argue with her. She seemed calmer
now, and he didn't want to upset her any more than he had to.

"That's what you've been working on with Snookums?" he asked.

"That's it."

"For eight years?"

"For eight years."

"Is that the information, the data, that makes Snookums so priceless,
aside from his nucleonics work?"

She smiled a little then. "Oh no. Of course not, silly. He's been fed
data on everything--physics, subphysics, chemistry, mathematics--all
kinds of things. Most of the major research laboratories on Earth have
problems of one kind or another that Snookums has been working on. He
hasn't been given the problem _I_ was working on at all; it would bias
him." Then the tears came back. "And now it doesn't matter. He's insane.
He's lying."

"What's he saying?"

"He insists that he's never broken the First Law, that he has never hurt
a human being. And he insists that he has followed the orders of human
beings, according to the Second Law."

"May I talk to him?" Mike asked.

She shook her head. "Fitz is running him through an analysis. He even
made me leave." Then she looked at his face more closely. "You don't
just want to confront him and call him a liar, do you? No--that's not
like you. You know he's just a machine--better than I do, I guess....
What is it, Mike?"

_No_, he thought, looking at her, _she still thinks he's human.
Otherwise, she'd know that a computer can't lie--not in the human sense
of the word._

_Most people, if told that a man had said one thing, and that a computer
had given a different answer, would rely on the computer._

"What is it, Mike?" she repeated.

"Lew Mellon," he said very quietly, "is dead."

The blood drained from her face, leaving her skin stark against the
bright red of her hair. For a moment he thought she was going to faint.
Then a little of the color came back.

"Snookums." Her voice was whispery.

He shook his head. "No. Apparently he tried to jump Vaneski and got hit
with a stun beam. It shouldn't have killed him--but apparently it did."

"God, God, God," she said softly. "Here I've been crying about a damned
machine, and poor Lew has been lying up there dead." She buried her face
in her hands, and her voice was muffled when she spoke again. "And I'm
all cried out, Mike. I can't cry any more."

Before Mike could make up his mind whether to say anything or not, the
door of Snookums' room opened and Dr. Fitzhugh came out, closing the
door behind him. There was an odd, stricken look on his face. He looked
at Leda and then at Mike, but the expression on his face showed that he
really hadn't seen them clearly.

"Did you ever wonder if a robot had a soul, Mike?" he asked in a
wondering tone.

"No," Mike admitted.

Leda took her hands from her face and looked at him. Her expression was
a bright blank stare.

"He won't answer my questions," Fitzhugh said in a hushed tone. "I can't
complete the analysis."

"What's that got to do with his soul?" Mike asked.

"He won't answer my questions," Fitzhugh repeated, looking earnestly at
Mike. "He says God won't allow him to."




18


Captain Sir Henry Quill opened the door of the late Lieutenant Mellon's
quarters and went in, followed by Mike the Angel. The dead man's gear
had to be packed away so that it could be given to his nearest of kin
when the officers and crew of the _Brainchild_ returned to Earth.
Regulations provided that two officers must inventory his personal
effects and those belonging to the Space Service.

"Does Chief Pasteur know what killed him yet, Captain?" Mike asked.

Quill shook his head. "No. He wants my permission to perform an
autopsy."

"Are you going to let him?"

"I think not. We'll put the body in the freezer and have the autopsy
performed on Earth." He looked around the room, seeing it for the first
time.

"If you don't," said Mike, "you've got three suspected killers on your
hands."

Quill was unperturbed. "Don't be ridiculous, Golden Wings."

"I'm not," Mike said. "I hit him in the pit of his stomach. Chief
Pasteur filled him full of sedative. Mister Vaneski shot him with a
stun beam. He died. Which one of us did it?"

"Probably no single one of them, but a combination of all three," said
Captain Quill. "Each action was performed in the line of duty and
without malice aforethought--without even intent to harm permanently,
much less to kill. There will have to be a court-martial, of course--or,
at the very least, a board of inquiry will be appointed. But I am
certain you'll all come through any such inquiry scatheless." He picked
up a book from Mellon's desk. "Let's get about our business, Mister
Gabriel. Mark down: Bible, one."

Mike put it down on the list.

"_International Encyclopedia_, English edition. Thirty volumes and
index."

Mike put it down.

"_The Oxford-Webster Dictionary of the English Language_--

"_Hallbert's Dictionary of Medical Terms_--

"_The Canterbury Theological Dictionary_--

"_The Christian Religion and Symbolic Logic_, by Bishop K. F. Costin--

"_The Handbook of Space Medicine_--"

As Captain Quill called out the names of the books and put them into the
packing case he'd brought, Mike marked them down--while something began
ticking in the back of his mind.

"Item," said Captain Quill, "one crucifix." He paused. "Beautifully
carved, too." He put it into the packing case.

"Excuse me, Captain," said Mike suddenly. "Let me take a look at
something, will you?" Excitedly, he leaned over and took some of the
books out, looking at the pages of each one.

"I'll be damned," he said after a moment. "Or I _should_ be--for being
such a stupid idiot!"

Captain Quill narrowed his eyes. "What are you talking about, Mister
Gabriel?"

"I'm not sure yet, Captain," Mike hedged. "May I borrow these three
books?" He held them up in his hands.

"May I be so bold as to ask _why_, Mister Gabriel?"

"I just want to look at them, sir," Mike said. "I'll return them within
a few hours."

"Mister Gabriel," Captain Quill said, "after what happened last night, I
am suspicious of everything that goes on aboard this ship. But--yes. You
may take them. However, I want them returned before we land tomorrow
morning."

Mike blinked. Neither he nor anyone else--with the exception of Captain
Quill and Lieutenant Commander von Liegnitz, the navigator, knew the
destination of the ship. Mike hadn't realized they were that close to
their goal. "I'll have them back by then," he promised.

"Very well. Now let's get on about our work."
