The balance bought the coal with which it was cooked, and _fifteen_
people were fed!"


SAVED FROM STARVATION.


On the second floor of a rear house lived a lady well known once as
among the foremost members of a wealthy church. The first blow of
adversity opened a wide passage for a succession of disasters. She
passed through the whole sliding scale, until the missionary found her
in the poor, dilapidated tenement where, for two days and nights, she
had lain in bed to keep warm; or as nearly so as her scanty covering
would admit.

It was Saturday, and the only food she had to keep her alive until
Monday, was two soda biscuits! She had sold everything comfortable in
the way of furniture; all her clothing but one respectable suit for the
street, and the only thing remaining, that pointed to the history of
better days, was a pair of gold eye-glasses, given her by her dying
mother. Within a few months her dire necessity had often pointed to the
glasses; but she could not see without them, nor could she sell the gold
frames unless she had means to have the glass set in commoner ones.
Moreover, the harpies who feed and thrive on the miseries of the poor,
would in no case have given her more than twenty-five cents for them;
and the short respite derived from that amount would not have
compensated for the sacrifice. She had looked at them that morning; felt
that starve she must and would, but that souvenir of her mother should
never leave her. She went back to bed and prayed fervently that the Lord
would show her some way of escape, or take her that day to himself. She
slept an hour or two, and then awakened, strong in the conviction that
he would show her some way before night, and though it was six o'clock
P.M., before the missionary called, no doubt had arisen to trouble her
mind; and as soon as he entered and introduced himself, she said--"You
are a messenger from the Lord, sir; I have been expecting you."


GOD WITH US.


An old woman was taking home' some sewing the night before, and passing
through a narrow and dark street, was knocked down by a runaway horse.
Taken up senseless and unknown, she was carried into the house of a kind
family who sent for a physician. It was not till next morning that she
recovered consciousness, and was able to give her address. A messenger
was at once dispatched to her husband, who was supposed to be wild with
terror. He was truly thankful to hear from human lips of her
whereabouts; but said he knew she was not dead, and he would see her in
the morning; for the Lord had been with him all night and assured him of
it. He had also kept the fire from going out; and now that she would be
brought home in a few hours, he was ready to trust his Father, as he had
been through the night. His hourly friend was Immanuel, God _with_ us;
not God somewhere or other in infinite space.


A VESSEL SAVED.


A vessel was six months making the passage from Liverpool to Bermuda
Island. Fogs enveloped it; winds sent it hither and thither; captain and
mate lost their reckoning, lost their senses; and when, added to the
rest, the vessel sprung a leak, gave up in despair. Crew and passengers
were finally reduced to a few drops of water and one potato a day, and
they merely waited death from starvation or drowning. All but one! One
man; a minister, whose faith and belief in their final escape burned but
brighter and brighter, as the others sank in the gloom of silent
despair. A few days before they made the land, the leakage suddenly
ceased; no one could account for it; but a week after their arrival,
when the vessel had been condemned by the authorities as unsea-worthy,
it was proposed to turn it bottom upward and see what stopped the leak.
God seemed to have performed a miracle for them, when it was discovered
that that end of the vessel was entirely covered with barnacles!


A REMARKABLE PRAYER CONCERNING A REMARKABLE TEXT.


A clergyman, accustomed to preach regularly in his journey through
Fleming Circuit, Kentucky, was preparing on one Saturday for the labors
of the next day. He was then staying at the residence of a family named
Bowers, from which he was to journey the next day five miles to preach
at 11 A.M., at a church called Mt. Olivet. On this Saturday, as he
relates the incident, as soon and as privately as practicable, I pored
over the Bible in quest of a suitable subject for the next day at Mount
Olivet, and strange to tell! not one passage in the whole Book, that
afternoon and night, could I fix upon, as, in my estimation, suitable
for the next day. There was one passage, (two or three clauses of which
I had by some means got fixed in my memory), that early that afternoon
appeared in my mind as though each word was written in CAPITAL LETTERS.
I turned to the whole passage as soon as I could find it; Heb. 6: 4-6;
and read, "For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened,"
etc., etc. I had previously studied that whole subject, as recorded in
the original, and as disposed of by learned Commentators of different
creeds. I had settled in my own mind the import of the passage. But it
seemed unsuitable for me, not then three years old in the ministry, to
attempt the settlement of a theological question, about which the best
and most learned of modern days had differed. I therefore tried to
dismiss it from my mind, and to find some passage more suitable for the
coming morrow. But my constant effort proved unsuccessful; and the said
passage in Hebrews often recurred to my mind. Thus passed my time till I
had to go to bed, resolving to attempt an early settlement of the
growing difficulty next morning. But the morning studies produced no
change in the unsettled state of the question, what shall I preach from
to-day? Thus matters remained until I reached Mount Olivet, and had to
begin service without a text. But I concluded if a suitable text did not
occur while singing, praying and reading some Scripture lesson, rather
than have no text, I would take Heb. 6: 4-6. And, cornered in this
dilemma, so I did, and used it as well as I could.

I then passed around the circuit as usual, and the fourth Saturday
thereafter, I arrived again at Brother Bowers', preached, met the class,
etc. Then, when all the class had left the room except their own family,
Brother and Sister Bowers said to me, each manifesting intense feeling
and interest, "Have you heard of the _strange_ thing that happened when
you were here four weeks ago?" Said I, "No! what was it?" They said,
"Did you see a man sitting in the house while you was preaching to-day?"
describing his dress, looks, etc. I answered, "Yes." Said they, "Did you
see a woman sitting over there," describing her? I said, "Yea." Said
they, "They are husband and wife--their name is--(I have long since
forgotten the name)--they are good members of the Presbyterian church,
their children are members of our class, as you have called their names
every time you have examined us. The man and his wife were here and
heard you four weeks ago--they know our rules, and when those not of our
church were dismissed, they left their children with us, as usual, and
their parents started home. And, as they themselves tell us and others,
as they went along, said the woman to her husband, 'Does not Mr. Akers
preach to-morrow at Mount Olivet?' And he answered, 'I believe he does.'
Said she, '_Well, if I thought he would take a certain text I would like
very much to go and hear him._' Said her husband, '_What text_?' And she
repeated the whole passage in _Hebrews_ 6:4-6. Said her husband, 'Well,
I reckon he will take some subject that will be interesting, and if you
say so we will not go to our own church to-morrow, we will go to Mount
Olivet.' She answered, '_Agreed,_ and I do pray the Lord that he may
take that text.' And she says, she continued to pray all that evening
and next morning, until sitting in the church at Mount Olivet, she heard
_you read out the said text, when she knew the Lord had answered her
prayer_, and she could scarcely help from loud crying of thanks to God."

I then told Brother and Sister Bowers my troubles about that text, as
above stated. The Lord answers prayer.


HOW SHE LEARNED TO LOVE THE BIBLE.


The Rev. Frederick G. Clark thus writes of an answer to prayer, from one
who wanted to love the Bible more:

"Twenty-seven years ago, in the congregation of my first charge, was a
lady whose love for the Bible was something remarkable. In the
confidence of a pastoral visit, she told me of her joy in the divine
word, and also recited the incidents of her experience in this regard.
She had formerly read her Bible as so many do--a chapter now, and a
halfchapter then, without much interest or profit. She was, even then,
most interested in religious things. But her chief sources of spiritual
strength were in such writings as those of Baxter, Payson and Robert
Phillips. It was her custom to read the Bible from duty, and then turn
to these uninspired volumes for the kindling of a higher devotion. For a
good while this satisfied her; but, at length, she came to feel grieved
about it. She thought it a dishonor to God's word that any book should
be as interesting to her as the Bible. She tried to change this, but, at
first, with little success. The Bible was still duty--Baxter was
pleasure and spiritual elevation.

"_At length, she could bear it no longer; so she took the case to God,
with strong crying. She told her Heavenly Father how grieved she was
that any book should rival the Bible in her affections. She asked this
one thing--and she renewed her prayer every day--that her first delight
might be in reading the word of God_. I think it was some time before
she felt that her request was granted. But, at length, the answer to her
prayer was complete and marvelous. A strange light came over the sacred
page. A fascination held her to her Bible. She discovered a depth, a
meaning, a curiosity, a charm, which were all new and most wonderful.
Sometimes, when she had finished reading her Bible for the night, and
had closed the book and had moved towards her bed, she would go back
again and enjoy the luxury of a few more verses.


THE BLIND RESTORED TO SIGHT.


At the age of twenty years, a lady in Winchester, Iowa, began to lose
her health, and in a short time was confined to her bed. And she
writes:--"In addition to this I lost the use of my eyes, and was blind
and helpless, a greater portion of my time for five years.

"I enjoyed the blessing of prayer and trust some six months before
feeling a liberty to pray for the healing of my body; fearing I should
desire it without due submission to God's will. It was with _fear and
trembling_ that I first made known this request. Though my pleadings in
this direction were earnest, and often agonizing, yet I could say with a
fervor as never before, 'Not my will, but thine be done.'

"About the end of November, or early in December, 1873, I realized that
my faith was perfect, that I was ready _now_ to be healed, that my faith
was momentarily waiting on God, resting without a doubt on the promises.
From this time forward my faith remained fixed with but one exception.
During the time between December, 1873, and July, 1874, I was healed to
such an extent that I could walk some, and see more or less every day,
though sometimes with only one of my eyes. A portion of this time I felt
as though in a furnace of fire; but amid the flames I realized the
presence of the Son of God, who said, '_have chosen thee in the furnace
of affliction_.' This for a time seemed an answer to my petition, and so
thought it my life-work to suffer; for a while my faith became inactive,
and I almost ceased praying for my health. Though I felt submissive, yet
somehow I was soon crying, and that most instinctively, 'Thou Son of
David, have mercy on me.' After this, my faith did not waver. Oh, the
lesson of patience I learned in thus _waiting_ on _God's_ good time. And
with what comfort could I present my body an offering to Him, realizing
that as soon as at all possible with His will, I should be healed; I had
an assurance of this, but did not know whether it would be during life,
or accomplished only at death.

"In this manner I waited before God until the morning of the 29th of
July, when, without ecstasy of joy, or extra illumination, came a sense
of the presence of Jesus, and a presentation of this gift, accompanied
with these words: 'Here is the gift for which you have been praying; are
you willing to receive it?'

"I at first felt the incoming of the Divine power at the parts diseased,
steadily driving out the same, until death was swallowed up in victory.
I at once arose from my bed, and proceeded to work about the house, to
the great astonishment of my friends, some of whom thought me wild; but
I continued my work, assuring them that Jesus had healed me. Realizing
the scrutiny and doubt with which I was observed, I said to my father,
'What do you think?' He replied, 'It is supernatural power; no one can
deny it.'

"My healing took place on Wednesday; on Saturday was persuaded to lie
down, which I did, but found the bed was no place for me; thought of
Peter's wife's mother, who 'arose and ministered to them; knew that to
her, strength, as well as health, was instantly given, as in the case of
the palsied man, who rose, took up his bed, and departed. I returned to
my work, backing my experience with those in God's word, and since then
have not lain down during the day time.

"My friends could not realize the completeness of the cure, until I read
a full hour, and that by lamp-light, and until asked to desist, the
first opportunity after being healed.

"A week from this time, I discharged the hired girl, taking charge of
the household work, which I have continued with perfect ease. About four
weeks after my healing, had occasion to walk four miles, which I did
with little or no weariness. Let me add to the praise of God, that I
have no disease whatever. Am able to do more hard work with less
weariness, than at any other period in my life, and faith in the Lord is
the balm that made me whole."


THE WIDOW'S SHOES.


A poor woman--a widow with an invalid son--a member of the church, could
not attend church, or the neighborhood prayer-meetings, for the want of
shoes. She asked the Lord for the shoes. That very day the village
school-master called in to see her son. Meanwhile he noticed that the
boy's mother had very poor shoes. He said nothing, but felt impressed,
and inwardly resolved to purchase the poor woman a pair of shoes
forthwith. He accordingly hired a horse, rode two miles on horseback to
a shoe-store, bought the shoes, and requested them sent to the widow's
cottage without delay. They proved a perfect fit; and that very night
the overjoyed woman hurried to the prayer-meeting to announce that in
answer to prayer the Lord had sent her the shoes.

The young school-master, who, I suspect, was my informant himself, now a
venerable, white-haired man, heard the poor woman's testimony; and his
pillow that night was wet with tears of gratitude and joy because God
had used him thus to bless the poor widow, and to answer her prayers.


A REMARKABLE DREAM.


The late Dr. Whitehead was accustomed to repeat with pleasure' the
following fact: In the year 1764, he was stationed as an itinerant
preacher in Cornwall. He had to preach one evening in a little village
where there was a small Methodist Society. "The friend," said he, "at
whose house we preached, had at that time a daughter, who lived with one
of our people about ten miles off. His wife was gone to attend her
daughter, who was dangerously ill of a fever; and her husband had that
day received a message from her, informing him that his child's life was
despaired of. He earnestly and with tears desired Mr. Whitehead to
recommend his daughter to God in prayer, both before and after
preaching. He did so in the most warm and affectionate manner. Late that
evening, or very early next morning, while the young woman's mother was
sitting by her daughter's bedside (who had been in a strong delirium for
several days), she opened her eyes and hastily addressed her mother
thus: 'O mother! I have been dreaming that I saw a man lifting up his
eyes and hands to heaven, and fervently praying to God for my recovery!
The Lord has heard his prayers, and my fever is gone; and what is far
better, the Lord has spoken peace to my soul, and sealed His pardoning
love on my heart. I know it, I feel it, my dear mother; and His Spirit
bears witness with my spirit, that I am a child of God, and an heir of
glory.' Her mother, thinking that she was still in delirium, desired her
to compose herself, and remain quiet. The daughter replied, 'My dear
mother, I am in no delirium now; I am perfectly in my senses; do help me
to rise, that upon my bended knees I may praise God.' Her mother did so,
and they both praised God with joyful hearts, and from that hour the
young woman recovered so fast, that she was soon able to attend to the
affairs of the family where she lived. She had never seen Mr. Whitehead,
previous to this remarkable time; but some weeks after, she saw him, and
the moment she beheld his face, she fainted away. As soon as she came to
herself, she said, 'Sir, you are the person I saw in my dream, when I
was ill in a violent fever; and I beheld you lift up your hands and eyes
to heaven, and most fervently pray for my recovery and conversion to
God. The Lord, in mercy, heard your prayers, and answered them to the
healing of my wounded spirit, and to the restoration of my body. I have
walked in the light of His countenance from that time to the present,
and I trust I shall do so as long as I live.' How remarkably does this
circumstance illustrate the words of St. James, 'The prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have
committed sins, they shall be forgiven him!'"


"YOU MUST NOT GO."


A remarkable instance of deep impression occasionally made by the Holy
Spirit on the mind of the Rev. William Bramwell during prayer, occurred
in Liverpool. A pious young woman, a member of Society, wished to go to
her friends, then living in Jamaica. She took her passage, had her
luggage taken on board, and expected to sail on the following day.
Having the greatest respect for Mr. Bramwell, she waited upon him, to
take leave and request an interest in his prayers. Before parting, they
knelt down, and he recommended her to the care of God. After he had been
engaged in prayer some time, he suddenly paused, and thus addressed her,
"My dear sister, you must not go to-morrow. God has just told me you
must not go." She was surprised, but he was positive, and prevailed upon
her to postpone her voyage, and assisted her to remove her luggage out
of the vessel. The ship sailed, and in about six weeks intelligence
arrived that the vessel was lost, and all on board had perished.


EVIL AVERTED.


A correspondent of the _Guide to Holiness_ says: "We remember a poor
woman who had had a life of sore vicissitude which she bore with
remarkable Christian cheerfulness; and after a time of the suspension of
trial, a bad prospect came in sight. She resorted to a friend to whom
she confidingly related the threatening evil, and at parting said, 'Oh
pray for us.' The case as it was known was taken immediately that early
morning to the throne of grace and laid out in all its circumstances
with a deeply sympathizing heart, and a consciousness of the past
sufferings of that woman--and as the friend rose from prayer, the answer
was given that the evil was averted, and a new change would come to that
afflicted one.

"That very day a strange deliverance and opening appeared which set that
family at rest from their peculiar trials for the rest of life."


HOW A POOR LITTLE CRIPPLE CONVERTED A VILLAGE.


Mr. D.L. Moody relates the instance of a poor little cripple, whose
prayers were answered to the conversion of _fifty-six people._

"I once knew a little cripple who lay upon her death bed. She had given
herself to God, and was distressed only because she could not labor for
Him actively among the lost. Her clergyman visited her, and hearing her
complaint, told her from her sick bed she could pray; to pray for those
she wished to see turning to God. He told her to write the names down,
and then to pray earnestly; he went away and thought of the subject no
more.

"Soon a feeling of religious interest sprang up in the village, and the
churches were crowded nightly. The little cripple heard of the progress
of the revival, and inquired anxiously for the names of the saved. A few
weeks later she died, and among a roll of papers that was found under
her little pillow, was one bearing the names of fifty-six persons, every
one of whom had in the revival been converted. By each name was a little
cross by which the poor crippled saint had checked off the names of the
converts as they had been reported to her."


PLEASE GOD, GIVE US A HOME.


Mr. Moody tells of a beautiful answer to the faith of a little child.

"I remember a child that lived with her parents in a small village. One
day the news came that her father had joined the army (it was the
beginning of our war), and a few days after, the landlord came to demand
the rent. The mother told him she hadn't got it, and that her husband
had gone into the army. He was a hard-hearted wretch, and he stormed,
and said that they must leave the house; he wasn't going to have people
who couldn't pay the rent.

"After he was gone, the mother threw herself into the armchair, and
began to weep bitterly. Her little girl, whom she taught to pray in
faith, (but it is more difficult to practice than to preach,) came up to
her, and said, '_What makes you cry, mamma, I will pray to God to give
us a little home, and won't He_?' What could the mother say? So the
little child went into the next room and began to pray. The door was
open, and the mother could hear every word.

_"'O, God, you have come and taken away father, and mamma has got no
money, and the landlord will turn us out because we can't pay, and we
will have to sit on the door-step, and mamma will catch cold. Give us a
little home_.' Then she waited as if for an answer, and then added,
'_Won't you, please, God_?'

"She came out of that room quite happy, expecting a home to be given
them. The mother felt reproved. God heard the prayer of that little one,
for he touched the heart of the cruel landlord, and she has never paid
any rent since."

God give us the faith of that little child, that we may likewise expect
an answer, "_nothing wavering_."


"OF COURSE HE WILL."


Mr. Moody also gives the story of a little child whose father and mother
had died, and she was taken into another family. The first night she
asked if she could pray, as she used to do.

They said, Oh, yes! So she knelt down, and prayed as her mother taught
her, and when that was ended she added a little prayer of her own: "_Oh,
God, make these people as kind to me as father and mother were_." Then
she paused, and looked up, as if expecting an answer, and added, "_Of
course he will_."

How sweetly simple was that little one's faith; she expected God to
"do," and she got her request.


STRIKING ANSWER.


The following incidents are specially contributed to these pages by Rev.
J.S. Bass, a Home Missionary of Brooklyn, N.Y.:

"While living in Canada, my eldest daughter, then a girl of ten years of
age, rather delicate and of feeble health, had a severe attack of
chorea, "St. Vitus's dance." To those who have had any experience in
this distressing complaint, nothing need be said of the deep affliction
of the household at the sight of our loved one, as all her muscles
appeared to be affected, the face distorted with protrusion of the
tongue, and the continuous involuntary motions by jerks of her limbs.
The ablest medical advice and assistance were employed, and all that the
sympathy of friends and the skill of physicians could do were of no
avail. She grew worse rather than better, and death was looked to as a
happy release to the sufferings of the child, and the anguish of the
parents; as the medical men had given as their opinion that the mind of
the child would become diseased, and if her life were lengthened, it
would be an enfeebled body united to an idiotic mind.

"But God was better to us than our most sanguine hopes far better to us
than our fears.

"In our trouble we thought on God, and asked his help. We knew we had
the prayers of some of God's chosen ones. On a certain Sunday morning I
