The Project Gutenberg EBook of Project Mastodon, by Clifford Donald Simak

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Project Mastodon

Author: Clifford Donald Simak

Release Date: August 2, 2007 [EBook #22216]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROJECT MASTODON ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, dpcfmander and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note: This story was first published in March 1955
_Galaxy_ and the etext was produced from the anthology "All the
Traps of Earth and other stories". Extensive research did not
uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication
was renewed.]




PROJECT MASTODON

By

Clifford D. Simak


The chief of protocol said, "Mr. Hudson of--ah--Mastodonia."

The secretary of state held out his hand. "I'm glad to see you,
Mr. Hudson. I understand you've been here several times."

"That's right," said Hudson. "I had a hard time making your people
believe I was in earnest."

"And are you, Mr. Hudson?"

"Believe me, sir, I would not try to fool you."

"And this Mastodonia," said the secretary, reaching down to tap
the document upon the desk. "You will pardon me, but I've never
heard of it."

"It's a new nation," Hudson explained, "but quite legitimate. We
have a constitution, a democratic form of government, duly elected
officials, and a code of laws. We are a free, peace-loving people
and we are possessed of a vast amount of natural resources and--"

"Please tell me, sir," interrupted the secretary, "just where are
you located?"

"Technically, you are our nearest neighbors."

"But that is ridiculous!" exploded Protocol.

"Not at all," insisted Hudson. "If you will give me a moment, Mr.
Secretary, I have considerable evidence."

He brushed the fingers of Protocol off his sleeve and stepped
forward to the desk, laying down the portfolio he carried.

"Go ahead, Mr. Hudson," said the secretary. "Why don't we all sit
down and be comfortable while we talk this over?"

"You have my credentials, I see. Now here is a propos--"

"I have a document signed by a certain Wesley Adams."

"He's our first president," said Hudson. "Our George Washington,
you might say."

"What is the purpose of this visit, Mr. Hudson?"

"We'd like to establish diplomatic relations. We think it would be
to our mutual benefit. After all, we are a sister republic in
perfect sympathy with your policies and aims. We'd like to
negotiate trade agreements and we'd be grateful for some Point
Four aid."

The secretary smiled. "Naturally. Who doesn't?"

"We're prepared to offer something in return," Hudson told him
stiffly. "For one thing, we could offer sanctuary."

"Sanctuary!"

"I understand," said Hudson, "that in the present state of
international tensions, a foolproof sanctuary is not something to
be sneezed at."

The secretary turned stone cold. "I'm an extremely busy man."

Protocol took Hudson firmly by the arm. "Out you go."

General Leslie Bowers put in a call to State and got the
secretary.

"I don't like to bother you, Herb," he said, "but there's
something I want to check. Maybe you can help me."

"Glad to help you if I can."

"There's a fellow hanging around out here at the Pentagon, trying
to get in to see me. Said I was the only one he'd talk to, but you
know how it is."

"I certainly do."

"Name of Huston or Hudson or something like that."

"He was here just an hour or so ago," said the secretary.
"Crackpot sort of fellow."

"He's gone now?"

"Yes. I don't think he'll be back."

"Did he say where you could reach him?"

"No, I don't believe he did."

"How did he strike you? I mean what kind of impression did you get
of him?"

"I told you. A crackpot."

"I suppose he is. He said something to one of the colonels that
got me worrying. Can't pass up anything, you know--not in the
Dirty Tricks Department. Even if it's crackpot, these days you got
to have a look at it."

"He offered sanctuary," said the secretary indignantly. "Can you
imagine that!"

"He's been making the rounds, I guess," the general said. "He was
over at AEC. Told them some sort of tale about knowing where there
were vast uranium deposits. It was the AEC that told me he was
heading your way."

"We get them all the time. Usually we can ease them out. This
Hudson was just a little better than the most of them. He got in
to see me."

"He told the colonel something about having a plan that would
enable us to establish secret bases anywhere we wished, even in
the territory of potential enemies. I know it sounds crazy...."

"Forget it, Les."

"You're probably right," said the general, "but this idea sends
me. Can you imagine the look on their Iron Curtain faces?"

The scared little government clerk, darting conspiratorial glances
all about him, brought the portfolio to the FBI.

"I found it in a bar down the street," he told the man who took
him in tow. "Been going there for years. And I found this
portfolio laying in the booth. I saw the man who must have left it
there and I tried to find him later, but I couldn't."

"How do you know he left it there?"

"I just figured he did. He left the booth just as I came in and it
was sort of dark in there and it took a minute to see this thing
laying there. You see, I always take the same booth every day and
Joe sees me come in and he brings me the usual and--"

"You saw this man leave the booth you usually sit in?"

"That's right."

"Then you saw the portfolio."

"Yes, sir."

"You tried to find the man, thinking it must have been his."

"That's exactly what I did."

"But by the time you went to look for him, he had disappeared."

"That's the way it was."

"Now tell me--why did you bring it here? Why didn't you turn it in
to the management so the man could come back and claim it?"

"Well, sir, it was like this. I had a drink or two and I was
wondering all the time what was in that portfolio. So finally I
took a peek and--"

