being even scorched.

"This is surely a most extraordinary adventure," said the Woggle-Bug, who
was greatly amazed; "for it upsets all the Natural Laws that I heard
Professor Nowitall teach in the school-house."

"Of course it does," said the Scarecrow, wisely. "All magic is unnatural,
and for that reason is to be feared and avoided. But I see before us the
gates of the Emerald City, so I imagine we have now overcome all the magical
obstacles that seemed to oppose us."

Indeed, the walls of the City were plainly visible, and the Queen of the
Field Mice, who had guided them so faithfully, came near to bid them good-
bye.

"We are very grateful to your Majesty for your kind assistance," said the
Tin Woodman, bowing before the pretty creature.

"I am always pleased to be of service to my friends," answered the Queen,
and in a flash she had darted away upon her journey home.



168               Full page line-art drawing.



169               The Prisoners of the Queen


Approaching the gateway of the Emerald City the travelers found it guarded
by two girls of the Army of Revolt, who opposed their entrance by drawing
the knitting-needles from their hair and threatening to prod the first that
came near.

But the Tin Woodman was not afraid."

At the worst they can but scratch my beautiful nickel-plate," he said. "But
there will be no 'worst,' for I think I can manage to frighten these absurd
soldiers very easily. Follow me closely, all of you!"

Then, swinging his axe in a great circle to right and left before him, he
advanced upon the gate, and the others followed him without hesitation.

The girls, who had expected no resistance whatever, were terrified by the
sweep of the glittering axe and fled screaming into the city; so that our



170
travelers passed the gates in safety and marched down the green marble
pavement of the wide street toward the royal palace.

"At this rate we will soon have your Majesty upon the throne again," said
the Tin Woodman, laughing at his easy conquest of the guards.

"Thank you, friend Nick," returned the Scarecrow, gratefully. "Nothing can
resist your kind heart and your sharp axe."

As they passed the rows of houses they saw through the open doors that men
were sweeping and dusting and washing dishes, while the women sat around in
groups, gossiping and laughing.

"What has happened?" the Scarecrow asked a sad-looking man with a bushy
beard, who wore an apron and was wheeling a baby-carriage along the
sidewalk.

"Why, we've had a revolution, your Majesty as you ought to know very well,"
replied the man; "and since you went away the women have been running things
to suit themselves. I'm glad you have decided to come back and restore
order, for doing housework and minding the children is wearing out the
strength of every man in the Emerald City."

"Hm!" said the Scarecrow, thoughtfully. "If it



171
is such hard work as you say, how did the women manage it so easily?"

"I really do not know" replied the man, with a deep sigh. "Perhaps the women
are made of castiron."

No movement was made, as they passed along the street, to oppose their
progress. Several of the women stopped their gossip long enough to cast
curious looks upon our friends, but immediately they would turn away with a
laugh or a sneer and resume their chatter. And when they met with several
girls belonging to the Army of Revolt, those soldiers, instead of being
alarmed or appearing surprised, merely stepped out of the way and allowed
them to advance without protest.

This action rendered the Scarecrow uneasy."

I'm afraid we are walking into a trap," said he.

"Nonsense!" returned Nick Chopper, confidently; "the silly creatures are
conquered already!"

But the Scarecrow shook his head in a way that expressed doubt, and Tip
said:

"It's too easy, altogether. Look out for trouble ahead."

"I will," returned his Majesty. Unopposed they reached the royal palace and
marched up the marble steps, which had once been



172               Full page line-art drawing.

               "IT'S TOO EASY, ALTOGETHER."



173
thickly crusted with emeralds but were now filled with tiny holes where the
jewels had been ruthlessly torn from their settings by the Army of Revolt.
And so far not a rebel barred their way.

Through the arched hallways and into the magnificent throne room marched the
Tin Woodman and his followers, and here, when the green silken curtains fell
behind them, they saw a curious sight.

Seated within the glittering throne was General Jinjur, with the Scarecrow's
second-best crown upon her head, and the royal sceptre in her right hand. A
box of caramels, from which she was eating, rested in her lap, and the girl
seemed entirely at ease in her royal surroundings.

The Scarecrow stepped forward and confronted her, while the Tin Woodman
leaned upon his axe and the others formed a half-circle back of his
Majesty's person.

"How dare you sit in my throne?" demanded the Scarecrow, sternly eyeing the
intruder. "Don't you know you are guilty of treason, and that there is a law
against treason?"

"The throne belongs to whoever is able to take it," answered Jinjur, as she
slowly ate another caramel. "I have taken it, as you see; so just now I am
the Queen, and all who oppose me are guilty of



174
treason, and must be punished by the law you have just mentioned."

This view of the case puzzled the Scarecrow.

"How is it, friend Nick?" he asked, turning to the Tin Woodman.

"Why, when it comes to Law, I have nothing to, say" answered that personage.
"for laws were never meant to be understood, and it is foolish to make the
attempt."

"Then what shall we do?" asked the Scarecrow, in dismay.

"Why don't you marry the Queen? And then you can both rule," suggested the
Woggle-Bug.

Jinjur glared at the insect fiercely. "Why don't you send her back to her
mother, where she belongs?" asked Jack Pumpkinhead.

Jinjur frowned.

"Why don't you shut her up in a closet until she behaves herself, and
promises to be good?" enquired Tip. Jinjur's lip curled scornfully.

"Or give her a good shaking!" added the Saw-Horse.

"No," said the Tin Woodman, "we must treat the poor girl with gentleness.
Let us give her all the Jewels she can carry, and send her away happy and
contented."



175

At this Queen Jinjur laughed aloud, and the next minute clapped her pretty
hands together thrice, as if for a signal.

"You are very absurd creatures," said she; "but I am tired of your nonsense
and have no time to bother with you longer."

While the monarch and his friends listened in amazement to this impudent
speech, a startling thing happened. The Tin Woodman's axe was snatched from
his grasp by some person behind him, and he found himself disarmed and
helpless. At the same instant a shout of laughter rang in the ears of the
devoted band, and turning to see whence this came they found themselves
surrounded by the Army of Revolt, the girls bearing in either hand their
glistening knitting-needles. The entire throne room seemed to be filled with
the rebels, and the Scarecrow and his comrades realized that they were
prisoners.

"You see how foolish it is to oppose a woman's wit," said Jinjur, gaily;
"and this event only proves that I am more fit to rule the Emerald City than
a Scarecrow. I bear you no ill will, I assure you; but lest you should prove
troublesome to me in the future I shall order you all to be destroyed. That
is, all except the boy, who belongs to old Mombi and must be restored to her
keeping. The rest of



176
you are not human, and therefore it will not be wicked to demolish you. The
Saw-Horse and the Pumpkinhead's body I will have chopped up for kindling-
wood; and the pumpkin shall be made into tarts. The Scarecrow will do nicely
to start a bonfire, and the tin man can be cut into small pieces and fed to
the goats. As for this immense Woggle-Bug--"

"Highly Magnified, if you please!" interrupted the insect.

"I think I will ask the cook to make green-turtle soup of you," continued
the Queen, reflectively.

The Woggle-Bug shuddered.

"Or, if that won't do, we might use you for a Hungarian goulash, stewed and
highly spiced," she added, cruelly.

This programme of extermination was so terrible that the prisoners looked
upon one another in a panic of fear. The Scarecrow alone did not give way to
despair. He stood quietly before the Queen and his brow was wrinkled in deep
thought as he strove to find some means to escape.

While thus engaged he felt the straw within his breast move gently. At once
his expression changed from sadness to joy, and raising his hand he quickly
unbuttoned the front of his jacket.

This action did not pass unnoticed by the crowd



177
of girls clustering about him, but none of them suspected what he was doing
until a tiny grey mouse leaped from his bosom to the floor and scampered

               Line-Art Drawing

away between the feet of the Army of Revolt. Another mouse quickly followed;
then another and another, in rapid succession. And suddenly such a



178
scream of terror went up from the Army that it might easily have filled the
stoutest heart with consternation. The flight that ensued turned to a
stampede, and the stampede to a panic.

For while the startled mice rushed wildly about the room the Scarecrow had
only time to note a whirl of skirts and a twinkling of feet as the girls
disappeared from the palace--pushing and crowding one another in their mad
efforts to escape.

The Queen, at the first alarm, stood up on the cushions of the throne and
began to dance frantically upon her tiptoes. Then a mouse ran up the
cushions, and with a terrified leap poor Jinjur shot clear over the head of
the Scarecrow and escaped through an archway--never pausing in her wild
career until she had reached the city gates.

So, in less time than I can explain, the throne room was deserted by all
save the Scarecrow and his friends, and the Woggle-Bug heaved a deep sigh of
relief as he exclaimed:

"Thank goodness, we are saved!"

"For a time, yes;" answered the Tin Woodman. "But the enemy will soon
return, I fear."

"Let us bar all the entrances to the palace!" said the Scarecrow. "Then we
shall have time to think what is best to be done."



179

So all except Jack Pumpkinhead, who was still tied fast to the Saw-Horse,
ran to the various entrances of the royal palace and closed the heavy doors,
bolting and locking them securely. Then, knowing that the Army of Revolt
could not batter down the barriers in several days, the adventurers gathered
once more in the throne room for a council of war.

               Line-Art Drawing



180               Full page line-art drawing.



181               The Scarecrow Takes Time to Think


"It seems to me," began the Scarecrow, when all were again assembled in the
throne room, "that the girl Jinjur is quite right in claiming to be Queen.
And if she is right, then I am wrong, and we have no business to be
occupying her palace."

"But you were the King until she came," said the Woggle-Bug, strutting up
and down with his hands in his pockets; "so it appears to me that she is the
interloper instead of you."

"Especially as we have just conquered her and put her to flight," added the
Pumpkinhead, as he raised his hands to turn his face toward the Scarecrow.

"Have we really conquered her?" asked the Scarecrow, quietly. "Look out of
the window, and tell me what you see."



182

Tip ran to the window and looked out.

"The palace is surrounded by a double row of girl soldiers," he announced.

"I thought so," returned the Scarecrow. "We are as truly their prisoners as
we were before the mice frightened them from the palace."

"My friend is right," said Nick Chopper, who had been polishing his breast
with a bit of chamois-leather. "Jinjur is still the Queen, and we are her
prisoners."

"But I hope she cannot get at us," exclaimed the Pumpkinhead, with a shiver
of fear. "She threatened to make tarts of me, you know."

"Don't worry," said the Tin Woodman. "It cannot matter greatly. If you stay
shut up here you will spoil in time, anyway. A good tart is far more
admirable than a decayed intellect."

"Very true," agreed the Scarecrow.

"Oh, dear!" moaned Jack; "what an unhappy lot is mine! Why, dear father, did
you not make me out of tin--or even out of straw--so that I would keep
indefinitely."

"Shucks!" returned Tip, indignantly. "You ought to be glad that I made you
at all." Then he added, reflectively, "everything has to come to an end,
some time."



183

"But I beg to remind you," broke in the Woggle-Bug, who had a distressed
look in his bulging, round eyes, "that this terrible Queen Jinjur suggested
making a goulash of me--Me! the only Highly Magnified and Thoroughly
Educated Woggle-Bug in the wide, wide world!"

"I think it was a brilliant idea," remarked the Scarecrow, approvingly.

"Don't you imagine he would make a better soup?" asked the Tin Woodman,
turning toward his friend.

