of levels placed on the ring (at K for instance).

Fig.  61.

This apparatus may appear unnecessarily complex, but it is worth while
to set it up, for it makes the operation of casting a speculum fairly
certain.  If the metal is at the right temperature it will form a
uniformly liquid disc inside the ring.  The mass sets almost directly,
and as soon as this occurs it is pushed to the edge of the plate and
the metal in the lip broken off by a smart upward tap with a hammer.
The dovetailed bit of iron is knocked downwards and falls off, and the
ring may then be lifted clear of the casting.  The object of the
dovetail will now be understood, for without it there is great risk of
breaking into the speculum in knocking the "tail" off.

A box of quite dry sawdust is prepared in readiness for the process of
annealing before the speculum is cast.  The box must be a sound wooden
or metal box, and must be approximately air-tight.  For a speculum a
foot in diameter the box must measure at least 3 feet both ways in
plan, and be 2 feet 6 inches deep.  Half the sawdust is in the box and
is well pressed down so as to half fill it.  The other half must be
conveniently ready to hand.  As soon as possible after casting, the
speculum is thrown into the box, covered over with the sawdust, and
the lid is put on.

The object in having the box nearly air-tight is to avoid
air-currents, which would increase the rate of cooling.  A speculum a
foot in diameter may conveniently take about three days to anneal, and
should be sensibly warm when the box is opened on the fourth day.  For
larger sizes longer times will be required.  We will say that the
sawdust thickness on each side must be proportional to the dimensions
of the speculum, or may even increase faster with advantage if time is
of no moment.

The process of annealing may be considered successful if the disc does
not fly to pieces in working;  it is to be worked on the chilled side.
The object of giving the chill the approximate counterpart form will
now appear; it saves some rough grinding, and causes the finished
surface to be more homogeneous than it would be if the centre were
sunk by grinding through the chilled surface.

In 1889 I learned from Mr. Schneider, Professor Row-land's assistant
at Baltimore, that in casting specula for concave gratings a good deal
of trouble had been saved by carrying out the operation in an
atmosphere consisting mostly of coal gas.  It was claimed that in this
way the presence of specks of oxide was avoided.  I did not see the
process in operation, but the results attained are known and admired
by all experimenters.

Sec. 71.  Grinding and polishing Specula.

The rough grinding is accomplished by means of a lead tool and coarse
emery; the size of grain may be such as will pass a sieve of 60
threads to the inch.  The process of grinding is quite similar to that
previously described, but it goes on comparatively quickly.  The rough
grinding is checked by the spherometer, and is interrupted when that
instrument gives accordant and correct measurements all over the
surface.

The fine grinding may be proceeded with by means of a glass-faced tool
as before described, or the labour may be reduced in the following
manner.  A slate tool, which must be free from green spots (a source
of uneven hardness), is prepared, and this is brought nearly to the
curvature of the roughly ground speculum, by turning or otherwise.  It
is finished on the speculum itself with a little flour of emery.  The
fine grinding is then carried on by means of slate dust and water, the
slate tool being the grinder.  The tool is, of course, scored into
squares on the surface.

If the casting process has been carried out successfully, the rough
grinding may take, say six hours, and the fine grinding say thirty
hours for a disc a foot in diameter.  The greatest source of trouble
is want of homogeneity in the casting, as evidenced by blowholes, etc.
In general, the shortest way is to discard the disc and start afresh
if there is any serious want of perfection in the continuity or
homogeneity of the metal.

Fig.  62.

The finely ground surface must, of course, be apparently correct in so
far as a spherometer (with 3 inches between the legs for a disc 1 foot
in diameter) will show.  Polishing and figuring are carried out
simultaneously.  Half an hour's polishing with a slate-backed pitch
tool and rouge and water will enable an optical test to be made.  The
most convenient test is that of Foucault, a simple appliance for the
purpose being shown in the figure (62).  It essentially consists of a
small lamp surrounded by an opaque chimney (A) through which a minute
aperture (pin-hole) is made.  A small lens may be used, of very great
curvature, or even a transparent marble to throw an image of the flame
on the pin-hole.

A screen (B) is placed close to the source, and is provided with a
rocking or tilting motion (C) in its own plane.  The source and screen
are partly independent, and each is provided with a fine adjustment
which serves to place it in position near the centre of curvature.
The screen is so close to the pin-hole in fact that both the source
and a point on the edge of the screen may be said to be at the centre
of curvature of the mirror.  The mirror is temporarily mounted so as
to have its axis horizontal, in a cellar or other place of uniform
temperature.

The final focussing to the centre of curvature is made by the fine
adjustment screws;  the image may be received on a bit of paper placed
on the screen and overlapping the edge nearest the source.  The screws
are worked till the image has its smallest dimension and is bisected
by the edge of the screen.  The test consists in observing the
appearance of the mirror surface while the screen is tilted to cut off
the light, as seen by an eye placed at the edge of the screen, a
peephole or eye lens being provided to facilitate placing the eye in a
correct position.  The screen screws are worked so as to gradually cut
off the light, and the observer notes the appearance of the mirror
surface.  If the curves are perfect and spherical, the transition from
complete illumination to darkness will be abrupt, and no part of the
mirror will remain illuminated after the rest.

For astronomical purposes a parabolic mirror is required.  In this
case the disc may be partially screened by zonal screens, and the
position of the image for different zones noted;  the correctness or
otherwise of the curvature may then be ascertained by calculation.  A
shorter way is to place the source just outside the focus, to be found
by trial, and then, moving the extinction screen (now a separate
appliance) to, say, five times the radius of curvature away, where the
image should now appear, the suddenness of extinction may be
investigated.  This, of course, involves a corresponding modification
of the apparatus.

Whether the tests indicate that a deepening of the Centre, i.e.
increase of the curvature, or a flattening of the edges is required,
at least two remedial processes are available.  The "chisel and
mallet" method of altering the size of the pitch, squares of the
polisher may be employed, or paper or small pitch tools may be used to
deepen the centre.  The "chisel and mallet" method merely consists in
removing pitch squares from a uniformly divided tool surface by means
of the instruments mentioned.  This removal is effected at those
points at which the abrasion requires to be reduced.

When some practice is attained, I understand that it is usual to try
for a parabolic form at once, as soon as the polishing commences.
This is done by dividing the pitch surface by V-shaped grooves, the
sides of the grooves being radii of the circular surface, so that the
central parts of the mirror get most of the polishing action.  If
paper tools are used they must not be allowed much overhang, or the
edges of the mirror betray the effects of paper elasticity.  Most
operators "sink" the middle, but the late Mr. Lassell, a most
accomplished worker, always attained the parabolic form by reducing
the curvature of the edges of a spherical mirror.

Sec. 72.  Preparation of Flat Surfaces.

As Sir H.  Grubb has pointed out, this operation only differs from
those previously described in that an additional condition has to be
satisfied.  This condition refers to the mean curvature, which must be
exact (in the case of flats it is of course zero) to a degree which is
quite unnecessary in the manufacture of mirrors or lenses.

A little consideration will show that to get a surface flat the most
straightforward method is to carry out the necessary and sufficient
condition for three surfaces to fit each other impartially.  If they
each fit each other, they must clearly all be flat.  To carry out the
process of producing a flat surface, therefore, two tools are made,
and the glass or speculum is ground first on one and then on the
other, the tools being kept "in fit" by occasional mutual grinding.
The grinding and polishing go on as usual.  If paper is employed, care
must be taken that the polisher is about the same size as the object
to be polished.

There is a slight tendency to polish most at the edges; but if the
sweeps are of the right shape and size, this may be corrected
approximately.  The best surfaces which have come under my notice are
those prepared as "test surfaces" by Mr. Brashear of Alleghany, Pa,
U.S.A.  These I believe to be pitch polished.  A pitch bed is
prepared, I presume, in a manner similar to that described for
rocksalt surfaces; but the working of the glass is an immense art, and
one which I believe--if one may judge by results--is only known to
Mr. Brashear.

In general, the effect of polishing will be to produce a convex or
concave surface, quite good enough for most purposes, but distinctly
faulty when tested by the interference fringes produced with the aid
of the test plate.  The following information therefore--which I draw
from Mr. 'Cook--will not enable a student to emulate Mr. Brashear,
but will undoubtedly help him to get a very much better surface than
he usually buys at a high price, as exhibited on a spectroscope prism.

The only difference between this process and the one described for
polishing lenses, lies in the fact that the rouge is put into the
paper surface while the latter is wet with a dilute gum "mucilage."
It is of course assumed that the object and the two tools have been
finely ground and fit each other impartially.  The paper is rubbed
over with rouge and weak gum water.  The tool, when dry, is applied to
the flat ground surface (of the object), and is scraped with the
three-cornered file chisel as formerly described.  This process must
be very carefully carried out.  The paper must be of the quality
mentioned, or may even be thinner and harder.  The cross strokes
should be more employed than in the case of the curved surfaces.

A good deal will depend on the method employed for supporting the
work; it is in general better to support the tool, which may have a
slate backing of any desired thickness, whereby the difficulty
resulting from strains is reduced.  The work must be mounted in such a
way as to minimise the effect of changes of temperature.  If a pitch
bed is selected, Mr. Brashear's instructions for rock salt may be
followed, with, of course, the obvious necessary modifications.  See
also next section.

Sec. 73.  Polishing Flat Surfaces on Glass or on Speculum Metal.

The above process may be employed for speculum metal, or pitch may be
used.  In the latter case a fresh tool must be prepared every hour or
so, because the metal begins to strip and leave bits on the polisher;
this causes a certain amount of scratching to take place.  As against
this disadvantage, the process of polishing, in so far as the state of
the surface is concerned, need not take an hour if the fine grinding
has been well done.

For the finest work changes of temperature, as in the case of glass,
cause a good deal of trouble, and the operator must try to arrange his
method of holding the object so as to give rise to the least possible
communication of heat from the hand.

The partial elasticity of paper, which is its defect as a polishing
backing, is, I believe, partly counterbalanced by the difficulty of
forming with pitch an exact counterpart tool without introducing a
serious rise of temperature (i.e.  warming the pitch).  The rate of
subsidence of the latter is very slow at temperatures where it is hard
enough to work reliably as a polisher.

A student interested in the matter of flat surfaces will do well to
read an account of Lord Rayleigh's work on the subject, Nature, vol.
xlviii, 1893, pp.  212, 526 (or B.  A.  Reports, 1893).  In the first
of these communications Lord Rayleigh describes the method of using
test plates, and shows how to obtain the interference fringes in the
clearest manner.

For the ordinary optician a dark room and a soda flame afford all
requisite information;  and if a person succeeds in making three glass
discs, say 6 inches in diameter, so flat that, when superposed in any
manner, the interference fringes are parallel and equidistant, even to
the roughest observation, he has nothing to learn from any book ever
written on glass polishing.  Lord Rayleigh has also shown how to use
the free clean surface of water as a natural test plate.

Since the above was written the following details of his exact course
of procedure have been sent to me by Mr. Brashear, and I hereby tender
my thanks:-

"It really takes years to know just what to do when you reach that
point where another touch either gives you the most perfect results
attainable, or ruins the work you have already done.  It has taken us
a long time to find out how to make a flat surface, and when we were
called upon to make the twenty-eight plane and parallel surfaces for
the investigation of the value of the metre of the international
standard, every one of which required an accuracy of one-twentieth of
a wave length, we had a difficult task to perform. However, it was
found that every surface had the desired accuracy, and some of them
went far beyond it.

It is an advantage in making flat surfaces to make more than one at a
time; it is better to make at least three, and in fact we always grind
and 'fine' three together.  In making speculum plates we get up ten or
twelve at once on the lead lap.  These speculum plates we can test as
we go on by means of our test plane until we get them nearly flat.  In
polishing them we first make quite a hard polisher, forming it on a
large test plane that is very nearly correct.  We then polish a while
on one surface and test it, then on a second and test it, and after a
while we accumulate plates that are slightly concave and slightly
convex.  By working upon these alternately with the same polisher, we
finally get our polisher into such shape that it approximates more and
more to a flat surface, and with extreme care and slow procedure we
finally attain the results desired.

All our flats are polished on a machine which has but little virtue in
itself, unmixed with brains.  Any machine giving a straight
diametrical stroke will answer the purpose.  The glass should be
mounted so as to be perfectly free to move in every direction--that
is to say, perfectly unconstrained.  We mount all our flats on a piece
of body Brussels carpet, so that every individual part of the woof
acts as a yielding spring.  The flats are held in place by wooden
clamps at the edges, which never touch, but allow the bits of glass or
metal to move slowly around if they are circular; if they are
rectangular we allow them to tumble about as they please within the
frame holding them.

For making speculum metal plates either plane or concave we use
polishers so hard that they scratch the metal all over the surface
with fine microscopic scratches.  We always work for figure, and when
we get a hard polisher that is in proper shape, we can do ever so many
surfaces with it if the environments of temperature are all right.  If
we have fifty speculum flats to make, and we recently made three times
that number, we get them all ready and of accurate surface with the
hard polisher.  Then we prepare a very soft polisher, easily indented
when cold with the thumb nail.  A drop of rouge and about three drops
of water are put on the plate, and with the soft polisher about one
minute suffices to clean up all the scratches and leave a beautiful
black polish on the metal.  This final touch is given by hand; if we
do not get the polish in a few minutes the surface is generally ruined
for shape, and we have to resort to the hard polisher again.

I assure you that nothing but patience and perseverance will master
the difficulty that one has to encounter, but with these two elements
'you are bound to get there.'"

CHAPTER III

MISCELLANEOUS PROCESSES

Sec. 74.  Coating Glass with Aluminium and Soldering Aluminium.

A process of coating glass with aluminium has been lately discovered,
which, if I mistake not, may be of immense service in special cases
where a strongly adherent deposit is required.  My attention was first
attracted to the matter by an article in the Archives des Sciences
physiques et naturelles de Geneve, 1894, by M. Margot.  It appears
that clean aluminium used as a pencil will leave a mark on clean damp
glass.  If, instead of a pencil, a small wheel of aluminium--say as
big as a halfpenny and three times as thick--is rotated on the lathe,
and a piece of glass pressed against it, the aluminium will form an
adherent, though not very continuous coating on the glass.

Working with a disc of the size described rotating about as fast as
for brass-turning, I covered about two square inches of glass surface
in about five minutes.  The deposit was of very uneven thickness, but
was nearly all thick enough to be sensibly opaque.  By burnishing the
brilliance is improved (I used an agate burnisher and oil), but a
little of the aluminium is rubbed off.  The fact that the burnisher
does not entirely remove it is a sign of the strength of the adherence
which exists between the aluminium and the glass.  In making the
experiment, care must be taken to have the glass quite clean--or at
all events free from grease--in order to obtain the best results.

M. Margot has contributed further information to the Archives des
Sciences physiques et naturelles (February 1895).  He finds that
adherence between aluminium and glass is promoted by dusting the glass
with powders, such as rouge.  There is no doubt that a considerable
improvement is effected in this way;  both rouge and alumina have in
my hands greatly increased the facility with which the aluminium is
deposited.  M. Margot finds that zinc and magnesium resemble aluminium
in having properties of adherence to glass, and, what is more, carry
this property into their alloys with tin.  Thus an alloy of zinc and
tin in the proportions of about 92 per cent tin and 8 per cent zinc
may be melted on absolutely clean glass, and will adhere strongly to
it if well rubbed by an asbestos crayon.

A happy inspiration was to try whether these alloys would, under
similar circumstances, adhere to aluminium itself, and a trial showed
that this was indeed the case, provided that both the aluminium and
alloy are scrupulously clean and free from oxide.  In this way M.
Margot has solved the problem of soldering aluminium. I have satisfied
myself by trial of the perfect ease and absolute success of this
method.  The alloy of zinc and tin in the proportions above mentioned
is formed at the lowest possible temperature by melting the
