Two hours later they were still waiting for Barras.

Talleyrand and Bruix had been admitted to Barras' bathroom just after
Gohier and Moulins had left it, and in talking with them Barras forgot
his appointment.


We will now see what was happening in the Rue de la Victoire.

At seven o'clock, contrary to his usual custom, Bonaparte was up and
waiting in full uniform in his bedroom. Roland entered. Bonaparte was
perfectly calm; they were on the eve of a battle.

"Has no one come yet, Roland?" he asked.

"No, general," replied the young man, "but I heard the roll of a
carriage just now."

"So did I," replied Bonaparte.

At that minute a servant announced: "The citizen Joseph Bonaparte, and
the citizen General Bernadotte."

Roland questioned Bonaparte with a glance; was he to go or stay? He
was to stay. Roland took his stand at the corner of a bookcase like a
sentinel at his post.

"Ah, ha!" exclaimed Bonaparte, seeing that Bernadotte was still attired
in civilian's clothes, "you seem to have a positive horror of the
uniform, general!"

"Why the devil should I be in uniform at seven in the morning," asked
Bernadotte, "when I am not in active service?"

"You will be soon."

"But I am retired."

"Yes, but I recall you to active service."

"You?"

"Yes, I."

"In the name of the Directory?"

"Is there still a Directory?"

"Still a Directory? What do you mean?"

"Didn't you see the troops drawn up in the streets leading to the
Tuileries as you came here?"

"I saw them, and I was surprised."

"Those soldiers are mine."

"Excuse me," said Bernadotte; "I thought they belonged to France."

"Oh, to France or to me; is it not all one?"

"I was not aware of that," replied Bernadotte, coldly.

"Though you doubt it now, you will be certain of it tonight. Come,
Bernadotte, this is the vital moment; decide!"

"General," replied Bernadotte, "I am fortunate enough to be at this
moment a simple citizen; let me remain a simple citizen."

"Bernadotte, take care! He that is not for me is against me."

"General, pay attention to your words! You said just now, 'Take care.'
If that is a threat, you know very well that I do not fear them."

Bonaparte came up to him, and took him by both hands.

"Oh, yes, I know that; that is why I must have you with me. I not only
esteem you, Bernadotte, but I love you. I leave you with Joseph; he is
your brother-in-law. Between brothers, devil take it, there should be no
quarrelling."

"Where are you going?"

"In your character of Spartan you are a rigid observer of the laws, are
you not? Well, here is a decree issued by the Council of Five Hundred
last night, which confers upon me the immediate command of the troops in
Paris. So I was right," he added, "when I told you that the soldiers you
met were mine, inasmuch as they are under my orders."

And he placed in Bernadotte's hands the copy of the decree which had
been sent to him at six o'clock that morning. Bernadotte read it through
from the first line to the last.

"To this," said he, "I have nothing to object. Secure the safety of the
National Legislature, and all good citizens will be with you."

"Then be with me now."

"Permit me, general, to wait twenty-four hours to see how you fulfil
that mandate."

"Devil of a man!" cried Bonaparte. "Have your own way." Then, taking him
by the arm, he dragged him a few steps apart from Joseph, and continued,
"Bernadotte, I want to play above-board with you."

"Why so," retorted the latter, "since I am not on your side?"

"Never mind. You are watching the game, and I want the lookers-on to see
that I am not cheating."

"Do you bind me to secrecy?"

"No."

"That is well, for in that case I should have refused to listen to your
confidences."

"Oh! my confidences are not long! Your Directory is detested, your
Constitution is worn-out; you must make a clean sweep of both, and turn
the government in another direction. You don't answer me."

"I am waiting to hear what you have to say."

"All I have to say is, Go put on your uniform. I can't wait any longer
for you. Join me at the Tuileries among our comrades."

Bernadotte shook his head.

"You think you can count on Moreau, Beurnonville, and Lefebvre," resumed
Bonaparte. "Just look out of that window. Who do you see there, and
there? Moreau and Beurnonville. As for Lefebvre, I do not see him, but
I am certain I shall not go a hundred steps before meeting him. Now will
you decide?"

"General," replied Bernadotte, "I am not a man to be swayed by example,
least of all when that example is bad. Moreau, Beurnonville, and
Lefebvre may do as they wish. I shall do as I ought!"

"So you definitively refuse to accompany me to the Tuileries?"

"I do not wish to take part in a rebellion."

"A rebellion! A rebellion! Against whom? Against a parcel of imbeciles
who are pettifogging from morning till night in their hovels."

"These imbeciles, general, are for the moment the representatives of the
law. The Constitution protects them; they are sacred to me."

"At least promise me one thing, iron rod that you are."

"What is it?"

"To keep quiet."

"I will keep quiet as a citizen, but--"

"But what? Come, I made a clean breast of it to you; do you do
likewise."

"But if the Directory orders me to act, I shall march against the
agitators, whoever they may be."

"Ah! So you think I am ambitious?" asked Bonaparte.

"I suspect as much," retorted Bernadotte, smiling.

"Faith," said Bonaparte, "you don't know me. I have had enough of
politics, and what I want is peace. Ah, my dear fellow! Malmaison and
fifty thousand a year, and I'd willingly resign all the rest. You don't
believe me. Well, I invite you to come and see me there, three months
hence, and if you like pastorals, we'll do one together. Now, au revoir!
I leave you with Joseph, and, in spite of your refusal, I shall expect
you at the Tuileries. Hark! Our friends are becoming impatient."

They were shouting: "Vive Bonaparte!"

Bernadotte paled slightly. Bonaparte noticed this pallor.

"Ah, ha," he muttered. "Jealous! I was mistaken; he is not a Spartan, he
is an Athenian!"

As Bonaparte had said, his friends were growing impatient. During the
hour that had elapsed since the decree had been posted, the salon,
the anterooms, and the courtyard had been crowded. The first person
Bonaparte met at the head of the staircase was his compatriot, Colonel
Sebastiani, then commanding the 9th Dragoons.

"Ah! is that you, Sebastiani?" said Bonaparte. "Where are your men?"

"In line along the Rue de la Victoire, general."

"Well disposed?"

"Enthusiastic! I distributed among them ten thousand cartridges which I
had in store."

"Yes; but you had no right to draw those cartridges out without an order
from the commandant of Paris. Do you know that you have burned your
vessels, Sebastiani?"

"Then take me into yours, general. I have faith in your fortunes."

"You mistake me for Caesar, Sebastiani!"

"Faith! I might make worse mistakes. Besides, down below in the
courtyard there are forty officers or more, of all classes, without pay,
whom the Directory has left in the most complete destitution for the
last year. You are their only hope, general; they are ready to die for
you."

"That's right. Go to your regiment, and take leave of it."

"Take leave of it? What do you mean, general?"

"I exchange it for a brigade. Go, go!"

Sebastiani did not wait to be told twice. Bonaparte continued his way.
At the foot of the stairs he met Lefebvre.

"Here I am, general!" said Lefebvre.

"You? And where is the 17th military division?"

"I am waiting for my appointment to bring it into action."

"Haven't you received your appointment?"

"From the Directory, yes. But as I am not a traitor, I have just sent in
my resignation, so that they may know I am not to be counted on."

"And you have come for me to appoint you, so that I may count on you, is
that it?"

"Exactly."

"Quick, Roland, a blank commission; fill in the general's name, so that
I shall only have to put my name to it. I'll sign it on the pommel of my
saddle."

"That's the true sort," said Lefebvre.

"Roland."

The young man, who had already started obediently, came back to the
general.

"Fetch me that pair of double-barrelled pistols on my mantel-piece at
the same time," said Bonaparte, in a low tone. "One never knows what may
happen."

"Yes, general," said Roland; "besides, I shan't leave you."

"Unless I send you to be killed elsewhere."

"True," replied the young man, hastening away to fulfil his double
errand.

Bonaparte was continuing on his way when he noticed a shadow in the
corridor. He recognized Josephine, and ran to her.

"Good God!" cried she, "is there so much danger?"

"What makes you think that?"

"I overheard the order you gave Roland."

"Serves you right for listening at doors. How about Gohier?"

"He hasn't come."

"Nor his wife?"

"She is here."

Bonaparte pushed Josephine aside with his hand and entered the salon. He
found Madame Gohier alone and very pale.

"What!" said he, without any preamble, "isn't the President coming?"

"He was unable to do so, general," replied Madame Gohier.

Bonaparte repressed a movement of impatience. "He absolutely must come,"
said he. "Write him that I await him, and I will have the note sent."

"Thank you, general," replied Madame Gohier; "my servants are here, and
they can attend to that."

"Write, my dear friend, write," said Josephine, offering her paper and
pen and ink.

Bonaparte stood so that he could see over her shoulder what she wrote.
Madame Gohier looked fixedly at him, and he drew back with a bow. She
wrote the note, folded it, and looked about her for the sealing-wax;
but, whether by accident or intention, there was none. Sealing the note
with a wafer, she rang the bell. A servant came.

"Give this note to Comtois," said Madame Gohier, "and bid him take it to
the Luxembourg at once."

Bonaparte followed the servant, or rather the letter, with his eyes
until the door closed. Then, turning to Madame Gohier, he said: "I
regret that I am unable to breakfast with you. But if the President has
business to attend to, so have I. You must breakfast with my wife. Good
appetite to you both."

And he went out. At the door he met Roland.

"Here is the commission, general," said the young man, "and a pen."

Bonaparte took the pen, and using the back of his aide-de-camp's hat, he
signed the commission. Roland gave him the pistols.

"Did you look; to them?" asked Bonaparte.

Roland smiled. "Don't be uneasy," said he; "I'll answer for them."

Bonaparte slipped the pistols in his belt, murmuring as he did so: "I
wish I knew what she wrote her husband."

"I can tell you, word for word, what she wrote, general," said a voice
close by.

"You, Bourrienne?"

"Yes. She wrote: 'You did right not to come, my dear; all that is
happening here convinces me that the invitation was only a snare. I will
rejoin you shortly.'"

"You unsealed the letter?"

"General, Sextus Pompey gave a dinner on his galley to Antony and
Lepidus. His freedman said to him: 'Shall I make you emperor of the
world?' 'How can you do it?' 'Easily. I will cut the cable of your
galley, and Antony and Lepidus are prisoners.' 'You should have done so
without telling me,' replied Sextus. 'Now I charge you on your life not
to do it.' I remembered those words, general: '_You should have done so
without telling me_.'"

Bonaparte thought an instant; then he said: "You are mistaken; it was
Octavius and not Antony who was on Sextus' galley with Lepidus." And he
went on his way to the courtyard, confining his blame to the historical
blunder.

Hardly had the general appeared on the portico than cries of "Vive
Bonaparte!" echoed through the courtyard into the street, where they
were taken up by the dragoons drawn up in line before the gate.

"That's a good omen, general," said Roland.

"Yes. Give Lefebvre his commission at once; and if he has no horse,
let him take one of mine. Tell him to meet me in the court of the
Tuileries."

"His division is already there."

"All the more reason."

Glancing about him, Bonaparte saw Moreau and Beurnonville, who were
waiting for him, their horses held by orderlies. He saluted them with
a wave of his hand, already that of a master rather than that of a
comrade. Then, perceiving General Debel out of uniform, he went down the
steps and approached him.

"Why are you in civilian's dress?" he asked.

"General, I was not notified. I chanced to be passing along the street,
and, seeing the crowd before your house, I came in, fearing you might be
in danger."

"Go and put on your uniform quickly."

"But I live the other side of Paris; it would take too long." But,
nevertheless, he made as if to retire.

"What are you going to do?"

"Don't be alarmed, general."

Debel had noticed an artilleryman on horseback who was about his size.

"Friend," said he, "I am General Debel. By order of General Bonaparte
lend me your uniform and your horse, and I'll give you furlough for
the day. Here's a louis to drink the health of the commander-in-chief.
To-morrow, come to my house for your horse and uniform. I live in the
Rue Cherche-Midi, No. 11."

"Will nothing be done to me?"

"Yes, you shall be made a corporal."

"Good!" said the artilleryman; and he quickly handed over his uniform
and horse to General Debel.

In the meantime, Bonaparte heard talking above him. He raised his head
and saw Joseph and Bernadotte at a window.

"Once more, general," he said to Bernadotte, "will you come with me?"

"No," said the latter, firmly. Then, lowering his tone, he continued:
"You told me just now to take care."

"Yes."

"Well, I say to you, take care."

"Of what?"

"You are going to the Tuileries?"

"Of course."

"The Tuileries are very near the Place de la Revolution."

"Pooh!" retorted Bonaparte, "the guillotine has been moved to the
Barriere du Trone."

"Never mind. The brewer Santerre still controls the Faubourg
Saint-Antoine, and Santerre is Moulins' friend."

"Santerre has been warned that at the first inimical movement he
attempts I will have him shot. Will you come?"

"No."

"As you please. You are separating your fortunes from mine; I do not
separate mine from yours." Then, calling to his orderly, he said: "My
horse!"

They brought his horse. Seeing an artillery private near him, he said:
"What are you doing among the epaulets?"

The artilleryman began to laugh.

"Don't you recognize me, general?" he asked.

"Faith, it's Debel! Where did you get that horse and the uniform?"

"From that artilleryman you see standing there in his shirt. It will
cost you a corporal's commission."

"You are wrong, Debel," said Bonaparte; "it will cost me two
commissions, one for the corporal, and one for the general of division.
Forward, march, gentlemen! We are going to the Tuileries."

And, bending forward on his horse, as he usually did, his left hand
holding a slack rein, his right resting on his hip, with bent head
and dreamy eyes, he made his first steps along that incline, at once
glorious and fatal, which was to lead him to a throne--and to St.
Helena.




CHAPTER XXIV. THE EIGHTEENTH BRUMAIRE

On entering the Rue de la Victoire, Bonaparte found Sebastiani's
dragoons drawn up in line of battle. He wished to address them, but they
interrupted him at the first words, shouting: "We want no explanations.
We know that you seek only the good of the Republic. Vive Bonaparte!"

The cortege followed the streets which led from the Rue de la Victoire
to the Tuileries, amid the cries of "Vive Bonaparte!"

General Lefebvre, according to promise, was waiting at the palace gates.
Bonaparte, on his arrival at the Tuileries, was hailed with the same
cheers that had accompanied him. Once there, he raised his head and
shook it. Perhaps this cry of "Vive Bonaparte!" did not satisfy him. Was
he already dreaming of "Vive Napoleon?"

He advanced in front of the troop, surrounded by his staff, and read
the decree of the Five Hundred, which transferred the sessions of the
Legislature to Saint-Cloud and gave him the command of the armed forces.

Then, either from memory, or offhand--Bonaparte never admitted any
one to such secrets--instead of the proclamation he had dictated to
Bourrienne two days earlier, he pronounced these words:

"Soldiers--The Council of Ancients has given me the command of the city
and the army.

"I have accepted it, to second the measures to be adopted for the good
of the people.

"The Republic has been ill governed for two years. You have hoped for my
return to put an end to many evils. You celebrated it with a unanimity
which imposes obligations that I now fulfil. Fulfil yours, and second
your general with the vigor, firmness and strength I have always found
in you.

"Liberty, victory, and peace will restore the French Republic to the
rank it occupied in Europe, which ineptitude and treason alone caused
her to lose!"

The soldiers applauded frantically. It was a declaration of war against
the Directory, and soldiers will always applaud a declaration of war.

The general dismounted, amid shouts and bravos, and entered the
Tuileries. It was the second time he had crossed the threshold of this
palace of the Valois, whose arches had so ill-sheltered the crown
and head of the last Bourbon who had reigned there. Beside him walked
citizen Roederer. Bonaparte started as he recognized him, and said:

"Ah! citizen Roederer, you were here on the morning of August 10."

"Yes, general," replied the future Count of the Empire.

"It was you who advised Louis XVI. to go before the National Assembly."

"Yes."

"Bad advice, citizen Roederer! I should not have followed it."

"We advise men according to what we know of them. I would not give
General Bonaparte the same advice I gave King Louis XVI. When a king has
the fact of his flight to Varennes and the 20th of June behind him, it
is difficult to save him."

As Roederer said these words, they reached a window opening on the
garden of the Tuileries. Bonaparte stopped, and, seizing Roederer by
the arm, he said: "On the 20th of June I was there," pointing with his
finger to the terrace by the water, "behind the third linden. Through
the open window I could see the poor king, with the red cap on his head.
It was a piteous sight; I pitied him."

"What did you do?"

"Nothing, I could do nothing; I was only a lieutenant of artillery.
But I longed to go in like the others, and whisper: 'Sire, give me four
cannon, and I'll sweep the whole rabble out.'"

What would have happened if Lieutenant Bonaparte had followed his
impulse, obtained what he wanted from Louis XVI., and _swept the rabble
out_, that is to say the people of Paris? Had his cannon made a
clean sweep on June 20th, would he have had to make another the 13th
Vendemiaire for the benefit of the Convention?

While the ex-Syndic; who had grown grave, was outlining in his mind
the opening pages of his future "History of the Consulate," Bonaparte
presented himself at the bar of the Council of the Ancients, followed
by his staff, and by all those who chose to do likewise. When the tumult
caused by this influx of people had subsided, the president read over
the decree which invested Bonaparte with the military power. Then, after
requesting him to take the oath, the president added:

"He who has never promised his country a victory which he did not
win, cannot fail to keep religiously his new promise to serve her
faithfully."

Bonaparte stretched forth his hand and said solemnly:

"I swear it!"

All the generals repeated after him, each for himself:

"I swear it!"

The last one had scarcely finished, when Bonaparte recognized Barras'
secretary, that same Bollot of whom Barras had spoken that morning
to his two colleagues. He had come there solely to give his patron an
account of all that was happening there, but Bonaparte fancied he was
sent on some secret mission by Barras. He resolved to spare him the
first advance, and went straight to him, saying:

"Have you come on behalf of the Directors?" Then, without giving him
time to answer, he continued: "What have they done with that France I
left so brilliant? I left peace; I find war. I left victories; I find
reverses. I left the millions of Italy, and I find spoliation and
penury. What have become of the hundred thousand Frenchmen whom I knew
by name? They are dead!"

It was not precisely to Barras' secretary that these words should have
been said; but Bonaparte wished to say them, needed to say them, and
little he cared to whom he said them. Perhaps even, from his point of
view, it was better to say them to some one who could not answer him. At
that moment Sieyes rose.

"Citizens," said he, "the Directors Moulins and Gohier ask to be
admitted."

"They are no longer Directors," said Bonaparte, "for there is no longer
a Directory."

"But," objected Sieyes, "they have not yet sent in their resignation."

"Then admit them and let them give it," retorted Bonaparte.

Moulins and Gohier entered. They were pale but calm. They knew they came
to force a struggle, but behind their resistance may have loomed the
Sinnamary. The exiles they sent there the 18th of Fructidor pointed the
way.

"I see with satisfaction," Bonaparte hastened to say, "that you have
yielded to our wishes and those of your two colleagues."

Gohier made a step forward and said firmly: "We yield neither to your
wishes, nor to those of our two colleagues, who are no longer our
colleagues, since they have resigned, but to the Law. It requires that
the decree transferring the legislative body to Saint-Cloud shall be
proclaimed without delay. We have come here to fulfil the duty which the
law imposes on us, fully determined to defend it against all factious
persons, whoever they may be, who attempt to attack it."

"Your zeal does not astonish us," replied Bonaparte; "and because you
are a man who loves his country you will unite with us."

"Unite with you! And why?"

"To save the Republic."

"To save the Republic! There was a time, general, when you had the honor
to be its prop. But to-day the glory of saving it is reserved for us."

"You save it!" retorted Bonaparte. "How will you do that? With the means
your Constitution gives you? Why, that Constitution is crumbling on all
sides, and even if I did not topple it over, it could not last eight
days."

"Ah!" cried Moulins, "at last you avow your hostile intentions."

"My intentions are not hostile!" shouted Bonaparte, striking the floor
with the heel of his boot. "The Republic is in peril; it must be saved,
and I shall do it."

"You do it?" cried Gohier. "It seems to me it is for the Directory, not
you, to say, 'I shall do it!'"

"There is no longer a Directory."

"I did indeed hear that you said so just a moment before we came in."

"There is no longer a Directory, now that Sieyes and Ducos have
resigned."

"You are mistaken. So long as there are three Directors, the Directory
still exists. Neither Moulins, Barras nor myself, have handed in our
resignations."

At that moment a paper was slipped in Bonaparte's hand, and a voice said
in his ear: "Read it." He did so; then said aloud: "You, yourself, are
mistaken. Barras has resigned, for here is his resignation. The law
requires three Directors to make a Directory. You are but two, and, as
you said just now, whoever resists the law is a rebel." Then handing
the paper to the president, he continued: "Add the citizen Barras'
resignation to that of citizens Sieyes and Ducos, and proclaim the fall
of the Directory. I will announce it to my soldiers."

Moulins and Gohier were confounded. Barras' resignation sapped the
foundations of all their plans. Bonaparte had nothing further to do at
the Council of Ancients, but there still remained much to be done in
the court of the Tuileries. He went down, followed by those who had
accompanied him up. His soldiers no sooner caught sight, of him than
they burst into shouts of "Vive Bonaparte!" more noisily and more
eagerly than ever. He sprang into his saddle and made them a sign that
he wished to speak to them. Ten thousand voices that had burst into
cries were hushed in a moment. Silence fell as if by enchantment.

"Soldiers," said Bonaparte, in a voice so loud that all could hear it,
"your comrades in arms on the frontiers are denuded of the necessaries
of life. The people are miserable. The authors of these evils are the
factious men against whom I have assembled you to-day. I hope before
long to lead you to victory; but first we must deprive those who would
stand in the way of public order and general prosperity of their power
to do harm."

Whether it was weariness of the government of the Directory, or the
fascination exercised by the magic being who called them to victory--so
long forgotten in his absence--shouts of enthusiasm arose, and like a
train of burning powder spread from the Tuileries to the Carrousel,
from the Carrousel to the adjacent streets. Bonaparte profited by this
movement. Turning to Moreau, he said:

"General, I will give you proof of the immense confidence I have in you.
Bernadotte, whom I left at my house, and who refused to follow us, had
the audacity to tell me that if he received orders from the Directory he
should execute them against whosoever the agitators might be. General,
I confide to you the guardianship of the Luxembourg. The tranquillity of
Paris and the welfare of the Republic are in your hands."

And without waiting for a reply he put his horse to a gallop, and rode
off to the opposite end of the line.

Moreau, led by military ambition, had consented to play a part in this
great drama; he was now forced to accept that which the author assigned
him. On returning to the Louvre, Gohier and Moulins found nothing
changed apparently. All the sentries were at their posts. They retired
to one of the salons of the presidency to consult together. But they had
scarcely begun their conference, when General Jube, the commandant of
the Luxembourg, received orders to join Bonaparte at the Tuileries with
the guard of the Directory. Their places were filled by Moreau and
a portion of the soldiers who had been electrified by Bonaparte.
Nevertheless the two Directors drew up a message for the Council of the
Five Hundred, in which they protested energetically against what had
been done. When this was finished Gohier handed it to his secretary, and
Moulins, half dead with exhaustion, returned to his apartments to take
some food.

It was then about four o'clock in the afternoon. An instant later
Gohier's secretary returned in great perturbation.

"Well," said Gohier, "why have you not gone?"

"Citizen president," replied the young man, "we are prisoners in the
palace."

"Prisoners? What do you mean?"

"The guard has been changed, and General Jube is no longer in command."

"Who has replaced him?"

"I think some one said General Moreau."

"Moreau? Impossible! And that coward, Barras, where is he?"

"He has started for his country-place at Grosbois."

"Ah! I must see Moulins!" cried Gohier, rushing to the door. But at the
entrance he found a sentry who barred the door. Gohier insisted.

"No one can pass," said the sentry.

"What! not pass?"

"No."

"But I am President Gohier!"

"No one can pass," said the sentry; "that is the order."

Gohier saw it would be useless to say more; force would be impossible.
He returned to his own rooms.

In the meantime, General Moreau had gone to see Moulins; he wished to
justify himself. Without listening to a word the ex-Director turned his
back on him, and, as Moreau insisted, he said: "General, go into the
ante-chamber. That is the place for jailers."

Moreau bowed his head, and understood for the first time into what a
fatal trap his honor had fallen.

At five o'clock, Bonaparte started to return to the Rue de la Victoire;
all the generals and superior officers in Paris accompanied him. The
blindest, those who had not understood the 13th Vendemiaire, those who
had not yet understood the return from Egypt, now saw, blazing over
the Tuileries, the star of his future, and as everybody could not be a
planet, each sought to become a satellite.

The shouts of "Vive Bonaparte!" which came from the lower part of the
Rue du Mont Blanc, and swept like a sonorous wave toward the Rue de la
Victoire, told Josephine of her husband's return. The impressionable
Creole had awaited him anxiously. She sprang to meet him in such
agitation that she was unable to utter a single word.

"Come, come!" said Bonaparte, becoming the kindly man he was in his own
home, "calm yourself. We have done to-day all that could be done."

"Is it all over?"

"Oh, no!" replied Bonaparte.

"Must it be done all over again to-morrow?"

"Yes, but to-morrow it will be merely a formality."

That formality was rather rough; but every one knows of the events at
Saint-Cloud. We will, therefore, dispense with relating them, and turn
at once to the result, impatient as we are to get back to the real
subject of our drama, from which the grand historical figure we have
introduced diverted us for an instant.

One word more. The 20th Brumaire, at one o'clock in the morning,
Bonaparte was appointed First Consul for ten years. He himself selected
Cambaceres and Lebrun as his associates under the title of Second
Consuls, being firmly resolved this time to concentrate in his own
person, not only all the functions of the two consuls, but those of the
ministers.

The 20th Brumaire he slept at the Luxembourg in president Gohier's bed,
the latter having been liberated with his colleague Moulins.

Roland was made governor of the Luxembourg.




CHAPTER XXV. AN IMPORTANT COMMUNICATION

Some time after this military revolution, which created a great stir in
Europe, convulsing the Continent for a time, as a tempest convulses
the ocean--some time after, we say, on the morning of the 30th Nivoise,
better and more clearly known to our readers as the 20th of January,
1800, Roland, in looking over the voluminous correspondence which his
new office entailed upon him, found, among fifty other letters asking
for an audience, the following:

  MONSIEUR THE GOVERNOR-I know your loyalty to your word, and you
  will see that I rely on it. I wish to speak to you for five
  minutes, during which I must remain masked.

  I have a request to make to you. This request you will grant or
  deny. In either case, as I shall have entered the Palace of the
  Luxembourg in the interest oL the First Consul, Bonaparte, and
  the royalist party to which I belong, I shall ask for your word
  of honor that I be allowed to leave it as freely as you allow
  me to enter.

  If to-morrow, at seven in the evening, I see a solitary light
  in the window over the clock, I shall know that Colonel Roland
  de Montrevel has pledged me his word of honor, and I shall boldly
  present myself at the little door of the left wing of the palace,
  opening on the garden. I shall strike three blows at intervals,
  after the manner of the free-masons.

  In order that you may know to whom you engage or refuse your word,
  I sign a name which is known to you, that name having been, under
  circumstances you have probably not forgotten, pronounced before
  you.

    MORGAN,
    Chief of the Companions of Jehu.

Roland read the letter twice, thought it over for a few moments, then
rose suddenly, and, entering the First Consul's study, handed it to him
silently. The latter read it without betraying the slightest emotion,
or even surprise; then, with a laconism that was wholly Lacedaemonian, he
said: "Place the light."

Then he gave the letter back to Roland.

The next evening, at seven o'clock, the light shone in the window,
and at five minutes past the hour, Roland in person was waiting at the
little door of the garden. He had scarcely been there a moment when
three blows were struck on the door after the manner of the free-masons;
first two strokes and then one.

The door was opened immediately. A man wrapped in a cloak was sharply
defined against the grayish atmosphere of the wintry night. As for
Roland, he was completely hidden in shadow. Seeing no one, the man in
the cloak remained motionless for a second.

"Come in," said Roland.

"Ah! it is you, colonel!"

"How do you know it is I?" asked Roland.

"I recognize your voice."

"My voice! But during those few moments we were together in the
