  Weaning bit for animals, J.P. Israel                 186,347
  Weather strip, E.C. Underwood                        186,386
  Whirling toy, J.H.Jenkins                            186,255
  Wrench, P. Chapin, Sr                                186,197

       *       *       *       *       *


DESIGNS PATENTED.

  9,700, 9,701.--CHAINS.--D.A. Beam, Newark, N.J.
  9,702.--BRACKETS.--O.F. Fogelstrand, Kensington, Conn.
  9,703.--BOTTLE.--A.T. Francis, Paterson, N.J., et al.
  9,704, 9,705.--CARPETS.--A. Heald, Philadelphia, Pa.
  9,706.--CARPETS.--D. McNair, Boston, Mass.
  9,707, 9,708.--CARPETS.--T.J. Stearns, Boston, Mass.
  9,709.--BRONZE.--J.W. Tiemann et al., Darlington, N.J.
  9,710.--SHIRT FRONT.--S. Weill, New York city.
  9,711.--DESK.--J.H. Frink, Detroit, Mich.

[A copy of any of the above patents may be had by remitting one dollar
to MUNN & Co., 37 Park Row, New York city.]

       *       *       *       *       *




ADVERTISEMENTS.


       *       *       *       *       *

Inside Page, each insertion 75 cents a line. Back Page, each insertion
$1.00 a line.

_Engravings may head advertisements at the same rate per line, by
measurement, as the letter press. Advertisements must be received at
publication office as early as Friday morning to appear in next
issue._

       *       *       *       *       *


WATER WHEELS.

More than four times as many of Jas. Lefell's improved Double Turbine
Water Wheels in operation than any other kind. 24 sizes made, ranging
from 5 3-4 to 96 in. diam. under heads from 1 to 240 ft. Successful
for every purpose. Large new pamphlet, the finest ever published,
containing over 30 fine illustrations, sent free to parties interested
in water power.

[Illustration]

  JAS. LEFFEL & CO.,
  Springfield, O., and 109 Liberty
  St., New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *


STEEL CASTINGS,

From 1-4 to 10,000 lbs. weight. An invaluable substitute for expensive
forgings or for malleable iron castings requiring great strength. Send
for circular and price list to CHESTER STEEL CASTING COMPANY, EVELINA
STREET, PHILADELPHIA, PA.

       *       *       *       *       *


GEORGE C. HICKS & CO., Baltimore, Md. CLAY RETORTS, TILES, FIRE
BRICKS, &c. Terra Cotta Pipes of all sizes.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHEAPEST ROTARY HAND CORNSHELLER IN THE U.S.

Guaranteed to be the simplest, cheapest, most durable, effective and
the best. Buy it. Try it and be convinced. Samples $1.00. Large
profits to agents. Address Harrisburgh Pa., Family Cornsheller Co.
Lock Box 9.

       *       *       *       *       *


Y.A. FAY & CO.

CINCINNATI, OHIO U.S.S.

WOOD WORKING MACHINERY.

Woodsworth Planers and matchers, Daniels & Dimension Planers,
Universal Wood Workers, Band & Circular Re-Saws, Ripping, Edging &
Cross-Cutting Saws, Molding, Mortising and Tenoning Machines, Band &
Scroll Saws, Carving, Boring, Shaping, Friezing & Sand Papering
Machines, Wood Lathes & Machinery for Furniture, Car, Wheel &
Agricultural Shops. Superior to any in use. Prices reduced to suit the
times.

       *       *       *       *       *


DAYTON CAM PUMP.

THE ONLY PUMP IN THE MARKET DESIGNED AND CONSTRUCTED ESPECIALLY FOR
BOILER FEEDING.

Are Pumping water at 268 deg. F. No Dead Centers. The Steam Valve is a
plain Slide Valve identical to the slide valve of a Steam Engine, but
derives its motion from a cam. Speed can be regulated to suit
evaporation. Pumping Returns from Steam Heating Apparatus a specialty.

Send for Circular.

Smith, Vaile & Co., DAYTON, OHIO.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *


WANTED THE SOLE MANUFACTURE for England, of one or two Patent Articles
in demand by steam users. Advertisers have good manufacturing
premises, and a first-class connection among steam users in England
and the Continent. Apply in first instance by letter to P.S.B., care
of Mr. G. STREET, Advertising Offices, 30 Cornhill, London, E.C.,
England.

       *       *       *       *       *


A NEW YEAR'S GIFT

A $5 NEW YEAR'S GIFT

GIVEN AWAY!

To Every Reader of This Paper!

Consisting of the beautiful and valuable Steel Engraving, entitled

"CHRIST IN THE TEMPLE!"

In an American edition, issued by W.W. Bostwick & Co., Publishers, 177
and 179 West Fourth Street, Cincinnati, O., and furnished to every
READER OF THIS PAPER FREE.

The retail price of the English edition of this Engraving is $12.00
PER COPY. It illustrates one of the most remarkable incidents in the
life time of our Savior. The subject is taken from Luke, Second
Chapter, 46, 47, 48, 49, and 50th Verses. Its size is three feet long
and two feet wide, and has over 30 FIGURES REPRESENTED.

It is the best Premium ever given away. W.W. Bostwick & Co. will
supply every Reader of this paper with the valuable and appropriate
Engraving of "Christ in the Temple" as a New Year's Gift.

A NEW YEARS GIFT

Readers will therefore please cut out the following Certificate and
send it to W.W. Bostwick & Co., Publishers, 177 and 179 West Fourth
Street, Cincinnati, O., for redemption, together with 25 cents to pay
for postage, wrapping, roller, and mounting the Engraving. Cut Out
this Readers' Certificate. It is worth $5.00.

CERTIFICATE.

On receipt of this Certificate, together with 25 cents to pay for
postage, roller, wrapping, and mounting, we will send the beautiful
Engraving, three feet long and two feet wide, entitled

"CHRIST IN THE TEMPLE,"

To every Reader of this paper, by mail, postpaid. Send for Engraving
at once, stating name in full, P.O. address, county, and State,
Address all orders to W.W. BOSTWICK CO., PUBLISHERS, 17. & 17 W.
Fourth St., Cincinnati, O.

Readers of this paper will be allowed this New Year's Premium Gift,
and all orders must be accompanied with above Certificate, which be
sure to cut out and send with directions for mailing to W.W. BOSTWICK
& CO., PUBLISHERS, 177 AND 179 WEST FOURTH STREET, CINCINNATI, O.

A NEW YEAR'S GIFT
COPYRIGHT SECURED

       *       *       *       *       *


A MAN OF A THOUSAND.

Having discovered, in a manner which might be considered almost
providential, a positive cure for consumption and all Lung Complaints,
I feel it my duty to make it known in a practical manner by furnishing
a sample bottle, free of charge, to all sufferers, my only hope of
remuneration being that the medicine will perform all I claim for it.
The ingredients are of the choicest herbal products and perfectly
safe; will be sent FREE TO ALL. Address at once. DR. O. PHELPS BROWN,
21 Grand St., Jersey City, N.J.

       *       *       *       *       *


I HAVE 500 ACRES OF LAND IN SAN

Jacinto County, Texas. Rolling and heavily timbered, with two spring
branches running through the land. The entire tract suitable for
farming purposes. Title perfect. At the present valuation of land in
the neighborhood, its worth five dollars per acre. The Bast and West
Narrow Gauge R.R. when completed will run within easy distance of the
land, which will increase its value materially. I will give a warranty
deed to the above tract of land in exchange for one 15-horse power
portable engine, and 20-horse boiler return flues, new and
complete-geared to run sugar mill without Band and Gin with Band. The
machinery to be delivered at depot in Liberty. Any reference given
desired. Address Y.L. RIDLEY, Liberty, Liberty County, Texas.

       *       *       *       *       *


$290 FOR BEST PIANOS IN THE WORLD

--in use all over the U.S. in over 900 towns by persons you will find
in our Illustrated Circular, probably residents of your own place, or
very near, where you can try our pianos. Genuine Rosewood--overstrung
--full iron plate--7 1-3 octaves--Agraffe--and possessing every
improvement known, and warranted 5 years by a responsible incorporated
Manufacturing Co., referring by permission to the Chemical National
Bank, New York City, by far the strongest bank in America. Pianos sent
everywhere on trial. We have no agents. Send for Illustrated Circular
giving full particulars. Address

  UNITED STATES PIANO COMPANY.
  810 Broadway, New York.
  (Please name this paper.)

       *       *       *       *       *


PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE PROPERTIES OF CONTINUOUS BRIDGES.

By Charles E. Bender, C.E. Illustrated. Being No. 26, Van Nostrand's
Science Series. 18mo. boards, 50 cents. _Recently Published._ THE
FATIGUE OF METALS UNDER REPEATED STRAINS, with various tables of
results of experiments, from the German of Prof. Ludwig Spangenberg,
with a preface by S.H. Shreve, A.M. 18 mo. bound, 50 cents. D. VAN
NOSTRAND, Publisher, 23 Murran Street, and 27 Warren Street.

[3 stars] Copies sent free by mail on receipt of price.

       *       *       *       *       *


WANTED--A Second-Hand Shaping Machine; 12 inch stroke; in good
condition. Pratt & Whitney's make preferred. Address, with full
particulars as to size, make, and price, R.G.E., 589 Lorimer Street,
Greenpoint, L.I.

       *       *       *       *       *


WOOD-WORKING MACHINERY,

Such as Woodworth Planing, Tongueing, and Grooving Machines, Daniel's
Planers, Richardson's Patent Improved Tenon Machines, Mortising,
Moulding, and Re-Saw Machines, and Wood-Working Machinery generally.
Manufactured by WITHERBY, RUGG & RICHARDSON, 26 Salisbury Street,
Worcester, Mass. (Shop formerly occupied by R. BALL & CO.)

       *       *       *       *       *


BRAINARD MILLING MACHINES all styles and sizes. Universal Milling
Machines from $200 upwards; Brown's Patent Screw Machines. &c., &c.
Address BRAINARD M.M. CO., 131 Milk St., Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *


AGENTS TO CONTROL TERRITORY,

West and South (New England States, Connecticut excepted, taken), for
the sale of the "Eureka Button Fasteners," Patented 1876. No tool
required to put them on. Samples, &c., free. W.L. URANN, M'f'r, 21
Fulton St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


ENGINES AND BOILERS.

New and complete. One 2-horse power, $140: 3 H.P., $175; 5H. P., $250;
10 H.P., $500; 25 H.P., $1,000; all sizes in proportion. Patterns,
drawings and models best and cheapest of any. Address POND 187 Grand
St. N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *
