The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tao Teh King, by Lao-Tze

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tao Teh King

Author: Lao-Tze

Posting Date: July 12, 2008 [EBook #216]
Release Date: February, 1995

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAO TEH KING ***




Produced by Gregory Walker





THE TAO TEH KING,

OR

THE TAO AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS

by Lao-Tse

Translated by James Legge





PART 1.


Ch. 1. 1. The Tao that can be trodden is not the enduring and
unchanging Tao.  The name that can be named is not the enduring and
unchanging name.

2. (Conceived of as) having no name, it is the Originator of heaven
and earth; (conceived of as) having a name, it is the Mother of all
things.

3.

   Always without desire we must be found,
   If its deep mystery we would sound;
   But if desire always within us be,
   Its outer fringe is all that we shall see.

4. Under these two aspects, it is really the same; but as development
takes place, it receives the different names.  Together we call them
the Mystery.  Where the Mystery is the deepest is the gate of all that
is subtle and wonderful.


2. 1. All in the world know the beauty of the beautiful, and in doing
this they have (the idea of) what ugliness is; they all know the skill
of the skilful, and in doing this they have (the idea of) what the
want of skill is.

2. So it is that existence and non-existence give birth the one to
(the idea of) the other; that difficulty and ease produce the one (the
idea of) the other; that length and shortness fashion out the one the
figure of the other; that (the ideas of) height and lowness arise from
the contrast of the one with the other; that the musical notes and
tones become harmonious through the relation of one with another; and
that being before and behind give the idea of one following another.

3. Therefore the sage manages affairs without doing anything, and
conveys his instructions without the use of speech.

4. All things spring up, and there is not one which declines to show
itself; they grow, and there is no claim made for their ownership;
they go through their processes, and there is no expectation (of a
reward for the results).  The work is accomplished, and there is no
resting in it (as an achievement).

   The work is done, but how no one can see;
  'Tis this that makes the power not cease to be.


3. 1. Not to value and employ men of superior ability is the way to
keep the people from rivalry among themselves; not to prize articles
which are difficult to procure is the way to keep them from becoming
thieves; not to show them what is likely to excite their desires is
the way to keep their minds from disorder.

2. Therefore the sage, in the exercise of his government, empties
their minds, fills their bellies, weakens their wills, and strengthens
their bones.

3. He constantly (tries to) keep them without knowledge and without
desire, and where there are those who have knowledge, to keep them
from presuming to act (on it).  When there is this abstinence from
action, good order is universal.


4. 1. The Tao is (like) the emptiness of a vessel; and in our
employment of it we must be on our guard against all fulness.  How
deep and unfathomable it is, as if it were the Honoured Ancestor of
all things!

2. We should blunt our sharp points, and unravel the complications of
things; we should attemper our brightness, and bring ourselves into
agreement with the obscurity of others.  How pure and still the Tao
is, as if it would ever so continue!

3. I do not know whose son it is.  It might appear to have been before
God.


5. 1. Heaven and earth do not act from (the impulse of) any wish to be
benevolent; they deal with all things as the dogs of grass are dealt
with.  The sages do not act from (any wish to be) benevolent; they
deal with the people as the dogs of grass are dealt with.

2. May not the space between heaven and earth be compared to a
bellows?

  'Tis emptied, yet it loses not its power;
  'Tis moved again, and sends forth air the more.
   Much speech to swift exhaustion lead we see;
   Your inner being guard, and keep it free.


6.

   The valley spirit dies not, aye the same;
   The female mystery thus do we name.
   Its gate, from which at first they issued forth,
   Is called the root from which grew heaven and earth.
   Long and unbroken does its power remain,
   Used gently, and without the touch of pain.


7. 1. Heaven is long-enduring and earth continues long.  The reason
why heaven and earth are able to endure and continue thus long is
because they do not live of, or for, themselves.  This is how they are
able to continue and endure.

2. Therefore the sage puts his own person last, and yet it is found in
the foremost place; he treats his person as if it were foreign to him,
and yet that person is preserved.  Is it not because he has no
personal and private ends, that therefore such ends are realised?


8. 1. The highest excellence is like (that of) water.  The excellence
of water appears in its benefiting all things, and in its occupying,
without striving (to the contrary), the low place which all men
dislike.  Hence (its way) is near to (that of) the Tao.

2. The excellence of a residence is in (the suitability of) the place;
that of the mind is in abysmal stillness; that of associations is in
their being with the virtuous; that of government is in its securing
good order; that of (the conduct of) affairs is in its ability; and
that of (the initiation of) any movement is in its timeliness.

3. And when (one with the highest excellence) does not wrangle (about
his low position), no one finds fault with him.


9. 1. It is better to leave a vessel unfilled, than to attempt to
carry it when it is full.  If you keep feeling a point that has been
sharpened, the point cannot long preserve its sharpness.

2. When gold and jade fill the hall, their possessor cannot keep them
safe.  When wealth and honours lead to arrogancy, this brings its evil
on itself.  When the work is done, and one's name is becoming
distinguished, to withdraw into obscurity is the way of Heaven.

