my shoe and the frog of my foot. The stone was sharp on the inside and
round on the outside, which, as every one knows, is the most dangerous
kind that a horse can pick up, at the same time cutting his foot and
making him most liable to stumble and fall.

Whether the man was partly blind or only very careless I can't say, but
he drove me with that stone in my foot for a good half-mile before he
saw anything. By that time I was going so lame with the pain that at
last he saw it, and called out, "Well, here's a go! Why, they have sent
us out with a lame horse! What a shame!"

He then chucked the reins and flipped about with the whip, saying, "Now,
then, it's no use playing the old soldier with me; there's the journey
to go, and it's no use turning lame and lazy."

Just at this time a farmer came riding up on a brown cob. He lifted his
hat and pulled up.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he said, "but I think there is something the
matter with your horse; he goes very much as if he had a stone in
his shoe. If you will allow me I will look at his feet; these loose
scattered stones are confounded dangerous things for the horses."

"He's a hired horse," said my driver. "I don't know what's the matter
with him, but it is a great shame to send out a lame beast like this."

The farmer dismounted, and slipping his rein over his arm at once took
up my near foot.

"Bless me, there's a stone! Lame! I should think so!"

At first he tried to dislodge it with his hand, but as it was now
very tightly wedged he drew a stone-pick out of his pocket, and very
carefully and with some trouble got it out. Then holding it up he said,
"There, that's the stone your horse had picked up. It is a wonder he did
not fall down and break his knees into the bargain!"

"Well, to be sure!" said my driver; "that is a queer thing! I never knew
that horses picked up stones before."

"Didn't you?" said the farmer rather contemptuously; "but they do,
though, and the best of them will do it, and can't help it sometimes on
such roads as these. And if you don't want to lame your horse you must
look sharp and get them out quickly. This foot is very much bruised,"
he said, setting it gently down and patting me. "If I might advise,
sir, you had better drive him gently for awhile; the foot is a good deal
hurt, and the lameness will not go off directly."

Then mounting his cob and raising his hat to the lady he trotted off.

When he was gone my driver began to flop the reins about and whip the
harness, by which I understood that I was to go on, which of course I
did, glad that the stone was gone, but still in a good deal of pain.

This was the sort of experience we job horses often came in for.




29 Cockneys


Then there is the steam-engine style of driving; these drivers were
mostly people from towns, who never had a horse of their own and
generally traveled by rail.

They always seemed to think that a horse was something like a
steam-engine, only smaller. At any rate, they think that if only they
pay for it a horse is bound to go just as far and just as fast and with
just as heavy a load as they please. And be the roads heavy and muddy,
or dry and good; be they stony or smooth, uphill or downhill, it is all
the same--on, on, on, one must go, at the same pace, with no relief and
no consideration.

These people never think of getting out to walk up a steep hill. Oh, no,
they have paid to ride, and ride they will! The horse? Oh, he's used
to it! What were horses made for, if not to drag people uphill? Walk! A
good joke indeed! And so the whip is plied and the rein is chucked and
often a rough, scolding voice cries out, "Go along, you lazy beast!" And
then another slash of the whip, when all the time we are doing our
very best to get along, uncomplaining and obedient, though often sorely
harassed and down-hearted.

This steam-engine style of driving wears us up faster than any other
kind. I would far rather go twenty miles with a good considerate driver
than I would go ten with some of these; it would take less out of me.

Another thing, they scarcely ever put on the brake, however steep the
downhill may be, and thus bad accidents sometimes happen; or if they do
put it on, they often forget to take it off at the bottom of the hill,
and more than once I have had to pull halfway up the next hill, with one
of the wheels held by the brake, before my driver chose to think about
it; and that is a terrible strain on a horse.

Then these cockneys, instead of starting at an easy pace, as a gentleman
would do, generally set off at full speed from the very stable-yard; and
when they want to stop, they first whip us, and then pull up so suddenly
that we are nearly thrown on our haunches, and our mouths jagged with
the bit--they call that pulling up with a dash; and when they turn a
corner they do it as sharply as if there were no right side or wrong
side of the road.

I well remember one spring evening I and Rory had been out for the day.
(Rory was the horse that mostly went with me when a pair was ordered,
and a good honest fellow he was.) We had our own driver, and as he was
always considerate and gentle with us, we had a very pleasant day. We
were coming home at a good smart pace, about twilight. Our road turned
sharp to the left; but as we were close to the hedge on our own side,
and there was plenty of room to pass, our driver did not pull us in. As
we neared the corner I heard a horse and two wheels coming rapidly down
the hill toward us. The hedge was high, and I could see nothing, but the
next moment we were upon each other. Happily for me, I was on the side
next the hedge. Rory was on the left side of the pole, and had not even
a shaft to protect him. The man who was driving was making straight for
the corner, and when he came in sight of us he had no time to pull over
to his own side. The whole shock came upon Rory. The gig shaft ran right
into the chest, making him stagger back with a cry that I shall never
forget. The other horse was thrown upon his haunches and one shaft
broken. It turned out that it was a horse from our own stables, with the
high-wheeled gig that the young men were so fond of.

The driver was one of those random, ignorant fellows, who don't even
know which is their own side of the road, or, if they know, don't care.
And there was poor Rory with his flesh torn open and bleeding, and the
blood streaming down. They said if it had been a little more to one side
it would have killed him; and a good thing for him, poor fellow, if it
had.

As it was, it was a long time before the wound healed, and then he was
sold for coal-carting; and what that is, up and down those steep hills,
only horses know. Some of the sights I saw there, where a horse had to
come downhill with a heavily loaded two-wheel cart behind him, on which
no brake could be placed, make me sad even now to think of.

After Rory was disabled I often went in the carriage with a mare named
Peggy, who stood in the next stall to mine. She was a strong, well-made
animal, of a bright dun color, beautifully dappled, and with a
dark-brown mane and tail. There was no high breeding about her, but she
was very pretty and remarkably sweet-tempered and willing. Still, there
was an anxious look about her eye, by which I knew that she had some
trouble. The first time we went out together I thought she had a very
odd pace; she seemed to go partly a trot, partly a canter, three or four
paces, and then a little jump forward.

It was very unpleasant for any horse who pulled with her, and made me
quite fidgety. When we got home I asked her what made her go in that
odd, awkward way.

"Ah," she said in a troubled manner, "I know my paces are very bad, but
what can I do? It really is not my fault; it is just because my legs are
so short. I stand nearly as high as you, but your legs are a good three
inches longer above your knee than mine, and of course you can take a
much longer step and go much faster. You see I did not make myself.
I wish I could have done so; I would have had long legs then. All my
troubles come from my short legs," said Peggy, in a desponding tone.

"But how is it," I said, "when you are so strong and good-tempered and
willing?"

"Why, you see," said she, "men will go so fast, and if one can't keep up
to other horses it is nothing but whip, whip, whip, all the time. And so
I have had to keep up as I could, and have got into this ugly shuffling
pace. It was not always so; when I lived with my first master I always
went a good regular trot, but then he was not in such a hurry. He was a
young clergyman in the country, and a good, kind master he was. He had
two churches a good way apart, and a great deal of work, but he never
scolded or whipped me for not going faster. He was very fond of me.
I only wish I was with him now; but he had to leave and go to a large
town, and then I was sold to a farmer.

"Some farmers, you know, are capital masters; but I think this one was a
low sort of man. He cared nothing about good horses or good driving; he
only cared for going fast. I went as fast as I could, but that would
not do, and he was always whipping; so I got into this way of making a
spring forward to keep up. On market nights he used to stay very late at
the inn, and then drive home at a gallop.

"One dark night he was galloping home as usual, when all of a sudden the
wheel came against some great heavy thing in the road, and turned the
gig over in a minute. He was thrown out and his arm broken, and some of
his ribs, I think. At any rate, it was the end of my living with him,
and I was not sorry. But you see it will be the same everywhere for me,
if men must go so fast. I wish my legs were longer!"

Poor Peggy! I was very sorry for her, and I could not comfort her, for
I knew how hard it was upon slow-paced horses to be put with fast ones;
all the whipping comes to their share, and they can't help it.

She was often used in the phaeton, and was very much liked by some of
the ladies, because she was so gentle; and some time after this she was
sold to two ladies who drove themselves, and wanted a safe, good horse.

I met her several times out in the country, going a good steady pace,
and looking as gay and contented as a horse could be. I was very glad to
see her, for she deserved a good place.

After she left us another horse came in her stead. He was young, and had
a bad name for shying and starting, by which he had lost a good place. I
asked him what made him shy.

"Well, I hardly know," he said. "I was timid when I was young, and was a
good deal frightened several times, and if I saw anything strange I
used to turn and look at it--you see, with our blinkers one can't see
or understand what a thing is unless one looks round--and then my master
always gave me a whipping, which of course made me start on, and did not
make me less afraid. I think if he would have let me just look at things
quietly, and see that there was nothing to hurt me, it would have been
all right, and I should have got used to them. One day an old gentleman
was riding with him, and a large piece of white paper or rag blew across
just on one side of me. I shied and started forward. My master as usual
whipped me smartly, but the old man cried out, 'You're wrong! you're
wrong! You should never whip a horse for shying; he shies because he is
frightened, and you only frighten him more and make the habit worse.'
So I suppose all men don't do so. I am sure I don't want to shy for the
sake of it; but how should one know what is dangerous and what is not,
if one is never allowed to get used to anything? I am never afraid of
what I know. Now I was brought up in a park where there were deer; of
course I knew them as well as I did a sheep or a cow, but they are not
common, and I know many sensible horses who are frightened at them, and
who kick up quite a shindy before they will pass a paddock where there
are deer."

I knew what my companion said was true, and I wished that every young
horse had as good masters as Farmer Grey and Squire Gordon.

Of course we sometimes came in for good driving here. I remember one
morning I was put into the light gig, and taken to a house in Pulteney
Street. Two gentlemen came out; the taller of them came round to my
head; he looked at the bit and bridle, and just shifted the collar with
his hand, to see if it fitted comfortably.

"Do you consider this horse wants a curb?" he said to the hostler.

"Well," said the man, "I should say he would go just as well without;
he has an uncommon good mouth, and though he has a fine spirit he has no
vice; but we generally find people like the curb."

"I don't like it," said the gentleman; "be so good as to take it off,
and put the rein in at the cheek. An easy mouth is a great thing on a
long journey, is it not, old fellow?" he said, patting my neck.

Then he took the reins, and they both got up. I can remember now how
quietly he turned me round, and then with a light feel of the rein, and
drawing the whip gently across my back, we were off.

I arched my neck and set off at my best pace. I found I had some one
behind me who knew how a good horse ought to be driven. It seemed like
old times again, and made me feel quite gay.

This gentleman took a great liking to me, and after trying me several
times with the saddle he prevailed upon my master to sell me to a friend
of his, who wanted a safe, pleasant horse for riding. And so it came to
pass that in the summer I was sold to Mr. Barry.




30 A Thief


My new master was an unmarried man. He lived at Bath, and was much
engaged in business. His doctor advised him to take horse exercise, and
for this purpose he bought me. He hired a stable a short distance from
his lodgings, and engaged a man named Filcher as groom. My master knew
very little about horses, but he treated me well, and I should have had
a good and easy place but for circumstances of which he was ignorant. He
ordered the best hay with plenty of oats, crushed beans, and bran,
with vetches, or rye grass, as the man might think needful. I heard the
master give the order, so I knew there was plenty of good food, and I
thought I was well off.

For a few days all went on well. I found that my groom understood
his business. He kept the stable clean and airy, and he groomed me
thoroughly; and was never otherwise than gentle. He had been an hostler
in one of the great hotels in Bath. He had given that up, and now
cultivated fruit and vegetables for the market, and his wife bred and
fattened poultry and rabbits for sale. After awhile it seemed to me that
my oats came very short; I had the beans, but bran was mixed with them
instead of oats, of which there were very few; certainly not more than a
quarter of what there should have been. In two or three weeks this began
to tell upon my strength and spirits. The grass food, though very good,
was not the thing to keep up my condition without corn. However, I
could not complain, nor make known my wants. So it went on for about two
months; and I wondered that my master did not see that something was
the matter. However, one afternoon he rode out into the country to see a
friend of his, a gentleman farmer, who lived on the road to Wells.

This gentleman had a very quick eye for horses; and after he had
welcomed his friend he said, casting his eye over me:

"It seems to me, Barry, that your horse does not look so well as he did
when you first had him; has he been well?"

"Yes, I believe so," said my master; "but he is not nearly so lively as
he was; my groom tells me that horses are always dull and weak in the
autumn, and that I must expect it."

"Autumn, fiddlesticks!" said the farmer. "Why, this is only August; and
with your light work and good food he ought not to go down like this,
even if it was autumn. How do you feed him?"

My master told him. The other shook his head slowly, and began to feel
me over.

"I can't say who eats your corn, my dear fellow, but I am much mistaken
if your horse gets it. Have you ridden very fast?"

"No, very gently."

"Then just put your hand here," said he, passing his hand over my neck
and shoulder; "he is as warm and damp as a horse just come up from
grass. I advise you to look into your stable a little more. I hate to be
suspicious, and, thank heaven, I have no cause to be, for I can trust my
men, present or absent; but there are mean scoundrels, wicked enough to
rob a dumb beast of his food. You must look into it." And turning to
his man, who had come to take me, "Give this horse a right good feed of
bruised oats, and don't stint him."

"Dumb beasts!" Yes, we are; but if I could have spoken I could have told
