that such a ramble would now be attended with bad consequences."

"I am very glad to hear that," she said. "I was in here arranging some
flowers for the breakfast table when I heard you come down, and fancied
I detected something surreptitious in your step on the stairs."

"You did me injustice," I replied. "I had no idea of going out at all."

Despite her effort to convey an impression that my interception was
purely accidental, I had at the time a dim suspicion of what I
afterwards learned to be the fact, namely, that this sweet creature, in
pursuance of her self-assumed guardianship over me, had risen for the
last two or three mornings at an unheard-of hour, to insure against the
possibility of my wandering off alone in case I should be affected as
on the former occasion. Receiving permission to assist her in making up
the breakfast bouquet, I followed her into the room from which she had
emerged.

"Are you sure," she asked, "that you are quite done with those terrible
sensations you had that morning?"

"I can't say that I do not have times of feeling decidedly queer," I
replied, "moments when my personal identity seems an open question. It
would be too much to expect after my experience that I should not have
such sensations occasionally, but as for being carried entirely off my
feet, as I was on the point of being that morning, I think the danger
is past."

"I shall never forget how you looked that morning," she said.

"If you had merely saved my life," I continued, "I might, perhaps, find
words to express my gratitude, but it was my reason you saved, and
there are no words that would not belittle my debt to you." I spoke
with emotion, and her eyes grew suddenly moist.

"It is too much to believe all this," she said, "but it is very
delightful to hear you say it. What I did was very little. I was very
much distressed for you, I know. Father never thinks anything ought to
astonish us when it can be explained scientifically, as I suppose this
long sleep of yours can be, but even to fancy myself in your place
makes my head swim. I know that I could not have borne it at all."

"That would depend," I replied, "on whether an angel came to support
you with her sympathy in the crisis of your condition, as one came to
me." If my face at all expressed the feelings I had a right to have
toward this sweet and lovely young girl, who had played so angelic a
role toward me, its expression must have been very worshipful just
then. The expression or the words, or both together, caused her now to
drop her eyes with a charming blush.

"For the matter of that," I said, "if your experience has not been as
startling as mine, it must have been rather overwhelming to see a man
belonging to a strange century, and apparently a hundred years dead,
raised to life."

"It seemed indeed strange beyond any describing at first," she said,
"but when we began to put ourselves in your place, and realize how much
stranger it must seem to you, I fancy we forgot our own feelings a good
deal, at least I know I did. It seemed then not so much astounding as
interesting and touching beyond anything ever heard of before."

"But does it not come over you as astounding to sit at table with me,
seeing who I am?"

"You must remember that you do not seem so strange to us as we must to
you," she answered. "We belong to a future of which you could not form
an idea, a generation of which you knew nothing until you saw us. But
you belong to a generation of which our forefathers were a part. We
know all about it; the names of many of its members are household words
with us. We have made a study of your ways of living and thinking;
nothing you say or do surprises us, while we say and do nothing which
does not seem strange to you. So you see, Mr. West, that if you feel
that you can, in time, get accustomed to us, you must not be surprised
that from the first we have scarcely found you strange at all."

"I had not thought of it in that way," I replied. "There is indeed much
in what you say. One can look back a thousand years easier than forward
fifty. A century is not so very long a retrospect. I might have known
your great-grand-parents. Possibly I did. Did they live in Boston?"

"I believe so."

"You are not sure, then?"

"Yes," she replied. "Now I think, they did."

"I had a very large circle of acquaintances in the city," I said. "It
is not unlikely that I knew or knew of some of them. Perhaps I may have
known them well. Wouldn't it be interesting if I should chance to be
able to tell you all about your great-grandfather, for instance?"

"Very interesting."

"Do you know your genealogy well enough to tell me who your forbears
were in the Boston of my day?"

"Oh, yes."

"Perhaps, then, you will some time tell me what some of their names
were."

She was engrossed in arranging a troublesome spray of green, and did
not reply at once. Steps upon the stairway indicated that the other
members of the family were descending.

"Perhaps, some time," she said.

After breakfast, Dr. Leete suggested taking me to inspect the central
warehouse and observe actually in operation the machinery of
distribution, which Edith had described to me. As we walked away from
the house I said, "It is now several days that I have been living in
your household on a most extraordinary footing, or rather on none at
all. I have not spoken of this aspect of my position before because
there were so many other aspects yet more extraordinary. But now that I
am beginning a little to feel my feet under me, and to realize that,
however I came here, I am here, and must make the best of it, I must
speak to you on this point."

"As for your being a guest in my house," replied Dr. Leete, "I pray you
not to begin to be uneasy on that point, for I mean to keep you a long
time yet. With all your modesty, you can but realize that such a guest
as yourself is an acquisition not willingly to be parted with."

"Thanks, doctor," I said. "It would be absurd, certainly, for me to
affect any oversensitiveness about accepting the temporary hospitality
of one to whom I owe it that I am not still awaiting the end of the
world in a living tomb. But if I am to be a permanent citizen of this
century I must have some standing in it. Now, in my time a person more
or less entering the world, however he got in, would not be noticed in
the unorganized throng of men, and might make a place for himself
anywhere he chose if he were strong enough. But nowadays everybody is a
part of a system with a distinct place and function. I am outside the
system, and don't see how I can get in; there seems no way to get in,
except to be born in or to come in as an emigrant from some other
system."

Dr. Leete laughed heartily.

"I admit," he said, "that our system is defective in lacking provision
for cases like yours, but you see nobody anticipated additions to the
world except by the usual process. You need, however, have no fear that
we shall be unable to provide both a place and occupation for you in
due time. You have as yet been brought in contact only with the members
of my family, but you must not suppose that I have kept your secret. On
the contrary, your case, even before your resuscitation, and vastly
more since has excited the profoundest interest in the nation. In view
of your precarious nervous condition, it was thought best that I should
take exclusive charge of you at first, and that you should, through me
and my family, receive some general idea of the sort of world you had
come back to before you began to make the acquaintance generally of its
inhabitants. As to finding a function for you in society, there was no
hesitation as to what that would be. Few of us have it in our power to
confer so great a service on the nation as you will be able to when you
leave my roof, which, however, you must not think of doing for a good
time yet."

"What can I possibly do?" I asked. "Perhaps you imagine I have some
trade, or art, or special skill. I assure you I have none whatever. I
never earned a dollar in my life, or did an hour's work. I am strong,
and might be a common laborer, but nothing more."

"If that were the most efficient service you were able to render the
nation, you would find that avocation considered quite as respectable
as any other," replied Dr. Leete; "but you can do something else
better. You are easily the master of all our historians on questions
relating to the social condition of the latter part of the nineteenth
century, to us one of the most absorbingly interesting periods of
history: and whenever in due time you have sufficiently familiarized
yourself with our institutions, and are willing to teach us something
concerning those of your day, you will find an historical lectureship
in one of our colleges awaiting you."

"Very good! very good indeed," I said, much relieved by so practical a
suggestion on a point which had begun to trouble me. "If your people
are really so much interested in the nineteenth century, there will
indeed be an occupation ready-made for me. I don't think there is
anything else that I could possibly earn my salt at, but I certainly
may claim without conceit to have some special qualifications for such
a post as you describe."



Chapter 17

I found the processes at the warehouse quite as interesting as Edith
had described them, and became even enthusiastic over the truly
remarkable illustration which is seen there of the prodigiously
multiplied efficiency which perfect organization can give to labor. It
is like a gigantic mill, into the hopper of which goods are being
constantly poured by the train-load and shipload, to issue at the other
end in packages of pounds and ounces, yards and inches, pints and
gallons, corresponding to the infinitely complex personal needs of half
a million people. Dr. Leete, with the assistance of data furnished by
me as to the way goods were sold in my day, figured out some astounding
results in the way of the economies effected by the modern system.

As we set out homeward, I said: "After what I have seen to-day,
together with what you have told me, and what I learned under Miss
Leete's tutelage at the sample store, I have a tolerably clear idea of
your system of distribution, and how it enables you to dispense with a
circulating medium. But I should like very much to know something more
about your system of production. You have told me in general how your
industrial army is levied and organized, but who directs its efforts?
What supreme authority determines what shall be done in every
department, so that enough of everything is produced and yet no labor
wasted? It seems to me that this must be a wonderfully complex and
difficult function, requiring very unusual endowments."

"Does it indeed seem so to you?" responded Dr. Leete. "I assure you
that it is nothing of the kind, but on the other hand so simple, and
depending on principles so obvious and easily applied, that the
functionaries at Washington to whom it is trusted require to be nothing
more than men of fair abilities to discharge it to the entire
satisfaction of the nation. The machine which they direct is indeed a
vast one, but so logical in its principles and direct and simple in its
workings, that it all but runs itself; and nobody but a fool could
derange it, as I think you will agree after a few words of explanation.
Since you already have a pretty good idea of the working of the
distributive system, let us begin at that end. Even in your day
statisticians were able to tell you the number of yards of cotton,
velvet, woolen, the number of barrels of flour, potatoes, butter,
number of pairs of shoes, hats, and umbrellas annually consumed by the
nation. Owing to the fact that production was in private hands, and
that there was no way of getting statistics of actual distribution,
these figures were not exact, but they were nearly so. Now that every
pin which is given out from a national warehouse is recorded, of course
the figures of consumption for any week, month, or year, in the
possession of the department of distribution at the end of that period,
are precise. On these figures, allowing for tendencies to increase or
decrease and for any special causes likely to affect demand, the
estimates, say for a year ahead, are based. These estimates, with a
proper margin for security, having been accepted by the general
administration, the responsibility of the distributive department
ceases until the goods are delivered to it. I speak of the estimates
being furnished for an entire year ahead, but in reality they cover
that much time only in case of the great staples for which the demand
can be calculated on as steady. In the great majority of smaller
industries for the product of which popular taste fluctuates, and
novelty is frequently required, production is kept barely ahead of
consumption, the distributive department furnishing frequent estimates
based on the weekly state of demand.

"Now the entire field of productive and constructive industry is
divided into ten great departments, each representing a group of allied
industries, each particular industry being in turn represented by a
subordinate bureau, which has a complete record of the plant and force
under its control, of the present product, and means of increasing it.
The estimates of the distributive department, after adoption by the
administration, are sent as mandates to the ten great departments,
which allot them to the subordinate bureaus representing the particular
industries, and these set the men at work. Each bureau is responsible
for the task given it, and this responsibility is enforced by
departmental oversight and that of the administration; nor does the
distributive department accept the product without its own inspection;
while even if in the hands of the consumer an article turns out unfit,
the system enables the fault to be traced back to the original workman.
The production of the commodities for actual public consumption does
not, of course, require by any means all the national force of workers.
After the necessary contingents have been detailed for the various
industries, the amount of labor left for other employment is expended
in creating fixed capital, such as buildings, machinery, engineering
works, and so forth."

"One point occurs to me," I said, "on which I should think there might
be dissatisfaction. Where there is no opportunity for private
enterprise, how is there any assurance that the claims of small
minorities of the people to have articles produced, for which there is
no wide demand, will be respected? An official decree at any moment may
deprive them of the means of gratifying some special taste, merely
because the majority does not share it."

"That would be tyranny indeed," replied Dr. Leete, "and you may be very
sure that it does not happen with us, to whom liberty is as dear as
equality or fraternity. As you come to know our system better, you will
see that our officials are in fact, and not merely in name, the agents
and servants of the people. The administration has no power to stop the
production of any commodity for which there continues to be a demand.
Suppose the demand for any article declines to such a point that its
production becomes very costly. The price has to be raised in
proportion, of course, but as long as the consumer cares to pay it, the
production goes on. Again, suppose an article not before produced is
demanded. If the administration doubts the reality of the demand, a
popular petition guaranteeing a certain basis of consumption compels it
to produce the desired article. A government, or a majority, which
should undertake to tell the people, or a minority, what they were to
eat, drink, or wear, as I believe governments in America did in your
day, would be regarded as a curious anachronism indeed. Possibly you
had reasons for tolerating these infringements of personal
independence, but we should not think them endurable. I am glad you
raised this point, for it has given me a chance to show you how much
more direct and efficient is the control over production exercised by
the individual citizen now than it was in your day, when what you
called private initiative prevailed, though it should have been called
capitalist initiative, for the average private citizen had little
enough share in it."

"You speak of raising the price of costly articles," I said. "How can
prices be regulated in a country where there is no competition between
buyers or sellers?"

"Just as they were with you," replied Dr. Leete. "You think that needs
explaining," he added, as I looked incredulous, "but the explanation
need not be long; the cost of the labor which produced it was
recognized as the legitimate basis of the price of an article in your
day, and so it is in ours. In your day, it was the difference in wages
that made the difference in the cost of labor; now it is the relative
number of hours constituting a day's work in different trades, the
maintenance of the worker being equal in all cases. The cost of a man's
work in a trade so difficult that in order to attract volunteers the
hours have to be fixed at four a day is twice as great as that in a
trade where the men work eight hours. The result as to the cost of
labor, you see, is just the same as if the man working four hours were
paid, under your system, twice the wages the others get. This
calculation applied to the labor employed in the various processes of a
manufactured article gives its price relatively to other articles.
Besides the cost of production and transportation, the factor of
scarcity affects the prices of some commodities. As regards the great
staples of life, of which an abundance can always be secured, scarcity
is eliminated as a factor. There is always a large surplus kept on hand
from which any fluctuations of demand or supply can be corrected, even
in most cases of bad crops. The prices of the staples grow less year by
year, but rarely, if ever, rise. There are, however, certain classes of
articles permanently, and others temporarily, unequal to the demand,
as, for example, fresh fish or dairy products in the latter category,
and the products of high skill and rare materials in the other. All
that can be done here is to equalize the inconvenience of the scarcity.
This is done by temporarily raising the price if the scarcity be
temporary, or fixing it high if it be permanent. High prices in your
day meant restriction of the articles affected to the rich, but
nowadays, when the means of all are the same, the effect is only that
those to whom the articles seem most desirable are the ones who
purchase them. Of course the nation, as any other caterer for the
public needs must be, is frequently left with small lots of goods on
its hands by changes in taste, unseasonable weather and various other
causes. These it has to dispose of at a sacrifice just as merchants
often did in your day, charging up the loss to the expenses of the
business. Owing, however, to the vast body of consumers to which such
lots can be simultaneously offered, there is rarely any difficulty in
getting rid of them at trifling loss. I have given you now some general
notion of our system of production; as well as distribution. Do you
find it as complex as you expected?"

I admitted that nothing could be much simpler.

"I am sure," said Dr. Leete, "that it is within the truth to say that
the head of one of the myriad private businesses of your day, who had
to maintain sleepless vigilance against the fluctuations of the market,
the machinations of his rivals, and the failure of his debtors, had a
far more trying task than the group of men at Washington who nowadays
direct the industries of the entire nation. All this merely shows, my
dear fellow, how much easier it is to do things the right way than the
wrong. It is easier for a general up in a balloon, with perfect survey
of the field, to manoeuvre a million men to victory than for a sergeant
to manage a platoon in a thicket."

"The general of this army, including the flower of the manhood of the
nation, must be the foremost man in the country, really greater even
than the President of the United States," I said.

"He is the President of the United States," replied Dr. Leete, "or
rather the most important function of the presidency is the headship of
the industrial army."

"How is he chosen?" I asked.

"I explained to you before," replied Dr. Leete, "when I was describing
the force of the motive of emulation among all grades of the industrial
army, that the line of promotion for the meritorious lies through three
grades to the officer's grade, and thence up through the lieutenancies
to the captaincy or foremanship, and superintendency or colonel's rank.
Next, with an intervening grade in some of the larger trades, comes the
general of the guild, under whose immediate control all the operations
of the trade are conducted. This officer is at the head of the national
bureau representing his trade, and is responsible for its work to the
administration. The general of his guild holds a splendid position, and
one which amply satisfies the ambition of most men, but above his rank,
which may be compared--to follow the military analogies familiar to
you--to that of a general of division or major-general, is that of the
chiefs of the ten great departments, or groups of allied trades. The
chiefs of these ten grand divisions of the industrial army may be
compared to your commanders of army corps, or lieutenant-generals, each
having from a dozen to a score of generals of separate guilds reporting
to him. Above these ten great officers, who form his council, is the
general-in-chief, who is the President of the United States.

"The general-in-chief of the industrial army must have passed through
all the grades below him, from the common laborers up. Let us see how
he rises. As I have told you, it is simply by the excellence of his
record as a worker that one rises through the grades of the privates
and becomes a candidate for a lieutenancy. Through the lieutenancies he
rises to the colonelcy, or superintendent's position, by appointment
from above, strictly limited to the candidates of the best records. The
general of the guild appoints to the ranks under him, but he himself is
not appointed, but chosen by suffrage."

"By suffrage!" I exclaimed. "Is not that ruinous to the discipline of
the guild, by tempting the candidates to intrigue for the support of
the workers under them?"

"So it would be, no doubt," replied Dr. Leete, "if the workers had any
suffrage to exercise, or anything to say about the choice. But they
have nothing. Just here comes in a peculiarity of our system. The
general of the guild is chosen from among the superintendents by vote
of the honorary members of the guild, that is, of those who have served
their time in the guild and received their discharge. As you know, at
the age of forty-five we are mustered out of the army of industry, and
have the residue of life for the pursuit of our own improvement or
