The Project Gutenberg EBook of Chasing the Sun, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Chasing the Sun

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: October 31, 2007 [EBook #23262]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHASING THE SUN ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Chasing the Sun, by R.M. Ballantyne.

________________________________________________________________________
Our Hero, Fred Temple, has risen to be a senior manager in the great
Liverpool business founded by his father.  But he was getting overworked
and deeply tired, so one day he announced that he was taking leave for a
while and was going to visit Norway in a small yacht.

Ballantyne had several holidays in Norway, so to write about it and
describe it was a pleasure to him.  This book is therefore an account of
Norway seen through the eyes of an enthusiast for that country.

Fred takes some friends with him.  Together, they have great adventures
and great fun.  They even venture so far north as Lapland, and the Land
of the Midnight Sun.

A wonderful piece of vintage Victoriana at its best.

________________________________________________________________________
CHASING THE SUN, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

PREPARATIONS FOR THE CHASE.

Fred Temple was a tall, handsome young fellow of about five-and-twenty.

He had a romantic spirit, a quiet gentlemanly manner, a pleasant smile,
and a passionate desire for violent exercise.  To look at him you would
have supposed that he was rather a lazy man, for all his motions were
slow and deliberate.  He was never in a hurry, and looked as if it would
take a great deal to excite him.  But those who knew Fred Temple well
used to say that there was a great deal more in him than appeared at
first sight.  Sometimes a sudden flush of the brow, or a gleam of his
eyes, told of hidden fires within.

Fred, when a small boy, was extremely fond of daring and dangerous
expeditions.  He had risked his life hundreds of times on tree-tops and
precipices for birds' nests, and had fought more hand-to-hand battles
than any of the old Greek or Roman heroes.  After he became a man, he
risked his life more than once in saving the lives of others, and it was
a notable fact that many of the antagonists of his boyhood became, at
last, his most intimate friends.

Fred Temple was fair and ruddy.  At about the age of nineteen certain
parts of his good-looking face became covered with a substance
resembling floss-silk.  At twenty-five this substance had changed into a
pair of light whiskers and a lighter moustache.  By means of that
barbarous custom called shaving he kept his chin smooth.

Fred's father was a wealthy Liverpool merchant.  At the period when our
tale opens Fred himself had become chief manager of the business.
People began, about this time, to say that the business could not get on
without him.  There were a great number of hands, both men and women,
employed by Temple and Son, and there was not one on the establishment,
male or female, who did not say and believe that Mr Frederick was the
best master, not only in Liverpool, but in the whole world.  He did not
by any means overdose the people with attentions; but he had a hearty
offhand way of addressing them that was very attractive.  He was a firm
ruler.  No skulker had a chance of escape from his sharp eye, but, on
the other hand, no hard-working servant was overlooked.

One day it was rumoured in the works that Mr Frederick was going to
take a long holiday.  Since his appointment to the chief charge, Fred
had taken few holidays, and had worked so hard that he began to have a
careworn aspect, so the people said they were "glad to hear it; no one
in the works deserved a long holiday better than he."  But the people
were not a little puzzled when Bob Bowie, the office porter, told them
that their young master was going away for three months to chase the
sun!

"Chase the sun, Bob! what d'ye mean?" said one.  "I don't know wot I
mean; I can only tell ye wot I say," answered Bowie bluntly.

Bob Bowie was an old salt--a retired seaman--who had sailed long as
steward of one of the ships belonging to the House of Temple and Son,
and, in consequence of gallantry in saving the life of a comrade, had
been pensioned off, and placed in an easy post about the office, with
good pay.  He was called Old Bob because he looked old, and was
weather-worn, but he was stout and hale, and still fit for active
service.

"Come, Bowie," cried another, "how d'ye know he's goin' to chase the
sun?"

"Cause I heerd him say so," replied Bob.

"Was he in earnest?" inquired a third.

"In coorse he wos," said Bob.

"Then it's my opinion," replied the other, "that old Mr Temple'll have
to chase _his_ son, and clap him in a strait-jacket w'en he catches
him--if he talks such stuff."

The porter could not understand a joke, and did not like one, so he
turned on his heel, and, leaving his friends to laugh at their comrade's
jest, proceeded to the counting-room.

There were two counting-rooms--a small outer and a large inner one.  In
the outer room sat a tall middle-aged man, lanky and worn in appearance
and with a red nose.  Opposite to him, at the same desk, sat a small fat
boy with a round red face, and no chin to speak of.  The man was writing
busily--the boy was drawing a caricature of the man, also busily.

Passing these, Bob Bowie entered the inner office, where a dozen clerks
were all busily employed, or pretending to be so.  Going straight onward
like a homeward-bound ship, keeping his eyes right ahead, Bob was
stranded at last in front of a green door, at which he knocked, and was
answered with a hearty "Come in."

The porter went in and found Fred Temple seated at a table which was
covered with books and papers.

"Oh!  I sent for you, Bowie, to say that I want you to go with me to
Norway to-morrow morning."

"To Norway, sir!" said Bowie in surprise.

"Ay, surely you're not growing timid in your old age, Bob!  It is but a
short voyage of two or three days.  My little schooner is a good
sea-boat, and a first-rate sailor."

"Why, as for bein' _timid_," said the porter, rubbing the end of his
nose, which was copper-coloured and knotty, "I don't think I ever knowed
that there feelin', but it does take a feller aback to be told all of a
suddent, after he's reg'larly laid up in port, to get ready to trip
anchor in twelve hours and bear away over the North Sea--not that I
cares a brass fardin' for that fish-pond, blow high, blow low, but it's
raither suddent, d'ye see, and my rig ain't just seaworthy."

Bowie glanced uneasily at his garments, which were a cross between those
of a railway-guard and a policeman.

"Never mind the rig, Bob," cried Fred, laughing.  "Do you get ready to
start, with all the underclothing you have, by six to-morrow morning.
We shall go to Hull by rail, and I will see to it that your top-sails
are made all right."

"Wery good, sir."

"You've not forgotten how to make lobscouse or plum-duff, I dare say?"

Bob's eyes brightened as he replied stoutly, "By no manner o' means."

"Then be off, and, remember, sharp six."

"Ay, ay, sir," cried the old seaman in a nautical tone that he had not
used for many years, and the very sound of which stirred his heart with
old memories.  He was about to retire, but paused at the threshold of
the green door.

"Beg parding, sir, but if I might make so bold as to ax--"

"Go on, Bob," said Fred encouragingly.

"I heerd ye say to our cashier, sir, that you wos goin' for to _chase
the sun_.  Wot sort of a chase may that be, sir?"

"Ha!  Bowie, that's a curious chase, but not a wild goose one, as I hope
to show you in a month or two.  You know, of course, that in the regions
of the earth north of the Arctic Circle the sun shines by night as well
as by day for several weeks in summer?"

"In coorse I do," answered Bob; "every seaman knows that or ought for to
know it; and that it's dark all day as well as all night in winter for
some weeks, just to make up for it, so to speak."

"Well, Bob, I am very desirous to see this wonderful sight with my own
eyes, but I fear I am almost too late of setting out.  The season is so
far advanced that the sun is setting farther and farther north every
night, and if the winds baffle us I won't be able to catch him sitting
up all night; but if the winds serve, and we have plenty of them we may
yet be in time to see him draw an unbroken circle in the sky.  You see
it will be a regular chase, for the sun travels north at a rapid pace.
D'you understand?"

Bob Bowie grinned, nodded his head significantly, retired, and shut the
door.

Fred Temple, left alone, seized a quill and scribbled off two notes,--
one to a friend in Scotland, the other to a friend in Wales.  The note
to Scotland ran as follows:--

"MY DEAR GRANT,--I have made up my mind to go to Norway for three
months.  Principal object to chase the sun.  Secondary objects, health
and amusement.  Will you go?  You will find my schooner comfortable, my
society charming (if you make yourself agreeable), and no end of
salmon-fishing and scenery.  Reply by return of post.  I go to Hull
to-morrow, and will be there a week.  This will give you ample time to
get ready.

"Ever thine, FRED TEMPLE."

The note to Wales was addressed to Sam Sorrel, and was written in
somewhat similar terms, but Sam being a painter by profession, the
beauty of the scenery was enlarged on and held out as an inducement.

Both of Fred's friends had been prepared some time before for this
proposal, and both of them at once agreed to assist him in "chasing the
sun!"

That night Frederick Temple dreamed that the sun smiled on him in a
peculiarly sweet manner; he dreamed, still further, that it beckoned him
to follow it to the far north, whereupon Fred was suddenly transformed
into a gigantic locomotive engine; the sun all at once became a green
dragon with pink eyes and a blue tail; and he set off in chase of it
into the Arctic regions with a noise like a long roar of the loudest
thunder!



CHAPTER TWO.

THE STORM AND THE FIRST ADVENTURE.

A storm raged on the bosom of the North Sea.  The wind whistled as if
all the spirits of Ocean were warring with each other furiously.  The
waves writhed and tossed on the surface as if in agony.  White foam,
greenish-grey water, and leaden-coloured sky were all that met the eyes
of the men who stood on the deck of a little schooner that rose and sank
and staggered helplessly before the tempest.

Truly, it was a grand sight--a terrible sight--to behold that little
craft battling with the storm.  It suggested the idea of God's might and
forbearance,--of man's daring and helplessness.

The schooner was named the _Snowflake_.  It seemed, indeed, little
heavier than a flake of snow, or a scrap of foam, in the grasp of that
angry sea.  On her deck stood five men.  Four were holding on to the
weather-shrouds; the fifth stood at the helm.  There was only a narrow
rag of the top-sail and the jib shown to the wind, and even this small
amount of canvas caused the schooner to lie over so much that it seemed
a wonder she did not upset.

Fred Temple was one of the men who held on to the weather-rigging; two
of the others were his friends Grant and Sam Sorrel.  The fourth was one
of the crew, and the man at the helm was the Captain; for, although Fred
understood a good deal of seamanship, he did not choose to take on his
own shoulders the responsibility of navigating the yacht.  He employed
for that purpose a regular seaman whom he styled Captain, and never
interfered with him, except to tell him where he wished to go.

Captain McNab was a big, tough, raw-boned man of the Orkney Islands.  He
was born at sea, had lived all his life at sea, and meant (so he said)
to die at sea.  He was a grim, hard-featured old fellow, with a face
that had been so long battered by storms that it looked more like the
figure-head of a South-Sea whaler than the countenance of a living man.
He seldom smiled, and when he did he smiled grimly; never laughed, and
never spoke when he could avoid it.  He was wonderfully slow both in
speech and in action, but he was a first-rate and fearless seaman, in
whom the owner of the schooner had perfect confidence.

As we have fallen into a descriptive vein it may be as well to describe
the rest of our friends offhand.  Norman Grant was a sturdy Highlander,
about the same size as his friend Temple, but a great contrast to him;
for while Temple was fair and ruddy, Grant was dark, with hair, beard,
whiskers, and moustache bushy and black as night.  Grant was a
Highlander in heart as well as in name, for he wore a Glengarry bonnet
and a kilt, and did not seem at all ashamed of exposing to view his
brown hairy knees.  He was a hearty fellow, with a rich deep-toned
voice, and a pair of eyes so black and glittering that they seemed to
pierce right through you and come out at your back when he looked at
you!  Temple, on the contrary, was clad in grey tweed from head to foot,
wideawake included, and looked, as he was, a thorough Englishman.  Grant
was a doctor by profession; by taste a naturalist.  He loved to shoot
and stuff birds of every shape and size and hue, and to collect and
squeeze flat plants of every form and name.  His rooms at home were
filled with strange specimens of birds, beasts, fishes, and plants from
every part of Scotland, England, and Ireland--to the disgust of his old
nurse, whose duty it was to dust them, and to the delight of his little
brother, whose self-imposed duty it was to pull out their tails and pick
out their eyes!

Grant's trip to Norway promised a rich harvest in a new field, so he
went there with romantic anticipations.

Sam Sorrel was like neither of his companions.  He was a little fellow--
a mere spider of a man, and extremely thin; so thin that it seemed as if
his skin had been drawn over the bones in a hurry and the flesh
forgotten!  The Captain once said to Bob Bowie in a moment of confidence
that Mr Sorrel was a "mere spunk," whereupon Bob nodded his head, and
added that he was no better than "half a fathom of pump water."

If there was little of Sam, however, that little was good stuff.  It has
been said that he was a painter by profession.  Certainly there was not
a more enthusiastic artist in the kingdom.  Sam was a strange mixture of
earnestness, enthusiasm, and fun.  Although as thin as a walking-stick,
and almost as flat as a pancake, he was tough like wire, could walk any
distance, could leap farther than anybody, and could swim like a cork.
His features were sharp, prominent and exceedingly handsome.  His eyes
were large, dark, and expressive, and were surmounted by delicate
eyebrows which moved about continually with every changeful feeling that
filled his breast.  When excited his glance was magnificent, and the
natural wildness of his whole aspect was increased by the luxuriance of
his brown hair, which hung in long elf-locks over his shoulders.  Among
his intimates he was known by the name of "Mad Sam Sorrel."

When we have said that the crew of the schooner consisted of six picked
men besides those described and our friend Bob Bowie, we have enumerated
