The Project Gutenberg EBook of Brave and Bold, by Horatio Alger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Brave and Bold

Author: Horatio Alger

Posting Date: March 17, 2011 [EBook #9990]
Release Date: February, 2006
[This file was first posted on November 6, 2003]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRAVE AND BOLD ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.










BRAVE AND BOLD


Or


THE FORTUNES OF ROBERT RUSHTON


By


HORATIO ALGER JR.




CHAPTER I.


THE YOUNG RIVALS.

The main schoolroom in the Millville Academy was brilliantly lighted,
and the various desks were occupied by boys and girls of different ages
from ten to eighteen, all busily writing under the general direction of
Professor George W. Granville, Instructor in Plain and Ornamental
Penmanship.

Professor Granville, as he styled himself, was a traveling teacher, and
generally had two or three evening schools in progress in different
places at the same time. He was really a very good penman, and in a
course of twelve lessons, for which he charged the very moderate price
of a dollar, not, of course, including stationery, he contrived to
impart considerable instruction, and such pupils as chose to learn were
likely to profit by his instructions. His venture in Millville had been
unusually successful. There were a hundred pupils on his list, and there
had been no disturbance during the course of lessons.

At nine precisely, Professor Granville struck a small bell, and said, in
rather a nasal voice:

"You will now stop writing."

There was a little confusion as the books were closed and the pens were
wiped.

"Ladies and gentlemen," said the professor, placing one arm under his
coat tails and extending the other in an oratorical attitude, "this
evening completes the course of lessons which I have had the honor and
pleasure of giving you. I have endeavored to impart to you an easy and
graceful penmanship, such as may be a recommendation to you in after
life. It gives me pleasure to state that many of you have made great
proficiency, and equaled my highest expectations. There are others,
perhaps, who have not been fully sensible of the privileges which they
enjoyed. I would say to you all that perfection is not yet attained. You
will need practice to reap the full benefit of my instructions. Should
my life be spared, I shall hope next winter to give another course of
writing lessons in this place, and I hope I may then have the pleasure
of meeting you again as pupils. Let me say, in conclusion, that I thank
you for your patronage and for your good behavior during this course of
lessons, and at the same time I bid you good-by."

With the closing words, Professor Granville made a low bow, and placed
his hand on his heart, as he had done probably fifty times before, on
delivering the same speech, which was the stereotyped form in which he
closed his evening schools.

There was a thumping of feet, mingled with a clapping of hands, as the
professor closed his speech, and a moment later a boy of sixteen,
occupying one of the front seats, rose, and, advancing with easy
self-possession, drew from his pocket a gold pencil case, containing a
pencil and pen, and spoke as follows:

"Professor Granville, the members of your writing class, desirous of
testifying their appreciation of your services as teacher, have
contributed to buy this gold pencil case, which, in their name, I have
great pleasure in presenting to you. Will you receive it with our best
wishes for your continued success as a teacher of penmanship?"

With these words, he handed the pencil to the professor and returned to
his seat.

The applause that ensued was terrific, causing the dust to rise from
the floor where it had lain undisturbed till the violent attack of two
hundred feet raised it in clouds, through which the figure of the
professor was still visible, with his right arm again extended.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he commenced, "I cannot give fitting utterance
to the emotions that fill my heart at this most unexpected tribute of
regard and mark of appreciation of my humble services. Believe me, I
shall always cherish it as a most valued possession, and the sight of it
will recall the pleasant, and, I hope, profitable hours which we have
passed together this winter. To you, in particular, Mr. Rushton, I
express my thanks for the touching and eloquent manner in which you have
made the presentation, and, in parting with you all, I echo your own
good wishes, and shall hope that you may be favored with an abundant
measure of health and prosperity."

This speech was also vociferously applauded. It was generally considered
impromptu, but was, in truth, as stereotyped as the other. Professor
Granville had on previous occasions been the recipient of similar
testimonials, and he had found it convenient to have a set form of
acknowledgment. He was wise in this, for it is a hard thing on the spur
of the moment suitably to offer thanks for an unexpected gift.

"The professor made a bully speech," said more than one after the
exercises were over.

"So did Bob Rushton," said Edward Kent.

"I didn't see anything extraordinary in what he said," sneered Halbert
Davis. "It seemed to me very commonplace."

"Perhaps you could do better yourself, Halbert," said Kent.

"Probably I could," said Halbert, haughtily.

"Why didn't you volunteer, then?"

"I didn't care to have anything to do with it," returned Halbert,
scornfully.

"That's lucky," remarked Edward, "as there was no chance of your getting
appointed."

"Do you mean to insult me?" demanded Halbert, angrily.

"No, I was only telling the truth."

Halbert turned away, too disgusted to make any reply. He was a boy of
sixteen, of slender form and sallow complexion, dressed with more
pretension than taste. Probably there was no boy present whose suit was
of such fine material as his. But something more than fine clothes is
needed to give a fine appearance, and Halbert's mean and insignificant
features were far from rendering him attractive, and despite the
testimony of his glass, Halbert considered himself a young man of
distinguished appearance, and was utterly blind to his personal defects.

What contributed to feed his vanity was his position as the son of the
richest man in Millville. Indeed, his father was superintendent, and
part owner, of the great brick factory on the banks of the river, in
which hundreds found employment. Halbert found plenty to fawn upon him,
and was in the habit of strutting about the village, swinging a light
cane, neither a useful nor an ornamental member of the community.

After his brief altercation with Edward Kent, he drew on a pair of kid
gloves, and looked about the room for Hester Paine, the lawyer's
daughter, the reigning belle among the girls of her age in Millville.
The fact was, that Halbert was rather smitten with Hester, and had made
up his mind to escort her home on this particular evening, never
doubting that his escort would be thankfully accepted.

But he was not quick enough, Robert Rushton had already approached
Hester, and said, "Miss Hester, will you allow me to see you home?"

"I shall be very glad to have your company, Robert," said Hester.

Robert was a general favorite. He had a bright, attractive face, strong
and resolute, when there was occasion, frank and earnest at all times.
His clothes were neat and clean, but of a coarse, mixed cloth, evidently
of low price, suiting his circumstances, for he was poor, and his mother
and himself depended mainly upon his earnings in the factory for the
necessaries of life. Hester Paine, being the daughter of a well-to-do
lawyer, belonged to the village aristocracy, and so far as worldly
wealth was concerned, was far above Robert Rushton. But such
considerations never entered her mind, as she frankly, and with real
pleasure, accepted the escort of the poor factory boy.

Scarcely had she done so when Halbert Davis approached, smoothing his
kid gloves, and pulling at his necktie.

"Miss Hester," he said, consequentially, "I shall have great pleasure in
escorting you home."

"Thank you," said Hester, "but I am engaged."

"Engaged!" repeated Halbert, "and to whom?"

"Robert Rushton has kindly offered to take me home."

"Robert Rushton!" said Halbert, disdainfully. "Never mind. I will
relieve him of his duty."

"Thank you, Halbert," said Robert, who was standing by, "I won't trouble
you. I will see Miss Paine home."

"Your escort was accepted because you were the first to offer it," said
Halbert.

"Miss Hester," said Robert, "I will resign in favor of Halbert, if you
desire it."

"I don't desire it," said the young girl, promptly. "Come, Robert, I am
ready if you are."

With a careless nod to Halbert, she took Robert's arm, and left the
schoolhouse. Mortified and angry, Halbert looked after them, muttering,
"I'll teach the factory boy a lesson. He'll be sorry for his impudence
yet."




CHAPTER II.


PUNISHING A COWARD

Mrs. Rushton and her son occupied a little cottage, not far from the
factory. Behind it were a few square rods of garden, in which Robert
raised a few vegetables, working generally before or after his labor in
the factory. They lived in a very plain way, but Mrs. Rushton was an
excellent manager, and they had never lacked the common comforts of
life. The husband and father had followed the sea. Two years before, he
left the port of Boston as captain of the ship _Norman_, bound for
Calcutta. Not a word had reached his wife and son since then, and it was
generally believed that it had gone to the bottom of the sea. Mrs.
Rushton regarded herself as a widow, and Robert, entering the factory,
took upon himself the support of the family. He was now able to earn six
dollars a week, and this, with his mother's earnings in braiding straw
for a hat manufacturer in a neighboring town, supported them, though
they were unable to lay up anything. The price of a term at the writing
school was so small that Robert thought he could indulge himself in it,
feeling that a good handwriting was a valuable acquisition, and might
hereafter procure him employment in some business house. For the
present, he could not do better than to retain his place in the factory.

Robert was up at six the next morning. He spent half an hour in sawing
and splitting wood enough to last his mother through the day, and then
entered the kitchen, where breakfast was ready.

"I am a little late this morning, mother," he said. "I must hurry down
my breakfast, or I shall be late at the factory, and that will bring
twenty-five cents fine."

"It would be a pity to get fined, but you mustn't eat too fast. It is
not healthful."

"I've got a pretty good digestion, mother," said Robert, laughing.
"Nothing troubles me."

"Still, you mustn't trifle with it. Do you remember, Robert," added his
mother, soberly, "it is just two years to-day since your poor father
left us for Boston to take command of his ship?"

"So it is, mother; I had forgotten it."

"I little thought then that I should never see him again!" and Mrs.
Rushton sighed.

"It is strange we have never heard anything of the ship."

"Not so strange, Robert. It must have gone down when no other vessel was
in sight."

"I wish we knew the particulars, mother. Sometimes I think father may
have escaped from the ship in a boat, and may be still alive."

"I used to think it possible, Robert; but I have given up all hopes of
it. Two years have passed, and if your father were alive, we should have
seen him or heard from him ere this."

"I am afraid you are right. There's one thing I can't help thinking of,
mother," said Robert, thoughtfully. "How is it that father left no
property? He received a good salary, did he not?"

"Yes; he had received a good salary for several years."

"He did not spend the whole of it, did he?"

"No, I am sure he did not. Your father was never extravagant."

"Didn't he ever speak to you on the subject?"

"He was not in the habit of speaking of his business; but just before he
went away, I remember him telling me that he had some money invested,
and hoped to add more to it during the voyage which proved so fatal to
him."

"He didn't tell you how much it was, nor how it was invested?"

"No; that was all he said. Since his death, I have looked everywhere in
the house for some papers which would throw light upon it; but I have
been able to find nothing. I do not care so much for myself, but I
should be glad if you did not have to work so hard."

"Never mind me, mother; I'm young and strong, I can stand work--but it's
hard on you."

"I am rich in having a good son, Robert."

"And I in a good mother," said Robert, affectionately. "And, now, to
change the subject. I suspect I have incurred the enmity of Halbert
Davis."

"How is that?" asked Mrs. Rushton.

"I went home with Hester Paine, last evening, from writing school. Just
as she had accepted my escort, Halbert came up, and in a condescending
way, informed her that he would see her home."

"What did she say?"

"She told him she was engaged to me. He said, coolly, that he would
relieve me of the duty, but I declined his obliging offer. He looked mad
enough, I can tell you. He's full of self-conceit, and I suppose he
wondered how any one could prefer me to him."

"I am sorry you have incurred his enmity."

"I didn't lose any sleep by it."

"You know his father is the superintendent of the factory."

"Halbert isn't."

"But he may prejudice his father against you, and get you discharged."

"I don't think he would be quite so mean as that. We won't borrow
trouble, mother. But time's up, and I must go."

Robert seized his hat and hurried to the mill. He was in his place when
the great factory bell stopped ringing on the stroke of seven, and so
escaped the fine, which would have cut off one-quarter of a day's pay.

Meanwhile, Halbert Davis had passed an uncomfortable and restless night.
He had taken a fancy to Hester Paine, and he had fully determined to
escort her home on the previous evening. As she was much sought after
among her young companions, it would have gratified his pride to have it
known that she had accepted his company. But he had been cut out, and by
Robert Rushton--one of his father's factory hands. This made his
jealousy more intolerable, and humiliated his pride, and set him to work
devising schemes for punishing Robert's presumption. He felt that it was
Robert's duty, even though he had been accepted, to retire from the
field as soon as his, Halbert's, desire was known. This Robert had
expressly declined to do, and Halbert felt very indignant. He made up
his mind that he would give Robert a chance to apologize, and if he
declined to do so he would do what he could to get him turned out of the
factory.

At twelve o'clock the factory bell pealed forth a welcome sound to the
hundreds who were busily at work within the great building. It was the
dinner hour, and a throng of men, women and children poured out of the
great portals and hastened to their homes or boarding houses to dine.
Among them was Robert Rushton. As he was walking homeward with his usual
quick, alert step, he came upon Halbert Davis, at the corner of the
street.

Halbert was dressed carefully, and, as usual, was swinging his cane in
his gloved hand. Robert would have passed him with a nod, but Halbert,
who was waiting for him, called out:

"I say, you fellow, stop a minute. I want to speak to you."

"Are you addressing me?" asked Robert, with a pride as great as his own.

"Yes."

"Then you had better mend your manners."

"What do you mean?" demanded Halbert, his sallow face slightly flushing.

"My name is Robert Rushton. Call me by either of these names when you
speak to me, and don't say 'you fellow.'"

"It seems to me," sneered Halbert, "that you are putting on airs for a
factory boy."

"I am a factory boy, I acknowledge, and am not ashamed to acknowledge
it. Is this all you have to say to me? If so, I will pass on, as I am in
haste."

"I have something else to say to you. You were impudent to me last
evening."

