
"Dangle," said Clapperton, "we must stop that cad Corder's playing at
all cost.  It will upset everything.  Come and talk to him."

But Corder, perhaps with an inkling of what was in store for him, had
entrenched himself behind a number of other players, and in close
proximity to Ranger, who had evidently told himself off to see that the
last recruit of the fifteen was not tampered with.

The signals of the two seniors were studiously not observed, and when
Dangle, getting desperate, said--

"Corder, half a minute; Clapperton wants you."  Ranger interposed with--

"Come on, you fellows, it's time we got into our flannels," and
effectually checkmated the manoeuvre.

"If he doesn't get paid out for this," growled Clapperton, "I'm precious
mistaken."

"Yes; and the other fellows must see that he is.  If this sort of thing
spreads, we may as well cave in at once."

The Rendlesham fellows hovered about under shelter till the last moment,
grumbling at the weather, the grass, and the dock.  At length the
Fellsgarth boys put in an appearance; sides were solemnly tossed for,
and the order to "spread out" was given.

"Hullo!" said one of the Rendlesham men as he passed Clapperton and
Dangle, "why aren't you playing?  Afraid of the cold?"

"No, we scratched because--"

"Have you got that big man down who was so hot in the scrimmages?  I
forget his name.  _He's_ not one of the delicate ones, I fancy."

"No more are we; we're not playing because--"

"Hullo! they're waiting," said the player, and went off, leaving the
explanation still unfinished.

One of the last to run out was Corder.

"You young cad," growled Clapperton as he passed; "take my advice and
don't play, unless--"

"Come on, Corder--waiting," shouted Yorke.

Corder obeyed like lightning.

The match began disastrously for Fellsgarth.  Within five minutes of the
kick-off, a run up by one of the Rendlesham quarter-backs carried the
ball right into the School lines, and a touch-down resulted.  On a fine
day like last Saturday a goal would have been certain, but on the wet
grass, the try did not come off.  But five minutes later, a drop-kick
from the middle of the field by the Rendlesham captain secured a
magnificent goal for the home team.

Clapperton sneered.

"What I expected," said he.  "They'll be lucky if they don't lose a
dozen."

Yorke, on the contrary, was cheering up.  Bad as these opening ten
minutes had been, he fancied his team was not going to do so badly after
all.  The new players were working like mad in the scrimmage.  Ranger
was as quick on his feet in the wet as in the dry; and Corder at half-
back had been surprisingly steady.

Before kicking off again he made one or two changes.  He moved Ridgway,
who was a heavy weight, up into the forwards.  Corder, greatly to his
delight, was entrusted with the goal, and Fisher major moved up to half-
back.  The forwards were ordered on no account to break loose, but if
necessary to keep the ball among them till time was called.

Then, with his well-known "On you go!" he lacked off.

The ball was almost immediately locked up in a tight, fierce scrimmage.
The boys took the captain's advice with a vengeance, and held the ball
among their feet doggedly, neither letting it through on their side, nor
forcing it out on the side of the enemy.

At length, however, it could be seen filtering out sideways, just where
the captain was hovering outside the scrimmage.

"Let it come!" he whispered.  "Look out, Ranger!"

Next moment the ball was under his arm, and before any one realised that
the scrimmage was up, he was off with it and among the enemy's half-
backs.  The half-backs knew Yorke of old, and closed upon him before he
could double or get round them.

"Pass!" shouted Ranger.

It was beautifully done, while Yorke was falling and Ranger brushing
past.  The enemy's half-backs were not in it with the fleet Fellsgarth
runner, nor was their back; and to their own utter amazement, three
minutes later the School placed to their credit an easy goal.

Then did Clapperton and Dangle and Brinkman gnash their teeth till they
ached, and Fullerton, standing near, had his gibe.

"It was worth coming here in the rain to see that, wasn't it?"

The match was not yet over.  The Rendlesham men, startled into attention
by this unexpected rebuff, took care that such a misadventure should not
happen again, and making all the use they could of their superior
weight, bore down the scrimmages and forced the ball into the open.
Once they carried it through with a splendid rush, and their captain
picking it up under the very feet of the boys, ran it forward a few
yards, and took a drop-kick which missed by only a few inches.

A little later came Corder's chance.  He had lived all the term for this
moment.  If he was taken back to Fellsgarth on a shutter he would not
care, so long as he did himself credit now.

He had a clear field to start with, and was well out of touch before the
advance guard of the enemy bore down on him.  Then it was a sight to see
him wriggle and dodge, and twist and turn in and out among them,
threading them like a needle through a string of beads, and slipping
through their hands like an eel.

"Well played indeed, Corder!" cried Yorke.

Oh, what music was in the sound!  What would he not dare now!

On he went, now diving under an arm, now staggering round a leg; now
jumping like a kangaroo against an opponent.  The very sight of his
evolutions seemed to demoralise the Rendlesham men.  They floundered and
slid on the slippery grass, and made wild grabs without ever reaching
him.  It was really too ridiculous to be eluded by a raw hand like
this--and yet he eluded them.

Half-way down the field he ran with a roar of applause at his back, and
only a handful of the enemy left ahead.  How splendid if he could only
pass them, and make his record with a run from one goal to the other!

Alas! a swoop from behind greeted the proud thought; two hands clawed at
his shoulders, and from his shoulders slipped to his waist, and from his
waist slid down to his ankles, where for a moment they held, and sent
the runner tripping over on his nose in the mud, with the ball spinning
away a yard ahead.

It was all up.  No!  Fisher was on the spot, and at Fisher's heels
Ridgway.  The Rendlesham backs flung themselves in the way, but only to
divert, not to stop their career.  When Corder picked himself up and
rubbed the mud out of his eyes, the first thing he saw was Ridgway
sitting behind the enemy's line with the ball comfortably resting on his
knee!  It was another for the School--perhaps a goal.

Alas! on that ground the long side-kick was too much even for Yorke.  It
shot wide, and Rendlesham breathed again.

But the long and short of it was that the match was a tie; a goal and a
try to each side; and that to Corder belonged the credit of a big hand
in the lesser point.

"Awfully well run, Corder," said the captain, as, time having been
called, the two walked off the field together.  "You must play for us
again."

After that, who should say life was not worth living?

The very weather seemed to change for Corder.  The sun came out, flowers
sprang up at his feet, birds started singing in the trees overhead.
What a letter he would have to write home to-morrow!  The captain's pat
on the back sent a glow all through him.  Who wouldn't be a Fellsgarth
chap after all?

It scarcely damped his joy to perceive that neither Clapperton, Dangle,
nor Brinkman shared in the general congratulations, but looked more
black and threatening than ever as he passed.  Pooh! what did he care
for that!

How he enjoyed the glorious Rendlesham high tea, and the drive home in
the rain with everybody talking and laughing and rejoicing, singing
songs and shouting war-cries!  He was quite sorry when it came to an
end, and he had to dismount and go over alone to his own house.

He could hear the shouts and huzzas of the Classics across the Green as
Wakefield's turned out in a body to welcome their men.  No one at
Forder's turned out to welcome him.  The four prefects themselves had
not even waited for him.

For the first time that day Corder felt himself wishing he had a little
sympathy in his jubilation.  It was dull, when everybody over on the
other side was shouting himself hoarse, to hear not a "cheep" of
congratulation from his own fellows.

However, it didn't matter much.  He went to his room and changed, and
hoped his messmate Wilson would not be long in coming for supper and a
gossip.

Wilson came presently, but his face was glum and his manner frigid.

"Oh, here you are, old chap; I'm peckish.  Did you hear about the match,
we--"

"Shut up," said Wilson; "you're a cad.  I don't want to talk to you."

Corder put down his knife and fork, and looked up in amazement.  This
from Wilson!  He knew Clapperton was sore about it, but Wilson--

He went on eating while thinking it out, and Wilson ate too in silence,
and then rose to go.

"Are you not going to prepare to-night?"

"Yes, in Dangle's room."

And Corder was left alone.

This was too bad of Wilson--to-night of all nights.  He would go and
look up Selby.  Selby, he knew, would be interested in the day's news,
for had they not practised drop-kicks together for an hour a day all
this term?

Selby was in, but not at all glad to see him.

"Are you busy, old man?" asked Corder.

"I don't want you here," said Selby.

"Why, what's the row?"

"Row?  You're a sneak, that's the row.  Cut!"

Surely Selby must be out of sorts to talk like that.  Corder stood in
the door for a moment, on the off-chance that his friend might be
joking.  But no; Selby turned his back and began to read a book.

This was getting monotonous.  Corder returned to his study to think it
out a little more.  His fag, Cash, was there looking for a paper.

"Hullo, youngster! that you?  We didn't get beaten after all, to-day, I
suppose you heard."

Cash's reply was laconic, to say the least of it.  He turned round and
put out his tongue.

"None of your cheek, I say," said Corder, "or I'll--"

"How _dare_ you speak to me!" said the junior; "you're a cad--I'm not
going to fag for a cad."

And he vanished.

Corder went to bed that night sorely perplexed.  And his perplexity was
not relieved when he rose next morning and found a paper on his table
with the following genial notice:--

"Any boy in Forder's found speaking to Corder the sneak will be cut by
the house.  By Order."



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE SHOP OPENS.

Robert--no one knew his surname--was a regular institution at
Fellsgarth.  Pluralist and jack-of-all-trades as he was, he seemed
unable to make much of a hand at anything he took up.  He was School
porter, owner of the School shop, keeper of the club properties, and
occasional School policeman; and he discharged none of his functions
well.  The masters did not regard him with much confidence, the boys,
for the most part, did not care for him, the other men about the place
disliked him.  And yet, as part and parcel of Fellsgarth, every one put
up with him.

As has already been hinted, his management of the School shop had been a
conspicuous failure--both for himself and the young innocents who
squandered their substance on his tarts.  He complained that he could
make no profit; and as his method for recouping himself was to supply
the worst possible article at the highest possible price, his young
customers neglected him and aggravated his loss.

It was rumoured that another more questionable method of replenishing
his exchequer was by laying odds on the School games, which (as in the
case of the second Rendlesham match) did not always turn out in the way
he expected.  This, however, was only rumour, and was not to be reckoned
among Bob's known transgressions, which were general stupidity,
surliness, unsteadiness, and an inveterate distaste for veracity.

Such being his reputation, it astonished no one on the Monday following
the events recorded in the last chapter to see the shutters of the shop
at the Watch-tower Gate up, and a rudely scrawled announcement, "This
shop is closed."

But what did cause astonishment was a subsequent announcement inscribed
in print letters:--

"This establishment will reopen on Wednesday under entirely new
management.  Superior grub at greatly reduced prices.  No more shoe-
leather or flat swipes!  Best tarts 1 penny each; ditto ginger-beer 11/2
pence a bottle.  Fresh fruit and pastry daily.  Rally round the old
shop!

"By Order."

Speculation ran high as to who the enterprising new tradesman could be.
Some said it was Mrs Wisdom.  Others said one of the Penchurch shops
was going to run it as a branch.  Others suggested that some of the
seniors had a hand in it.  But the truth never once leaked out.

Our nine juniors played an artful part in that day's business.  They
mingled with the crowd in front of the notice, and freely bandied about
wild conjectures as to who the new manager or managers could be, at the
same time hinting broadly that _they_ intended to patronise the new
concern.

"Tell you what," said D'Arcy, "perhaps it's the doctor wants to turn an
honest penny.  Don't blame him either."

"Perhaps it's Rollitt," suggested Cash, amid laughter.  "What a game!
He'll go selling tarts by the pint and ginger-beer by the ounce.  Whew!
think of Rollitt's ginger-beer."

"I asked Bob if he knew who it was," said Wally, "and he said, `No, he
wished he did; he'd get something out of him for good-will.'"

"What's that?" asked Ashby.  "If he'd said bad temper, there might have
been some of that going about."

"Anyhow," said Wally, "I rather fancy the thing myself.  The things
can't be worse than they have been, and if they're fresh every day,
they're bound to be better, and the tarts are a halfpenny less, and so's
the ginger-pop."

"Hooroo!" said Cottle; "you can get half as much again for the same
money.  I wish they'd open to-day."

After which, one by one they tailed off, leaving a general impression
behind them that whoever else was in the secret, these nine young
innocent lambs were not.

Matters had not advanced to this stage without considerable
deliberation.  Several committee meetings had been held, some of which,
under Mr Stratton's presidency, had been of a practical nature, others,
without his controlling presence, had ended in dust.  On the whole,
however, the young merchant adventurers had exhibited a reasonable grasp
of their responsibilities and an aptitude for dealing with the necessary
details.

One point discussed was whether the shop should be open all day, or only
at certain times.  Mr Stratton was in favour of the latter.  He urged
that during the off hours between eleven and twelve, and in the
afternoon between four and six, would be ample.

The committee argued, from personal experience, that there were other
hours of the day when a fellow felt in the humour for a "blow out."  To
this Mr Stratton replied, "Let him `blow out' by all means, but not on
the company's premises.  He could do his shopping during shop hours, and
`blow out' with his purchases at any hour of the day or night the School
rules permitted.  They couldn't undertake to provide a banqueting hall
for their customers."

"But," urged the committee, "if you have a shopman, why not get your
money's worth out of him?"

"Why waste our money on a shopman at all?" propounded Mr Stratton to
his astounded fellow-directors.  "Why not take turns behind the counter
ourselves; say one of the Wheatfields and Cash one week, and Cottle and
Ashby the next, and so on?  The hours proposed were not school hours;
and though the persons on duty might occasionally be done out of a game,
still it would fall on all alike, and would be a little sacrifice for
the common good."

"But," said Percy, whose hair was on end at this tremendous proposition,
"suppose Wally--that is, I mean, wouldn't it be necessary to count the
tarts before each chap went on duty and see how many there were at the
end?"

"It might with you and your lot," retorted Wally, very red in the face.
"It'd be best to have a weighing machine handy and charge you 8 pence a
pound for every pound extra you weighed at the end of the day!"

"We'll neither count nor weigh," said Mr Stratton; "we'll trust to
every fellow's honour.  Why, if we couldn't do that, do you suppose the
shop would keep open a week?"

This impressed the meeting vastly, and the discussion was changed to the
question of profits.

The boys were in favour of screwing all they could out of their
customers.  They didn't see why, if Bob sold bad tarts for three-
halfpence, they shouldn't sell good ones at least for the same price.

"It's giving it to 'em both ends," said they.

"Why not?" said the master.  "We want the fellows to get the benefit.
We don't want all the profit.  As it is, we shall make a farthing on
