disease.

Dishonesty destroys one's ability to heal mentally. Conceit cannot avert
the effects of deceit. Taking advantage of the present ignorance in
relation to Christian Science Mind-healing, many are flooding our land with
conflicting theories and practice. We should not spread abroad patchwork
ideas that in some vital points lack Science. How sad it is that envy will
bend its bow and shoot its arrow at the idea which claims only its
inheritance, is naturally modest, generous, and sincere! while the
trespassing error murders either friend or foe who stands in its way. Truly
it is better to fall into the hands of God, than of man.

When I revised "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," in 1878,
some irresponsible people insisted that my manual of the practice of
Christian Science Mind-healing should not be made public; but I obeyed a
diviner rule. People dependent on the rules of this practice for their
healing, not having lost the Spirit which sustains the genuine practice,
will put that book in the hands of their patients, whom it will heal, and
recommend it to their students, whom it would enlighten. Every teacher must
pore over it in secret, to keep himself well informed. The Nemesis of the
history of Mind-healing notes this hour.

Dishonesty necessarily stultifies the spiritual sense which Mind-healers
specially need; and which they must possess, in order to be safe members of
the community. How good and pleasant a thing it is to seek not so much
thine own as another's good, to sow by the wayside for the way-weary, and
trust Love's recompense of love.

Plagiarism from my writings is so common it is becoming odious to honest
people; and such compilations, instead of possessing the essentials of
Christian Science, are tempting and misleading.

Reading Science and Health has restored the sick to health; but the task
of learning thoroughly the Science of Mind-healing and demonstrating it
understandingly had better be undertaken in health than sickness.




DISEASE UNREAL

Disease is more than _imagination_; it is a human error, a constituent part
of what comprise the whole of mortal existence,--namely, material sensation
and mental delusion. But an erring sense of existence, or the error of
belief, named disease, never made sickness a stubborn reality. On the
ground that harmony is the truth of being, the Science of Mind-healing
destroys the feasibility of disease; hence error of thought becomes fable
instead of fact. Science demonstrates the reality of Truth and the
unreality of the error. A self-evident proposition, in the Science of
Mind-healing, is that disease is unreal; and the efficacy of my system,
beyond other systems of medicine, vouches for the validity of that
statement. Sin and disease are not scientific, because they embody not the
idea of divine Principle, and are not the phenomena of the immutable laws
of God; and they do not arise from the divine consciousness and true
constituency of being.

The unreality of sin, disease, and death, rests on the exclusive truth that
being, to be eternal, must be harmonious. All disease must be--and can only
be--healed on this basis. All true Christian Scientists are vindicating,
fearlessly and honestly, the Principle of this grand verity of
Mind-healing.

In erring mortal thought the reality of Truth has an antipode,--the reality
of error; and disease is one of the severe realities of this error. God has
no opposite in Science. To Truth there is no error. As Truth alone is real,
then it follows that to declare error real would be to make it Truth.
Disease arises from a false and material sense, from the belief that matter
has sensation. Therefore this material sense, which is untrue, is of
necessity unreal. Moreover, this unreal sense substitutes for Truth an
unreal belief,--namely, that life and health are independent of God, and
dependent on material conditions. Material sense also avers that Spirit, or
Truth, cannot restore health and perpetuate life, but that material
conditions can and do destroy both human health and life.

If disease is as real as health, and is itself a state of being, and yet is
arrayed against being, then Mind, or God, does not meddle with it. Disease
becomes indeed a stubborn reality, and man is mortal. A "kingdom divided
against itself is brought to desolation;" therefore the mind that attacks a
normal and real condition of man, is profanely tampering with the realities
of God and His laws. Metaphysical healing is a lost jewel in this
misconception of reality. Any contradictory fusion of Truth with error, in
both theory and practice, prevents one from healing scientifically, and
makes the last state of one's patients worse than the first. If disease is
real it is not illusive, and it certainly would contradict the Science of
Mind-healing to attempt to destroy the realities of Mind in order to heal
the sick.

On the theory that God's formations are spiritual, harmonious, and eternal,
and that God is the only creator, Christian Science refutes the validity of
the testimony of the senses, which take cognizance of their own
phenomena,--sickness, disease, and death. This refutation is indispensable
to the destruction of false evidence, and the consequent cure of the
sick,--as all understand who practise the true Science of Mind-healing. If,
as the error indicates, the evidence of disease is not false, then disease
cannot be healed by denying its validity; and this is why the mistaken
healer is not successful, trying to heal on a material basis.

The evidence that the earth is motionless and the sun revolves around our
planet, is as sensible and real as the evidence for disease; but Science
determines the evidence in both cases to be unreal. To material sense it is
plain also that the error of the revolution of the sun around the earth is
more apparent than the adverse but true Science of the stellar universe.
Copernicus has shown that what appears real, to material sense and feeling,
is absolutely unreal. Astronomy, optics, acoustics, and hydraulics are all
at war with the testimony of the physical senses. This fact intimates that
the laws of Science are mental, not material; and Christian Science
demonstrates this.




SCIENCE OF MIND-HEALING


The rule of divinity is golden; to be wise and true rejoices every heart.
But evil influences waver the scales of justice and mercy. No personal
considerations should allow any root of bitterness to spring up between
Christian Scientists, nor cause any misapprehension as to the motives of
others. We must love our enemies, and continue to do so unto the end. By
the love of God we can cancel error in our own hearts, and blot it out of
others.

Sooner or later the eyes of sinful mortals must be opened to see every
error they possess, and the way out of it; and they will "flee as a bird to
your mountain," away from the enemy of sinning sense, stubborn will, and
every imperfection in the land of Sodom, and find rescue and refuge in
Truth and Love.

Every loving sacrifice for the good of others is known to God, and the
wrath of man cannot hide it from Him. God has appointed for Christian
Scientists high tasks, and will not release them from the strict
performance of each one of them. The students must now fight their own
battles. I recommend that Scientists draw no lines whatever between one
person and another, but think, speak, teach, and write the truth of
Christian Science without reference to right or wrong personality in this
field of labor. Leave the distinctions of individual character and the
discriminations and guidance thereof to the Father, whose wisdom is
unerring and whose love is universal.

We should endeavor to be long-suffering, faithful, and charitable with all.
To this small effort let us add one more privilege--namely, silence
whenever it can substitute censure. Avoid voicing error; but utter the
truth of God and the beauty of holiness, the joy of Love and "the peace of
God, that passeth all understanding," recommending to all men fellowship in
the bonds of Christ. Advise students to rebuke each other always in love,
as I have rebuked them. Having discharged this duty, counsel each other to
work out his own salvation, without fear or doubt, knowing that God will
make the wrath of man to praise Him, and that the remainder thereof He will
restrain. We can rejoice that every germ of goodness will at last struggle
into freedom and greatness, and every sin will so punish itself that it
will bow down to the commandments of Christ,--Truth and Love.

I enjoin it upon my students to hold no controversy or enmity over
doctrines and traditions, or over the misconceptions of Christian Science,
but to work, watch, and pray for the amelioration of sin, sickness, and
death. If one be found who is too blind for instruction, no longer cast
your pearls before this state of mortal mind, lest it turn and rend you;
but quietly, with benediction and hope, let the unwise pass by, while you
walk on in equanimity, and with increased power, patience, and
understanding, gained from your forbearance. This counsel is not new, as
my Christian students can testify; and if it had been heeded in times past
it would have prevented, to a great extent, the factions which have sprung
up among Scientists to the hindrance of the Cause of Truth. It is true that
the mistakes, prejudices, and errors of one class of thinkers must not be
introduced or established among another class who are clearer and more
