They passed into a steep incline. Now down the upper arm, she recalled.

"I feel like Eurydice," she said aloud.

_You ... funny ..._ an echoing voice sounded in her skull.

"Hey," she said. "What was that?" But the voice was silent. The wall
turned abruptly and the floor leveled out. They were in a section of the
passage now that corresponded roughly to the statue's radial artery. At
the wrist, there was a light. They mounted a stairway, came out a trap
door, and found themselves standing high in the temple. Below them the
great room spread, vastly deep, and still empty. Beside them, the stems
of the bronze wheat stalks rose up through the fist and spired another
fifty feet before breaking into clusters of golden grain and leaves.
Across from them, over the dark curve of Gargantuan chest, in the
statue's other hand, the shaft of the scythe leaned away into shadow.

"Look," she said. "You follow me now." She started back along the top of
the forearm and then began the tedious climb over the rippling biceps,
till at last they reached the broad shoulder. They walked across the
hollow above the collar bone until they stood just below the great
scooping shell of the ear.

She took the paper bag she had stuffed into her belt, tied one end of
the string around the neck, and then, holding the other, she heaved the
bag up and over the ear. She got the other end of the string, knotted it
as high as she could reach, and gave it a tug. "I hope this works," she
said. "I had it all figured out yesterday. The tensile strength of this
stuff is about two hundred and fifty pounds, which ought to do for you
and me." She planted her foot on the swell of the neck tendon, and in
seven leaps she made it to the lobe of the ear. She swung around into
the hollow, using the frontal wing as a pivot. Crouching in the hollow
trumpet, she looked down at Snake. "Come up," she said. "Hurry up."

Snake joined her a moment later.

The ear was hollow, too. It led back into a cylindrical chamber which
went up through the head of the god. The architect who had designed the
statue had conveniently left the god's lid flipped. They climbed the
ladder and emerged amid the tangle of pipes which represented the hair
of the god. They made their way forward through the mass of pipes to
where the forehead sloped dangerously forward. They could see the
foreshortened nose and the rim of the statue's middle eye above that.
There wasn't much of anything after that for the next thousand feet
until the base of the altar. "Now you can really be some help," she told
him. "Hold on to my wrist and let me down. I'll get the jewel."

They grabbed wrists, and Snake's three other hands, as well as the
joints of his knees, locked around the base of five pipes that sprouted
around them.

Slowly she slid forward, until her free hand slipped on the stone and
she dropped the length of their two arms and swung just above the
statue's nose. The eye opened in front of her. The lid arced above her,
and the white of either side of the ebony iris shone faintly in the half
darkness. At the center of the iris, in a small hollow, sitting on the
top of a metal support, was the jewel.

She reached her free hand toward it as she swung.

From somewhere a gong suddenly sounded. Light flooded over her. Looking
up, she saw white sockets of light shining down into her own eyes.
Panicking, she almost released Snake's wrist. But a voice in her head
(hers or someone else's, she couldn't tell) rang out. _Hold ... on ...
damn ... it ..._

Then she grabbed the jewel. The metal shaft in which the jewel had stood
was not steady, and tilted as her hand came away from it. The tilting
must have set off some clockwork mechanism, because the great eyelid was
slowly lowering over the ivory and ebony eye. She swung again at the end
of the rope of bone and flesh; half blinded by the lights above her, she
looked over her shoulder, into the temple below. There was singing, the
beginning of a processional hymn. The morning rites had started!

Light glinted on the stone limbs of the god. Figures were pouring into
the temple. They must have seen her, but the hymn, sonorous and
gigantic, rose like flood water, and she suddenly thought that if she
fell, she would drown in the sound of it.

Snake was pulling her up. Stone against her arm, against her cheek. She
clenched her other fist tightly at her side. Another hand came down and
helped pull her. Then another. Then she was lying among the metal pipes,
and he was loosening her fingers from his wrist. He tugged her to her
feet, and for a moment she was looking out over the now filled temple.

Nervous energy contracted coldly along her body, and the sudden sight of
the great drop filled her eyes and her head, and she staggered. Snake
caught her and at last helped her back to the ladder. "We've got it,"
she said to him before they started down. She breathed deeply. Then she
checked in her palm to see if it was still there; it was, and again she
looked out over the people below. Light on the up-turned faces made them
look like scattered pearls on the dark floor. An exaltation suddenly
burst in her shoulders, flooded her legs and arms and for a moment
washed the pain away. Snake, with one hand on her shoulder, was grinning
also. "We've got it!" she said again.

They went down the ladder into the statue's skull. Snake preceded her
out the hollow ear. He reached around, caught the cord, and let himself
down to the shoulder.

She hesitated for a moment, then put the jewel in her mouth, and
followed him. Standing beside him once more, she removed it, and then
rubbed her shoulders. "Boy, am I going to have some Charley horse by
tomorrow," she said. "Do me a favor and untie my bag for me?"

Snake untied the parcel from the end of the cord, and together now they
climbed down the bicep and back over the forearm to the trap door in the
wrist.

She glanced down at the faces of the worshipers just before they
disappeared into the tunnel. Snake was taking the jewel from her hand.
She let him have it, and watched him raise it up above his head.

Immediately, when he raised the jewel, the pearls of faces went out like
extinguished flames as heads bent all through the temple.

"That's the ticket," grinned Argo. "Come on." But Snake did not go into
the tunnel. Instead he walked around the fist, took hold of one of the
bronze wheat stems, and slid down through an opening between the thumb
and forefinger. "That way?" asked Argo. "Oh well, I guess so. You know
I'm going to write an epic about this."

But Snake had already gone. She followed him, clutching her feet around
a great bunch of stems. He was waiting for her at the plateau of leaves,
and nestled there, they gazed out once more at the fascinated
congregation.

Again Snake held aloft the jewel, and again heads bowed. The hymn began
to repeat itself, the individual words lost in the sonority of the hall.
They started down the last length of stems now, coming quickly. When
they stood at last on the base, she put her hand on his shoulder and
looked across the brass altar rail. The congregation pressed close,
although she did not recognize an individual face. Yet a mass of people
stood there, enormous and familiar. As Snake started forward, holding up
the jewel, the people fell back from the rail. Snake climbed over the
altar rail, and then helped her over.

Her shoulders were beginning to hurt now, and the enormity of the theft
ran chills up and down, up and down her spine. The black marble altar
step as she put her foot down was awfully cold.

They started forward again, and the last note of the hymn echoed to
silence, filling the hall with the roaring quiet of the hushed breathing
of hundreds.

Simultaneously, both she and Snake got the urge to look back at the
great diminishing height of Hama behind them. All three eyes were shut
firmly now. A quiet composed of the rustling of a hundred dark robes
upon another hundred hissed about them as they started forward again.

There was a spotlight on them, she suddenly realized. That was why the
people, hovering back from the circular effulgence over the floor around
them seemed so dim. Her heart had become a pulse at the bottom of her
tongue. They kept on going forward, into the shadowed faces, into the
parting sea of dark cloaks and hoods.

Then the last of the figures stepped aside from the temple door, and she
could see the sunlight out in the garden. They stood still for a
moment, Snake holding high the jewel; then they burst forward, out
through the door and down over the bright steps.

Instantly the hymn began again behind them, as if their departure had
been a signal. The music flooded after them, and when they reached the
bottom step, they both whirled, crouching like animals, expecting the
congregation to come welling darkly out after them. But there was only
the music, flowing into the light, washing around them, a transparent
river, a sea.

    "_Freeze the drop in the hand,
    and break the earth with singing.
    Hail the height of a man,
    and also the height of a woman._"

Over the music came a brittle chirping from the trees. Fixed with fear,
they watched the temple door as the hymn progressed. Then Snake suddenly
stood up straight and grinned.

She scratched her red hair, shifted her weight, and looked at Snake. "I
guess they're not coming," she said, sounding almost disappointed. Then
she giggled. "Well, I guess we got it."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Don't move," repeated Hama Incarnate.

"Now look--" began Urson.

"You are perfectly safe," the god continued, "unless you do anything
foolish. You have shown great wisdom. Continue to show it. I have a lot
to explain to you."

"Like what?" asked Geo.

"I'll start with the lizards," smiled the god.

"The what?" asked Iimmi.

"The singing lizards," said Hama. "You walked through a grove of trees
just a few minutes ago. You had just been through a series of happenings
that was probably the most frightening in your life. Suddenly you heard
a singing in the trees. What was it?"

"I thought it was a bird," Iimmi said.

"But why a bird?" asked the god.

"Because that's what a bird sounds like," stated Urson impatiently. "Who
needs an old lizard singing to them on a morning like this?"

"Your second point is much better than your first," said the god. "You
do not need a lizard, but you did need a bird. A bird means spring,
life, good luck, cheerfulness. You think of a bird singing and you think
of thoughts that men have been thinking for thousands upon thousands of
years. Poets have written of it in every language, Catullus in Latin,
Keats in English, Li Po in Chinese, Darnel X24 in New English. You
expected a bird because after what you had been through, you needed to
hear a bird. Lizards run from under wet rocks, scurry over gravestones.
A lizard is not what you needed."

"So what do lizards have to do with why we're here?" demanded Urson.

"Why are you here?" repeated the god, subtly changing Urson's question.
"There are many reasons, I am sure. You tell me some of them."

"You have done wrongs to Argo--at least to Argo of Leptar," Geo
explained. "We have come to undo them. You have kidnaped the young Argo,
as well as her mother apparently. We have come to take her back. You
have misused the jewels. We have come to take the last one from you."

Hama smiled. "Only a poet could see the wisdom in such honesty. I
thought I might have to wheedle to get that much out of you."

"I guess it was pretty certain that you knew that much already," Geo
said.

"True," answered Hama. Then his tone changed. "Do you know how the
jewels work?"

They shook their heads.

"They are basically very simple mechanical contrivances which are
difficult in execution, but simple in concept. I will explain. Human
thoughts, it was discovered after the Great Fire during the first
glorious years of the City of New Hope, did not produce waves similar to
radio waves, but the electrical synapse pattern, it was found, can be
read by radio waves, in the same way a mine detector reads the
existence of metal."

"Radio?" Geo said.

"That's right," Hama said. "Oh, I forgot, you don't know anything about
that at all. Well, I can't go through the whole thing now. Suffice it to
say that each of the jewels contains a carefully honed crystal which is
constantly sending out beams which can read these thought patterns. Also
the crystal acts like a magnifying glass or a mirror, and reflects and
magnifies the energy from the brain into heat or light or any other kind
of electromagnetic radiation--there I go again--so that you can send
great bolts of heat with them, as you have seen done.

"But the actual workings of them are not important. And their ability to
send heat out is only their secondary power. Their primary importance is
that they can be used to penetrate the mind. Now we come to the
lizards."

"Wait a minute," Geo said. "Before we get to the lizards. Do you mean go
into minds like Snake does?" Suddenly he remembered that the boy was not
there.

But the god went on. "Like Snake," he said. "But different. Snake was
born with the ability to transmute the brain patterns of his thoughts to
others; in that he has a power something like the jewels, but nowhere as
strong. But with the jewels, you can jam a person's thoughts...."

"Just go into his mind and stop him from thinking?" asked Iimmi.

"No," said the god. "Conscious thought is too powerful. Otherwise, you
would stop thinking every time Snake spoke to you. It works another way.
How many reasons does a man have for any single action?"

They looked at him uncomprehendingly.

"Why, for example, does a man pull his hand from a fire?"

"Because it hurts," said Urson. "Why else?"

"Yes, why else?" asked Hama.

"I think I see what you mean," said Iimmi. "He also pulls it out because
he knows that outside the fire his hand isn't going to hurt. Like the
bird, I mean the lizard. One reason we reacted like we did was because
it sounded like a bird. The other reason was because we wanted to hear
a bird just then. The man pulls his hand out because the fire hurts, and
because he wants it not to hurt."

"In other words," Geo summarized, "there are at least two reasons for
everything."

"Exactly," explained Hama. "And notice that one of these reasons is
unconscious. But with the jewel, you can jam the unconscious reason; so
that if a man has his hand in a fire, you can jam his unconscious reason
of wanting it to stop hurting. Completely bewildered, and in no less
pain, he will stand there until his wrist is a smoking nub."

Geo reached over and felt his severed arm.

"Dictators during the entire history of this planet have used similar
techniques. By not letting the people of their country know what
conditions existed outside their boundaries, they could get the people
to fight to stay in those conditions. It was the old adage, convince a
slave that he's free, and he will fight to maintain his slavery. Why
does a poet sing? Because he likes music; and because silence frightens
him. Why does a thief steal? To get the goods from his victim; also to
prove that his victim cannot get him."

"That's how Argo got Snake back," Geo said to Urson. "I see now. He was
just thinking of running away, and she jammed his desire not to get
caught; so he had nothing to direct him in which direction to run. So he
ran where she told him, straight back to her."

"That's right," Hama said. "But something else was learned when these
jewels were invented. Or rather a lesson which history should have
taught us thousands of years ago was finally driven home. No man can
wield absolute power over other men and still retain his own mind. For
no matter how good his intentions are when he takes up the power, his
alternate reason is that freedom, the freedom of the people and
ultimately his own, terrifies him. Only a man afraid of freedom would
want this power, would conceive of wielding it. And that fear of freedom
will turn him into a slave of this power. For this reason, the jewels
are evil. That is why we have summoned you to steal them from us."

"To steal them from you?" asked Geo. "Why couldn't you have simply
destroyed them when you had them."

"We have already been infected," smiled the god. "We are a small band
here on Aptor. To reach the state of organization, to collect the
scattered scientific knowledge of the times before the Great Fire, was
not easy. Too often the jewels have been used, and abused, and now we
cannot destroy it. We would have to destroy ourselves first. We kidnaped
Argo and left you the second jewel, hoping that you would come after the
third and last one. Now you have come, and now the jewel is being
stolen."

"Snake?" asked Geo.

"That's right," replied Hama.

"But I thought he was your spy," Geo said.

"That he is our spy is his unconscious reason for his actions,"
explained Hama. "He is aware only that he is working against the evil he
has seen in Jordde. Spy is too harsh a word for him. Say, rather, little
thief. He became a spy for us quite unwittingly when he was on the
island as a child with Jordde. I have explained something to you of how
the mind works. We have machines that can duplicate what Snake does in a
