full of tears: "In Heaven!"

Now that he was with God, the last ties which kept his consoling
Angel in the world were broken. Angels do not remain on this
earth; when they have accomplished their mission, they return
instantly to Heaven. That is why they have wings. Celine tried
therefore to fly to the Carmel; but the obstacles seemed
insurmountable. One day, when matters were going from bad to
worse, I said to Our Lord after Holy Communion: "Thou knowest,
dear Jesus, how earnestly I have desired that the trials my Father
endured should serve as his purgatory. I long to know if my wish
is granted. I do not ask Thee to speak to me, I only want a sign.
Thou knowest how much opposed is Sister N. to Celine's entering;
if she withdraw her opposition, I shall regard it as an answer
from Thee, and in this way I shall know that my Father went
straight to Heaven."

God, Who holds in His Hand the hearts of His creatures, and
inclines them as He will, deigned in His infinite mercy and
ineffable condescension to change that Sister's mind. She was the
first person I met after my thanksgiving, and, with tears in her
eyes, she spoke of Celine's entrance, which she now ardently
desired. Shortly afterwards the Bishop set every obstacle aside,
and then you were able, dear Mother, without any hesitation, to
open our doors to the poor little exile.[6]

Now I have no desire left, unless it be to love Jesus even unto
folly! It is Love alone that draws me. I no longer wish either for
suffering or death, yet both are precious to me. Long did I call
upon them as the messengers of joy. I have suffered much, and I
have thought my barque near indeed to the Everlasting Shore. From
earliest childhood I have imagined that the Little Flower would be
gathered in its springtime; now, the spirit of self-abandonment
alone is my guide. I have no other compass, and know not how to
ask anything with eagerness, save the perfect accomplishment of
God's designs upon my soul. I can say these words of the Canticle
of our Father, St. John of the Cross:

"I drank deep in the cellar of my Friend, And, coming forth again,
Knew naught of all this plain, And lost the flock I erst was wont
to tend. My soul and all its wealth I gave to be His Own; No more
I tend my flock, all other work is done, And all my exercise is
Love alone."[7]

Or rather:

"Love hath so wrought in me Since I have known its sway, That all
within me, whether good or ill, It makes subservient to the end it
seeks, And soon transforms my soul into itself."[8]

Full sweet is the way of Love. It is true one may fall and be
unfaithful to grace; but Love, knowing how to profit by
everything, quickly consumes whatever is displeasing to Jesus,
leaving in the heart only a deep and humble peace. I have obtained
many spiritual lights through the works of St. John of the Cross.
When I was seventeen and eighteen they were my only food; but,
later on, and even now, all spiritual authors leave me cold and
dry. However beautiful and touching a book may be, my heart does
not respond, and I read without understanding, or, if I
understand, I cannot meditate. In my helplessness the Holy
Scriptures and the _Imitation_ are of the greatest assistance; in
them I find a hidden manna, genuine and pure. But it is from the
Gospels that I find most help in the time of prayer; from them I
draw all that I need for my poor soul. I am always discovering in
them new lights and hidden mysterious meanings. I know and I have
experienced that "the Kingdom of God is within us."[9] Our Lord
has no need of books or teachers to instruct our souls. He, the
Teacher of Teachers, instructs us without any noise of words. I
have never heard Him speak, yet I know He is within me. He is
there, always guiding and inspiring me; and just when I need them,
lights, hitherto unseen, break in. This is not as a rule during my
prayers, but in the midst of my daily duties. Sometimes, however,
as this evening, at the close of a meditation spent in utter
dryness, a word of comfort is given to me: "Here is the Master I
give thee, He will teach thee all that thou shouldst do. I wish
thee to read in the Book of Life in which is contained the science
of love. . . ."[10]

The Science of Love! How sweetly do these words echo in my soul!
That science alone do I desire. Having given all my substance for
it, like the Spouse in the Canticles, "I think that I have given
nothing."[11] After so many graces, may I not sing with the
Psalmist that "the Lord is good, that His Mercy endureth for
ever"?[12]

It seems to me that if everyone were to receive such favours God
would be feared by none, but loved to excess; that no one would
ever commit the least wilful fault--and this through love, not
fear.

Yet all souls cannot be alike. It is necessary that they should
differ from one another in order that each Divine Perfection may
receive its special honour. To me, He has given His Infinite
Mercy, and it is in this ineffable mirror that I contemplate his
other attributes. Therein all appear to me radiant with Love. His
Justice, even more perhaps than the rest, seems to me to be
clothed with Love. What joy to think that Our Lord is just, that
is to say, that He takes our weakness into account, that He knows
perfectly the frailty of our nature! Of what, then, need I be
afraid?

Will not the God of Infinite Justice, Who deigns so lovingly to
pardon the sins of the Prodigal Son, be also just to me "who am
always with Him"?[13]

In the year 1895 I received the grace to understand, more than
ever, how much Jesus desires to be loved. Thinking one day of
those who offer themselves as victims to the Justice of God, in
order to turn aside the punishment reserved for sinners by taking
it upon themselves, I felt this offering to be noble and generous,
but was very far from feeling myself drawn to make it. "O my
Divine Master," I cried from the bottom of my heart, "shall Thy
Justice alone receive victims of holocaust? Has not Thy Merciful
Love also need thereof? On all sides it is ignored, rejected . . .
the hearts on which Thou wouldst lavish it turn to creatures,
there to seek their happiness in the miserable satisfaction of a
moment, instead of casting themselves into Thine Arms, into the
unfathomable furnace of Thine Infinite Love.

"O my God! must Thy Love which is disdained lie hidden in Thy
Heart? Methinks, if Thou shouldst find souls offering themselves
as victims of holocaust to Thy Love, Thou wouldst consume them
rapidly; Thou wouldst be well pleased to suffer the flames of
infinite tenderness to escape that are imprisoned in Thy Heart.

"If Thy Justice--which is of earth--must needs be satisfied, how
much more must Thy Merciful Love desire to inflame souls, since
_"Thy mercy reacheth even to the Heavens"_?[14] O Jesus! Let me be
that happy victim--consume Thy holocaust with the Fire of Divine
Love!"

Dear Mother, you know the love, or rather the oceans of grace
which flooded my soul immediately after I made that Act of
Oblation on June 9, 1895. From that day I have been penetrated and
surrounded with love. Every moment this Merciful Love renews me
and purifies me, leaving in my soul no trace of sin. I cannot fear
Purgatory; I know I do not merit to enter, even, into that place
of expiation with the Holy Souls, but I also know that the fire of
Love is more sanctifying than the fire of Purgatory. I know that
Jesus could not wish useless suffering for us, and He would not
inspire me with the desires I feel, were He not willing to fulfill
them.
______________________________

[1] Psalm 102[103]:14.

[2] Phil. 4:7.

[3] This letter, the style of which may seem strange to English
ears, is modelled closely on the formal and quaint letters whereby
French parents of the better class announce to their friends the
marriage of their children. Such letters of _"faire-part"_ are
issued in the name of relatives to the third or fourth degree.
[Ed.]

[4] Therese had kept this wish hidden in her heart from the days
of her childhood, and later in life she made the following
confidence: "I was ten the day Papa told Celine that she was to
begin painting lessons. I felt quite envious. Then he turned to me
and said: 'Well, little Queen, would you like to learn painting
too?' I was going to say: 'Yes, indeed I should,' when Marie
remarked that I had not the same taste for it as Celine. She
carried her point, and I said nothing, thinking it was a splendid
opportunity to make a big sacrifice for Our Lord; I was so anxious
to learn, that even now I wonder how I was able to keep silence."

[5] Eccl. 2:11.

[6] Celine entered the Convent on September 14, 1894, and took the
name of Sister Genevieve of St. Teresa.

[7] Spiritual Canticle: Stanzas 18 and 20.

[8] Hymn to the Deity.

[9] Luke 17:21.

[10] Revelation of Our Lord to Bd. Margaret Mary.

[11] Cant. 8:7.

[12] Psalm 103[104]:1.

[13] Luke 15:31.

[14] Cf. Psalm 35[36]:6.

______________________________


CHAPTER IX
THE NIGHT OF THE SOUL

Dear Mother, I thought I had written enough, and now you wish for
more details of my religious life. I will not argue, but I cannot
help smiling when I have to tell you things that you know quite as
well as I do. Nevertheless, I will obey. I do not ask what use
this manuscript can be to any one, I assure you that even were you
to burn it before my eyes, without having read it, I should not
mind in the least.

The opinion is not uncommon in the Community that you have always
indulged me, ever since I entered the Convent; however, "Man seeth
those things that appear, but the Lord beholdeth the heart."[1]
Dear Mother, once again I thank you for not having spared me.
Jesus knew well that His Little Flower needed the life-giving
water of humiliation--it was too weak to take root otherwise, and
to you it owes so great a blessing. But for some months, the
Divine Master has entirely changed His method of cultivating His
Little Flower. Finding no doubt that it has been sufficiently
watered, He now allows it to expand under the warm rays of a
brilliant sun. He smiles on it, and this favour also comes through
you, dear Mother, but far from doing it harm, those smiles make
the Little Flower grow in a wondrous way. Deep down in its heart
it treasures those precious drops of dew--the mortifications of
other days--and they remind it that it is small and frail. Even
were all creatures to draw near to admire and flatter it, that
would not add a shade of idle satisfaction to the true joy which
thrills it, on realising that in God's Eyes it is but a poor,
worthless thing, and nothing more.

When I say that I am indifferent to praise, I am not speaking,
dear Mother, of the love and confidence you show me; on the
contrary I am deeply touched thereby, but I feel that I have now
nothing to fear, and I can listen to those praises unperturbed,
attributing to God all that is good in me. If it please Him to
make me appear better than I am, it is nothing to me, He can act
as He will. My God, how many ways dost Thou lead souls! We read of
Saints who left absolutely nothing at their death, not the least
thing by which to remember them, not even a single line of
writing; and there are others like our holy Mother, St. Teresa,
who have enriched the Church with their sublime teaching, and have
not hesitated to reveal "the secrets of the King,"[2] that He may
be better known and better loved.

Which of these two ways is more pleasing to Our Lord? It seems to
me that they are equally so.

All those beloved by God have followed the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, who commanded the prophets to write: "Tell the just man
that all is well."[3] Yes, all is well when one seeks only the
Master's Will, and so I, poor Little Flower, obey my Jesus when I
try to please you, who represent him here on earth.

You know it has ever been my desire to become a Saint, but I have
always felt, in comparing myself with the Saints, that I am as far
removed from them as the grain of sand, which the passer-by
tramples underfoot, is remote from the mountain whose summit is
lost in the clouds.

Instead of being discouraged, I concluded that God would not
inspire desires which could not be realised, and that I may aspire
to sanctity in spite of my littleness. For me to become great is
impossible. I must bear with myself and my many imperfections; but
I will seek out a means of getting to Heaven by a little way--very
short and very straight, a little way that is wholly new. We live
in an age of inventions; nowadays the rich need not trouble to
climb the stairs, they have lifts instead. Well, I mean to try and
find a lift by which I may be raised unto God, for I am too tiny
to climb the steep stairway of perfection. I have sought to find
in Holy Scripture some suggestion as to what this lift might be
which I so much desired, and I read these words uttered by the
Eternal Wisdom Itself: "Whosoever is a little one, let him come to
Me."[4] Then I drew near to God, feeling sure that I had
discovered what I sought; but wishing to know further what He
would do to the little one, I continued my search and this is what
I found: "You shall be carried at the breasts and upon the knees;
as one whom the mother caresseth, so will I comfort you."[5]

Never have I been consoled by words more tender and sweet. Thine
Arms, then, O Jesus, are the lift which must raise me up even unto
Heaven. To get there I need not grow; on the contrary, I must
remain little, I must become still less. O my God, thou hast gone
beyond my expectation, and I . . . "I will sing Thy mercies! Thou
hast taught me, O Lord, from my youth and till now I have declared
Thy wonderful works, and thus unto old age and grey hairs."[6]

What will this old age be for me? It seems to me that it could as
well be now as later: two thousand years are no more in the Eyes
of the Lord than twenty years . . . than a single day! But do not
think, dear Mother, that your child is anxious to leave you, and
deems it a greater grace to die in the morning rather than in the
evening of life; to please Jesus is what [s]he really values and
desires above all things. Now that He seems to come near and draw
her to His Heavenly Home, she is glad; she has understood that God
has need of no one to do good upon earth, still less of her than
of others. Meantime I know your will, dear Mother. You wish me to
carry out, at your side, a work which is both sweet and easy,[7]
and this work I shall complete in Heaven. You have said to me, as
Our Lord said to St. Peter: "Feed my lambs." I am amazed, for I
feel that I am so little. I have entreated you to feed your little
lambs yourself and to keep me among them. You have complied in
part with my reasonable wish, and have called me their companion,
rather than their mistress, telling me nevertheless to lead them
through fertile and shady pastures, to point out where the grass
is sweetest and best, and warn them against the brilliant but
poisonous flowers, which they must never touch except to crush
under foot.

How is it, dear Mother, that my youth and inexperience have not
frightened you? Are you not afraid that I shall let your lambs
stray afar? In acting as you have done, perhaps you remembered
that Our Lord is often pleased to give wisdom to little ones.

On this earth it is rare indeed to find souls who do not measure
God's Omnipotence by their own narrow thoughts. The world is
always ready to admit exceptions everywhere here below. God alone
is denied this liberty. It has long been the custom among men to
reckon experience by age, for in his youth the holy King David
sang to His Lord: "I am young and despised,"[8] but in the same
Psalm he does not fear to say: "I have had understanding above old
men, because I have sought Thy commandments, Thy word is a lamp to
my feet, and a light to my paths; I have sworn, and I am
determined, to keep the judgments of Thy Justice."[9]

And you did not even consider it imprudent to assure me one day,
that the Divine Master had enlightened my soul and given me the
experience of years. I am too little now to be guilty of vanity; I
am likewise too little to endeavour to prove my humility by
fine-sounding words. I prefer to own in all simplicity that "He
that is mighty hath done great things to me"--[10] and the
greatest is that He has shown me my littleness and how incapable I
am of anything good.

My soul has known trials of many kinds. I have suffered much on
this earth. In my childhood I suffered with sadness, but now I
find sweetness in all things. Anyone but you, dear Mother, who
know me thoroughly, would smile at reading these pages, for has
ever a soul seemed less tried than mine? But if the martyrdom
which I have endured for the past year were made known, how
astonished everyone would be! Since it is your wish I will try to
describe it, but there are no words really to explain these
things. The words will always fall short of the reality.

During Lent last year I felt much better than ever and continued
so until Holy Week, in spite of the fast which I observed in all
its rigour. But in the early hours of Good Friday, Jesus gave me
to hope that I should soon join Him in His beautiful Home. How
sweet is this memory!

I could not obtain permission to remain watching at the Altar of
Repose throughout the Thursday night, and I returned to our cell
at midnight. Scarcely was my head laid on the pillow when I felt a
hot stream rise to my lips. I thought I was going to die, and my
heart nearly broke with joy. But as I had already put out our
lamp, I mortified my curiosity until the morning and slept in
peace. At five o'clock, when it was time to get up, I remembered
at once that I had some good news to learn, and going to the
window I found, as I had expected, that our handkerchief was
soaked with blood. Dearest Mother, what hope was mine! I was
firmly convinced that on this anniversary of His Death, my Beloved
had allowed me to hear His first call, like a sweet, distant
murmur, heralding His joyful approach.

I assisted at Prime and Chapter most fervently, and then I
hastened to cast myself at my Mother's knees and confide to her my
happiness. I did not feel the least pain, so I easily obtained
permission to finish Lent as I had begun, and on this Good Friday
I shared in all the austerities of the Carmel without any
relaxation. Never had these austerities seemed sweeter to me; the
hope of soon entering Heaven transported me with joy.

Still full of joy, I returned to our cell on the evening of that
happy day, and was quietly falling asleep, when my sweet Jesus
gave me the same sign as on the previous night, of my speedy
entrance to Eternal Life. I felt such a clear and lively Faith
that the thought of Heaven was my sole delight. I could not
believe it possible for men to be utterly devoid of Faith, and I
was convinced that those who deny the existence of another world
really lie in their hearts.

But during the Paschal days, so full of light, our Lord made me
understand that there really are in truth souls bereft of Faith
and Hope, who, through abuse of grace, lose these precious
treasures, the only source of pure and lasting joy. He allowed my
soul to be overwhelmed with darkness, and the thought of Heaven,
which had consoled me from my earliest childhood, now became a
subject of conflict and torture. This trial did not last merely
for days or weeks; I have been suffering for months, and I still
await deliverance. I wish I could express what I feel, but it is
beyond me. One must have passed through this dark tunnel to
understand its blackness. However, I will try to explain it by
means of a comparison.

Let me suppose that I had been born in a land of thick fogs, and
had never seen the beauties of nature, or a single ray of
sunshine, although I had heard of these wonders from my early
youth, and knew that the country wherein I dwelt was not my real
home--there was another land, unto which I should always look
forward. Now this is not a fable, invented by an inhabitant of the
land of fogs, it is the solemn truth, for the King of that sunlit
country dwelt for three and thirty years in the land of darkness,
and alas!--the darkness did not understand that He was the Light
of the World._[11]

But, dear Lord, Thy child has understood Thou art the Light
Divine; she asks Thy pardon for her unbelieving brethren, and is
willing to eat the bread of sorrow as long as Thou mayest wish.
For love of Thee she will sit at that table of bitterness where
these poor sinners take their food, and she will not stir from it
until Thou givest the sign. But may she not say in her own name,
and the name of her guilty brethren: "O God, be merciful to us
sinners!"[12] Send us away justified. May all those on whom Faith
does not shine see the light at last! O my God, if that table
