When William and Captain Mayhew had left the cabin, Colonel
Shepherd sent for Sergeant Ringwood.

"Sergeant," he said, "a young fellow will come on board, tomorrow
at eight o'clock, to join the regiment as a recruit. Take him at
once to the surgeon, and get him passed. I know we shall be able to
give him but little drill, before we get to the frontier; but do
all you can for him, and I will make it up to you. He is a smart
young fellow, and I have a good deal of interest in him.

"He was on his way to China, and was wrecked among the Malays, and
has gone through a good deal. Finding himself here with nothing to
do, and with a prospect of active service on the frontier, he has
decided to enlist and, as he is a gallant young fellow, I do not
wish to balk his fancy."

The sergeant saluted and took his leave, impressed with the
idea--although the colonel had not said so--that the new recruit
was a young gentleman, who had joined the service simply for the
sake of taking part in the war.

The next morning Will took leave of his friend Hans; who had, the
previous day, shipped on board a Dutch ship, homeward bound; and
who was, a few hours later, to shift his berth to her, after he had
been on shore to fit himself out in clothes. Hans was much affected
at saying goodbye to his companion, and the two promised to
correspond with each other.

On bidding farewell to his friend the captain of the Sea Belle, the
latter informed Will that Mr. Reynolds had, on behalf of the owners
of the Sea Belle, paid 100 pounds to his account into the Bank of
Hindustan; and that this, or any portion of it, would be paid to
his order; as the captain had furnished the agent with a slip of
paper upon which Will had, at his request, signed his name. This
had, with the money, been deposited at the bank; so that his
signature might be recognized, and honored.

On reaching the Euphrates, Will was at once taken charge of by
Sergeant Ringwood; who took him before the doctor, to whom the
colonel had already spoken. The medical examination was
satisfactory, the doctor remarking:

"You are rather slight yet, but you will fill out, in time."

The age was asked, and given as under nineteen; and eighteen was
inscribed against him, in the books. Then he was taken before the
colonel, and attested; and was, from that moment, a member of the
regiment. A uniform was served out to him, and the usual articles
of kit. The sergeant saw that his belts were put on properly, and
his knapsack packed; and half an hour afterwards he fell in, with
his musket on his shoulder, among the troops paraded on the deck of
the Euphrates, prior to embarkation.

So quickly had it all been managed that Will could hardly believe
that he was awake as, feeling strangely hampered by his belts and
accouterments, he descended the accommodation ladder, and took his
place with his new comrades on board one of the great native boats,
and rowed to the shore. The regiment was marched direct to the
railway station, where the heavy baggage had been sent, on the
previous day. The men took their places in the long train which
stood in readiness and, half an hour later, steamed north from
Calcutta.

Hitherto, none of his comrades had spoken to Will. In the bustle of
landing, all had enough to do to look to themselves; and it was not
until he found himself, with eight comrades and a corporal, in the
railway carriage that he was addressed.

"Well, young 'un," one said, "what's yer name, and where do you
come from? Calcutta isn't much of a place for recruiting."

"I was on my way to China," Will replied, "and got wrecked among
the Malays; then I got picked up by a vessel, and we had some hot
fighting. Then I was landed at Calcutta and, seeing nothing much to
do, and hearing that there was a chance of a fight with the
Afghans, I thought the best thing to do was to enlist.

"My name is William Gale."

"I wasn't quite sure that you were an Englishman. You are pretty
nigh as dark as them copper-colored niggers here."

"So would you be," Will laughed, "if you had been living, as I
have, for ten months among savages, without even a shirt to your
back."

"Tell us all about it," the soldier said.

"This is a bit of luck, mates, our having someone who can tell us a
tale, when we have got such a long journey before us."

Will made his story as full as he could, and it lasted a long time.
When it was finished, the men expressed their opinion that he was a
good sort and, Will having handed over to the corporal a
sovereign--to be expended on drinks by the way, as his footing in
the regiment--he became quite a popular character, and soon felt at
home in his new position.



Chapter 9: The Advance Into Afghanistan.


There was but little talking in the middle of the day, in the
train, for the heat was excessive. All the men had taken off their
coats, and sat in their shirt sleeves. But they were, nevertheless,
bathed in perspiration.

Late at night, the train arrived at Allahabad. Here there was a
stop, till morning. The men alighted from the train; and lay down
on their folded blankets, with their knapsacks for pillows, on the
platform or in the waiting rooms. A plentiful supply of water had
been prepared for their use, at the station; and outside were
several water carriers; and many of the men stripped off their
shirts, and had water poured over their heads and bodies. Will Gale
was among these and, greatly refreshed, he enjoyed some fruit and
cakes which he purchased from native vendors; and then, lying down
on a bench in the station, was soon asleep.

Four days' traveling brought them to the end of the railway. They
were ferried across the Attock, and then their real work began.
Although it was now late in September, the heat was still intense.
Tents were struck an hour before daybreak and, by eleven o'clock
each day, the column was at its halting place. It was, however,
hours before the tents and baggage arrived.

Many of the draft cattle were very poor, forage was scarce, and the
arrangements far from good. The consequence was that great numbers
of the oxen broke down and died, and many of the troops were often
obliged to sleep in the air, owing to the non-arrival of their
tents. The defects of the transport were aggravated, as the time
went on; and the Norfolk Rangers fared much better than some of the
troops which followed them.

The regiment was destined to operate in the Khuram valley, under
the command of General Roberts. The advanced column of this
division consisted of the 7th company of Bengal Sappers, the 23rd
Bengal Pioneers; a battery of horse artillery, one of Royal
Artillery, and two mountain batteries; a squadron of the 10th
Hussars, and the 12th Bengal Cavalry. The first brigade of infantry
comprised the 2nd battalion of the 8th Foot, the 29th Bengal Native
Infantry, and the 5th Punjaub Infantry. The second brigade
consisted of the 72nd Highlanders, the 21st Native Infantry, the
2nd Punjaub Infantry, and the 5th Ghoorkas. The place of assembly
was Kohat. The Norfolk Rangers were to act as a reserve.

It was on the 2nd of October that the Rangers arrived at Kohat,
heartily glad that their march across the sandy plains of the
Punjaub was at an end. The other regiments comprising the force
poured in rapidly and, on the 9th, the general arrived and assumed
the command. The next day the Punjaub regiments were sent forward
to Thull. It was not until the middle of November that the European
regiments followed them; and the six weeks were, by the Rangers,
for the most part employed in drill for, after their voyage and
journey up the country, their commanding officer considered it
necessary to work them hard, to get them to the highest state of
discipline.

William Gale was worked exceptionally hard; as he had, in that
short time, to learn the manual and platoon exercises, and to pick
up enough of drill to enable him to take his place in the ranks.
Fortunately he carried himself well, and required far less drilling
than the majority of the recruits. By the time that the regiment
moved forward, he was able to take his place in his company; and
had mastered all the movements which were likely to be necessary,
in the campaign.

The road between Kohat and Thull runs in a valley between
mountains, those on the right being inhabited by the Waziries, a
fierce and independent tribe. The regiment which had first marched
had exercised every precaution against an attack. The convoys of
stores and provisions sent forward had always been accompanied by
strong escorts, and orders were issued that officers going forward
on duty should not travel without protection. The Waziries,
however--contrary to expectation--remained quiet; probably waiting
to see the turn which matters took for, had we suffered a repulse,
they would assuredly have taken part, at once, against us; and
would have aided in massacring fugitives, and robbing baggage
wagons.

The march to Thull occupied five days, which were very pleasant
ones to William Gale. His heavy work at drill was now over. He was
no longer considered a recruit, but ranked as a soldier. The
marches were not long and, for many hours in the afternoon, the
high hills threw the valley in shade; and the soldiers, after
pitching their tents, were able to stroll about, or to lie under
the trees in which the valley abounded. The regiment reached Thull
on the 18th of November and, on the morning of the 21st, the column
advanced.

The river, whose bed was 500 yards wide, was fortunately now low,
being reduced to a stream of 40 yards wide by 3 deep. A trestle
bridge had been thrown across it, for the use of the infantry. The
river was distant a mile and a half from the town. No opposition
was expected but, as a small Afghan garrison was stationed in a
fort at Kapizang, a short distance beyond the river, an attempt was
to be made to capture it.

The 29th Punjaub Infantry first crossed the river, at the bridge.
The 10th Hussars forded the river and extended, in skirmishing
order, to cut off the retreat of the garrison. When they reached
the fort, however--which was a square enclosure, with round towers
at the corners--it was found that the garrison, who had doubtless
received warning from spies in Thull, had abandoned the place in
the night.

The cavalry were now sent forward to reconnoiter, the infantry
following; and the advanced force halted at Ahmed-I-shama for the
night. Not a single habitation was passed, during the nine miles
march. The road was generally a mere track, 6 feet wide; passing
through tangled brakes of dwarf palms, intersected by stony
gullies, except when it ran along the steep bank of the river.

The following day the rest of the first brigade marched up to
Ahmed-I-shama; while the advanced force, under Colonel Gordon,
moved on to Hazir-pir. The Rangers were with the first brigade, but
not with the advanced party. This was composed wholly of native
troops, consisting of the Pioneer regiments and the Sappers and
Miners. These had hard work, for the road--which was fifteen miles
in length--was scarcely passable for wheeled carriages, and the
guns could not be taken along until the boulders and blocks of
stone, which strewed the way, were removed or blasted into pieces.

On the 23rd the Rangers, with the Horse Artillery battery and two
native regiments, marched towards Hazir-pir; but the difficulties
of the road were so great that they had to camp, for the night,
four miles short of that place. General Roberts and the
headquarters went forward the same day.

As the general passed along the road, the headmen of all the
villages near came and paid their respects; and the villagers lined
the roads as the troops passed, offering fowls, eggs, milk, and
dried fruit for sale. As William Gale had brought a supply of money
with him, he was able to indulge in all those luxuries and, indeed,
as the men had had few opportunities of spending money at Thull,
all were well supplied with cash.

The halt at Hazir-pir was, then, a very pleasant one. Supplies of
grass, fuel, and provisions were brought in, in considerable
quantities, there; but much difficulty arose in settling the terms
of purchase, as coin was almost unknown in the valley and,
therefore, there was no established price--one native being ready
to sell, for a few coppers, articles for which another demanded as
many pieces of silver. On the hills around a considerable number of
sheep were seen grazing; but the natives did not care about selling
these which, indeed, belonged for the most part, not to the
Turis--the tribe which inhabit the valley--but to nomad Ghilzais
who, like the Swiss shepherds, move about with their charges among
the mountains, wherever fodder is to be obtained.

Khuram valley, itself, is bare and monotonous. With the exception
of fruit trees planted round the villages, scarce a tree is to be
found; but each village is marked by a huge chunar--or oriental
plane--beneath which the villagers rest during the noonday heat.

But if the valley itself was bare and desolate, the scenery around
was lovely. The great range of mountains known as the Safaid-Koh
bound the valley on the east and north. This range averages 14,000
feet high, from which spurs run out at right angles, enclosing
narrower valleys, with broiling torrents rushing through boulders.
The slopes of these valleys are covered with luxuriant vegetation,
till the limit of trees is reached at a height of about 11,000
feet; above which, in winter, the snow lies thick while, in summer,
it furnishes the finest pasture to the Ghilzai flocks and herds.
The valley lands and the lower slopes of the hills are laid out in
terraces, and irrigated rice fields extend near the rivers. Valley
and hill are alike covered with stones and boulders, Afghanistan
being probably the most stony country in the world.

On the 24th the headquarters, with the cavalry and two regiments,
moved forward ten miles and encamped at the south end of the
Darwazi Pass--the road leading to open, broad valleys, covered with
dwarf palms, and wholly uncultivated. On the 25th the advanced
force crossed the pass, which was a gentle slope and offered no
great difficulty and, at night, encamped at the Khuram fort, which
had been evacuated by the enemy. The buildings--which would have
been useful for the troops--had, however, been wrecked by the
Turis; who have a deadly hate for the Afghans--their masters--and
who were also animated in their work of destruction by a desire to
obtain wood, which is exceedingly scarce there.

At Khuram there are two forts, the one 120 yards and the other 100
yards square. Inside these were quarters for the governor, and huts
for the garrison and officers; and in the smaller forts were
stables for the cavalry forces. This place was made the
headquarters of the forces in the Khuram valley.

The general now rode on, with two squadrons of the 12th Bengal
Cavalry, to reconnoiter in the direction of the Peiwar-Khotal;
towards which the enemy were supposed to be retreating, and where
they were expected to make a stand. As they approached the village
of Peiwar, two villages were seen in flames; and news was brought
in that three Afghan regiments, with twelve guns, had lately passed
through. The natives reported that they were encumbered by their
guns, and that forced labor was procured for the purpose of
removing them. Later on, a rumor came that the twelve guns were
stuck in the ravine at the foot of the Khotal, or pass.

With but a small force of cavalry at his command, the general could
do nothing; and so returned to Khuram, and determined to hurry up
the troops faster than he had intended, so as to capture the guns
reported--as was afterwards proved, falsely--to have been left
behind by the Afghans. The sick and all superfluous baggage were
left behind at Khuram and, on the 28th, the troops moved at
daybreak; the two brigades marching in parallel columns.

The cold was now severe at night, although it was hot in the
daytime. It had been intended to halt at Halid-Kitta, four miles
from the Khotal; but the intelligence arriving--that the Ameer's
troops had abandoned their guns, and were in disorderly
retreat--decided the general to push forward at once to the
Peiwar-Khotal--seven miles further--instead of waiting, and giving
the enemy time to strengthen their position. A mile from the foot
of the actual ascent of the Khotal lies the village of Turrai, two
miles and a half beyond Peiwar. Turrai is situated in a valley, the
ground at whose entrance is very much broken up by the shoulders
and spurs of the hill.

The left column--the 5th and 29th Punjaub in advance, with the 2nd
battalion of the 8th and the 23rd Pioneers, the Rangers, and two
guns of the Number 1 mountain battery in support--were sent to the
left, with instructions to turn a ridge forming the south boundary
of the valley, and to seize the village of Turrai. They were also
to follow up, closely, any body of retreating Afghan troops that
they might come across. The light brigade were to march up the
regular road to the Peiwar, thus supporting the attack of the left
brigade.

The left brigade followed out its orders, except that the regiment
in support did not go round the southern side of the spur, but kept
to the north. No enemy was seen on the south side of the spur so,
