destruction, but to make way for the gentle descent of God's blessing,
which will more than fill every vessel set to receive it. This is the
universal law, not always fulfilled in increase of outward goods, but in
the better riches of communion and of larger possession in God Himself.
He suffers no man to be His creditor, but more than returns our gifts,
as legends tell of some peasant who brought his king a poor tribute of
fruits of his fields, and went away from the presence-chamber with a
jewel in his hand.


THE UNCHANGING LORD

     'I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
     consumed.' MALACHI iii. 6.

The scriptural revelations of the divine Name are always the basis of
intensely practical admonition. The Bible does not think it worth while
to proclaim the Name of God without building on the proclamation
promises or commandments. There is no 'mere theology' in Scripture; and
it does not speak of 'attributes,' nor give dry abstractions of
infinitude, eternity, omniscience, unchangeableness, but lays stress on
the personality of God, which is so apt to escape us in these abstract
conceptions, and thus teaches us to think of this personal God our
Father, as infinite, eternal, knowing all things, and never changing.
There is all the difference in our attitude towards the very same truth
if we think of the unchangeableness of God, or if we think that our
Father God is unchangeable. In our text the thought of Him as unchanging
comes into view as the foundation of the continuance of the unfaithful
sons of Jacob in their privileges and in their very lives. 'I am the
Lord,' Jehovah, the Self-existent, the Eternal whose being is not under
the limitations of succession and time. 'Because I am Jehovah, I change
not'; and because Jehovah changes not, therefore our finite and mortal
selves abide, and our infinite and sinful selves are still the objects
of His steadfast love.

Let us consider, first, the unchangeable God, and second, the unchanging
God as the foundation of our changeful lives.

I. The unchangeable God.

In the great covenant-name Jehovah there is revealed an existence which
reverses all that we know of finite and progressive being, or finite and
mortal being, or finite and variable nature. With us there are mutations
arising from physical nature. The material must needs be subject to laws
of growth and decadence. Our spiritual nature is subject to changes
arising from the advancement in knowledge. Our moral nature is subject
to fluctuations; circumstances play upon us, and 'nothing continueth in
one stay.' Change is the condition of life. It means growth and
happiness; it belongs to the perfection of creatures. But the
unchangeableness of God is the negation of all imperfection, it is the
negation of all dependence on circumstances, it is the negation of all
possibility of decay or exhaustion, it is the negation of all caprice.
It is the assurance that His is an underived, self-dependent being, and
that with Him is the fountain of light; it is the assurance that, raised
above the limits of time and the succession of events, He is in the
eternal present, where all things that were and are, and are to come,
stand naked and open. It is the assurance that the calm might of His
eternal will acts, not in spasms of successive volitions preceded by a
period of indecision and equilibrium between contending motives, but is
one continuous uniform energy, never beginning, never bending, never
ending; that the purpose of His will is 'the eternal purpose which He
hath purposed in Himself.' It is the assurance that the clear vision of
His infinite knowledge, from the heat of which nothing is hid, has no
stages of advancement, and no events lying nebulous in a dim horizon by
reason of distance, or growing in clearness as they draw nearer, but
which pierces the mists of futurity and the veils of the past and the
infinities of the present, and 'from the beginning to the end knoweth
all things.' It is the assurance that the mighty stream of love from the
heart of God is not contingent on the variations of our character and
the fluctuations of our poor hearts, but rises from His deep well, and
flows on for ever, 'the river of God' which 'is full of water.' It is
the assurance that round all the majesty and the mercy which He has
revealed for our adoration and our trust there is the consecration of
permanence, that we might have a rock on which to build and never be
confounded. Is there anywhere in the past an act of His power, a word of
His lip, a revelation of His heart which has been a strength or a joy or
a light to any man? It is valid for me, and is intended for my use. 'He
fainteth not, nor is weary.' The bush burns and is not consumed. 'I will
not alter the thing that has gone out of my lips.' 'By two immutable
things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we have strong
consolation.'

II. The unchanging God as the foundation of our changeful lives.

In the most literal sense our text is true. Because He lives we live
also. He is the same for ever, therefore we are not consumed. The
foundation of our being lies beyond and beneath all the mutable things
from which we are tempted to believe that we draw our lives, and is in
God. The true lesson to be drawn from the mutable phenomena of earth
is--heaven. The many links in the chain must have a staple. Reason
requires that behind all the fleeting shall be the permanent. There must
be a basis which does not partake of change. The lesson from all the
mutable creation is the immutable God.

Since God changes not, the life of our spirits is not at the mercy of
changing events. We look back on a lifetime of changing scenes through
which we have passed, and forward to a similar succession, and this
mutability is sad to many of us, and in some aspects sad to all, so
powerless we are to fix and arrest any of our blessings. Which we shall
keep we know not; we only know that, as certainly as buds and blossoms
of spring drop, and the fervid summer darkens to November fogs and
December frosts, so certainly we shall have to part with much in our
passage through life. But if we let God speak to us, the necessary
changes that come to us will not be harmful but blessed, for the lesson
that the mutability of the mutual is meant to impress upon us is, the
permanency of the divine, and our dependence, not on them, but on Him.
We may look upon all the world of time and chance and think that He who
Himself is unchanging changeth all. The eye of the tempest is a point of
rest. The point in the heavens towards which, according to some
astronomers, the whole of the solar system is drifting, is a fixed
point. If we depend on Him, then change is not all sad; it cannot take
God away, but it may bring us nearer to Him. We cannot be desolate as
long as we have Him. We know not what shall be on the morrow. Be it so;
it will be God's to-morrow. When the leaves drop we can see the rock on
which the trees grow; and when changes strip the world for us of some of
its waving beauty and leafy shade, we may discern more clearly the firm
foundation on which our hopes rest. All else changes. Be it so; that
will not kill us, nor leave us utterly forlorn as long as we hear the
voice which says, 'I am the Lord; I change not; therefore ye are not
consumed.'

God's purposes and promises change not, therefore our faith may rest on
Him, notwithstanding our own sins and fluctuations. It is this aspect of
the divine immutability which is the thought of our text. God does not
turn from His love, nor cancel His promises, nor alter His purposes of
mercy because of our sins. If God could have changed, the godless
forgetfulness of, and departure from, Him of 'the Sons of Jacob' would
have driven Him to abandon His purposes; but they still live--living
evidences of His long-suffering. And in that preservation of them God
would have them see the basis of hope for the future. So this is the
confidence with which we should cheer ourselves when we look upon the
past, and when we anticipate the future. The sins that have been in our
past have deserved that we should have been swept away, but we are here
still. Why are we? Why do we yet live? Because we have to do with an
unchanging love, with a faithfulness that never departs from its word,
with a purpose of blessing that will not be turned aside. So let us look
back with this thought and be thankful; let us look forward with it and
be of good cheer. Trust yourself, weak and sinful as you are, to that
unchanging love. The future will have in it faults and failures, sins
and shortcomings, but rise from yourself to God. Look beyond the light
and shade of your own characters, or of earthly events to the central
light, where there is no glimmering twilight, no night, 'no variableness
nor shadow of turning.' Let us live in God, and be strong in hope.
Forward, not backward, let us look and strive; so our souls, fixed and
steadied by faith in Him, will become in a manner partakers of His
unchangeableness; and we too in our degree will be able to say, 'The
Lord is at my side; I shall not be moved.'


A DIALOGUE WITH GOD

     'Return unto Me, and I will return unto you, saith the Lord of
     Hosts. But ye say, Wherein shall we return?'--MALACHI iii. 7
     (R.V.).

In previous sermons we have considered God's indictment of man's sin met
by man's plea of 'not guilty,' and God's threatenings brushed aside by
man's question. Here we have the climax of self-revealing and patient
love in God's wooing voice to draw the wanderer back, met by man's
refusing answer. These three divine utterances taken together cover the
whole ground of His speech to us; and, alas! these three human
utterances but too truly represent for the most part our answers to Him.

I. God's invitation to His wandering child.

The gracious invitation of our text presupposes a state of departure.
The child who is tenderly recalled has first gone away. There has been a
breach of love. Dependence has been unwelcome, and cast off with the
vain hope of a larger freedom in the far-off land; and this is the true
charge against us. It is not so much individual acts of sin but the
going away in heart and spirit from our Father God which describes the
inmost essence of our true condition, and is itself the source of all
our acts of sin. Conscience confirms the description. We know that we
have departed from Him in mind, having wasted our thoughts on many
things and not having had Him in the multitude of them in us. We have
departed from Him in heart, having squandered our love and dissipated
our desires on many objects, and sought in the multiplicity of many
pearls--some of them only paste--a substitute for the all-sufficient
simplicity of the One of great price. We have departed from Him in will,
having reared up puny inclinations and fleeting passions against His
calm and eternal purpose, and so bringing about the shock of a collision
as destructive to us as when a torpedo-boat crashes in the dark against
a battleship, and, cut in two, sinks.

The gracious invitation of our text follows, 'I am the Lord, I change
not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.' Threatenings, and the
execution of these in acts of judgment, are no indication of a change in
the loving heart of God; and because it is the same, however we have
sinned against it and departed from it, there is ever an invitation and
a welcome. We may depart from Him, but He never departs from us. Nor
does He wait for us to originate the movement of return, but He invites
us back. By all His words in His threatenings and in His commandments,
as in the acts of His providence, we can hear His call to return. The
fathers of our flesh never cease to long for their prodigal child's
return; and their patient persistence of hope is but brief and broken
when contrasted with the infinite long-suffering of the Father of
spirits. We have heard of a mother who for long empty years has nightly
set a candle in her cottage window to guide her wandering boy back to
her heart; and God has bade us think more loftily of the
unchangeableness of His love than that of a woman who may forget, that
she should not have compassion upon the son of her womb.

II. Man's answer to God's invitation.

It is a refusal which is half-veiled and none the less real. There is
no unwillingness to obey professed, but it is concealed under a mask of
desiring a little more light as to how a return is to be accomplished.
There are not many of us who are rooted enough in evil as to be able to
blurt out a curt 'I will not' in answer to His call. Conscience often
bars the way to such a plain and unmannerly reply; but there are many
who try to cheat God, and who do to some extent cheat themselves, by
professing ignorance of the way which would lead them to His heart. Some
of us have learned only too well to raise questions about the method of
salvation instead of accepting it, and to dabble in theology instead of
making sure work of return. Some of us would fain substitute a host of
isolated actions, or apparent moral or religious observance, for the
return of will and heart to God; and all who in their consciences answer
God's call by saying, 'Wherein shall we return?' with such a meaning are
playing tricks with themselves, and trying to hoodwink God.

But the question of our text has often a nobler origin, and comes from
the depths of a troubled heart. Not seldom does God's loving invitation
rouse the dormant conscience to the sense of sin. The man, lying broken
at the foot of the cliff down which he has fallen, and seeing the
brightness of God far above, has his heart racked with the question: How
am I, with lame limbs, to struggle back to the heights above? 'How shall
man be just with God?' All the religions of the world, with their
offerings and penances and weary toils, are vain attempts to make a way
back to the God from whom men have wandered, and that question, 'Wherein
shall we return?' is really the meaning of the world's vain seeking and
profitless effort.

God has answered man's question; for Christ is at once the way back to
God, and the motive which draws us to walk in it. He draws us back by
the magnetism of His love and sacrifice. We return to God when we cling
to Jesus. He is the highest, the tenderest utterance of the divine
voice; and when we yield to His invitation to Himself we return to God.
He calls to each of us, 'Come unto Me, and I will give you rest.' What
can we reply but, 'I come; let me never wander from Thee'?


'STOUT WORDS,' AND THEIR CONFUTATION

     'Your words have been stout against Me, saith the Lord: yet ye say,
     What have we spoken so much against Thee? 14. Ye have said, It is
     vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we have kept His
     ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of
     Hosts? 15. And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work
     wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered.
     16. Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another: and
     the Lord hearkened, and heard it; and a book of remembrance was
     written before Him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought
     upon His name. 17. And they shall be Mine, saith the Lord of Hosts,
     in that day when I make up My jewels; and I will spare them, as a
     man spareth his own son that serveth him. 18. Then shall ye return,
     and discern between the righteous and the wicked; between him that
     serveth God and him that serveth Him not. IV. 1. For, behold, the
     day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and
     all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh
     shall burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave
     them neither root nor branch. 2. But unto you that fear My Name
     shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and
     ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall. 3. And ye
     shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the
     soles of your feet, in the day that I shall do this, saith the Lord
     of Hosts. 4. Remember ye the law of Moses My servant, which I
     commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and
     judgments. 5. Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the
     coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: 6. And he shall
     turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the
     children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a
     curse.'--MALACHI iii. 13-18; iv. 1-6.

This passage falls into three parts,--the 'stout words' against God
which the Prophet sets himself to confute (verses 13-15); the prophecy
of the day which will show their falsehood (verse 16 to iv. 3); and the
closing exhortation and prediction (iv. 4-6).

I. The returning exiles had not had the prosperity which they had hoped.
So many of them, even of those who had served God, began to let doubts
darken their trust, and to listen to the whispers of their own hearts,
reinforced by the mutterings of others, and to ask: 'What is the use of
religion? Does it make any difference to a man's condition?' Here had
they been keeping God's charge, and going in black garments 'before the
Lord,' in token of penitence, and no good had come to them, while
arrogant neglect of His commandments did not seem to hinder happiness,
and 'they that work wickedness are built up.' Sinful lives appeared to
have a firm foundation, and to rise high and palace-like, while
righteous ones were like huts. Goodness seemed to spell ruin.

What was wrong in these 'stout words'? It was wrong to attach such worth
to external acts of devotion, as if these were deserving of reward. It
was wrong to suspend the duty of worship on the prosperity resulting
from it, and to seek 'profit' from 'keeping his charge.' Such religion
was shallow and selfish, and had the evils of the later Pharisaism in
germ in it. It was wrong to yield to the doubts which the apparently
unequal distribution of worldly prosperity stirred in their hearts. But
the doubts themselves were almost certain to press on Old Testament
believers, as well as on Old Testament scoffers, especially under the
circumstances of Malachi's time. The fuller light of Christianity has
eased their pressure, but not removed it, and we have all had to face
them, both when our own hearts have ached with sorrow and when pondering
on the perplexities of this confused world. We look around, and, like
the psalmist, see 'the prosperity of the wicked,' and, like him, have to
confess that our 'steps had wellnigh slipped' at the sight. The old, old
question is ever starting up. 'Doth God know?' The mystery of suffering
and the mystery of its distribution, the apparent utter want of
connection between righteousness and well-being, are still formidable
difficulties in the way of believing in a loving, all-knowing, and
all-powerful God, and are stock arguments of the unbeliever and
perplexities of humble faith. Never to have felt the force of the
difficulty is not so much the sign of steadfast faith as of scant
reflection. To yield to it, and still more, to let it drive us to cast
religion aside, is not merely folly, but sin. So thinks Malachi.

II. To the stout words of the doubters is opposed the conversation of
the godly. '_Then_ they that feared the Lord spake one with another,'
nourishing their faith by believing speech with like-minded. The more
the truths by which we believe are contradicted, the more should we
commune with fellow-believers. Attempts to rob us should make us hold
our treasure the faster. Bold avowal of the faith is especially called
for when many potent voices deny it. And, whoever does not hear, God
hears. Faithful words may seem lost, but they and every faithful act are
written in His remembrance and will be recompensed one day. If our names
and acts are written there, we may well be content to accept scanty
measures of earthly good, and not be 'envious of the foolish' in their
prosperity.

Malachi's answer to the doubters leaves all other considerations which
might remove the difficulty unmentioned, and fixes on the one, the
prophecy of a future which will show that it is not all the same whether
a man is good or bad. It was said of an English statesman that he called
a new world into existence to redress the balance of the old, and that
is what the Prophet does. Christianity has taught us many other ways of
meeting the doubters' difficulty, but the sheet anchor of faith in that
storm is the unconquerable assurance that a day comes when the
righteousness of providence will be vindicated, and the eternal
difference between good and evil manifested in the fates of men. The
Prophet is declaring what will be a fact one day, but he does not know
when. Probably he never asked himself whether 'the day of the Lord' was
near or far off, to dawn on earth or to lie beyond mortal life. But this
he knew--that God was righteous, and that sometime and somewhere
character would settle destiny, and even outwardly it would be good to
be good. He first declares this conviction in general terms, and then
passes on to a magnificent and terrible picture of that great day.

The promise, which lay at the foundation of Israel's national existence,
included the recognition of it as 'a peculiar treasure unto Me above all
people,' and Malachi looks forward to that day as the epoch when God
will show by His acts how precious the righteous are in His sight. Not
the whole Israel, but the righteous among them, are the heirs of the old
promise. It is an anticipation of the teaching that 'they are not all
Israel which are of Israel,' And it bids us look for the fulfilment of
every promise of God's to that great day of the Lord which lies still
before us all, when the gulf between the righteous and the wicked shall
be solemnly visible, wide, and profound. There have been many 'days
which I make' in the world's history, and in a measure each of them has
re-established the apparently tottering truth that there is a God who
judgeth in the earth, but the day of days is yet to come.

No grander vision of judgment exists than Malachi's picture of 'the
day,' lurid, on the one hand, with the fierce flame, before which the
wicked are as stubble that crackles for a moment and then is grey ashes,
or as a tree in a forest fire, which stands for a little while, a pillar
of flame, and then falls with a crash, shaking the woods; and on the
otherhand, radiant with the early beams of healing sunshine, in whose
sweet morning light the cattle, let out from their pent-up stalls,
gambol in glee. But let us not forget while we admire the noble poetry
of its form that this is God's oracle, nor that we have each to settle
for ourselves whether that day shall be for us a furnace to destroy or a
sun to cheer and enlighten.

We can only note in a sentence the recurrence in verse 1 of the phrases
'the proud' and they 'that work wickedness,' from verse 15 of chapter
iii. The end of those whom the world called happy, and who seemed stable
and elevated, is to be as stubble before the fire. We must also point
out that 'the sun of righteousness' means the sun which is
righteousness, and is not a designation of the Messiah. Nor can we dwell
on the picture of the righteous treading down the wicked, which seems to
prolong the previous metaphor of the leaping young cattle. Then shall
'the upright have dominion over them in the morning.'

III. The final exhortation and promise point backwards and forwards,
summing up duty in obedience to the law, and fixing hope on a future
reappearance of the leader of the prophets. Moses and Elijah are the two
giant figures which dominate the history of Israel. Law and prophecy are
the two forms in which God spoke to the fathers. The former is of
perpetual obligation, the latter will flash up again in power on the
threshold of the day. Jesus has interpreted this closing word for us.
John came 'in the spirit and power of Elijah,' and the purpose of his
coming was to 'turn the hearts of the fathers to the children' (Luke i.
16, 17); that is, to bring back the devout dispositions of the
patriarchs to the existing generations, and so to bring the 'hearts of
the children to their fathers,' as united with them in devout obedience.
If John's mission had succeeded, the 'curse' which smote Israel would
have been stayed. God has done all that He can do to keep us from being
consumed by the fire of that day. The Incarnation, Life, and Death of
Jesus Christ made a day of the Lord which has the twofold character of
that in Malachi's vision, for He is a 'saviour of life unto life' or
'of death unto death,' and must be one or other to us. But another day
of the Lord is still to come, and for each of us it will come burning as
a furnace or bright as sunrise. Then the universe shall 'discern between
the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that
serveth Him not.'


THE LAST WORDS OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS

     'Lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.'--MALACHI iv. 6.

     'The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
     Amen.'--REVELATION xxii. 21.

It is of course only an accident that these words close the Old and the
New Testaments. In the Hebrew Bible Malachi's prophecies do not stand at
the end; but he was the last of the Old Testament prophets, and after
him there were 'four centuries of silence.' We seem to hear in his words
the dying echoes of the rolling thunders of Sinai. They gather up the
whole burden of the Law and of the prophets; of the former in their
declaration of a coming retribution, of the latter in the hope that that
retribution may be averted.

Then, in regard to John's words, of course as they stand they are simply
the parting benediction with which he takes leave of his readers; but it
is fitting that the Book of which they are the close should seal up the
canon, because it stands as the one prophetic book of the New Testament,
and so reaches forward into the coming ages, even to the consummation of
all things. And just as Christ in His Ascension was taken from them
whilst His hands were lifted up in the act of blessing, so it is fitting
that the revelation of which He is the centre and the theme should part
from us as He did, shedding with its final words the dew of benediction
on our upturned heads.

I venture, then, to look at these significant closing words of the two
Testaments as conveying the spirit of each, and suggesting some thoughts
about the contrast and the harmony and the order that subsist between
them.

I. I ask you, first, to notice the apparent contrast and the real
harmony and unity of these two texts.

'Lest I come and smite the land with a curse.' That last awful word does
not convey, in the original, quite the idea of our English word 'curse.'
It refers to a somewhat singular institution in the Mosaic Law according
to which things devoted, in a certain sense, to God were deprived of
life. And the reference historically is to the judgments that were
inflicted upon the nations that occupied the land before the Israelitish
invasion, those Canaanites and others who were put under 'the ban' and
devoted to utter destruction. So, says my text, Israel, which has
stepped into their places, may bring down upon its head the same
devastation; and as they were swept off the face of the land that they
had polluted with their iniquities, so an apostate and God-forgetting
Judah may again experience the same utter destruction falling upon them.
If instead of the word 'curse' we were to substitute the word
'destruction,' we should get the true idea of the passage.

And the thought that I want to insist upon is this, that here we have
distinctly gathered up the whole spirit of millenniums of divine
revelation, all of which declare this one thing, that as certainly as
there is a God, every transgression and disobedience receives, and must
receive, its just recompense of reward.

That is the spirit of law, for law has nothing to say, except, 'Do this,
and thou shalt live; do not this, and thou shalt die.'

And then turn to the other. 'The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you all.' What has become of the thunder? All melted into dewy rain of
love and pity and compassion. Grace is love that stoops; grace is love
that foregoes its claims, and forgives sins against itself. Grace is
love that imparts, and this grace, thus stooping, thus pardoning, thus
bestowing, is a universal gift. The Apostolic benediction is the
declaration of the divine purpose, and the inmost heart and loftiest
meaning of all the words which from the beginning God hath spoken is
that His condescending, pardoning, self-bestowing mercy may fall upon
all hearts, and gladden every soul.

So there seems to emerge, and there is, a very real and a very
significant contrast. 'I come and smite the earth with a curse' sounds
strangely unlike 'The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.'
And, of course, in this generation there is a strong tendency to dwell
upon that contrast and to exaggerate it, and to assert that the more
recent has antiquated the more ancient, and that now the day when we
have to think of and to dread the curse that smites the earth is past,
'because the true Light now shineth.'

So I ask you to notice that beneath this apparent contrast there is a
real harmony, and that these two utterances, though they seem to be so
diverse, are quite consistent at bottom, and must both be taken into
account if we would grasp the whole truth. For, as a matter of fact,
nowhere are there more tender utterances and sweeter revelations of a
divine mercy than in that ancient law with its attendant prophets. And
as a matter of fact, nowhere, through all the thunderings and lightnings
of Sinai, are there such solemn words of retribution as dropped from the
lips of the Incarnate Love. There is nothing anywhere so dreadful as
Christ's own words about what comes, and must come, to sinful men. Is
there any depth of darkness in the Old Testament teaching of retribution
half as deep, half as black, and as terrible, as the gulf that Christ
opens at your feet and mine? Is there anything so awful as the
threatenings of Infinite Love?

And the same blending of the widest proclamation of, and the most
perfect rejoicing confidence in, the universal and all-forgiving love of
God, with the teaching of the sharpest retribution, lies in the writings
of this very Apostle about whose words I am speaking. There are nowhere
in Scripture more solemn pictures than those in that book of the
Apocalypse, of the inevitable consequences of departure from the love
and the faith of God, and John, the Apostle of love, is the preacher of
judgment as none of the other writers of the New Testament are.

Such is the fact, and there is a necessity for it. There must be this
blending; for if you take away from your conception of God the absolute
holiness which hates sin, and the rigid righteousness which apportions
to all evil its bitter fruits, you have left a maimed God that has not
power to love but is nothing but weak, good-natured indulgence. Impunity
is not mercy, and punishment is never the negation of perfect love, but
rather, if you destroy the one you hopelessly maim the other. The two
halves are needed in order to give full emphasis to either. Each note
alone is untrue; blended, they make the perfect chord.

II. And now, let me ask you to look with me at another point, and that
is, the relation of the grace to the punishment.

Is it not love which proclaims judgment? Are not the words of my first
text, if you take them all, merciful, however they wear a surface of
threatening? 'Lest I come.' Then He speaks that He may not come, and
declares the issue of sin in order that that issue may never need to be
experienced by us that listen to Him. Brethren! both in regard to the
Bible and in regard to human ministrations of the Gospel, it is
all-important, as it seems to me at present, to insist that it is the
cruellest kindness to keep back the threatenings for fear of darkening
the grace; and that, on the other hand, it is the truest tenderness to
warn and to proclaim them. It is love that threatens; 'tis mercy to tell
us that the wrath will come.

And just as one relation between the grace and the retribution is that
the proclamation of the retribution is the work of the grace, so there
is another relation--the grace is manifested in bearing the punishment,
and in bearing it away by bearing it. Oh! there is no adequate measure
of what the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ is except the measure of the
smiting destruction from which He frees us. It is because every
transgression receives its just recompense of reward, because the wages
of sin is death, because God cannot but hate and punish the evil, that
we get our truest standard of what Christ's love is to every soul of us.
For on Him have met all the converging rays of the divine retribution,
and burnt the penal fire into His very heart. He has come between every
one of us, if we will, and that certain incidence of retribution for our
evil, taking upon Himself the whole burden of our sin and of our guilt,
and bearing that awful death which consists not in the mere dissolution
of the tie between soul and body, but in the separation of the conscious
spirit from God, in order that we may stand peaceful, serene, untouched,
when the hail and the fire of the divine judgment are falling from the
heavens and running along the earth. The grace depends for all our
conceptions of its glory, its tenderness, and its depth, on our estimate
of the wrath from which it delivers.

So, dear brethren, remember, if you tamper with the one you destroy the
other; if there be no fearful judgment from which men need to be
delivered, Christ has borne nothing for us that entitles Him to demand
our hearts; and all the ascriptions of praise and adoration to Him, and
all the surrender of loving hearts, in utter self-abandonment, to Him
that has borne the curse for us, fade and are silent. If you strike out
the truth of Christ's bearing the results of sin from your theology, you
do not thereby exalt, but you fatally lower the love; and in the
interests of the loftiest conceptions of a divine loving-kindness and
mercy that ever have blessed the world, I beseech you, be on your guard
against all teachings that diminish the sinfulness of sin, and that ask
again the question which first of all came from lips that do not commend
it to us--'_Hath_ God said?' or advance to the assertion--'Ye shall
_not_ surely die.' If 'I come to smite the earth with a curse' ceases to
be a truth to you, 'the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ' will fade away
for you likewise.

III. Now, still further, let me ask you to consider, lastly, the
alternative which these texts open for us.

I believe that the order in which they stand in Scripture is the order
in which men generally come to believe them, and to feel them. I am
old-fashioned enough and narrow enough to believe in conversion; and to
believe further that, as a rule, the course through which the soul
passes from darkness into light is the course which divine revelation
took: first, the unveiling of sin and its issues, and then the glad
leaping up of the trustful heart to the conception of redeeming grace.

But what I seek briefly to suggest now is, not only the order of
manifestation as brought out in these words, but also the alternative
which they present to us, one branch or other of which every soul of you
will have to experience. You must have either the destruction or the
grace. And, more wonderful still, the same coming of the same Lord will
be to one man the destruction, and to another the manifestation and
reception of His perfect grace. As it was in the Lord's first coming,
'He is set for the rise and the fall of many in Israel.' The same heat
softens some substances and bakes others into hardness. A bit of wax and
a bit of clay put into the same fire--one becomes liquefied and the
other solidified. The same light is joy to one eye and torture to
another. The same pillar of cloud was light to the hosts of Israel, and
darkness and dismay to the armies of Egypt. The same Gospel is 'a savour
of life unto life, or of death unto death,' by the giving forth of the
same influences killing the one and reviving the other; the same Christ
is a Stone to build upon or a Stone of stumbling; and when He cometh at
the last, Prince, King, Judge, to you and me, His coming shall be
prepared as the morning; and ye 'shall have a song as when one cometh
with a pipe to the mountain of the Lord'; or else it shall be a day of
darkness and not of light. He comes to me, to you; He comes to smite or
He comes to glorify.

Oh, brethren! do not believe that God's threatenings are wind and words;
do not let teachings that sap the very foundations of morality and eat
all the power out of the Gospel persuade you that the solemn words, 'The
soul that sinneth it shall die,' are not simple verity.

And then, my brethren, oh! then, do you turn yourselves to that dear
Lord whose grace is magnified in this most chiefly, that 'He hath borne
our sins and carried our sorrows'; and taking Him for your Saviour, your
King, your Shield, your All, when He cometh it will be life to you; and
the grace that He imparts will be heaven for ever more.

        *        *        *        *        *




ST. MATTHEW

_Chaps. I to VIII_




CONTENTS

        MATTHEW'S GENEALOGY OF JESUS CHRIST (Matt. i. 1-16)
        THE NATIVITY (Matt. i. 18-25)
        THE NAME ABOVE EVERY NAME (Matt. i. 21)
        THE FIRST-FRUITS OF THE GENTILES (Matt. ii. 1-12)
        THE KING IN EXILE (Matt. ii. 13-23)
        THE HERALD OF THE KING (Matt. iii. 1-12)
        THE BAPTISM IN FIRE (Matt. iii. 11)
        THE BAPTISM OF JESUS (Matt. iii. 13-17)
        THE DOVE OF GOD (Matt. in. 16)
        THE VICTORY OF THE KING (Matt. iv. 1-11)
        THE SPRINGING OF THE GREAT LIGHT (Matt. iv. 12-16)
        THE EARLY WELCOME AND THE FIRST MINISTERS OF THE KING
            (Matt. iv. 17-25)
        THE NEW SINAI (Matt. v. 1-16)
        THE FIRST BEATITUDE (Matt. v. 3)
        THE SECOND BEATITUDE (Matt. v. 4)
        THE THIRD BEATITUDE (Matt. v. 5)
        THE FOURTH BEATITUDE (Matt. v. 6)
        THE FIFTH BEATITUDE (Matt. v. 7)
        THE SIXTH BEATITUDE (Matt. v. 8)
        THE SEVENTH BEATITUDE (Matt. v. 9)
        THE EIGHTH BEATITUDE (Matt. v. 10)
        SALT WITHOUT SAVOUR (Matt. v. 13)
        THE LAMP AND THE BUSHEL (Matt. v. 14-16)
        THE NEW FORM OF THE OLD LAW (Matt. v. 17-26)
        'SWEAR NOT AT ALL' (Matt. v. 33-37)
        NON-RESISTANCE (Matt. v. 38-42)
        THE LAW OF LOVE (Matt. v. 43-48)
        TRUMPETS AND STREET CORNERS (Matt. vi. 1-5)
        SOLITARY PRAYER (Matt. vi. 6)
        THE STRUCTURE OF THE LORD'S PRAYER (Matt. vi. 9)
        'OUR FATHER' (Matt. vi. 9)
        'HALLOWED BE THY NAME' (Matt. vi. 9)
        'THY KINGDOM COME' (Matt. vi. 10)
        'THY WILL BE DONE' (Matt. vi. 10)
        THE CRY FOR BREAD (Matt. vi. 11)
        'FORGIVE US OUR DEBTS' (Matt. vi. 12)
        'LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION' (Matt. vi. 13)
        'DELIVER US FROM EVIL' (Matt. vi. 13)
        'THINE IS THE KINGDOM' (Matt. vi. 13)
        FASTING (Matt. vi. 16-18)
        TWO KINDS OF TREASURE (Matt. vi. 10-20)
        HEARTS AND TREASURES (Matt. vi. 21)
        ANXIOUS CARE (Matt. vi. 24-25)
        JUDGING, ASKING, AND GIVING (Matt. vii. 1-12)
        OUR KNOCKING (Matt. vii. 7)
        THE TWO PATHS (Matt, vii. 1344)
        THE TWO HOUSES (Matt. vii. 24-26)
        THE CHRIST OF THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT (Matt. vii. 28-29)
        THE TOUCH THAT CLEANSES (Matt. viii. 14)
        THE FAITH WHICH CHRIST PRAISES (Matt. viii. 8-9)
        SWIFT HEALING AND IMMEDIATE SERVICE (Matt. viii. 14-15)
        THE HEALING CHRIST (Matt. viii. 17)
        CHRIST REPRESSING RASH DISCIPLESHIP (Matt. viii. 19-20)
        CHRIST STIMULATING SLUGGISH DISCIPLESHIP (Matt. viii. 21-22)
        THE PEACE-BRINGER IN THE NATURAL WORLD (Matt, viii. 23-27)
        THE PEACE-BRINGER IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD (Matt. viii. 28-34)


        *        *        *        *        *


MATTHEW'S GENEALOGY OF JESUS CHRIST

     'The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the
     son of Abraham. 2. Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and
     Jacob begat Judas and his brethren; 3. And Judas begat Phares and
     Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram; 4.
     And Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat Naasson; and Naasson
     begat Salmon; 5. And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat
     Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse; 6. And Jesse begat David the
     king; and David the king begat Solomon of her that had been the
     wife of Urias; 7. And Solomon begat Roboam; and Roboam begat Abia;
     and Abia begat Asa; 8. And Asa begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat
     Joram; and Joram begat Ozias; 9. And Ozias begat Joatham; and
     Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias; 10. And Ezekias begat
     Manasses; and Manasses begat Amon; and Amon begat Josias; 11. And
     Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were
     carried away to Babylon: 12. And after they were brought to
     Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel;
     13. And Zorobabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim
     begat Azor; 14. And Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc begat Achim; and
     Achim begat Eliud; 15. And Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat
     Matthan; and Matthan begat Jacob; 16. And Jacob begat Joseph the
     husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called
     Christ.'--MATT. 1. 1-16.

To begin a Gospel with a genealogy strikes us modern Westerns as
singular, to say the least of it. To preface the Life of Jesus with an
elaborate table of descents through forty-one generations, and then to
show that the forty-second had no real connection with the forty-first,
strikes us as irrelevant. Clause after clause comes the monotonous
'begat,' till the very last, when it fails, and we read instead: 'Jacob
begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus.' So, then,
whoever drew up this genealogy knew that Jesus was not Joseph's son.
Why, then, was he at the pains to compile it, and why did the writer of
the Gospel, if he was not the compiler, think it important enough to
open his narrative? The answer lies in two considerations: the ruling
idea of the whole Gospel, that Jesus is the promised Jewish Messiah,
David's son and Israel's king; and the characteristic ancient idea that
the full rights of sonship were given by adoption as completely as by
actual descent. Joseph was 'of the house and lineage of David,' and
Joseph took Mary's first-born as his own child, thereby giving Him
inheritance of all his own status and claims. Incidentally we may remark
that this presentation of Jesus as Joseph's heir seems to favour the
probability that He was regarded as His reputed father's first-born
child, and so disfavours the contention that the 'brethren' of Jesus
were Joseph's children by an earlier marriage. But, apart from that, the
place of this table of descent at the beginning of the Gospel makes it
clear that the prophecies of the Messiah as David's son were by the
Hebrew mind regarded as adequately fulfilled by Jesus being by adoption
the son of Joseph, and that such fulfilment was regarded as important by
the evangelist, not only for strengthening his own faith, but for urging
his Lord's claims on his fellow-countrymen, whom he had chiefly in view
in writing. Such external 'fulfilment' goes but for little with us, who
rest Jesus' claims to be our King on more inward and spiritual grounds,
but it stands on the same level as other similar fulfilments of prophecy
which meet us in the Gospels; such as the royal entry into Jerusalem,
'riding upon an ass,' in which the outward, literal correspondence is
but a finger-post, pointing to far deeper and truer realisation of the
prophetic ideal in Jesus.

What, then, did the evangelist desire to make prominent by the
genealogy? The first verse answers the question. We need not discuss
whether the title, 'The book of the generations of Jesus Christ,'
applies to the table of descent only, or to the whole chapter. The
former seems the more probable conclusion, but the point to note is that
two facts are made prominent in the title; viz. that Jesus was a true
Jew, 'forasmuch as He also is a son of Abraham,' and was the true king
of Israel, being the 'Son of David,' of whom prophets had spoken such
great things. If we would take in the full significance of Matthew's
starting-point, we must set by the side of it those of the other three
evangelists. Mark plunges at once, without preface or allusion to
earlier days, into the stir and stress of Christ's work, slightly
touching on the preliminaries of John's mission, the baptism and
temptation, and hurrying on to the call of the fishermen, and the busy
scenes on the Sabbath in Capernaum. Luke has his genealogy as well as
Matthew, but, in accordance with his universalistic, humanist tone, he
traces the descent from far behind Abraham, even to 'Adam, which was the
son of God,' and he works in the reverse order to Matthew, going upwards
from Joseph instead of downwards to him. John soars high above all
earthly birth, and begins away back in the Eternities before the world
was, for his theme is not so much the son of Joseph who was the son of
David and the son of Abraham, or the son of Adam who was the son of God,
as the Eternal 'Word' who 'was with God,' and entered into history and
time when He 'became flesh.' We must take all these points of view
together if we would understand any of them, for they are not
contradictory, but complementary.

The purpose of Matthew's genealogy is further brought out by its
symmetrical arrangement into three groups of fourteen generations
each--an arrangement not arrived at without some free manipulating of
the links. The sacred number is doubled in each case, which implies
eminent completeness. Each of the three groups makes a whole in which a
tendency runs out to its goal, and becomes, as it were, the
