before it assumed this latter position, its movements could, of course, no
longer be traced on the vertical glass, and the broken line in the diagram
ought to be extended much further
[page 326]
down in this and all other cases. By 6.45 A.M. on the following morning it
had risen considerably, and continued to rise for the next hour; but,
judging from other observations, it would soon have begun to fall again.
Between 11 A.M. and 5.30 P.M. the leaflet moved at least four times up and
four times down before the great nocturnal fall commenced; it reached its
highest point at noon. Similar observations were made on two other
leaflets, with nearly the same results. Sachs and Pfeffer have also
described briefly* the autonomous movements of the leaves of this plant.

Fig 128. Oxalis acetosella: circumnutation and nyctitropic movements of a
nearly full-grown leaf, with filament attached to the midrib of one of the
leaflets; traced on vertical glass during 20 h. 45m.

On another occasion the petiole of a leaf was secured to a little stick
close beneath the leaflets, and a filament tipped with a bead of
sealing-wax was affixed to the mid-rib of one of them, and a mark was
placed close behind. At 7 P.M., when the leaflets were asleep, the filament
depended vertically down, and the movements of the bead were then traced
till 10.40 P.M., as shown in the following diagram (Fig. 129). We here see
that the leaflet moved a little from side to side, as well as a little up
and down, whilst asleep.

* Sachs in 'Flora,' 1863, p. 470, etc; Pfeffer, 'Die Period. Bewegungen,'
etc., 1875, p. 53.
[page 327]

Fig 129. Oxalis acetosella: circumnutation of leaflet when asleep; traced
on vertical glass during 3 h. 40 m.

Oxalis Valdiviana.--The leaves resemble those of the last species, and the
movements of two leaflets (the main petioles of both having been secured)
were traced during two days; but the tracings are not given, as they
resembled that of O. acetosella, with the exception that the up and down
oscillations were not so frequent during the day, and there was more
lateral movement, so that broader ellipses were described. The leaves awoke
early in the morning, for by 6.45 A.M. on June 12th and 13th they had not
only risen to their full height, but had already begun to fall, that is,
they were circumnutating. We have seen in the last chapter that the
cotyledons, instead of sinking, rise up vertically at night.

Oxalis Ortegesii.--The large leaves of this plant sleep like those of the
previous species. The main petioles are long, and that of a young leaf rose
20o between noon and 10 P.M., whilst the petiole of an older leaf rose only
13o. Owing to this rising of the petioles, and the vertical sinking of the
large leaflets, the leaves become crowded together at night, and the whole
plant then exposes a much smaller surface to radiation than during the day.

Oxalis Plumierii.--In this species the three leaflets do not surround the
summit of the petiole, but the terminal leaflet projects in the line of the
petiole, with a lateral leaflet on each side. They all sleep by bending
vertically downwards, but do not become at all folded. The petiole is
rather long, and, one having been secured to a stick, the movement of the
terminal leaflet was traced during 45 h. on a vertical glass. It moved in a
very simple manner, sinking rapidly after 5 P.M., and rising rapidly early
next morning. During the middle of the day it moved slowly and a little
laterally. Consequently the ascending and descending lines did not
coincide, and a single great ellipse was formed each day. There was no
other evidence of circumnutation, and this fact is of interest, as we shall
hereafter see.

Oxalis sensitiva.--The leaflets, as in the last species, bend vertically
down at night, without becoming folded. The much elongated main petiole
rises considerably in the evening, but in
[page 328]
some very young plants the rise did not commence until late at night. We
have seen that the cotyledons, instead of sinking like the leaflets, rise
up vertically at night.

Oxalis bupleurifolia.--This species is rendered remarkable by the petioles
being foliaceous, like the phyllodes of many Acacias. The leaflets are
small, of a paler green and more tender consistence than the foliaceous
petioles. The leaflet which was observed was .55 inch in length, and was
borne by a petiole 2 inches long and .3 inch broad. It may be suspected
that the leaflets are on the road to abortion or obliteration, as has
actually occurred with those of another Brazilian species, O. rusciformis.
Nevertheless, in the present species the nyctitropic movements are
perfectly performed. The foliaceous petiole was first observed during 48
h., and found to be in continued circumnutation, as shown in the
accompanying figure (Fig. 130). It rose during the day and early part of
the night, and fell during the remainder of the night and early morning;
but the movement was not sufficient to be called sleep. The ascending and
descending lines did not coincide, so that an ellipse was formed each day.
There was but little zigzagging; if the filament had been fixed
longitudinally, we should probably have seen that there was more lateral
movement than appears in the diagram.

Fig. 130. Oxalis bupleurifolia: circumnutation of foliaceous petiole,
filament fixed obliquely across end of petiole; movements traced on
vertical glass from 9 A.M. June 26th to 8.50 A.M. 28th. Apex of leaflet 4 ½
inches from the glass, so movement not much magnified. Plant 9 inches high,
illuminated from above. Temp. 23 1/2o - 24 1/2o C.

A terminal leaflet on another leaf was next observed (the petiole being
secured), and its movements are shown in Fig. 131. During the day the
leaflets are extended horizontally, and at night depend vertically; and as
the petiole rises during the day the leaflets have to bend down in the
evening
[page 329]
more than 90o, so as to assume at night their vertical position. On the
first day the leaflet simply moved up and down; on the

Fig. 131. Oxalis bupleurifolia: circumnutation and nyctitropic movement of
terminal leaflet, with filament affixed along the midrib; traced on a
vertical glass from 9 A.M. on June 26th to 8.45 A.M. 28th. Conditions the
same as in the last case.

second day it plainly circumnutated between 8 A.M. and 4.30 P.M., after
which hour the great evening fall commenced.
[page 330]

Averrhoa bilimbi (Oxalidae).--It has long been known,* firstly, that the
leaflets in this genus sleep; secondly, that they move spontaneously during
the day; and thirdly, that they are sensitive to a touch; but in none of
these respects do they differ essentially from the species of Oxalis. They
differ, however, as Mr. R. I. Lynch** has lately shown, in their
spontaneous movements being strongly marked. In the case of A. bilimbi, it
is a wonderful spectacle to behold on a warm sunny day the leaflets one
after the other sinking rapidly downwards, and again ascending slowly.
Their movements rival those of Desmodium gyrans. At night the leaflets hang
vertically down; and now

Fig. 132. Averrhoa bilimbi: leaf asleep; drawing reduced.

they are motionless, but this may be due to the opposite ones being pressed
together (Fig. 132). The main petiole is in constant movement during the
day, but no careful observations were made on it. The following diagrams
are graphic representations of the variations in the angle, which a given
leaflet makes with the vertical. The observations were made as follows. The
plant growing in a pot was kept in a high temperature, the petiole of the
leaf to be observed pointing straight at the observer, being separated from
him by a vertical pane of glass. The petiole was secured so that the basal
joint, or pulvinus, of one of the lateral leaflets was at the centre of a
graduated arc placed close behind the leaflet. A fine glass filament was
fixed to the leaf, so as to project like a continuation of the

* Dr. Bruce, 'Philosophical Trans.,' 1785, p. 356.

** 'Journal Linn. Soc.,' vol. xvi. 1877, p. 231.
[page 331]

midrib. This filament acted as an index; and as the leaf rose and fell,
rotating about its basal joint, its angular movement

Fig. 133. Averrhoa bilimbi: angular movements of a leaflet during its
evening descent, when going to sleep. Temp. 78o - 81o F.

could be recorded by reading off at short intervals of time the position of
the glass filament on the graduated arc. In order
[page 332]
to avoid errors of parallax, all readings were made by looking through a
small ring painted on the vertical glass, in a line with the joint of the
leaflet and the centre of the graduated arc. In the following diagrams the
ordinates represent the angles which the leaflet made with the vertical at
successive instants.* It follows that a fall in the curve represents an
actual dropping of the leaf, and that the zero line represents a vertically
dependent position. Fig. 133 represents the nature of the movements which
occur in the evening, as soon as the leaflets begin to assume their
nocturnal position. At 4.55 P.M. the leaflet formed an angle of 85o with
the vertical, or was only 5o below the horizontal; but in order that the
diagram might get into our page, the leaflet is represented falling from
75o instead of 85o. Shortly after 6 P.M. it hung vertically down, and had
attained its nocturnal position. Between 6.10 and 6.35 P.M. it performed a
number of minute oscillations of about 2o each, occupying periods of 4 or 5
m. The complete state of rest of the leaflet which ultimately followed is
not shown in the diagram. It is manifest that each oscillation consists of
a gradual rise, followed by a sudden fall. Each time the leaflet fell, it
approached nearer to the nocturnal position than it did on the previous
fall. The amplitude of the oscillations diminished, while the periods of
oscillation became shorter.

In bright sunshine the leaflets assume a highly inclined dependent
position. A leaflet in diffused light was observed rising for 25 m. A blind
was then pulled up so that the plant was brightly illuminated (BR in Fig.
134), and within a minute it began to fall, and ultimately fell 47o, as
shown in the diagram. This descent was performed by six descending steps,
precisely similar to those by which the nocturnal fall is effected. The
plant was then again shaded (SH), and a long slow rise occurred until
another series of falls commenced at BR', when the sun was again admitted.
In this experiment cool air was allowed to enter by the windows being
opened at the same time that the blinds were pulled up, so that in spite of
the sun shining on the plant the temperature was not raised.

The effect of an increase of temperature in diffused light is

* In all the diagrams 1 mm. in the horizontal direction represents one
minute of time. Each mm. in the vertical direction represents one degree of
angular movement. In Figs. 133 and 134 the temperature is represented
(along the ordinates) in the scale of 1 mm. to each 0.1 degree C. In Fig.
135 each mm. equals 0.2o F.
[page 333]

shown in Fig. 135. The temperature began to rise at 11.35 A.M. (in
consequence of the fire being lighted), but by 12.42 a marked fall had
occurred. It may be seen in the diagram that when the temperature was
highest there were rapid oscillations

Fig. 134. Averrhoa bilimbi: angular movements of leaflet during a change
from bright illumination to shade; temperature (broken line) remaining
nearly the same.

of small amplitude, the mean position of the leaflet being at the time
nearer the vertical. When the temperature began to fall, the oscillations
became slower and larger, and the mean position of the leaf again
approached the horizontal. The rate of oscillation was sometimes quicker
than is represented in the above diagram. Thus, when the temperature was
between 31o and
[page 334]

Fig. 135. Averrhoa bilimbi: angular movement of leaflet during a change of
temperature; light remaining the same. The broken line shows the change of
temperature.
[page 335]

32o C., 14 oscillations of a few degrees occurred in 19 m. On the other
hand, an oscillation may be much slower; thus a leaflet was observed
(temperature 25o C.) to rise during 40 m. before it fell and completed its
oscillation.

Fig. 136. Porlieria hygrometrica: circumnutation and nyctitropic movements
of petiole of leaf, traced from 9.35 A.M. July 7th to about midnight on the
8th. Apex of leaf 7 ½ inches from the vertical glass. Temp. 19 1/2o - 20
1/2o C.

Porlieria hygrometrica (Zygophylleae).--The leaves of this plant (Chilian
form) are from 1 to 1 ½ inch in length, and bear as many as 16 or 17 small
leaflets on each side, which do not stand opposite one another. They are
articulated to the petiole, and the petiole to the branch by a pulvinus. We
must premise that apparently two forms are confounded under the same name:
the leaves on a bush from Chili, which was sent to us from Kew, bore many
leaflets, whilst those on plants in the Botanic Garden at Würzburg bore
only 8 or 9 pairs; and the whole character of the bushes appeared somewhat
different. We shall also see that they differ in a remarkable physiological
peculiarity. On the Chilian plant the petioles of the younger leaves on
upright branches, stood horizontally during the day, and at night sank down
vertically so as to depend parallel and close to the branch beneath. The
petioles of rather older leaves did not become at night vertically
depressed, but only highly inclined. In one instance we found a branch
which had grown perpendicularly downwards, and the petioles on it moved in
the same direction relatively to the branch as just stated, and therefore
moved upwards. On horizontal branches the younger petioles likewise move at
night in the same direction as before, that is, towards the branch, and are
consequently then extended horizontally; but it is remarkable that the
older petioles on the
[page 336]
same branch, though moving a little in the same direction, also bend
downwards; they thus occupy a somewhat different position, relatively to
the centre of the earth and to the branch, from that of the petioles on the
upright branches. With respect to the leaflets, they move at night towards
the apex of the petiole until their midribs stand nearly parallel to it;
and they then lie neatly imbricated one over the other. Thus half of the
upper surface of each leaflet is in close contact with half of the lower
surface of the one next in advance; and all the leaflets, excepting the
basal ones, have the whole of their upper surfaces and half of their lower
surfaces well protected. Those on the opposite sides of the same petiole do
not come into close contact at night, as occurs with the leaflets of so
many Leguminosae but are separated by an open furrow; nor could they
exactly coincide, as they stand alternately with respect to one another.

The circumnutation of the petiole of a leaf 3/4 of an inch in length, on an
upright branch, was observed during 36h., and is shown in the preceding
diagram (Fig. 136). On the first morning, the leaf fell a little and then
rose until 1 P.M., and this was probably due to its being now illuminated
through a skylight from above; it then circumnutated on a very small scale
round the same spot until about 4 P.M., when the great evening fall
commenced. During the latter part of the night or very early on the next
morning the leaf rose again. On the second day it fell during the morning
till 1 P.M., and this no doubt is its normal habit. From 1 to 4 P.M. it
rose in a zigzag line, and soon afterwards the great evening fall
commenced. It thus completed a double oscillation during the 24 h.

The specific name given to this plant by Ruiz and Pavon, indicates that in
its native arid home it is affected in some manner by the dryness or
dampness of the atmosphere.* In the Botanic Garden at Würzburg, there was a
plant in a pot out of doors which was daily watered, and another in the
open ground which was never watered. After some hot and dry weather there
was a great difference in the state of the leaflets on these two plants;
those on the unwatered plant in the open ground remaining half,

* 'Systema Veg. Florae Peruvianae et Chilensis,' tom. i. p. 95, 1798. We
cannot understand the account given by the authors of the behaviour of this
plant in its native home. There is much about its power of foretelling
changes in the weather; and it appears as if the brightness of the sky
largely determined the opening and closing of the leaflets.
[page 337]

or even quite, closed during the day. But twigs cut from this bush, with
their ends standing in water, or wholly immersed in it, or kept in damp air
under a bell-glass, opened their leaves though exposed to a blazing sun;
whilst those on the plant in the ground remained closed. The leaves on this
same plant, after some heavy rain, remained open for two days; they then
became half closed during two days, and after an additional day were quite
closed. This plant was now copiously watered, and on the following morning
the leaflets were fully expanded. The other plant growing in a pot, after
having been exposed to heavy rain, was placed before a window in the
Laboratory, with its leaflets open, and they remained so during the daytime
for 48 h.; but after an additional day were half closed. The plant was then
watered, and the leaflets on the two following days remained open. On the
third day they were again half closed, but on being again watered remained
open during the two next days. From these several facts we may conclude
that the plant soon feels the want of water; and that as soon as this
occurs, it partially or quite closes its leaflets, which in their then
imbricated condition expose a small surface to evaporation. It is therefore
probable that this sleep-like movement, which occurs only when the ground
is dry, is an adaptation against the loss of moisture.

A bush about 4 feet in height, a native of Chili, which was thickly covered
with leaves, behaved very differently, for during the day it never closed
its leaflets. On July 6th the earth in the small pot in which it grew
appeared extremely dry, and it was given a very little water. After 21 and
22 days (on the 27th and 28th), during the whole of which time the plant
did not receive a drop of water, the leaves began to droop, but they showed
no signs of closing during the day. It appeared almost incredible that any
plant, except a fleshy one, could have kept alive in soil so dry, which
resembled the dust on a road. On the 29th, when the bush was shaken, some
leaves fell off, and the remaining ones were unable to sleep at night. It
was therefore moderately watered, as well as syringed, late in the evening.
On the next morning (30th) the bush looked as fresh as ever, and at night
the leaves went to sleep. It may be added that a small branch while growing
on the bush was enclosed, by means of a curtain of bladder, during 13 days
in a large bottle half full of quicklime, so that the air within must have
been intensely dry; yet the leaves on this branch did not suffer in the
[page 338]
least, and did not close at all during the hottest days. Another trial was
made with the same bush on August 2nd and 6th (the soil appearing at this
latter date extremely dry), for it was exposed out of doors during the
whole day to the wind, but the leaflets showed no signs of closing. The
Chilian form therefore differs widely from the one at Würzburg, in not
closing its leaflets when suffering from the want of water; and it can live
for a surprisingly long time without water.

Tropaeolum majus (?) (cultivated var.) (Tropaeoleae).--Several plants in
pots stood in the greenhouse, and the blades of the leaves which faced the
front-lights were during the day highly inclined and at night vertical;
whilst the leaves on the back of the pots, though of course illuminated
through the roof, did not become vertical at night. We thought, at first,
that this difference in their positions was in some manner due to
heliotropism, for the leaves are highly heliotropic. The true explanation,
however, is that unless they are well illuminated during at least a part of
the day they do not sleep at night; and a little difference in the degree
of illumination determines whether or not they shall become vertical at
night. We have observed no other so well-marked a case as this, of the
influence of previous illumination on nyctitropic movements. The leaves
present also another peculiarity in their habit of rising or awaking in the
morning, being more strongly fixed or inherited than that of sinking or
sleeping at night. The movements are caused by the bending of an upper part
of the petiole, between ½ and 1 inch in length; but the part close to the
blade, for about 1/4 of an inch in length, does not bend and always remains
at right angles to the blade. The bending portion does not present any
external or internal difference in structure from the rest of the petiole.
We will now give the experiments on which the above conclusions are
founded.

A large pot with several plants was brought on the morning of Sept. 3rd out
of the greenhouse and placed before a north-east window, in the same
position as before with respect to the light, as far as that was possible.
On the front of the plants, 24 leaves were marked with thread, some of
which had their blades horizontal, but the greater number were inclined at
about 45o, beneath the horizon; at night all these, without exception,
became vertical. Early on the following morning (4th) they reassumed their
former positions, and at night again became vertical. On the 5th the
shutters were opened at 6.15 A.M., and
[page 339]
by 8.18 A.M., after the leaves had been illuminated for 2 h. 3 m. and had
acquired their diurnal position, they were placed in a dark cupboard. They
were looked at twice during the day and thrice in the evening, the last
time at 10.30 P.M., and not one had become vertical. At 8 A.M. on the
following morning (6th) they still retained the same diurnal position, and
were now replaced before the north-east window. At night all the leaves
which had faced the light had their petioles curved and their blades
vertical; whereas none of the leaves on the back of the plants, although
they had been moderately illuminated by the diffused light of the room,
were vertical. They were now at night placed in the same dark cupboard; at
9 A.M. on the next morning (7th) all those which had been asleep had
reassumed their diurnal position. The pot was then placed for 3 h. in the
sunshine, so as to stimulate the plants; at noon they were placed before
the same north-east window, and at night the leaves slept in the usual
manner and awoke on the following morning. At noon on this day (8th) the
plants, after having been left before the north-east window for 5 h. 45 m.
and thus illuminated (though not brightly, as the sky was cloudy during the
whole time), were replaced in the dark cupboard, and at 3 P.M. the position
of the leaves was very little, if at all, altered, so that they are not
quickly affected by darkness; but by 10.15 P.M. all the leaves which had
faced the north-east sky during the 5 h. 45 m. of illumination stood
vertical, whereas those on the back of the plant retained their diurnal
position. On the following morning (9th) the leaves awoke as on the two
former occasions in the dark, and they were kept in the dark during the
whole day; at night a very few of them became vertical, and this was the
one instance in which we observed any inherited tendency or habit in this
plant to sleep at the proper time. That it was real sleep was shown by
these same leaves reassuming their diurnal position on the following
morning (10th) whilst still kept in the dark.

The pot was then (9.45 A.M. 10th) replaced, after having been kept for 36
h. in darkness, before the north-east window; and at night the blades of
all the leaves (excepting a few on the back of the plants) became
conspicuously vertical.
At 6.45 A.M. (11th) after the plants had been illuminated on the same side
as before during only 25 m., the pot was turned round, so that the leaves
which had faced the light now faced the interior of the room, and not one
of these went to sleep at night;
[page 340]
whilst some, but not many, of those which had formerly stood facing the
back of the room and which had never before been well illuminated or gone
to sleep, now assumed a vertical position at night. On the next day (12th)
the plant was turned round into its original position, so that the same
leaves faced the light as formerly, and these now went to sleep in the
usual manner. We will only add that with some young seedlings kept in the
greenhouse, the blades of the first pair of true leaves (the cotyledons
being hypogean) stood during the day almost horizontally and at night
almost vertically.

A few observations were subsequently made on the circumnutation of three
leaves, whilst facing a north-east window; but the tracings are not given,
as the leaves moved somewhat towards the light. It was, however, manifest
that they rose and fell more than once during the daytime, the ascending
and descending lines being in parts extremely zigzag. The nocturnal fall
commenced about 7 P.M., and the leaves had risen considerably by 6.45 A.M.
on the following morning.

Leguminosae.--This Family includes many more genera with sleeping species
than all the other families put together. The number of the tribes to which
each genus belongs, according to Bentham and Hooker's arrangement, has been
added.

Crotolaria (sp.?) (Tribe 2).--This plant is monophyllous, and we are
informed by Mr. T. Thiselton Dyer that the leaves rise up vertically at
night and press against the stem.

Lupinus (Tribe 2).--The palmate or digitate leaves of the species in this
large genus sleep in three different manners. One of the simplest, is that
all the leaflets become steeply inclined downwards at night, having been
during the day extended horizontally. This is shown in the accompanying
figures (Fig. 137), of a leaf of L. pilosus, as seen during the day from
vertically above, and of another leaf asleep with the leaflets inclined
downwards. As in this position they are crowded together, and as they do
not become folded like those in the genus Oxalis, they cannot occupy a
vertically dependent position; but they are often inclined at an angle of
50o beneath the horizon. In this species, whilst the leaflets are sinking,
the petioles rise up, in two instances when the angles were measured to the
extent of 23o. The leaflets of L. sub-carnosus and arboreus, which were
horizontal during the day, sank down at night in nearly the same manner;
the former to an angle of 38o and the latter of 36o, beneath the horizon;
but their petioles
[page 341]
did not move in any plainly perceptible degree. It is, however, quite
possible, as we shall presently see, that if a large number of plants of
the three foregoing and of the following species

Fig. 137. Lupinus pilosus: A, leaf seen from vertically above in daytime;
B, leaf asleep, seen laterally at night.

were to be observed at all seasons, some of the leaves would be found to
sleep in a different manner.

In the two following species the leaflets, instead of moving downwards,
rise at night. With L. Hartwegii some stood at noon at a mean angle of 36o
above the horizon, and at night at 51o, thus forming together a hollow cone
with moderately steep sides. The petiole of one leaf rose 14o and of a
second 11o at night. With L. luteus a leaflet rose from 47o at noon to 65o
above the horizon at night, and another on a distinct leaf rose from 45o to
69o. The petioles, however, sink at night to a small extent, viz., in three
instances by 2o, 6o, and 9o 30 seconds. Owing to this movement of the
petioles, the outer and longer leaflets have to bend up a little more than
the shorter and inner ones, in order that all should stand symmetrically at
night. We shall presently see that some leaves on the same individual
plants of L. luteus sleep in a very different manner.

We now come to a remarkable position of the leaves when asleep, which is
common to several species of Lupines. On the same leaf the shorter
leaflets, which generally face the centre of the plant, sink at night,
whilst the longer ones on the opposite side rise; the intermediate and
lateral ones merely twisting on their own axes. But there is some
variability with respect to which leaflets rise or fall. As might have been
expected from such diverse and complicated movements, the
[page 342]
base of each leaflet is developed (at least in the case of L. luteus) into
a pulvinus. The result is that all the leaflets on the same leaf stand at
night more or less highly inclined, or even quite vertically, forming in
this latter case a vertical star. This occurs with the leaves of a species
purchased under the name of

Fig. 138. Lupinus pubescens: A, leaf viewed laterally during the day; B,
same leaf at night; C, another leaf with the leaflet forming a vertical
star at night. Figures reduced.

L. pubescens; and in the accompanying figures we see at A (Fig. 138) the
leaves in their diurnal position; and at B the same plant at night with the
two upper leaves having their leaflets almost vertical. At C another leaf,
viewed laterally, is shown with the leaflets quite vertical. It is chiefly
or exclusively the youngest leaves which form at night vertical stars. But
there
[page 343]
is much variability in the position of the leaves at night on the same
plant; some remaining with their leaflets almost horizontal, others forming
more or less highly inclined or vertical stars, and some with all their
leaflets sloping downwards, as in our first class of cases. It is also a
remarkable fact, that although all the plants produced from the same lot of
seeds were identical in appearance, yet some individuals at night had the
leaflets of all their leaves arranged so as to form more or less highly
inclined stars; others had them all sloping downwards and never forming a
star; and others, again, retained them either in a horizontal position or
raised them a little.

We have as yet referred only to the different positions of the leaflets of
L. pubescens at night; but the petioles likewise differ in their movements.
That of a young leaf which formed a highly inclined star at night, stood at
noon at 42o above the horizon, and during the night at 72o, so had risen
30o. The petiole of another leaf, the leaflets of which occupied a similar
position at night, rose only 6o. On the other hand, the petiole of a leaf
with all its leaflets sloping down at night, fell at this time 4o. The
petioles of two rather older leaves were subsequently observed; both of
which stood during the day at exactly the same angle, viz., 50o above the
horizon, and one of these rose 7o - 8o, and the other fell 3o - 4o at night.
We meet with cases like that of L. pubescens with some other species. On a
single plant of L. mutabilis some leaves, which stood horizontally during
the day, formed highly inclined stars at night, and the petiole of one rose
7o. Other leaves which likewise stood horizontally during the day, had at
night all their leaflets sloping downwards at 46o beneath the horizon, but
their petioles had hardly moved. Again, L. luteus offered a still more
remarkable case, for on two leaves, the leaflets which stood at noon at
about 45o above the horizon, rose at night to 65o and 69o, so that they
formed a hollow cone with steep sides. Four leaves on the same plant, which
had their leaflets horizontal at noon, formed vertical stars at night; and
three other leaves equally horizontal at noon, had all their leaflets
sloping downwards at night. So that the leaves on this one plant assumed at
night three different positions. Though we cannot account for this fact, we
can see that such a stock might readily give birth to species having widely
different nyctitropic habits.

Little more need be said about the sleep of the species of Lupinus;
several, namely, L. polyphyllus, nanus, Menziesii, speciosus,
[page 344]
and albifrons, though observed out of doors and in the greenhouse, did not
change the position of their leaves sufficiently at night to be said to
sleep. From observations made on two sleeping species, it appears that, as
with Tropaeolum majus, the leaves must be well illuminated during the day
in order to sleep at night. For several plants, kept all day in a
sitting-room with north-east windows, did not sleep at night; but when the
pots were placed on the following day out of doors, and were brought in at
night, they slept in the usual manner. the trial was repeated on the
following day and night with the same result.

Some observations were made on the circumnutation of the leaves of L.
luteus and arboreus. It will suffice to say that the leaflets of the latter
exhibited a double oscillation in the course of 24 h.; for they fell from
the early morning until 10.15 A.M., then rose and zigzagged greatly till 4
P.M., after which hour the great nocturnal fall commenced. By 8 A.M. on the
following morning the leaflets had risen to their proper height. We have
seen in the fourth chapter, that the leaves of Lupinus speciosus, which do
not sleep, circumnutate to an extraordinary extent, making many ellipses in
the course of the day.

Cytisus (Tribe 2), Trigonella and Medicago (Tribe 3).--Only

Fig. 139. Medicago marina: A, leaves during the day; B, leaves asleep at
night.

a few observations were made on these three genera. The petioles on a young
plant, about a foot in height, of Cytisus fragrans rose at night, on one
occasion 23o and on another 33o. The three leaflets also bend upwards, and
at the same time
[page 345]
approach each other, so that the base of the central leaflet overlaps the
bases of the two lateral leaflets. They bend up so much that they press
against the stem; and on looking down on one of these young plants from
vertically above, the lower surfaces of the leaflets are visible; and thus
their upper surfaces, in accordance with the general rule, are best
protected from radiation. Whilst the leaves on these young plants were thus
behaving, those on an old bush in full flower did not sleep at night.

Trigonella Cretica resembles a Melilotus in its sleep, which will be
immediately described. According to M. Royer,* the leaves of Medicago
maculata rise up at night, and "se renversent un peu de manière à presenter
obliquement au ciel leur face inférieure." A drawing is here given (Fig.
139) of the leaves of M. marina awake and asleep; and this would almost
serve for Cytisus fragrans in the same two states.

Melilotus (Tribe 3).--The species in this genus sleep in a remarkable
manner. The three leaflets of each leaf twist through an angle of 90o, so
that their blades stand vertically at night with one lateral edge presented
to the zenith (Fig. 140). We shall best understand the other and more
complicated movements, if we imagine ourselves always to hold the leaf with
the tip of the terminal leaflet pointed to the north. The leaflets in
becoming vertical at night could of course twist so that their upper
surfaces should face to either side; but the two lateral leaflets always
twist so that this surface tends to face the north, but as they move at the
same time towards the terminal leaflet, the upper surface of the one faces
about N.N.W., and that of the other N.N.E. The terminal leaflet behaves
differently, for it twists to either side, the upper surface facing
sometimes east and sometimes west, but rather more commonly west than east.
The terminal leaflet also moves in another and more remarkable manner, for
whilst its blade is twisting and becoming vertical, the whole leaflet bends
to one side, and invariably to the side towards which the upper surface is
directed; so that if this surface faces the west the whole leaflet bends to
the west, until it comes into contact with the upper and vertical surface
of the western lateral leaflet. Thus the upper surface of the terminal and
of one of the two lateral leaflets is well protected.

The fact of the terminal leaflet twisting indifferently to either

* 'Annales des Sc. Nat. Bot.' (5th series), ix. 1868, p. 368.
[page 346]

side and afterwards bending to the same side, seemed to us so remarkable,
that we endeavoured to discover the cause. We imagined that at the
commencement of the movement it might be determined by one of the two
halves of the leaflet being a little heavier than the other. Therefore bits
of wood were gummed on one side of several leaflets, but this produced no
effect; and they continued to twist in the same direction as

Fig. 140. Melilotus officinalis: A, leaf during the daytime. B, another
leaf asleep. C, a leaf asleep as viewed from vertically above; but in this
case the terminal leaflet did not happen to be in such close contact with
the lateral one, as is usual.

they had previously done. In order to discover whether the same leaflet
twisted permanently in the same direction, black threads were tied to 20
leaves, the terminal leaflets of which twisted so that their upper surfaces
faced west, and 14 white threads to leaflets which twisted to the east.
These were observed occasionally during 14 days, and they all continued,
with a single exception, to twist and bend in the same direction; for
[page 347]
one leaflet, which had originally faced east, was observed after 9 days to
face west. The seat of both the twisting and bending movement is in the
pulvinus of the sub-petioles.

We believe that the leaflets, especially the two lateral ones, in
performing the above described complicated movements generally bend a
little downwards; but we are not sure of this, for, as far as the main
petiole is concerned, its nocturnal movement is largely determined by the
position which the leaf happens to occupy during the day. Thus one main
petiole was observed to rise at night 59o, whilst three others rose only 7o
and 9o. The petioles and sub-petioles are continually circumnutating during
the whole 24 h., as we shall presently see.

The leaves of the following 15 species, M. officinalis, suaveolens,
parviflora, alba, infesta, dentata, gracilis, sulcata, elegans, coerulea,
petitpierreana, macrorrhiza, Italica, secundiflora, and Taurica, sleep in
nearly the same manner as just described; but the bending to one side of
the terminal leaflet is apt to fail unless the plants are growing
vigorously. With M. petitpierreana and secundiflora the terminal leaflet
was rarely seen to bend to one side. In young plants of M. Italica it bent
in the usual manner, but with old plants in full flower, growing in the
same pot and observed at the same hour, viz., 8.30 P.M., none of the
terminal leaflets on several scores of leaves had bent to one side, though
they stood vertically; nor had the two lateral leaflets, though standing
vertically, moved towards the terminal one. At 10.30 P.M., and again one
hour after midnight, the terminal leaflets had become very slightly bent to
one side, and the lateral leaflets had moved a very little towards the
terminal one, so that the position of the leaflets even at this late hour
was far from the ordinary one. Again, with M. Taurica the terminal leaflets
were never seen to bend towards either of the two lateral leaflets, though
these, whilst becoming vertical, had bent towards the terminal one. The
sub-petiole of the terminal leaflet in this species is of unusual length,
