The Project Gutenberg EBook The Bride of the Nile, by Georg Ebers, v3
#80 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Bride of the Nile, Volume 3.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5519]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on July 4, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRIDE OF THE NILE, BY EBERS, V3 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers

Volume 3.



CHAPTER X.

After the great excitement of the night Paula had thrown herself on her
bed with throbbing pulses.  Sleep would not come to her, and so at rather
more than two hours after sunrise she went to the window to close the
shutters.  As she did so she looked out, and she saw Hiram leap into a
boat and push the light bark from the shore.  She dared neither signal
nor call to him; but when the faithful soul had reached open water he
looked back at her window, recognized her in her white morning dress and
flourished the oar high in the air.  This could only mean that he had
fulfilled his commission and sold her jewel.  Now he was going to the
other side to engage the Nabathaean.

When she had closed the shutters and darkened the room she again lay
down.  Youth asserted its rights the weary girl fell into deep, dreamless
slumbers.

When she woke, with the heat drops on her forehead, the sun was nearly at
the meridian, only an hour till the Ariston would be served, the Greek
breakfast, the first meal in the morning, which the family eat together
as they also did the principal meal later in the clay.  She had never yet
failed to appear, and her absence would excite remark.

The governor's household, like that of every Egyptian of rank, was
conducted more on the Greek than the Egyptian plan; and this was the case
not merely as regarded the meals but in many other things, and especially
the language spoken.  From the Mukaukas himself down to the youngest
member of the family, all spoke Greek among themselves, and Coptic, the
old native dialect, only to the servants.  Nay, many borrowed and foreign
words had already crept into use in the Coptic.

The governor's granddaughter, pretty little Mary, had learnt to speak
Greek fluently and correctly before she spoke Coptic, but when Paula had
first arrived she could not as yet write the beautiful language of Greece
with due accuracy.  Paula loved children; she longed for some occupation,
and she had therefore volunteered to instruct the little girl in the art.
At first her hosts had seemed pleased that she should render this
service, but ere long the relation between the Lady Neforis and her
husband's niece had taken the unpleasant aspect which it was destined to
retain.  She had put a stop to the lessons, and the reason she had
assigned for this insulting step was that Paula had dictated to her pupil
long sentences out of her Orthodox Greek prayerbook.  This, it was true,
she had done; but without the smallest concealment; and the passages she
had chosen had contained nothing but what must elevate the soul of every
Christian, of whatever confession.

The child had wept bitterly over her grandmother's fiat, though Paula had
always taken the lessons quite seriously, for Mary loved her older
companion with all the enthusiasm of a half-grown girl--as a child of ten
really is in Egypt; her passionate little heart worshipped the beautiful
maiden who was in every respect so far above her, and Paula's arms had
opened wide to embrace the child who brought sunshine into the gloomy,
chill atmosphere she breathed in her uncle's house.  But Neforis regarded
the child's ardent love for her Melchite relation as exaggerated and
morbid, imperilling perhaps her religious faith; and she fancied that
under Paula's influence Mary had transferred her affections from her to
the younger woman with added warmth.  Nor was this idea wholly fanciful;
the child's strong sense of justice could not bear to see her friend
misunderstood and slighted, often simply and entirely misjudged and
hardly blamed, so Mary felt it her duty, as far as in her lay, to make up
for her grandmother's delinquencies in regard to the guest who in the
child's eyes was perfection.

But Neforis was not the woman to put up with this demeanor in a child.
Mary was her granddaughter, the only child of her lost son, and no one
should come between them.  So she forbid the little girl to go to Paula's
room without an express message, and when a Greek teacher was engaged for
her, her instructions were that she should keep her pupil as much as
possible out of the Syrian damsel's way.  All this only fanned the
child's vehement affection; and tenderly as her grandmother would
sometimes caress her--while Mary on her part never failed in dutiful
obedience--neither of them ever felt a true and steady warmth of heart
towards the other; and for this Paula was no doubt to blame, though
against her will and by her mere existence.

Often, indeed, and by a hundred covert hints Dame Neforis gave Paula to
understand that she it was who had alienated her grandchild; there was
nothing for it but to keep the child for whom she yearned, at a distance,
and only rarely reveal to her the abundance of her love.  At last her
life was so full of grievance that she was hardly able to be innocent
with the innocent--a child with the child; Mary was not slow to note
this, and ascribed Paula's altered manner to the suffering caused by
her grandmother's severity.

Mary's most frequent opportunities of speaking to her friend were
just before meals; for at that time no one was watching her, and her
grandmother had not forbidden her calling Paula to table.  A visit to her
room was the child's greatest delight--partly because it was forbidden--
but no less because Paula, up in her own room, was quite different from
what she seemed with the others, and because they could there look at
each other and kiss without interference, and say what ever they pleased.
There Mary could tell her as much as she dared of the events in their
little circle, but the lively and sometimes hoydenish little girl was
often withheld from confessing a misdemeanor, or even an inoffensive
piece of childishness, by sheer admiration for one who to her appeared
nobler, greater and loftier than other beings.

Just as Paula had finished putting up her hair, Mary, who would rush like
a whirlwind even into her grandmother's presence, knocked humbly at the
door.  She did not fly into Paula's arms as she did into those of
Susannah or her daughter Katharina, but only kissed her white arm with
fervent devotion, and colored with happiness when Paula bent down to her,
pressed her lips to her brow and hair, and wiped her wet, glowing cheeks.
Then she took Mary's head fondly between her hands and said:

"What is wrong with you, madcap?"

In fact the sweet little face was crimson, and her eyes swelled as if she
had been crying violently.

"It is so fearfully hot," said Mary.  "Eudoxia"--her Greek governess--
"says that Egypt in summer is a fiery furnace, a hell upon earth.  She is
quite ill with the heat, and lies like a fish on the sand; the only good
thing about it is.  .  ."

"That she lets you run off and gives you no lessons?"

Mary nodded, but as no lecture followed the confession she put her head
on one side and looked up into Paula's face with large roguish eyes.

"And yet you have been crying!--a great girl like you?"

"I--I crying?"

"Yes, crying.  I can see it in your eyes.  Now confess: what has
happened?"

"You will not scold me?"

"Certainly not."

"Well then.  At first it was fun, such fun you cannot think, and I do
not mind the heat; but when the great hunt had gone by I wanted to go
to my grand mother and I was not allowed.  Do you know, something very
particular had been going on in the fountain-room; and as they all
came out again I crept behind Orion into the tablinum--there are such
wonderful things there, and I wanted just to frighten him a little;
we have often played games together before.  At first he did not see me,
and as he was bending over the hanging, from which the gem was stolen--I
believe he was counting the stones in the faded old thing--I just jumped
on to his shoulder, and he was so frightened--I can tell you, awfully
frightened!  And he turned upon me like a fighting-cock and--and he gave
me a box on the ear; such a slap, it is burning now--and all sorts of
colors danced before my eyes.  He always used to be so nice and kind to
me, and to you, too, and so I used to be fond of him--he is my uncle too
--but a box on the ears, a slap such as the cook might give to the
turnspit--I am too big for that; that I will certainly not put up with
it!  Since my last birthday all the slaves and upper servants, too, have
had to treat me as a lady and to bow down to me!  And now!--it was just
here.--How dare he?"  She began to cry again and sobbed out: "But that
was not all.  He locked me into the dark tablinum and left--left me...."
her tears flowed faster and faster, "left me sitting there!  It was so
horrible; and I might have been there now if I had not found a gold
plate; I seized my great-grandfather--I mean the silver image of Menas,
and hammered on it, and screamed Fire!  Then Sebek heard me and fetched
Orion, and he let me out, and made such a fuss over me and kissed me.
But what is the good of that; my grandfather will be angry, for in my
terror I beat his father's nose quite flat on the plate."

Paula had listened, now amused and now grave, to the little girl's story;
when she ceased, she once more wiped her eyes and said:

"Your uncle is a man, and you must not play with him as if he were a
child like yourself.  The reminder you got was rather a hard one, no
doubt, but Orion tried to make up for it.--But the great hunt, what was
that?"

At this question Mary's eyes suddenly sparkled again.  In an instant all
her woes were forgotten, even her ancestor's flattened nose, and with a
merry, hearty laugh she exclaimed:

"Oh! you should have seen it!  You would have been amused too.  They
wanted to catch the bad man who cut the emerald out of the hanging.  He
had left his shoes and they had held them under the dogs' noses and then
off they went!  First they rushed here to the stairs; then to the
stables, then to the lodgings of one of the horse-trainers, and I kept
close behind, after the terriers and the other dogs.  Then they stopped
to consider and at last they all ran out at the gate towards the town.  I
ought not to have gone beyond the court-yard, but--do not be cross with
me--it was such fun!--Out they went, along Hapi Street, across the
square, and at last into the Goldsmith's Street, and there the whole pack
plunged into Gamaliel's shop--the Jew who is always so merry.  While he
was talking to the others his wife gave me some apricot tartlets; we do
not have such good ones at home."

"And did they find the man?"  asked Paula, who had changed color
repeatedly during the child's story.

