
Dave kept a close watch out in all directions while Hiram hurried up
a quick breakfast.  They got through with the meal rapidly.  Then
Dave went over the machine, seeing that the gasoline tanks were full
and the gearing and oiling apparatus in good order.

Two hours went by, and there were no developments that indicated
that the visitor to their camp had been other than a straggler, with
no purpose in view in his rapid disappearance.  Hiram became more
matter-of-fact, and guessed he had "got scared for nothing."  All
the same he kept a close lookout all of the time, particularly in
the direction of Brantford.

Dave was planning a visit on foot to that town.  He decided,
however, that he would wait till afternoon so as to be sure that
there was no occasion for worry.  Both lads discovered the fallacy
of their theories at the same moment.

"Look!" suddenly shouted Hiram, pointing.

"I see," said Dave calmly, but under the surface greatly stirred up.

"It's the Drifter!"

"Yes."

"What are you going to do?"

"Come," spoke Dave simply, and sprang into his seat in the Machine.

Hiram hastily collected their few belongings scattered about the
spot.  He bundled them into the accommodation basket, and was in his
place almost as soon as Dave.

The eyes of both of the young aviators were fixed on a rapidly approaching
object--an airship.  Dave did not have to glance at its construction more
than once to know definitely that it was the stolen Drifter.

Whoever was at the levers, Jerry or his father, thoroughly
understood his business, Dave saw that.  The aero-hydroplane came
rather abruptly into view over a wooded hill top, and was rapidly
approaching them.

"You see, I was right," said Hiram hastily.  "That half breed was a
spy, at least to that crowd.  He has directed them here."

"All ready," ordered Dave, in a set, sturdy tone, and the self
starter began to work.

"What is it--a chase?" fluttered Hiram.

"We'll have to wait and see.  You know what kind of fellows the
Dawsons are.  I'm not going to sit like a bird in a nest and have
them swoop down upon us, though."

"There are three--you can count them in their airship," said Hiram,
shading his eyes and craning his neck.

"Four," corrected Dave.  "The Drifter has a capacity of five
ordinary people, Mr. Randolph told me."

The Monarch II made a magnificent slanting rise up into the air.
Dave knew the splendid qualities of the machine under his control.
They included an ability for a quick light ascent.  He had no idea
of the purpose of the Drifter crowd, but of course their main object
was to capture their rival.  The question was, failing in this, how,
far would they go in the way of crippling or even destroying the
Monarch II.

The Drifter was headed on a course directly towards the eminence
which the boys had just left behind them.  There had come up an
eight hour wind about noon, and Dave knew that would be child's play
maneuvering to avoid the enemy intent on annoying or injuring them.
He drove ahead at a six hundred feet level and waited for the
Drifter crowd to indicate what their purpose was.

"They are changing their course!" said Hiram quickly, as the Drifter
wheeled suddenly.

"They are going to try a new ascent," explained Dave.

"Why?"

"To get to a higher level than ourselves."

"Then they mean mischief?"

"I am afraid that they do," replied the young aviator.

"Maybe they are trying to scare us," suggested Hiram.

Dave was now certain that the purpose of the Dawsons was to pursue,
capture or intimidate them, or drive them away.  They had a superb
machine, and as they made a far lateral shoot it brought them
considerably higher up than the Monarch II.

In fact, after one or two circles, like a huge bird swooping after
prey, the Drifter came almost directly over them.

Dave's tactics were now purely defensive and evasive.  There were
five people aboard the aero-hydroplane, and they were desperate
persons.  He was not surprised when an object same shooting
downwards from the Drifter.  It struck one of the plane wires and
then dropped earthwards.

"Something's whipped loose," spoke Hiram quickly.

"It's one of the elevator wires," said Dave, darting a quick glance
at the spot.  "This won't do."

Now it was an over-water flight with no measured course to pursue.
The Drifter tried to repeat its recent tactics.  Dave noticed that
the Monarch II had become somewhat faulty in its running.  He was
anxious to get away from the enemy.  His main efforts were directed
towards preserving a sure balance, for once or twice there was a
wobble, as if the machine was hurt in some vital part.

The young aviator made out a buoy a few miles to the west.  Beyond
it was a little settlement.  He set his course for reaching it, and
directed his full attention to the levers and the angle indicated.

The indicator was directly in front of the pilot seat.  It showed
positively how the machine was flying, on the top or down bank.  It
comprised a cup with lines set about ten degrees, and gave a sure
safety limit.  Only the pendulum was movable.   This was mounted on
an arm always perpendicular, a small mirror reflecting the
variations of the pendulum.

Climbing and banking, Dave got quite a lead on the Drifter, but the
aero-hydroplane kept up a steady pursuit.

"There's something the matter besides the broken wire," spoke Dave
to his anxious companion.  "The oil intake is dogged or one of the
planes loose.  We can't take any risks."

Dave sent the Monarch II on a downward shoot.  There was a single
pontoon in the center of the craft, with small tanks beneath the
planes to prevent tipping over in the water.  Dave aimed to hit the
bay near to the shore.

Suddenly the aircraft acted queer.  It had evidently struck a hole
in the air.  The machine seemed fairly to drop from under its
occupants, and thirty feet from the water, Dave was lifted from his
seat and took a sudden plunge over-board.

He went under the surface and came up dazed and nearly stunned.  As
he floated, dashing the water from his eyes, he saw the Drifter, now
a flying boat, cut around a point of rocks, bearing straight down
upon him.

Dave looked quickly about him for the Monarch II.  To his surprise,
as it scudded across the waves for perhaps a hundred feet on its
momentum, it lifted again free of the surface of the bay.

He made out Hiram clambering from his seat like a sailor among the
riggings of a ship.  He saw the machine go up on a sharp slant,
clear the shore of the bay, and disappear beyond the high cliffs
lining it.

Then something struck him.  It was some light part of the rotary
engined aero-hydroplane, the Drifter, cutting the water like a
knife.  His head dizzied, and the young aviator went under the
surface of the lake with a shock.





CHAPTER XXII

DAVE A CAPTIVE


It took Dave an hour to find out just what had happened to him.  He
roused up to find two men carrying him, one at his feet, one at his
shoulders.  All that he could guess was that they were on land.  How
he had been fished out of the water, and what had become of the
Drifter, the young aviator had no means of knowing.

The two men were rough looking fellows and reminded Dave of dock
laborers or loiterers.  They were big and sturdy, and as Dave
stretched out and showed signs of life, one of them remarked
gruffly.

"None of that--no squirming, now."

Dave's clothes were soggy and dripping.  He felt somewhat sore on
one side of his head, but so far as he could figure it out he was
not crippled; or seriously hurt.

The young aviator cast his eyes about him to, learn that they were
going through a patch of timber.  Then came a meadow-like stretch,
and then a thicket.  They had not gone far into that before the men
dropped him on the ground and stood over him.

"Can you walk?" asked one of the two.

"I think I can," replied Dave, arising quite nimbly to his feet.

The instant he did this both of the men reached, out and seized an
arm.  Dave was thus pinioned tightly as the men forced him along.

"Most there," growled one of them gruffly.

"Good thing," retorted the other.

Finally they came to a dense thicket that covered a rise.  About
half way up this, almost hidden by saplings and vines, Dave made
out a grim looking patched-up building.

It was an old hut to which various additions had been made.  One of
Dave's companions uttered a peculiar whistle.  The door of the place
was opened, and a disreputable looking fellow like themselves
admitted them.

"Hello, who's this?" he spoke in a tone of curiosity.

"Oh, some one to take care of," was the short reply.

"He don't look like a revenue."

"Worse than that.  Ridgely will tell you when he comes," was the
indifferent retort.  "Have you a place to keep him tight and safe?"

"I guess so," laughed the other, "a dozen of them."

"One will do."

Dave was led through several rooms.  Then they came to a partition
formed of heavy timbers.  In its center was a stout door with an
immense padlock.

"Get in there," spoke the most ferocious of his captors, giving Dave
a push.

Then the door was closed with a crash that showed how heavy it was.
Dave could hear those outside securing the padlock.

"A prisoner, eh?" mused Dave, looking about him.  "Yes, it is,
indeed, tight and safe."

Dave's prison place was gruesome in the extreme.  On three sides was
solid rock, forming a semicircular back to the room.  The partition,
closed the entire front.  Near its top in several places were cut
out apertures, admitting air and a little light.

There were some broken boxes in the place and a heap of burlap.
Dave decided that it had been used at some time or other as a place
of storage.  He did not yet feel normal, so he sat down on one of
the boxes and felt about his head.

"Just a bruise," he reported.  "I suppose they, dragged me aboard of
the Drifter from the water, but what about Hiram and the Monarch
II?"

Dave started up, all weakness and dizziness disappearing as if by
magic, as he thrilled over the possible peril of his comrade.  With
a recollection only of his last sight of Hiram grid the Monarch II,
he feared what might have happened to either or both.

It worried Dave a good deal and made him restless and unhappy, but
finally he figured out a theory.  In some unaccountable way the
Monarch II had no sooner glided along on its pontoon, than it had
run straightway up into the air, as though the self starter was in
perfect action.  Dave recalled Hiram struggling to reach the pilot's
seat.  Then he had witnessed the disappearance of the Monarch II.

"I doubt if Hiram could manage the machine--I even doubt with
something wrong with it, as there surely was, if he could keep it
adrift," decided Dave.  "What then?"

The young aviator pictured Hiram and the machine in a tangle among
the trees, or dropping upset among the rocks.  He had not seen
anything of the Dawsons or the Drifter since he had fallen into the
water of the bay.  Perhaps, he reasoned, they had resumed an air
chase of the fugitive.

Dave had several hours to himself.  He detected no sound or movement
outside of the strange room he was in.  It was dreadfully dull and
lonesome, and he wondered what the outcome of his present adventure
would be.

It was well along in the day, when Dave from sheer weariness and
worry had lain down among the heaps of burlap, that a diversion came
to monotony.  He started up as he heard voice outside of the door.
Then the padlock rattled, the door opened, and some one stepped
across the threshold.  The visitor stared about to locate Dave, and
spoke the words:

"That you, Dashaway?"

The room was lighter now, with the door half open.  Dave rubbed his
eyes and strained his gaze, and took a good look at the speaker.

"Don't you know me?" challenged the latter.

"Oh, yes," replied Dave, "I see now.  You are the gentleman we
rescued from the lake at Columbus."

"I don't suppose you think me much of a gentleman just now,
Dashaway," spoke Ridgely, for, he was, in fact Dave's visitor.

His tone was somewhat regretful, and not at all unfriendly.  Dave
was shrewd enough to discover this, and politic enough to take quick
advantage of it.

"Oh, I don't know," he said.  "Of course you are with the crowd who
had me locked in here."

"I'm sorry to say that's true," responded Ridgely.

"It's not pleasant here, I can tell you," said Dave, "and the whole
thing is pretty high handed, don't you think so, Mr. Ridgely?"

"I don't think it, Dashaway, I know, it. See here, I've got nothing
against you.  On the contrary, I owe you a good deal.  I'm not
forgetting that you saved my life when my launch struck the rocks
near Columbus."

Dave was silent, resolved to let the man have his say out.

"I was in a fix then, I was in a fix before I got there, and I'm
afraid I'm in a fix now," continued Ridgely.  "I've come to see you
in the right spirit, Dashaway."

"How is that?" inquired Dave.

