Project Gutenberg's The Mystery at Putnam Hall, by Arthur M. Winfield

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mystery at Putnam Hall
       The School Chums' Strange Discovery

Author: Arthur M. Winfield

Release Date: January 29, 2006 [EBook #17636]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERY AT PUTNAM HALL ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration: SOME CADETS CAME INTO VIEW, EACH CARRYING A BUCKET OF
WATER.

    _The Mystery of Putnam Hall_--_Frontispiece._ (Page 95)]





THE MYSTERY AT

PUTNAM HALL

_Or_

_The School Chums' Strange Discovery_

BY

ARTHUR M. WINFIELD (Edward Stratemeyer)

AUTHOR OF THE FAMOUS "ROVER BOYS SERIES," ETC.


_ILLUSTRATED_


 NEW YORK
 GROSSET & DUNLAP PUBLISHERS
 Made in the United States of America




BOOKS FOR BOYS


BY ARTHUR M. WINFIELD

(Edward Stratemeyer)


       *       *       *       *       *

12mo.   Cloth.   Illustrated

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PUTNAM HALL CADET SERIES

          THE CADETS OF PUTNAM HALL
          THE RIVALS OF PUTNAM HALL
          THE CHAMPIONS OF PUTNAM HALL
          THE REBELLION AT PUTNAM HALL
          CAMPING OUT DAYS AT PUTNAM HALL
          THE MYSTERY AT PUTNAM HALL

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FIRST ROVER BOYS SERIES

          THE ROVER BOYS AT SCHOOL
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE OCEAN
          THE ROVER BOYS IN THE JUNGLE
          THE ROVER BOYS OUT WEST
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE GREAT LAKES
          THE ROVER BOYS IN THE MOUNTAINS
          THE ROVER BOYS IN CAMP
          THE ROVER BOYS ON LAND AND SEA
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE RIVER
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE PLAINS
          THE ROVER BOYS IN SOUTHERN WATERS
          THE ROVER BOYS ON THE FARM
          THE ROVER BOYS ON TREASURE ISLE
          THE ROVER BOYS AT COLLEGE
          THE ROVER BOYS DOWN EAST
          THE ROVER BOYS IN THE AIR
          THE ROVER BOYS IN NEW YORK
          THE ROVER BOYS IN ALASKA
          THE ROVER BOYS IN BUSINESS
          THE ROVER BOYS ON A TOUR

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SECOND ROVER BOYS SERIES

          THE ROVER BOYS AT COLBY HALL
          THE ROVER BOYS ON SNOWSHOE ISLAND
          THE ROVER BOYS UNDER CANVAS
          THE ROVER BOYS ON A HUNT

GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, New York

          COPYRIGHT, 1911, under the title of
          _The Putnam Hall Mystery_

GROSSET & DUNLAP




CONTENTS


          CHAPTER                                     PAGE

                I. AN ENCOUNTER ON THE ROAD              1

               II. THE CADETS OF PUTNAM HALL            11

              III. SOMETHING ABOUT A RUNAWAY            19

               IV. A FRUITLESS SEARCH                   29

                V. THE FIGHT IN THE GYMNASIUM           39

               VI. CAPTAIN PUTNAM INVESTIGATES          49

              VII. PEPPER MAKES A DISCOVERY             59

             VIII. THE FOOTBALL ELEVEN                  69

               IX. THE FOOTBALL GAME                    79

                X. PUTTING OUT A LIVELY BLAZE           89

               XI. A MYSTERIOUS HAPPENING               99

              XII. AN INVITATION ACCEPTED              109

             XIII. THE WORK OF THE ENEMY               119

              XIV. AT THE FORD MANSION                 129

               XV. THE SNOWBALL BATTLE                 139

              XVI. IN WHICH MORE VALUABLES VANISH      149

             XVII. THE TUG-OF-WAR                      159

            XVIII. A CURIOUS MEETING                   169

              XIX. ABOUT A SET OF TEETH                178

               XX. PEPPER A PRISONER                   187

              XXI. A GRAVE ACCUSATION                  196

             XXII. THE MYSTERY GOES ON                 205

            XXIII. AN ELECTION OF OFFICERS             214

             XXIV. ANDY SHOWS HIS COURAGE              223

              XXV. THE MAN AT POINT VIEW LODGE         231

             XXVI. WHAT THE CONSTABLE THOUGHT          239

            XXVII. LOOKING FOR CLUES                   247

           XXVIII. TO THE RESCUE                       255

             XXIX. A REAL HERO                         263

              XXX. THE MYSTERY EXPLAINED--CONCLUSION   271




INTRODUCTION


MY DEAR BOYS:

This story is complete in itself, but forms the sixth volume in a line
issued under the general title of "Putnam Hall Series."

As mentioned several times, this line was started because many young
folks wanted to know what happened at Putnam Hall Military School
previous to the arrival at that institution of the Rover boys, as
already related in my "Rover Boys Series."

To gratify this curiosity I wrote the first volume of this series,
called "The Putnam Hall Cadets," showing how Captain Putnam organized
his famous school, and how it was Jack Ruddy and Pepper Ditmore came to
be among his first pupils.

In the second book, entitled "The Putnam Hall Rivals," I gave the
particulars of several contests on the field of sports, and also told
about a thrilling balloon ride and of an odd discovery in the woods.

Following the second book came a third, "The Putnam Hall Champions,"
with more bitterly-contested games, in one of which young Major Ruddy's
enemies played him a foul trick.

From the opening of the school there had been dissatisfaction with one
of the teachers, and when another was engaged who proved to be a man of
peculiar whims, the boys went into open revolt, as related in another
volume, called "The Putnam Hall Rebellion." The cadets literally ran
away, and did not return to the Hall until Captain Putnam came upon the
scene to straighten matters out.

The rebellion was followed by a grand outing, as related in "The Putnam
Hall Encampment." The cadets marched far away from the school, to the
shore of a beautiful lake, and there our heroes managed to have a good
time in spite of the mean work of several of their enemies.

In the present volume are related the particulars of a most puzzling
mystery which at one time threatened to bring disaster to the whole
school. How the mystery was at last solved I leave for the pages which
follow to explain.

Again I thank both young and old for all the nice things they have said
about my books. I hope the reading of the volumes affords all both
pleasure and profit.

          Affectionately and sincerely yours,
                                   EDWARD STRATEMEYER.




THE MYSTERY AT PUTNAM HALL




CHAPTER I

AN ENCOUNTER ON THE ROAD


"Here we are again, as the clown says in the circus!"

"Right you are, Pepper. And I'll be glad to get back to Putnam Hall once
more," responded Major Jack Ruddy, as he followed his chum from the lake
steamer to the Cedarville dock.

"Hello, there is Andy!" cried Pepper Ditmore, as he caught sight of a
familiar face in the crowd of cadets, "Andy, where have you been? Why
didn't you come on the boat with us?"

"I got in last night," answered Andy Snow. "How are you, anyway?" And he
shook hands cordially.

"Oh, I'm as fine as a new-tooth comb," answered Pepper Ditmore, with a
grin. "Ready for study and fun."

"Especially fun, I'll wager. How about it, Jack?"

"Oh, Pepper usually manages to get his share," came from the young major
of the Putnam Hall battalion. "But, Andy, did you---- Hi, look where you
are going, will you, Ritter!" cried Jack, rather angrily.

A tall youth, carrying a big dress-suit case, had forced his way through
the crowd, hitting Jack in the knee with his baggage.

"What do you want to block the way for?" demanded Reff Ritter, sourly.
"Think you own the dock?"

"I've got as much right here, Ritter, as you have!" retorted the young
major, sharply. "Don't you knock me again like that."

"I will--if you get in my way."

"If you do, you'll take the consequences."

"Bah! Don't you try to dictate to me, Jack Ruddy!" growled Reff Ritter.
"You got the best of me last term, but you'll not get the best of me
this term, I'll tell you that!"

"Phew! Ritter is somewhat peppery!" whispered Andy Snow.

"I guess I know the reason," came from a student named Dale Blackmore.

"What is it?"

"I'll tell you later--too much of a crowd here," rejoined Dale.

About twenty cadets, all bound for Putnam Hall Military Academy, had
arrived on the boat from Ithaca, and these, along with some others who
had come down to the dock to see the boat come in, gathered around Jack
Ruddy and Reff Ritter to see the outcome of the unexpected encounter.

Jack Ruddy had good cause to consider Reff Ritter his enemy. But he had
hoped that during the term now opening at the school the bully of Putnam
Hall would keep his distance.

"I am not trying to dictate to you, Ritter," answered Jack, as calmly as
he could. "But I don't propose to let you hit me with your suitcase."

"Huh! It was an accident!" growled Reff.

"Oh, come on, Reff!" put in Gus Coulter, the bully's close crony. "Let
us get good seats in the carryall."

"That's the talk! Let us get in before the others take the seats!" came
from Nick Paxton, another crony.

He pushed ahead, and his elbow caught Pepper Ditmore directly in the
ribs.

"Not quite so swift, Paxton!" cried Pepper, and he gave the cadet a
quick shove backwards. Paxton bumped into Reff Ritter, lost his
footing, and fell over the dress-suit case in the bully's hand.

"Hurrah! One down!" cried Andy Snow. "How many yards to gain for a
touchdown, Nick?"

"What do you mean by knocking me down!" roared Nick Paxton, as he
scrambled to his feet. "I'll not stand for it."

"Then sit down again," answered Pepper, merrily. "And next time keep
your elbow out of my ribs," he added. "Come on, we don't want to get
left!" he added to his chums.

A bolt was made by many of the cadets for the Putnam Hall carryall, and
soon a crowd was inside and on the front seat, talking, joking and
cheering, as suited the mood of each individual. Jack, Pepper, Andy and
Dale managed to crowd inside throwing their suitcases on the top. Gus
Coulter got in also, but when he saw that Reff Ritter and Nick Paxton
had been left, he scrambled out again, and his place was taken by Fred
Century, another student.

"Hello, Peleg, old sport!" cried Pepper, gaily, to the driver of the
turnout. "How have you been for the past fifty years?"

"Oh, I'm very well, thank you," responded Peleg Snuggers.

"Heard you had a fortune left to you," went on Pepper, with a wink at
his chums. "Old uncle died and left you half a million."

"Three-quarters of a million," put in Andy Snow, scenting fun. "All in
gold, too."

"Isn't that fine!" said Jack. "Peleg, how about lending me ten or
fifteen dollars?"

"I could use a five-spot myself," added Dale.

"I'd like to borrow about fifty for a new bicycle," came from Fred
Century.

"Don't be modest about lending us the cash," went on Pepper. "Just hand
it out as if you had always had it."

"I ain't had no fortune left to me!" burst out the general utility man,
desperately. "Who said I had?"

"Why, everybody knows it, Peleg," responded Pepper. "Come, don't be
modest about it. Was it really three-quarters of a million?"

"Maybe it was more," suggested Jack.

"If I were you, Peleg, I'd not carry so much around in my pockets," said
Dale.

"I ain't had a cent left to me!" shouted the driver of the carryall.
"This is some of your jokes, an' I want you to stop it! Oh, dear, now
the school's opened ag'in I suppose there won't be no rest fer nobuddy!"
And he heaved a mountainous sigh.

"Oh, Peleg! Don't be angry with me!" murmured Pepper, with a trace of
tears in his voice. "If you get angry I'll die!"

"You behave yourself, Pepper Ditmore, or I won't drive you to the Hall."

"Peleg, don't you want me to drive?" asked Andy, who was on the front
seat. "I'm a cracker-jack at driving."

"Not much! Don't you tech them hosses!" shouted the general utility man
in alarm. "That off hoss is a new one an' he's mighty skittish, I can
tell you. This mornin' when I was hookin' him up he nigh kicked the leg
off o' me!"

"Say, how are we going to get to the Hall?" came in ugly tones from Reff
Ritter. He, with six other boys, was standing beside the carryall.

"Captain Putnam said he'd send down some carriages," answered Peleg
Snuggers. "There they come now," and he pointed to the turnouts.

"Pshaw! I wanted to go in the carryall," grumbled Ritter.

"So did I," added Gus Coulter.

"Well, this is full, so you'll have to take the carriages," answered
Peleg Snuggers. "Everybody hold fast!" he shouted, as he took up the
reins.

"We are off!" shouted Pepper, gaily. "Farewell to Cedarville and ho! for
Putnam Hall!"

"Wish I had room, I'd turn a handspring for you," came from Andy, who
was quite an acrobat.

"Now don't you cut up any monkey-shines," pleaded the driver of the
carryall. "That new hoss won't stand for 'em."
