The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jimsy and the Monsters, by Walt Sheldon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Jimsy and the Monsters

Author: Walt Sheldon

Release Date: March 21, 2010 [EBook #31716]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JIMSY AND THE MONSTERS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Katherine Ward and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  Science fiction, in collaboration with the idea-men and
  technicians of Hollywood, has been responsible for many horrors,
  dating back to "The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari" and "The Lost World."
  But Hollywood has created one real-life horror that tops all
  creations of fantasy--the child star. In this story we at last see
  such a brat meet Things from Alien Space.




jimsy and the monsters

by ... Walt Sheldon

  Hollywood could handle just about anything--until Mildume's
  machine brought in two real aliens.


Mr. Maximilian Untz regarded the monsters with a critical eye. Script
girls, cameramen, sometimes even stars quailed under Mr. Untz's
critical eye--but not these monsters. The first had a globelike head
and several spidery legs. The second was willowy and long-clawed. The
third was covered with hair. The prop department had outdone itself.

"Get Jimsy," said Mr. Untz, snapping his fingers.

A young earnest assistant producer with a crew cut turned and relayed
the summons. "Jimsy--Jimsy LaRoche!" Down the line of cables and
cameras it went. _Jimsy_ ... _Jimsy_....

A few moments later, from behind the wall flat where he had been
playing canasta with the electricians, emerged Jimsy LaRoche, the
eleven-year-old sensation. He took his time. He wore powder-blue
slacks and a sports shirt and his golden hair was carefully ringleted.
He was frowning. He had been interrupted with a meld of a hundred and
twenty.

"Okay, so what is it now?" he said, coming up to Mr. Untz.

Mr. Untz turned and glared down at the youth. Jimsy returned the
glare. There was a sort of cold war between Mr. Untz and Master Jimsy
LaRoche, the sort you could almost hear hotting up. Mr. Untz pointed
to the monsters. "Look, Jimsy. Look at them. What do you think?" He
watched the boy's expression carefully.

Jimsy said, "To use one of your own expressions, Max--_pfui_. They
wouldn't scare a mouse." And then Jimsy shrugged and walked away.

Mr. Untz turned to his assistant. "Harold," he said in an injured
tone. "You saw it. You heard it. You see what I've got to put up
with."

"Sure," said Harold Potter sympathetically. He had mixed feelings
toward Mr. Untz. He admired the producer's occasional flashes of
genius, he deplored his more frequent flashes of stupidity. On the
whole, however, he regarded himself as being on Mr. Untz's side in the
war between Mr. Untz and the world and Hollywood. He knew Mr. Untz's
main trouble.

Some years ago Maximilian Untz had been brought to Hollywood heralded
as Vienna's greatest producer of musicals. So far he had been assigned
to westerns, detectives, documentaries, a fantasy of the future--but
no musicals. And now it was a psychological thriller. Jimsy played the
killer as a boy and there was to be a dream sequence, a nightmare full
of monsters. Mr. Untz was determined it should be the most terrifying
dream sequence ever filmed.

Only up to now he wasn't doing so good.

"I would give," said Mr. Untz to Harold Potter, "my right eye for
some _really_ horrible monsters." He gestured at the world in
general. "Think of it, Harold. We got atom bombs and B-29's, both
vitamins and airplanes, and stuff to cure you of everything from
broken legs to dropsy. A whole world of modern science--but nobody
can make a fake monster. It looks anything but fake and wouldn't scare
an eleven-year-old boy."

"It's a thought," agreed Harold Potter. He had a feeling for things
scientific; he had taken a B.S. in college but had drifted into
