prayer" (Acts iii. 1).

_Structure._ See note under this head at Terce.

Why does the Church desire prayer at the ninth hour?

1. In this she follows the example of her Founder, Christ, Who prayed at
the ninth hour. "At the ninth hour, Jesus cried out with a loud voice,
saying 'Eloi, Eloi, lamma sabacthani?' which is, being interpreted, 'My
God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?'" (St. Mark xv. 34).

2. That ninth hour was the long-wished-for and long-watched-for hour
when reconciliation between earth and heaven was complete.

3. To beg from God light and grace, especially towards the end of life,
for the day's decline in the afternoon is a figure of the waning of
spiritual and corporal life. The hymn for None expresses this:--

     "O God, unchangeable and true,
      Of all the light and power,
      Dispensing light in silence through
      Each successive hour;
      Lord, brighten our declining day,
      That it may never wane
      Till death, when all things round decay,
      Brings back the morn again.
      This grace on Thy redeemed confer,
      Father, Co-equal Son,
      And Holy Ghost, the Comforter,
      Eternal Three in One--Amen."
      (St. Ambrose's hymn, translated by Cardinal
       Newman).




TEXTS AND INTENTIONS TO AID THE PIOUS RECITATION OF NONE.

1. "Come down from the cross" (St. Matthew, c. 27).

2. "Lord, remember me when Thou shalt come into Thy Kingdom" (St.
Matthew, c. 23).

3. "My God, my God, why has Thou forsaken me?" (St. Matthew, c. 27).

_General Intentions_. All the intentions of the Sacred Heart; the
conversion of Britain; the Church in America.

_Personal Intentions_. Fervour in preparation for Mass; fervour in
thanksgiving after Mass; fidelity to professional duties and studies.

_Special Intentions_. The temporal welfare of Ireland; to beg a blessing
on her priests; to beg a blessing on her Church students; to beg a
blessing on her Catholic laity; to beg a blessing on her
elementary schools.




CHAPTER IV.


VESPERS AND COMPLINE.

_Etymology_. The word _vespers_ comes directly from the Latin _Vesper_;
_Vespera_ or _Espera_ was a name given to the star Venus, which rising
in the evening was a call to prayer. This Hour is recited after None and
before Compline. In structure, it resembles Lauds, Pater Noster, Ave,
Gloria, Five Psalms with antiphons, Capitulum, Hymn, Versicle, antiphon,
Magnificat, antiphon and collect.

It had several synonymous names. It was called _Duodecima Hora_
(Antiphonary of Bangor), because it was said at the twelfth hour of the
day, six o'clock, or, perhaps, the name came from the twelve psalms
which made up the Hour in some churches. It was known, too, by the names
_Lucernarium, hora lucernalis_, the hour of the candles; because at this
hour a number of candles were lighted, not only to shed light but for
symbolic purposes. It was sometimes referred to as _hora incensi_, from
the custom of burning incense at this evening service, and sometimes it
is called _gratiarum actio_ (St. Isidore), because it gives thanks to
God for the graces given during the day. It came to mean not the evening
Hour, but the sunset Hour. And in the sixth century it was celebrated
before daylight had gone and before there was any need for artificial
light. In the fourth century it was recited by torchlight.

_Antiquity_. The Jews honoured God by special and solemn evening
service. Their feasts by God's command began in the evening. "From
evening unto evening you shall celebrate your sabbaths" (Lev. xxiii,
32). And David sang "Evening and morning and at noon I will speak and
declare" (Psalm 54:32). The eariy Christians faithfully followed
the practice.

"In the sixth century, the order of Psalms, etc., in Vespers differed
little from the Vespers in our modern Breviaries. Long before the sixth
century there were evening Offices in various forms. Its existence in
the fourth century is also confirmed by St. Augustine, St. Ambrose, St.
Basil, St. Ephraem ... Before the fourth century we find allusions to
the evening prayer in the early Fathers, Clement I. of Rome, St.
Ignatius, St. Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origen, the Canons of
St. Hippolytus, St. Cyprian (for texts see Baumer-Biron; 1. c.t. 20 seq.
73-74, 76, 78)"--(Dorn Cabrol, _Cath. Ency._, art "Vespers").

Why do we offer up public prayer in the evening? The old liturgists
reply:--

1. To imitate the devout Christians of apostolic times.

2. To honour Jesus, the true Sun of the world, Who hid Himself at His
Incarnation, and in His life, and Whose glory was hidden in His Passion.

3. To thank Christ for the Eucharist, which He instituted in the evening
of His earthly life, ... "and they prepared the Pasch. But when it was
evening (vespere autem) He sat down with His twelve disciples" (St.
Matthew, xxvi. 20). At this vesper meeting He gave to priests the power
to offer the sacrifice of the Mass, to change bread and wine into His
body and blood. At this vesper service, too, Christ and His apostles
celebrated the divine praises, "Hymno dicto" (St. Matthew xxvi. 30).

4. In the evening our Lord's body was taken down from the cross.

5. At the approach of evening Christ appeared to His disciples at Emmaus
and revealed to them His divinity. "Stay with us because it is towards
evening (_advesperascit_) and He went in with them. He took bread and
blessed and brake and gave it to them and their eyes were opened and
they knew Him" (St. Luke xxiv. 29-30). At Vespers we thank God for the
Eucharist.

The hymns at Vespers date for the most part from the sixth century. They
are of great beauty and have the peculiar characteristic of telling of
the days of creation. Thus St. Gregory's (?) fine hymn, _Lucis Creator
optime_, in Sunday's Vespers, refers to the creation of light; Monday's
hymn, _Immense coeli Creator_, refers to the separation of land and
water; Wednesday's hymn (written probably by St. Ambrose), _Coeli Deus
sanctissime_, refers to the creation of the sun and moon; the hymns for
Thursday's vespers, _Magnae Deus potentiae_, refers to the creation of
fish and birds; Friday's hymn, _Hominis superne conditor_ (St. Gregory),
refers to the creation of the beasts of the earth; Saturday's hymn (St.
Ambrose) is an exception, as it refers to the Trinity. All these hymns
have been beautifully translated into English and the text and
translations repay study.

Sunday's hymn, _Lucis Creator optime_, stands thus in translation:--

     "O blest Creator of the light,
      Who makest the day with radiance bright,
      And o'er the forming world didst call
      The light from chaos first of all.

      Whose wisdom joined in sweet array
      The morn and eve and named them day,
      Night comes with all its darkening fears;
      Regard Thy people's prayers and tears,

      Lest sunk in sin, and whelmed with strife,
      They lose the gift of endless life;
      While thinking--but the thoughts of time,
      They weave new chains of woe and crime.

      But grant them grace that they may strain
      The heavenly gate and prize to gain;
      Each harmful lure aside to cast,
      And purge away each error past.

      O Father, that we ask be done,
      Through Jesus Christ, Thine only Son;
      Who, with the Holy Ghost and Thee,
      Doth live and reign eternally. Amen."

      (Translation by Dr. J.M. Neale).

_Structure._ Vespers, in structure, resembles Lauds and consists of five
Psalms. It begins with Pater Noster, Ave (said silently), Deus in
adjutorium,... Domine ad adjuvandum.... Gloria Patri.... Sicut erat.
Alleluia or Laus tibi.... Antiphon begun only if the feast be not
double; if feast be a double the antiphon is said in full before and
after each psalm. If feast be a semi-double or simple the antiphon is
intoned at the beginning and is said in full at end of each psalm and
then only. Then are said Capitulum, Deo gratias, Hymn, versicle and
response, antiphon to Magnificat, the canticle Magnificat, Gloria
Patri.... Sicut erat.... Dominus vobiscum.... Et cum spiritu tuo,
Oremus, collect, commemoration if any made by versicle and response and
antiphon of Magnificat proper to commemoration with collect, Dominus
vobiscum, Et cum.... Benedicamus Domino; Deo gratias, Fidelium
animae.... Amen. If Compline be not said immediately after Vespers,
Pater Noster is added.

At the opening words of the _Magnificat_, _Nunc Dimittis_ and
_Benedictus_, it is a practice with many priests to make the sign of the
cross from forehead to breast, as at _Deus in adjutorium_ (_cf._
Ceremoniale Epis. lib. II. i. 14). This custom, where it exists, should
be preserved (S.R.C., April, 1867).

Writers on liturgy tell us that the number of Psalms in Vespers have a
symbolic meaning, typifying the five wounds of the Saviour, the last of
which, the wound in the side, was inflicted on the evening of Good
Friday, and the others, as the Church says in the hymn _Vergente mundi
vespere_, at the waning of the day of the Old Law, before the dawn of
salvation (Honorius of Autun, circa 1130). Other writers say that these
five psalms should produce acts of contrition for the sins committed
during the day, by the five senses; and that they should be for us,
morally, what the five lighted lamps were for the wise virgins in the
Gospel parable (Amalare of Metz, circa 850).

_Magnificat._ Author. The Blessed Virgin Mary is the author of this
canticle. "The witness of the codices and of the Fathers is practically
unanimous for the Vulgate reading: 'Et ait Maria,' but apart from this,
the attribution of the _Magnificat_ to Elizabeth would in St. Luke's
context be highly abnormal" (Dr. H. T. Henry, _Cath. Encyc_., word,
_Magnificat_)--The Roman Breviary entitles it _Canticum Beatae Marine
Virginis_.

It is divided by commentators into three parts (St. Luke 1, vv. 46-49;
50-53; 54-55). It "is in many places very similar in thought and phrase
to the Canticle of Anna (I. Kings ii. 1-10) and to various psalms (Ps.
33, vv. 3-4; Ps. 39, v. 9; Ps. 70, v. 9; Ps. 125, vv. 2-3; Ps. 110, v.
9; Ps. 97, v. 1; Ps. 117, v. 16; Ps. 32, v. 10; Ps. 92, v. 7; Ps. 33, v.
11; Ps. 97, v-3; Ps. 131, v. 11). Similarities are found in Hab. c. III.
v. 18; Mal. c. III. v. 12; Job. c. 5, v. 11; Is, c. 41, v. 8; Is. c.
149, v. 3, and Gen. c. 17, v. 19. Steeped thus in scriptural thought and
Phraseology, summing up in its inspired ecstasy the economy of God with
His chosen people, indicating the fulfilment of olden prophecy, and
prophesying anew until end of time, the Magnificat is the crown of the
Old Testament singing, the last canticle of the Old and the first of the
New Testament. It is an ecstasy of praise for the inestimable favour
bestowed by God on the Virgin, for the mercies shown to Israel, and for
the fulfilment of the promises made to Abraham and the patriarchs" (Dr.
Henry, _loc. cit_.).

It is found universally in the ancient liturgies and affords a proof of
the apostolic and universal praise of the Blessed Virgin. Durandus
(thirteenth century) gives some reasons for the assignment of the
Magnificat to Vespers. Because Vespers is the grandest liturgical Hour;
because Mary probably arrived at the house of Elizabeth in the evening;
because it was in the moral evening of the world that Mary consented to
be the Mother of God; because she is the star of the sea, etc. The
following interesting reason for the use of the Magnificat at Vespers is
given by St. Bede (works 5, 306). "It comes to pass, by the bounty of
the Lord, that if we were at all times to meditate upon the acts and
sayings of the Blessed Virgin, the observance of chastity and the works
of virtue will always continue with us. For, the excellent and salutary
custom has grown up in Holy Church that all shall sing her hymn (the
Magnificat) every day with the Vesper Psalms, in order that the
recalling of the Lord's incarnation, by this means, may the oftener
incite the souls of the faithful to devotion and that the consideration
of the example set by His Mother may confirm them in the stability of
virtue. And it is meet that this should be done at Vespers, so that the
mind wearied in the course of the day, and distracted by various
opinions, may, at the approach of the season of quiet, collect itself in
oneness of meditation and through the wholesome reminder may hasten to
cleanse itself, by the prayers and tears of the night, from everything
useless or harmful which it had contracted by the business of the day."

_Suffrages of the Saints_. (Title XXXV.) In Sec.2 of rubrics of the new
Breviary we read, "Deinceps, quando facienda erunt suffragia sanctorum,
unum fiet suffragium, juxta formulam propositam in Ordinario novi
Psalterii." Thus were abolished the old formulae of suffrages and a new
one inserted.

Antiphon Beata Dei Genitrix.... V. Mitificavit .... R. Et exaudivit....
Oremus, A cunctis....

This will be said at Lauds and Vespers outside Paschal time (1) on all
Sundays and ferias, (2) on semi-doubles and simples, except (_a_) in
Advent and Passiontide, (_b_) when there is a commemoration of a double,
a day within an octave. In Paschal time the Commemoration is of
the Cross.

In this prayer the names of the Holy Angels and of St. John the Baptist,
if they be titulars, are inserted before the name of St. Joseph. At the
letter N. in the prayer, the name of the titular saint of the particular
church should be inserted; but churches dedicated by the title of a
mystery (e.g., the Ascension) are not to be named in this prayer
(S.R.C., March, 1912).




TEXTS AND INTENTIONS TO AID THE PIOUS RECITATION OF VESPERS.

1. "Woman, behold thy Son; Behold Thy mother" (St. John, c. 19),

2. "I thirst" (St. John, c. 19).

3. "And they, putting a sponge full of vinegar about hyssop, put it to
His mouth" (St. John, c. 19).

_General Intentions_. The conversion of sinners; the wants of the
Church; those in death agony; spread of Eucharistic devotion; daily
Communion; priest adorers; reparation for bad Communions; reparation for
impieties and irreverences towards the Eucharist.

_Personal Intentions_. Regularity in visits to Blessed Sacrament;
Fervour in Mass and in administering Holy Communion; a happy death; true
and deep devotion to Mary.

_Special Intentions_. The Irish Daily Mass Crusade; Total Abstinence;
devotion to the Passion; devotion to the agonising Heart of Jesus.




COMPLINE.

_Etymology and synonym_. The word compline comes from the Latin word
_complere_, to complete, to finish, because this Hour completes or
finishes the day Hours of the Office. It bore several names, _Completa_
(St. Isidore), _Initium noctis_ (St. Columbanus), _Prima noctis hora_
(St. Fructeux).

_Antiquity_. The origin of this Hour has given rise to a great deal of
controversy. Both Baumer and Battifol in their histories of the Breviary
attribute the origin of this Hour to St. Benedict (480-543). Other
scholars attribute its origin to St. Basil, and hence date it from the
fourth century. It is admitted that before the time of St. Basil, Bishop
of Caesarea (370-379) this Hour was in existence. Some hold that St.
Basil established the Hour in the East and St. Benedict in the West. The
latter certainly invested the Hour with the liturgical character and
arrangement which were preserved by the Benedictines and adapted by the
Roman Church. The Compline of the Roman Church is more ornate and solemn
than the liturgy assigned to this Hour by St. Benedict, which was very
simple. The addition of the response _In manus tuas Domine_, the _Nunc
dimittis_ and its anthem of the Blessed Virgin make this Hour one of
great beauty.

_Structure_, The structure of the Hour seems to point to its monastic
origin, "The reader begins, 'Pray, Father, a blessing' (jube, domne
benedicere); the blessing, 'The Lord Almighty grant us a quiet night and
a perfect end. Amen.' 'Noctem quietam....' Then follows a short lesson,
which the Father Abbot gave to his monks. 'Brethren, be sober and watch;
because your adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion, goeth about,
seeking whom he may devour, whom resist ye, strong in faith. But Thou, O
Lord, have mercy on us.' And the monks answer 'Thanks be to God.'
'Fratres sobrii estote et vigilate....' Then the _Pater Noster_
(silently), and the presiding priest, who was the Abbot or his deputy,
said the confiteor and the choir answered _Misereatur_.... 'May Almighty
God have mercy upon thee and forgive thee thy sins, and bring thee to
life everlasting.' The choir then repeats the Confiteor and the priest
replies 'Misereatur vestri....' 'May Almighty God have mercy upon you,
forgive you your sins and bring you to life everlasting.'" Of course, in
private recitation, or where two or three recite the Office, these
prayers are said only once, and in the Confiteor, _tibi pater_ and _te
pater_ are omitted, and _nostri, nostris, nos, nostrorum, nobis_, are
said in the Misereatur and Indulgentiam.

Then the _Converte nos Deus.... At averte iram tuam.... Deus in
adjutorium.... Domine ad adjuvandum.... Gloria Patri_.... Antiphon
(begun only) and three psalms, which vary, are said, _Gloria
Patri_.... _Sicut erat_... being said at the end of each. _In
manus tuas_... is said twice. _Redemisti nos_. ... _Commendo
spiritum meum_; _Custodi nos_ ... _sub umbra_.... _Salva
nos_; _Nunc dimittis_.... _Gloria Patri, Salva nos Domine
vigilantes, custodi nos_... _pace_. (Preces are said here if
rubric orders; i.e., _Kyrie eleison, Christie eleison_... _ad te
veniat_); _Dominus vobiscum, Et cum_.... _Benedicamus Domino,
Deo gratias_; _Benedicat et custodiat nos omnipotens_. Amen;
then the anthem of the Blessed Virgin, _Alma Redemptoris Mater_
(from Saturday before first Sunday of Advent to the feast of the
Purification, inclusive) with its antiphon; in Advent, _Angelus
Domini_, response, _Et concepit_, Oremus and prayer, _Gratiam
tuam_, or with antiphon (after Advent) _Post partum_... and
response, _Dei genetrix, Oremus, Deus qui salutis_. After the
Purification, until Holy Thursday the anthem is _Ave regina
coelorum_, with versicle _Dignare me_ ..., _Da mihi_, Oremus,
_Concedemisericors_. From Holy Saturday until Saturday after
Pentecost, the anthem is _Regina coeli_ with versicle, _Gaude_... and
response, _Quia surrexit_.... _Oremus_ and prayer, _Deus qui per
resurrectionem_. From Holy Trinity Sunday to the Saturday before
Advent, the antiphon is _Salve Regina_ with versicle, _Ora pro
nobis_... response, _Ut digni, Oremus_ and prayer, _Omnipotens
semipeterne Deus_. Then the versicle _Divinum auxilium_.... Amen.
_Pater Noster, Ave, Credo_, in silence, are said. The _Sacro-sanctae_
is added (see pp. 133-135).

The study of the component parts of this Hour are of great interest.
After the Abbot had given his blessing and begged of God to grant the
two-fold favour of a quiet night and a good death, a monk read from Holy
Scripture, and when a suitable portion was read, or at the end of a
Scripture chapter or theme, the Abbot said, "Tu autem," and the reader
"Tu autem, Domine, miserere nobis." This was to ask God to pardon faults
both of reader in his reading and of monks, who, perhaps, were drowsy
and inattentive. The Abbot terminated the exercise by the _Adjutorium
nostrum_ (the _Pater Noster_ is of more recent introduction). Monks who
were absent substituted for the Scripture lesson which they had missed,
the pithy extract from St. Peter, "Fratres; sobrii estote," which we now
read. The whole company of monks and their abbot then proceeded to the
chapel where each made his examination of conscience, and at a sign from
the abbot, the monks, two by two, in a subdued tone of voice, said the
_Confiteor, Misereatur, Indulgentiam_ and _Converte nos_. Gavantus and
Merati hold that the _Converte nos_ does not belong to this introductory
matter, but formed part of Compline proper. This prayer is very
beautiful: "Convert us, O God, our Saviour. And turn away Thine anger
from us. Incline unto my aid, O God; O Lord, make haste to help us.
Glory be to the Father,... Praise be to God."

The new arrangement of the Psalter did not retain the old traditional
psalms, 4, 90, 133, in Compline, except for Sundays and solemn feasts.
But the selection of psalms accords well with the idea of the
hour--night prayer--and with the other prayers, which go to make up the
close of the Office of the day. The hymn, _Te lucis_, so chastely
simple, has ever been admired. Its ideas suit so admirably for the
prayer before sleep and for reminding us of sleep and her sister death
and the solemn petition made to God to be our guardian and defence in
the solemn hour of death, are simply and solemnly set out in this daily
hymn. How beautiful it reads in Father Caswall's translation:--

     "Now with the fast departing light,
      Maker of all, we ask of Thee
      Of Thy great mercy, through the night,
      Our guardian and defence to be.

      Far off let idle visions fly,
      No phantom of the night molest:
      Curb Thou our raging enemy,
      That we in chaste repose may rest.

      Father of mercies! hear our cry;
