Drakenflesh!' and this so terrified the Draken that he let the bag fall
and fled.

On the road he met a fox, which asked him why he seemed so frightened.
He answered that he was afraid of the children of Herr Lazarus, who had
been within a hair-breadth of eating him up. But the fox laughed, and
said: 'What! you were afraid of the children of Herr Lazarus? He had
two fowls, one of which I ate yesterday, the other I will go and fetch
now--if you do not believe me, come and see for yourself; but you must
first tie yourself on to my tail.'

The Draken then tied himself on to the fox's tail, and went back thus
with it to Lazarus's house, in order to see what it would arrange. There
stood Lazarus with his gun raised ready to fire, who, when he saw the
fox coming along with the Draken, called out to the fox: 'Did I not tell
you to bring me all the Draken, and you bring me only one?'

When the Draken heard that he made off to the rightabout at once, and
ran so fast that the fox was dashed in pieces against the stones.

When Lazarus had got quit of the Draken he built himself, with their
gold, a magnificent house, in which he spent the rest of his days in
great enjoyment.




The Story of the Queen of the Flowery Isles


There once lived a queen who ruled over the Flowery Isles, whose
husband, to her extreme grief, died a few years after their marriage. On
being left a widow she devoted herself almost entirely to the education
of the two charming princesses, her only children. The elder of them was
so lovely that as she grew up her mother greatly feared she would excite
the jealousy of the Queen of all the Isles, who prided herself on being
the most beautiful woman in the world, and insisted on all rivals bowing
before her charms.

In order the better to gratify her vanity she had urged the king, her
husband, to make war on all the surrounding islands, and as his
greatest wish was to please her, the only conditions he imposed on any
newly-conquered country was that each princess of every royal house
should attend his court as soon as she was fifteen years old, and do
homage to the transcendent beauty of his queen.

The queen of the Flowery Isles, well aware of this law, was fully
determined to present her daughter to the proud queen as soon as her
fifteenth birthday was past.

The queen herself had heard a rumour of the young princess's great
beauty, and awaited her visit with some anxiety, which soon developed
into jealousy, for when the interview took place it was impossible not
to be dazzled by such radiant charms, and she was obliged to admit that
she had never beheld anyone so exquisitely lovely.

Of course she thought in her own mind 'excepting myself!' for nothing
could have made her believe it possible that anyone could eclipse her.

But the outspoken admiration of the entire court soon undeceived her,
and made her so angry that she pretended illness and retired to her own
rooms, so as to avoid witnessing the princess's triumph. She also sent
word to the Queen of the Flowery Isles that she was sorry not to be well
enough to see her again, and advised her to return to her own states
with the princess, her daughter.

This message was entrusted to one of the great ladies of the court, who
was an old friend of the Queen of the Flowery Isles, and who advised her
not to wait to take a formal leave but to go home as fast as she could.

The queen was not slow to take the hint, and lost no time in obeying it.
Being well aware of the magic powers of the incensed queen, she warned
her daughter that she was threatened by some great danger if she left
the palace for any reason whatever during the next six months.

The princess promised obedience, and no pains were spared to make the
time pass pleasantly for her.

The six months were nearly at an end, and on the very last day a
splendid fete was to take place in a lovely meadow quite near the
palace. The princess, who had been able to watch all the preparations
from her window, implored her mother to let her go as far as the meadow;
and the queen, thinking all risk must be over, consented, and promised
to take her there herself.

The whole court was delighted to see their much-loved princess at
liberty, and everyone set off in high glee to join in the fete.

The princess, overjoyed at being once more in the open air, was walking
a little in advance of her party when suddenly the earth opened under
her feet and closed again after swallowing her up!

The queen fainted away with terror, and the younger princess burst into
floods of tears and could hardly be dragged away from the fatal spot,
whilst the court was overwhelmed with horror at so great a calamity.

Orders were given to bore the earth to a great depth, but in vain; not a
trace of the vanished princess was to be found.

She sank right through the earth and found herself in a desert place
with nothing but rocks and trees and no sign of any human being. The
only living creature she saw was a very pretty little dog, who ran up to
her and at once began to caress her. She took him in her arms, and after
playing with him for a little put him down again, when he started off in
front of her, looking round from time to time as though begging her to
follow.

She let him lead her on, and presently reached a little hill, from which
she saw a valley full of lovely fruit trees, bearing flowers and fruit
together. The ground was also covered with fruit and flowers, and in the
middle of the valley rose a fountain surrounded by a velvety lawn.

The princess hastened to this charming spot, and sitting down on the
grass began to think over the misfortune which had befallen her, and
burst into tears as she reflected on her sad condition.

The fruit and clear fresh water would, she knew, prevent her from dying
of hunger or thirst, but how could she escape if any wild beast appeared
and tried to devour her?

At length, having thought over every possible evil which could happen,
the princess tried to distract her mind by playing with the little dog.
She spent the whole day near the fountain, but as night drew on she
wondered what she should do, when she noticed that the little dog was
pulling at her dress.

She paid no heed to him at first, but as he continued to pull her
dress and then run a few steps in one particular direction, she at last
decided to follow him; he stopped before a rock with a large opening in
the centre, which he evidently wished her to enter.

The princess did so and discovered a large and beautiful cave lit up
by the brilliancy of the stones with which it was lined, with a little
couch covered with soft moss in one corner. She lay down on it and the
dog at once nestled at her feet. Tired out with all she had gone through
she soon fell asleep.

Next morning she was awakened very early by the songs of many birds.
The little dog woke up too, and sprang round her in his most caressing
manner. She got up and went outside, the dog as before running on in
front and turning back constantly to take her dress and draw her on.

She let him have his way and he soon led her back to the beautiful
garden where she had spent part of the day before. Here she ate some
fruit, drank some water of the fountain, and felt as if she had made an
excellent meal. She walked about amongst the flowers, played with her
little dog, and at night returned to sleep in the cave.

In this way the princess passed several months, and as her first terrors
died away she gradually became more resigned to her fate. The little
dog, too, was a great comfort, and her constant companion.

One day she noticed that he seemed very sad and did not even caress her
as usual. Fearing he might be ill she carried him to a spot where she
had seen him eat some particular herbs, hoping they might do him good,
but he would not touch them. He spent all the night, too, sighing and
groaning as if in great pain.

At last the princess fell asleep, and when she awoke her first thought
was for her little pet, but not finding him at her feet as usual, she
ran out of the cave to look for him. As she stepped out of the cave she
caught sight of an old man, who hurried away so fast that she had barely
time to see him before he disappeared.

This was a fresh surprise and almost as great a shock as the loss of her
little dog, who had been so faithful to her ever since the first day she
had seen him. She wondered if he had strayed away or if the old man had
stolen him.

Tormented by all kinds of thoughts and fears she wandered on, when
suddenly she felt herself wrapped in a thick cloud and carried through
the air. She made no resistance and before very long found herself, to
her great surprise, in an avenue leading to the palace in which she had
been born. No sign of the cloud anywhere.

As the princess approached the palace she perceived that everyone was
dressed in black, and she was filled with fear as to the cause of this
mourning. She hastened on and was soon recognised and welcomed with
shouts of joy. Her sister hearing the cheers ran out and embraced the
wanderer, with tears of happiness, telling her that the shock of her
disappearance had been so terrible that their mother had only survived
it a few days. Since then the younger princess had worn the crown, which
she now resigned to her sister to whom it by right belonged.

But the elder wished to refuse it, and would only accept the crown on
condition that her sister should share in all the power.

The first acts of the new queen were to do honour to the memory of
her dear mother and to shower every mark of generous affection on her
sister. Then, being still very grieved at the loss of her little dog,
she had a careful search made for him in every country, and when nothing
could be heard of him she was so grieved that she offered half her
kingdom to whoever should restore him to her.

Many gentlemen of the court, tempted by the thought of such a reward,
set off in all directions in search of the dog; but all returned
empty-handed to the queen, who, in despair announced that since life was
unbearable without her little dog, she would give her hand in marriage
to the man who brought him back.

The prospect of such a prize quickly turned the court into a desert,
nearly every courtier starting on the quest. Whilst they were away the
queen was informed one day that a very ill-looking man wished to speak
with her. She desired him to be shown into a room where she was sitting
with her sister.

On entering her presence he said that he was prepared to give the queen
her little dog if she on her side was ready to keep her word.

The princess was the first to speak. She said that the queen had
no right to marry without the consent of the nation, and that on so
important an occasion the general council must be summoned. The queen
could not say anything against this statement; but she ordered an
apartment in the palace to be given to the man, and desired the council
to meet on the following day.

Next day, accordingly, the council assembled in great state, and by the
princess's advice it was decided to offer the man a large sum of money
for the dog, and should he refuse it, to banish him from the kingdom
without seeing the queen again. The man refused the price offered and
left the hall.

The princess informed the queen of what had passed, and the queen
approved of all, but added that as she was her own mistress she had made
up her mind to abdicate her throne, and to wander through the world till
she had found her little dog.

The princess was much alarmed by such a resolution, and implored the
queen to change her mind. Whilst they were discussing the subject,
one of the chamberlains appeared to inform the queen that the bay was
covered with ships. The two sisters ran to the balcony, and saw a large
fleet in full sail for the port.

In a little time they came to the conclusion that the ships must come
from a friendly nation, as every vessel was decked with gay flags,
streamers, and pennons, and the way was led by a small ship flying a
great white flag of peace.

The queen sent a special messenger to the harbour, and was soon informed
that the fleet belonged to the Prince of the Emerald Isles, who begged
leave to land in her kingdom, and to present his humble respects to
her. The queen at once sent some of the court dignitaries to receive the
prince and bid him welcome.

She awaited him seated on her throne, but rose on his appearance, and
went a few steps to meet him; then begged him to be seated, and for
about an hour kept him in close conversation.

The prince was then conducted to a splendid suite of apartments, and the
next day he asked for a private audience. He was admitted to the queen's
own sitting-room, where she was sitting alone with her sister.

After the first greetings the prince informed the queen that he had some
very strange things to tell her, which she only would know to be true.

'Madam,' said he, 'I am a neighbour of the Queen of all the Isles; and
a small isthmus connects part of my states with hers. One day, when
hunting a stag, I had the misfortune to meet her, and not recognising
her, I did not stop to salute her with all proper ceremony. You, Madam,
know better than anyone how revengeful she is, and that she is also a
mistress of magic. I learnt both facts to my cost. The ground opened
under my feet, and I soon found myself in a far distant region
transformed into a little dog, under which shape I had the honour to
meet your Majesty. After six months, the queen's vengeance not being yet
satisfied, she further changed me into a hideous old man, and in this
form I was so afraid of being unpleasant in your eyes, Madam, that I hid
myself in the depths of the woods, where I spent three months more. At
the end of that time I was so fortunate as to meet a benevolent fairy
who delivered me from the proud queen's power, and told me all your
adventures and where to find you. I now come to offer you a heart which
has been entirely yours, Madam, since first we met in the desert.'

A few days later a herald was sent through the kingdom to proclaim the
joyful news of the marriage of the Queen of the Flowery Isles with the
young prince. They lived happily for many years, and ruled their people
well.

As for the bad queen, whose vanity and jealousy had caused so much
mischief, the Fairies took all her power away for a punishment.

['Cabinet des Fees.']




Udea and Her Seven Brothers


Once upon a time there was a man and his wife who had seven boys. The
children lived in the open air and grew big and strong, and the six
eldest spent part of every day hunting wild beasts. The youngest did not
care so much about sport, and he often stayed with his mother.

One morning, however, as the whole seven were going out for a long
expedition, they said to their aunt, 'Dear aunt, if a baby sister comes
into the world to-day, wave a white handkerchief, and we will return
immediately; but if it is only a boy, just brandish a sickle, and we
will go on with what we are doing.'

Now the baby when it arrived really proved to be a girl, but as the aunt
could not bear the boys, she thought it was a good opportunity to get
rid of them. So she waved the sickle. And when the seven brothers saw
the sign they said, 'Now we have nothing to go back for,' and plunged
deeper into the desert.

The little girl soon grew to be a big girl, and she was called by all
her friends (though she did not know it) 'Udea, who had driven her seven
brothers into strange lands.'

One day, when she had been quarrelling with her playmates, the oldest
among them said to her, 'It is a pity you were born, as ever since, your
brothers have been obliged to roam about the world.'

Udea did not answer, but went home to her mother and asked her, 'Have I
really got brothers?'

'Yes,' replied her mother, 'seven of them. But they went away the day
you were born, and I have never heard of them since.'

Then the girl said, 'I will go and look for them till I find them.'

'My dear child,' answered her mother, 'it is fifteen years since they
left, and no man has seen them. How will you know which way to go?'

'Oh, I will follow them, north and south, east and west, and though I
may travel far, yet some day I will find them.'

Then her mother said no more, but gave her a camel and some food, and a
negro and his wife to take care of her, and she fastened a cowrie shell
round the camel's neck for a charm, and bade her daughter go in peace.

During the first day the party journeyed on without any adventures, but
the second morning the negro said to the girl, 'Get down, and let the
negress ride instead of you.'

'Mother,' cried Udea.

'What is it?' asked her mother.

'Barka wants me to dismount from my camel.'

'Leave her alone, Barka,' commanded the mother, and Barka did not dare
to persist.

But on the following day he said again to Udea, 'Get down, and let the
negress ride instead of you,' and though Udea called to her mother she
was too far away, and the mother never heard her. Then the negro seized
her roughly and threw her on the ground, and said to his wife, 'Climb
up,' and the negress climbed up, while the girl walked by the side. She
had meant to ride all the way on her camel as her feet were bare and the
stones cut them till the blood came. But she had to walk on till night,
when they halted, and the next morning it was the same thing again.
Weary and bleeding the poor girl began to cry, and implored the negro to
let her ride, if only for a little. But he took no notice, except to bid
her walk a little faster.

By-and-by they passed a caravan, and the negro stopped and asked the
leader if they had come across seven young men, who were thought to be
hunting somewhere about. And the man answered, 'Go straight on, and by
midday you will reach the castle where they live.'

When he heard this, the black melted some pitch in the sun, and smeared
the girl with it, till she looked as much a negro as he did. Next he
bade his wife get down from the camel, and told Udea to mount, which she
was thankful to do. So they arrived at her brothers' castle.

Leaving the camel kneeling at the entrance for Udea to dismount, the
negro knocked loudly at the door, which was opened by the youngest
brother, all the others being away hunting. He did not of course
recognise Udea, but he knew the negro and his wife, and welcomed them
