object, if she is willing to meet thee in his stead!"

"How, madam?" said the Caesar, astonished; "do you propose yourself to
hold the lists against me?"

"Against you!" said the Countess; "against all the Grecian Empire, if
they shall affirm that Robert of Paris is justly used and lawfully
confined."

"And are the conditions," said the Caesar, "the same as if Count Robert
himself held the lists? The vanquished must then be at the pleasure of
the conqueror for good or evil."

"It would seem so," said the Countess, "nor do I refuse the hazard;
only, that if the other champion shall bite the dust, the noble Count
Robert shall be set at liberty, and permitted to depart with all
suitable honours."

"This I refuse not," said the Caesar, "provided it is in my power."

A deep growling sound, like that of a modern gong, here interrupted the
conference.




CHAPTER THE NINETEENTH.


The Varangian and Count Robert, at every risk of discovery, had
remained so near as fully to conjecture, though they could not
expressly overhear, the purport of the conversation.

"He has accepted her challenge!" said the Count of Paris.

"And with apparent willingness," said Hereward.

"O, doubtless, doubtless,"--answered the Crusader; "but he knows not
the skill in war which a woman may attain; for my part, God knows I
have enough depending upon the issue of this contest, yet such is my
confidence, that I would to God I had more. I vow to our Lady of the
Broken Lances, that I desire every furrow of land I possess--every
honour which I can call my own, from the Countship of Paris, down to
the leather that binds my spur, were dependent and at issue upon this
fair field, between your Caesar, as men term him, and Brenhilda of
Aspramonte."

"It is a noble confidence," said the Varangian, "nor durst I say it is
a rash one; only I cannot but remember that the Caesar is a strong man,
as well as a handsome, expert in the use of arms, and, above all, less
strictly bound than you esteem yourself by the rules of honour. There
are many ways in which advantage may be given and taken, which will
not, in the Caesar's estimation, alter the character of the field from
an equal one, although it might do so in the opinion of the chivalrous
Count of Paris, or even in that of the poor Varangian. But first let me
conduct you to some place of safety, for your escape must be soon, if
it is not already, detected. The sounds which we heard intimate that
some of his confederate plotters have visited the garden on other than
love affairs. I will guide thee to another avenue than that by which we
entered. But you would hardly, I suppose, be pleased to adopt the
wisest alternative?"

"And what may that be?" said the Count.

"To give thy purse, though it were thine all, to some poor ferryman to
waft thee over the Hellespont, then hasten to carry thy complaint to
Godfrey of Bouillon, and what friends thou mayst have among thy
brethren crusaders, and determine, as thou easily canst, on a
sufficient number of them to come back and menace the city with instant
war, unless the Emperor should deliver up thy lady, most unfairly made
prisoner, and prevent, by his authority, this absurd and unnatural
combat."

"And would you have me, then," said Count Robert, "move the crusaders
to break a fairly appointed field of battle? Do you think that Godfrey
of Bouillon would turn back upon his pilgrimage for such an unworthy
purpose; or that the Countess of Paris would accept as a service, means
of safety which would stain her honour for ever, by breaking an
appointment solemnly made on her own challenge?--Never!"

"My judgment is then at fault," said the Varangian, "for I see I can
hammer out no expedient which is not, in some extravagant manner or
another, controlled by your foolish notions. Here is a man who has been
trapped into the power of his enemy, that he might not interfere to
prevent a base stratagem upon his lady, involving both her life and
honour; yet he thinks it a matter of necessity that he keeps faith as
precisely with these midnight poisoners, as he would had it been
pledged to the most honourable men!"

"Thou say'st a painful truth," said Count Robert; "but my word is the
emblem of my faith; and if it pass to a dishonourable or faithless foe,
it is imprudently done on my part; but if I break it, being once
pledged, it is a dishonourable action, and the disgrace can never be
washed from my shield."

"Do you mean, then," said the Varangian, "to suffer your wife's honour
to remain pledged as it at present is, on the event of an unequal
combat?"

"God and the saints pardon thee such a thought!" said the Count of
Paris. "I will go to see this combat with a heart as firm, if not as
light, as any time I ever saw spears splintered. If by the influence of
any accident or treachery,--for fairly, and with such an antagonist,
Brenhilda of Aspramonte cannot be overthrown,--I step into the lists,
proclaim the Caesar as he is--a villain--show the falsehood of his
conduct from beginning to end,--appeal to every noble heart that hears
me, and then--God show the right!"

Hereward paused, and shook his head. "All this," he said, "might be
feasible enough provided the combat were to be fought in the presence
of your own countrymen, or even, by the mass! if the Varangians were to
be guards of the lists. But treachery of every kind is so familiar to
the Greeks, that I question if they would view the conduct of their
Caesar as any thing else than a pardonable and natural stratagem of Dan
Cupid, to be smiled at, rather than subjected to disgrace or
punishment."

"A nation," said Count Robert, "who could smile at such a jest, may
heaven refuse them sympathy at their utmost need, when their sword is
broken in their hand, and their wives and daughters shrieking in the
relentless grasp of a barbarous enemy!"

Hereward looked upon his companion, whose flushed cheeks and sparkling
eyes bore witness to his enthusiasm.

"I see," he said, "you are resolved, and I know that your resolution
can in justice be called by no other name than an act of heroic folly:
--What then? it is long since life has been bitter to the Varangian
exile. Morn has raised him from a joyless bed, which night has seen him
lie down upon, wearied with wielding a mercenary weapon in the wars of
strangers. He has longed to lay down his life in an honourable cause,
and this is one in which the extremity and very essence of honour is
implicated. It tallies also with my scheme of saving the Emperor, which
will be greatly facilitated by the downfall of his ungrateful
son-in-law." Then addressing himself to the Count, he continued, "Well,
Sir Count, as thou art the person principally concerned, I am willing
to yield to thy reasoning in this affair; but I hope you will permit me
to mingle with your resolution some advices of a more everyday and less
fantastic nature. For example, thy escape from the dungeons of the
Blacquernal must soon be generally known. In prudence, indeed, I myself
must be the first to communicate it, since otherwise the suspicion will
fall on me--Where do you think of concealing yourself? for assuredly
the search will be close and general."

"For that," said the Count of Paris, "I must be indebted to thy
suggestion, with thanks for every lie which thou findest thyself
obliged to make, to contrive, and produce in my behalf, entreating thee
only to render them as few as possible, they being a coin which I
myself never fabricate."

"Sir knight," answered Hereward, "let me begin first by saying, that no
knight that ever belted sword is more a slave to truth, when truth is
observed towards him, than the poor soldier who talks to thee; but when
the game depends not upon fair play, but upon lulling men's
cautiousness asleep by falsehood, and drugging their senses by opiate
draughts, they who would scruple at no means of deceiving me, can
hardly expect that I, who am paid in such base money, should pass
nothing on my part but what is lawful and genuine. For the present thou
must remain concealed within my poor apartment, in the barracks of the
Varangians, which is the last place where they will think of seeking
for thee. Take this, my upper cloak, and follow me; and now that we are
about to leave these gardens, thou mayst follow me unsuspected as a
sentinel attending his officer; for, take it along with you, noble
Count, that we Varangians are a sort of persons upon whom the Greeks
care not to look very long or fixedly."

They now reached the gate where they had been admitted by the negress,
and Hereward, who was intrusted with the power, it seems, of letting
himself out of the philosopher's premises, though not of entering
without assistance from the portress, took out a key which turned the
lock on the garden side, so that they soon found themselves at liberty.
They then proceeded by by-paths through the city, Hereward leading the
way, and the Count following, without speech or remonstrance, until
they stood before the portal of the barracks of the Varangians.

"Make haste," said the sentinel who was on duty, "dinner is already
begun." The communication sounded joyfully in the ears of Hereward, who
was much afraid that his companion might have been stopt and examined.
By a side passage he reached his own quarters, and introduced the Count
into a small room, the sleeping chamber of his squire, where he
apologized for leaving him for some time; and, going out, locked the
door, for fear, as he said, of intrusion.

The demon of suspicion was not very likely to molest a mind so frankly
constituted as that of Count Robert, and yet the last action of
Hereward did not fail to occasion some painful reflections.

"This man," he said, "had needs be true, for I have reposed in him a
mighty trust, which few hirelings in his situation would honourably
discharge. What is to prevent him to report to the principal officer of
his watch, that the Frank prisoner, Robert, Count of Paris, whose wife
stands engaged for so desperate a combat with the Caesar, has escaped,
indeed, this morning, from the prisons of the Blacquernal, but has
suffered himself to be trepanned at noon, and is again a captive in the
barracks of the Varangian Guard?---what means of defence are mine, were
I discovered to these mercenaries?--What man could do, by the favour of
our Lady of the Broken Lances, I have not failed to achieve. I have
slain a tiger in single combat--I have killed one warder, and conquered
the desperate and gigantic creature by whom he was supported. I have
had terms enough at command to bring over this Varangian to my side, in
appearance at least; yet all this does not encourage me to hope that I
could long keep at bay ten or a dozen such men as these beef-fed knaves
appear to be, led in upon me by a fellow of thewes and sinews such as
those of my late companion.--Yet for shame, Robert! such thoughts are
unworthy a descendant of Charlemagne. When wert thou wont so curiously
to count thine enemies, and when wert thou wont to be suspicious, since
he, whose bosom may truly boast itself incapable of fraud, ought in
honesty to be the last to expect it in another? The Varangian's look is
open, his coolness in danger is striking, his speech is more frank and
ready than ever was that of a traitor. If he is false, there is no
faith in the hand of nature, for truth, sincerity, and courage are
written upon his forehead."

While Count Robert was thus reflecting upon his condition, and
combating the thick-coming doubts and suspicions which its
uncertainties gave rise to, he began to be sensible that he had not
eaten for many hours; and amidst many doubts and fears of a more heroic
nature, he half entertained a lurking suspicion, that they meant to let
hunger undermine his strength before they adventured into the apartment
to deal with him.

We shall best see how far these doubts were deserved by Hereward, or
how far they were unjust, by following his course after he left his
barrack-room. Snatching a morsel of dinner, which he ate with an
affectation of great hunger, but, in fact, that his attention to his
food might be a pretence for dispensing with disagreeable questions, or
with conversation of any kind, he pleaded duty, and immediately leaving
his comrades, directed his course to the lodgings of Achilles Tatius,
which were a part of the same building. A Syrian slave, who opened the
door, after a deep reverence to Hereward, whom he knew as a favourite
attendant of the Acolyte, said to him that his master was gone forth,
but had desired him to say, that if he wished to see him, he would find
him at the Philosopher's Gardens, so called, as belonging to the sage
Agelastes.

Hereward turned about instantly, and availing himself of his knowledge
of Constantinople to thread its streets in the shortest time possible,
at length stood alone before the door in the garden-wall, at which he
and the Count of Paris had previously been admitted in the earlier part
of the day. The same negress appeared at the same private signal, and
when he asked for Achilles Tatius, she replied, with some sharpness,
"Since you were here this morning, I marvel you did not meet him, or
that, having business with him, you did not stay till he arrived. Sure
I am, that not long after you entered the garden the Acolyte was
enquiring for you."

"It skills not, old woman" said the Varangian; "I communicate the
reason of my motions to my commander, but not to thee." He entered the
garden accordingly, and avoiding the twilight path that led to the
Bower of Love,--so was the pavilion named in which he had overheard the
dialogue between the Caesar and the Countess of Paris,--he arrived
before a simple garden-house, whose humble and modest front seemed to
announce that it was the abode of philosophy and learning. Here,
passing before the windows, he made some little noise, expecting to
attract the attention either of Achilles Tatius, or his accomplice
Agelastes, as chance should determine. It was the first who heard, and
who replied. The door opened; a lofty plume stooped itself, that its
owner might cross the threshold, and the stately form of Achilles
Tatius entered the gardens. "What now," he said, "our trusty sentinel?
what hast thou, at this time of day, come to report to us? Thou art our
good friend, and highly esteemed soldier, and well we wot thine errand
must be of importance, since thou hast brought it thyself, and at an
hour so unusual."

"Pray Heaven," said Hereward, "that the news I have brought deserve a
welcome."

"Speak them instantly," said the Acolyte, "good or bad; thou speakest
to a man to whom fear is unknown." But his eye, which quailed as he
looked on the soldier--his colour, which went and came--his hands,
which busied themselves in an uncertain manner in adjusting the belt of
his sword,--all argued a state of mind very different from that which
his tone of defiance would fain have implied. "Courage," he said, "my
trusty soldier! speak the news to me. I can bear the worst thou hast to
tell."

"In a word, then," said the Varangian, "your Valour directed me this
morning to play the office of master of the rounds upon those dungeons
of the Blacquernal palace, where last night the boisterous Count Robert
of Paris was incarcerated"--

"I remember well," said Achilles Tatius.--"What then?"

"As I reposed me," said Hereward, "in an apartment above the vaults, I
heard cries from beneath, of a kind which attracted my attention. I
hastened to examine, and my surprise was extreme, when looking down
into the dungeon, though I could see nothing distinctly, yet, by the
wailing and whimpering sounds, I conceived that the Man of the Forest,
the animal called Sylvan, whom our soldiers have so far indoctrinated
in our Saxon tongue as to make him useful in the wards of the prison,
was bemoaning himself on account of some violent injury. Descending
with a torch, I found the bed on which the prisoner had been let down
burnt to cinders; the tiger which had been chained within a spring of
it, with its skull broken to pieces; the creature called Sylvan,
prostrate, and writhing under great pain and terror, and no prisoner
whatever in the dungeon. There were marks that all the fastenings had
been withdrawn by a Mytilenian soldier, companion of my watch, when he
visited the dungeon at the usual hour; and as, in my anxious search, I
at length found his dead body, slain apparently by a stab in the
throat, I was obliged to believe that while I was examining the cell,
he, this Count Robert, with whose daring life the adventure is well
consistent, had escaped into the upper air, by means, doubtless, of the
ladder and trap-door by which I had descended."

"And wherefore didst thou not instantly call treason, and raise the hue
and cry?" demanded the Acolyte.

"I dared not venture to do so," replied the Varangian, "till I had
instructions from your Valour. The alarming cry of treason, and the
various rumours likely at this moment to ensue, might have involved a
search so close, as perchance would have discovered matters in which
the Acolyte himself would have been rendered subject to suspicion."

"Thou art right," said Achilles Tatius, in a whisper: "and yet it will
be necessary that we do not pretend any longer to conceal the flight of
this important prisoner, if we would not pass for being his
accomplices. Where thinkest thou this unhappy fugitive can have taken
refuge?"

"That I was in hopes of learning from your Valour's greater wisdom,"
said Hereward.

"Thinkest thou not," said Achilles, "that he may have crossed the
Hellespont, in order to rejoin his own countrymen and adherents?"

"It is much to be dreaded," said Hereward. "Undoubtedly, if the Count
listened to the advice of any one who knew the face of the country,
such would be the very counsel he would receive."

"The danger, then, of his return at the head of a vengeful body of
Franks," said the Acolyte, "is not so immediate as I apprehended at
first, for the Emperor gave positive orders that the boats and galleys
which yesterday transported the crusaders to the shores of Asia should
recross the strait, and bring back no single one of them from the step
upon their journey on which he had so far furthered them.--Besides,
they all,--their leaders, that is to say,--made their vows before
crossing, that they would not turn back so much as a foot's pace, now
that they had set actually forth on the road to Palestine."

"So, therefore," said Hereward, "one of the two propositions is
unquestionable; either Count Robert is on the eastern side of the
strait, having no means of returning with his brethren to avenge the
usage he has received, and may therefore be securely set, at
defiance,--or else he lurks somewhere in Constantinople, without a
friend or ally to take his part, or encourage him openly to state his
supposed wrongs; in either case, there can, I think, be no tact in
conveying to the palace the news that he has freed himself, since it
would only alarm the court, and afford the Emperor ground for many
suspicions.--But it is not for an ignorant barbarian like me to
prescribe a course of conduct to your valour and wisdom, and methinks
the sage Agelastes were a fitter counsellor than such as I am."

"No, no, no," said the Acolyte, in a hurried whisper; "the philosopher
and I are right good friends, sworn good friends, very especially bound
together; but should it come to this, that one of us must needs throw
before the footstool of the Emperor the head of the other, I think thou
wouldst not advise that I, whose hairs have not a trace of silver,
should be the last in making the offering; therefore we will say
nothing of this mishap, but give thee full power, and the highest
charge to seek for Count Robert of Paris, be he dead or alive, to
secure him within the dungeons set apart for the discipline of our own
corps, and when thou hast done so, to bring me notice. I may make him
my friend in many ways, by extricating his wife from danger by the axes
of my Varangians. What is there in this metropolis that they have to
oppose them?"

"When raised in a just cause," answered Hereward, "nothing."

"Hah!--say'st thou?" said the Acolyte; "how meanest thou by that?--but
I know--Thou art scrupulous about having the just and lawful command of
thy officer in every action in which thou art engaged, and, thinking in
that dutiful and soldierlike manner, it is my duty as thine Acolyte to
see thy scruples satisfied. A warrant shalt thou have, with full
powers, to seek for and imprison this foreign Count of whom we have
been speaking--And, hark thee, my excellent friend," he continued, with
some hesitation, "I think thou hadst better begone, and begin, or
rather continue thy search. It is unnecessary to inform our friend
Agelastes of what has happened, until his advice be more needful than
as yet it is on the occasion. Home--home to the barracks; I will
account to him for thy appearance here, if he be curious on the
subject, which, as a suspicious old man, he is likely to be. Go to the
barracks, and act as if thou hadst a warrant in every respect full and
ample. I will provide thee with one when I come back to my quarters."

The Varangian turned hastily homewards.

"Now, is it not," he said, "a strange thing, and enough to make a man a
rogue for life--to observe how the devil encourages young beginners in
falsehood! I have told a greater lie--at least I have suppressed more
truth--than on any occasion before in my whole life--and what is the
consequence? Why, my commander throws almost at my head a warrant
sufficient to guarantee and protect me in all I have done, or propose
to do! If the foul fiend were thus regular in protecting his votaries,
methinks they would have little reason to complain of him, or better
men to be astonished at their number. But a time comes, they say, when
he seldom fails to desert them. Therefore, get thee behind me, Satan!
If I have seemed to be thy servant for a short time, it is but with an
honest and Christian purpose."

As he entertained these thoughts, he looked back upon the path, and was
startled at an apparition of a creature of a much greater size, and a
stranger shape than human, covered, all but the face, with a reddish
dun fur; his expression an ugly, and yet a sad melancholy; a cloth was
wrapped round one hand, and an air of pain and languor bespoke
suffering from a wound. So much was Hereward pre-occupied with his own
reflections, that at first he thought his imagination had actually
raised the devil; but after a sudden start of surprise, he recognised
his acquaintance Sylvan. "Hah! old friend," he said, "I am happy thou
hast made thy escape to a place where them wilt find plenty of fruit to
support thee. Take my advice--keep out of the way of discovery--Keep
thy friend's counsel."

The Man of the Wood uttered a chattering noise in return to this
address.

"I understand thee," said Hereward, "thou wilt tell no tales, thou
sayest; and faith, I will trust thee rather than the better part of my
own two-legged race, who are eternally circumventing or murdering each
other."

A minute after the creature was out of sight, Hereward heard the shriek
of a female, and a voice which cried for help. The accents must have
been uncommonly interesting to the Varangian, since, forgetting his own
dangerous situation, he immediately turned and flew to the suppliant's
assistance.




CHAPTER THE TWENTIETH.

     She comes! she comes! in all the charms of youth,
     Unequall'd love, and unsuspected truth!


Hereward was not long in tracing the cry through the wooded walks, when
a female rushed into his arms; alarmed, as it appeared, by Sylvan, who
was pursuing her closely. The figure of Hereward, with his axe
uplifted, put an instant stop to his career, and with a terrified note
of his native cries, he withdrew into the thickest of the adjoining
foliage.

Relieved from his presence, Hereward had time to look at the female
whom he had succoured: She was arrayed in a dress which consisted of
several colours, that which predominated being a pale yellow; her tunic
was of this colour, and, like a modern gown, was closely fitted to the
body, which, in the present case, was that of a tall, but very
well-formed person. The mantle, or upper garment, in which the whole
figure was wrapped, was of fine cloth; and the kind of hood which was
attached to it having flown back with the rapidity of her motion, gave
to view the hair beautifully adorned and twisted into a natural
head-dress. Beneath this natural head-gear appeared a face pale as
death, from a sense of the supposed danger, but which preserved, even
amidst its terrors, an exquisite degree of beauty.

Hereward was thunderstruck at this apparition. The dress was neither
Grecian, Italian, nor of the costume of the Franks;--it was
_Saxon!_--connected by a thousand tender remembrances with Hereward's
childhood and youth. The circumstance was most extraordinary. Saxon
women, indeed, there were in Constantinople, who had united their
fortunes with those of the Varangians; and those often chose to wear
their national dress in the city, because the character and conduct of
their husbands secured them a degree of respect, which they might not
have met with either as Grecian or as stranger females of a similar
rank. But almost all these were personally known to Hereward. It was no
time, however, for reverie--he was himself in danger---the situation of
the young female might be no safe one. In every case, it was judicious
to quit the more public part of the gardens; he therefore lost not a
moment in conveying the fainting Saxon to a retreat he fortunately was
acquainted with. A covered path, obscured by vegetation, led through a
species of labyrinth to an artificial cave, at the bottom of which,
half-paved with shells, moss, and spar, lay the gigantic and
half-recumbent statue of a river deity, with its usual attributes--that
is, its front crowned with water-lilies and sedges, and its ample hand
half-resting upon an empty urn. The attitude of the whole figure
corresponded with the motto,--"I SLEEP--AWAKE ME NOT."

"Accursed relic of paganism," said Hereward, who was, in proportion to
his light, a zealous Christian--"brutish stock or stone that thou art!
I will wake thee with a vengeance." So saying, he struck the head of
the slumbering deity with his battle-axe, and deranged the play of the
fountain so much that the water began to pour into the basin.

"Thou art a good block, nevertheless," said the Varangian, "to send
succour so needful to the aid of my poor countrywoman. Thou shalt give
her also, with thy leave, a portion of thy couch." So saying he
arranged his fair burden, who was as yet insensible, upon the pedestal
where the figure of the River God reclined. In doing this, his
attention was recalled to her face, and again and again he was thrilled
with an emotion of hope, but so excessively like fear, that it could
only be compared to the flickering of a torch, uncertain whether it is
to light up or be instantly extinguished. With a sort of mechanical
attention, he continued to make such efforts as he could to recall the
intellect of the beautiful creature before him. His feelings were those
of the astronomical sage, to whom the rise of the moon slowly restores
the contemplation of that heaven, which is at once, as a Christian, his
hope of felicity, and, as a philosopher, the source of his knowledge.
The blood returned to her cheek, and reanimation, and even
recollection, took place in her earlier than in the astonished
Varangian.

"Blessed Mary!" she said, "have I indeed tasted the last bitter cup,
and is it here where thou reunitest thy votaries after death!--Speak,
Hereward! if thou art aught but an empty creature of the
imagination!--speak, and tell me, if I have but dreamed of that
monstrous ogre!"

"Collect thyself, my beloved Bertha," said the Anglo-Saxon, recalled by
the sound of her voice, "and prepare to endure what thou livest to
witness, and thy Hereward survives to tell. That hideous thing
exists--nay, do not start, and look for a hiding-place--thy own gentle
hand with a riding rod is sufficient to tame its courage. And am I not
here, Bertha? Wouldst thou wish another safeguard?"

"No--no," exclaimed she, seizing on the arm of her recovered lover. "Do
I not know you now?"

"And is it but now you know me, Bertha?" said Hereward.

"I suspected before," she said, casting down her eyes; "but I know with
certainty that mark of the boar's tusk."

Hereward suffered her imagination to clear itself from the shock it had
received so suddenly, before he ventured to enter upon present events,
in which there was so much both to doubt and to fear. He permitted her,
therefore, to recall to her memory all the circumstances of the rousing
the hideous animal, assisted by the tribes of both their fathers. She
mentioned in broken words the flight of arrows discharged against the
boar by young and old, male and female, and how her own well aimed, but
feeble shaft, wounded him sharply; she forgot not how, incensed at the
pain, the creature rushed upon her as the cause, laid her palfrey dead
upon the spot, and would soon have slain her, had not Hereward, when
every attempt failed to bring his horse up to the monster, thrown
himself from his seat, and interposed personally between the boar and
Bertha. The battle was not decided without a desperate struggle; the
boar was slain, but Hereward received the deep gash upon his brow which
she whom he had saved how recalled to her memory. "Alas!" she said,
"what have we been to each other since that period? and what are we
now, in this foreign land?"

"Answer for thyself, my Bertha," said the Varangian, "if thou
canst;--and if thou canst with truth say that thou art the same Bertha
who vowed affection to Hereward, believe me, it were sinful to suppose
that the saints have brought us together with a view of our being
afterwards separated."

"Hereward," said Bertha, "you have not preserved the bird in your bosom
safer than I have; at home or abroad, in servitude or in freedom,
amidst sorrow or joy, plenty or want, my thought was always on the
troth I had plighted to Hereward at the stone of Odin."

"Say no more of that," said Hereward; "it was an impious rite, and good
could not come of it."

"Was it then so impious?" she said, the unbidden tear rushing into her
large blue eyes.--"Alas! it was a pleasure to reflect that Hereward was
mine by that solemn engagement!"

"Listen to me, my Bertha," said Hereward, taking her hand: "We were
then almost children; and though our vow was in itself innocent, yet it
was so far wrong, as being sworn in the presence of a dumb idol,
representing one who was, while alive, a bloody and cruel magician. But
we will, the instant an opportunity offers itself, renew our vow before
a shrine of real sanctity, and promise suitable penance for our
ignorant acknowledgment of Odin, to propitiate the real Deity, who can
bear us through those storms of adversity which are like to surround
us."

Leaving them for the time to their love-discourse, of a nature pure,
simple, and interesting, we shall give, in a few words, all that the
reader needs to know of their separate history between the boar's hunt
and the time of their meeting in the gardens of Agelastes.

In that doubtful state experienced by outlaws, Waltheoff, the father of
Hereward, and Engelred, the parent of Bertha, used to assemble their
unsubdued tribes, sometimes in the fertile regions of Devonshire,
sometimes in the dark wooded solitudes of Hampshire, but as much as
possible within the call of the bugle of the famous Edric the Forester,
so long leader of the insurgent Saxons. The chiefs we have mentioned
were among the last bold men who asserted the independence of the Saxon
race of England; and like their captain Edric, they were generally
known by the name of Foresters, as men who lived by hunting, when their
power of making excursions was checked and repelled. Hence they made a
step backwards in civilization, and became more like to their remote
ancestors of German descent, than they were to their more immediate and
civilized predecessors, who before the battle of Hastings, had advanced
considerably in the arts of civilized life.

Old superstitions had begun to revive among them, and hence the
practice of youths and maidens plighting their troth at the stone
circles dedicated, as it was supposed, to Odin, in whom, however, they
had long ceased to nourish any of the sincere belief which was
entertained by their heathen ancestors.

In another respect these outlaws were fast resuming a striking
peculiarity of the ancient Germans. Their circumstances naturally
brought the youth of both sexes much together, and by early marriage,
or less permanent connexions, the population would have increased far
beyond the means which the outlaws had to maintain, or even to protect
themselves. The laws of the Foresters, therefore, strictly enjoined
that marriages should be prohibited until the bridegroom was twenty-one
years complete. Future alliances were indeed often formed by the young
people, nor was this discountenanced by their parents, provided that
the lovers waited until the period when the majority of the bridegroom
should permit them to marry. Such youths as infringed this rule,
incurred the dishonourable epithet of _niddering_, or worthless,--an
epithet of a nature so insulting, that men were known to have slain
themselves, rather than endure life under such opprobrium. But the
offenders were very few amidst a race trained in moderation and
self-denial; and hence it was that woman, worshipped for so many years
like something sacred, was received, when she became the head of a
family, into the arms and heart of a husband who had so long expected
her, was treated as something more elevated than the mere idol of the
moment; and feeling the rate at which she was valued, endeavoured by
her actions to make her life correspond with it.

It was by the whole population of these tribes, as well as their
parents, that after the adventure of the boar hunt, Hereward and Bertha
were considered as lovers whose alliance was pointed out by Heaven, and
they were encouraged to approximate as much as their mutual
inclinations prompted them. The youths of the tribe avoided asking
Martha's hand at the dance, and the maidens used no maidenly entreaty
or artifice to detain Hereward beside them, if Bertha was present at
the feast. They clasped each other's hands through the perforated
stone, which they called the altar of Odin, though later ages have
ascribed it to the Druids, and they implored that if they broke their
faith to each other, their fault might be avenged by the twelve swords
which were now drawn around them during the ceremony by as many youths,
and that their misfortunes might be so many as twelve maidens, who
stood around with their hair loosened, should be unable to recount,
either in prose or verse.

The torch of the Saxon Cupid shone for some years as brilliant as when
it was first lighted. The time, however, came when they were to be
tried by adversity, though undeserved by the perfidy of either. Years
had gone past, and Hereward had to count with anxiety how many months
and weeks were to separate him from the bride, who was beginning
already by degrees to shrink less shyly from the expressions and
caresses of one who was soon to term her all his own. William Rufus,
however, had formed a plan of totally extirpating the Foresters, whose
implacable hatred, and restless love of freedom, had so often disturbed
the quiet of his kingdom, and despised his forest laws. He assembled
his Norman forces, and united to them a body of Saxons who had
submitted to his rule. He thus brought an overpowering force upon the
bands of Waltheoff and Engelred, who found no resource but to throw the
females of their tribe, and such as could, not bear arms, into a
convent dedicated to St. Augustin, of which Kenelm their relation was
prior, and then turning to the battle, vindicated their ancient valour
by fighting it to the last. Both the unfortunate chiefs remained dead
on the field, and Hereward and his brother had wellnigh shared their
fate; but some Saxon inhabitants of the neighbourhood, who adventured
on the field of battle, which the victors had left bare of every thing
save the booty of the kites and the ravens, found the bodies of the
youths still retaining life. As they were generally well known and much
beloved by these people, Hereward and his brother were taken care of
till their wounds began to close, and their strength returned. Hereward
then heard the doleful news of the death of his father and Engelred.
His next enquiry was concerning his betrothed bride and her mother. The
poor inhabitants could give him little information. Some of the females
who had taken refuge in the convent, the Norman knights and nobles had
seized upon as their slaves, and the rest, with the monks who had
harboured them, were turned adrift, and their place of retreat was
completely sacked and burnt to the ground.

Half-dead himself at hearing these tidings, Hereward sallied out, and
at every risk of death, for the Saxon Foresters were treated as
outlaws, commenced enquiries after those so dear to him. He asked
concerning the particular fate of Bertha and her mother, among the
miserable creatures who yet hovered about the neighbourhood of the
convent, like a few half-scorched bees about their smothered hive. But,
in the magnitude of their own terrors, none had retained eyes for their
neighbours, and all that they could say was, that the wife and daughter
of Engelred were certainly lost; and their imaginations suggested so
many heart-rending details to this conclusion, that Hereward gave up
all thoughts of further researches, likely to terminate so uselessly
and so horribly.

The young Saxon had been all his life bred up in a patriotic hatred to
the Normans, who did not, it was likely, become dearer to his thoughts
in consequence of this victory. He dreamed at first of crossing the
strait, to make war against the hated enemy in their own country; but
an idea so extravagant did not long retain possession of his mind. His
fate was decided by his encountering an aged palmer, who knew or
pretended to have known, his father, and to be a native of England.
This man was a disguised Varangian, selected for the purpose, possessed
of art and dexterity, and well provided with money. He had little
difficulty in persuading Hereward, in the hopeless desolation of his
condition, to join the Varangian Guard, at this moment at war with the
Normans, under which name it suited Hereward's prepossessions to
represent the Emperor's wars with Robert Guiscard, his son Bohemond,
and other adventurers, in Italy, Greece, or Sicily. A journey to the
East also inferred a pilgrimage, and gave the unfortunate Hereward the
chance of purchasing pardon for his sins by visiting the Holy Land. In
gaining Hereward, the recruiter also secured the services of his elder
brother, who had vowed not to separate from him.

The high character of both brothers for courage, induced this wily
agent to consider them as a great prize, and it was from the memoranda
respecting the history and character of those whom he recruited, in
which the elder had been unreservedly communicative, that Agelastes
picked up the information respecting Hereward's family and
circumstances, which, at their first secret interview, he made use of
to impress upon the Varangian the idea of his supernatural knowledge.
Several of his companions in arms were thus gained over; for it will
easily be guessed, that these memorials were intrusted to the keeping
of Achilles Tatius, and he, to further their joint purposes, imparted
them to Agelastes, who thus obtained a general credit for supernatural
knowledge among these ignorant men. But Hereward's blunt faith and
honesty enabled him to shun the snare.

Such being the fortunes of Hereward, those of Bertha formed the subject
of a broken and passionate communication between the lovers, broken
like an April day, and mingled with many a tender caress, such as
modesty permits to lovers when they meet again unexpectedly after a
separation, which threatened to be eternal. But the story may be
comprehended in few words. Amid the general sack of the monastery, an
old Norman knight seized upon Bertha as his prize. Struck with her
beauty, he designed her as an attendant upon his daughter, just then
come out of the years of childhood, and the very apple of her father's
eye, being the only child of his beloved Countess, and sent late in
life to bless their marriage-bed. It was in the order of things that
the lady of Aspramonte, who was considerably younger than the knight,
should govern her husband, and that Brenhilda, their daughter, should
govern both her parents.

The Knight of Aspramonte, however, it may be observed, entertained some
desire to direct his young offspring to more feminine amusements than
those which began already to put her life frequently in danger.
Contradiction was not to be thought of, as the good old knight knew by
experience. The influence and example of a companion a little older
than herself might be of some avail, and it was with this view that, in
the confusion of the sack, Aspramonte seized upon the youthful Bertha.
Terrified to the utmost degree, she clung to her mother, and the Knight
of Aspramonte, who had a softer heart than was then usually found under
a steel cuirass, moved by the affliction of the mother and daughter,
and recollecting that the former might also be a useful attendant upon
his lady, extended his protection to both, and conveying them out of
the press, paid the soldiers who ventured to dispute the spoil with
him, partly in some small pieces of money, and partly in dry blows with
the reverse of his lance.

The well-natured knight soon after returned to his own castle, and
being a man of an orderly life and virtuous habits, the charming
beauties of the Saxon virgin, and the more ripened charms of her
mother, did not prevent their travelling in all honour as well as
safety to his family fortress, the castle of Aspramonte. Here such
masters as could be procured were got together to teach the young
Bertha every sort of female accomplishment, In the hope that her
mistress, Brenhilda, might be inspired with a desire to partake in her
education; but although this so far succeeded, that the Saxon captive
became highly skilled in such music, needle-work, and other female
accomplishments as were known to the time, yet her young mistress,
Brenhilda, retained the taste for those martial amusements which had so
sensibly grieved her father, but to which her mother, who herself had
nourished such fancies in her youth, readily gave sanction.

The captives, however, were kindly treated. Brenhilda became infinitely
attached to the young Anglo-Saxon, whom she loved less for her
ingenuity in arts, than for her activity in field sports, to which her
early state of independence had trained her.

The Lady of Aspramonte was also kind to both the captives; but, in one
particular, she exercised a piece of petty tyranny over them. She had
imbibed an idea, strengthened by an old doting father-confessor, that
the Saxons were heathens at that time, or at least heretics, and made a
positive point with her husband that the bondswoman and girl who were
to attend on her person and that of her daughter, should be qualified
for the office by being anew admitted into the Christian Church by
baptism.

Though feeling the falsehood and injustice of the accusation, the
mother had sense enough to submit to necessity, and received the name
of Martha in all form at the altar, to which she answered during the
rest of her life.

But Bertha showed a character upon this occasion inconsistent with the
general docility and gentleness of her temper. She boldly refused to be
admitted anew into the pale of the Church, of which her conscience told
her she was already a member, or to exchange for another the name
originally given her at the font. It was in vain that the old knight
commanded, that the lady threatened, and that her mother advised and
entreated. More closely pressed in private by her mother, she let her
motive be known, which had not before been suspected. "I know," she
said, with a flood of tears, "that my father would have died ere I was
subjected to this insult; and then--who shall assure me that vows which
were made to the Saxon Bertha, will be binding if a French Agatha be
substituted in her stead? They may banish me," she said, "or kill me if
they will, but if the son of Waltheoff should again meet with the
daughter of Engelred, he shall meet that Bertha whom he knew in the
forests of Hampton."

All argument was in vain; the Saxon maiden remained obstinate, and to
try to break her resolution, the Lady of Aspramonte at length spoke of
dismissing her from the service of her young mistress, and banishing
her from the castle. To this also she had made up her mind, and she
answered firmly though respectfully, that she would sorrow bitterly at
parting with her young lady; but as to the rest, she would rather beg
under her own name, than be recreant to the faith of her fathers and
condemn it as heresy, by assigning one of Frank origin. The Lady
Brenhilda, in the meantime, entered the chamber, where her mother was
just about to pass the threatened doom of banishment.--"Do not stop for
my entrance, madam," said the dauntless young lady; "I am as much
concerned in the doom which you are about to pass as is Bertha; If she
crosses the drawbridge of Aspramonte as an exile, so will I, when she
has dried her tears, of which even my petulance could never wring one
from her eyes. She shall be my squire and body attendant, and
Launcelot, the bard, shall follow with my spear and shield."

"And you will return, mistress," said her mother, "from so foolish an
expedition, before the sun sets?"

"So heaven further me in my purpose, lady," answered the young heiress,
"the sun shall neither rise nor set that sees us return, till this name
of Bertha, and of her mistress, Brenhilda, are wafted as far as the
trumpet of fame can sound them.--Cheer up, my sweetest Bertha!" she
said, taking her attendant by the hand, "If heaven hath torn thee from
thy country and thy plighted troth, it hath given thee a sister and a
friend, with whom thy fame shall be forever blended."

The Lady of Aspramonte was confounded: She knew that her daughter was
perfectly capable of the wild course which she had announced, and that
she herself, even with her husband's assistance, would be unable to
prevent her following it. She passively listened, therefore, while the
Saxon matron, formerly Urica, but now Martha, addressed her daughter.
"My child," she said, "as you value honour, virtue, safety, and
gratitude, soften your heart towards your master and mistress, and
follow the advice of a parent, who has more years and more judgment
than you. And you, my dearest young lady, let not your lady-mother
think that an attachment to the exercises you excel in, has destroyed
in your bosom filial affection, and a regard to the delicacy of your
sex!--As they seem both obstinate, madam," continued the matron, after
watching the influence of this advice upon the young woman, "perhaps,
if it may be permitted me. I could state an alternative, which might,
in the meanwhile, satisfy your ladyship's wishes, accommodate itself to
the wilfulness of my obstinate daughter, and answer the kind purpose of
her generous mistress." The Lady of Aspramonte signed to the Saxon
matron to proceed. She went on accordingly: "The Saxons, dearest lady,
of the present day, are neither pagans nor heretics; they are, in the
time of keeping Easter, as well as in all other disputable doctrine,
humbly obedient to the Pope of Rome; and this our good Bishop well
knows, since he upbraided some of the domestics for calling me an old
heathen. Yet our names are uncouth in the ears of the Franks, and bear,
perhaps, a heathenish sound. If it be not exacted that my daughter
submit to a new rite of baptism, she will lay aside her Saxon name of
Bertha upon all occasions while in your honourable household. This will
cut short a debate which, with forgiveness, I think is scarce of
importance enough to break the peace of this castle. I will engage
that, in gratitude for this indulgence of a trifling scruple, my
daughter, if possible, shall double the zeal and assiduity of her
service to her young lady."

The Lady of Aspramonte was glad to embrace the means which this offer
presented, of extricating herself from the dispute with as little
compromise of dignity as could well be. "If the good Lord Bishop
approved of such a compromise," she said, "she would for herself
withdraw her opposition." The prelate approved accordingly, the more
readily that he was informed that the young heiress desired earnestly
such an agreement. The peace of the castle was restored, and Bertha
recognized her new name of Agatha as a name of service, but not a name
of baptism.

One effect the dispute certainly produced, and that was, increasing in
an enthusiastic degree the love of Bertha for her young mistress. With
that amiable failing of attached domestics and humble friends, she
endeavoured to serve her as she knew she loved to be served; and
therefore indulged, her mistress in those chivalrous fancies which
distinguished her even in her own age, and in ours would have rendered
her a female Quixote. Bertha, indeed, never caught the frenzy of her
mistress; but, strong, willing, and able-bodied, she readily qualified
herself to act upon occasion as a squire of the body to a Lady
Adventuress; and, accustomed from her childhood to see blows dealt,
blood flowing, and men dying, she could look with an undazzled eye upon
the dangers which her mistress encountered, and seldom teased her with
remonstrances, unless when those were unusually great. This compliance
on most occasions, gave Bertha a right of advice upon some, which,
always given with the best intentions and at fitting times,
strengthened her influence with her mistress, which a course of conduct
savouring of diametrical opposition would certainly have destroyed.

A few more words serve to announce the death of the Knight of
Aspramonte--the romantic marriage of the young lady with the Count of
Paris--their engagement in the crusade--and the detail of events with
which the reader is acquainted.

Hereward did not exactly comprehend some of the later incidents of the
story, owing to a slight strife which arose between Bertha and him
during the course of her narrative. When she avowed the girlish
simplicity with which she obstinately refused to change her name,
because, in her apprehension, the troth-plight betwixt her and her
lover might be thereby prejudiced, it was impossible for Hereward not
to acknowledge her tenderness, by snatching her to his bosom, and
impressing his grateful thanks upon her lips. She extricated herself
immediately from his grasp, however, with cheeks more crimsoned in
modesty than in anger, and gravely addressed her lover thus: "Enough,
enough, Hereward! this may be pardoned to so unexpected a meeting; but
we must in future remember, that we are probably the last of our race;
and let it not be said, that the manners of their ancestors were
forgotten by Hereward and by Bertha; think, that though we are alone,
the shades of our fathers are not far off, and watch to see what use we
make of the meeting, which, perhaps, their intercession has procured
us."

"You wrong me, Bertha," said Hereward, "if you think me capable of
forgetting my own duty and yours, at a moment when our thanks are due
to Heaven, to be testified very differently than by infringing on its
behests, or the commands of our parents. The question is now, How we
shall rejoin each other when we separate? since separate, I fear, we
must."

"O! do not say so!" exclaimed the unfortunate Bertha.

"It must be so," said Hereward, "for a time; but I swear to thee by the
hilt of my sword, and the handle of my battle-axe, that blade was never
so true to shaft as I will be to thee!"

"But wherefore, then, leave me, Hereward?" said the maiden; "and oh!
wherefore not assist me in the release of my mistress?"

"Of thy mistress!" said Hereward. "Shame! that thou canst give that
name to mortal woman!"

"But she _is_ my mistress," answered Bertha, "and by a thousand kind
ties which cannot be separated so long as gratitude is the reward of
kindness."

"And what is her danger," said Hereward; "what is it she wants, this
accomplished lady whom thou callest mistress?"

"Her honour, her life, are alike in danger," said Bertha. "She has
agreed to meet the Caesar in the field, and he will not hesitate, like
a baseborn miscreant, to take every advantage in the encounter, which,
I grieve to say, may in all likelihood be fatal to my mistress."

"Why dost thou think so?" answered Hereward. "This lady has won many
single combats, unless she is belied, against adversaries more
formidable than the Caesar."

"True," said the Saxon maiden; "but you speak of things that passed in
