Project Gutenberg's Gascoyne, The Sandal Wood Trader, by R. M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Gascoyne, The Sandal Wood Trader
       A Tale of the Pacific

Author: R. M. Ballantyne

Release Date: April 23, 2005 [EBook #15689]
Last updated: January 3, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GASCOYNE, THE SANDAL WOOD TRADER ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Taavi Kalju and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at www.pgdp.net.





[Illustration: The next moment he leveled the pistol at the savage's
head and fired.]




                              GASCOYNE,

                       THE SANDAL-WOOD TRADER

                       A TALE OF THE PACIFIC.


                        By R.M. BALLANTYNE.


    _Author of "Erling the Bold," "The Red Eric," "Deep Down," etc._

                    A.L. BURT COMPANY, PUBLISHERS

                     52-58 Duane Street, New York.




CONTENTS.

     CHAPTER I.
     The Schooner

     CHAPTER II.
     Bumpus is Fiery and Philosophical--Murderous Designs Frustrated

     CHAPTER III.
     A Rough Walk Enlivened by Rambling Talk--Bumpus is "Agreeable"

     CHAPTER IV.
     The Missionary--Suspicions, Surprises, and Surmises

     CHAPTER V.
     The Pastor's Household--Preparations for War

     CHAPTER VI.
     Suspicions Allayed and Reawakened

     CHAPTER VII.
     Master Corrie Caught Napping--Snakes in the Grass

     CHAPTER VIII.
     A Surprise--A Battle and a Fire

     CHAPTER IX.
     Baffled and Perplexed--Plans for a Rescue

     CHAPTER X.
     The Pursuit--Poopy, Led on by Love and Hate, Rushes to the Rescue

     CHAPTER XI.
     A Ghost--A Terrible Combat Ending in a Dreadful Plunge

     CHAPTER XII.
     Dangerous Navigation and Doubtful Pilotage--Montague is Hot, Gascoyne
     Sarcastic

     CHAPTER XIII.
     Doings on Board the "Foam"

     CHAPTER XIV.
     Greater Mysteries than Ever--A Bold Move and Clever Escape

     CHAPTER XV.
     Remarkable Doings of Poopy--Extraordinary Case of Resuscitation

     CHAPTER XVI.
     A Wild Chase--Hope, Disappointment, and Despair--The Sandal-wood
     Trader Outwits the Man-of-War

     CHAPTER XVII.
     The Escape

     CHAPTER XVIII.
     The Goat's Pass--An Attack, a Bloodless Victory, and a Sermon

     CHAPTER XIX.
     Sorrow and Sympathy--The Widow Becomes a Pleader, and her Son Engages
     in Single Combat

     CHAPTER XX.
     Mysterious Consultations and Plans--Gascoyne Astonishes his Friends,
     and makes an Unexpected Confession

     CHAPTER XXI.
     A Terrible Doom for an Innocent Man

     CHAPTER XXII.
     The Rendezvous--An Episode--Peculiar Circumstances, and other Matters

     CHAPTER XXIII.
     Plans Partially Carried out--The Cutter's Fate, and a Serious
     Misfortune

     CHAPTER XXIV.
     An Unexpected Meeting--Doings on the Isle of Palms--Gascoyne's Despair

     CHAPTER XXV.
     Surly Dick--The Rescue

     CHAPTER XXVI.
     The Capture and the Fire

     CHAPTER XXVII.
     Pleading for Life

     CHAPTER XXVIII.
     A Peculiar Confidant--More Difficulties, and Various Plans to Overcome
     Them

     CHAPTER XXIX.
     Bumpus is Perplexed--Mysterious Communings, and a Curious Leave-taking

     CHAPTER XXX.
     More Leave-Taking--Deep Designs--Bumpus in a New Capacity

     CHAPTER XXXI.
     The Ambush--The Escape--Retributive Justice--And Conclusion




GASCOYNE,

THE SANDAL-WOOD TRADER.




CHAPTER I.

THE SCHOONER.


The great Pacific is the scene of our story. On a beautiful morning,
many years ago, a little schooner might have been seen floating, light
and graceful as a seamew, on the breast of the slumbering ocean. She was
one of those low, black-hulled vessels, with raking, taper masts,
trimly-cut sails, and elegant form, which we are accustomed to associate
with the idea of a yacht or a pirate.

She might have been the former, as far as appearance went; for the sails
and deck were white as snow, and every portion of brass and copper above
her water-line shone in the hot sun with dazzling brilliancy. But
pleasure-seekers were not wont, in those days, to take such distant
flights, or to venture into such dangerous seas,--dangerous alike from
the savage character of the islanders, and the numerous coral reefs that
lie hidden a few feet below the surface of the waves.

Still less probable did it seem that the vessel in question could belong
to the lawless class of craft to which we have referred; for, although
she had what may be styled a wicked aspect, and was evidently adapted
for swift sailing, neither large guns nor small arms of any kind were
visible.

Whatever her nature or her object, she was reduced, at the time we
introduce her to the reader, to a state of inaction by the dead calm
which prevailed. The sea resembled a sheet of clear glass. Not a cloud
broke the softness of the sky, in which the sun glowed hotter and hotter
as it rose towards the zenith. The sails of the schooner hung idly from
the yards; her reflected image was distorted, but scarcely broken, by
the long, gentle swell; her crew, with the exception of the watch, were
asleep either on deck or down below; and so deep was the universal
silence, that, as the vessel rose and fell with a slow, quiet motion,
the pattering of the reef-points on her sails forcibly attracted the
listener's attention, as does the ticking of a clock in the deep silence
of night. A few sea-birds rested on the water, as if in the enjoyment of
the profound peace that reigned around; and far away on the horizon
might be seen the tops of the palm trees that grow on one of those coral
islands which lie scattered in thousands, like beautiful gems, on the
surface of that bright blue sea.

Among the men who lay sleeping in various easy, off-hand attitudes on
the schooner's deck, was one who merits special attention--not only
because of the grotesque appearance of his person, but also because he
is one of the principal actors in our tale.

He was a large, powerful man, of that rugged build and hairy aspect that
might have suggested the idea that he would be difficult to kill. He
was a fair man, with red hair, and a deeply sun-burned face, on which
jovial good humor sat almost perpetually enthroned. At the moment when
we introduce him to the reader, however, that expression happened to be
modified in consequence of his having laid him down to sleep in a
sprawling manner on his back--the place as well as the position being,
apparently, one of studied discomfort. His legs lay over the heel of the
bowsprit, his big body reposed on a confused heap of blocks and cordage,
and his neck rested on the stock of an anchor so that his head hung down
over it, presenting the face to view with the large mouth wide open, in
an upside-down position. The man was evidently on the verge of choking,
but, being a strong man, and a rugged man, and a healthy man, he did not
care. He seemed to prefer choking to the trouble of rousing himself and
improving his position.

How long he would have lain in this state of felicity it is impossible
to say, for his slumbers were rudely interrupted by a slight lurch of
the schooner, which caused the blocks and cordage attached to the sheet
of the jib to sweep slowly, but with rasping asperity, across his face.
Any ordinary man would have been seriously damaged--at least in
appearance--by such an accident; but this particular sea-dog was tough
in the skin,--he was only awakened by it--nothing more. He yawned,
raised himself lazily, and gazed round with that vacant stare of
unreasonable surprise which is common to man on passing from a state of
somnolence to that of wakefulness.

Gradually the expression of habitual good-humor settled on his visage,
as he looked from one to another of his sleeping comrades, and at last,
with a bland smile, he broke forth into the following soliloquy:

"Wot a goose, wot a grampus you've bin, John Bumpus: firstly, for goin'
to sea; secondly, for remainin' at sea; thirdly, for not forsakin' the
sea; fourthly, for bein' worried about it at all, now that you've made
up your mind to retire from the sea; and fifthly--"

Here John Bumpus paused as if to meditate on the full depth and meaning
of these polite remarks, or to invent some new and powerful expression
wherewith to deliver his fifth head. His mental efforts seemed to fail,
however; for, instead of concluding the sentence, he hummed the
following lines, which, we may suppose, were expressive of his feelings,
as well as his intentions:--

    "So good-by to the mighty ocean,
      And adoo to the rollin' sea.
    For it's nobody has no notion
      Wot a grief it has bin to me."

"Ease off the sheets and square the topsail yards," was at that moment
said, or rather murmured, by a bass voice so deep and rich that,
although scarcely raised above a whisper, it was distinctly heard over
the whole deck.

John Bumpus raised his bulky form with a degree of lithe activity that
proved him to be not less agile than athletic, and, with several others,
sprang to obey the order. A few seconds later the sails were swelled out
by a light breeze, and the schooner moved through the water at a rate
which seemed scarcely possible under the influence of so gentle a puff
of air. Presently the breeze increased, the vessel cut through the blue
water like a knife, leaving a long track of foam in her wake as she
headed for the coral-island before referred to. The outer reef or
barrier of coral which guarded the island was soon reached. The narrow
opening in this natural bulwark was passed. The schooner stood across
the belt of perfectly still water that lay between the reef and the
shore, and entered a small bay, where the cairn water reflected the
strip of white sand, green palm, and tropical plants that skirted its
margin, as well as the purple hills of the interior.

Here she swept round in a sudden but graceful curve, until all her
canvas fluttered in the breeze, and then dropped anchor in about six
fathoms water.




CHAPTER II.

BUMPUS IS FIERY AND PHILOSOPHICAL--MURDEROUS DESIGNS FRUSTRATED.


The captain of the schooner, whose deep voice had so suddenly terminated
the meditations of John Bumpus, was one of those men who seem to have
been formed for the special purpose of leading and commanding their
fellows.

He was not only unusually tall and powerful,--physical qualities which,
in themselves, are by no means sufficient to command respect,--but, as
we have said, he possessed a deep, full-toned bass voice, in which there
seemed to lie a species of fascination; for its softest tones riveted
attention, and when it thundered forth commands in the fiercest storms,
it inspired confidence and a feeling of security in all who heard it.
The countenance of the captain, however, was that which induced men to
accord to him a position of superiority in whatever sphere of action he
chanced to move. It was not so much a handsome as a manly and singularly
grave face, in every line of which was written inflexible determination.
His hair was short, black, and curly. A small mustache darkened his
upper lip, but the rest of his face was closely shaven, so that his
large chin and iron jaw were fully displayed. His eyes were of that
indescribable blue color which can exhibit the intensest passion, or
the most melting tenderness.

He wore a somber but somewhat picturesque costume,--a dark-colored
flannel shirt and trousers, which latter were gathered in close round
his lower limbs by a species of drab gaiter that appeared somewhat
incongruous with the profession of the man. The only bit of bright color
about him was a scarlet belt round his waist, from the side of which
depended a long knife in a brown leather sheath. A pair of light shoes,
and a small round cap resembling what is styled in these days a
pork-pie, completed his costume. He was about forty years of age.

Such was the commander, or captain, or skipper of this
suspicious-looking schooner,--a man pre-eminently fitted for the
accomplishment of much good, or the perpetration of great evil.

As soon as the anchor touched the ground, the captain ordered a small
boat to be lowered, and, leaping into it with two men, one of whom was
our friend John Bumpus, rowed toward the shore.

"Have you brought your kit with you, John?" inquired the captain, as the
little boat shot over the smooth waters of the bay.

"Wot's of it, sir," replied our rugged seaman, holding up a small bundle
tied in a red cotton handkerchief, "I s'pose our cruise ashore won't be
a long one."

"It will be long for you, my man,--at least as far as the schooner is
concerned, for I do not mean to take you aboard again."

"Not take me aboard agin!" exclaimed the sailor, with a look of surprise
which quickly degenerated into an angry frown and thereafter gradually
relaxed into a broad grin as he continued: "Why, capting, wot _do_ you
mean to do with me then? for I'm a heavy piece of goods, d'ye see, and
can't be easily moved about without a small touch o' my own consent, you
know."

Jo Bumpus, as he was fond of styling himself, said this with a
serio-comic air of sarcasm, for he was an exception to the general rule
of his fellows. He had little respect for, and no fear of, his
commander. Indeed, to say truth (for truth must be told, even though the
character of our rugged friend should suffer), Jo entertained a most
profound belief in the immense advantage of muscular strength and vigor
in general, and of his own prowess in particular.

Although not quite so gigantic a man as his captain, he was nearly so,
and, being a bold, self-reliant fellow, he felt persuaded in his own
mind that he could thrash him, if need were. In fact, Jo was convinced
that there was no living creature under the sun, human or otherwise,
that walked upon two legs, that he could not pommel to death, with more
or less ease, by means of his fists alone. And in this conviction he was
not far wrong. Yet it must not be supposed that Jo Bumpus was a boastful
man or a bully. Far from it. He was so thoroughly persuaded of his
invincibility that he felt there was no occasion to prove it. He
therefore followed the natural bent of his inclinations, which led him
at all times to exhibit a mild, amiable, and gentle aspect,--except, of
course, when he was roused. As occasion for being roused was not wanting
in the South Seas in those days, Jo's amiability was frequently put to
the test. He sojourned, while there, in a condition of alternate calm
and storm; but riotous joviality ran, like a rich vein, through all his
checkered life, and lit up its most somber phases like gleams of light
on an April day.

"You entered my service with your own consent," replied the captain to
Jo's last remark, "and you may leave it, with the same consent, whenever
you choose; but you will please to remember that I did not engage you to
serve on board the schooner. Back there you do not go either with or
without your consent, my fine fellow, and if you are bent on going to
sea on your own account.--you've got a pair of good arms and legs,--you
can swim! Besides," continued the captain, dropping the tone of sarcasm
in which this was said, and assuming a more careless and good-natured
air, "you were singing something not long since, if I mistake not, about
'farewell to the rolling sea,' which leads me to think you will not
object to a short cruise on shore for a change, especially on such a
beautiful island as this is."

"I'm your man, capting," cried the impulsive seaman, at the same time
giving his oar a pull that well-nigh spun the boat round. "And, to say
wot's the plain truth, d'ye see, I'm not sorry to ha' done with your
schooner; for, although she is as tight a little craft as any man could
wish for to go to sea in, I can't say much for the crew,--saving your
presence, Dick," he added, glancing over his shoulder at the
surly-looking man who pulled the bow oar. "Of all the rascally set I
ever clapped eyes on, they seems to me the worst. If I didn't know you
for a sandal-wood trader, I do believe I'd take ye for a pirate."

"Don't speak ill of your messmates behind their backs, Jo," said the
captain, with a slight frown. "No good and true man ever does that."

"No more I do," replied John Bumpus, while a deep red color suffused
his bronzed countenance. "No more I do, leastwise if they wos here I'd
say it to their faces; for they're a set of as ill-tongued villains as I
ever had the misfortune to--"

"Silence!" exclaimed the captain, suddenly, in a voice of thunder.

Few men would have ventured to disobey the command given by such a man,
but John Bumpus was one of those few. He did indeed remain silent for
two seconds, but it was the silence of astonishment.
