more fatiguing efforts such as neural pressure or selective paralysis.

One must conserve one's powers for times when they might be really
needed.

Too, there was the remote possibility that some lackland wanderer might
come by and find a flaw in the protection of the Estates--even somehow
penetrate to the Residence. Barra shuddered at that thought, then
shrugged it off. Kira Barra was well protected, of that he had made
sure. Ever vigilant surrogates were deposited in all the strategic spots
of the Estates--not only to allow quick observations of the condition of
the lands, but also to give automatic warning of the approach of anyone
of inimical turn of mind.

He eased his bulk into the chair, twisted about for a few moments as it
adjusted to fit his body, then leaned back with a sigh of relaxation and
directed his thoughts to the crystal before him.

Under the impulses of his amplified thought, the crystal glowed,
appeared to expand, then became a three-dimensional vista.

The high intensity summary and excerpt leader had been not too
deceptive, Barra told himself as the story unfolded. It was a well done
adventure projection, based on the war with the Fifth planet.
Critically, he watched the actions of a scout crew, approving of the
author's treatment and selection of material. He, Barra, was something
of a connoisseur of these adventure crystals, even though he had never
found it necessary to leave the protection of Earth's surface.

He shrugged, taking his attention from the projection.

The lacklanders, he told himself--entertainment people, caravan masters,
seafarers, other wanderers of light responsibility--were the natural
ones to be selected to go out and deal with remote emergencies.

Like all stable, responsible men of property and worth, he was far too
valuable to the Commonwealth to risk himself in wild dashes to the dead,
non-psionic lands, or out into the emptiness of space. As far as risking
himself on combat missions of interplanetary war-- He shook his head.
This was pure stupidity.

He frowned uneasily. It had been a bit unfair, though, of the
Controllers. They had completely excused him from service on the basis
of inaptitude. It had rankled ever since.

Of course he couldn't be expected to dash madly about in some two-man
scout. Even as his brother's assistant, he had been a person of quite
definite standing and responsibility and such antics would have been
beneath his dignity. He had made that quite plain to them.

There had been responsible posts where a man of his quality and standing
could have been of positive value. And, as he had pointed out, they
could have assigned him to one of those.

But no! They had merely excused him. Inapt!

As far as that went, he told himself angrily, he, Kio Barra, could
comport himself with the best if necessity demanded.

Those dashing characters in this projection were, of course, the
figments of some unstable dreamer's imagination. But they showed the
instability of the usual lackland wanderers. And what could such men do
that a solid, responsible man like himself couldn't do better?

He returned to the crystal, then shook his head in disgust. It had
become full--flat--meaningless. Besides, he had matters of real import
to take care.

He directed his attention to the chair, which obediently swung about
until he faced his large view crystal.

"Might as well have a look at the East Shore," he told himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he focused his attention, the crystal expanded, then became a huge
window through which he could see the shores of the inland sea, then the
lands to the east of the large island on which he had caused his
Residence to be built. He looked approvingly at the rolling, tree-clad
hills as the view progressed.

Suddenly, he frowned in annoyance. The great northern null was in
turbulence again, thrusting its shapeless arms down toward the borders
of Kira Barra. He growled softly.

There, he told himself, was the result of the carelessness of those
lackland fools who had been entrusted with the defense of the home
planet. Their loose, poorly planned defenses had allowed the pseudomen
of the Fifth to dash in and drop their destructors in a good many spots
on the surface. And here was one of them.

Here was a huge area which had once been the site of a great city and
which had contained the prosperous and productive estates of a Master
Protector, now reduced to a mere wasteland into which slaves might
escape, to lead a brute-like existence in idleness.

He had lost pseudomen slaves in this very null and he knew he would
probably lose more. Despite the vigilance of the surrogates, they kept
slipping across the river and disappearing into that swirling
nothingness. And now, with that prominence so close--

He had no guards he could trust to go after the fellows, either. Such
herd guards as he had would decide to desert their protector and take up
the idle life which their fellow pseudomen had adopted. A few of them
had gone out and done just that. Their memories of the protection and
privileges granted them were short and undependable. He sighed.

"Ungrateful beasts!"

Some Master Protectors had little trouble along that line. Others had
managed to hire the services of halfmen--weak psionics, too weak to
govern and yet strong and able enough to be more than mere pseudomen.

These halfmen made superb, loyal guards and overseers--for some--but
none had remained at Kira Barra. They had come, to be sure, but they had
stayed on for a time, then drifted away.

And, he thought angrily, it was illegal to restrain these halfmen in
any way. Some soft-headed fool had granted their kind the rights of
Commonwealth citizenship. Halfmen had even managed to take service with
the fleet during the war with the Fifth Planet. Some of them had even
managed somehow to be of small value--and now many of them held the
status of veterans of that victorious war--a status he, one of the great
landholders, was denied.

No, he told himself, until such time as the nulls were solved and
eliminated, such pseudomen as managed to cross the northeastern river
were safe enough in their unknown land. And, he thought sourly, the
scholars had made no progress in their studies of the nulls.

Probably they were concerning themselves with studies more likely to
give them preferment or more immediate personal gain.

Of course, the wasteland wasn't entirely unknown, not to him, at least.
He had viewed the area personally. There were hilltops on the Estates
from which ordinary eyesight would penetrate far into the dead area,
even though the more powerful and accurate parasight was stopped at its
borders. Yes, he had seen the affected area.

He had noted that much of it had regained a measure of fertility. There
was life now--some of it his own meat lizards who had wandered across
the river and out of his control. And he had even seen some of the
escaped pseudomen slinking through the scrub growth and making their
crudely primitive camps.

"Savages!" he told himself. "Mere animals. And one can't do a thing
about them, so long as they let that dead area persist."

Eventually, the scholars had reported, the dead areas would diminish and
fade from existence. He smiled bitterly. Here was a nice evasion--a neat
excuse for avoiding study and possible, dangerous research.

So long as those nulls remained, they would be sources of constant loss
of the responsible Master Protectors, and would thus threaten the very
foundations of the Commonwealth.

Possibly, he should-- He shook his head.

No, he thought, this was impractical. Parasight was worthless beyond the
borders of the null. No surrogate could penetrate it and no weapon would
operate within it. It would be most unsafe for any true man to enter.
There, one would be subject to gross, physical attack and unable to make
proper defense against it.

Certainly, the northern null was no place for him to go. Only the
pseudomen could possibly tolerate the conditions to be found there, and
thus, there they had found haven and were temporarily supreme.

Besides, this matter was the responsibility of the Council of
Controllers and the scholars they paid so highly.

He concentrated on the crystal, shifting the view to scan toward the
nearest village.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly, he sat forward in his chair. A herd of saurians was slowly
drifting toward one of the arms the null had thrust out. Shortly, they
would have ambled into a stream and beyond, out of all possible control.
Perhaps they might wander for years in the wastelands. Perhaps they and
their increase might furnish meat for the pseudomen who lurked inside
the swirling blankness.

He snarled to himself. No herders were in sight. No guard was in
attendance. He would have to attend to this matter himself. He
concentrated his attention on the power crystals of a distant surrogate,
willing his entire ego into the controls.

At last, the herd leader's head came up. Then the long-neck curved,
snaking around until the huge beast stared directly at the heap of rocks
which housed the crystals of the surrogate himself. The slow drift of
the herd slowed even more, then stopped as the other brutes dimly
recognized that something had changed. More of the ridiculously tiny
heads swiveled toward the surrogate.

Kio Barra squirmed in his chair. Holding these empty minds was a chore
he had always hated.

Certainly, there was less total effort than that required for the
control of the more highly organized pseudomen, but the more complex
minds reacted with some speed and the effort was soon over. There was a
short, sometimes sharp struggle, then surrender.

But this was long-term, dragging toil--a steady pushing at a soggy,
unresisting, yet heavy mass. And full concentration was imperative if
anything was to be accomplished. The reptilian minds were as unstable
as they were empty and would slip away unless firmly held. He stared
motionlessly at his crystal, willing the huge reptiles to turn--to
waddle back to the safe grasslands of the estate, far from the null.

At last, the herd was again in motion. One by one, the huge brutes swung
about and galloped clumsily toward more usual pastures, their long necks
swaying loosely with their motion.

Switching from surrogate to surrogate, Barra followed them, urged them,
forced them along until they plunged into the wide swamp northeast of
Tibara village.

He signed wearily and shifted his viewpoint to a surrogate which
overlooked the village itself. What, he wondered, had happened to the
herdsmen--and to the guards who should be overseeing the day's work?

       *       *       *       *       *

Half hidden among ferns and the mastlike stems of trees, the rude huts
of Tibara nestled in the forest, blending with their surroundings, until
only the knowing observer could identify them by vague form. Barra
shifted his viewpoint to the central village surrogate.

There were other open spaces in the village, but this was the largest.
Here was the village well, near which a few children played some
incomprehensible game. An old man had collected a pile of rock and had
started work on the well curb. Now, he sat near his work, leaning
against the partly torn down wall. Spots of sunlight, coming through
the fronds high above, struck his body, leaving his face in shadow. He
dozed in the warmth, occasionally allowing his eyes to half open as he
idly regarded the scene before him.

Before some of the huts surrounding the rude plaza, women squatted on
the ground, their arms swinging monotonously up and down as they struck
their wooden pestles into bowls of grain which they were grinding to
make the coarse meal which was their mainstay of diet.

A few men could be seen, scratching at small garden plots or idly
repairing tools. Others squatted near their huts, their attention
occupied by fishing gear. Still others merely leaned against convenient
trees, looking at each other, their mouths moving in the grotesque way
of the pseudoman when he could find an excuse to idle away time.

Barra listened to the meaningless chatter of grunts and hisses, then
disregarded the sounds. They formed, he had been told, a sort of
elementary code of communication. He coughed disparagingly. Only some
subhuman could bring himself to study such things.

Of course, he knew that some lacklanders could make vocal converse with
the pseudomen and caravan masters seemed to do it as a regular thing,
but he could see no point in such effort. He could make his demands
known without lowering himself by making idiotic noises.

His communicator crystals would drive simple thoughts into even the
