
[Footnote 657: _Lockyer's Chemistry of the Sun_, p. 324.]

[Footnote 658: _Month. Not._, vol. li., p. 76.]

[Footnote 659: _Ibid._, vol. lviii., p. 370.]

[Footnote 660: _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xi., p. 615.]

[Footnote 661: Thollon's estimate (_Comptes Rendus_, t. xcvii., p. 902)
of 300,000 _kilometres_, seems considerably too low. Limiting the
"average prominence region" to a shell 54,000 miles deep (2' of arc as
seen from the earth), the visual line will, at mid-height (27,000 miles
from the sun's surface), travel through (in round numbers) 320,000 miles
of that region.]

[Footnote 662: Liveing and Dewar, _Phil. Mag._, vol. xvi. (5th ser.), p.
407.]

[Footnote 663: _Chemistry of the Sun_, p. 260.]

[Footnote 664: _Nature_, October 14, 1886.]

[Footnote 665: The normal spectrum is that depending exclusively upon
wave-length--the fundamental constant given by nature as regards light.
It is obtained by the interference of rays, in the manner first
exemplified by Fraunhofer, and affords the only unvarying standard for
measurement. In the refraction spectrum (upon which Kirchhoff's map was
founded), the relative positions of the lines vary with the material of
the prisms.]

[Footnote 666: Scheiner, _Die Spectralanalyse der Gestirne_, p. 168.]

[Footnote 667: _Phil. Mag._, vol. xxvii., p. 479.]

[Footnote 668: _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xii., p. 321;
Frost-Scheiner, _Astr. Spectr._, p. 363.]

[Footnote 669: Published in _Astroph. Jour._, vols. i. to vi.]

[Footnote 670: _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xi., p. 793.]

[Footnote 671: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. vi., p. 95.]

[Footnote 672: _Annales de l'Observatoire de Nice_, t. iii., 1890.]

[Footnote 673: _Trans. Royal Society of Edinburgh_, vol. xxxvi., p. 99.]

[Footnote 674: Rev. A. L. Cortie, _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xi., p.
401. Specimens of his photographs were given by Ranyard in _Knowledge_,
vol. xiii., p. 212.]

[Footnote 675: _Ann. d. Phys._, Bd. cxvii., p. 296.]

[Footnote 676: _Comptes Rendus_, t. lxiii., p. 647.]

[Footnote 677: _Ibid._, t. lxxxvi., p. 317. Some half dozen of these
identifications have proved fallacious.]

[Footnote 678: _Chemistry of the Sun_, p. 143.]

[Footnote 679: _Amer. Jour. of Science_, vol. xxxiv., p. 348.]

[Footnote 680: _Berlin Abhandlungen_, 1889.]

[Footnote 681: _Amer. Jour. of Science_, vol. xli., p. 243. See
Appendix, Table II.]

[Footnote 682: _Astrophy. Jour._, vol. ix., p. 219; Fowler, _Knowledge_,
vol. xxiii., p. 11.]

[Footnote 683: _Amer. Jour, of Science_, vol. xiv., p. 89; _Nature_,
vol. xvi., p. 364; _Month. Not._, vol. xxxix., p. 440.]

[Footnote 684: _Month. Not._, vol. xxxviii., p. 473; Trowbridge and
Hutchins, _Amer. Jour. of Science_, vol. xxxiv., p. 263.]

[Footnote 685: Scheiner, _Die Spectralanalyse_, p. 180.]

[Footnote 686: _Comptes Rendus_, t. lxvii., p. 1123.]

[Footnote 687: Rev. A. L. Cortie, _Month. Not._, vol. li., p. 18.]

[Footnote 688: Young, _The Sun_, p. 135; Hale, _Astr. and Astrophysics_,
vol. xi., p. 312 Buss, _Jour. Brit. Astr. Ass._, vol. ix., p. 253.]

[Footnote 689: _Phil. Trans._, vol. clxx., p. 46.]

[Footnote 690: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xcvii., p. 555; t. ci., p. 1145.]

[Footnote 691: Liveing and Dewar, _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xi., p.
705.]

[Footnote 692: _Comptes Rendus_, t. lx., p. 213; t. lxiii., p. 289.]

[Footnote 693: _Ibid._, t. cviii., p. 1035.]

[Footnote 694: _Ibid._, t. cxi., p. 431.]

[Footnote 695: _Astroph. Jour._, vols. iv., p. 317; vi., p. 426.]

[Footnote 696: _Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin._, vol. xxxii., p. 452.]

[Footnote 697: _Comptes Rendus_, t. cxi., p. 941; Huggins, _Proc. Roy.
Soc._, vol. xlvi., p. 168.]




                                CHAPTER V

                         _TEMPERATURE OF THE SUN_


Newton was the first who attempted to measure the quantity of heat
received by the earth from the sun. His object in making the experiment
was to ascertain the temperature encountered by the comet of 1680 at its
passage through perihelion. He found it, by multiplying the observed
heating effects of direct sunshine according to the familiar rule of the
"inverse squares of the distances," to be about 2,000 times that of
red-hot iron.[698]

Determinations of the sun's thermal power, made with some scientific
exactness, date, however, from 1837. A few days previous to the
beginning of that year, Herschel began observing at the Cape of Good
Hope with an "actinometer," and obtained results agreeing quite
satisfactorily with those derived by Pouillet from experiments made in
France some months later with a "pyrheliometer."[699] Pouillet found
that the vertical rays of the sun falling on each square centimetre of
the earth's surface are competent (apart from atmospheric absorption) to
raise the temperature of 1.7633 grammes of water one degree Centigrade
per minute. This number (1.7633) he called the "solar constant"; and the
unit of heat chosen is known as the "calorie." Hence it was computed
that the total amount of solar heat received during a year would suffice
to melt a layer of ice covering the entire earth to a depth of 30.89
metres, or 100 feet; while the heat emitted would melt, at the sun's
surface, a stratum 11.80 metres thick each minute. A careful series of
observations showed that nearly half the heat incident upon our
atmosphere is stopped in its passage through it.

Herschel got somewhat larger figures, though he assigned only a third as
the spoil of the air. Taking a mean between his own and Pouillet's, he
calculated that the ordinary expenditure of the sun per minute would
have power to melt a cylinder of ice 184 feet in diameter, reaching from
his surface to that of Alpha Centauri; or, putting it otherwise,
that an ice-rod 45.3 miles across, continually darted into the sun with
the velocity of light, would scarcely consume, in dissolving, the
thermal supplies now poured abroad into space.[700] It is nearly certain
that this estimate should be increased by about two-thirds in order to
bring it up to the truth.

Nothing would, at first sight, appear simpler than to pass from a
knowledge of solar emission--a strictly measurable quantity--to a
knowledge of the solar temperature; this being defined as the
temperature to which a surface thickly coated with lamp-black (that is,
of standard radiating power) should be raised to enable it to send us,
from the sun's distance, the amount of heat actually received from the
sun. Sir John Herschel showed that heat-rays at the sun's surface must
be 92,000 times as dense as when they reach the earth; but it by no
means follows that either the surface emitting, or a body absorbing
those heat-rays must be 92,000 times hotter than a body exposed here to
the full power of the sun. The reason is, that the rate of
emission--consequently the rate of absorption, which is its
correlative--increases very much faster than the temperature. In other
words, a body radiates or cools at a continually accelerated pace as it
becomes more and more intensely heated above its surroundings.

Newton, however, took it for granted that radiation and temperature
advance _pari passu_--that you have only to ascertain the quantity of
heat received from, and the distance of a remote body in order to know
how hot it is.[701] And the validity of this principle, known as
"Newton's Law" of cooling, was never questioned until De la Roche
pointed out, in 1812,[702] that it was approximately true only over a
low range of temperature; while five years later, Dulong and Petit
generalised experimental results into the rule, that while temperature
grows by arithmetical, radiation increases by geometrical
progression.[703] Adopting this formula, Pouillet derived from his
observations on solar heat a solar temperature of somewhere between
1,461 deg. and 1,761 deg. C. Now, the higher of these points--which is
nearly that of melting platinum--is undoubtedly surpassed at the focus of
certain burning-glasses which have been constructed of such power as
virtually to bring objects placed there within a quarter of a million of
miles of the photosphere. In the rays thus concentrated, platinum and
diamond become rapidly vaporised, notwithstanding the great loss of heat
by absorption, first in passing through the air, and again in traversing
the lens. Pouillet's maximum is then manifestly too low, since it
involves the absurdity of supposing a radiating mass capable of heating
a distant body more than it is itself heated.

Less demonstrably, but scarcely less surely, Mr. J. J. Waterston, who
attacked the problem in 1860, erred in the opposite direction. Working
up, on Newton's principle, data collected by himself in India and at
Edinburgh, he got for the "potential temperature" of the sun 12,880,000
deg. Fahr.,[704] equivalent to 7,156,000 deg. C. The phrase _potential
temperature_ (for which Violle substituted, in 1876, _effective
temperature_) was designed to express the accumulation in a single
surface, postulated for the sake of simplicity, of the radiations not
improbably received from a multitude of separate solar layers
reinforcing each other; and might thus (it was explained) be
considerably higher than the _actual_ temperature of any one stratum.

At Rome, in 1861, Father Secchi repeated Waterston's experiments, and
reaffirmed his conclusion;[705] while Soret's observations, made on the
summit of Mont Blanc in 1867,[706] furnished him with materials for a
fresh and even higher estimate of ten million degrees Centigrade.[707]
Yet from the very same data, substituting Dulong and Petit's for
Newton's law, Vicaire deduced in 1872 a _provisional_ solar temperature
of 1,398 deg.[708] This is below that at which iron melts, and we know that
iron-vapour exists high up in the sun's atmosphere. The matter was taken
into consideration on the other side of the Atlantic by Ericsson in
1871. He attempted to re-establish the shaken credit of Newton's
principle, and arrived, by its means, at a temperature of 4,000,000 deg.
Fahrenheit.[709] Subsequently, an "underrated computation," based upon
observation of the quantity of heat received by his "sun motor," gave
him 3,000,000 deg. And the result, as he insisted, followed inevitably
from the principle that the temperature produced by radiant heat is
proportional to its density, or inversely as its diffusion.[710] The
principle, however, is demonstrably unsound.

In 1876 the sun's temperature was proposed as the subject of a prize by
the Paris Academy of Sciences; but although the essay of M. Jules Violle
was crowned, the problem was declared to remain unsolved. Violle (who
adhered to Dulong and Petit's formula) arrived at an _effective_
temperature of 1,500 deg. C., but considered that it might _actually_ reach
2,500 deg. C., if the emissive power of the photospheric clouds fell far
short (as seemed probable) of the lamp-black standard.[711] Experiments
made in April and May, 1881, giving a somewhat higher result, he raised
this figure to 3,000 deg. C.[712]

Appraisements so outrageously discordant as those of Waterston, Secchi,
and Ericsson on the one hand, and those of the French _savants_ on the
other, served only to show that all were based upon a vicious principle.
Professor F. Rosetti,[713] accordingly, of the Paduan University, at
last perceived the necessity for getting out of the groove of "laws"
plainly in contradiction with facts. The temperature, for instance, of
the oxy-hydrogen flame was fixed by Bunsen at 2,800 deg. C.--an estimate
certainly not very far from the truth. But if the two systems of
measurement applied to the sun be used to determine the heat of a solid
body rendered incandescent in this flame, it comes out, by Newton's mode
of calculation, 45,000 deg. C.; by Dulong and Petit's, 870 deg. C.[714]
Both, then, are justly discarded, the first as convicted of exaggeration,
the second of undervaluation. The formula substituted by Rosetti in 1878
was tested successfully up to 2,000 deg. C.; but since, like its
predecessors, it was a purely empirical rule, guaranteed by no principle,
and hence not to be trusted out of sight, it was, like them, liable to
break down at still higher elevations. Radiation by this new prescription
increases as the _square_ of the _absolute_ temperature--that is, of the
number of degrees counted from the "absolute zero" of -273 deg. C. Its
employment gave for the sun's radiating surface an effective temperature
of 20,380 deg. C. (including a supposed loss of one-half in the solar
atmosphere); and setting a probable deficiency in emission (as compared
with lamp-black) against a probable mutual reinforcement of superposed
strata, Professor Rosetti considered "effective" as nearly equivalent to
"actual" temperature. A "law of cooling," proposed by M. Stefan at Vienna
in 1879,[715] was shown by Boltzmann, many years later, to have a certain
theoretical validity.[716] It is that emission grows as the fourth power
of absolute temperature. Hence the temperature of the photosphere would
be proportional to the square root of the square root of its heating
effects at a distance, and appeared, by Stefan's calculations from
Violle's measures of solar radiative intensity, to be just 6,000 deg. C.;
while M. H. Le Chatelier[717] derived 7,600 deg. from a formula, conveying
an intricate and unaccountable relation between the temperature of an
incandescent body and the intensity of its red radiations.

From a series of experiments carefully conducted at Daramona, Ireland,
with a delicate thermal balance, of the kind invented by Boys and
designated a "radio-micrometer," Messrs. Wilson and Gray arrived in
1893, with the aid of Stefan's Law, at a photospheric temperature of
7,400 deg. C.,[718] reduced by the first-named investigator in 1901 to
6,590 deg.[719] Dr. Paschen, of Hanover, on the other hand, ascribed
to the sun a temperature of 5,000 deg. from comparisons between solar
radiative intensity and that of glowing platinum;[720] while F. W. Very
showed in 1895[721] that a minimum value of 20,000 deg. C. for the same
datum resulted from Paschen's formula connecting temperature with the
position of maximum spectral energy.

A new line of inquiry was struck out by Zoellner in 1870. Instead of
tracking the solar radiations backward with the dubious guide of
empirical formulae, he investigated their intensity at their source. He
showed[722] that, taking prominences to be simple effects of the escape
of powerfully compressed gases, it was possible, from the known
mechanical laws of heat and gaseous constitution, to deduce minimum
values for the temperatures prevailing in the area of their development.
These came out 27,700 deg. C. for the strata lying immediately above, and
68,400 deg. C. for the strata lying immediately below the photosphere, the
former being regarded as the region _into_ which, and the latter as the
region _from_ which the eruptions took place. In this calculation, no
prominences exceeding 40,000 miles (1.5') in height were included. But
in 1884, G. A. Hirn of Colmar, having regard to the enormous velocities
of projection observed in the interim, fixed two million degrees
Centigrade as the lowest _internal_ temperature by which they could be
accounted for; although admitting the photospheric condensations to be
incompatible with a higher _external_ temperature than 50,000 deg. to
100,000 deg. C.[723]

This method of going straight to the sun itself, observing what goes on
there, and inferring conditions, has much to recommend it; but its
profitable use demands knowledge we are still very far from possessing.
We are quite ignorant, for instance, of the actual circumstances
attending the birth of the solar flames. The assumption that they are
nothing but phenomena of elasticity is a purely gratuitous one.
Spectroscopic indications, again, give hope of eventually affording a
fixed point of comparison with terrestrial heat sources; but their
interpretation is still beset with uncertainties; nor can, indeed, the
expression of transcendental temperatures in degrees of impossible
thermometers be, at the best, other than a futile attempt to convey
notions respecting a state of things altogether outside the range of our
experience.

A more tangible, as well as a less disputable proof of solar radiative
intensity than any mere estimates of temperature, was provided in some
experiments made by Professor Langley in 1878.[724] Using means of
unquestioned validity, he found the sun's disc to radiate 87 times as
much heat, and 5,300 times as much light as an equal area of metal in a
Bessemer converter after the air-blast had continued about twenty
minutes. The brilliancy of the incandescent steel, nevertheless, was so
blinding, that melted iron, flowing in a dazzling white-hot stream into
the crucible, showed "deep brown by comparison, presenting a contrast
like that of dark coffee poured into a white cup." Its temperature was
estimated (not quite securely)[725] at about 2,000 deg. C.; and no
allowances were made, in computing relative intensities, for atmospheric
ravages on sunlight, for the extra impediments to its passage presented
by the smoke-laden air of Pittsburgh, or for the obliquity of its
incidence. Thus, a very large balance of advantage lay on the side of
the metal.

A further element of uncertainty in estimating the intrinsic strength of
the sun's rays has still to be considered. From the time that his disc
first began to be studied with the telescope, it was perceived to be
less brilliant near the edges. Lucas Valerius, of the Lyncean Academy,
seems to have been the first to note this fact, which, strangely enough,
was denied by Galileo in a letter to Prince Cesi of January 25,
1613.[726] Father Scheiner, however, fully admitted it, and devoted some
columns of his bulky tome to the attempt to find its appropriate
explanation.[727] In 1729 Bouguer measured, with much accuracy, the
amount of this darkening; and from his data, Laplace, adopting a
principle of emission now known to be erroneous, concluded that the sun
loses eleven-twelfths of his light through absorption in his own
atmosphere.[728] The real existence of this atmosphere, which is totally
distinct from the beds of ignited vapours producing the Fraunhofer
lines, is not open to doubt, although its nature is still a matter of
conjecture. The separate effects of its action on luminous, thermal, and
chemical rays were carefully studied by Father Secchi, who in 1870[729]
inferred the total absorption to be 88/100 of all radiations taken
together, and added the important observation that the light from the
limb is no longer white, but reddish-brown. Absorptive effects were thus
seen to be unequally distributed; and they could evidently be studied to
advantage only by taking the various rays of the spectrum separately,
and finding out how much each had suffered in transmission.

This was done by H. C. Vogel in 1877.[730] Using a polarising
photometer, he found that only 13 per cent. of the violet rays escape at
the edge of the solar disc, 16 of the blue and green, 25 of the yellow,
and 30 per cent. of the red. Midway between centre and limb, 88.7 of
violet light and 96.7 of red penetrate the absorbing envelope, the
abolition of which would increase the intensity of the sun's visible
spectrum above two and a half times in the most, and once and a half
times in the least refrangible parts. The nucleus of a small spot was
ascertained to be of the same luminous intensity as a portion of the
unbroken surface about two and a half minutes from the limb. These
experiments having been made during a spot-minimum when there is reason
to think that absorption is below its average strength, Vogel suggested
their repetition at a time of greater activity. They were extended to
the heat-rays by Edwin B. Frost. Detailed inquiries made at Potsdam in
1892[731] went to show that, were the sun's atmosphere removed, his
thermal power, as regards ourselves, would be increased 1.7 times. They
established, too, the practical uniformity in radiation of all parts of
his disc. A confirmatory result was obtained about the same time by
Wilson and Rambaut, who found that the unveiled sun would be once and a
half times hotter than the actual sun.[732]

Professor Langley, now of Washington, gave to measures of the kind a
refinement previously undreamt of. Reliable determinations of the
"energy" of the individual spectral rays were, for the first time,
rendered possible by his invention of the "bolometer" in 1880.[733] This
exquisitely sensitive instrument affords the means of measuring heat,
not directly, like the thermopile, but in its effects upon the
conduction of electricity. It represents, in the phrase of the inventor,
the finger laid upon the throttle-valve of a steam-engine. A minute
force becomes the modulator of a much greater force, and thus from
imperceptible becomes conspicuous. By locally raising the temperature of
an inconceivably fine strip of platinum serving as the conducting-wire
in a circuit, the flow of electricity is impeded at that point, and the
included galvanometer records a disturbance of the electrical flow.
Amounts of heat were thus detected in less than ten seconds, which,
expended during a thousand years on the melting of a kilogramme of ice,
would leave a part of the work still undone; and further improvements
rendered this marvellous instrument capable of thrilling to changes of
temperature falling short of one ten-millionth of a degree
Centigrade.[734]

The heat contained in the diffraction spectrum is, with equal
dispersions, barely one-tenth of that in the prismatic spectrum. It had,
accordingly, never previously been found possible to measure it in
detail--that is, ray by ray. But it is only from the diffraction, or
normal spectrum that any true idea can be gained as to the real
distribution of energy among the various constituents, visible and
invisible, of a sunbeam. The effect of passage through a prism is to
crowd together the red rays very much more than the blue. To this
prismatic distortion was owing the establishment of a pseudo-maximum of
heat in the infra-red, which disappeared when the natural arrangement by
wave-length was allowed free play. Langley's bolometer has shown that
the hottest part of the normal spectrum virtually coincides with its
most luminous part, both lying in the orange, close to the D-line.[735]
Thus the last shred of evidence in favour of the threefold division of
solar radiations vanished, and it became obvious that the varying
effects--thermal, luminous, or chemical--produced by them are due, not
to any distinction of quality in themselves, but to the different
properties of the substances they impinge upon. They are simply bearers
of energy, conveyed in shorter or longer vibrations; the result in each
separate case depending upon the capacity of the material particles
meeting them for taking up those shorter or longer vibrations, and
turning them variously to account in their inner economy.

A long series of experiments at Allegheny was completed in the summer of
1881 on the crest of Mount Whitney in the Sierra Nevada. Here, at an
elevation of 14,887 feet, in the driest and purest air, perhaps, in the
world, atmospheric absorptive inroads become less sensible, and the
indications of the bolometer, consequently, surer and stronger. An
enormous expansion was at once given to the invisible region in the
solar spectrum below the red. Captain Abney had got chemical effects
from undulations twelve ten-thousandths of a millimetre in length. These
were the longest recognised as, or indeed believed, on theoretical
grounds, to be capable of existing. Professor Langley now got heating
effects from rays of above twice that wave-length, his delicate thread
of platinum groping its way down nearly to thirty ten-thousandths of a
millimetre, or three "microns." The known extent of the solar spectrum
was thus at once more than doubled. Its visible portion covers a range
of about one octave; bolometric indications already in 1884 comprised
between three and four. The great importance of the newly explored
region appears from the fact that three-fourths of the entire energy of
sunlight reside in the infra-red, while scarcely more than one-hundredth
part of that amount is found in the better known ultra-violet
space.[736] These curious facts were reinforced, in 1886,[737] by
further particulars learned with the help of rock-salt lenses and
prisms, glass being impervious to very slow, as to very rapid
vibrations. Traces were thus detected of solar heat distributed into
bands of transmission alternating with bands of atmospheric absorption,
far beyond the measurable limit of 5.3 microns.

In 1894, Langley described at the Oxford Meeting of the British
Association[738] his new "bolographic" researches, in which the
sensitive plate was substituted for the eye in recording deflections of
the galvanometer responding to variations of invisible heat. Finally, in
1901,[739] he embodied in a splendid map of the infra-red spectrum 740
absorption-lines of determinate wave-lengths, ranging from 0.76 to 5.3
microns. Their chemical origin, indeed, remains almost entirely unknown,
no extensive investigations having yet been undertaken of the slower
vibrations distinctive of particular substances; but there is evidence
that seven of the nine great bands crossing the "new spectrum" (as
Langley calls it)[740] are telluric, and subject to seasonal change.
Here, then, he thought, might eventually be found a sure standing-ground
for vitally important previsions of famines, droughts, and
bonanza-crops.

Atmospheric absorption had never before been studied with such precision
as it was by Langley on Mount Whitney. Aided by simultaneous
observations from Lone Pine, at the foot of the Sierra, he was able to
calculate the intensity belonging to each ray before entering the
earth's gaseous envelope--in other words, to construct an
extra-atmospheric curve of energy in the spectrum. The result showed
that the blue end suffered far more than the red, absorption varying
inversely as wave-length. This property of stopping predominantly the
quicker vibrations is shared, as both Vogel and Langley[741] have
conclusively shown, by the solar atmosphere. The effect of this double
absorption is as if two plates of reddish glass were interposed between
us and the sun, the withdrawal of which would leave his orb, not only
three or four times more brilliant, but in colour distinctly
greenish-blue.[742]

The fact of the uncovered sun being _blue_ has an important bearing upon
the question of his temperature, to afford a somewhat more secure answer
to which was the ultimate object of Professor Langley's persevering
researches; for it is well known that as bodies grow hotter, the
proportionate representation in their spectra of the more refrangible
rays becomes greater. The lowest stage of incandescence is the familiar
one of _red_ heat. As it gains intensity, the quicker vibrations come
in, and an optical balance of sensation is established at _white_ heat.
The final term of _blue_ heat, as we now know, is attained by the
photosphere. On this ground alone, then, of the large original
preponderance of blue light, we must raise our estimate of solar heat;
and actual measurements show the same upward tendency. Until quite
lately, Pouillet's figure of 1.7 calories per minute per square
centimetre of terrestrial surface, was the received value for the "solar
constant." Forbes had, it is true, got 2.85 from observations on the
Faulhorn in 1842;[743] but they failed to obtain the confidence they
merited. Pouillet's result was not definitely superseded until Violle,
from actinometrical measures at the summit and base of Mont Blanc in
1875, computed the intensity of solar radiation at 2.54,[744] and Crova,
about the same time, at Montpellier, showed it to be above two
calories.[745] Langley went higher still. Working out the results of the
Mount Whitney expedition, he was led to conclude atmospheric absorption
to be fully twice as effective as had hitherto been supposed. Scarcely
60 per cent., in fact, of those solar radiations which strike
perpendicularly through a seemingly translucent sky, were estimated to
attain the sea-level. The rest are reflected, dispersed, or absorbed.
This discovery involved a large addition to the original supply so
mercilessly cut down in transmission, and the solar constant rose at
once to three calories. Nor did the rise stop there. M. Savelieff
deduced for it a value of 3.47 from actinometrical observations made at
Kieff in 1890;[746] and Knut Angstrom, taking account of the arrestive
power of carbonic acid, inferred enormous atmospheric absorption, and a
solar constant of four calories.[747] In other words, the sun's heat
reaching the outskirts of our atmosphere is capable of doing without
cessation the work of an engine of four-horse power for each square yard
of the earth's surface. Thus, modern inquiries tend to render more and
more evident the vastness of the thermal stores contained in the great
central reservoir of our system, while bringing into fair agreement the
estimates of its probable temperature. This is in great measure due to
the acquisition of a workable formula by which to connect temperature
with radiation. Stefan's rule of a fourth-power relation, if not
actually a law of nature, is a colourable imitation of one; and its
employment has afforded a practical certainty that the sun's
temperature, so far as it is definable, neither exceeds 12,000 deg. C.,
nor falls short of 6,500 deg. C.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 698: _Principia_, p. 498 (1st ed.).]

[Footnote 699: _Comptes Rendus_, t. vii., p. 24.]

[Footnote 700: _Results of Astr. Observations_, p. 446.]

[Footnote 701: "Est enim calor solis ut radiorum densitas, hoc est,
reciproce ut quadratum distantiae locorum a sole."--_Principia_, p. 508
(3d ed., 1726).]

[Footnote 702: _Jour. de Physique_, t. lxxv., p. 215.]

[Footnote 703: _Ann. de Chimie_, t. vii., 1817, p. 365.]

[Footnote 704: _Phil. Mag._, vol. xxiii. (4th ser.), p. 505.]

[Footnote 705: _Nuovo Cimento_, t. xvi., p. 294.]

[Footnote 706: _Comptes Rendus_, t. lxv., p. 526.]

[Footnote 707: The direct result of 5-1/3 million degrees was doubled in
allowance for absorption in the sun's own atmosphere. _Comptes Rendus_,
t. lxxiv., p. 26.]

[Footnote 708: _Ibid._, p. 31.]

[Footnote 709: _Nature_, vols. iv., p. 204; v., p. 505.]

[Footnote 710: _Ibid._, vol. xxx., p. 467.]

[Footnote 711: _Ann. de Chim._, t. x. (5th ser.), p. 361.]

[Footnote 712: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xcvi., p. 254.]

[Footnote 713: _Phil. Mag._, vol. viii., p. 324, 1879.]

[Footnote 714: _Ibid._, p. 325.]

[Footnote 715: _Sitzungsberichte_, Wien, Bd. lxxix., ii., p. 391.]

[Footnote 716: _Wiedemann's Annalen_, Bd. xxii., p. 291; _Scheiner,
Strahlung und Temperatur der Sonne_, p. 27.]

[Footnote 717: _Comptes Rendus_, March 28, 1892; _Astr. and
Astrophysics_, vol. xi., p. 517.]

[Footnote 718: _Phil. Trans._, vol. clxxxv., p. 361.]

[Footnote 719: _Proc. Roy. Society_, December 12, 1901.]

[Footnote 720: Scheiner, _Temp. der Sonne_, p. 36.]

[Footnote 721: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. ii., p. 318.]

[Footnote 722: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 1,815-16.]

[Footnote 723: _L'Astronomie_, September, 1884, p. 334.]

[Footnote 724: _Amer. Jour. of Science_, vol. i. (3rd ser.), p. 653.]

[Footnote 725: Young, _The Sun_, p. 310.]

[Footnote 726: _Op._, t. vi., p. 198.]

[Footnote 727: _Rosa Ursina_, lib. iv., p. 618.]

[Footnote 728: _Mec. Cel._, liv. x., p. 323.]

[Footnote 729: _Le Soleil_ (1st ed.), p. 136.]

[Footnote 730: _Monatsber._, Berlin, 1877, p. 104.]

[Footnote 731: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 3,105-6; _Astr. and Astrophysics_,
vol. xi., p. 720.]

[Footnote 732: _Proc. Roy. Irish Acad._, vol. ii., No. 2, 1892.]

[Footnote 733: _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xxi., p. 187.]

[Footnote 734: _Amer. Jour. of Science_, vol. v., p. 245, 1898.]

[Footnote 735: For J. W. Draper's partial anticipation of this result,
see _Ibid_. vol. iv., 1872, p. 174.]

[Footnote 736: _Phil. Mag._, vol. xiv., p. 179, 1883.]

[Footnote 737: "The Solar and the Lunar Spectrum," _Memoirs National
Acad. of Science_, vol. xxxii.; "On hitherto Unrecognised Wave-lengths,"
_Amer. Jour. of Science_, vol. xxxii., August, 1886.]

[Footnote 738: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. i., p. 162.]

[Footnote 739: _Annals of the Smithsonian Astroph. Observatory_, vol.
i.; _Comptes Rendus_, t. cxxxi., p. 734; _Astroph. Jour._, vol. iii., p.
63.]

[Footnote 740: _Phil. Mag._, July, 1901.]

[Footnote 741: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xcii., p. 701.]

[Footnote 742: _Nature_, vol. xxvi., p. 589.]

[Footnote 743: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxxxii., p. 273.]

[Footnote 744: _Ann. de Chim._, t. x., p. 321.]

[Footnote 745: _Ibid._, t. xi., p. 505.]

[Footnote 746: _Comptes Rendus_, t. cxii., p. 1200.]

[Footnote 747: _Wied. Ann._, Bd. xxxix., p. 294; Scheiner, _Temperatur
der Sonne_, pp. 36, 38.]




                                CHAPTER VI

                           _THE SUN'S DISTANCE_


The question of the sun's distance arises naturally from the
consideration of his temperature, since the intensity of the radiations
emitted as compared with those received and measured, depends upon it.
But the knowledge of that distance has a value quite apart from its
connection with solar physics. The semi-diameter of the earth's orbit is
our standard measure for the universe. It is the great fundamental datum
of astronomy--the unit of space, any error in the estimation of which is
multiplied and repeated in a thousand different ways, both in the
planetary and sidereal systems. Hence its determination was called by
Airy "the noblest problem in astronomy." It is also one of the most
difficult. The quantities dealt with are so minute that their sure grasp
tasks all the resources of modern science. An observational inaccuracy
which would set the moon nearer to, or farther from us than she really
is by one hundred miles, would vitiate an estimate of the sun's distance
to the extent of sixteen million![748] What is needed in order to attain
knowledge of the desired exactness is no less than this: to measure an
angle about equal to that subtended by a halfpenny 2,000 feet from the
eye, within a little more than a thousandth part of its value.

The angle thus represented is what is called the "horizontal parallax"
of the sun. By this amount--the breadth of a halfpenny at 2,000 feet--he
is, to a spectator on the rotating earth, removed at rising and setting
from his meridian place in the heavens. Such, in other terms, would be
the magnitude of the terrestrial radius as viewed from the sun. If we
knew this magnitude with certainty and precision, we should also know
with certainty and precision--the dimensions of the earth being, as they
are, well ascertained--the distance of the sun. In fact, the one
quantity commonly stands for the other in works treating professedly of
astronomy. But this angle of parallax or apparent displacement cannot be
directly measured--cannot even be perceived with the finest instruments.
Not from its smallness. The parallactic shift of the nearest of the
stars as seen from opposite sides of the earth's orbit, is many times
smaller. But at the sun's limb, and close to the horizon, where the
visual angle in question opens out to its full extent, atmospheric
troubles become overwhelming, and altogether swamp the far more minute
effects of parallax.

There remain indirect methods. Astronomers are well acquainted with the
proportions which the various planetary orbits bear to each other. They
are so connected, in the manner expressed by Kepler's Third Law, that
the periods being known, it only needs to find the interval between any
two of them in order to infer at once the distances separating them all
from one another and from the sun. The plan is given; what we want to
discover is the scale upon which it is drawn; so that, if we can get a
reliable measure of the distance of a single planet from the earth, our
problem is solved.

Now some of our fellow-travellers in our unending journey round the sun,
come at times well within the scope of celestial trigonometry. The orbit
of Mars lies at one point not more than thirty-five million miles
outside that of the earth, and when the two bodies happen to arrive
together in or near the favourable spot--a conjuncture which occurs
every fifteen years--the desired opportunity is granted. Mars is then
"in opposition," or on the _opposite_ side of us from the sun, crossing
the meridian consequently at midnight.[749] It was from an opposition of
Mars, observed in 1672 by Richer at Cayenne in concert with Cassini in
Paris, that the first scientific estimate of the sun's distance was
derived. It appeared to be nearly eighty-seven millions of miles
(parallax 9.5"); while Flamsteed deduced 81,700,000 (parallax 10") from
his independent observations of the same occurrence--a difference quite
insignificant at that stage of the inquiry. But Picard's result was just
half Flamsteed's (parallax 20"; distance forty-one million miles); and
Lahire considered that we must be separated from the hearth of our
system by an interval of _at least_ 136 million miles.[750] So that
uncertainty continued to have an enormous range.

Venus, on the other hand, comes closest to the earth when she passes
between it and the sun. At such times of "inferior conjunction" she is,
however, still twenty-six million miles, or (in round numbers) 109 times
as distant as the moon. Moreover, she is so immersed in the sun's rays
that it is only when her path lies across his disc that the requisite
facilities for measurement are afforded. These "partial eclipses of the
sun by Venus" (as Encke termed them) are coupled together in pairs,[751]
of which the components are separated by eight years, recurring at
intervals alternately of 105-1/2 and 121-1/2 years. Thus, the first
calculated transit took place in December, 1631, and its companion
(observed by Horrocks) in the same month (N.S.), 1639. Then, after the
lapse of 121-1/2 years, came the June couple of 1761 and 1769; and again
after 105-1/2, the two last observed, December 8, 1874, and December 6,
1882. Throughout the twentieth century there will be no transit of
Venus; but the astronomers of the twenty-first will only have to wait
four years for the first of a June pair. The rarity of these events is
due to the fact that the orbits of the earth and Venus do not lie in the
same plane. If they did, there would be a transit each time that our
twin-planet overtakes us in her more rapid circling--that is, on an
average, every 584 days. As things are actually arranged, she passes
above or below the sun, except when she happens to be very near the line
of intersection of the two tracks.

Such an occurrence as a transit of Venus seems, at first sight, full of
promise for solving the problem of the sun's distance. For nothing would
appear easier than to determine exactly either the duration of the
passage of a small, dark orb across a large brilliant disc, or the
instant of its entry upon or exit from it. And the differences in these
times (which, owing to the comparative nearness of Venus, are quite
considerable), as observed from remote parts of the earth, can be
translated into differences of space--that is, into apparent or
parallactic displacements, whereby the distance of Venus becomes known,
and thence, by a simple sum in proportion, the distance of the sun. But
in that word "exactly" what snares and pitfalls lie hid! It is so easy
to think and to say; so indefinitely hard to realise. The astronomers of
the eighteenth century were full of hope and zeal. They confidently
expected to attain, through the double opportunity offered them, to
something like a permanent settlement of the statistics of our system.
They were grievously disappointed. The uncertainty as to the sun's
distance, which they had counted upon reducing to a few hundred thousand
miles, remained at many millions.

In 1822, however, Encke, then director of the Seeberg Observatory near
Gotha, undertook to bring order out of the confusion of discordant, and
discordantly interpreted observations. His combined result for both
transits (1761 and 1769) was published in 1824,[752] and met universal
acquiescence. The parallax of the sun thereby established was 8.5776",
corresponding to a mean distance[753] of 95-1/4 million miles. Yet this
abolition of doubt was far from being so satisfactory as it seemed.
Serenity on the point lasted exactly thirty years. It was disturbed in
1854 by Hansen's announcement[754] that the observed motions of the moon
could be drawn into accord with theory only on the terms of bringing the
sun considerably nearer to us than he was supposed to be.

Dr. Matthew Stewart, professor of mathematics in the University of
Edinburgh, had made a futile attempt in 1763 to deduce the sun's
distance from his disturbing power over our satellite.[755] Tobias Mayer
of Gottingen, however, whose short career was fruitful of suggestions,
struck out the right way to the same end; and Laplace, in the seventh
book of the _Mecanique Celeste_,[756] gave a solar parallax derived from
the lunar "parallactic inequality" substantially identical with that
issuing from Encke's subsequent discussion of the eighteenth-century
transits. Thus, two wholly independent methods--the trigonometrical,
or method by survey, and the gravitational, or method by
perturbation--seemed to corroborate each the upshot of the use of the
other until the nineteenth century was well past its meridian. It is
singular how often errors conspire to lead conviction astray.

Hansen's note of alarm in 1854 was echoed by Leverrier in 1858.[757] He
found that an apparent monthly oscillation of the sun which reflects a
real monthly movement of the earth round its common centre of gravity
with the moon, and which depends for its amount solely on the mass of
the moon and the distance of the sun, required a diminution in the
admitted value of that distance by fully four million miles. Three years
later he pointed out that certain perplexing discrepancies between the
observed and computed places both of Venus and Mars, would vanish on the
adoption of a similar measure.[758] Moreover, a favourable opposition of
Mars gave the opportunity in 1862 for fresh observations, which,
separately worked out by Stone and Winnecke, agreed with all the newer
investigations in fixing the great unit at slightly over 91 million
miles. In Newcomb's hands they gave 92-1/2 million.[759] The
accumulating evidence in favour of a large reduction in the sun's
distance was just then reinforced by an auxiliary result of a totally
different and unexpected kind.

The discovery that light does not travel instantaneously from point to
point, but takes some short time in transmission, was made by Olaus
Roemer in 1675, through observing that the eclipses of Jupiter's
satellites invariably occurred later, when the earth was on the far
side, than when it was on the near side of its orbit. Half the
difference, or the time spent by a luminous vibration in crossing the
"mean radius" of the earth's orbit, is called the "light-equation"; and
the determination of its precise value has claimed the minute care
distinctive of modern astronomy. Delambre in 1792 made it 493 seconds.
Glasenapp, a Russian astronomer, raised the estimate in 1874 to 501,
Professor Harkness adopts a safe medium value of 498 seconds. Hence, if
we had any independent means of ascertaining how fast light travels, we
could tell at once how far off the sun is.

There is yet another way by which knowledge of the swiftness of light
would lead us straight to the goal. The heavenly bodies are perceived,
when carefully watched and measured, to be pushed forward out of their
true places, in the direction of the earth's motion, by a very minute
quantity. This effect (already adverted to) has been known since
Bradley's time as "aberration." It arises from a combination of the two
movements of the earth round the sun and of the light-waves through the
ether. If the earth stood still, or if light spent no time on the road
from the stars, such an effect would not exist. Its amount represents
the proportion between the velocities with which the earth and the
light-rays pursue their respective journeys. This proportion is,
roughly, one to ten thousand. So that here again, if we knew the rate
per second of luminous transmission, we should also know the rate per
second of the earth's movement, consequently the size of its orbit and
the distance of the sun.

But, until lately, instead of finding the distance of the sun from the
velocity of light, there has been no means of ascertaining the velocity
of light except through the imperfect knowledge possessed as to the
distance of the sun. The first successful terrestrial experiments on the
point date from 1849; and it is certainly no slight triumph of human
ingenuity to have taken rigorous account of the delay of a sunbeam in
flashing from one mirror to another. Fizeau led the way,[760] and he was
succeeded, after a few months, by Leon Foucault,[761] who, in 1862, had
so far perfected Wheatstone's method of revolving mirrors, as to be able
to announce with authority that light travelled slower, and that the sun
was in consequence nearer than had been supposed.[762] Thus a third line
of separate research was found to converge to the same point with the
two others.

Such a conspiracy of proof was not to be resisted, and at the
anniversary meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society in February, 1864,
the correction of the solar distance took the foremost place in the
annals of the year. Lest, however, a sudden bound of four million miles
nearer to the centre of our system should shake public faith in
astronomical accuracy, it was explained that the change in the solar
parallax corresponding to that huge leap, amounted to no more than the
breadth of a human hair 125 feet from the eye![763] The Nautical Almanac
gave from 1870 the altered value of 8.95", for which Newcomb's result of
8.85", adopted in 1869 in the Berlin Ephemeris, was substituted some ten
years later. In astronomical literature the change was initiated by Sir
Edmund Beckett in the first edition (1865) of his _Astronomy without
Mathematics_.

If any doubt remained as to the misleading character of Encke's
deduction, so long implicitly trusted in, it was removed by Powalky's
and Stone's rediscussions, in 1864 and 1868 respectively, of the transit
observations of 1769. Using improved determinations of the longitude of
the various stations, and a selective judgment in dealing with their
materials, which, however indispensable, did not escape adverse
criticism, they brought out results confirmatory of the no longer
disputed necessity for largely increasing the solar parallax, and
proportionately diminishing the solar distance. Once more in 1890, and
this time with better success, the eighteenth-century transits were
investigated by Professor Newcomb.[764] Turning to account the
experience gained in the interim regarding the optical phenomena
accompanying such events, he elicited from the mass of somewhat
discordant observations at his command, a parallax (8.79") in close
agreement with the value given by sundry modes of recent research.

Conclusions on the subject, however, were still regarded as purely
provisional. A transit of Venus was fast approaching, and to its
arbitrament, as to that of a court of final appeal, the pending question
was to be referred. It is true that the verdict in the same case by the
same tribunal a century earlier had proved of so indecisive a character
as to form only a starting-point for fresh litigation; but that century
had not passed in vain, and it was confidently anticipated that
observational difficulties, then equally unexpected and insuperable,
would yield to the elaborate care and skill of forewarned modern
preparation.

The conditions of the transit of December 8, 1874, were sketched out by
Sir George Airy, then Astronomer-Royal, in 1857,[765] and formed the
subject of eager discussion in this and other countries down to the very
eve of the occurrence. In these Mr. Proctor took a leading part; and it
was due to his urgent representations that provision was made for the
employment of the method identified with the name of Halley,[766] which
had been too hastily assumed inapplicable to the first of each
transit-pair. It depends upon the difference in the length of time taken
by the planet to cross the sun's disc, as seen from various points of
the terrestrial surface, and requires, accordingly, the visibility of
both entrance and exit at the same station. Since these were, in 1874,
separated by about three and a half hours, and the interval may be much
longer, the choice of posts for the successful use of the "method of
durations" is a matter of some difficulty.

The system described by Delisle in 1760, on the other hand, involves
merely noting the instant of ingress or egress (according to situation)
from opposite extremities of a terrestrial diameter; the disparity in
