existed between them.

Ione, however, had not ceased to regret his estrangement: she attributed
it, at present, to the engrossing duties of his severe fraternity.  And
often, amidst all her bright hopes, and her new attachment to her
betrothed--often, when she thought of her brother's brow prematurely
furrowed, his unsmiling lip, and bended frame, she sighed to think that
the service of the gods could throw so deep a shadow over that earth
which the gods created.

But this day when he visited her there was a strange calmness on his
features, a more quiet and self-possessed expression in his sunken eyes,
than she had marked for years.  This apparent improvement was but
momentary--it was a false calm, which the least breeze could ruffle.

'May the gods bless thee, my brother!' said she, embracing him.

'The gods!  Speak not thus vaguely; perchance there is but one God!'

'My brother!'

'What if the sublime faith of the Nazarene be true?  What if God be a
monarch--One--Invisible--Alone?  What if these numerous, countless
deities, whose altars fill the earth, be but evil demons, seeking to
wean us from the true creed?  This may be the case, Ione!'

'Alas! can we believe it? or if we believed, would it not be a
melancholy faith answered the Neapolitan.  'What! all this beautiful
world made only human!--mountain disenchanted of its Oread--the waters
of their Nymph--that beautiful prodigality of faith, which makes
everything divine, consecrating the meanest flowers, bearing celestial
whispers in the faintest breeze--wouldst thou deny this, and make the
earth mere dust and clay?  No, Apaecides: all that is brightest in our
hearts is that very credulity which peoples the universe with gods.'

Ione answered as a believer in the poesy of the old mythology would
answer. We may judge by that reply how obstinate and hard the contest
which Christianity had to endure among the heathens.  The Graceful
Superstition was never silent; every, the most household, action of
their lives was entwined with it--it was a portion of life itself, as
the flowers are a part of the thyrsus.  At every incident they recurred
to a god, every cup of wine was prefaced by a libation; the very
garlands on their thresholds were dedicated to some divinity; their
ancestors themselves, made holy, presided as Lares over their hearth and
hall.  So abundant was belief with them, that in their own climes, at
this hour, idolatry has never thoroughly been outrooted: it changes but
its objects of worship; it appeals to innumerable saints where once it
resorted to divinities; and it pours its crowds, in listening reverence,
to oracles at the shrines of St. Januarius or St. Stephen, instead of to
those of Isis or Apollo.

But these superstitions were not to the early Christians the object of
contempt so much as of horror.  They did not believe, with the quiet
scepticism of the heathen philosopher, that the gods were inventions of
the priests; nor even, with the vulgar, that, according to the dim light
of history, they had been mortals like themselves.  They imagined the
heathen divinities to be evil spirits--they transplanted to Italy and to
Greece the gloomy demons of India and the East; and in Jupiter or in
Mars they shuddered at the representative of Moloch or of Satan.

Apaecides had not yet adopted formally the Christian faith, but he was
already on the brink of it.  He already participated the doctrines of
Olinthus--he already imagined that the lively imaginations of the
heathen were the suggestions of the arch-enemy of mankind.  The innocent
and natural answer of Ione made him shudder.  He hastened to reply
vehemently, and yet so confusedly, that Ione feared for his reason more
than she dreaded his violence.

'Ah, my brother!' said she, 'these hard duties of thine have shattered
thy very sense.  Come to me, Apaecides, my brother, my own brother; give
me thy hand, let me wipe the dew from thy brow--chide me not now, I
understand thee not; think only that Ione could not offend thee!'

'Ione,' said Apaecides, drawing her towards him, and regarding her
tenderly, 'can I think that this beautiful form, this kind heart, may be
destined to an eternity of torment?'

'Dii meliora! the gods forbid!' said Ione, in the customary form of
words by which her contemporaries thought an omen might be averted.

The words, and still more the superstition they implied, wounded the ear
of Apaecides.  He rose, muttering to himself, turned from the chamber,
then, stopping, half way, gazed wistfully on Ione, and extended his
arms.

Ione flew to them in joy; he kissed her earnestly, and then he said:

'Farewell, my sister! when we next meet, thou mayst be to me as nothing;
take thou, then, this embrace--full yet of all the tender reminiscences
of childhood, when faith and hope, creeds, customs, interests, objects,
were the same to us.  Now, the tie is to be broken!'

With these strange words he left the house.

The great and severest trial of the primitive Christians was indeed
this; their conversion separated them from their dearest bonds. They
could not associate with beings whose commonest actions, whose commonest
forms of speech, were impregnated with idolatry.  They shuddered at the
blessing of love, to their ears it was uttered in a demon's name.  This,
their misfortune, was their strength; if it divided them from the rest
of the world, it was to unite them proportionally to each other.  They
were men of iron who wrought forth the Word of God, and verily the bonds
that bound them were of iron also!

Glaucus found Ione in tears; he had already assumed the sweet privilege
to console.  He drew from her a recital of her interview with her
brother; but in her confused account of language, itself so confused to
one not prepared for it, he was equally at a loss with Ione to conceive
the intentions or the meaning of Apaecides.

'Hast thou ever heard much,' asked she, 'of this new sect of the
Nazarenes, of which my brother spoke?'

'I have often heard enough of the votaries,' returned Glaucus, 'but of
their exact tenets know I naught, save that in their doctrine there
seemeth something preternaturally chilling and morose.  They live apart
from their kind; they affect to be shocked even at our simple uses of
garlands; they have no sympathies with the cheerful amusements of life;
they utter awful threats of the coming destruction of the world; they
appear, in one word, to have brought their unsmiling and gloomy creed
out of the cave of Trophonius. Yet,' continued Glaucus, after a slight
pause, 'they have not wanted men of great power and genius, nor
converts, even among the Areopagites of Athens. Well do I remember to
have heard my father speak of one strange guest at Athens, many years
ago; methinks his name was PAUL.  My father was amongst a mighty crowd
that gathered on one of our immemorial hills to hear this sage of the
East expound: through the wide throng there rang not a single
murmur!--the jest and the roar, with which our native orators are
received, were hushed for him--and when on the loftiest summit of that
hill, raised above the breathless crowd below, stood this mysterious
visitor, his mien and his countenance awed every heart, even before a
sound left his lips.  He was a man, I have heard my father say, of no
tall stature, but of noble and impressive mien; his robes were dark and
ample; the declining sun, for it was evening, shone aslant upon his form
as it rose aloft, motionless, and commanding; his countenance was much
worn and marked, as of one who had braved alike misfortune and the
sternest vicissitude of many climes; but his eyes were bright with an
almost unearthly fire; and when he raised his arm to speak, it was with
the majesty of a man into whom the Spirit of a God hath rushed!

'"Men of Athens!" he is reported to have said, "I find amongst ye an
altar with this inscription:

              TO THE UNKNOWN GOD.

  Ye worship in ignorance the same Deity I serve.
    To you unknown till now, to you be it now revealed."

'Then declared that solemn man how this great Maker of all things, who
had appointed unto man his several tribes and his various homes--the
Lord of earth and the universal heaven, dwelt not in temples made with
hands; that His presence, His spirit, were in the air we breathed--our
life and our being were with Him.  "Think you," he cried, "that the
Invisible is like your statues of gold and marble?  Think you that He
needeth sacrifice from you: He who made heaven and earth?" Then spoke he
of fearful and coming times, of the end of the world, of a second rising
of the dead, whereof an assurance had been given to man in the
resurrection of the mighty Being whose religion he came to preach.

'When he thus spoke, the long-pent murmur went forth, and the
philosophers that were mingled with the people, muttered their sage
contempt; there might you have seen the chilling frown of the Stoic, and
the Cynic's sneer; and the Epicurean, who believeth not even in our own
Elysium, muttered a pleasant jest, and swept laughing through the crowd:
but the deep heart of the people was touched and thrilled; and they
trembled, though they knew not why, for verily the stranger had the
voice and majesty of a man to whom "The Unknown God" had committed the
preaching of His faith.'

Ione listened with wrapt attention, and the serious and earnest manner
of the narrator betrayed the impression that he himself had received
from one who had been amongst the audience that on the hill of the
heathen Mars had heard the first tidings of the word of Christ!



Chapter VI

THE PORTER.  THE GIRL.  AND THE GLADIATOR.

THE door of Diomed's house stood open, and Medon, the old slave, sat at
the bottom of the steps by which you ascended to the mansion. That
luxurious mansion of the rich merchant of Pompeii is still to be seen
just without the gates of the city, at the commencement of the Street of
Tombs; it was a gay neighborhood, despite the dead.  On the opposite
side, but at some yards nearer the gate, was a spacious hostelry, at
which those brought by business or by pleasure to Pompeii often stopped
to refresh themselves.  In the space before the entrance of the inn now
stood wagons, and carts, and chariots, some just arrived, some just
quitting, in all the bustle of an animated and popular resort of public
entertainment.  Before the door, some farmers, seated on a bench by a
small circular table, were talking over their morning cups, on the
affairs of their calling.  On the side of the door itself was painted
gaily and freshly the eternal sign of the chequers. By the roof of the
inn stretched a terrace, on which some females, wives of the farmers
above mentioned, were, some seated, some leaning over the railing, and
conversing with their friends below. In a deep recess, at a little
distance, was a covered seat, in which some two or three poorer
travellers were resting themselves, and shaking the dust from their
garments.  On the other side stretched a wide space, originally the
burial-ground of a more ancient race than the present denizens of
Pompeii, and now converted into the Ustrinum, or place for the burning
of the dead.  Above this rose the terraces of a gay villa, half hid by
trees.  The tombs themselves, with their graceful and varied shapes, the
flowers and the foliage that surrounded them, made no melancholy feature
in the prospect.  Hard by the gate of the city, in a small niche, stood
the still form of the well-disciplined Roman sentry, the sun shining
brightly on his polished crest, and the lance on which he leaned.  The
gate itself was divided into three arches, the centre one for vehicles,
the others for the foot-passengers; and on either side rose the massive
walls which girt the city, composed, patched, repaired at a thousand
different epochs, according as war, time, or the earthquake had
shattered that vain protection.  At frequent intervals rose square
towers, whose summits broke in picturesque rudeness the regular line of
the wall, and contrasted well with the modern buildings gleaming whitely
by.

The curving road, which in that direction leads from Pompeii to
Herculaneum, wound out of sight amidst hanging vines, above which
frowned the sullen majesty of Vesuvius.

'Hast thou heard the news, old Medon?' said a young woman, with a
pitcher in her hand, as she paused by Diomed's door to gossip a moment
with the slave, ere she repaired to the neighboring inn to fill the
vessel, and coquet with the travellers.

'The news! what news?' said the slave, raising his eyes moodily from the
ground.

'Why, there passed through the gate this morning, no doubt ere thou wert
well awake, such a visitor to Pompeii!'

'Ay,' said the slave, indifferently.

'Yes, a present from the noble Pomponianus.'

'A present!  I thought thou saidst a visitor?'

'It is both visitor and present.  Know, O dull and stupid! that it is a
most beautiful young tiger, for our approaching games in the
amphitheatre.  Hear you that, Medon?  Oh, what pleasure!  I declare I
shall not sleep a wink till I see it; they say it has such a roar!'

'Poor fool!' said Medon, sadly and cynically.

'Fool me no fool, old churl!  It is a pretty thing, a tiger, especially
if we could but find somebody for him to eat.  We have now a lion and a
tiger; only consider that, Medon! and for want of two good criminals
perhaps we shall be forced to see them eat each other.  By-the-by, your
son is a gladiator, a handsome man and a strong, can you not persuade
him to fight the tiger?  Do now, you would oblige me mightily; nay, you
would be a benefactor to the whole town.'

'Vah! vah!' said the slave, with great asperity; 'think of thine own
danger ere thou thus pratest of my poor boy's death.'

'My own danger!' said the girl, frightened and looking hastily
around--'Avert the omen! let thy words fall on thine own head!' And the
girl, as she spoke, touched a talisman suspended round her neck. '"Thine
own danger!" what danger threatens me?'

'Had the earthquake but a few nights since no warning?' said Medon.
'Has it not a voice?  Did it not say to us all, "Prepare for death; the
end of all things is at hand?"'

'Bah, stuff!' said the young woman, settling the folds of her tunic.
'Now thou talkest as they say the Nazarenes talked--methinks thou art
one of them.  Well, I can prate with thee, grey croaker, no more: thou
growest worse and worse--Vale! O Hercules, send us a man for the
lion--and another for the tiger!'


            Ho! ho! for the merry, merry show,
            With a forest of faces in every row!
            Lo, the swordsmen, bold as the son of Alcmena,
            Sweep, side by side, o'er the hushed arena;
            Talk while you may--you will hold your breath
            When they meet in the grasp of the glowing death.
            Tramp, tramp, how gaily they go!
            Ho! ho! for the merry, merry show!

Chanting in a silver and clear voice this feminine ditty, and holding up
her tunic from the dusty road, the young woman stepped lightly across to
the crowded hostelry.

'My poor son!' said the slave, half aloud, 'is it for things like this
thou art to be butchered?  Oh! faith of Christ, I could worship thee in
all sincerity, were it but for the horror which thou inspirest for these
bloody lists.'

The old man's head sank dejectedly on his breast.  He remained silent
and absorbed, but every now and then with the corner of his sleeve he
wiped his eyes.  His heart was with his son; he did not see the figure
that now approached from the gate with a quick step, and a somewhat
fierce and reckless gait and carriage.  He did not lift his eyes till
the figure paused opposite the place where he sat, and with a soft voice
addressed him by the name of:

'Father!'

'My boy! my Lydon! is it indeed thou?' said the old man, joyfully. 'Ah,
thou wert present to my thoughts.'

'I am glad to hear it, my father,' said the gladiator, respectfully
touching the knees and beard of the slave; 'and soon may I be always
present with thee, not in thought only.'

'Yes, my son--but not in this world,' replied the slave, mournfully.

'Talk not thus, O my sire! look cheerfully, for I feel so--I am sure
that I shall win the day; and then, the gold I gain buys thy freedom.
Oh! my father, it was but a few days since that I was taunted, by one,
too, whom I would gladly have undeceived, for he is more generous than
the rest of his equals.  He is not Roman--he is of Athens--by him I was
taunted with the lust of gain--when I demanded what sum was the prize of
victory.  Alas! he little knew the soul of Lydon!'

'My boy! my boy!' said the old slave, as, slowly ascending the steps, he
conducted his son to his own little chamber, communicating with the
entrance hall (which in this villa was the peristyle, not the
atrium)--you may see it now; it is the third door to the right on
entering.  (The first door conducts to the staircase; the second is but
a false recess, in which there stood a statue of bronze.) 'Generous,
affectionate, pious as are thy motives,' said Medon, when they were thus
secured from observation, 'thy deed itself is guilt: thou art to risk
thy blood for thy father's freedom--that might be forgiven; but the
prize of victory is the blood of another.  Oh, that is a deadly sin; no
object can purify it.  Forbear! forbear! rather would I be a slave for
ever than purchase liberty on such terms!'

'Hush, my father!' replied Lydon, somewhat impatiently; 'thou hast
picked up in this new creed of thine, of which I pray thee not to speak
to me, for the gods that gave me strength denied me wisdom, and I
understand not one word of what thou often preachest to me--thou hast
picked up, I say, in this new creed, some singular fantasies of right
and wrong.  Pardon me if I offend thee: but reflect!  Against whom shall
I contend?  Oh! couldst thou know those wretches with whom, for thy
sake, I assort, thou wouldst think I purified earth by removing one of
them.  Beasts, whose very lips drop blood; things, all savage,
unprincipled in their very courage: ferocious, heartless, senseless; no
tie of life can bind them: they know not fear, it is true--but neither
know they gratitude, nor charity, nor love; they are made but for their
own career, to slaughter without pity, to die without dread!  Can thy
gods, whosoever they be, look with wrath on a conflict with such as
these, and in such a cause?  Oh, My father, wherever the powers above
gaze down on earth, they behold no duty so sacred, so sanctifying, as
the sacrifice offered to an aged parent by the piety of a grateful son!'

The poor old slave, himself deprived of the lights of knowledge, and
only late a convert to the Christian faith, knew not with what arguments
to enlighten an ignorance at once so dark, and yet so beautiful in its
error. His first impulse was to throw himself on his son's breast--his
next to start away to wring his hands; and in the attempt to reprove,
his broken voice lost itself in weeping.

'And if,' resumed Lydon--'if thy Deity (methinks thou wilt own but one?)
be indeed that benevolent and pitying Power which thou assertest Him to
be, He will know also that thy very faith in Him first confirmed me in
that determination thou blamest.'

'How! what mean you?' said the slave.

'Why, thou knowest that I, sold in my childhood as a slave, was set free
at Rome by the will of my master, whom I had been fortunate enough to
please. I hastened to Pompeii to see thee--I found thee already aged and
infirm, under the yoke of a capricious and pampered lord--thou hadst
lately adopted this new faith, and its adoption made thy slavery doubly
painful to thee; it took away all the softening charm of custom, which
reconciles us so often to the worst.  Didst thou not complain to me that
thou wert compelled to offices that were not odious to thee as a slave,
but guilty as a Nazarene? Didst thou not tell me that thy soul shook
with remorse when thou wert compelled to place even a crumb of cake
before the Lares that watch over yon impluvium? that thy soul was torn
by a perpetual struggle?  Didst thou not tell me that even by pouring
wine before the threshold, and calling on the name of some Grecian
deity, thou didst fear thou wert incurring penalties worse than those of
Tantalus, an eternity of tortures more terrible than those of the
Tartarian fields?  Didst thou not tell me this?  I wondered, I could not
comprehend; nor, by Hercules! can I now: but I was thy son, and my sole
task was to compassionate and relieve.  Could I hear thy groans, could I
witness thy mysterious horrors, thy constant anguish, and remain
inactive? No! by the immortal gods! the thought struck me like light
from Olympus!  I had no money, but I had strength and youth--these were
thy gifts--I could sell these in my turn for thee!  I learned the amount
of thy ransom--I learned that the usual prize of a victorious gladiator
would doubly pay it. I became a gladiator--I linked myself with those
accursed men, scorning, loathing, while I joined--I acquired their
skill--blessed be the lesson!--it shall teach me to free my father!'

'Oh, that thou couldst hear Olinthus!' sighed the old man, more and more
affected by the virtue of his son, but not less strongly convinced of
the criminality of his purpose.

'I will hear the whole world talk if thou wilt,' answered the gladiator,
gaily; 'but not till thou art a slave no more.  Beneath thy own roof, my
father, thou shalt puzzle this dull brain all day long, ay, and all
night too, if it give thee pleasure.  Oh, such a spot as I have chalked
out for thee!--it is one of the nine hundred and ninety-nine shops of
old Julia Felix, in the sunny part of the city, where thou mayst bask
before the door in the day--and I will sell the oil and the wine for
thee, my father--and then, please Venus (or if it does not please her,
since thou lovest not her name, it is all one to Lydon)--then, I say,
perhaps thou mayst have a daughter, too, to tend thy grey hairs, and
hear shrill voices at thy knee, that shall call thee "Lydon's father!"
Ah! we shall be so happy--the prize can purchase all.  Cheer thee! cheer
up, my sire!--And now I must away--day wears--the lanista waits me.
Come! thy blessing!'

As Lydon thus spoke, he had already quitted the dark chamber of his
father; and speaking eagerly, though in a whispered tone, they now stood
at the same place in which we introduced the porter at his post.

'O bless thee! bless thee, my brave boy!' said Medon, fervently; 'and
may the great Power that reads all hearts see the nobleness of thine,
and forgive its error!'

The tall shape of the gladiator passed swiftly down the path; the eyes
of the slave followed its light but stately steps, till the last glimpse
was gone; and then, sinking once more on his seat, his eyes again
fastened themselves on the ground.  His form, mute and unmoving, as a
thing of stone. His heart!--who, in our happier age, can even imagine
its struggles--its commotion?

'May I enter?' said a sweet voice.  'Is thy mistress Julia within?'

The slave mechanically motioned to the visitor to enter, but she who
addressed him could not see the gesture--she repeated her question
timidly, but in a louder voice.

'Have I not told thee!' said the slave, peevishly: 'enter.'

'Thanks,' said the speaker, plaintively; and the slave, roused by the
tone, looked up, and recognized the blind flower-girl.  Sorrow can
sympathize with affliction--he raised himself, and guided her steps to
the head of the adjacent staircase (by which you descended to Julia's
apartment), where, summoning a female slave, he consigned to her the
charge of the blind girl.



Chapter VII

THE DRESSING-ROOM OF A POMPEIAN BEAUTY. IMPORTANT CONVERSATION BETWEEN
JULIA AND NYDIA.

THE elegant Julia sat in her chamber, with her slaves around her--like
the cubiculum which adjoined it, the room was small, but much larger
than the usual apartments appropriated to sleep, which were so
diminutive, that few who have not seen the bed-chambers, even in the
gayest mansions, can form any notion of the petty pigeon-holes in which
the citizens of Pompeii evidently thought it desirable to pass the
night.  But, in fact, 'bed' with the ancients was not that grave,
serious, and important part of domestic mysteries which it is with us.
The couch itself was more like a very narrow and small sofa, light
enough to be transported easily, and by the occupant himself, from place
to place; and it was, no doubt, constantly shifted from chamber to
chamber, according to the caprice of the inmate, or the changes of the
season; for that side of the house which was crowded in one month,
might, perhaps, be carefully avoided in the next.  There was also among
the Italians of that period a singular and fastidious apprehension of
too much daylight; their darkened chambers, which first appear to us the
result of a negligent architecture, were the effect of the most
elaborate study. In their porticoes and gardens they courted the sun
whenever it so pleased their luxurious tastes.  In the interior of their
houses they sought rather the coolness and the shade.

Julia's apartment at that season was in the lower part of the house,
immediately beneath the state rooms above, and looking upon the garden,
with which it was on a level.  The wide door, which was glazed, alone
admitted the morning rays: yet her eye, accustomed to a certain
darkness, was sufficiently acute to perceive exactly what colors were
the most becoming--what shade of the delicate rouge gave the brightest
beam to her dark glance, and the most youthful freshness to her cheek.

On the table, before which she sat, was a small and circular mirror of
the most polished steel: round which, in precise order, were ranged the
cosmetics and the unguents--the perfumes and the paints--the jewels and
combs--the ribands and the gold pins, which were destined to add to the
natural attractions of beauty the assistance of art and the capricious
allurements of fashion.  Through the dimness of the room glowed brightly
the vivid and various colourings of the wall, in all the dazzling
frescoes of Pompeian taste.  Before the dressing-table, and under the
feet of Julia, was spread a carpet, woven from the looms of the East.
Near at hand, on another table, was a silver basin and ewer; an
extinguished lamp, of most exquisite workmanship, in which the artist
had represented a Cupid reposing under the spreading branches of a
myrtle-tree; and a small roll of papyrus, containing the softest elegies
of Tibullus.  Before the door, which communicated with the cubiculum,
hung a curtain richly broidered with gold flowers.  Such was the
dressing-room of a beauty eighteen centuries ago.

The fair Julia leaned indolently back on her seat, while the ornatrix
(i.e. hairdresser) slowly piled, one above the other, a mass of small
curls, dexterously weaving the false with the true, and carrying the
whole fabric to a height that seemed to place the head rather at the
centre than the summit of the human form.

Her tunic, of a deep amber, which well set off her dark hair and
somewhat embrowned complexion, swept in ample folds to her feet, which
were cased in slippers, fastened round the slender ankle by white
thongs; while a profusion of pearls were embroidered in the slipper
itself, which was of purple, and turned slightly upward, as do the
Turkish slippers at this day. An old slave, skilled by long experience
in all the arcana of the toilet, stood beside the hairdresser, with the
broad and studded girdle of her mistress over her arm, and giving, from
time to time (mingled with judicious flattery to the lady herself),
instructions to the mason of the ascending pile.

'Put that pin rather more to the right--lower--stupid one!  Do you not
observe how even those beautiful eyebrows are?--One would think you were
dressing Corinna, whose face is all of one side.  Now put in the
flowers--what, fool!--not that dull pink--you are not suiting colors to
the dim cheek of Chloris: it must be the brightest flowers that can
alone suit the cheek of the young Julia.'

'Gently!' said the lady, stamping her small foot violently: 'you pull my
hair as if you were plucking up a weed!'

'Dull thing!' continued the directress of the ceremony.  'Do you not
know how delicate is your mistress?--you are not dressing the coarse
horsehair of the widow Fulvia.  Now, then, the riband--that's right.
Fair Julia, look in the mirror; saw you ever anything so lovely as
yourself?'

When, after innumerable comments, difficulties, and delays, the
intricate tower was at length completed, the next preparation was that
of giving to the eyes the soft languish, produced by a dark powder
applied to the lids and brows; a small patch cut in the form of a
crescent, skillfully placed by the rosy lips, attracted attention to
their dimples, and to the teeth, to which already every art had been
applied in order to heighten the dazzle of their natural whiteness.

To another slave, hitherto idle, was now consigned the charge of
arranging the jewels--the ear-rings of pearl (two to each ear)--the
massive bracelets of gold--the chain formed of rings of the same metal,
to which a talisman cut in crystals was attached--the graceful buckle on
the left shoulder, in which was set an exquisite cameo of Psyche--the
girdle of purple riband, richly wrought with threads of gold, and
clasped by interlacing serpents--and lastly, the various rings, fitted
to every joint of the white and slender fingers.  The toilet was now
arranged according to the last mode of Rome.  The fair Julia regarded
herself with a last gaze of complacent vanity, and reclining again upon
her seat, she bade the youngest of her slaves, in a listless tone, read
to her the enamoured couplets of Tibullus. This lecture was still
proceeding, when a female slave admitted Nydia into the presence of the
lady of the place.

'Salve, Julia!' said the flower-girl, arresting her steps within a few
paces from the spot where Julia sat, and crossing her arms upon her
breast.  'I have obeyed your commands.'

'You have done well, flower-girl,' answered the lady.  'Approach--you
may take a seat.'

One of the slaves placed a stool by Julia, and Nydia seated herself.

Julia looked hard at the Thessalian for some moments in rather an
embarrassed silence.  She then motioned her attendants to withdraw, and
to close the door.  When they were alone, she said, looking mechanically
from Nydia, and forgetful that she was with one who could not observe
her countenance:

'You serve the Neapolitan, Ione?'

'I am with her at present,' answered Nydia.

'Is she as handsome as they say?'

'I know not,' replied Nydia.  'How can I judge?'

'Ah! I should have remembered.  But thou hast ears, if not eyes.  Do thy
fellow-slaves tell thee she is handsome?  Slaves talking with one
another forget to flatter even their mistress.'

'They tell me that she is beautiful.'

'Hem!--say they that she is tall?'

'Yes.'

'Why, so am I.  Dark haired?'

'I have heard so.'

'So am I.  And doth Glaucus visit her much?'
