"You must be aware, comrades," said the young soldier, addressing the
crowd rather than his interrogator, "that Sidi Hamet--now Dey of
Algiers--has given strict orders that the houses of the Jews are to be
respected.  I am here to see these orders carried out."

"And who art thou? again I demand," said the bully, observing that his
comrades showed a tendency to waver, "that dost presume to--"

"I am one," cried the young soldier, with a whirl of his gleaming blade
so close to the man's nose that he staggered back in alarm--"I am one
who knows how to fulfil his duty.  Perchance I may be one who shall even
presume some day to mount the throne when Hamet Dey is tired of it--in
which case I know of a bully whose head shall grace the highest spike on
Bab-Azoun!"

The quiet smile with which the latter part of this speech was delivered,
and the determined air of the youth, combined to make the soldiers
laugh, so that the bully felt himself under the necessity of retiring.

Sheathing his sword with a business-like air, and rudely pushing his
prisoner into the house, whither Bacri had already retired, the young
soldier entered and shut the door.

"Lucien!" exclaimed Bacri in surprise, as he grasped the hand of the
young janissary, "thou hast managed this business well, considering that
thou art no Turk.  How didst thou come to think of it?"

"I should never have thought of it, had not my worthy father suggested
the idea," replied Lucien, with a smile, as he removed the rope from the
neck of his sire.--"Forgive me, father, if I have played my part too
roughly--"

"Too roughly!" echoed the bluff merchant, with a laugh; "why, boy, dost
think that thine old father has lost all his youthful vigour?  I trow
not.--You see, Signor Bacri, we have had information of what was
impending for some days past, and although we could do nothing to avert
the catastrophe, we thought it possible that we might manage to avoid
the massacre at the palace.  Knowing from report that the janissaries
ran riot at such times, and being aware that my son Lucien--who is a
noted linguist, Signor Bacri--spoke their language almost as well as a
native, I suggested that he should procure a uniform and personate a
janissary, while I should act the part of a runaway slave.  Being a
favourite with poor Achmet, as you know, Lucien had much influence among
the domestics, and easily procured the disguise.  The moment the
insurrection took place we fled from the palace, and, as you see, here
we are!"

"But why came you hither?" asked Bacri, with a troubled look.

"To whom else could we flee for shelter?" returned Lucien.  "You are the
only friend we have in the city--except, indeed, the Padre Giovanni, who
has no power to save us."

"Alas!" returned the Jew, leading his friends into the skiffa, and
seating himself on the edge of the fountain that played there, "you lean
on a broken reed.  My power is not sufficient to protect myself.  Even
now the soldiers might have taken my life, and robbed my house with
impunity, had it not been for your courage, Lucien.  My predecessor was
shot in cold blood by a man who for the murder was only transported.  If
he had slain the poorest Turk, or even a Moor, he would have been
strangled.  We are a despised as well as persecuted race, and our
influence or power to protect you is very small.  Indeed, if it were
known that I had given you shelter, my life would be forfeited, as well
as yours.  I have already placed it in great jeopardy in order to save
Mariano--"

"Mariano!" exclaimed Francisco, turning an anxious gaze on the Jew; "is
he, then, in danger?"

"He is captured by the Turks," replied Bacri, "and is now in the
Bagnio."

"Where they will doubtless bastinado him to death," said Francisco,
grinding his teeth and clenching his hands with suppressed passion.
"Bacri, I feel that in me which makes me long to run a-muck among these
Turks."

"I understand you not," said Bacri.

"Why, I will take the first opportunity that offers to cut the throats
of as many of these fiends as possible before they manage to cut mine.
They say that vengeance is sweet.  I will taste it and try," said the
merchant, with a grim smile.

"`Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord,'" returned Bacri
slowly; "says not your own Scripture so?"

"It may be so, but man's power of endurance is limited," retorted
Francisco gloomily.

"But God's power to aid and strengthen is _not_ limited," returned the
Jew.  "Believe me, no good ever came of violence--at least from
revengeful violence.  No doubt a violent assault at the right time and
with a right motive has often carried the day; but violence given way to
for the mere purpose of gratifying the feelings is not only useless, it
is hurtful and childish."

"Hast never given way to such thyself, Bacri?" demanded Francisco with
some asperity.

"I have," replied the Jew with humility, "and it is because I have done
so that I am enabled to speak with some authority as to the results.
Your desire, I suppose, is to save Mariano.  If you would attain that
end, you must learn to curb your passions and use the powers of judgment
with which your Maker has endowed you."

"Well, well, we will let that point hang on its peg in the meantime,"
returned Francisco impatiently; "but what wouldst thou advise? we are at
your mercy."

"I will do what I can to prove that a Jew is not ungrateful," answered
Bacri.  "If they leave us unmolested here till night-fall we may find a
way of escape for you, at all events from the city, but it is only such
as desperate men would choose to take."

"We _are_ desperate men," said Lucien quietly.

"Once outside the walls," continued the Jew, "you must keep perfectly
close and still by day, for a diligent search will be made for you, and
only at night will you be able to creep out from your place of hiding to
steal what you can for food, and to attempt to gain the coast, where
your only chance of escape lies in seizing one of the small feluccas in
which the piracies of the Algerines are carried on, and putting off to
sea without provisions,--with the certainty of being pursued, and the
all but certainty of being overtaken."

"Such risks are better than death or slavery," answered Francisco.  "We
think not of danger.  The only thing that gives me concern is how we are
to get my poor son out of the Bagnio."

"I will manage that for you," said Bacri, "for my gold is at least
powerful with menials; but in order to do this I shall have to leave the
house for a time and must conceal you in a cellar."

"Do as you will, Bacri," said Francisco; "we are in your hands and place
implicit confidence in you."

"Well, follow me!" said the Jew.

Rising and leaving the skiffa, he conducted them down a staircase into a
small cellar, which was almost too low to admit of their standing erect.
Here he pointed out a shelf on which were a pot of water and a loaf,
also a bundle of straw on which they might rest when so disposed.
Having described carefully to them the manner of Mariano's escape over
the roof of the house and by the city wall, and having given them the
rope that had been used on that occasion, he said--

"Now I leave you.  I must lock the trap-door that leads to this dungeon,
and carry away the key, because if rioters were to break in and find the
key in it, they would at once discover your refuge."

"And what if you be killed, Bacri, and we be left here without a soul in
the world who knows of our whereabouts?" said Francisco, with a look of
anxiety.  "I'd rather be bastinadoed to death than be buried alive after
all."

"If it goes ill with me, as may well be the case," answered the Jew,
"you have only to make use of this crowbar and wrench off the lock of
the door.  But if rioters enter the house, be careful not to do it until
some time after they are gone, and all is quiet.  When free, you must
use your own wisdom and discretion.--Farewell!"

Bacri ascended the trap-ladder and shut the door, leaving his friends in
darkness which was made visible but not dispelled by a small lantern.
They listened intently to his receding footsteps until the last faint
echo left them in total silence.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

FRANCISCO AND HIS SON IN DANGER.

For several hours Francisco and his son sat on the bundle of straw
listening intently to every sound, being naturally filled with anxiety
as to the success of Bacri in his efforts to aid Mariano.  At last they
heard a loud knocking at the street door, which, after being repeated
impatiently once or twice, was followed by a thunderous noise, as if the
house were being entered by violence.

"The janissaries have returned," said Francisco, with a serious look.

"We had better put out the light," suggested Lucien, as a crashing sound
announced the bursting in of the door.

"Do, lad.--Stay, let me get hold of this crowbar; it is better than
nothing if it comes to--.  Now, out with it!"

A moment more and they were in total darkness, while the trampling of
feet overhead and the shouts of many voices told that the mob had
entered the Jew's dwelling.

Every moment the two prisoners expected to see the trap-door of their
retreat wrenched open, but no one seemed to have discovered it, and they
were beginning to breathe more freely, and to hope that they should
escape, when there came a sudden and violent stamping just overhead.
Then there was a sound of breaking timber, and presently the edge of the
trap-door began to lift and creak under the pressure of some powerful
instrument.  Another moment and it flew open and a man looked in, but of
course could see nothing.  Descending the steps, he called loudly for a
light, and one of his comrades brought a lantern, with which he was
about to descend, but, missing his footstep, he fell to the ground and
extinguished it.

At that moment Lucien and his father drew back into the darkest part of
the cellar, in the shadow of a small projection.

"Fetch another light!" shouted the soldiers.

"Now's our time," whispered Lucien, grasping his scimitar and preparing
for a dash.

"Not yet," replied his father, laying a strong grasp on his arm.

It was well that Lucien was restrained, for, while the soldiers were
clamouring for a light, their comrades above gave a shout as though
something new and surprising had been discovered.  Full of curiosity,
the soldiers in the cellar darted out.

"Now!" whispered Francisco.

Lucien at once sprang up the ladder, but looked out cautiously; for the
sudden change in the sounds above apprised him that the robbers had left
the apartment.

He saw them busy ransacking a cupboard in which the Jew had placed a
large quantity of plate, a little of which was solid, and a large
portion showy, but comparatively valueless.  It had been arranged by him
in such a way as to make a superb show of wealth, in the hope that it
might tempt any who should take a fancy to rob his house to expend much
of their labour and energy on that horde, thereby creating an important
diversion from much more valuable deposits made elsewhere.

So busy were the plunderers that they left the room above the cellar
quite unguarded.

"The coast is clear," whispered Lucien, looking back.  "We must act out
our part of janissary and slave, father.  Quick!  Shoulder this small
chest."

Francisco obeyed almost mechanically, laid down the crowbar, threw a
light chest that chanced to be near at hand on his shoulder, and
followed his son silently up the staircase to the entrance-hall of the
house, where they found two janissaries guarding the door.

"Pretend to stumble, father," whispered Lucien, on observing them.

Francisco not only pretended to, but, in his zealous obedience, actually
did stumble with such good will that he fell with a heavy crash on the
marble pavement, sending the chest violently out at the door into the
street, much to the amusement of the two sentinels.

"Scoundrel!" cried Lucien furiously, in Turkish, at the same time
flourishing his scimitar and bestowing on his submissive parent a most
unmerciful kick.  "Up, out with you, and shoulder it!  See that you mind
your feet better, else the bastinado shall make them tingle!"

He brushed so savagely past the sentinels that they had not time to stop
him, even if so disposed, then turning suddenly back, said--

"Your lantern, friend; one will serve you well enough, and I shall need
the other with so awkward a slave."

"Here it is, comrade," replied the man; "but who and what hast thou got
there?"

"Waste not your time in questions," said Lucien hastily; "they have
discovered heavy treasure inside, and require the aid of one of you.
Surely it needs not two to guard a Jew's door!"

He hurried off without awaiting a reply.

In perfect silence they traversed several narrow streets without meeting
any one.  It was nearly dark at the time, and it was evident that the
rioters had been restrained by the new Dey, for their shouts were now
heard in only two or three of the main thoroughfares.

During his service as scribe to Achmet, Lucien had visited all parts of
the town, and was familiar with its main outlines, if not with its
details.  He therefore knew how to avoid the frequented parts, and yet
take a pretty direct course for Bab-Azoun.  But he was sorely perplexed
as to how he should now act, for it was much too early in the night to
make an attempt to get over the city walls.

In this dilemma he retired into the deep shadow of an old doorway, and
covered up the lantern, while he held a whispered consultation with his
father.

"It seems to me, my son," said Francisco, sitting down on the chest
which he had hitherto carried, "that we have only got out of the
frying-pan into the fire; for it is not reason to expect that all the
janissaries we chance to meet will let us pass without question, and I
fear that you have no sufficient ground of excuse for wandering about
the city at such hours in disturbed times in charge of a slave on whose
countenance submission sits with so bad a grace."

"True, father," answered Lucien, much perplexed; "perhaps it would be
well to remain where we are till a later hour.  If any one seeks to
enter this dismal staircase, we can easily avoid observation by getting
into one of its dark corners, and--"

He was interrupted by the sound of approaching footsteps, and
immediately retired with his father into one of the corners referred to.

"It is only two streets further on," said a low voice, which sounded
familiar in the ears of the listeners.  "There you shall be safe, for
Jacob Mordecai is a trusty friend, and I will go see how it fares with
our--"

"'Tis Bacri," whispered Lucien, as the voice died away in the distance.

"We must not lose sight of him," said Francisco, darting out.

Lucien outran his father, and quickly overtook Bacri and another man,
who was completely enveloped in the folds of a burnous, such as was
then, and still is, worn by the Bedouin Arabs.

On hearing the footsteps in pursuit, Bacri and his companion had
commenced to run, but perceiving that only two men followed them, they
turned and stood in an attitude of defence.  He who wore the burnous
flung back the hood, and, freeing his sword-arm from its folds,
displayed to the astonished gaze of Lucien and Francisco the face and
form of Mariano.

"Father!" he exclaimed; "Lucien!"

"Mariano!" cried Francisco, throwing his arms round his younger son and
giving him a hearty kiss on each cheek.

"Hist! be quiet," said Bacri, seizing Francisco by the arm in his
powerful grasp and dragging him along.

The interference of the Jew was not a moment too soon, for several
soldiers who were patrolling the streets at the time overheard the sound
of their voices and hurried towards them.

They ran now, in good earnest, and quickly reached the door of Jacob
Mordecai's house, which Bacri opened with a key, and shut gently after
letting his friends pass, so that the soldiers lost sight of them as if
by a magical disappearance.
