it all, and found that there were two sovereigns too many, which she
offered to return to the teller with a triumphant air, but that
incredulous man smiled benignantly, and advised her to count it again.
She did count it again, and found that there were four pieces too few.
Whereupon she retired with the bag to a side table, and, in a state of
profuse perspiration, began to count it over a third time with
deliberate care.

Tottie watched and checked each piece like a lynx, and the sum was at
last found to be correct!

Mrs Gaff quitted the bank with a feeling of intense relief, and met
Lizzie Gordon walking with Emmie Wilson just outside the door.

"My dear Miss Gordon," exclaimed the poor woman, kissing Lizzie's hand
in the fulness of her heart, "you've no ideer what agonies I've bin
a-sufferin' in that there bank.  If they're a-goin' to treat me in this
way always, I'll draw out the whole o' my ten hundred thousand pound--if
that's the sum--an' stow it away in my Stephen's sea-chest, what he's
left behind him."

"Dear Mrs Gaff, what have they done to you?" asked Lizzie in some
concern.

"Oh, it's too long a story to tell ye here, my dear.  Come with me.  I'm
a-goin' straight to yer uncle's, Captain Bingley.  Be he to home?  But
stop; did ye ever see a hundred golden pounds?"

Mrs Gaff cautiously opened the mouth of her bag and allowed Lizzie to
peep in, but refused to answer any questions regarding her future
intentions.

Meanwhile Emmie and Tottie had flown into each other's arms.  The former
had often seen my niece, both at the house of Mr Stuart and at my own,
as our respective ladies interchanged frequent visits, and Miss Peppy
always brought Emmie when she came to see us.  Lizzie had taken such a
fancy to the orphan that she begged Miss Peppy to allow her to go with
her and me sometimes on our visits to the houses of distressed sailors
and fishermen.  In this way Emmie and Tottie had become acquainted, and
they were soon bosom friends, for the gentle, dark-eyed daughter of Mrs
Gaff seemed to have been formed by nature as a harmonious counterpart to
the volatile, fair-haired orphan.  Emmie, I may here remark in passing,
had by this time become a recognised inmate of Mr Stuart's house.  What
his intentions in regard to her were, no one knew.  He had at first
vowed that the foundling should be cast upon the parish, but when the
illness, that attacked the child after the ship-wreck, had passed away,
he allowed her to remain without further remark than that she must be
kept carefully out of his way.  Kenneth, therefore, held to his first
intention of not letting his father or any one else know that the poor
girl was indeed related to him by the closest tie.  Meanwhile he
determined that Emmie's education should not be neglected.

Immediately on arriving at my residence, Mrs Gaff was, at her own
request, ushered into my study, accompanied by Tottie.

I bade her good-day, and, after a few words of inquiry as to her health,
asked if I could be of any service to her.

"No, capting, thank 'ee," she said, fumbling with her bag as if in
search of something.

"No news of Stephen or Billy, I suppose?" said I in a sad tone.

"Not yet, capting, but I expect 'em one o' these days, an' I'm a-gettin'
things ready for 'em."

"Indeed! what induces you to expect them so confidently?"

"Well, capting, I can't well tell 'ee, but I do, an' in the meantime
I've come to thank 'ee for all yer kindness to Tottie an' me when we was
in distress.  Yer Society, capting, has saved me an' Tottie fro'
starvation, an' so I've come for to give ye back the money ye sent me by
Mr Stuart, for there's many a poor widder as'll need it more nor I do."

So saying, she placed the money on the table, and I thanked her
heartily, adding that I was glad to be able to congratulate her on her
recent good fortune.

"Moreover," continued Mrs Gaff, taking a small bag from the large one
which hung on her arm, and laying it also on the table, "I feel so
thankful to the Almighty, as well as to you, sir, that I've come to give
ye a small matter o' goold for the benefit o' the Society ye b'longs to,
an' there it be."

"How much is here?" said I, lifting up the bag.

"A hundred pound.  Ye needn't count it, capting, for it's all c'rekt,
though it _was_ shovelled out to me as if it war no better than coals or
sugar.  Good-day, capting."

Mrs Gaff, turning hastily round as if to avoid my thanks, or my
remonstrances at so poor a woman giving so large a sum, seized Tottie by
the wrist and dragged her towards the door.

"Stop, stop, my good woman," said I; "at least let me give you a
receipt."

"Please, capting, I doesn't want one.  Surely I can trust ye, an' I've
had my heart nigh broke with bits o' paper this good day."

"Well, but I am required by the rules of the Society to give a receipt
for all sums received."

Mrs Gaff was prevailed on to wait for the receipt, but the instant it
was handed to her, she got up, bounced out of the room, and out of the
house into the street.  I hastened to the window, and saw her and Tottie
walking smartly away in the direction of Cove, with their enormous
bonnets quivering violently, and their ribbons streaming in the breeze.

Half an hour afterwards, Dan Horsey, who had been sent to me with a note
from my friend Stuart, went down into my kitchen, and finding Susan
Barepoles there alone, put his arm round her waist.

"Don't," said Susan, struggling unsuccessfully to get free.  "What d'ye
think Mrs Gaff has bin an' done?"

"Don't know, my jewel, no more nor a pig as has niver seen the light o'
day," said Dan.

"She's bin--and gone--and given--" said Susan, with great deliberation,
"one--hundred--gold sovereigns--to the Shipwrecked thingumbob Society!"

"How d'ye know that, darlint?" inquired Dan.

"Master told Miss Lizzie, Miss Lizzie told missis, and missis told me."

"You don't say so!  Well, I wish I wor the Shipwrecked thing-me-bob
Society, I do," said Dan with a sigh; "but I an't, so I'll have to cut
my stick, clap spurs to my horse, as the story books say, for Capting
Bingley towld me to make haste.  But there's wan thing, Susan, as I
wouldn't guv for twice the sum."

"An' what may that be?" asked Susan shyly.

"It's _that_," said Dan, imprinting a kiss on Susan's lips, to the
dismay of Bounder, who chanced to be in the back scullery and heard the
smack.

Cook rushed to the kitchen, but when she reached it Dan was gone, and a
few minutes later that worthy was cantering toward Seaside Villa,
muttering to himself:

"Tin thousand pound!  It's a purty little bit o' cash.  I only wish as a
brother o' mine, (if I had wan), would leave me half as much, an' I'd
buy a coach and six, an' put purty Susan inside and mount the box
meself, an' drive her to Africay or Noo Zealand, (not to mintion
Ottyheity and Kangaroo), by way of a marriage trip!  Hey!  Bucephalus,
be aisy now.  It isn't Master Kenneth that's on yer back just now, so
mind what yer about, or it'll be wus for ye, old boy."



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE OPEN BOAT ON THE PACIFIC--GAFF AND BILLY IN DREADFUL CIRCUMSTANCES--
A MESSAGE FROM THE SEA, AND A MADMAN'S DEATH.

While these events are taking place in the busy seaport of Wreckumoft,
let us return to the little boat which we left floating, a solitary
speck, upon the breast of the great Pacific Ocean.

As long as the whale-ship continued visible, the three occupants of the
boat sat immovable, gazing intently upon her in deep silence, as if each
felt that when she disappeared his last hold upon earth was gone.

Billy was the first to break silence.

"She's gone, father," he whispered.

Both men started, and looked round at the boy.

"Ay, she's gone," observed Gaff with a sigh; "and now we'll have to pull
for it, night an' day, as we are able."

He began slowly to get out one of the oars as he spoke.

"It would have been better if they had cut our throats," growled Captain
Graddy with a fierce oath.

"You'd have been worse off just now if they had, captain," said Gaff,
shaking off his depression of spirits by a strong effort of will.
"Come, Cap'n Graddy, you an' I are in the same fix; let's be friends,
and do our best to face the worst, like men."

"It makes little matter how we face it," said the captain, "it'll come
to the same thing in the long run, if we don't manage to make it a short
run by taking strong measures.  (He touched the hilt of a knife which he
wore at all times in his belt.)  However, we may as well pull as not."

He rose and sulkily took an oar, while Gaff took another.

"Now, captain," said Gaff, "you know better than me how far we be fro'
land, an' which is the way to pull."

"I should think we're five hundred miles from the nearest land," said
Graddy, "in a nor'-east direction, an' there's no islands that I know of
between us an' South America, so we may just pull about for exercise
till the grub's done, an' then pull till we're dead."

The captain burst into a loud, fierce laugh, as if he thought the last
remark uncommonly witty.

Presently he said, "You may as well see how much we've got to eat an'
drink before beginnin' our work."

"All right, my hearty!" cried Gaff, rising with alacrity to examine
their store of provisions; "here's a small bag o' biscuit as'll last us
three days, mayhap, on half allowance, so we'll be able to do with
quarter allowance for the first few days, an' then reduce to an eighth,
which'll make it spin out a few days longer.  By that time we may fall
in with a sail, who knows?"

"We're far beyond the track o' ships," said the captain bitterly.  "Is
there never a drop o' water in the boat?"

"Not a drop," replied Gaff, "I've searched all round, an' only found a
empty bottle."

"Ay, meant for to smuggle brandy aboard when they got the chance, the
brutes!" said the captain, referring to his recent crew.  "Well, it
don't matter.  We've now the prospect of dyin' o' thirst before we die
of starvation.  For my part, I prefer to die o' starvation, so ye may
put yourself an' your brat on full allowance as long as it lasts."

Poor Billy's horror at the prospect before him was much aggravated by
the fierce and brutal manner of Graddy, and he would fain have gone and
hid his face in his father's bosom; but he had been placed at the helm
while the two were pulling, so he could not forsake his post.

It was a calm evening when they were thus cast adrift on the boundless
sea, and as night advanced the calm deepened, so that the ocean became
like a sea of ink, in which the glorious host of stars were faithfully
mirrored.

Hour after hour the two men pulled at the oars with a slow-measured
steady stroke, while Billy sat at the helm, and kept the boat's head in
the direction of a certain star which the captain pointed out to him.
At length the star became like a moon to Billy's gazing eyes; then it
doubled itself, and then it went out altogether as the poor boy fell
forward.

"Hallo, Billy! mind your helm!" cried his father.

"I felled asleep, daddy," said the Bu'ster apologetically, as he resumed
his place.

"Well, well, boy; lie down and take a sleep.  It's too hard on you.  Eat
a biscuit first though before you lie down, and I'll keep the boat's
head right with the oar."

The captain made no remark, but the moon, which had just arisen, shone
on his hard features, and showed that they were more fierce and lowering
than at the beginning of the night.

Billy gladly availed himself of the permission, and took a biscuit out
of the bag.  Before he had eaten half of it he fell back in the
stern-sheets of the boat, dropt into a sound sleep, and dreamed of home
and his mother and Tottie.

Hour after hour the men pulled at the oars.  They were strong men both
of them, inured to protracted exertion and fatigue.  Still the night
seemed as if it would never come to an end, for in those high southern
latitudes at that time of the year the days were very short and the
nights were long.

At last both men stopped rowing, as if by mutual consent.

"It's a pity," said Gaff, "to knock ourselves up together.  You'd better
lie down, cap'n, an' I'll pull both oars for a spell."

"No, no, Gaff," replied Graddy, with sudden and unaccountable urbanity;
"I'm not a bit tired, and I'm a bigger man than you--maybe a little
stronger.  So do you lie down beside the boy, an' I'll call ye when I
want a rest."

Gaff remonstrated, protesting that he was game to pull for hours yet,
but the captain would take no denial, so he agreed to rest; yet there
was an uneasy feeling in his breast which rendered rest almost
impossible.  He lay for a long time with his eyes fixed on the captain,
who now pulled the two oars slowly and in measured time as before.

At last, in desperation, Gaff gave Billy a poke in the ribs which roused
him.

"Come, boy," said his father almost sternly, "you've slept long enough
now; get up an' steer.  Don't you see the cap'n's pullin' all alone!"

"All right, daddy," said Billy, uttering a loud yawn and stretching
himself.  "Where am I?  Oh! oh!"

The question was put before he had quite recovered consciousness; the
terminal "oh!" was something like a groan of despair, as his eye fell on
the forbidding countenance of the captain.

Billy took the tiller in silence.  After a little while Gaff drew his
son's ear near to his mouth, and said in a low whisper--

"Billy, my lad, I _must_ have a sleep, but I dursn't do it unless you
keep a sharp eye on the captain.  He's after mischief, I'm quite sure o'
that, so give me a tremendous dig in the ribs if he offers to rise from
his seat.  Mind what I say now, lad.  Our lives may depend on it."

Billy promised to be watchful, and in less than two minutes afterwards
Gaff was sunk in deep repose.

The boy was faithful to his trust.  Without appearing to be watching
him, he never for one moment removed his eyes so far from where the
captain sat labouring at the oars as to give him a chance of moving
without being seen.  As time passed by, however, Billy found it
difficult to keep awake, and, in proportion as this difficulty
increased, his staring at the captain became more direct and intense.
Of course Graddy perceived this, and the sneering smile that crossed his
visage showed that he had made a shrewd guess at the cause of the lad's
attentions.

By degrees Billy's eyes began to droop, and he roused himself frequently
with a strong effort, feeling desperately alarmed lest he should be
overcome.  But nature was not to be denied.  Again and again did his
head fall forward, again and again did he look up with a startled
expression to perceive that Graddy was regarding him with a cold
sardonic smile.  Gradually Billy's eyes refused to convey a correct
impression of what they rested on.  The rower's head suddenly became
twice as large as his body, a sight which so alarmed the boy that he
started up and could scarce restrain a cry, but the head had shrunk into
its ordinary proportions, and the sardonic smile was there as before.

Oh! what would not Billy have given at that time to have been thoroughly
wide-awake and fresh!  He thought for a moment of awaking his father,
but the thought was only half formed ere sleep again weighed down his
spirit, causing his eyelids to blink despite his utmost efforts to keep
them open.  Presently he saw Graddy draw the right oar quietly into the
boat, without ceasing to row with the left one, and slowly draw the
knife which hung at his belt.

The boy tried to shout and arouse his father, but he was paralysed with
horror.  His blood seemed to curdle in his veins.  No sound would issue
from his lips, neither could he move hand or foot while the cold glassy
eye of the captain rested on him.

Suddenly Graddy sprang up, and Billy's voice found vent in a shrill cry.
At the same moment Stephen Gaff awoke, and instinctively his hand
grasped the tiller.  He had no time to rise, but with the same force
that drew the tiller from its socket in the helm he brought it forward
with crashing violence on the forehead of Graddy, who was stooping to
plunge the knife into his breast.  He staggered beneath the blow.
Before he could recover himself it was repeated, and he fell heavily
back into the bottom of the boat.

"Thank the Lord," murmured Gaff, as he leaned over his fallen foe, "the
villain's hand has bin stopped short this time.  Come, Billy, help me to
lift him up."

Gaff's blows had been delivered with such vigour that Graddy's head was
much damaged, and it was a long time before the two could get him
