He cut an alder shoot about eight feet long, trimmed it, and poked it
through the hole. It went through easily enough. He prodded at the sod
in the other world, digging up small tufts. When he pulled the stick
back, some of the other world dirt was on the sharp end. It looked and
smelled just about like any dirt.

Old Tom came stretching out into the morning sun and stalked over to
investigate. After a careful inspection of the hole he settled down with
his paws tucked under him to watch. Ed took a flat round can from his
pocket, lined his lip frugally with snuff, and sat down on the up-ended
bucket to watch too. At the moment, that seemed the likeliest thing to
do.

       *       *       *       *       *

_It was nearly swarming time, the Harn had many things to preoccupy it,
but it spared one unit to watch the hole into the other world. So far,
nothing much had happened. A large biped had found the opening from the
other side. It had been joined by a smaller quadruped; but neither
showed any indication yet of coming through. The sun was shining through
the hole, a large young yellow sun, and the air was crisp, with sharp
interesting odors._

_The biped ejected a thin squirt of brown liquid through the hole--venom
of some sort, apparently. The Harn hastily drew back out of range._

       *       *       *       *       *

The hole into the other world stayed there, as unobtrusively fixed as if
it had been there since the beginning of time. Nothing came through, and
nothing moved in the other world but leaves stirring now and then with a
breeze, clouds drifting across the sky. Ed began to realize it was
getting late in the morning, and he had not yet had breakfast. He left
old Tom to watch the hole, got stiffly to his feet and went on down the
trail to get the pail of water he had started for. From the cabin door,
he could still see the hole into the other world. He kept one eye on it
while he cooked breakfast.

As he was finishing his second cup of coffee, he noticed the view into
the other world becoming duller, dimming in a peculiar fashion. He left
the dirty dishes and went over to look more closely. What was happening,
he found, was just that it was getting dark in the other world. The
effect was strange, much like looking out the door of a brightly lighted
room at dusk. The edges of the hole cast a very clearly marked shadow
now, and outside this shaft of sunlight the view faded, until a few
yards away it was impossible to make out any detail.

Presently the stars came out. Ed was not an astronomer, but he had a
woodsman's knowledge of the sky. He could find nothing familiar in any
of the stars he saw. In some way, that was more unsettling than the hole
itself had been.

After he had finished the dishes, he cut two gee-pole spruce, trimmed
them, and stuck one on each side of the hole. He got some thin thread he
used to tie beaver snares and wove it back and forth between the poles,
rigging a tin can alarm. It seemed likely someone or something had put
the hole there, it had not just happened. If anything came through, Ed
wanted to know about it. Just to make extra sure, he got some number
three traps and made a few blind sets in front of the hole.

Then he went back to his chores. Whatever was going to happen with the
hole would happen when it happened, and winter was still coming.

He set some babiche to soak for mending his snowshoes. He ran the net he
had set at the edge of the eddy for late silvers and took out two fish.
Old Tom had pretty well cleaned up the mice in the cellar hole, but they
were still burrowing around the sills of the lean-to. Ed took a shovel
and opened up a hole so Tom could get under the lean-to floor. He got
out his needles, palm, thread, and wax; and mended his winter moccasins.

Off and on, he checked the hole into the other world. There was nothing
but the slow progression of alien stars across the sky. Finally old Tom
grew bored and left to investigate the hole under the lean-to. Shortly
there were scutterings and squeakings as evidence that he, too, had got
back to business.

       *       *       *       *       *

Toward evening, Ed got to wondering how a living creature would take
transition into the other world. He had no intention of trying it
himself until he knew a lot more about it, but he thought he might be
able to scare up a surrogate. Out by the wood pile some live-traps were
piled under a spruce, from the time when Ed had been catching marten for
the Fish and Wildlife to transplant. One was still in pretty fair shape.
He patched it up and set it among the cottonwoods at the head of the
bar, where there were some rabbit trails.

When he went to bed it was still dark in the other world. He left the
cabin door ajar so he could see it from his bed and set his shotgun,
loaded with 00 buck, handy.

Nearing sixty, Ed was not a sound sleeper, even when he had nothing on
his mind. About ten it started to get light in the other world, and that
woke him up. He padded out to look, but there was no change, it looked
about the same as yesterday. He went back to bed.

The next morning there was a rabbit in the live-trap. With a pole, Ed
pushed the trap with the rabbit in it through into the other world and
watched. Nothing happened. After a while the rabbit began nibbling at
some spears of grass that pushed through the wire of the cage. Ed pulled
it back and examined the rabbit carefully. It seemed healthy and about
as happy as a rabbit could expect to be in a cage.

It did not get dark in the other world till about noon, that day; and
about seven, when it was dark in both worlds, Ed heard the jangle of the
tin can alarm, followed by the snap of one of the steel traps.

He took a flashlight and found a small hoofed animal, hardly bigger than
old Tom, rearing and bucking with a broken leg in the trap. It had sharp
little spike horns, only a few inches long, but mean. Ed got several
painful jabs before he got the animal tied up and out of the trap. He
restrung the alarm, then took his catch into the cabin to examine.

It was herbivorous and adult, from the looks of its teeth and hoofs,
though it only weighed about fifteen pounds. As an approximation, Ed
decided it was female. When he killed it and opened it up, at first
glance it looked reasonably familiar, on closer study less so.

The blood, anyway, was red; not blue or yellow or green; and the bones
were bones, just odd-shaped.

Ed cut off a slice of heart and tossed it to old Tom. The cat sniffed it
dubiously and then decided he liked it. He meowed for more. Ed gave it
to him and fried a small sliver of ham. It smelled and tasted fine, but
Ed contented himself with a single delicate nibble, pending further
developments. Anyway, it was beginning to look like a little exploration
would be feasible.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Harn, also, was well-satisfied with the way things were going. It
had been a strain to pass up the juicy little quadruped in the cage, but
the inhabitants of the other world seemed shy, and the Harn did not wish
to frighten them. At least, it knew now that life could come through the
hole, and the small herbivore it had herded through confirmed that
passage in the opposite direction was equally possible--plus a gratis
demonstration of the other world's pitiful defenses. At swarming time,
the whole new world would be open to embryo Harn, as well as this world
it presently occupied._

_It looked like a really notable swarming. The Harn budded three more
planters on the forcing stem, to be ready to take full advantage of
it._

It got light in the other world at one in the morning that night. Ed had
the days there pretty well pegged now. They were roughly twenty-seven
hours, of which about thirteen hours were dark. Not too high a latitude,
