Macedonian legion shall be housed in quarters of which they will tell
wonders for a long time to come. I would rather see them sleeping in
white wool and eating off silver than these vile traders. Tell them
that."

He was here interrupted, for Epagathos announced a deputation from
the Museum, and, at the same time, the painter Alexander, who had been
brought from prison. At this Caracalla exclaimed with disgust:

"Spare me the hair-splitting logicians!--Do you, Philostratus, receive
them in my name. If they make any impudent demands, you may tell them
my opinion of them and their Museum. Go, but come back quickly. Bring
in the painter. I will speak with him alone.--You, my friends, withdraw
with our idiologos, the priest of Alexander, who is well known here, and
visit the city. I shall not require you at present."

The whole troop hastened to obey. Caracalla now turned to Melissa once
more, and his eye brightened as he again discerned the dimple in her
cheeks, which had recovered their roses. Her imploring eyes met his,
and the happy expectation of seeing her brother lent them a light which
brought joy to the friendless sovereign. During his last speech he
had looked at her from time to time; but in the presence of so many
strangers she had avoided meeting his gaze. Now she thought that she
might freely show him that his favor was a happiness to her. Her soul,
as Roxana, must of course feel drawn to his; in that he firmly believed.
Her prayer and sacrifice for him sufficiently proved it--as he told
himself once more.

When Alexander was brought in, it did not anger him to see that the
brother, who held out his arms to Melissa in his habitual eager way, had
to be reminded by her of the imperial presence. Every homage was due
to this fair being, and he was, besides, much struck by Alexander's
splendid appearance. It was long since any youthful figure had so
vividly reminded him of the marble statues of the great Athenian
masters. Melissa's brother stood before him, the very embodiment of the
ideal of Greek strength and manly beauty. His mantle had been taken from
him in prison, and he wore only the short chiton, which also left bare
his powerful but softly modeled arms. He had been allowed no time to
arrange and anoint his hair, and the light-brown curls were tossed in
disorderly abundance about his shapely head. This favorite of the gods
appeared in Caesar's eyes as an Olympic victor, who had come to claim
the wreath with all the traces of the struggle upon him.

No sign of fear, either of Caesar or his lion, marred this impression.
His bow, as he approached the potentate, was neither abject nor awkward,
and Caesar felt bitter wrath at the thought that this splendid youth,
of all men, should have selected him as the butt of his irony. He would
have regarded it as a peculiar gift of fortune if this man--such a
brother of such a sister--could but love him, and, with the eye of an
artist, discern in the despot the great qualities which, in spite of his
many crimes, he believed he could detect in himself. And he hoped, with
an admixture of anxiety such as he had never known before, that the
painter's demeanor would be such as should allow him to show mercy.

When Alexander besought him with a trustful mien to consider his youth,
and the Alexandrian manners which he had inherited both from his parents
and his grandparents, if indeed his tongue had wagged too boldly in
speaking of the all-powerful Caesar, and to remember the fable of the
lion and the mouse, the scowl he had put on to impress the youth with
his awfulness and power vanished from Caesar's brow. The idea that this
great artist, whose sharp eye could so surely distinguish the hideous
from the beautiful, should regard him as ill-favored, was odious to him.
He had listened to him in silence; but suddenly he inquired of Alexander
whether it was indeed he, whom he had never injured, who had written the
horrible epigram nailed with the rope to the door of the Serapeum and
when the painter emphatically denied it, Caesar breathed as though a
burden had fallen from his soul. He nevertheless insisted on hearing
from the youth's own lips what it was that he had actually dared to say.
After some hesitation, during which Melissa besought Caesar in vain to
spare her and her brother this confession, Alexander exclaimed:

"Then the hunted creature must walk into the net, and, unless your
clemency interferes, on to death! What I said referred partly to the
wonderful strength that you, my lord, have so often displayed in the
field and in the circus; and also to another thing, which I myself now
truly repent of having alluded to. It is said that my lord killed his
brother."

"That--ah! that was it!" said Caesar, and his face, involuntarily this
time, grew dark.

"Yes, my lord," Alexander went on, breathing hard. "To deny it would be
to add a second crime to the former one, and I am one of those who would
rather jump into cold water both feet at once, when it has to be done.
All the world knows what your strength is; and I said that it was
greater than that of Father Zeus; for that he had cast his son
Hephaestos only on the earth, and your strong fist had cast your brother
through the earth into the depths of Hades. That was all. I have not
added nor concealed anything."

Melissa had listened in terror to this bold confession. Papinian, the
brave praetorian prefect, one of the most learned lawyers of his time,
had incurred Caracalla's fury by refusing to say that the murder of
Geta was not without excuse; and his noble answer, that it was easier to
commit fratricide than to defend it, cost him his life.

So long as Caesar had been kind to her, Melissa had felt repelled by
him; but now, when he was angry, she was once more attracted to him.

As the wounds of a murdered man are said to bleed afresh when the
murderer approaches, Caracalla's irritable soul was wont to break out
in a frenzy of rage when any one was so rash as to allude to this,
his foulest crime. This reference to his brother's death had as usual
stirred his wrath, but he controlled it; for as a torrent of rain
extinguishes the fire which a lightning-flash has kindled, the homage to
his strength, in Alexander's satire, had modified his indignation. The
irony which made the artist's contemptuous words truly witty, would not
have escaped Caracalla's notice if they had applied to any one else;
but he either did not feel it, or would not remark it, for the sake
of leaving Melissa in the belief that his physical strength was really
wonderful. Besides, he thus could indulge his wish to avoid pronouncing
sentence of death on this youth; he only measured him with a severe eye,
and said in threatening tones, to repay mockery in kind and to remind
the criminal of the fate imperial clemency should spare him:

"I might be tempted to try my strength on you, but that it is worse to
try a fall with a vaporing wag, the sport of the winds, than with the
son of Caesar. And if I do not condescend to the struggle, it is
because you are too light for such an arm as this." And as he spoke he
boastfully grasped the muscles which constant practice had made thick
and firm. "But my hand reaches far. Every man-at-arms is one of its
fingers, and there are thousands of them. You have made acquaintance
already, I fancy, with those which clutched you."

"Not so," replied Alexander, with a faint smile, as he bowed humbly. "I
should not dare resist your great strength, but the watch-dogs of the
law tried in vain to track me. I gave myself up."

"Of your own accord?"

"To procure my father's release, as he had been put in prison."

"Most magnanimous!" said Caesar, ironically. "Such a deed sounds well,
but is apt to cost a man his life. You seem to have overlooked that."

"No, great Caesar; I expected to die."

"Then you are a philosopher, a contemner of life."

"Neither. I value life above all else; for, if it is taken from me,
there is an end of enjoying its best gifts."

"Best gifts!" echoed Caesar. "I should like to know which you honor with
the epithet."

"Love and art."

"Indeed?" said Caracalla, with a swift glance at Melissa. Then, in an
altered voice, he added, "And revenge?"

"That," said the artist, boldly, "is a pleasure I have not yet tasted.
No one ever did me a real injury till the villain Zminis robbed my
guiltless father of his liberty; and he is not worthy to do such
mischief, as a finger of your imperial hand."

At this, Caesar looked at him suspiciously, and said in stern tones:

"But you have now the opportunity of trying the fine flavor of
vengeance. If I were timid--since the Egyptian acted only as my
instrument--I should have cause to protect myself against you."

"By no means," said the painter, with an engaging smile, "it lies in
your power to do me the greatest benefit. Do it, Caesar! It would be a
joy to me to show that, though I have been reckless beyond measure, I am
nevertheless a grateful man."

"Grateful?" repeated Caracalla, with a cruel laugh. Then he rose slowly,
and looked keenly at Alexander, exclaiming:

"I should almost like to try you."

"And I will answer for it that you will never regret it!" Melissa put
in. "Greatly as he has erred, he is worthy of your clemency."

"Is he?" said Caesar, looking down at her kindly. "What Roxana's soul
affirms by those rosy lips I can not but believe."

Then again he paused, studying Alexander with a searching eye, and
added:

"You think me strong; but you will change that opinion--which I
value--if I forgive you like a poor-spirited girl. You are in my power.
You risked your life. If I give it you, I must have a gift in return,
that I may not be cheated."

"Set my father free, and he will do whatever you may require of him,"
Melissa broke out. But Caracalla stopped her, saying: "No one makes
conditions with Caesar. Stand back, girl."

Melissa hung her head and obeyed; but she stood watching the eager
discussion between these two dissimilar men, at first with anxiety and
then with surprise.

Alexander seemed to resist Caesar's demands; but presently the despot
must have proposed something which pleased the artist, for Melissa
heard the low, musical laugh which had often cheered her in moments of
sadness. Then the conversation was more serious, and Caracalla said, so
loud that Melissa could hear him:

"Do not forget to whom you speak. If my word is not enough, you can go
back to prison." Then again she trembled for her brother; but some soft
word of his mollified the fury of the terrible man, who was never the
same for two minutes together. The lion, too, which lay unchained by his
master's seat, gave her a fright now and then; for if Caesar raised his
voice in anger, he growled and stood up.

How fearful were this beast and his lord! Rather would she spend her
whole life on a ship's deck, tossed to and fro by the surges, than share
this man's fate. And yet there was in him something which attracted her;
nay, and it nettled her that he should forget her presence.

At last Alexander humbly asked Caracalla whether he might not tell
Melissa to what he had pledged his word.

"That shall be my business," replied Caesar. "You think that a mere girl
is a better witness than none at all. Perhaps you are right. Then let it
be understood: whatever you may have to report to me, my wrath shall not
turn against you. This fellow--why should you not be told, child?--is
going into the town to collect all the jests and witty epigrams which
have been uttered in my honor."

"Alexander!" cried Melissa, clasping her hands and turning pale with
horror. But Caracalla laughed to himself, and went on cheerfully:

"Yes, it is dangerous work, no doubt; and for that reason I pledged my
word as Caesar not to require him to pay for the sins of others. On the
contrary, he is free, if the posy he culls for me is sufficient."

"Ay," said Alexander, on whom his sister's white face and warning looks
were having effect. "But you made me another promise on which I lay
great stress. You will not compel me to tell you, nor try to discover
through any other man, who may have spoken or written any particular
satire."

"Enough!" said Caracalla, impatiently; but Alexander was not to be
checked. He went on vehemently: "I have not forgotten that you said
conditions were not to be made with Caesar; but, in spite of my
impotence, I maintain the right of returning to my prison and there
awaiting my doom, unless you once more assure me, in this girl's
presence, that you will neither inquire as to the names of the authors
of any gibes I may happen to have heard, nor compel me by any means
whatever to give up the names of the writers of epigrams. Why should I
not satisfy your curiosity and your relish of a sharp jest? But rather
than do the smallest thing which might savor of treachery--ten times
rather the axe or the gallows!"

And Caracalla replied with a dark frown, loudly and briefly:

"I promise."

"And if your rage is too much for you?" wailed Melissa, raising her
hands in entreaty; but the despot replied, sternly:

"There is no passion which can betray Caesar into perjury."

At this moment Philostratus came in again, with Epagathos, who announced
the praetorian prefect. Melissa, encouraged by the presence of her kind
protector, went on:

"But, great Caesar, you will release my father and my other brother?"

"Perhaps," replied Caracalla. "First we will see how this one carries
out his task."

"You will be satisfied, my lord," said the young man, looking quite
happy again, for he was delighted at the prospect of saying audacious
things to the face of the tyrant whom all were bent on flattering, and
holding up the mirror to him without, as he firmly believed, bringing
any danger on himself or others.

He bowed to go. Melissa did the same, saying, as airily as though she
were free to come and go here:

"Accept my thanks, great Caesar. Oh, how fervently will I pray for you
all my life, if only you show mercy to my father and brothers!"

"That means that you are leaving me?" asked Caracalla.

"How can it be otherwise?" said Melissa, timidly. "I am but a girl, and
the men whom you expect--"

"But when they are gone?" Caesar insisted.

"Even then you can not want me," she murmured.

"You mean," said Caracalla, bitterly, "that you are afraid to come back.
You mean that you would rather keep out of the way of the man you prayed
for, so long as he is well. And if the pain which first aroused your
sympathy attacks him again, even then will you leave the irascible
sovereign to himself or the care of the gods?"

"Not so, not so," said Melissa, humbly, looking into his eyes with an
expression that pierced him to the heart, so that he added, with gentle
entreaty:

"Then show that you are she whom I believe you to be. I do not compel
you. Go whither you will, stay away even if I send for you; but"--and
here his brow clouded again--"why should I try to be merciful to her
from whom I looked for sympathy and kindliness, when she flees from me
like the rest?"

"O my lord!" Melissa sighed distressfully. "Go!" Caesar went on. "I do
not need you."

"No, no," the girl cried, in great trouble. "Call me, and I will come.
Only shelter me from the others, and from their looks of scorn; only--O
immortal gods!--If you need me, I will serve you, and willingly, with
all my heart. But if you really care for me, if you desire my presence,
why let me suffer the worst?" Here a sudden flood of tears choked her
utterance. A smile of triumph passed over Caesar's features, and drawing
Melissa's hands away from her tearful face, he said, kindly:

"Alexander's soul pines for Roxana's; that is what makes your presence
so dear to me. Never shall you have cause to rue coming at my call.
I swear it by the manes of my divine father--you, Philostratus, are
witness."

The philosopher, who thought he knew Caracalla, gave a sigh of relief;
and Alexander gladly reflected that the danger he had feared for his
sister was averted. This craze about Roxana, of which Caracalla had just
now spoken to him as a certain fact, he regarded as a monstrous illusion
of this strange man's, which would, however, be a better safeguard for
Melissa than pledges and oaths.

He clasped her hand, and said with cheerful confidence: "Only send for
her when you are ill, my lord, as long as you remain here. I know from
your own lips that there is no passion which can betray Caesar into
perjury. Will you permit her to come with me for the present?"

"No," said Caracalla, sharply, and he bade him go about the business
he had in hand. Then, turning to Philostratus, he begged him to conduct
Melissa to Euryale, the high-priest's noble wife, for she had been a
kind and never-forgotten friend of his mother's.

The philosopher gladly escorted the young girl to the matron, who had
long been anxiously awaiting her return.




CHAPTER XVIII.

The statue of Serapis, a figure of colossal size, carved by the
master-hand of Bryaxis, out of ivory overlaid with gold, sat enthroned
in the inner chamber of the great Temple of Serapis, with the kalathos
crowning his bearded face, and the three-headed Cerberus at his feet,
gazing down in supreme silence on the scene around. He did not lack for
pious votaries and enthusiastic admirers, for, so long as Caesar was
his guest, the curtain was withdrawn which usually hid his majestic form
from their eyes. But his most devoted worshipers thought that the god's
noble, benevolent, grave countenance had a wrathful look; for, though
nothing had been altered in this, the finest pillared hall in the world;
though the beautiful pictures in relief on the walls and ceiling, the
statues and altars of marble, bronze, and precious metals between the
columns, and the costly mosaic-work of many colors which decked the
floor in regular patterns, were the same as of yore, this splendid
pavement was trodden to-day by thousands of feet which had no concern
with the service of the god.

Before Caesar's visit, solemn silence had ever reigned in this worthy
home of the deity, fragrant with the scarcely visible fumes of kyphi;
and the worshipers gathered without a sound round the foot of his
statue, and before the numerous altars and the smaller images of the
divinities allied to him or the votive tablets recording the gifts and
services instituted in honor of Serapis by pious kings or citizens. On
feast-days, and during daily worship, the chant of priestly choirs might
be heard, or the murmur of prayer; and the eye might watch the stolists
who crowned the statues with flowers and ribbons, as required by the
ritual, or the processions of priests in their various rank. Carrying
sacred relics and figures of the gods on trays or boats, with emblematic
standards, scepters, and cymbals, they moved about the sacred precinct
in prescribed order, and most of them fulfilled their duties with
devotion and edification.

But Caesar's presence seemed to have banished these solemn feelings.
From morning till night the great temple swarmed with visitors, but
their appearance and demeanor were more befitting the market-place or
public bath than the sanctuary. It was now no more than the anteroom to
Caesar's audience-chamber, and thronged with Roman senators, legates,
tribunes, and other men of rank, and the clients and "friends" of
Caesar, mingled with soldiers of inferior grades, scribes, freedmen,
and slaves, who had followed in Caracalla's train. There were, too,
many Alexandrians who expected to gain some benefit, promotion, or
distinction through the emperor's favorites. Most of these kept close to
his friends and intimates, to make what profit they could out of them.
Some were corn and wine dealers, or armorers, who wished to obtain
contracts for supplying the army; others were usurers, who had money to
lend on the costly objects which warriors often acquired as booty; and
here, as everywhere, bedizened and painted women were crowding round the
free-handed strangers. There were Magians, astrologers, and magicians
by the dozen, who considered this sacred spot the most suitable place
in which to offer their services to the Romans, always inquisitive
for signs and charms. They knew how highly Egyptian magic was esteemed
throughout the empire; though their arts were in fact prohibited, each
outdid the other in urgency, and not less in a style of dress which
should excite curiosity and expectancy.

Serapion held aloof. Excepting that he wore a beard and robe, his
appearance even had nothing in common with them; and his talar was not
like theirs, embroidered with hieroglyphics, tongues, and flames, but of
plain white stuff, which gave him the aspect of a learned and priestly
sage.

As Alexander, on his way through the temple to fulfill Caesar's
commission, went past the Magian, Castor, his supple accomplice, stole
up behind a statue, and, when the artist disappeared in the crowd,
whispered to his master:

"The rascally painter is at liberty!"

"Till further notice!" was the reply, and Serapion was about to give his
satellite some instructions, when a hand was laid on his shoulder, and
Zminis said in a low voice:

"I am glad to have found you here. Accusations are multiplying against
you, my friend; and though I have kept my eyes shut till now, that
cannot last much longer."

"Let us hope you are mistaken," replied the Magian, firmly. And then
he went on in a hurried whisper: "I know what your ambition is, and my
support may be of use to you. But we must not be seen together. We will
meet again in the instrument-room, to the left of the first stairs up to
the observatory. You will find me there."

"At once, then," said the other. "I am to be in Caesar's presence in a
quarter of an hour."

The Magian, as being one of the most skillful makers of astronomical
instruments, and attached to the sanctuary, had a key of the room he
had designated. Zminis found him there, and their business was quickly
settled. They knew each other well, and each knew things of the other
which inspired them with mutual fear. However, as time pressed, they set
aside all useless antagonisms, to unite against the common foe.

The Magian knew already that Zminis had been named to Caesar as a
possible successor to the chief of the night-watch, and that he had a
powerful rival. By the help of the Syrian, whose ventriloquism was so
perfect that he never failed to produce the illusion that his feigned
voice proceeded from any desired person or thing, Serapion had enmeshed
the praetorian prefect, the greatest magnate in the empire next to
Caesar himself, and in the course of the past night had gained a firm
hold over him.

Macrinus, a man of humble birth, who owed his promotion to Severus, the
father of Caracalla, had, the day before, been praying in the Pantheon
to the statue of his deceased patron. A voice had proceeded from the
image, telling him that the divine Severus needed him for a great work.
A pious seer was charged to tell him more exactly what this was; and
he would meet him if he went at about sunset to the shrine of Isis,
and called three times on the name of Severus before the altar of the
goddess.

The Syrian ventriloquist had, by Serapion's orders, hidden behind a
pillar and spoken to the prefect from the statue; and Macrinus had, of
course, obeyed his instructions. He had met the Magian in the Temple
of Isis, and what he had seen, heard, and felt during the night had so
deeply affected him that he had promised to revisit Serapion the next
evening. What means he had used to enslave so powerful a man the Magian
did not tell his ally; but he declared that Macrinus was as wax in
his hands, and he came to an agreement with the Egyptian that if he,
Serapion, should bring about the promotion for which Zminis sighed,
Zminis, on his part, should give him a free hand, and commend his arts
to Caesar.

It needed but a few minutes to conclude this compact; but then the
Magian proceeded to insist that Alexander's father and brother should be
made away with.

"Impossible," replied Zminis. "I should be only too glad to wring the
necks of the whole brood; but, as it is, I am represented to Caesar as
too stern and ruthless. And a pretty little slut, old Heron's daughter,
has entangled him in her toils."

"No," said Serapion, positively. "I have seen the girl, and she is as
innocent as a child. But I know the force of contrast: when depravity
meets purity--"

"Come, no philosophizing!" interrupted the other. "We have better things
to attend to, and one or the other may turn to your advantage."

And he told him that Caesar, whose whim it was to spare Alexander's
life, regarded Melissa as an incarnation of Roxana.

"That is worth considering," said the Magian, stroking his beard
meditatively; then he suddenly exclaimed:

"By the law, as you know, all the relatives of a state criminal are sent
to the quarries or the mines. Dispatch Heron and his philosopher son
forthwith. Whither?--that is your concern; only, for the next few days
they must be out of reach."

"Good!" said the Egyptian, and an odious smile overspread his thin brown
face. "They may go as galley-slaves and row themselves to the Sardinian
mines. A good idea!"

"I have even better ideas than that to serve a friend," replied
Serapion. "Only get the philosopher out of the way. If Caesar lends an
ear to his ready tongue, I shall never see you guardian of the peace.
The painter is less dangerous."

"He shall share their fate," cried the spy, and he licked his thick lips
as if tasting some dainty morsel. He waved an adieu to the Magian, and
hastened back to the great hall. There he strictly instructed one of his
subordinates to take care that the gem-cutter and his son Philip found
places on board a galley bound for Sardinia.

At the great door he again met Serapion, with the Syrian at his heels,
and the Magian said:

"My friend here has just seen a clay figure, molded by some practiced
hand. It represents Caesar as a defiant warrior, but in the shape of a
deformed dwarf. It is hideously like him; you can see it at the Elephant
tavern."

The Egyptian pressed his hand, with an eager "That will serve," and
hastily went out.

Two hours slipped by, and Zminis was still waiting in Caesar's anteroom.
The Greek, Aristides, shared his fate, the captain hitherto of the
armed guard; while Zminis had been the head of the spies, intrusted
with communicating written reports to the chief of the night-watch. The
Greek's noble, soldierly figure looked strikingly fine by the slovenly,
lank frame of the tall Egyptian. They both knew that within an hour or
so one would be supreme over the other; but of this they thought it best
to say nothing. Zminis, as was his custom when he wished to assume an
appearance of respect which he did not feel, was alternately abject
and pressingly confidential; while Aristides calmly accepted his
hypocritical servility, and answered it with dignified condescension.
Nor had they any lack of subjects, for their interests were the same,
and they both had the satisfaction of reflecting what injury must ensue
to public safety through their long and useless detention here.

But when two full hours had elapsed without their being bidden to
Caesar's presence, or taken any notice of by their supporters, Zminis
grew wroth, and the Greek frowned in displeasure. Meanwhile the anteroom
was every moment more crowded, and neither chose to give vent to his
anger. Still, when the door to the inner chambers was opened for a
moment, and loud laughter and the ring of wine-cups fell on their ears,
Aristides shrugged his shoulders, and the Egyptian's eyes showed an
ominous white ring glaring out of his brown face.

Caracalla had meanwhile received the praetorian prefect; he had forgiven
him his long delay, when Macrinus, of his own accord, had told him of
the wonderful things Serapion had made known to him. The prefect's son,
too, had been invited to the banquet of Seleukus; and when Caracalla
heard from him and others of the splendor of the feast, he had begun to
feel hungry. Even with regard to food, Caesar acted only on the impulse
of the moment; and though, in the field, he would, to please his
soldiers, be content with a morsel of bread and a little porridge, at
home he highly appreciated the pleasures of the table. Whenever he gave
the word, an abundant meal must at once be ready. It was all the same
to him what was kept waiting or postponed, so long as something to his
taste was set before him. Macrinus, indeed, humbly reminded him that
the guardians of the peace were awaiting him; but he only waved his hand
with contempt, and proceeded to the dining-room, which was soon filled
with a large number of guests. Within a few minutes the first dish was
set before his couch, and, as plenty of good stories were told, and an
admirable band of flute-playing and singing girls filled up the pauses
in the conversation, he enjoyed his meal. In spite, too, of the warning
which Galenus had impressed on his Roman physician, he drank freely of
the fine wine which had been brought out for him from the airy lofts
of the Serapeum, and those about him were surprised at their master's
unwonted good spirits.

He was especially gracious to the high-priest, whom he bade to a place
by his side; and he even accepted his arm as a support, when, the meal
being over, they returned to the tablinum.

'There he flung himself on a couch, with a burning head, and began
feeding the lion, without paying any heed to his company. It was a
pleasure to him to see the huge brute rend a young lamb. When the
remains of this introductory morsel had been removed and the pavement
washed, he gave the "Sword of Persia" pieces of raw flesh, teasing
the beast by snatching the daintiest bits out of his mouth, and then
offering them to him again, till the satiated brute stretched himself
yawning at his feet. During this entertainment, he had a letter read
to him from the senate, and dictated a reply to a secretary. His eyes
twinkled with a tipsy leer in his flushed face, and yet he was perfectly
competent; and his instructions to the senate, though imperious indeed,
were neither more nor less rational than in his soberest moods.

Then, after washing his hands in a golden basin, he acted on Macrinus's
suggestion, and the two candidates who had so long been waiting were
at last admitted. The prefect of the praetorians had, by the Magian's
desire, recommended the Egyptian; but Caesar wished to see for himself,
and then to decide. Both the applicants had received hints from their
supporters: the Egyptian, to moderate his rigor; the Greek, to express
himself in the severest terms. And this was made easy for him, for the
annoyance which had been pent up during his three hours' waiting was
sufficient to lend his handsome face a stern look. Zminis strove to
appear mild by assuming servile humility; but this so ill became his
cunning features that Caracalla saw with secret satisfaction that
he could accede to Melissa's wishes, and confirm the choice of the
high-priest, in whose god he had placed his hopes.

Still, his own safety was more precious to him than the wishes of any
living mortal; so he began by pouring out, on both, the vials of his
wrath at the bad management of the town. Their blundering tools had
not even succeeded in capturing the most guileless of men, the painter
Alexander. The report that the men-at-arms had seized him had been a
fabrication to deceive, for the artist had given himself up. Nor had
he as yet heard of any other traitor whom they had succeeded in laying
hands on, though the town was flooded with insolent epigrams directed
against the imperial person. And, as he spoke, he glared with fury at
the two candidates before him.

The Greek bowed his head in silence, as if conscious of his
short-comings; the Egyptian's eyes flashed, and, with an amazingly
low bend of his supple spine, he announced that, more than three
hours since, he had discovered a most abominable caricature in clay,
representing Caesar as a soldier in a horrible pygmy form.

"And the perpetrator," snarled Caracalla, listening with a scowl for the
reply.

Zminis explained that great Caesar himself had commanded his attendance
just as he hoped to find the traces of the criminal, and that, while
he was waiting, more than three precious hours had been lost. At this
Caracalla broke out in a fury:

"Catch the villain! And let me see his insolent rubbish. Where are your
eyes? You bungling louts ought to protect me against the foul brood
that peoples this city, and their venomous jests. Past grievances are
forgotten. Set the painter's father and brother at liberty. They have
had a warning. Now I want something new. Something new, I say; and,
above all, let me see the ringleaders in chains; the man who nailed
up the rope, and the caricaturists. We must have them, to serve as an
example to the others."

Aristides thought that the moment had now come for displaying his
severity, and he respectfully but decidedly represented to Caesar
that he would advise that the gem-cutter and his son should be kept in
custody. They were well-known persons, and too great clemency would only
aggravate the virulence of audacious tongues. The painter was free,
and if his relatives were also let out of prison, there was nothing to
prevent their going off to the other end of the world. Alexandria was
a seaport, and a ship would carry off the criminals before a man could
turn round.

At this the emperor wrathfully asked him whether his opinion had been
invited; and the cunning Egyptian said to himself that Caracalla was
anxious to spare the father and his sons for the daughter's sake. And
yet Caesar would surely wish to keep them in safety, to have some hold
over the girl; so he lied with a bold face, affirming that, in obedience
to the law of the land, he had removed Heron and Philip, at any rate for
the moment, beyond the reach of Caesar's mercy. They had in the course
of the night been placed on board a galley and were now on the way to
Sardinia. But a swift vessel should presently be sent to overtake it and
bring them back.

And the informer was right, for Caesar's countenance brightened. He did,
indeed, blame the Egyptian's overhasty action; but he gave no orders for
following up the galley.

Then, after reflecting for a short time, he said:

"I do not find in either of you what I require; but at a pinch we are
fain to eat moldy bread, so I must need choose between you two. The one
who first brings me that clay figure, and the man who modeled it, in
chains and bonds, shall be appointed chief of the night-watch."

Meanwhile Alexander had entered the room. As soon as Caracalla saw him,
he beckoned to him, and the artist informed him that he had made good
use of his time and had much to communicate. Then he humbly inquired as
to the clay figure of which Caesar was speaking, and Caracalla referred
him to Zminis. The Egyptian repeated what the Magian had told him.

Alexander listened calmly; but when Zminis ceased speaking, the artist
took a deep breath, drew himself up, and pointing a contemptuous finger
at the spy, as if his presence poisoned the air, he said: "It is that
fellow's fault, great Caesar, if the citizens of my native town dare
commit such crimes. He torments and persecutes them in your name. How
many a felony has been committed here, merely to scoff at him and his
creatures, and to keep them on the alert! We are a light-headed race.
Like children, we love to do the forbidden thing, so long as it is no
stain on our honor. But that wretch treats all laughter and the most
innocent fun as a crime, or so interprets it that it seems so. From
this malignant delight in the woes of others, and in the hope of rising
higher in office, that wicked man has brought misery on hundreds. It has
all been done in thy great name, O Caesar! No man has raised you up
more foes than this wretch, who undermines your security instead of
protecting it."

Here Zminis, whose swarthy face had become of ashy paleness, broke out
in a hoarse tone: "I will teach you, and the whole rabble of traitors at
your back--"

But Caesar wrathfully commanded him to be silent, and Alexander quietly
went on: "You can threaten, and you will array all your slanderous
arts against us, I know you. But here sits a sovereign who protects the
innocent--and I and mine are innocent. He will set his heel on your head
when he knows you--the curse of this city--for the adder that you are!
He is deceiving you now in small things, great Caesar, and later he will
deceive you in greater ones. Listen now how he has lied to you. He says
he discovered a caricature of your illustrious person in the guise of
a soldier. Why, then, did he not bring it away from the place where it
could only excite disaffection, and might even mislead those who should
see it into the belief that your noble person was that of a dwarf?
The answer is self-evident. He left it to betray others into further
mockery, to bring them to ruin."

Caesar had listened with approval, and now sternly asked the Egyptian:

"Did you see the image?"

"In the Elephant tavern!" yelled the man.

But Alexander shook his head doubtfully, and begged permission to ask
the Egyptian a question. This was granted, and the artist inquired
whether the soldier stood alone.

"So far as I remember, yes," replied Zminis, almost beside himself.

"Then your memory is as false as your soul!" Alexander shouted in his
face, "for there was another figure by the soldier's side. The clay,
still wet, clung to the same board as the figure of the soldier, modeled
by the same hand. No, no, my crafty fellow, you will not catch the
workman; for, being warned, he is already on the high-seas."

"It is false!" shrieked Zminis.

"That remains to be proved," said Alexander, scornfully.--"Allow me
now, great Caesar, to show you the figures. They have been brought by my
orders, and are in the anteroom-carefully covered up, of course, for the
fewer the persons who see them the better."

Caracalla nodded his consent, and Alexander hurried away; the despot
heaping abuse on Zminis, and demanding why he had not at once had the
images removed. The Egyptian now confessed that he had only heard of the
caricature from a friend, and declared that if he had seen it he should
have destroyed it on the spot. Macrinus here tried to excuse the spy, by
