was written the second task:

"The key that opens the chamber in which the princesses are sleeping
lies in the bottom of the lake. He who has performed the first task must
find the key."

When the simpleton came to the lake, the ducks which he had saved were
swimming upon it. At once they dived down into the depths below and
brought up the key.

The simpleton showed the key to the little gray man, who then gave him
the third tablet. On it was written the third task:

"The one who has gathered the pearls and found the key to the chamber
may now marry the youngest and dearest princess. He must, however, first
tell which is she. The princesses are exactly alike, but there is one
difference. Before they went to sleep, the eldest ate sugar, the second
ate syrup, and the youngest ate honey."

The simpleton laid down the tablet with a sigh. "How can I find out
which princess ate the honey?" he asked himself.

However, he put the key he had found in the lock and opened the door. In
the chamber the three princesses were lying. Ah, which was the youngest?

Just then the queen of the bees flew in through the window and tasted
the lips of all three. When she came to the lips that had sipped the
honey, she remained there. Then the young man knew that this was the
youngest and dearest princess.

So the enchantment came to an end. The sleepers awoke, and those who had
been turned to stone became alive again. The simpleton married the
youngest and dearest princess, and was made king after her father's
death. His two brothers, who were now sorry for what they had done,
married the other two princesses, and lived happily ever after.

--GRIMM.




[Illustration: A child dancing]

THE WORLD'S MUSIC


  The world's a very happy place,
    Where every child should dance and sing,
  And always have a smiling face,
    And never sulk for anything.

  I waken when the morning's come,
    And feel the air and light alive
  With strange sweet music like the hum
    Of bees about their busy hive.

  The linnets play among the leaves
    At hide-and-seek, and chirp and sing;
  While, flashing to and from the eaves,
    The swallows twitter on the wing.

  From dawn to dark the old mill-wheel
    Makes music, going round and round;
  And dusty-white with flour and meal,
    The miller whistles to its sound.

  The brook that flows beside the mill,
    As happy as a brook can be,
  Goes singing its old song until
    It learns the singing of the sea.

  For every wave upon the sands
    Sings songs you never tire to hear,
  Of laden ships from sunny lands
    Where it is summer all the year.

  The world is such a happy place
    That children, whether big or small,
  Should always have a smiling face
    And never, never sulk at all.

--GABRIEL SETOUN.




THE SLEEPING BEAUTY

I


Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who were very unhappy
because they had no children. But at last a little daughter was born,
and their sorrow was turned to joy. All the bells in the land were rung
to tell the glad tidings.

The king gave a christening feast so grand that the like of it had never
been known. He invited all the fairies he could find in the
kingdom--there were seven of them--to come to the christening as
godmothers. He hoped that each would give the princess a good gift.

When the christening was over, the feast came. Before each of the
fairies was placed a plate with a spoon, a knife, and a fork--all pure
gold. But alas! as the fairies were about to seat themselves at the
table, there came into the hall a very old fairy who had not been
invited. She had left the kingdom fifty years before and had not been
seen or heard of until this day.

The king at once ordered that a plate should be brought for her, but he
could not furnish a gold one such as the others had. This made the old
fairy angry, and she sat there muttering to herself.

Her angry threats were overheard by a young fairy who sat near. This
good godmother, fearing the old fairy might give the child an unlucky
gift, hid herself behind a curtain. She did this because she wished to
speak last and perhaps be able to change the old fairy's gift.

At the end of the feast, the youngest fairy stepped forward and said,
"The princess shall be the most beautiful woman in the world."

The second said,

"She shall have a temper as sweet as an angel."

The third said,

"She shall have a wonderful grace in all she does or says."

[Illustration: The old fairy looks at the princess in her cradle]

The fourth said,

"She shall sing like a nightingale."

The fifth said,

"She shall dance like a flower in the wind."

The sixth said,

"She shall play such music as was never heard on earth."

Then the old fairy's turn came. Shaking her head spitefully, she said,

"When the princess is seventeen years old, she shall prick her finger
with a spindle, and--she--shall--die!"

At this all the guests trembled, and many of them began to weep. The
king and queen wept loudest of all.

Just then the wise young fairy came from behind the curtain and said:
"Do not grieve, O King and Queen. Your daughter shall not die. I cannot
undo what my elder sister has done; the princess shall indeed prick her
finger with the spindle, but she shall not die. She shall fall into
sleep that will last a hundred years. At the end of that time, a king's
son will find her and awaken her."

Immediately all the fairies vanished.


II


The king, hoping to save his child even from this misfortune, commanded
that all spindles should be burned. This was done, but it was all in
vain.

One day when the princess was seventeen years of age, the king and queen
left her alone in the castle. She wandered about the palace and at last
came to a little room in the top of a tower. There an old woman--so old
and deaf that she had never heard of the king's command--sat spinning.

"What are you doing, good old woman?" asked the princess.

"I am spinning, my pretty child."

"Ah," said the princess. "How do you do it? Let me see if I can spin
also."

She had just taken the spindle in her hand when, in some way, it pricked
her finger. The princess dropped down on the floor. The old woman called
for help, and people came from all sides, but nothing could be done.

When the good young fairy heard the news, she came quickly to the
castle. She knew that the princess must sleep a hundred years and would
be frightened if she found herself alone when she awoke. So the fairy
touched with her magic wand all in the palace except the king and the
queen. Ladies, gentlemen, pages, waiting maids, footmen, grooms in the
stable, and even the horses--she touched them all. They all went to
sleep just where they were when the wand touched them. Some of the
gentlemen were bowing to the ladies, the ladies were embroidering, the
grooms stood currying their horses, and the cook was slapping the
kitchen boy.

The king and queen departed from the castle, giving orders that no one
was to go near it. This command, however, was not needed. In a little
while there sprang around the castle a wood so thick that neither man
nor beast could pass through.


III


A great many changes take place in a hundred years. The king had no
other child, and when he died, his throne passed to another royal
family. Even the story of the sleeping princess was almost forgotten.

One day the son of the king who was then reigning was out hunting, and
he saw towers rising above a thick wood. He asked what they were, but no
one could answer him.

At last an old peasant was found who said, "Your highness, fifty years
ago my father told me that there is a castle in the woods where a
princess sleeps--the most beautiful princess that ever lived. It was
said that she must sleep there a hundred years, when she would be
awakened by a king's son."

At this the young prince determined to find out the truth for himself.
He leaped from his horse and began to force his way through the wood. To
his astonishment, the stiff branches gave way, then closed again,
allowing none of his companions to follow.

A beautiful palace rose before him. In the courtyard the prince saw
horses and men who looked as if they were dead. But he was not afraid
and boldly entered the palace. There were guards motionless as stone,
gentlemen and ladies, pages and footmen, some standing, some sitting,
but all like statues.

[Illustration: The prince finds the princess]

At last the prince came to a chamber of gold, where he saw upon a bed
the fairest sight one ever beheld--a princess of about seventeen years
who looked as if she had just fallen asleep. Trembling, the prince knelt
beside her, and awakened her with a kiss. And now the enchantment was
broken.

The princess looked at him with wondering eyes and said: "Is it you, my
prince? I have waited for you long."

So happy were the two that they talked hour after hour. In the meantime
all in the palace awaked and each began to do what he was doing when he
fell asleep. The gentlemen went on bowing to the ladies, the ladies went
on with their embroidery. The grooms went on currying their horses, the
cook went on slapping the kitchen boy, and the servants began to serve
the supper. Then the chief lady in waiting, who was ready to die of
hunger, told the princess aloud that supper was ready.

The prince gave the princess his hand, and they all went into the great
hall for supper. That very evening the prince and princess were married.
The next day the prince took his bride to his father's palace, and there
they lived happily ever afterward.

--GRIMM.




THE UGLY DUCKLING

I


It was summer. The country was lovely just then. The cornfields were
waving yellow, the wheat was golden, the oats were still green, and the
hay was stacked in the meadows. Beyond the fields great forests and
ponds of water might be seen.

In the sunniest spot of all stood an old farmhouse, with deep canals
around it. At the water's edge grew great burdocks. It was just as wild
there as in the deepest wood, and in this snug place sat a duck upon her
nest. She was waiting for her brood to hatch.

At last one eggshell after another began to crack. From each little egg
came "Cheep! cheep!" and then a little duckling's head.

"Quack! quack!" said the duck; and all the babies quacked too. Then they
looked all around. The mother let them look as much as they liked, for
green is good for the eyes.

"How big the world is!" said all the little ducklings.

"Do you think this is all the world?" asked the mother. "It stretches a
long way on the other side of the garden and on to the parson's field,
but I have never been so far as that. I hope you are all out. No, not
all; that large egg is still unbroken. I am really tired of sitting so
long." Then the duck sat down again.

"Well, how goes it?" asked an old duck who had come to pay her a visit.

"There is one large egg that is taking a long time to hatch," replied
the mother. "But you must look at the ducklings. They are the finest I
have ever seen; they are all just like their father."

"Let me look at the egg which will not hatch," said the old duck. "You
may be sure that it is a turkey's egg. I was once cheated in that way.
Oh, you will have a great deal of trouble, for a turkey will not go into
the water. Yes, that's a turkey's egg. Leave it alone and teach the
other children to swim."

"No, I will sit on it a little longer," said the mother duck.

"Just as you please," said the old duck, and she went away.

At last the large egg cracked. "Cheep! cheep!" said the young one, and
tumbled out. How large it was! How ugly it was!

"I wonder if it can be a turkey chick," said the mother. "Well, we shall
see when we go to the pond. It must go into the water, even if I have to
push it in myself."

Next day the mother duck and all her little ones went down to the water.
Splash! she jumped in, and all the ducklings went in, too. They swam
about very easily, and the ugly duckling swam with them.

"No, it is not a turkey," said the mother duck. "See how well he can use
his legs. He is my own child! And he is not so very ugly either."


II


Then she took her family into the duck yard. As they went along, she
told the ducklings how to act.

"Keep close to me, so that no one can step on you," she said. "Come;
now, don't turn your toes in. A well-brought-up duck turns its toes out,
just like father and mother. Bow your heads before that old duck yonder.
She is the grandest duck here. One can tell that by the red rag around
her leg. That's a great honor, the greatest honor a duck can have. It
shows that the mistress doesn't want to lose her. Now bend your necks
and say 'Quack!'"

