
"What did it, boy? How did it happen?" Zack asked. Robbie merely whined.

"What's wrong with him?" Mrs. Stewart, broom in hand, asked from the
doorway.

"Don't rightly know," Zack patted the dog, "acts like he got something
in his eyes."

"Skunk?"

"Naw," Zack shook his head. "He don't smell. Something else."

"Cat?"

"No scratches, either. He acts like they're burnin' him, like he got
dust or somethin' in 'em."

"Well, take him out to the barn and you better get after Junius."

"Yeah, Ma. Come on, Robbie." He led Robbie to the barn and made him lie
on a bed of hay in one of the stalls then returned to the kitchen for
his lantern. He put on his thick denim jacket and work cap and turned to
his wife.

"If she ain't in the woods, I'll come back and git the truck and drive
over to the Leemers and see if he seen her."

He left the kitchen and shone the lantern around in the farmyard to get
his bearings, then headed for the north end of his farm. He could see
the faint glimmer of dawn in the east, more pronounced in the northeast,
and even more so due north. He rubbed his eyes. A much brighter glow
outlined the treetops in the north woods, that made the dawn on the
eastern horizon look like a dirty gray streak. His first thought was of
fire, but there was no smoke, no flame.

Zack walked dazedly toward the woods, his eyes glued to the light above
the trees. Soon he was in the woods, and he could see the brightness
extended down through the trees from the sky, on the other side of the
woods. He approached cautiously as the light grew brighter, and came to
the clearing where it was most intense. A thick bush obstructed his
view, and Zack moved it aside then uttered a hoarse gasp, as he clutched
at his eyes.

For a moment he felt he was dreaming. He squinted between the slits of
his fingers. The glow was still piercing, but he could see the brightly
lit Junius, radiating blue-white light, nibbling at the sparse grass in
the clearing. Zack stood transfixed, his eyes widening behind his
fingers. He felt the tears and the burning sensation, and squinted
tightly, turning his head from the unbelievable scene.

       *       *       *       *       *

Zack didn't remember his return to the farmhouse, or incoherently trying
to explain to his wife the scene he had witnessed. A stiff jolt of
elderberry wine drove off the jitters and reasoning returned. His wife
sat patiently, eyeing him oddly, as Zack muttered over and over again,
"It's unbelievable! It's unbelievable!"

Mrs. Stewart rose. "I'm going out and see fer myself. And, Zack, if yer
lying to me--"

Zack jumped from the chair, barring her way.

"Believe me, maw, it's true. Don't go out there. It might be too much
fer ya."

"It's the craziest thing I ever heard," Mrs. Stewart scoffed. "A cow
that shines like the sun!"

"Look, maw, will ya jest come with me as fer as the pasture, you can see
the glow from there, and mebbe that might convince ya."

"Yes, yes, I will." Mrs. Stewart jerked off her apron. "I declare, Zack,
I think these chores are getting the best of ya."

They walked to the pasture, their eyes on the treetops of the north
woods. A faint glow began to appear.

"See! See!" Zack pointed, laughing crazily.

"Let's get closer, looks like a fire," Mrs. Stewart said.

"Ain't no fire." Zack's tone was angry. "It's Junius and she's all lit
up like a Christmas tree."

"Zack, now you stop that kinda crazy talk. There's a reason behind
everything, and I'm sure there's one fer this."

"There is a reason, maw. Junius. She's got the whole clearing lit up
like the noonday sun. Lord only knows how she got that way, but she's
