stamping with their feet.

John Haynes rose, with a sneer upon his face.

"I would humbly inquire, Mr. Chairman, for you appear to have assumed
that position, whether you intend to favor us with your valuable
services as drillmaster."

Frank rose, with a flushed face.

"I am glad to be reminded of one thing, which I had forgotten," he said.
"As this is a meeting for the transaction of business, it is proper that
it should be regularly organized. Will some one nominate a chairman?"

"Frank Frost!" exclaimed half a dozen voices.

"I thank you for the nomination," said Frank, "but as I have something
further to communicate to the meeting, it will be better to select some
one else."

"I nominate Charles Reynolds," said one voice.

"Second the motion," said another.

"Those who are in favor of Charles Reynolds, as chairman of this
meeting, will please signify it in the usual manner," said Frank.

Charles Reynolds, being declared duly elected, advanced to the teacher's
chair.

"Mr. Chairman," said Frank, "I will now answer the question just put
to me. I do not propose to offer my services as drill-master, but I am
authorized to say that a gentleman whom you have all seen, Mr. Henry
Morton, is willing to give instruction till you are sufficiently
advanced to get along without it."

John Haynes, who felt disappointed at not having been called upon
to preside over the meeting, determined to make as much trouble as
possible.

"How are we to know that this Morton is qualified to give instruction?"
he asked, looking round at the boys.

"The gentleman is out of order. He will please address his remarks to
the Chair, and not to the audience," said the presiding officer.

"I beg pardon, Mr. Chairman," said John mockingly. "I forgot how
tenacious some people are of their brief authority."

"Order! order!" called half a dozen voices.

"The gentleman will come to order," said the chairman firmly, "and make
way for others unless he can treat the Chair with proper respect."

"Mr. Chairman," said Frank, rising, "I will mention, for the general
information, that Mr. Morton has acted as an officer of militia, and
that I consider his offer a kind one, since it will take up considerable
of his time and put him to some trouble."

"I move that Mr. Morton's offer be accepted, with thanks," said Henry
Tufts.

The motion was seconded by Tom Wheeler, and carried unanimously, with
the exception of one vote. John Haynes sat sullenly in his seat and took
no part in it.

"Who shall belong to the company?" asked the chairman. "Shall a fixed
age be required?"

"I move that the age be fixed at eleven," said Robert Ingalls.

This was objected to as too young, and twelve was finally fixed upon.

John Haynes moved not to admit any one who did not attend the academy.
Of course, this would exclude Frank, and his motion was not seconded.

It was finally decided to admit any above the age of twelve who desired
it, but the boys reserved to themselves the right of rejecting any who
should conduct himself in a manner to bring disgrace upon them.

"Mr. Chairman," said Frank, "in order to get under way as soon as
possible, I have written down an agreement to which those who wish to
join our proposed company can sign their names. If anybody can think of
anything better, I shall be glad to have it adopted instead of this."

He handed a sheet of paper to the chairman, who read from it the
following form of agreement: "We, the subscribers, agree to form a boys'
volunteer company, and to conform to the regulations which may hereafter
be made for its government."

"If there is no objection, we will adopt this form, and subscribe our
names," said the chairman.

The motion for adoption being carried, the boys came up one by one and
signed their names.

John Haynes would have held back, but for the thought that he might be
elected an officer of the new company.

"Is there any further business to come before the meeting?" inquired the
presiding officer.

"The boys at Webbington had a company three or four years ago," said Joe
Barry, "and they used wooden guns."

"Wooden guns!" exclaimed Wilbur Summerfield disdainfully. "You won't
catch me training round town with a wooden gun."

"I would remind the last three gentlemen that their remarks should be
addressed to the Chair," said the presiding officer. "Of course, I don't
care anything about it, but I think you would all prefer to have the
meeting conducted properly."

"That's so!" exclaimed several boys.

"Then," said the chairman, "I shall call to order any boy who addresses
the meeting except through me."

"Mr. Chairman," said Frank, rising, "as to the wooden guns, I quite
agree with the last speaker. It would seem too much like boy's play, and
we are too much in earnest for that. I have thought of an arrangement
which can be made if the Selectmen will give their consent. Ten or
fifteen years ago, longer than most of us can remember, as my father
has told me, there was a militia company in Rossville, whose arms were
supplied and owned by the town. When the company was disbanded the
muskets went back to the town, and I believe they are now kept in the
basement of the Town Hall. I presume that we can have the use of them
on application. I move that a committee be appointed to lay the matter
before the Selectmen and ask their permission."

His motion was agreed to.

"I will appoint John Haynes to serve on that committee," said the
chairman, after a pause.

This was a politic appointment, as Squire Haynes was one of the
Selectmen, and would be gratified at the compliment paid to his son.

"I accept the duty," said John, rising, and speaking in a tone of
importance.

"Is there any other business to come before the meeting?"

"I should like to inquire, Mr. Chairman, when our first meeting will
take place, and where is it to be?" asked Herbert Metcalf.

"I will appoint as a committee to make the necessary arrangements, Frank
Frost, Tom Wheeler, and Robert Ingalls. Due notice will be given in
school of the time and place selected, and a written notice will also be
posted up in the postoffice."

"Would it not be well, Mr. Chairman," suggested Frank, "to circulate
an invitation to other boys not present to-day to join the company? The
larger our number, the more interest will be felt. I can think of quite
a number who would be valuable members. There are Dick Bumstead, and
William Chamberlain, and many others."

At the sound of Dick Bumstead's name John Haynes looked askance at
Frank, but for the moment the thought of Dick's agency in the affair
of the pig-pen had escaped his recollection, and he looked quite
unconscious of any indirect reference to it.

"Will you make a motion to that effect?"

"Yes, if necessary."

"Is the motion seconded?"

"Second it," said Moses Rogers.

"I will appoint Wilbur Summerfield and Moses Rogers on that committee,"
said the chairman.

"I move that the meeting adjourn ipse dixit," said Sam Davis, bringing
out the latter phrase with considerable emphasis.

A roar of laughter followed which shook the schoolhouse to the very
rafters, and then a deafening clamor of applause. The proposer sat down
in confusion.

"What are you laughing at?" he burst forth indignantly.

"Mr. Chairman," said Henry Tufts, struggling with his laughter, "I
second the gentleman's motion, all except the Latin."

The motion was carried in spite of the manner in which it was worded,
and the boys formed little groups, and began eagerly to discuss the plan
which had been proposed. Frank had reason to feel satisfied with the
success of his suggestion. Several of the boys came up to him and
expressed their pleasure that he had brought the matter before them.

"I say, Frank," said Robert Ingalls, "We'll have a bully company."

"Yes," said Wilbur Summerfield, "if John Haynes belongs to it. He's a
bully, and no mistake."

"What's that you are saying about me?" blustered John Haynes, who caught
a little of what was said.

"Listeners never hear anything good of themselves," answered Wilbur.

"Say that again, Wilbur Summerfield," said John menacingly.

"Certainly, if it will do you any good. I said that you were a bully,
John Haynes; and there's not a boy here that doesn't know it to be
true."

"Take care!" said John, turning white with passion.

"While I'm about it, there's something more I want to say," continued
Wilbur undauntedly. "Yesterday you knocked my little brother off
his sled and sent him home crying. If you do it again, you will have
somebody else to deal with."

John trembled with anger. It would have done him good to "pitch into"
Wilbur, but the latter looked him in the face so calmly and resolutely
that discretion seemed to him the better part of valor, and with an oath
he turned away.

"I don't know what's got into John Haynes," said Wilbur. "I never liked
him, but now he seems to be getting worse and worse every day."



CHAPTER XXIII. POMP TAKES MRS. PAYSON PRISONER

Old Mrs. Payson, who arrived in Rossville at the same time with Henry
Morton, had been invited by her daughter, "Cynthy Ann," to pass the
winter, and had acquiesced without making any very strenuous objections.
Her "bunnit," which she had looked upon as "sp'ilt," had been so far
restored by a skilful milliner that she was able to wear it for best.
As this restoration cost but one dollar and a half out of the five which
had been given her by young Morton, she felt very well satisfied with
the way matters had turned out. This did not, however, by any means
diminish her rancor against Pomp, who had been the mischievous cause of
the calamity.

"Ef I could only get hold on him," Mrs. Payson had remarked on several
occasions to Cynthy Ann, "I'd shake the mischief out of him, ef I died
for't the very next minute."

Mrs. Payson was destined to meet with a second calamity, which
increased, if possible, her antipathy to the "young imp."

Being of a social disposition, she was quite in the habit of dropping
in to tea at different homes in the village. Having formerly lived in
Rossville, she was acquainted with nearly all the townspeople, and went
the rounds about once in two weeks.

One afternoon she put her knitting into a black work-bag, which she was
accustomed to carry on her arm, and, arraying herself in a green cloak
and hood, which had served her for fifteen years, she set out to call on
Mrs. Thompson.

Now, the nearest route to the place of her destination lay across a
five-acre lot. The snow lay deep upon the ground, but the outer surface
had become so hard as, without difficulty, to bear a person of ordinary
weight.

When Mrs. Payson came up to the bars, she said to herself, "'Tain't so
fur to go across lots. I guess I'll ventur'."

She let down a bar and, passing through, went on her way complacently.
But, alas, for the old lady's peace of mind! She was destined to come to
very deep grief.

That very afternoon Pomp had come over to play with Sam Thompson, and
the two, after devising various projects of amusement, had determined to
make a cave in the snow. They selected a part of the field where it had
drifted to the depth of some four or five feet. Beginning at a little
distance, they burrowed their way into the heart of the snow, and
excavated a place about four feet square by four deep, leaving the upper
crust intact, of course, without its ordinary strength.

The two boys had completed their task, and were siting down in their
subterranean abode, when the roof suddenly gave way, and a visitor
entered in the most unceremonious manner.

The old lady had kept on her way unsuspiciously, using as a cane a faded
blue umbrella, which she carried invariably, whatever the weather.

When Mrs. Payson felt herself sinking, she uttered a loud shriek and
waved her arms aloft, brandishing her umbrella in a frantic way. She was
plunged up to her armpits in the snow, and was, of course, placed in a
very unfavorable position for extricating herself.

The two boys were at first nearly smothered by the descent of snow, but
when the first surprise was over they recognized their prisoner. I am
ashamed to say that their feeling was that of unbounded delight, and
they burst into a roar of laughter. The sound, indistinctly heard,
terrified the old lady beyond measure, and she struggled frantically to
escape, nearly poking out Pomp's eye with the point of her umbrella.

Pomp, always prompt to repel aggression, in return, pinched her foot.

"Massy sakes! Where am I?" ejaculated the affrighted old lady. "There's
some wild crittur down there. Oh, Cynthy Ann, ef you could see your marm
at this moment!"

She made another vigorous flounder, and managed to kick Sam in the face.
Partly as a measure of self-defense, he seized her ankle firmly.

"He's got hold of me!" shrieked the old lady "Help! help! I shall be
murdered."

Her struggles became so energetic that the boys soon found it expedient
to evacuate the premises. They crawled out by the passage they had made,
and appeared on the surface of the snow.

The old lady presented a ludicrous appearance. Her hood had slipped off,
her spectacles were resting on the end of her nose, and she had lost her
work-bag. But she clung with the most desperate energy to the umbrella,
on which apparently depended her sole hope of deliverance.

"Hi yah!" laughed Pomp, as he threw himself back on the snow and began
to roll about in an ecstasy of delight.

Instantly Mrs. Payson's apprehensions changed to furious anger.

"So it's you, you little varmint, that's done this. Jest le' me get out,
and I'll whip you so you can't stan'. See ef I don't."

"You can't get out, missus; yah, yah!" laughed Pomp. "You's tied, you
is, missus."

"Come an' help me out, this minute!" exclaimed the old lady, stamping
her foot.

"Lor', missus, you'll whip me. You said you would."

"So I will, I vum," retorted the irate old lady, rather
undiplomatically. "As true as I live, I'll whip you till you can't
stan'."

As she spoke, she brandished her umbrella in a menacing manner.

"Den, missus, I guess you'd better stay where you is."

"Oh, you imp. See ef I don't have you put in jail. Here, you, Sam
Thompson, come and help me out. Ef you don't, I'll tell your mother, an'
she'll give you the wust lickin' you ever had. I'm surprised at you."

"You won't tell on me, will you?" said Sam, irresolutely.

"I'll see about it," said the old lady, in a politic tone.

She felt her powerlessness, and that concession must precede victory.

"Then, give me the umbrella," said Sam, who evidently distrusted her.

"You'll run off with it," said Mrs. Payson suspiciously.

"No, I won't."

"Well, there 'tis."

"Come here, Pomp, and help me," said Sam.

Pomp held aloof.

"She'll whip me," he said, shaking his head. "She's an old debble."

"Oh, you--you sarpint!" ejaculated the old lady, almost speechless with
indignation.

"You can run away as soon as she gets out," suggested Sam.

Pomp advanced slowly and warily, rolling his eyes in indecision.

"Jest catch hold of my hands, both on ye," said Mrs. Payson, "an' I'll
give a jump."

These directions were followed, and the old lady rose to the surface,
when, in an evil hour, intent upon avenging herself upon Pomp, she made
a clutch for his collar. In doing so she lost her footing and fell back
into the pit from which she had just emerged. Her spectacles dropped
off and, falling beneath her, were broken.

She rose, half-provoked and half-ashamed of her futile attempt. It was
natural that neither of these circumstances should effect an improvement
in her temper.

"You did it a purpose," she said, shaking her fist at Pomp, who stood
about a rod off, grinning at her discomfiture. "There, I've gone an'
broke my specs, that I bought two years ago, come fall, of a pedler.
I'll make you pay for 'em."

"Lor', missus, I ain't got no money," said Pomp. "Nebber had none."

Unfortunately for the old lady, it was altogether probable that Pomp
spoke the truth this time.

"Three and sixpence gone!" groaned Mrs. Payson. "Fust my bunnit, an'
then my specs. I'm the most unfort'nit' crittur. Why don't you help
me, Sam Thompson, instead of standin' and gawkin' at me?" she suddenly
exclaimed, glaring at Sam.

"I didn't know as you was ready," said Sam. "You might have been out
before this, ef you hadn't let go. Here, Pomp, lend a hand." Pomp shook
his head decisively.

"Don't catch dis chile again," he said. "I'm goin' home. Ole woman wants
to lick me."

Sam endeavored to persuade Pomp, but he was deaf to persuasion. He
squatted down on the snow, and watched the efforts his companion made to
extricate the old lady. When she was nearly out he started on a run, and
was at a safe distance before Mrs. Payson was in a situation to pursue
him.

The old lady shook herself to make sure that no bones were broken. Next,
she sent Sam down into the hole to pick up her bag, and then, finding,
on a careful examination, that she had recovered everything, even to the
blue umbrella, fetched the astonished Sam a rousing box on the ear.

"What did you do that for?" he demanded in an aggrieved tone.

"'Taint half as much as you deserve," said the old lady. "I'm goin' to
your house right off, to tell your mother what you've been a-doin'. Ef
you was my child, I'd beat you black and blue."

