
An impalpable war, pregnant with annihilating scientific devices and
other unseen bogies was one thing; actual invasion of the sacred soil
over which Old Glory flew, and by presumptuous foreigners who couldnt
even speak English, was quite another. At once the will of the nation
stiffened and for the first time something approaching enthusiasm was
manifest. Cartoonists, moved by a common impulse, unanimously drew
pictures of Uncle Sam rolling up his sleeves and preparing to give the
pesky interlopers a good trouncing before hurling them back into the
Pacific.

Unfortunately the presence of the grass prevented quick eviction of the
unwelcome visitors. Only a small portion of the armed forces was based
on the Pacific coast, because of the logistical problems presented by
inadequacies of supply and transportation. Of these only a fraction
could be sent to the threatened places for fear dispersions of the main
body would prove disastrous if the landings were feints. Thus the enemy
came ashore practically unopposed at his original landingpoints and
secured small additional beachheads at Gorda, Lucia, Morro Bay and
Carmel.

East of the grass there were whole armies who had completed basic
training, fit and supple. The obvious answer to the invasion was to load
them on transports and ship them to the theater of operations.
Unfortunately the agreement not to use heavierthanaircraft was an
insuperable bar to this action.

That the pact had never been designed to prevent nations from defending
their soil against an invader was certain; thousands of voices urged
that we keep the spirit of the treaty and disregard the letter. No one
could expect us to sit idly by and let our homeland be invaded because
of overfinicky interpretation of a diplomatic document.

But in spite of this clear logic, the American people were swept by a
wave of timidity. "If we use airplanes," they argued, "so will the
Russians; airplanes mean bombs; bombs mean atombombs. Better to let the
Russians hold what advantage their invasion has given them than to have
our cities destroyed, our population wiped out, our descendants--if
any--born with six heads or a dozen arms as a result of radioactivity."

According to General Thario, for a while it was touchandgo whether the
President would yield to the men of vision or the others. But in the end
apprehension and calculation ordained that every effort must be made to
reinforce the defense of the West Coast--except the effective one.

Of course every dirigible was commandeered and work speeded up on those
under construction; troopships, heedless of their vulnerability, rushed
for the Panama Canal; while negotiations were opened with Mexico,
looking toward transporting divisions over its territory to a point
south of the weed.

While confusion and defeatism took as heavy a toll of the country's
spirit as an actual defeat on the battlefield, the Russians slowly
pushed their way inland and consolidated their positions. The American
units offered valiant resistance, but little by little they were driven
northward until a fairly fixed front was established south of San
Francisco from the ocean to the bay and a more fluid one from the bay to
the edge of the grass. Army men, like the public, were suspicious of the
enemy's apparent contentment with this line, for they reasoned it
presaged further landings to the north.

General Thario's jubilation contrasted with the common gloom. "At last
the blunderers have given me active duty. I have a brigade in the Third
Army--finest of all. Can't write exactly where I'm stationed, but it is
not far from a wellknown city noted for its altitude, located in a
mining state. Brigade is remarkably fit, considering, and the men are
rearing to go. Keep your ear open for some news--it won't be long...."


_44._ The news was of the heroic counterlandings. The entire fleet,
disdainful of possible submarine action, stood off from the rear of the
Russian positions, bombarding them for fortyeight hours preliminary to
landing marines who fought their way inland to recapture nearly half the
invaded territory. Simultaneously the army below San Francisco pushed
the Russians back and made contact at some points with the marines. The
enemy was reduced to a mere foothold.

But the whole operation proved no more than a rearguard action. As
General Thario wrote, "We are fighting on the wrong continent." Joe was
even broader and more emphatic. "It's a putup job," he complained, "to
keep costplus plants like this operating. If they called off their silly
war (Beethoven down in the cellar during the siege of Vienna expresses
the right attitude) and went home, the country would fall back into
depression, we'd have some kind of revolution and everybody'd be better
off."

I had suspected him of being some kind of parlor radical and although he
would doubtless outgrow his youthful notions, it made me uneasy to have
a crank in my employ. But beyond urging him to keep his ideas strictly
to himself and not leave any more memopads scribbled over with clef
signs on his desk, I could do nothing, for upon his retention depended
his father's goodwill--the general's assignment to a fieldcommand hadnt
altered the status of our contracts--and we had too many unscrupulous
competitors to rely solely upon merit for the continuance of our sales.

George Thario's attitude was symptomatic of the demoralization of the
country, apparent even during our momentary success. There was no will
to victory, and the generalstaff, if one could believe General Thario,
was too unimaginative and inflexible to meet the peculiar conditions of
a war circumscribed and shaped by the alien glacier dividing the country
and diverting normal operations into novel channels.

So the new landings at Astoria and Longview, though anticipated and
indeed precisely indicated by the flimsiness of the Russian resistance
to the counteroffensive, caught the highcommand by surprise. "Never was
a military operation more certain," wrote General Thario, "and never was
less done to meet the certainty. Albert, if a businessman conducted
himself like the military college he would be bankrupt in six months."
Wherever the fault lay, the American gains were wiped out and the
invaders swept ahead to occupy all of the country west of the grass.

Boastfully, they sent us newsreels of their entries into Portland and
Seattle. They established headquarters in San Francisco and paraded
forty abreast down Market Street--renamed Krassny Prospekt. The Russians
also renamed Montgomery Street and Van Ness after Mooney and Billings
respectively, but for some reason abandoned these designations almost
immediately.

But for all their celebrations and 101 gun salutes, this was as far as
they could go; the monstrous growth which had clogged our defense now
sealed the invaders off and held them in an evershrinking sector. Now
came another period of quiescence in the war, but a period radically
different in temper from the first. There were many, perhaps
constituting a majority, who like George Thario wanted a peace, almost
any kind of peace, to be made. Others attempted to ignore the presence
of a war entirely and to conduct their lives as though it did not exist.
Still others seemed to regard it as some kind of game, a contest carried
on in a bloodless vacuum, and from these to the newspapers and the
Wardepartment came the hundreds of plans, nearly all of them entirely
fantastic, for conquering an enemy now unassailably entrenched.

But while pessimism and lassitude governed the United States the
intruders were taking energetic measures to increase their successes. "I
have been present at the questioning of two spies," reported General
Thario, "and I want to tell you the enemy is not going to miss a single
opportunity, unlike ourselves. What they have in mind I cannot guess;
they can't fly over the grass any more than we can as long as they want
to conciliate world opinion and I doubt if they can tunnel under it, but
that they intend to do _something_ is beyond question."

Often the obvious course is the surprising one; since the Russians
couldnt go over or under the grass they decided to march on top of it.
They had heard of our prewar snowshoe excursions on its surface and so
they equipped a vast army with this clumsy footgear and set it in motion
with supplytrains on wide skis pulled by the men themselves. Russian
ingenuity, boasted the Kremlin, would succeed in conquering the grass
where the decadent imperialists had failed.

"It is unbelievable--you might even call it absurd, but at least they
are doing something, not sitting twiddling their thumbs. My men would
give six months' pay to be as active as the enemy. To be sure they are
grotesque and inefficient--so was the Army of Italy. Imagine sending an
army--or armies if our reports are correct--on a six hundred mile march
without an airforce, without artillery, without any mechanized
equipment whatsoever. Unless, like the Army of Italy, they have a
Bonaparte concealed behind their lunacy they have no chance at all of
success, but by the military genius of Joseph Eggleston Johnston, if I
were a younger man and not an American I would like to be with them just
for the fun they are having."

By its very nature the expedition was composed exclusively of infantry
divisions carrying the latest type of automatic rifle. The field
commissaries, the ambulances, the baggagetrains, had to be cut to the
barest minimum and General Thario wrote that evidently because of the
impossibility of taking along artillery the enemy had also abandoned
their light and heavy machineguns. Against this determined threat,
behind the wall of the Rockies, the American army waited with field
artillery, railway guns, bazookas and flamethrowers. For the first time
there was belief in a Russian defeat if not in eventual American
victory.

But the waiting Americans were not to be given the opportunity for
handtohand combat. Since planes could not report the progress of the
snowshoers over the grass, dirigibles and free balloons drifting with
the wind gave minutetominute reports. Though many of the airships were
shot down and many more of the balloons blown helplessly out of the
area, enough returned to give a picture of the rapid disintegration of
the invading force.

Nothing like it had happened to an army since 1812. The snowshoes,
adequate enough for short excursions over the edge of the grass, became
suicidal instruments on a march of weeks. Starting eastward from their
bases in northern California, Oregon and Washington, in military
formation, singing triumphantly in minor keys, the Slavic steamroller
had presented an imposing sight. Americans in the occupied area, seeing
column after column of closely packed soldiers tramping endlessly up and
over the grass, said it reminded them of old prints of Pickett's charge
at Gettysburg.

The first day's march went well enough, though it covered no more than a
few miles. At night they camped upon great squares of tarpaulin and in
the morning resumed their webfooted way. But the night had not proved
restful, for over the edges of every tarpaulin the eager grass had
thrust impatient runners and when the time came to decamp more than half
the canvases had been left in possession of the weed. The second day's
progress was slower than the first and it was clear to the observers the
men were tiring unduly. More than one threw away his rifle to make the
marching easier, some freed themselves of their snowshoes and so after a
few yards sank, inextricably tangled into the grass; others lay down
exhausted, to rise no more. The men in the balloons could see by the way
the feet were raised that the inquisitive stolons were more and more
entangling themselves in the webbing.

Still the Soviet command poured fresh troops onto the grass. Profiting
perhaps by the American example, they transported new supplies to the
army by dirigibles, replacing the lost tarpaulins and rifles, daringly
sending whole divisions of snowshoers by parachute almost to the eastern
edge. This last experiment proved too reckless, for enough of these
adventurers were located to permit their annihilation by longrange
artillery.

"Their endurance is incredible, magnificent," eulogized General Thario
enthusiastically. "They are contending not only with the prospect of
meeting fresh, unworn troops on our side, but against a tireless enemy
who cannot be awed or hurt and even more against their own feelings of
fear and despair which must come upon them constantly as they get
farther into this green desert, farther from natural surroundings,
deeper into the silence and mystery of the abnormal barrier they have
undertaken to cross. They are supermen and only supernatural means will
defeat them."

But there was plenty of evidence that the general credited the foe with
a stronger spirit than they possessed. Their spirit was undoubtedly
high, but it could not stand up against the relentless harassment of the
grass. The weary, sodden advance went on, slower and slower; the toll
higher and higher. There were signs of dissatisfaction, mutiny and
madness. Some units turned about to be shot down by those behind, some
wandered off helplessly until lost forever. The dwindling of the great
army accelerated, airborne replacements dependent on such erratic
transport failed to fill the gaps.

The marchers no longer fired at the airships overhead; they moved their
feet slowly, hopelessly, stood stockstill for hours or faltered
aimlessly. Occasional improvised white flags could be seen, held
apathetically up toward the balloonists. Long after their brave start
the crazed and starving survivors began trickling into the American
lines where they surrendered. They were dull and listless except for one
strange manifestation: they shied away fearfully from every living plant
or growth, but did they see a bare patch of soil, a boulder or stretch
of sand, they clutched, kissed, mumbled and wept over it in a very
frenzy.


_45._ But the catastrophic loss of their great armies was not all the
enemy had to endure. As the grass had stood our ally and swallowed the
attackers, helping us in a negative fashion as it were, it now turned
and became a positive force in our relief. Unnoticed for months, it had
crept northwestward, filching precious mile after mile of the hostile
foothold. Now it spurted ahead as it had sometimes done before, at a
furious pace, to take over the coast as far north as the Russian River,
which now doubled the irony of its name, and added thousands of square
miles to its area at the enemy's expense. It surged directly westward
too, making what was left of the invader's foothold precarious in the
extreme.

The stockmarket boomed and the country went wild with joy at the news of
the Soviet defeats. At the darkest moment we had been delivered by
forces outside ourselves, but still indubitably American. Hymns of
praise were sung to the grass as the savior of the nation and in a burst
of gratitude it was declared a National Park, forever inviolate.
Rationing restrictions were eased and many industries were sensibly
returned to private ownership. Good old Uncle Sam was unbeatable
afterall.

But if the Americans were jubilant, the Russians were cast into deepest
gloom. Accustomed to tremendous wartime losses of manpower, they had at
first taken the news stoically, interpreting it as just another defeat
to be later redeemed by pouring fresh troops and then more fresh troops
after those which had gone down. But when they realized they had lost
not divisions but whole armies, that they had suffered a greater blow
than any in their history, that their reserve power was little greater
than the armies remaining to the Americans, and finally that the grass,
the foe which had dealt all these grievous blows, was rapidly wiping out
what remained of their bridgehead, they began to murmur against the war
itself.

"Under our dear little Uncle Stalin," they said, "this would never have
taken place. Our sons and brothers would not have been sent to die so
far away from Holy Mother Russia. Down with the enemies of Stalin. Down
with the warmongering bureaucracy."

The Kremlin hastened to assure the population it was carrying out the
wishes of the sainted Stalin. It convinced them of the purity of its
motives by machinegunning all demonstrators and executing after public
trials all Trotskyite-fascist-American saboteurs and traitors. For some
reason these arguments failed to win over the people and on November 7 a
new slogan was heard, "Long live Stalin and Trotsky," which proved so
popular that in a short time the entire bureaucracy was liquidated, the
Soviet Union declared an unequivocal workers' state, the army replaced
by Redguards, the selling of Soviet bonds decreed a contravention of
socialist economy, wages of all were equalized, and the word
stakhanovism erased from all Russian dictionaries.

No formal peace was ever made. Neither side had any further appetite for
war and though newspapers like the _Daily Intelligencer_ continued for
months to clamor for the resumption of hostilities, even to using
aircraft now that there was less danger of reprisal, both countries
seemed content to return quietly to the status quo. The only results of
the war, aside from the tremendous losses, was that in America the grass
had been unmolested for a year, and the Soviet Union had a new
constitution. One of the peculiar provisions of this constitution was
that political offenders--and the definition was now severely limited,
leaving out ninetynine percent of those formerly jeoparded--should
henceforth expiate their crimes by spending the term of their sentence
gazing at the colossal and elaborate tomb of Stalin which occupied the
center of Red Square.


_46._ General Stuart Thario, rudely treated by an ungrateful republic,
had the choice of a permanent colonelcy or retirement. I have always
thought it was his human vanity, making him cling to the title of
general, which caused him to retire. At any rate there was no difficulty
in finding a place for him in our organization, and if his son's salary
and position were reduced in consequence, it was all in the family, as
the saying goes.

One of the happy results of our unique system of free enterprise was the
rewarding of men in exact proportion to their merits and abilities. The
war, bringing disruption and bankruptcy to so many shiftless and
shortsighted people, made of Consolidated Pemmican one of the country's
great concerns. The organization welcoming General Thario was far
different from the one which had hired his son. I now had fourteen
factories, stretching like a string of lustrous pearls from Quebec down
to Montevideo, and I was negotiating to open new branches in Europe and
the Far East. I had been elected to the directorship of several
important corporations and my material possessions were enough to
constitute a nuisance--for I have always remained a simple, literary
sort of fellow at heart--requiring secretaries and stewards to look
after them.

It is a depressing sidelight on human nature that the achievement of
eminence brings with it the malice and spite of petty minds and no one
of prominence can avoid becoming the target of stupid and unscrupulous
attack. It would be pointless now to go into those carping and unjust
accusations directed at me by irresponsible newspaper columnists.
Another man might have ignored these mean assaults, but I am naturally
sensitive, and while it was beneath my dignity to reply personally I
thought it perhaps one of the best investments I could make to add a
newspaper to my other properties.

Now I am certainly not the sort of capitalist portrayed by cartoonists
in the early part of the century who would subvert the freedom of the
press by handpicking an editor and telling him what to say. I think the
proof of this as well as of my broadmindedness is to be found in the
fact that the paper I chose to buy was the _Daily Intelligencer_ and the
editor I retained was William Rufus Le ffacase. The _Intelligencer_ had
lost both circulation and money since it had, so to speak, no home base.
But moved perhaps by sentiment, I was not deterred from buying it for
this reason, and anyway it was purchasable at a more reasonable figure
on this account.

Small circulation or no, it--or rather Le ffacase himself--still
possessed that intangible thing called prestige and I was satisfied with
my bargain. Le ffacase showed no reluctance--as why indeed should
he?--to continue as managingeditor and acted toward me as though there
had never been any previous association, but I did not object to this
harmless eccentricity as a smallerminded person might have.

As publisher I named General Thario. I never knew exactly what purpose a
publisher serves, but it seemed necessary for every newspaper to have
one. Whatever the duties of the office, it left the general plenty of
time to attend to the concerns of Consolidated Pemmican. I fed the paper
judiciously with money and it was not long before it regained most of
the circulation it had lost.


_47._ There was no doubt the grass, our ally to such good purpose in the
war, had definitely slowed down; now it was looked upon as a fixture, a
part of the American heritage, a natural phenomenon which had outlived
its sensational period and come to be taken for granted. Botanists
pointed out that _Cynodon dactylon_, despite its ability to sheathe
itself against a chill, had never flourished in cold areas and there was
no reason to suppose the inoculated grass, even with its abnormal
metabolism, could withstand climates foreign to its habit. It was true
it had touched, in one place, the arctic tundra, but it was confidently
expected this excursion would soon cease. The high peaks of the Rockies
with the heavy winter snowdrifts lying between them promised no
permanent hospitality, and what seeds blew through the passes and
lighted on the Great Plains were generally isolated by saltbands, and
since they were confined to comparatively small clumps they were easily
wiped out by salt or fire. To all appearance the grass was satiated and
content to remain crouching over what it had won.

Only a minority argued that in its new form it might be infinitely
adaptable. Before, when stopped, it had produced seeds capable of
bearing the parent strain. So now, they argued, it would in time
acclimate itself to more rigorous temperatures. Among these pessimists,
Miss Francis, emerging from welldeserved obscurity, hysterically ranged
herself. She prophesied new sudden and sweeping advances and demanded
money and effort equal to that expended in the late war be turned to
combating the grass. As if taxes were not already outrageously high.

Those in authority, with a little judicious advice from persons of
standing, quite properly disregarded her querulous importunities. The
whole matter of dealing with the weed was by now in the hands of a
permanent body, the Federal Disruptions Commission. This group had spent
the first six months of its existence exactly defining and asserting its
jurisdiction, which seemed to spread just as the vegetation calling it
into being did; and the second six months wrangling with the Federal
Trade Commission over certain "Cease and Desist" orders issued to firms
using allusions to the grass on the labels of their products, thereby
implying they were as vigorous, or of as wide application, as the
representation. The Disruptions Commission had no objection in principle
to this castigation; they merely thought it should have come from their
regulatory hands.

But with the end of the war a new spirit animated the honorable members
of the commission and as a token of revived energy they issued a stern
directive that no two groups engaged in antigraminous research were to
pool their knowledge; for competition, the commission argued in the
sixtyseven page order, spurred enthusiasm and the rivalry between
workers would the sooner produce a solution. Having settled this
basically important issue they turned their attention to investigating
the slower progress of the grass to determine whether it was permanent
or temporary and whether its present sluggishness could be turned to
good account. As a sort of side project--perhaps to show the wideness of
their scope--they undertook as well to study the reasons for the failure
of the wartime inoculation of the steppes as contrasted with the
original too successful California one. They planned a compilation of
their findings, tentatively scheduled to cover a hundred and fortyseven
foliovolumes which would remain the basic work for all approaching the
problem of attacking the grass; and as an important public figure who
had some firsthand knowledge of the subject they requested me to visit,
at my own expense, the newest outposts of the weed and favor them with
my observations. I was not averse to the suggestion, for the authority
of the commission would admit me to areas closed to ordinary citizens
and I was toying with the idea it might be possible in some way to use
the devilgrass as an ingredient in our food products.


_48._ George Thario having shown in many ways he was growing stale on
the job and in need of a vacation, I decided to take him with me.
Besides, if the thought of using the weed as a source of cheap
rawmaterial came to anything, the engagement of his interest at an early
stage would increase his usefulness. Before setting out for the field I
read reports of investigators on the spot and was disquieted to note a
unanimous mention of new stirrings on the edges of the green glacier. I
decided to lose no time and we set out at once in my personal plane for
a mountain lodge kindly offered by a business acquaintance. Here, for
the next few weeks, keeping in touch with my manifold affairs only by
telephone, Joe and I devoted ourselves to observing the grass.

Or rather I did. George Thario's idea of gathering data differed
radically from mine--I feel safe to say, as well as from that of almost
any other intelligent man. In a way he reminded me of the cameraman
Slafe in his brooding obliviousness to everything except the grass; but
Slafe had been doing a job for which he was being paid, whereas Joe was
only yielding to his own mood. For hours he lay flat on his belly,
staring through binoculars; at other times he wandered about the edge,
looking at, feeling, and smelling it and once I saw him bend down and
nibble at it like a sheep.

"You know, A W," he observed enthusiastically--he always called me "A W"
with just enough of a curious intonation to make it doubtful whether the
use of the initials was respectful or satirical--"you know, A W, I
understand those fellows who went and chucked themselves into the grass.
It's sublime; it has never happened in nature before. Ive read newspaper
and magazine accounts and either the writers have no eyes or else they
lie for the hell of it. They talk about the 'dirty brown' of the
flowers, but A W, Ive seen the flowers myself and theyre a vivid
glorious purple. Have you noticed the iridescent sparkle when the wind
ripples the blades? All the colors of the spectrum against the
background of that marvelous green."
