to answer whether the English Baron de Clarenham had arrived at
Bordeaux.  He had come, and with as splendid a train as ever was
beheld, and was in high favour at court.

This was no pleasing intelligence, but Eustace determined to go the
next day to present his nephew to the Prince immediately after the
noontide meal, when it was the wont of the Plantagenet Princes to throw
their halls open to their subjects.

Accordingly, leading Arthur by the hand, and attended by Gaston, he
made his appearance in the hall just as the banquet was concluded, but
ere the Knights had dispersed.  Many well-known faces were there, but
as he advanced up the space between the two long tables, he was amazed
at meeting scarce one friendly glance of recognition; some looked
unwilling to seem to know him, and returned his salutation with distant
coldness; others gazed at the window, or were intent on their wine, and
of these was Leonard Ashton, whom to his surprise he saw seated among
the Knights.

Thus he passed on until he had nearly reached the dais where dined the
Prince and the personages of the most exalted rank.  Here he paused as
his anxious gaze fell upon the Prince, and marked his countenance and
mien--alas! how changed!  He sat in his richly-carved chair, wrapped in
a velvet mantle, which, even on that bright day of a southern spring,
he drew closer round him with a shuddering chilliness.  His elbow
rested on the arm of his chair, and his wasted cheek leant on his
hand--the long thin fingers of which showed white and transparent as a
lady's; his eyes were bent on the ground, and a look of suffering or of
moody thought hung over the whole of that face, once full of free and
open cheerfulness. Tears filled Eustace's eyes as he beheld that wreck
of manhood and thought of that bright day of hope and gladness when his
brother had presented him to the Prince.

As he hesitated to advance, the Prince, raising his eyes, encountered
that earnest and sorrowful gaze, but only responding by a stern glance
of displeasure.  Eustace, however, stepped forward, and bending one
knee, said, "My Lord, I come to report myself as returned to your
service, and at the same time to crave for my nephew the protection you
were graciously pleased to promise him."

"It is well, Sir Eustace Lynwood," said Edward, coldly, and with a
movement of his head, as if to dismiss him from his presence; "and you,
boy, come hither," he added as Arthur, seeing his uncle rise and
retreat a few steps, was following his example.  "I loved your father
well," he said, laying his hand on the boy's bright wavy hair, "and you
shall find in me a steady friend as long as you prove yourself not
unworthy of the name you bear."

In spite of the awe with which Arthur felt his head pressed by that
royal hand, in spite of his reverence for the hero and the Prince, he
raised his eyes and looked upon the face of the Prince with an earnest,
pleading, almost upbraiding gaze, as if, child as he was, he deprecated
the favour, which so evidently marked the slight shown to his uncle.
But the Prince did not heed him, and rising from his chair, said,
"Thine arm, Clarenham.  Let us to the Princess, and present her new
page.  Follow me, boy."

With a wistful look at his uncle, standing alone on the step of the
dais, Arthur reluctantly followed the Prince as, leaning on Clarenham's
arm, he left the hall, and, crossing a gallery, entered a large
apartment.  At one end was a canopy embroidered with the arms and
badges of the heir of England, and beneath it were two chairs of state,
one of which was occupied by Joan Plantagenet, Princess of Wales, once
the Fair Maid of Kent, and though now long past her youth, still
showing traces of beauty befitting the lady for whom her royal cousin
had displayed such love and constancy.

As her husband entered, she rose, and looking anxiously at him, while
she came forward to meet him, inquired whether he felt fatigued.  "No,
my fair dame," replied the Prince, "I came but to present you your new
page; the young cousin, respecting whose safety my Lord de Clarenham
hath been so much in anxiety."

"Then it is his uncle who hath brought him?" asked Joan.

"Yes," replied Edward, "he himself brought him to the hall, and even
had the presumption to claim the protection for him that I pledged to
his father, when I deemed far otherwise of this young Eustace."

"What account does he give of the length of time that he has spent on
the road?" asked the Princess.

"Ay, there is the strangest part of the tale," said Fulk Clarenham,
with a sneer, "since he left the poor simple men at Lynwood believing
that he was coming at full speed to seek my Lord the Prince's
protection for the child, a convenient excuse for eluding the inquiries
of justice into his brawls at the funeral, as well as for the rents
which he carried off with him; but somewhat inconsistent when it is not
for five months that he makes his appearance at Bordeaux, and then in
the society of a band of _routiers_."

"It shall be inquired into," said the Prince.

"Nay, nay, my Lord," said Fulk, "may I pray you of your royal goodness
to press the matter no further.  He is still young, and it were a pity
to cast dishonour on a name which has hitherto been honourable.  Since
my young cousin is safe, I would desire no more, save to guard him from
his future machinations.  For his brother's sake, my Lord, I would
plead with you."

"Little did I think such things of him," said the Prince, "when I laid
knighthood on his shoulder in the battle-field of Navaretta; yet I
remember even then old Chandos chid me for over-hastiness. Poor old
Chandos, he has a rough tongue, but a true heart!"

"And, under favour, I would say," answered Clarenham, "that it might
have been those early-won honours that turned the head of such a mere
youth, so entirely without guidance, or rather, with the guidance of
that dissolute Squire, who, I grieve to observe, still haunts his
footsteps.  Knighthood, with nought to maintain it, is, in truth, a
snare."

"Well, I am weary of the subject," said the Prince, leaning back in his
chair.  "The boy is safe, and, as you say, Fulk, that is all that is of
importance.  Call hither the troubadour that was in the hall at noon.
I would have your opinion of his lay," he added, turning to his wife.

The indignation may be imagined with which Arthur listened to this
conversation, as he stood on the spot to which Edward had signed to him
to advance, when he presented him to the Princess.  He longed ardently
to break in with an angry refutation of the slanders cast on his uncle,
but he was too well trained in the rules of chivalry, to say nothing of
the awful respect with which he regarded the Prince, to attempt to
utter a word, and he could only edge himself as far away as was
possible from Clarenham, and cast at him glances of angry reproach.

His uneasy movements were interpreted as signs of fatigue and
impatience of restraint by one of the ladies, who was sitting at no
great distance, a very beautiful and graceful maiden, the Lady Maude
Holland, daughter to the Princess of Wales, by her first marriage; and
she kindly held out her hand to him, saying, "Come hither, my pretty
page.  You have not learnt to stand stiff and straight, like one of the
supporters of a coat-of-arms.  Come hither, and let me lead you to
company better suited to your years."

Arthur came willingly, as there was no more to hear about his uncle;
and besides, it was away from the hateful Clarenham.  She led him
across the hall to a tall arched doorway, opening upon a wide and
beautiful garden, filled with the plants and shrubs of the south of
France, and sloping gently down to the broad expanse of the blue waves
of the Garonne.  She looked round on all sides, and seeing no one, made
a few steps forward on the greensward, then called aloud, "Thomas!" no
answer, "Edward!  Harry of Lancaster!" but still her clear silvery
voice was unheeded, until a servant came from some other part of the
building, and, bowing, awaited her orders.  "Where are Lord Edward and
the rest?" she asked.

"Gone forth," the servant believed, "to ride on the open space near St.
Ursula's Convent."

"None left at home?"

"None, noble Lady."

"None," repeated Lady Maude, "save the little Lord Richard, whose baby
company your pageship would hardly esteem.  You must try to endure the
quietness of the lady's chamber, unless you would wish to be at once
introduced to the grave master of the Damoiseaux."

At this moment Arthur's eye fell upon a lady who had just emerged from
a long shady alley, up which she had been slowly walking, and the
bright look of recognition which lighted up his face, was so different
from the shy and constrained expression he had hitherto worn, that Lady
Maude remarked it, and following his gaze, said, "Lady Agnes de
Clarenham?  Ah yes, she is of kin to you.  Let us go meet her."  Then,
as they approached, she said, "Here, Agnes, I have brought you a young
cousin of yours, whom the Prince has just conducted into my mother's
chamber, where he bore so rueful a countenance that I grew pitiful
enough to come forth on a bootless errand after his fellow Damoiseaux,
who, it seems, are all out riding. So I shall even leave him to you,
for there is a troubadour in the hall, whose lay I greatly long to
hear."

Away tripped Lady Maude, well pleased to be free from the burthen her
good-nature had imposed on her.

"Arthur," exclaimed Agnes, "what joy to see you!  Is your uncle here?"

"Yes," said Arthur, "but oh, Cousin Agnes! if you had been by to hear
the foul slanders which Sir Fulk has been telling the Prince--oh,
Agnes! you would disown him for your brother."

"Arthur," said Agnes, with a voice almost of anguish, "how could
he--why did he tarry so long on the road?"

"How could we come on when the Duke of Brittany himself said it was
certain death or captivity?  We were forced to wait for an escort. And
now, Agnes, think of your brother saying that Uncle Eustace carried off
the rents of Lynwood, when every man in the Castle could swear it was
only the money Father Cyril had in keeping for his inheritance."

"Alas!" said Agnes.

"And the Prince will believe it--the Prince looks coldly on him
already, and my uncle loves the Prince like his own life.  Oh, he will
be ready to die with grief!  Agnes!  Agnes! what is to be done?  But
you don't believe it!" he proceeded, seeing that she was weeping
bitterly.  "You do not believe it--you promised you never would!  Oh
say you do not believe it!"

"I do not, Arthur; I never believed half they said of him; but oh, that
long delay was a sore trial to my confidence, and cruelly confirmed
their tales."

"And think of Fulk, too, hindering the Prince from inquiring, because
he says he would spare my uncle for my father's sake, when the truth
is, he only fears that the blackness of his own designs should be seen!
And Gaston, too, he slandered.  Oh, Agnes! Agnes! that there should be
such wickedness, and we able to do nought!"

"Nought but weep and pray!" said Agnes.  "And yet I can bear it better
now that you are here.  Your presence refutes the worst accusation, and
removes a heavy weight from my mind."

"You distrust him too!  I cannot love you if you do."

"Never, never!  I only feared some evil had befallen you, and grieved
to see the use made of your absence.  Your coming should make my heart
light again."

"Shall I often see you, Cousin Agnes? for there is none else in this
wide Castle that I shall care for."

"Oh yes, Arthur, there are full twenty pages little older than
yourself--Lord Thomas Holland, the Prince's stepson, brother to the
lady that led you to me; little Piers de Greilly, nephew to the Captal
de Buch; young Lord Henry of Lancaster; and the little Prince Edward
himself.  You will have no lack of merry playmates."

"Ah, but to whom can I talk of my blessed mother and of Uncle Eustace,
and of Lynwood Keep, and poor old Blanc Etoile, that I promised Ralph I
would bear in mind?"

"Well, Arthur," said Agnes, cheerfully, "it is the pages' duty to wait
on the ladies in hall and bower, and the ladies' office to teach them
all courtly manners, and hear them read and say the Credo and Ave. You
shall be my own especial page and servant.  Is it agreed?"

"Oh yes," said the boy.  "I wonder if the master of the Damoiseaux is
as strict as that lady said, and I wonder when I shall see Uncle
Eustace again."




CHAPTER XI


If Arthur Lynwood felt desolate when he left his uncle's side, it was
not otherwise with Sir Eustace as he lost sight of the child, who had
so long been his charge, and who repaid his anxiety with such confiding
affection.  The coveted fame, favour, and distinction seemed likewise
to have deserted him.  The Prince's coldness hung heavily on him, and
as he cast his eyes along the ranks of familiar faces, not one friendly
look cheered him.  His greetings were returned with coldness, and a
grave haughty courtesy was the sole welcome. Chafed and mortified, he
made a sign to Gaston, and they were soon in the street once more.

"Coward clown!" burst forth Gaston at once.  "Would that I could send
all his grinning teeth down the false throat of him!"

"Whose?  What mean you?"

"Whose but that sulky recreant, Ashton?  He has done well to obtain
knighthood, or I would beat him within an inch of his life with my
halbert, and if he dared challenge me, slay him as I would a carrion
crown!  He a Knight!  Thanks to his acres and to Lord Pembroke!"

"Patience, patience, Gaston--I have not yet heard of what he accuses
me."

"No! he has learnt policy--he saith it not openly!  He would deny it,
as did his Esquire when I taxed him with it!  Would that you could not
tell a letter!  Sir Eustace, of your favour let me burn every one of
your vile books."

"My innocent friends!  Nay, nay, Gaston--they are too knightly to merit
such measure.  Then it is the old accusation of witchcraft, I suppose.
So I was in league with the Castilian witch and her cats, was I?"

"Ay; and her broom-stick or her cats wafted you to Lynwood, where you
suddenly stood in the midst of the mourners, borne into the hall on a
howling blast!  How I got there, I am sorry to say, the craven declared
not, lest I should give him the lie at once!"

"But surely, such a tale is too absurd and vulgar to deceive our noble
Prince."

"Oh, there is another version for his ears.  This is only for the lower
sort, who might not have thought the worse of you for kidnapping your
nephew, vowing his mother should remain unburied till he was in your
hands, and carrying off all his rents."

"That is Clarenham's slander."

"Yes."

"And credited by the Prince?  Oh! little did I think the hand which
laid knighthood on my shoulder should repent the boon that it gave!"
exclaimed Eustace, with a burst of sorrow rather than anger.

"Do you not challenge the traitor at once?"

"I trow not, unless he speaks the charge to my face.  Father Cyril
declared that any outbreak on my part would damage our cause in the
eyes of the Chancellor; we must bide our time.  Since Arthur is safe, I
will bear my own burden.  I am guiltless in this matter, and I trust
that the blessing of Heaven on my deeds shall restore a name, obscured,
but not tarnished."

The resolution to forbear was tested, for time passed on without
vindicating him.  With such art had the toils of his enemies been
spread, that no opening was left him for demanding an explanation. The
calumnies could only be brought home to the lowest retainers of
Clarenham and Ashton, and the only result of the zealous refutation by
the followers of Sir Eustace was a brawl between John Ingram and a
yeoman of Clarenham's, ending in their spending a week in the custody
of the Provost Marshal.

Had there been any tournament or like sport at Bordeaux, Eustace could
have asserted his place, and challenged the attention of the court; but
the state of the Prince's health prevented such spectacles; nor had he
any opportunity of acquiring honour by his deeds in arms.  No army took
the field on either side, and the war was chiefly carried on by
expeditions for the siege or relief of frontier castles; and here his
unusual rank as Knight Banneret stood in his way, since it was contrary
to etiquette for him to put himself under the command of a Knight
Bachelor.  He was condemned therefore to a weary life of inaction, the
more galling, because his poverty made it necessary to seek maintenance
as formerly at the Prince's table, where he was daily reminded, by the
altered demeanour of his acquaintance, of the unjust suspicions beneath
which he laboured.  He had hoped that a dismissal from his post in the
Prince's band would give him the much-desired opportunity of claiming a
