but there they found their range of vision limited by peaks still
higher, while there were great valleys, in one of which, whether near
or far they could not tell, they knew, the _Annihilator_ was hidden.

They had almost lost track of time now, and they did not know how far
they had wandered. They had sought out lonely caves to sleep in when
they were so weary they could go no farther, and they had sat about on
bleak rocks shivering, and had eaten their scanty meals--shivering
because in spite of their fur garments they were cold, as they did not
eat enough to keep their blood properly circulating. They could not
when they did not have the food to eat!

Andy used up all but a few of his cartridges in firing signals, but to
no purpose. Their water was all but gone, and of their food only enough
remained for a day longer, though their life-torches still gave forth
plenty of vapor.

"Well, what's to be done?" asked Jack, as they sat about, looking
helplessly at one another.

"Might as well give up," suggested Mark bitterly.

"Give up? Not a bit of it!" cried Andy, as cheerfully as he could.
"Let's keep on. We'll find the projectile sooner or later."

So they kept on. It was while making their way between two great
mountain peaks that towered above their heads on either side, thousands
of feet up, making a sort of natural gateway, that Jack, who was in the
lead, cried out in astonishment at the sight that met his gaze when he
had passed the pinnacles.

"Look!" he shouted, pointing forward.

What he indicated was a great crater--larger and deeper than any they
had yet met with. It seemed a mile across, and, if gloom and darkness
were any indications, it was a hundred miles deep.

But it was not the size of the great hole in the ground, not its
fearful gloom, that attracted their attention. What did was a great
natural or artificial bridge of stone that was thrown across the middle
of it from edge to edge. A bridge of stone that spanned the abyss; a
roadway, fifty feet wide, which reached into some unknown land,
connecting it with the desolate country in which our friends had been
wandering.

"A bridge of stone across the cavern," said Jack, "but see. Here is a
house of stone. This was the guard-house, I'll wager--the guardhouse at
the entrance to some city, and that bridge is the means by which the
inhabitants entered and left. Maybe we are at the edge of the inhabited
part of the moon!"

His words thrilled them. They pressed forward to the beginning of the
bridge across the crater. They looked into the stone hut. Clearly it
had been made by hands, for it was composed of blocks of stone, neatly
fitted together. Jack's theory seemed confirmed.

Mark peered into the house, and uttered a cry of alarm.

"There's a petrified man in there!" he gasped.

Jack and Andy looked in at the open window. They saw, sitting at a
table, which was also of rock, a man, evidently a soldier, or rather he
had been, for he was nothing but stone now, like the hut in which he
dwelt.

The wanderers looked at each other with fear on their faces. What
dreadful mystery were they about to penetrate? "Let's cross the
bridge," suggested Jack, in a low voice. "Maybe this marks the end of
desolation. Perhaps we may find life and food across the crater."

"But--but the petrified man!" gasped Mark.

"What of it? He won't hurt us. Maybe there are live men, who will take
care of us, beyond there," and Jack pointed across the bridge of stone.

There was nothing to keep them where they were--in the land of
desolation. They could not live much longer there, with no food and
water. To pass on over the crater seemed the only thing to do.

"Come ahead," called Jack boldly. They followed him. They kept in the
middle of the road, for to approach the edge, where there was a sheer
descent of so many feet that it made them dizzy to think of it, filled
them with terror. On they hurried until, in a short time, they had
crossed the great chasm.

The road over the crater came to an end between two peaks, similar to
those at the beginning. Jack was the first to pass them, and as he
emerged he once more uttered a cry--a cry of fear and wonder.

And well he might, for in a valley below the wanderers there was a
city. A great city, with wonderful buildings, with wide streets well
laid out--a city in which figures of many men and women could be
seen--little children too! A fair city, teeming with life, it seemed!

But then, as they looked again, struck by the curious quiet that
prevailed, they knew that they were gazing down on a city of the
dead--a city where the inhabitants had been turned to stone, even as
had the soldier on guard in his lonely hut.

They had come upon a petrified city of the moon!




CHAPTER XXVI

SEEKING FOOD


"Well, if this isn't the limit!" burst out Jack, when he had stood and
contemplated the silent city for several moments, which also his
companions did. "After all our wanderings and troubles, when we do find
a place, it isn't any good to us. I don't suppose there is a square
meal in the whole town! Isn't it wonderful, though--every person turned
to stone!"

"Wonderful!" gasped old Andy. "I never saw anything like it in all my
life! What do you reckon did it, boys?"

"The same thing that turned the man in the hut, and the one Washington
thought was a ghost, into stone," answered Mark. "There was a rain of
some lime-water, or a liquid charged with similar chemicals, and the
people were turned to rocks."

It was uncanny, and for a moment they hesitated on the edge of the
city, which lay in a sort of cup-like valley, surrounded on all sides
by towering peaks of the moon mountains. The bridge over which they had
come afforded the only entrance to the city, and in times of war
(provided the inhabitants of the moon ever fought) the passage must
have been well guarded.

It was evidently a time of peace when the calamity that turned the
inhabitants to stone came upon them, for only one soldier was in the
guard hut--doubtless being there merely to give an alarm, or possibly
to keep out undesirable strangers.

"Well, are we going to stand here all day?" asked Jack of his
companions, when they had contemplated the silent city for five minutes
longer.

"I say, let's go down there and see what we can find. I'm getting
hungry."

"There'll be nothing there to eat," declared Mark. "If there ever was
anything, it's now stone. Think of a loaf of bread like a brick, and a
chunk of meat like some great rock!"

"Let's go down, anyhow," added Andy, and they advanced.

As they got down into the streets, the weird effect came over them more
strongly. It was as if they had suddenly entered some large town, and
at their advent every living person had been turned into an image.

"Wonderful, wonderful!" murmured Jack.

"I've read of the uncovering of the ancient buried cities, and how they
found women in the kitchen baking bread, and men at their work, but
this goes ahead of that, for here the people are not dust--they are
statues!"

"It certainly is wonderful," agreed Mark. "I only wish the two
professors could see this. They could write several books about it.
This proves that the moon was once inhabited, though it is dead now.
The projectile should have come to this part of the moon."

"Maybe they'll bring it here, when we get back and tell them what we've
seen," suggested Jack.

"Yes, if we ever do get back," went on his chum, with a return of his
gloomy thoughts.

The strangeness of the scenes all about them can scarcely be imagined.
Think of looking at a city street teeming with life, men and women
hurrying here and there, dogs running about, children at their play,
and then suddenly seeing that same street become as dead as some
mountain, with the people represented as stones on that same mountain,
and you can get some idea of what our friends looked upon.

Here was a woman, looking in a store window, probably at some bargains,
though even the very window and store itself was now stone, and the
woman was like a block of marble. Near her was a little child, also
turned to stone, and there were a number of men, standing together on a
street corner as if they had been talking politics when the calamity
overtook them.

There were shops where the workers had been turned to stone at their
benches, there were houses at the windows of which stone faces peered
out, and there were parks on the benches of which sat men, women and
children, stiff and solid--creatures of stone! Truly it was a city of
the dead!

The wanderers walked about, seeing new wonders on every side. They
spoke in whispers at times, as though at the sound of a loud voice the
silent ones would awaken and resume the occupations or pleasures they
had left off centuries ago.

Another strange part of it was that the people were not so very
different from those of the earth. They were exactly the same in size
and feature, but their clothing, as nearly as could be told from the
stone garments, seemed of a bygone fashion, such as was in vogue
hundreds of years ago. There were no horses observed, though there were
stone dogs and cats, and the shops given over to the sale of food
contained in the windows what seemed to be chunks of meat, loaves of
bread, and pies and cakes, though now they were only pieces of rock.

"It's just as if one of our cities and the people in it should be
suddenly petrified," said Mark. "It's almost like the earth up here;
only they don't seem to have gotten to trolley cars yet."

"Maybe they would if the moon hadn't cooled off when it did, and killed
them all," suggested Jack. "But, I say, let's get down to something
more practical than theorizing."

"What, for instance?" asked Mark.

"Looking for something to eat," went on Jack. "I'm nearly starved, and
I have only half a sandwich left. I want to eat it, yet, if I do, I
don't know where I'm going to get more. And as for water, I'd give a
handful of diamonds, if I had them, for half a glass of even warm
water."

"Yes, we do need food and water badly," said Andy.

"Then let's look for it," suggested Jack. "If we can find food in any
of these houses or shops, I don't believe the people will care if we
take it."

"Find food here?" cried Mark. "Why, you must be crazy! All the food is
turned to stone, and what isn't would be spoiled! Why, no one has been
alive here for thousands and thousands of years!"

"That's nothing," asserted Jack. "Don't you remember reading how, in
the arctic regions, they have found the bodies of prehistoric elephants
and mastodons encased in blocks of ice, where they have been for
centuries. The meat is perfectly preserved because of the cold. And
what of the grains of wheat they find in the coffins of Egyptian
mummies? Some of that is three thousand years old, yet it grows when
they plant it, and they can make bread of it.

"Now, maybe we can find some wheat or something to eat in some of these
houses. If there's meat, it will be perfectly preserved, for the
temperature is below freezing."

"That may be," admitted Mark, convinced, in spite of himself, "but it's
turned to stone, I tell you."

"The outside part may be," said Jack, "but if we can crack off the
outside layer of stone we may find some good meat inside. I'm going to
look, anyhow."

"That's not a bad idea!" cried Andy with enthusiasm. "Think of having a
loaf of bread and some beefsteak thousands of years old. I suppose they
had beefsteak here," he added cautiously.

"Some kind of meat, anyhow," agreed Jack. "Well, let's look for a place
that was once a restaurant or hotel, and we'll see what luck we have.
Come on."

They walked along the silent streets, with their silent occupants, and
finally Jack found what he was seeking. It was an eating place, to
judge by the appearance, and at tables inside were seated stone men and
women.

"Back to the kitchen!" cried Jack with enthusiasm. "There's where we'll
find food, if there is any!"

"It'll be all stone," declared Mark, but he and Andy followed Jack.

They came to the place where was what appeared to be a stove. It was
more like a brick oven, however, than a modern range, though in dishes
that were now stone something was being cooked when the catastrophe
occurred.

"There's meat, I'll wager!" cried Jack, pointing to several objects on
a table. They looked like chunks of beef, but when Mark struck them
with the end of his life-torch they gave forth a sound as if a rock had
been tapped.

"What did I tell you?" Mark asked, "Nothing but rocks. And the bread is
also a stone," he added bitterly.

"You're right," admitted Jack, with a sigh. "And I'm getting hungrier
than ever." They all were. For days they had been without sufficient
food, and now, when it was almost within their reach, they were denied
it by this curious trick of nature. With pale and wan faces they gazed
at each other, wetting their parched lips, for they had some time since
taken the last of their scant supply of water, and they were very
thirsty.

"I guess it's all up with us," murmured Mark. "We'll soon be like these
poor people here--blocks of stone."

"If we only could change this meat back into it's original shape,"
spoke Jack musingly, smiting his fist against a block of beef.

Suddenly Andy uttered a cry.

"I have it!" he fairly shouted.

"What?" asked Jack.

"I have a plan to get meat out of this hunk of stone!"

The two boys gazed at the old hunter as though they thought he had lost
his reason, but, chuckling gleefully, Andy took from his pouch several
cartridges, and proceeded to remove the wads, and pour the powder from
the paper shells out on the stone table.

"I'll have some meat for us," he muttered. "We shan't starve now!"




CHAPTER XXVII

THE BLACK POOL


"What are you going to do, Andy?" asked Jack, as he watched the old
hunter.

"What am I going to do? Why, I'm going to blast out some of this meat,
that's what I'm going to do! I heard you boys talking about elephants
and other things being preserved for centuries in a cake of ice, and,
if that's true, why won't the meat in this petrified city be preserved
just as well? It's always below freezing here, and that's cold enough."

"But the meat has turned to stone," objected Mark.

"Only the outside part of it, to my thinking," answered Andy. "I
believe that inside these lumps of rock we'll find good, fresh meat!"

"But how are you going to get it?" asked Jack.

"Just as I told you--blast it out with some of the powder from my
cartridges. I used to be a miner before I turned hunter, and when we
wanted gold we used to fire a charge in some rocks. Now we want meat,
and I'm going to do the same thing. I'll put some powder underneath
