who would some day be the King's Governor of one of the most
important counties in Brittany, was pulling his surplice down over his
head. The clock said 7:11.

Father Bright forced his mind Heavenward and repeated silently the
vesting prayers that his lips had formed meaninglessly, this time
putting his full intentions behind them. Then he added a short mental
prayer asking God to forgive him for allowing his thoughts to stray in
such a manner.

He opened his eyes and reached for his chasuble just as the sacristy
door opened and Sir Pierre, the Count's Privy Secretary, stepped in.

"I must speak to you, Father," he said in a low voice. And, glancing
at the young De Saint-Brieuc, he added: "Alone."

Normally, Father Bright would have reprimanded anyone who presumed to
break into the sacristy as he was vesting for Mass, but he knew that
Sir Pierre would never interrupt without good reason. He nodded and
went outside in the corridor that led to the altar.

"What is it, Pierre?" he asked.

"My lord the Count is dead. Murdered."

After the first momentary shock, Father Bright realized that the news
was not, after all, totally unexpected. Somewhere in the back of his
mind, it seemed he had always known that the Count would die by
violence long before debauchery ruined his health.

"Tell me about it," he said quietly.

Sir Pierre reported exactly what he had done and what he had seen.

"Then I locked the door and came straight here," he told the priest.

"Who else has the key to the Count's suite?" Father Bright asked.

"No one but my lord himself," Sir Pierre answered, "at least as far as
I know."

"Where is his key?"

"Still in the ring at his belt. I noticed that particularly."

"Very good. We'll leave it locked. You're certain the body was cold?"

"Cold and waxy, Father."

"Then he's been dead many hours."

"Lady Alice will have to be told," Sir Pierre said.

Father Bright nodded. "Yes. The Countess D'Evreux must be informed of
her succession to the County Seat." He could tell by the sudden
momentary blank look that came over Sir Pierre's face that the Privy
Secretary had not yet realized fully the implications of the Count's
death. "I'll tell her, Pierre. She should be in her pew by now. Just
step into the church and tell her quietly that I want to speak to her.
Don't tell her anything else."

"I understand, Father," said Sir Pierre.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were only twenty-five or thirty people in the pews--most of them
women--but Alice, Countess D'Evreux was not one of them. Sir Pierre
walked quietly and unobtrusively down the side aisle and out into the
narthex. She was standing there, just inside the main door, adjusting
the black lace mantilla about her head, as though she had just come in
from outside. Suddenly, Sir Pierre was very glad he would not have to
be the one to break the news.

She looked rather sad, as always, her plain face unsmiling. The
jutting nose and square chin which had given her brother the Count a
look of aggressive handsomeness only made her look very solemn and
rather sexless, although she had a magnificent figure.

"My lady," Sir Pierre said, stepping towards her, "the Reverent Father
would like to speak to you before Mass. He's waiting at the sacristy
door."

She held her rosary clutched tightly to her breast and gasped. Then
she said, "Oh. Sir Pierre. I'm sorry; you quite surprised me. I didn't
see you."

"My apologies, my lady."

"It's all right. My thoughts were elsewhere. Will you take me to the
good Father?"

Father Bright heard their footsteps coming down the corridor before he
saw them. He was a little fidgety because Mass was already a minute
overdue. It should have started promptly at 7:15.

The new Countess D'Evreux took the news calmly, as he had known she
would. After a pause, she crossed herself and said: "May his soul rest
in peace. I will leave everything in your hands, Father, Sir Pierre.
What are we to do?"

"Pierre must get on the teleson to Rouen immediately and report the
matter to His Highness. I will announce your brother's death and ask
for prayers for his soul--but I think I need say nothing about the
manner of his death. There is no need to arouse any more speculation
and fuss than necessary."

"Very well," said the Countess. "Come, Sir Pierre; I will speak to the
Duke, my cousin, myself."

"Yes, my lady."

Father Bright returned to the sacristy, opened the missal, and changed
the placement of the ribbons. Today was an ordinary Feria; a Votive
Mass would not be forbidden by the rubics. The clock said 7:17. He
turned to young De Saint-Brieuc, who was waiting respectfully.
"Quickly, my son--go and get the unbleached beeswax candles and put
them on the altar. Be sure you light them before you put out the white
ones. Hurry, now; I will be ready by the time you come back. Oh
yes--and change the altar frontal. Put on the black."

"Yes, Father." And the lad was gone.

Father Bright folded the green chasuble and returned it to the drawer,
then took out the black one. He would say a Requiem for the Souls of
All the Faithful Departed--and hope that the Count was among them.

       *       *       *       *       *

His Royal Highness, the Duke of Normandy, looked over the official
letter his secretary had just typed for him. It was addressed to
_Serenissimus Dominus Nostrus Iohannes Quartus, Dei Gratia, Angliae,
Franciae, Scotiae, Hiberniae, et Novae Angliae, Rex, Imperator, Fidei
Defensor_, ... "Our Most Serene Lord, John IV, by the Grace of God
King and Emperor of England, France, Scotland, Ireland, and New
England, Defender of the Faith, ..."

It was a routine matter; simple notification to his brother, the King,
that His Majesty's most faithful servant, Edouard, Count of Evreux had
departed this life, and asking His Majesty's confirmation of the
Count's heir-at-law, Alice, Countess of Evreux as his lawful
successor.

His Highness finished reading, nodded, and scrawled his signature at
the bottom: _Richard Dux Normaniae_.

Then, on a separate piece of paper, he wrote: "Dear John, May I
suggest you hold up on this for a while? Edouard was a lecher and a
slob, and I have no doubt he got everything he deserved, but we have
no notion who killed him. For any evidence I have to the contrary, it
might have been Alice who pulled the trigger. I will send you full
particulars as soon as I have them. With much love, Your brother and
servant, Richard."

He put both papers into a prepared envelope and sealed it. He wished
he could have called the king on the teleson, but no one had yet
figured out how to get the wires across the channel.

He looked absently at the sealed envelope, his handsome blond features
thoughtful. The House of Plantagenet had endured for eight centuries,
and the blood of Henry of Anjou ran thin in its veins, but the Norman
strain was as strong as ever, having been replenished over the
centuries by fresh infusions from Norwegian and Danish princesses.
Richard's mother, Queen Helga, wife to His late Majesty, Henry X,
spoke very few words of Anglo-French, and those with a heavy Norse
accent.

Nevertheless, there was nothing Scandinavian in the language, manner,
or bearing of Richard, Duke of Normandy. Not only was he a member of
the oldest and most powerful ruling family of Europe, but he bore a
Christian name that was distinguished even in that family. Seven Kings
of the Empire had borne the name, and most of them had been good
Kings--if not always "good" men in the nicey-nicey sense of the word.
Even old Richard I, who'd been pretty wild during the first forty-odd
years of his life, had settled down to do a magnificent job of kinging
for the next twenty years. The long and painful recovery from the
wound he'd received at the Siege of Chaluz had made a change in him
for the better.

There was a chance that Duke Richard might be called upon to uphold
the honor of that name as King. By law, Parliament must elect a
Plantagenet as King in the event of the death of the present
Sovereign, and while the election of one of the King's two sons, the
Prince of Wales and the Duke of Lancaster, was more likely than the
election of Richard, he was certainly not eliminated from the
succession.

[Illustration]

Meantime, he would uphold the honor of his name as Duke of Normandy.

Murder had been done; therefore justice must be done. The Count
D'Evreux had been known for his stern but fair justice almost as well
as he had been known for his profligacy. And, just as his pleasures
had been without temperance, so his justice had been untempered by
mercy. Whoever had killed him would find both justice and mercy--in so
far as Richard had it within his power to give it.

Although he did not formulate it in so many words, even mentally,
Richard was of the opinion that some debauched woman or cuckolded man
had fired the fatal shot. Thus he found himself inclining toward mercy
before he knew anything substantial about the case at all.

Richard dropped the letter he was holding into the special mail pouch
that would be placed aboard the evening trans-Channel packet, and then
turned in his chair to look at the lean, middle-aged man working at a
desk across the room.

"My lord Marquis," he said thoughtfully.

"Yes, Your Highness?" said the Marquis of Rouen, looking up.

"How true are the stories one has heard about the late Count?"

"True, Your Highness?" the Marquis said thoughtfully. "I would
hesitate to make any estimate of percentages. Once a man gets a
reputation like that, the number of his reputed sins quickly surpasses
the number of actual ones. Doubtless many of the stories one hears are
of whole cloth; others may have only a slight basis in fact. On the
other hand, it is highly likely that there are many of which we have
never heard. It is absolutely certain, however, that he has
acknowledged seven illegitimate sons, and I dare say he has ignored a
few daughters--and these, mind you, with unmarried women. His
adulteries would be rather more difficult to establish, but I think
your Highness can take it for granted that such escapades were far
from uncommon."

He cleared his throat and then added, "If Your Highness is looking for
motive, I fear there is a superabundance of persons with motive."

"I see," the Duke said. "Well, we will wait and see what sort of
information Lord Darcy comes up with." He looked up at the clock.
"They should be there by now."

Then, as if brushing further thoughts on the subject from his mind, he
went back to work, picking up a new sheaf of state papers from his
desk.

The Marquis watched him for a moment and smiled a little to himself.
The young Duke took his work seriously, but was well-balanced about
it. A little inclined to be romantic--but aren't we all at nineteen?
There was no doubt of his ability, nor of his nobility. The Royal
Blood of England always came through.
