    His bridle-reins were golden chains,
      And, with a martial clank,
    At each leap he could feel his scabbard of steel
      Smiting his stallion's flank.

    Before him, like a blood-red flag,
      The bright flamingoes flew;
    From morn till night he followed their flight,
      O'er plains where the tamarind grew,
    Till he saw the roofs of Caffre huts,
      And the ocean rose to view.

    At night he heard the lion roar,
      And the hyena scream,
    And the river-horse, as he crushed the reeds,
      Beside some hidden stream;
    And it passed, like a glorious roll of drums,
      Through the triumph of his dream.

    The forests, with their myriad tongues,
      Shouted of liberty;
    And the Blast of the Desert cried aloud,
      With a voice so wild and free,
    That he started in his sleep and smiled
      At their tempestuous glee.

    He did not feel the driver's whip,
      Nor the burning heat of day;
    For Death had illumined the Land of Sleep,
      And his lifeless body lay
    A worn-out fetter, that the soul
      Had broken and thrown away!

LONGFELLOW




Reading maketh a full man, conference a ready man, and writing an exact
man. Histories make men wise; poets, witty; the mathematics, subtle;
logic and rhetoric, able to contend.

BACON




THE CHASE


Early one August morning a doe was feeding on Basin Mountain.

The sole companion of the doe was her only child, a charming little
fawn, whose brown coat was just beginning to be mottled with beautiful
spots.

The buck, his father, had been that night on a long tramp across the
mountain to Clear Pond, and had not yet returned. He went to feed on the
lily pads there.

The doe was daintily cropping tender leaves and turning from time to
time to regard her offspring. The fawn had taken his morning meal and
now lay curled up on a bed of moss.

If the mother stepped a pace or two farther away in feeding, the fawn
made a half-movement, as if to rise and follow her. If, in alarm, he
uttered a plaintive cry, she bounded to him at once.

It was a pretty picture,--maternal love on the one part, and happy trust
on the other.

The doe lifted her head with a quick motion. Had she heard something?
Probably it was only the south wind in the balsams. There was silence
all about in the forest. With an affectionate glance at her fawn, she
continued picking up her breakfast.

But suddenly she started, head erect, eyes dilated, a tremor in her
limbs. She turned her head to the south; she listened intently.

There was a sound, a distinct, prolonged note, pervading the woods. It
was repeated. The doe had no doubt now. It was the baying of a
hound--far off, at the foot of the mountain.

Time enough to fly; time enough to put miles between her and the hound
before he should come upon her fresh trail; yes, time enough. But there
was the fawn.

The cry of the hound was repeated, more distinct this time. The mother
bounded away a few paces. The fawn started up with an anxious bleat. The
doe turned; she came back; she couldn't leave him.

She walked away toward the west, and the little thing skipped after her.
It was slow going for the slender legs, over the fallen logs and through
the rasping bushes. The doe bounded in advance and waited. The fawn
scrambled after her, slipping and tumbling along, and whining a good
deal because his mother kept always moving away from him.

Whenever the fawn caught up, he was quite content to frisk about. He
wanted more breakfast, for one thing; and his mother wouldn't stand
still. She moved on continually; and his weak legs were tangled in the
roots of the narrow deer path.

Suddenly came a sound that threw the doe into a panic of terror,--a
short, sharp yelp, followed by a prolonged howl, caught up and re-echoed
by other bayings along the mountain side. The danger was certain now; it
was near. She could not crawl on in this way; the dogs would soon be
upon them. She turned again for flight. The fawn, scrambling after her,
tumbled over, and bleated piteously. Flight with the fawn was
impossible.

The doe returned, stood by him, head erect and nostrils distended.
Perhaps she was thinking. The fawn lay down contentedly, and the doe
licked him for a moment. Then, with the swiftness of a bird, she dashed
away, and in a moment was lost in the forest. She went in the direction
of the hounds.

She descended the slope of the mountain until she reached the more open
forest of hard wood. She was going due east, when she turned away toward
the north, and kept on at a good pace.

In five minutes more she heard the sharp yelp of discovery, and then the
deep-mouthed howl of pursuit. The hounds had struck her trail where she
turned, and the fawn was safe.

For the moment fear left her, and she bounded on with the exaltation of
triumph. For a quarter of an hour she went on at a slapping pace,
clearing the bushes with bound after bound, flying over the fallen logs,
pausing neither for brook nor ravine. The baying of the hounds grew
fainter behind.

After running at high speed perhaps half a mile farther, it occurred to
her that it would be safe now to turn to the west, and, by a wide
circuit, seek her fawn. But at the moment she heard a sound that chilled
her heart. It was the cry of a hound to the west of her. There was
nothing to do but to keep on, and on she went, with the noise of the
pack behind her.

In five minutes more she had passed into a hillside clearing. She heard
a tinkle of bells. Below her, down the mountain slope, were other
clearings broken by patches of woods. A mile or two down lay the valley
and the farmhouses. That way also her enemies were. Not a merciful heart
in all that lovely valley. She hesitated; it was only for an instant.

She must cross the Slide Brook valley, if possible, and gain the
mountain opposite. She bounded on; she stopped. What was that? From the
valley ahead came the cry of a searching hound. Every way was closed but
one, and that led straight down the mountain to the cluster of houses.
The hunted doe went down "the open," clearing the fences, flying along
the stony path.

As she approached Slide Brook, she saw a boy standing by a tree with a
raised rifle. The dogs were not in sight, but she could hear them coming
down the hill. There was no time for hesitation. With a tremendous burst
of speed she cleared the stream, and as she touched the bank heard the
"ping" of a rifle bullet in the air above her. The cruel sound gave
wings to the poor thing.

In a moment more she leaped into the travelled road. Women and children
ran to the doors and windows; men snatched their rifles. There were
twenty people who were just going to shoot her, when the doe leaped the
road fence, and went away across a marsh toward the foothills.

By this time the dogs, panting and lolling out their tongues, came
swinging along, keeping the trail, like stupids, and consequently
losing ground when the deer doubled. But when the doe had got into the
timber, she heard the savage brutes howling across the meadow. (It is
well enough, perhaps, to say that nobody offered to shoot the dogs.)

The courage of the panting fugitive was not gone, but the fearful pace
at which she had been going told on her. Her legs trembled, and her
heart beat like a trip-hammer. She slowed her speed, but still fled up
the right bank of the stream. The dogs were gaining again, and she
crossed the broad, deep brook. The fording of the river threw the hounds
off for a time. She used the little respite to push on until the baying
was faint in her ears.

Late in the afternoon she staggered down the shoulder of Bartlett, and
stood upon the shore of the lake. If she could put that piece of water
between her and her pursuers, she would be safe. Had she strength to
swim it?

At her first step into the water she saw a sight that sent her back with
a bound. There was a boat mid-lake; two men were in it. One was rowing;
the other had a gun in his hand. What should she do? With only a
moment's hesitation she plunged into the lake. Her tired legs could not
propel the tired body rapidly.

The doe saw the boat nearing her. She turned to the shore whence she
came; the dogs were lapping the water and howling there. She turned
again to the centre of the lake. The brave, pretty creature was quite
exhausted now. In a moment more the boat was on her, and the man at the
oars had leaned over and caught her.

"Knock her on the head with that paddle!" he shouted to the gentleman in
the stern. The gentleman _was_ a gentleman, with a kind face. He took
the paddle in his hand. Just then the doe turned her head and looked at
him with her great appealing eyes.

"I can't do it! I can't do it!" and he dropped the paddle. "Oh, let her
go!"

But the guide slung the deer round, and whipped out his hunting-knife.
And the gentleman ate that night of the venison.

CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER
(Adapted)




THE INCHCAPE ROCK


    No stir in the air, no stir in the sea,
    The ship was as still as she could be;
    Her sails from heaven received no motion,
    Her keel was steady in the ocean.

    Without either sign or sound of their shock,
    The waves flowed over the Inchcape Rock;
    So little they rose, so little they fell,
    They did not move the Inchcape Bell.

    The pious Abbot of Aberbrothock
    Had placed that bell on the Inchcape Rock;
    On a buoy in the storm it floated and swung,
    And over the waves its warning rung.

    When the Rock was hid by the surge's swell,
    The mariners heard the warning bell;
    And then they knew the perilous Rock,
    And blessed the Abbot of Aberbrothock.

    The sun in heaven was shining gay;
    All things were joyful on that day;
    The sea-birds screamed as they wheeled round,
    And there was joyance in their sound.

    The buoy of the Inchcape Bell was seen,
    A darker speck on the ocean green;
    Sir Ralph the Rover walked his deck,
    And he fixed his eye on the darker speck.

    He felt the cheering power of spring;
    It made him whistle, it made him sing:
    His heart was mirthful to excess,
    But the Rover's mirth was wickedness.

    His eye was on the Inchcape float;
    Quoth he: "My men, put out the boat,
    And row me to the Inchcape Rock,
    And I'll plague the Abbot of Aberbrothock."

    The boat is lowered, the boatmen row,
    And to the Inchcape Rock they go;
    Sir Ralph bent over from the boat,
    And he cut the bell from the Inchcape float.

    Down sank the bell, with a gurgling sound,
    The bubbles rose and burst around;
    Quoth Sir Ralph: "The next who comes to the Rock
    Won't bless the Abbot of Aberbrothock."

    Sir Ralph the Rover sailed away;
    He scoured the seas for many a day;
    And now, grown rich with plundered store,
    He steers his course for Scotland's shore.

    So thick a haze o'erspreads the sky
    They cannot see the sun on high;
    The wind hath blown a gale all day,
    At evening it hath died away.

    On the deck the Rover takes his stand;
    So dark it is, they see no land.
    Quoth Sir Ralph: "It will be lighter soon,
    For there is the dawn of the rising moon."

    "Canst hear," said one, "the breakers roar?
    For methinks we should be near the shore."
    "Now where we are I cannot tell,
    But I wish we could hear the Inchcape Bell."

    They hear no sound; the swell is strong;
    Though the wind hath fallen, they drift along,
    Till the vessel strikes with a shivering shock;
    Cried they: "It is the Inchcape Rock!"

    Sir Ralph the Rover tore his hair,
    He cursed himself in his despair:
    The waves rush in on every side;
    The ship is sinking beneath the tide.

    But, even in his dying fear,
    One dreadful sound could the Rover hear,--
    A sound as if, with the Inchcape Bell,
    The fiends below were ringing his knell.

SOUTHEY




A ROUGH RIDE


"Well, young ones, what be gaping at?"

"Your mare," said I, standing stoutly up, being a tall boy now; "I never
saw such a beauty, sir. Will you let me have a ride on her?"

"Think thou couldst ride her, lad? She will have no burden but mine.
Thou couldst never ride her! Tut! I would be loath to kill thee."

"Ride her!" I cried, with the bravest scorn, for she looked so kind and
gentle; "there never was a horse upon Exmoor but I could tackle in half
an hour. Only I never ride upon saddle. Take those leathers off of her."

He looked at me with a dry little whistle, and thrust his hands into his
pockets, and so grinned that I could not stand it. And Annie laid hold
of me in such a way that I was almost mad with her. And he laughed, and
approved her for doing so. And the worst of all was--he said nothing.

"Get away, Annie. Do you think I'm a fool, good sir? Only trust me with
her, and I will not override her."

