
One day Davy sat on a rock beside the sea, leaning on his father's
boathook, and gazing with longing eyes out upon the clear calm ocean, on
which several ships and boats were floating idly, for there was not a
breath of wind to fill their sails.

"Oh, how I wish my father would let me go to sea!" said Davy, with a
deep sigh.  "I wonder if I shall ever sail away beyond that line yonder,
far, far away, where the sky seems to sink into the sea!"  The line that
he spoke of was the horizon.

Davy heaved another sigh, and smiled; for, just at that moment, his eyes
fell on a small crab that stood before him with its claws up as if it
were listening to what he said.

"Oh, crab, crab," cried the little boy, "you're a happy beast!"

At that moment he moved the boathook, and the crab ran away in such a
desperate hurry that Davy opened his eyes wide and said, "Humph! maybe
ye're not a happy beast after all!"  While he sat thus, a stout
fisherman came up and asked him what he was thinking about.  On being
told, he said, "Will you come with me, boy, to the building-yard, and
I'll show you a ship on the `stocks.'  I'm goin' as one of her crew when
she's ready for sea, and perhaps by that time your father will let you
go too."  You may be sure that Davy did not refuse such a good offer; so
the man and the boy went hand in hand to the yard where ships were
built.  Davy had never been there before, and great was his surprise
when he saw a huge thing standing on dry land, with great pieces of wood
of all shapes sticking round it, like the skeleton of a whale; but
greater still was his surprise when the fisherman said, "There, lad,
that's the ship."

"Well," exclaimed Davy, opening his large eyes to their widest, "it
don't look like one just now!"

The fisherman laughed.  "That's true, lad; but come--I'll explain;" and
taking Davy by the hand, he led him nearer to the "skeleton" of the
ship, and began to explain the names and uses of the different parts.

"You see that long thick timber," he said, "that runs from this end,
which is the `stern,' to that end, which is the `bow'--well, that is the
`keel.'  This post or beam that rises out of it here is the
`stern-post,' and that one that rises up at the far end yonder is the
`stem' or `cutwater.'  These are the principal timbers of the vessel,
and upon their strength the safety of a ship chiefly depends.  The
sticks that you see branching out from the keel like deers' horns are
called `ribs;' they are very strong, and the timbers that fasten them
together at the top are called `beams.'  Of course these pieces of wood
are some of them far larger than any trees that you have ever seen; but
if you examine them you will find that each timber and rib is made up of
two or three separate pieces of wood, fastened very strongly together.
When all the beams are fixed they will begin to nail the planks on to
the ribs; iron bolts are used for this purpose, but by far the greater
number of the nails are made of wood.  After this is done the seams
between the planks will be filled with oakum and the whole ship covered
over with pitch and tar, just in the same way as your father does to his
boat when she lets in water.  Then the bottom of the ship will be
entirely covered with sheets of copper, to prevent the wood worms from
destroying it.  These little rascals would eat through a ship's bottom
and very soon sink it, but for the copper.  Next, the deck is laid down,
and the ship will be ready for `launching.'  A ship's masts and rigging
are always put in after she is launched.  Now, lad, what d'ye think of
it?" said the fisherman as he walked home again with Davy.  "The ship's
to be a `three-master' full-rigged, and is to go by the name o' the
_Fair Nancy_."

As he said this he smiled, patted the little boy on the head and left
him.  But Davy replied not a word to his friend's remarks.  His curly
head was stuffed quite full with the keel, timbers, ribs, beams,
stern-post, planks, and cutwater of the _Fair Nancy_; he could not
speak, he found it difficult even to think, so he thrust his hands deep
into his pockets, sat down on the shank of an anchor, and stared out to
sea.  In half an hour he heaved a very deep sigh indeed, and said, "Oh!
dear me, I wonder if I shall ever go to sea in the _Fair Nancy_!"

Time flew on, and little Davy fished with his father, and worked for his
mother, and paid many a visit to the building-yard, to watch the
progress of the ship--his ship, as he called it.  He begged very hard,
too, to be allowed to go in her when she should be ready for sea.  At
first neither father nor mother would hear of it, but at last they began
to think that Davy would make a very good sailor, for certainly he was
an active obedient boy; so, although they did not say Yes, they were not
nearly so determined as they used to be in saying No.

The day of the launch was a great day at the seaport where Davy lived.
The launch of a large ship is always a very interesting and wonderful
sight indeed; so that thousands and thousands of people flock from all
directions to see it.  Whichever way Davy looked he saw crowds of
people, some on foot, some on horses, some on donkeys, and some in
carriages, all streaming towards the one great point--the ship-builder's
yard.  It seemed quite like a holiday or a fair, and was such a bright,
warm, sunny day that people's hearts felt far lighter than usual.  Davy
saw all this at a glance the moment he left home; and, throwing his red
nightcap into the air, he gave one long loud hurrah! and ran away as
fast as his heavy fishing-boots would let him.

The ship was very different now from what it had been when he first saw
it.  There were four little masts put up in it, on which were hoisted
gay and gaudy flags.  Her "hull," or body, was now coppered and neatly
painted, while all the rubbish of the building-yard was cleared away, so
that everything looked neat and clean.  The stocks, or framework on
which she had been built, sloped towards the water, so that when the
