The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Wizard of the Sea, by Roy Rockwood


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Wizard of the Sea
       A Trip Under the Ocean


Author: Roy Rockwood



Release Date: December 19, 2006  [eBook #20132]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIZARD OF THE SEA***


E-text prepared by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Emmy, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 20132-h.htm or 20132-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/1/3/20132/20132-h/20132-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/1/3/20132/20132-h.zip)





THE WIZARD OF THE SEA

or

A Trip Under the Ocean

by

ROY ROCKWOOD

Author of "A Schoolboy's Pluck," Etc.







[Illustration]



A. L. Burt Company, Publishers
New York
Copyright, 1900
by
The Mershon Company



[Illustration: IN FRONT OF HIM WAS A HUGE OCTOPUS. P. 112.]




CONTENTS

       I. INTRODUCING OUR HEROES.                1 
      II. A TERRIFIC EXPLOSION.                  8 
     III. THE GREAT FIGHT.                      14 
      IV. ON THE ROAD.                          20 
       V. HOKE UMMER'S TREACHERY.               26 
      VI. OUT ON THE BAY.                       32 
     VII. A LIVELY ENCOUNTER.                   46 
    VIII. MONT IS PUNISHED.                     51 
      IX. DOCTOR HOMER WODDLE.                  55 
       X. THE SUBMARINE TERROR.                 61 
      XI. ON THE BACK OF THE MONSTER.           67 
     XII. INSIDE OF THE "SEARCHER."             74 
    XIII. THE OWNER OF THE SUBMARINE MONSTER.   81 
     XIV. THE ATTACK.                           86 
      XV. PRISONERS.                            91 
     XVI. THE MYSTERIES OF THE "SEARCHER."      98 
    XVII. THE DEVIL FISH.                      106 
   XVIII. MONT IS LOST.                        113 
     XIX. MONT'S PERIL.                        120 
      XX. THE WRECKS.                          128 
     XXI. ON LAND ONCE MORE.                   132 
    XXII. FIGHTING THE SAVAGES.                141 
   XXIII. ELECTRIFYING THE SAVAGES.            149 
    XXIV. A PEARL WORTH A FORTUNE.             159 
     XXV. THE MAN OF MYSTERY.                  169 
    XXVI. THROUGH THE EARTH.                   177 
   XXVII. THE ESCAPE--CONCLUSION.              183 



THE WIZARD OF THE SEA.




CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCING OUR HEROES.


"Hip, hurrah! Hip, hurrah!"

"Well, I declare; Mont Folsom, what is the matter with you?"

"Matter? Nothing is the matter, Tom, only I'm going to a boarding
school--just the best place on the face of the earth, too--Nautical
Hall, on the seacoast."

"Humph! I didn't know as how a boarding school was such a jolly place,"
grumbled old Tom Barnstable. "They'll cane ye well if ye git into
mischief, lad."

"Will they, Tom? What for? I never do any wrong," and Mont Folsom put on
a very sober face.

"Jest to hear the lad! Never do no mischief! Ha! ha! Why you're the
wust boy in the town fer mischief, Mont--an' everybody knows it. A
nautical school, did ye say. Maybe they'll take ye out in a ship some
time in that case."

"They do take the pupils out--every summer, so Carl Barnaby was telling
me. He goes there, you know, and so does Link Harmer."

"Then you an' Carl will make a team--an' Heaven help the folks as comes
in your way," added Tom Barnstable decidedly.

"But we are not so bad, I tell you, Tom," said Mont, but with a sly
twinkle in his bright eyes.

"Oh, no, not at all. But jest you tell me who drove the cow into Squire
Borden's dining room and who stuffed the musical instruments of the
brass band with sawdust at the Fourth of July celebration? You never do
anything, you little innocent lamb!"

And with a loud guffaw the old character sauntered down the street
toward his favorite resort, the general store.

Montrose Folsom continued on his way. He was a handsome youth of
fifteen, tall and square-shouldered, with a taking way about him that
had made him a host of friends. He was the only son of Mrs. Alice
Folsom, a rich widow.

A moment after leaving Tom Barnstable, Mont reached the home of his
particular chum, Lincoln Harmer. Throwing open the gate, he espied Link
in the barnyard, and made a rush forward.

"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!"

"That settles it, Mont, you're going with me next term!" exclaimed Link,
a bright fellow of our hero's age.

"If I wasn't I'd sing a dirge instead of shouting, Link. Yes, it's all
settled, and I'll be ready to start with you Monday."

"Your mother has written to Captain Hooper?"

"Yes, and got word back in to-day's mail."

"Good!"

"I'm to buy a lot of things down to Carley's store and then go home and
start to pack up. Come on."

Arm in arm, the two chums made their way to the large general store,
where Tom Barnstable was again encountered. Here Mont purchased some
extra underclothing his mother said he needed. While he was at this Tom
Barnstable came close to him.

"When are ye goin' away?" he asked.

"Monday morning, six o'clock."

"Don't fergit the old man, Mont. We've had lots of good times--fishin'
an' huntin', ye know."

That was Tom Barnstable, good-natured and willing to do, but an absolute
beggar at the slightest chance.

"I won't forget you, Tom, not I," said the merry-hearted lad. "Here you
are," and he slipped a shining dollar into the man's hand. A moment
later he called one of the store clerks aside.

"Have you any of those April-fool cigars left?" he whispered.

"Yes--just four."

"I'll take them."

The cigars bought and paid for, the boy put three of them in an inside
pocket and then turned the fourth over to Tom Barnstable.

"Here, Tom, put the pipe away and have a real Havana to celebrate the
parting," he said, and the old man immediately did as requested.

The cigar burnt all right for just half a minute. Then something began
to bulge at the end. It kept growing larger and larger, forming into
what is called a Pharaoh's serpent, three or four feet long.

Tom Barnstable's eyes began to blaze. He stared at Mont wildly.

"Who--what--what is that?" he stammered. "Great Scott! I've got 'em!"

And, dashing the weed to the floor, he rushed from the country store,
with the boys' laugh ringing in his ears.

"He'll remember you now, no doubt of that!" said Link merrily.

The day was Saturday, and it was a busy one for both Mont and Link, with
packing trunks and bags, and getting ready otherwise.

The Sabbath passed quietly enough, and five o'clock Monday morning found
the two boys on their way to Nautical Hall.

The run of the train was to New York, and here they fell in with their
mutual chum, Carl Barnaby, a rich young fellow from their town, and
several others who will be introduced as our story progresses.

From the Metropolis the boys took another train directly for the
seacoast. At Pemberton they had to change cars, and here they met
several more scholars of Nautical Hall.

"There is Ike Brosnan and Hoke Ummer!" cried Link. "Two of our fellows."

The newcomers were quickly introduced. Ike Brosnan looked a whole-souled
fellow and full of fun. Hoke Ummer, on the other hand, seemed of a
decidedly sour turn of mind.

"Hoke is a good deal of a bully," whispered Link, later on. "You want to
steer clear of him."

"Thanks; he'll not step on my toes," returned Mont firmly. "The first
man who tries to haze or bully me will get his fingers burnt."

"Oh, the boys will be sure to want a little fun. You mustn't be too
particular."

"I don't mean that--I mean they mustn't go too far," replied Mont.

Little did he dream of all the hazings and larks to be played ere that
school term should be over.

The journey to the seacoast was devoid of any special incident. The ride
on the train was magnificent, and all enjoyed it thoroughly.

Towards nightfall a landing was made not many miles from Eagle Point.
Here at the dock a long stage was in waiting to take them to the Hall.
The four boys, along with a dozen others, got aboard, and they moved off
rapidly for Nautical Hall, two miles distant.




CHAPTER II.

A TERRIFIC EXPLOSION.


Nautical Hall was a large building of brick, stone, and wood situated at
the top of a small hill. In front was a level parade ground, and to one
side the grounds sloped down to the edge of a small bay, while at the
other they were flanked by a heavy wood.

The institution was owned and managed by Captain Hooper, an ex-army and
-navy officer, who looked to the military drill of the boys and left the
educational department to an able corps of assistants. With the
assistants and the gallant captain himself we will become better
acquainted as our tale proceeds.

Mont soon became acquainted with nearly all of the one hundred and odd
boys who attended Nautical Hall, and became the leader of a set composed
of himself, Link Harmer, Barry Powell, another lively lad, Carl Barnaby,
his old-time chum, Piggy Mumps, a fat youth, and Sam Schump, a German
pupil, as good-natured as can possibly be imagined.

As soon as the boys arrived they were assigned to their places. Mont was
put in the room with the crowd above mentioned. This room connected with
another, in which were installed the bully, Hoke Ummer; Bill Goul, his
toady, and half a dozen of the bully's cronies.

"This room will get into a free fight with that gang some day," was
Barry Powell's comment, after Schump, the German boy, had related how
the bully had treated him.

"Dot's it, mine gracious," replied Sam Schump. "Ve vill git togedder an'
show dem vot ve can do, aint it!"

Several days were spent in getting ready for the term. Mont was placed
in the first class, with twenty others, and he was likewise put in an
awkward squad to learn the steps and manual of arms, for the boys had
regular military and naval exercises.

As luck would have it, our hero was placed under one of the assistant
teachers, and fared very well, but poor Piggy Mumps was put in a squad
under Hoke Ummer, who did all he could to make the fat boy miserable.

"Eyes right! Eyes left! Front!" shouted Hoke. "Why don't you mind, you
clown!" he added to poor Piggy, who was in a sweat to do as ordered.

"Vot you say, eyes right an' den eyes left, ven da vos right?" asked
Piggy innocently.

"Silence! Eyes right! Eyes left! You clown, can't you twist your eyes,
or are you too fat?" roared Hoke.

"Ton't vos call me a clown, you--you unchentlemanly poy!" cried Piggy
wrathfully, when without warning Hoke fell upon him and hit him a blow
on the neck.

This was too much for Piggy, and he ran out of the line and closed with
the bully. But he was no match for the big boy, and Piggy would have
been severely punished had not Hoke been caught by the shoulder and
hurled backward against a wall.

"Let him alone!" came in the voice of Mont. "You have no right to touch
him, Hoke Ummer."

"Haven't I, though?" sneered the bully. "Do you suppose I'm going to be
made a fool of by a lump of fat like that? You clear out, or I'll give
you a dose, too!"

"You can try it on any time you please," replied our hero quietly.

"A fight! A fight!" exclaimed half a dozen at once, and the awkward
squad was broken up on the instant.

"A fight?" repeated the bully. "He'll get a thrashing--that's all it
will amount to. Come on down to the woods if you want to have it out."

"I'm willing to meet you," returned Mont, and started along, followed by
Piggy, Link, and a dozen others.

But scarcely had the boys gone a rod before the belfry bell rang out
loudly five times.

That was the signal for assembly on the parade grounds.

"Hullo, we can't go now!" cried Link. "Boys, you'll have to postpone
that mill till later."

"I'll meet you after assembly," growled Hoke Ummer, under his breath,
as Captain Hooper put in an appearance.

"I'll be ready any time," rejoined our hero.

"Boys, we are to have visitors in fifteen minutes!" shouted out Captain
Hooper. "Attention! The captains will form their companies on the campus
and a salute will be fired as the visitors enter the grounds."

Orders were quickly passed, and inside of five minutes the boy cadets
were drawn up in long lines, with the officers of the two companies in
their proper places.

The visitors were old friends of the captain who had come to the Hall
merely out of curiosity. As their carriages approached, a cannon was run
out, and Link and several others were detailed to fire it off.

Link chose Mont to assist, and before long all was in readiness to touch
her off.

"Here they come!" shouted somebody.

"Stand ready to fire!" sang out Captain Hooper, in true military style.
"Steady, boys, now--I expect all to make the best possible appearance.
Fire!"

Link touched the cannon off, while our hero and several others stood
close at hand.

Bang!

The report was terrific. The old cannon was overcharged, and was blown
into a thousand pieces, which flew in all directions.

Both Link and Mont were hurled flat, and while the former was seen to
stagger up again, our hero lay as one dead!




CHAPTER III.

THE GREAT FIGHT.


"He is dead!"

"Run for the doctor!"

"A piece struck me, too!"

"The cannon must have been overloaded!"

Such were some of the cries which went up after the awful explosion.

Captain Hooper stood close at hand, and instantly went to our hero's
assistance.

He caught the youth up in his arms and carried him to a shady spot.

"Bring some water," he commanded, but water was already at hand. With it
he bathed Mont's head.

For a minute there was an intense silence. Then, with a quiver, the lad
opened his eyes.

"Wha--what---- Did the cannon burst?" he asked feebly.

"Hurrah! He's all right!" shouted Link joyfully, and inside of five
minutes more Mont stood up and gazed about him in wonder.

But he was too weak to take part in the review, and while this went on
sat in a rustic chair under the oak tree, with several of the lady
visitors by his side.

The reception to the guests over, the cadets were dismissed, and the
crowd lost no time in dispersing.

Link remained with his chum, and both walked towards the lake.

"How do you feel?" asked Link anxiously.

"Rather faint in the legs, to tell the truth," was the reply. "But I
guess I'll soon get over it."

"Ready to do that fighting?" demanded a rough voice at their elbow, and
Hoke Ummer ranged up at their side.

"For shame, Hoke, Mont isn't in condition, and you know it," said Link.

"Oh, nonsense!" growled the bully. "That cannon affair was only a fake.
He wasn't hurt a bit."

This remark angered our hero, and, stepping up, he faced the bully
defiantly.

"I will fight you whenever you say," he said stoutly.

A boy standing near heard the remark, and the news spread like magic.

"A fight between Hoke and Mont. Come on down to the woods."

The schoolboy cadets needed no second invitation. A score started from
the campus instantly.

They were about evenly divided as to who would win.

The bully was known to be heavy and strong.

Yet our hero had shown lots of pluck.

In a corner of the grounds, shut out from view from the school windows
by a belt of trees, the boys assembled to witness the conflict.

Mont prepared for the encounter, assisted by Link.

Ummer, satisfied of an easy victory, placed himself in the hands of his
toady and backer, Bill Goul.

When the combatants were declared ready they faced each other.

As Hoke looked into the unflinching eyes of his opponent the smile of
satisfaction he had worn for the past few hours suddenly faded.

He could see he must do his best to win.

"But I'll mash him, see if I don't," he said to his toadies.

"That's right, Hoke!"

"Show him what you can do."

Mont said nothing.

"He's a tough one," whispered Link. "Beware of a foul."

"I'll have my eyes open."

The boys took off their coats and vests.

A ring was formed and our hero and the bully got into position.

"Time!" cried one of the older boys, and the great fight began.

At first Mont was cautious, for he wanted to take his opponent's
measure, so to speak.

Sure of victory, the bully rushed at him, and aimed a blow at Mont's
nose.

Our hero ducked, and Hoke's fist only sawed the air.

"That was a clean duck."

"Land him one, Hoke!"

"Go for him, Folsom!"

Around and around the ring went the two boys.

Then the bully aimed another blow at our hero.

As quick as a flash our hero warded it off.

Then out shot his fist, and the bully of Nautical Hall got a crashing
blow in the chin that knocked him clean off his feet.

