them to her aunt. This had angered Miss Nevin to the extent that she had
immediately ordered Eleanor to her room without telling her from whom
she had received her information.

For three days Eleanor had remained in her room, refusing to speak to
her aunt, who, at the end of that time, decreed that if she did not at
once apologize roundly and return to school her violin and piano would
both be taken from her until she should again become reasonable.

In the face of this new punishment, which was the severest penalty that
could be imposed upon her, Eleanor remained obdurate. Her violin and
piano were removed from her room and the piano in the drawing room was
closed. Still she stubbornly held out, and it was not until the day
before the beginning of the new term that she went to her aunt and
coldly agreed to comply with her wishes, providing she might have her
violin and piano once more.

Aside from this conversation they had exchanged no words, and Eleanor
therefore entered school that morning still believing the Phi Sigma Tau
to be at the bottom of her misfortune.

In spite of her recent assertion that she could not forgive Eleanor,
Grace's resentment vanished at sight of her enemy's humiliation. A
public apology was the last thing that either she or her friends
desired. Her promise to Mrs. Gray loomed up before her. If Eleanor
really did believe the Phi Sigma Tau innocent, then perhaps this would
be the opportunity for reconciliation. After a little thought, she tore
a sheet of paper from her notebook and wrote:

          "DEAR ELEANOR:

          "The members of the Phi Sigma Tau are very sorry
          about your having to make an apology. We did not
          wish it. We think you showed a great deal of the
          right kind of courage in making the public apology
          you did both to Miss Thompson and to us. Won't
          you come back to the Phi Sigma Tau?

                                    "YOUR SINCERE FRIENDS."

At recess Grace showed the note to her friends. She had signed her name
to the note and requested the others to do the same. Here she met with
some opposition. Nora, Marian Barber and Eva Allen were strongly opposed
to sending it. But Jessica, Anne and Miriam agreed with Grace that it
would be in fulfillment of the original promise to Mrs. Gray to help
Eleanor whenever they could do so. So the Phi Sigma Tau signed their
names and the note was passed to Eleanor directly after recess.

She opened it, read it through, and an expression of such intense scorn
passed over her face that Nora, who sat near her and who was covertly
watching her, knew at once that Grace's flag of truce had been trampled
in the dust.

Picking up her pen, Eleanor wrote rapidly for a brief space, underlined
what she had written, signed her name with a flourish, and, folding and
addressing her note, sent it to Grace.

Rather surprised at receiving an answer so quickly, Grace unfolded the
note. Then she colored, looked grave and, putting the note in the back
of the text-book she was holding, went on studying.

By the time school was over for the day, the girls of the Phi Sigma Tau
knew that Eleanor had once more repudiated their overtures of friendship
and were curious to see what she had written.

"Don't keep us in suspense. Let us see what she wrote," exclaimed Nora
O'Malley as the seven girls crossed the campus together.

"Here it is," said Grace, handing Nora the note.

Nora eagerly unfolded the paper and the girls crowded around, reading
over her shoulder, Grace walking a little apart from them. Then Nora
read aloud:

          "TO THE PHI SIGMA TAU:

          "Your kind appreciation of my conduct in the
          matter of apology is really remarkable, coupled
          with the fact that your inability to refrain from
          discussing my personal affairs with Mrs. Gray
          forced this recent humiliation upon me. To ask me
          to return to your society is only adding insult to
          injury. I am not particularly surprised at this,
          however. It merely proves you to be greater
          hypocrites than you at first seemed.

                                           "ELEANOR SAVELL."

"Well, of all things!" exclaimed Marian Barber. "Grace Harlowe, if you
ever attempt to conciliate her again, I'll disown you."

"What does she mean by saying that we discussed her affairs with Mrs.
Gray?" cried Jessica impatiently. "We have always tried to put her best
side out to dear Mrs. Gray, and you all know it."

"The best thing to do," said Anne, smiling a little, "is to tell Mrs.
Gray all about it. We might as well live up to the reputation Eleanor
has thrust upon us. It isn't pleasant to admit that we have failed with
Eleanor, but it isn't our fault, at any rate. I am going there this
afternoon. I'll tell her."

"May I go with you, Anne?" asked Grace.

"You know I'd love to have you," Anne replied.

"As long as I was the first to agree to look out for Eleanor, I have
decided I had better be with you at the finish," said Grace, as the two
girls walked slowly up the drive.

"The finish?" asked Anne. "Why do you say that, Grace?"

"You've heard about the last straw that broke the camel's back, haven't
you?" asked Grace. "Well, Eleanor's note is the last straw. I know I
said that once before, and I broke my word. I don't intend to break it
again, however. I am going to ask Mrs. Gray to release me from my
promise."




CHAPTER XVIII

THE PLAY'S THE THING


Excitement ran high in the three lower classes one morning in early
February when Miss Thompson requested that those interested in the
production of a Shakespearian play go to the library directly after
school, there to discuss the situation.

When the gong sounded dismissal, about sixty girls with dramatic
aspirations made for the library. The Phi Sigma Tau entered in a body.
They had decided at recess to carry away as many laurels as possible,
providing they could get into the cast.

Miss Tebbs, teacher of elocution; Miss Kane, teacher of gymnastics, and
Miss Thompson stood at one side of the library talking earnestly as they
noted each newcomer.

"Oh, look!" whispered Jessica, clutching Nora's arm. "There's Eleanor
and her crowd."

"Then look out for squalls," replied Nora. "She'll try to be the whole
cast, and will get a magnificent case of sulks if she can't have her own
way."

"Sh-h-h," warned Eva Allen. "She'll hear you. Besides, Miss Thompson is
going to speak."

The principal held up her hand for silence and the groups of girls
engaged in subdued conversation ceased talking and turned their
attention toward her.

"You are all aware that each year the senior class gives a play, which
they choose, manage and produce with no assistance save that given by
Miss Tebbs," said the principal. "So far the three lower classes have
never given a play. Some time ago Miss Tebbs suggested that as we need
money for special books in the library which our yearly appropriation
does not cover, we might present a Shakespearian play with good effect,
choosing the cast from the freshman, sophomore and junior classes.

"The first thing to be thought of is the play itself. After due
consideration, we decided that 'As You Like It' is better suited to our
needs than any of the other Shakespearian dramas. In it are twenty-one
speaking characters, besides numerous lords, pages and attendants. We
shall probably use about fifty girls, thus making it an elaborate
production. By the attendance this afternoon I should imagine that you
are heartily in favor of our project and that we shall have no trouble
in making up the cast. As Miss Tebbs has charge of the situation, I
yield the floor to her. She will explain to you about the giving out of
the parts."

There was an enthusiastic clapping of hands as Miss Thompson smiled and
nodded to the girls, then left the room. Miss Tebbs then stated that on
Friday afternoon after school there would be a "try out" for parts in
the gymnasium, in order to find out what girls were most capable of
doing good work in the cast. Just what the test would be had not been
decided. It would be well, however, to study the chosen play and become
familiar with it; also each girl must bring a copy of the play with her.
If the girls wished to ask any questions, she would answer them as far
as possible. Miss Kane would help with the posing and coaching when the
thing was fairly started.

The girls crowded around Miss Tebbs and Miss Kane, asking all sorts of
questions.

"One at a time, girls," laughed Miss Tebbs. "I have not asked you to
enact a mob scene."

Under cover of the confusion, Grace and her three friends slipped out of
the library.

"'The play's the thing,'" quoted Nora, "and me for it."

"That is for the judges to decide," said Jessica sagely. "Perhaps they
won't even look at you."

"Do you think any one could see my Irish countenance and fail to be
impressed?" demanded Nora.

"Really and truly, Nora, the more you travel with Hippy, the more you
talk like him," remarked Grace.

"I consider that a compliment," replied Nora, laughing. "Hippy says
awfully funny things."

"Look at our little Anne," said Jessica. "She is actually dreaming. Tell
us about it, dear."

"I was thinking of the play," said Anne dreamily. "I do so want a part,
if only a little one."

"You'll be chosen for Rosalind, see if you aren't," predicted Grace.

"Oh, no," said Anne. "Some one else will be sure to get that. Besides,
I'm too short."

"But, Anne, you've had stage experience," said Jessica. "You ought to
get it."

"Not in a Shakespearian play," replied Anne, shaking her head. "I might
not do well at all with that kind of part."

"Never fear, you'll be the star before you know it," said Nora.

By Friday, there was nothing on the school horizon save the cherished
play. Before school, at recess, and even in classes it was the topic of
the hour. To the eager girls the day seemed particularly long, and a
heartfelt sigh went up when the dismissal gong rang.

As the four chums hurried toward the gymnasium, Anne suddenly caught
Grace by the arm with a faint gasp of surprise. Glancing quickly down at
her friend to ascertain the cause of Anne's sudden agitation, Grace saw
her friend's eyes following the figure of a tall, distinguished-looking
man who was just disappearing down the corridor leading to the
gymnasium.

"What's the matter, Anne?" asked Grace. "Do you know that man?"

"No," replied Anne, "but I know who he is."

"He must be a remarkable person, considering the way you gasped and
clutched me," laughed Grace.

"That man is Everett Southard, the great Shakespearian actor," said Anne
almost reverently. "I saw him in 'Hamlet' and his acting is wonderful."

"No wonder you were surprised," said Grace.

"It fairly takes my breath. I've seen ever so many pictures of him and
read magazine articles about him. What do you suppose he is doing in
Oakdale, and at the High School--of all places?"

"Time will tell," said Nora. Then she suddenly clasped her hands. "O
girls, I know! He's here for the try-out!"

"Why of course he is," exclaimed Grace. "Now I remember Miss Tebbs
showed me a magazine picture of him one day last year, and told me that
she had known him since childhood. Besides, he is playing a three-night
engagement in Albany. I read it in the paper last night. It's as plain
as can be. Miss Tebbs has asked him to run up here and pick out the
cast."

"Good gracious," said Jessica. "I shall retire in confusion if he looks
at me. I won't dare aspire to a part now, and I had designs on the part
of Phebe."

"Don't be a goose," said Nora. "He's only a man. He can't hurt you.
I think having him here will be a lark. Won't some of those girls put
on airs, though. There he is talking with Miss Tebbs now."

The girls entered the gymnasium to find there nearly all of those who
had attended the first meeting in the library increased by about a score
of girls who had decided at the last minute to try for parts. Eleanor
stood at one end of the great room, with Edna Wright and Daisy Culver.
Grace thought she had never seen Eleanor looking more beautiful. She was
wearing a fur coat and hat far too costly for a school girl, and carried
a huge muff. Her coat was thrown open, disclosing a perfectly tailored
gown of brown, with trimmings of dull gold braid. She was talking
animatedly and her two friends were apparently hanging on every word she
uttered.

"No wonder Eleanor has an opinion of herself," said Nora. "Look at Daisy
and Edna. They act as though Eleanor were the Sultan of Turkey or the
Shah of Persia, or some other high and mighty dignitary. They almost
grovel before her."

"Never mind, Nora," said Grace. "As long as you retain your Irish
independence what do you care about what other girls do?"

"I don't care. Only they do act so silly," said Nora, with a sniff of
contempt.

"Sh-h-h!" said Jessica softly. "Miss Tebbs is going to call the meeting
to order."

A hush fell over the assembled girls as Miss Tebbs stepped forward to
address them.

"I am very glad to see so many girls here," she said. "It shows that you
are all interested in the coming play. Although you cannot all have
parts, I hope that you will feel satisfied with the selection made this
afternoon. In order that each member of the cast may be chosen on her
merit alone, my old friend, Mr. Southard, kindly consented to come from
Albany for the sole purpose of giving us the benefit of his great
Shakespearian experience. Allow me to introduce Mr. Everett Southard."

He was greeted with a round of applause, and after bowing his thanks,
the eminent actor plunged at once into the business at hand.

He spoke favorably of the idea of an all-girl cast, saying that each
year many girls' colleges presented Shakespearian plays with marked
success. The main thing to be considered was the intelligent delivery of
the great dramatist's lines. The thing to do would be to find out what
girls could most ably portray the various characters, it would be
necessary to try each girl separately with a few lines from the play. In
order to facilitate matters, he suggested that those girls who really
desired speaking parts step to one side of the room, while those who
wished merely to make the stage pictures, step to the other.

Out of the eighty girls, about thirty-five only stepped over to the side
from which the principal characters were to be chosen. Many of the girls
had no serious intentions whatever regarding the play, and the awe
inspired by Mr. Southard's presence made them too timid to venture to
open their mouths before him. Jessica, whose courage had fled, would
have been among the latter if Nora had not seized her firmly by the arm
as she prepared to flee and marched her over with the rest of the Phi
Sigma Tau. Eleanor and Edna Wright were among the junior contestants,
while there was a good showing of sophomores and freshmen.

Mr. Southard took in the aspirants with keen, comprehensive glance. His
eyes rested a shade longer on Eleanor. She made a striking picture as
she stood looking with apparent indifference at the girls about her.
Then his quick eye traveled to Grace's fine face and graceful figure,
and then on to Anne, whose small face was alive with the excitement of
the moment.

A breathless silence had fallen over the room. Every eye was fixed on
the actor, who stood with a small leather-covered edition of "As You
Like It" in his hand. Miss Tebbs stood by with a pencil and pad. The
great try-out was about to begin.




CHAPTER XIX

THE TRY OUT


"Will the young lady on the extreme right please come forward?" said Mr.
Southard pleasantly, indicating Marian Barber, who rather timidly
obeyed, taking the book he held out to her. At his request, she began to
read from Orlando's entrance, in the first scene of the fourth act. She
faltered a little on the first two lines, but shortly regained her
courage and read on in her best manner. When she had read about a dozen
lines he motioned for her to cease reading, said something to Miss
Tebbs, who made an entry on her pad, and beckoned to the girl next to
Marian to come forward.
