walk across the fields. I'll run up to my room and fetch my hat and
gloves, and bring yours down at the same time, Molly."

Five minutes later the two girls had set off. It was now holiday time at
the Towers, and almost immediately on their arrival they were greeted by
a whole bevy of children, who rushed up the avenue in a state of
breathless excitement.

"What do you think, Molly?" exclaimed Kitty, stammering almost in her
eagerness. "Oh, you'll never guess, for it is so uncommon and
unexpected--father and mother both went to London this morning?"

"Both--to London?" exclaimed Molly, stepping back a pace or two, while a
look of surprise, and even consternation, spread itself over her round,
fair face.

"Dear me, yes!" exclaimed Nell.

"And they were awfully jolly about it," exclaimed Boris; "and mother has
promised to bring me a rabbit."

"And me a dove," screamed Kitty.

"And perhaps I'm to have a shaggy pony all to myself," exclaimed Nell;
"but it's only perhaps. It's perhaps, too, with you, Boris, and you,
Kitty; you oughtn't to forget that."

"Oh, bother perhapses!" exclaimed Kitty. "I know I'm to have my rabbit;
he's to have lop-ears and long fur, and he's to be snow-white, if
possible. I described him fully to mother last night when she came to
tuck me up. I kept pulling my eyes open to stay awake for the purpose."

"And I told mother that I wished for a ring-dove," said Boris. "I want a
ring-dove awfully, for there's an empty cage in the attic that will just
fit it. Oh, I do hope, I do hope, that it will come!"

He looked almost sad as he spoke and glanced at Nell, who was not
looking at him.

"Nell, come here," exclaimed Molly suddenly. "Hester, you can explain to
Boris and Kitty what you have come about, and they can take you round
and show you the ball-room. Come along, Nell, I want to talk to you."

Molly put her arm round Nell and drew her down a side walk.

"Now, Nell," she said, "you must explain all this to me. Why has mother
gone to London? I am not so much surprised about father; father does go
sometimes, but mother. Why has she gone? Answer me, Nell; tell me what
you know."

"I don't know anything," said Nell. "Father was out all day yesterday,
and mother looked very sad. She didn't cry or anything of that sort, of
course; but she looked sad, and then father came home about tea-time
quite jolly and in high spirits, and he said something to mother and
they went into the study together; and then father shouted to Jane
Macalister to come to them, and Jane went; and presently we were told
that father and mother were to go to London this morning, and that
they'd be away perhaps a week, perhaps ten days. Jane told us that, and
then mother came into the room and she said the same thing, and she
looked kind of _pretence_-merry you know, and said that _perhaps_ she'd
bring us back things. It was then Kitty asked for the rabbit, and Boris
for the dove, and Guy wanted Star-Land and Harry some new carpenter's
tools, and mother promised everything with a perhaps tacked on; but I
don't think anyone noticed the perhaps except me, and all the time she
kept smiling with her lips, but her eyes were so sad."

"And you asked for a pony, Nell?"

Nell coloured crimson.

"No, I didn't," she replied; "but mother turned to me and put her arm
round me and said, 'If the others get their things you shall have the
wish of your heart, a shaggy pony.'"

"And what did you say to that, Nell?"

"I whispered back to her that I didn't want her to spend her money; and
then she kissed me very hard."

"And did father promise things?"

"He said that the house should be refurnished, and that we should go to
the sea, and he would buy new horses and a lovely carriage for mother.
Father was lively; I never saw him so gay."

"And they went off this morning?"

"Yes, very early; I wasn't even dressed, but I jumped out of bed and ran
to the window and saw them driving away."

"And that's all you know, Nell?" exclaimed Molly.

"Yes, that's all I know."

"Now, tell me what you think."

"What I think?" replied Nell. "I--" she hesitated. "No, I'd rather not."

"You must, Nell, you must. Remember I'm your own cosy old Moll; remember
I understand you, and I'm the eldest girl and mother's right hand.
There's something that you think very, very hard, Nell, and you have
wise thoughts, though you are so young. Tell me what they are; tell me
at once."

Molly knelt on the grass as she spoke and put her arms round Nell, who
leant up against her and laid her head on her shoulder.

"Now, Nell, speak."

Nell rubbed her cheek against Molly's, as if she found great comfort in
the contact.

"I think that mother is unhappy," she said, "and that, that we won't get
the presents."

"Come along and let's find Jane Macalister," exclaimed Molly suddenly.
She caught Nell's hand and rushed with her towards the house.

When Jane was not teaching, she was, generally, cooking, or mending
clothes, or putting the store-room in order. Jane never wasted a moment
of her time, and she was extremely fond of taking up all the loose
threads of work which other people had dropped. When the girls,
therefore, now found themselves in the great central hall, and Nell's
clear, high voice shouted for Jane, the single word, "store-room,"
seemed to echo back to them from somewhere in the clouds.

The store-room, where the largest supply of preserves and dried goods
was kept, was high up in the old tower--higher up even than the
schoolroom.

"You stay downstairs, Nell," exclaimed Molly; "I wish to see Jane
alone." She reached the spiral stairs, which she began to mount quickly.
By-and-by with panting breath she arrived at the store-room. The door
was open, but there was no Jane.

"Where are you, Jane Macalister?" called Molly.

"Linen press," called Jane from still higher up.

Molly mounted once more. Jane, with an old pillow-case pinned round her
head and a huge apron on, was on her knees sorting feathers.

"What are you doing?" exclaimed Molly.

"Don't speak to me for a moment, Molly; I'm in a perfect rage,"
exclaimed Jane. "There stand out of the draught, child, or you'll get
all this fluff into your hair. I have just discovered that the feathers
put into these last pillows were not properly cured, so I've been
obliged to take them all out, and I'm sprinkling them with lime. Faugh,
what a mess the place is in. This is what comes of taking in an
incompetent kitchen-maid like Susan Hicks. She did not half do the work
of sorting and curing these feathers. Now, what is it you want, Molly?
You can see for yourself that I'm up to my eyes in work."

"I can," said Molly. "Well, I'll wait for a moment."

"You'll wait for a moment!" screamed Jane. "I tell you I shan't have
done for hours. There are at least a dozen pillows to be unpicked and
their contents well sorted, and sprinkled with lime. I brought up a
sandwich in my pocket, and don't mean to come downstairs until the job
is done, and well done, too. Nothing frets me like half-finished work,
and these pillows would get on my brain at night if I didn't see to
them."

Molly slowly crossed the linen-press room, and stood by the window.

"There, child," exclaimed Jane, "you're exactly in my light. If you have
anything to say, say it and have done with it. By the way, how is Nora?
I hope they're not spoiling her at the Grange."

"Nora is getting on nicely, thank you."

"It was a lucky chance for her," continued Jane, "that she happened to
be near the Grange when she got hurt. Hester Thornton is sure to give
her every comfort. Molly, you're exactly in my light."

Molly moved to one side of the window.

Jane Macalister went on vigorously with her work, the fluff from the
feathers rose in the air, the smell of the lime was pungent.

"Faugh," continued Jane; "here's a lump for you. Susan Hicks, you'd
better keep out of my way for the present. 'Pon my word! look at this
quill, why I could make a pen with it; disgraceful, perfectly
disgraceful. Molly, I wish you wouldn't fidget. What in the world do you
want to say to me?"

"I want to ask you this," said Molly. "Why has mother gone to London?"

Jane bent low over her work, some fluff got into her nose and made her
sneeze.

"Look here, Molly," she exclaimed; "your mother went to London with your
father because she wished to, I suppose."

"Yes, but why did she wish it?"

"That I am not prepared to tell you, my dear."

Molly stamped her foot.

"I wish you'd look at me, Jane," she said, "and leave off fiddling with
those horrid, detestable feathers. When--when one is quite wretched,
what do feathers matter? I have come home to find father and mother
gone."

"And me over the feathers," interrupted Jane. "Well, I suppose people
want pillows, whether they're happy or miserable. I never knew before,
at least, that they didn't."

"Jane," said Molly, "you're hiding something from me."

Jane Macalister suddenly rose to her feet. She came up to Molly and took
her hand. "I didn't know you'd come over this morning, my love," she
said. "I have been told certain things, and what I'm told in confidence
cart-ropes won't drag from me. Your father and mother have gone to
London because there is a hope, just a hope, that terrible trouble may
be averted. It's all uncertainty, and it's all suspense at present,
Molly; and those who are cowards will bear it badly, and those who are
brave will bear it well. That's all I can tell you, my love; and now let
me get back to the feathers, or I won't have them done by night."




CHAPTER XIII.

THE FANCY BALL.


The best cure for anxiety, short of removing it altogether, is plenty of
work. Molly came down from her interview with Jane Macalister with a
sickening sense of coming disaster filling her heart. Hers was not a
particularly hopeful nature. By nature she was inclined to look at the
dark side rather than at the bright. She had plenty of courage and was
unselfish to a fault; but when she arrived in the hall now and found all
the rest of the children gathered round Hester and was greeted by peals
of excited laughter and shouts of excited joy, she would have given a
great deal to have been able to run away and hide herself.

This was impossible, however; she was dragged into the eager group of
children, and was obliged not only to listen to their remarks, but to
make suggestions of her own. In the absence of Mr. and Mrs. Lorrimer,
Molly had to decide whether the ball-room could be used or not. She
would have given the world to say no, but scarcely dared to do this with
all those eager delighted faces gazing at her.

"I am sure mother will consent," she said after a pause. "I will write
to her to-day and ask her; but I think we may act as if her consent were
already given. Now, shall we come to the ball-room and see what is
necessary to be done?"

"Oh, what a darling Molly you are," exclaimed all the other Lorrimers in
a breath. She found herself whirled in their midst to the old
ball-room, and the rest of the morning was spent in eager and animated
discussion.

This magnificent old room was apart from the rest of the house. It was
entered by a covered way from one of the drawing-rooms; but this
entrance had long been closed, and the room itself--since the family
purse had become so low--was only made use of as a play-room for the
children in wet weather, and as a place for all kinds of lumber and
rubbish. Hester and Molly were neither of them artistic in their tastes
or ideas, but they were intensely practical in all they said and did.
Molly proposed that the room should be first cleared out and thoroughly
cleaned, and that early on the following morning Annie Forest should
come and see it. The room was lit by seven tall Gothic windows, and had
a high arched roof of oak. Round the windows the thick ivy which only
years can produce hung in heavy masses. Some of this must be cleared
away, and some light draperies must relieve the dark tone of the walls.
The gallery was pronounced sufficiently sound for the band to stand
there, and Annie's original idea of placing Nora in the gallery as a
sort of queen of the ceremonies was superseded by a better one. She was
to have a special throne made for her at the other end of the ball-room.
There she would not only see perfectly, but would also be seen. It
seemed simple enough to have a ball in such a lovely room, and Hester
arranged to send some men over that very afternoon to begin the work of
clearing out the rubbish.

"We don't wish to take possession of the Towers," she said. "We only
want the loan of the ball-room, and of this delightful lawn just
beyond, where we can put up a marquee or tent."

"No, no," exclaimed Molly, "it must be all or nothing. You know how big
our entrance hall is, Hester, and those great half-empty drawing rooms.
The whole ground floor is to be at your disposal. If we do it at all,
let it be a real merry-making. It will be nice to have a merry-making
once again at the Towers."

Molly sighed as she spoke. Hester glanced at her, and the remark in her
father's letter flashed through her brain.

While the others were planning and talking at least twenty words to the
dozen, Nell was looking solemnly up at the tall windows with an
expression of ecstacy on her small face. Boris came up presently and
pulled her hand.

"What are you in a brown study for?" he asked.

"Oh, Boris," she exclaimed, flashing round on him; "it is more a white
dream than a brown study. Fancy this room all lit with Chinese lanterns
and the moon outside, and us sitting up until twelve o'clock, and music,
Boris, and everybody dancing. The story books will have come true--oh,
it will be too lovely."

"I'm thinking of the supper," said Boris. "I expect I'll get awful
peckish sitting up so late. I hope there'll be jellies--I love jellies;
don't you, Nell?"

"Yes; I heard Hester say there was to be a real band. I wonder if
they'll play any of the airs out of _Faust_. I do so love the Soldier's
Chorus, don't you?"

"Yes; I'll march to it when I'm big. Nell, do you think I'll be allowed
to have as many cakes as I wish, and _pate de foie gras_? I tasted it
once and 'twas ripping."

"I like it, too, rather," said Nell in a contemplative voice. "I mean to
be a fairy in the dance, though, and I'll have wings. Wings! how I wish
they'd bear me upward."

"Oh, do come out," exclaimed Boris. "I want to show you my dove's cage;
it was ever so musty, but I've cleaned it out, and it's as sweet as a
nut now."

The children left the room, and a few moments later Hester and Molly
returned to the Grange.

That evening Annie Forest had a very comprehensive scheme drawn out with
