The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa
- Adi Parva, by Kisari Mohan Ganguli

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa - Adi Parva
       Translated into English Prose

Author: Kisari Mohan Ganguli

Release Date: April, 2005 [EBook #7864]
Last Updated: March 8, 2013

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAHABHARATA ***




Produced by David King, Juliet Sutherland, and Charles
Franks, John B. Hare and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team







The Mahabharata

of

Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa

Translated into English Prose from the Original Sanskrit Text

by

Kisari Mohan Ganguli

[1883-1896]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, 2003. Redaction at Distributed Proofing,
Juliet Sutherland, Project Manager. Additional proofing and formatting at
sacred-texts.com, by J. B. Hare. This text is in the public domain. These
files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of
attribution is left intact.


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

The object of a translator should ever be to hold the mirror up to his
author. That being so, his chief duty is to represent so far as
practicable the manner in which his author's ideas have been expressed,
retaining if possible at the sacrifice of idiom and taste all the
peculiarities of his author's imagery and of language as well. In regard
to translations from the Sanskrit, nothing is easier than to dish up Hindu
ideas, so as to make them agreeable to English taste. But the endeavour of
the present translator has been to give in the following pages as literal
a rendering as possible of the great work of Vyasa. To the purely English
reader there is much in the following pages that will strike as ridiculous.
Those unacquainted with any language but their own are generally very
exclusive in matters of taste. Having no knowledge of models other than
what they meet with in their own tongue, the standard they have formed of
purity and taste in composition must necessarily be a narrow one. The
translator, however, would ill-discharge his duty, if for the sake of
avoiding ridicule, he sacrificed fidelity to the original. He must
represent his author as he is, not as he should be to please the narrow
taste of those entirely unacquainted with him. Mr. Pickford, in the
preface to his English translation of the Mahavira Charita, ably defends a
close adherence to the original even at the sacrifice of idiom and taste
against the claims of what has been called 'Free Translation,' which means
dressing the author in an outlandish garb to please those to whom he is
introduced.

In the preface to his classical translation of Bhartrihari's Niti Satakam
and Vairagya Satakam, Mr. C.H. Tawney says, "I am sensible that in the
present attempt I have retained much local colouring. For instance, the
ideas of worshipping the feet of a god or great men, though it frequently
occurs in Indian literature, will undoubtedly move the laughter of
Englishmen unacquainted with Sanskrit, especially if they happen to belong
to that class of readers who revel their attention on the accidental and
remain blind to the essential. But a certain measure of fidelity to the
original even at the risk of making oneself ridiculous, is better than the
studied dishonesty which characterises so many translations of oriental
poets."

We fully subscribe to the above although, it must be observed, the censure
conveyed to the class of translators last indicated is rather undeserved,
there being nothing like a 'studied dishonesty' in their efforts which
proceed only from a mistaken view of their duties and as such betray only
an error of the head but not of the heart. More than twelve years ago when
Babu Pratapa Chandra Roy, with Babu Durga Charan Banerjee, went to my
retreat at Seebpore, for engaging me to translate the Mahabharata into
English, I was amazed with the grandeur of the scheme. My first question
to him was,--whence was the money to come, supposing my competence for the
task. Pratapa then unfolded to me the details of his plan, the hopes he
could legitimately cherish of assistance from different quarters. He was
full of enthusiasm. He showed me Dr. Rost's letter, which, he said, had
suggested to him the undertaking. I had known Babu Durga Charan for many
years and I had the highest opinion of his scholarship and practical good
sense. When he warmly took Pratapa's side for convincing me of the
practicability of the scheme, I listened to him patiently. The two were
for completing all arrangements with me the very day. To this I did not
agree. I took a week's time to consider. I consulted some of my literary
friends, foremost among whom was the late lamented Dr. Sambhu C.
Mookherjee. The latter, I found, had been waited upon by Pratapa. Dr.
Mookherjee spoke to me of Pratapa as a man of indomitable energy and
perseverance. The result of my conference with Dr. Mookherjee was that I
wrote to Pratapa asking him to see me again. In this second interview
estimates were drawn up, and everything was arranged as far as my portion
of the work was concerned. My friend left with me a specimen of
translation which he had received from Professor Max Muller. This I began
to study, carefully comparing it sentence by sentence with the original.
About its literal character there could be no doubt, but it had no flow
and, therefore, could not be perused with pleasure by the general reader.
The translation had been executed thirty years ago by a young German
friend of the great Pundit. I had to touch up every sentence. This I did
without at all impairing faithfulness to the original. My first 'copy' was
set up in type and a dozen sheets were struck off. These were submitted to
the judgment of a number of eminent writers, European and native. All of
them, I was glad to see, approved of the specimen, and then the task of
translating the Mahabharata into English seriously began.

Before, however, the first fasciculus could be issued, the question as to
whether the authorship of the translation should be publicly owned, arose.
Babu Pratapa Chandra Roy was against anonymity. I was for it. The reasons
I adduced were chiefly founded upon the impossibility of one person
translating the whole of the gigantic work. Notwithstanding my resolve to
discharge to the fullest extent the duty that I took up, I might not live
to carry it out. It would take many years before the end could be reached.
Other circumstances than death might arise in consequence of which my
connection with the work might cease. It could not be desirable to issue
successive fasciculus with the names of a succession of translators
appearing on the title pages. These and other considerations convinced my
friend that, after all, my view was correct. It was, accordingly, resolved
to withhold the name of the translator. As a compromise, however, between
the two views, it was resolved to issue the first fasciculus with two
prefaces, one over the signature of the publisher and the other headed--
'Translator's Preface.' This, it was supposed, would effectually guard
against misconceptions of every kind. No careful reader would then
confound the publisher with the author.

Although this plan was adopted, yet before a fourth of the task had been
accomplished, an influential Indian journal came down upon poor Pratapa
Chandra Roy and accused him openly of being a party to a great literary
imposture, viz., of posing before the world as the translator of Vyasa's
work when, in fact, he was only the publisher. The charge came upon my
friend as a surprise, especially as he had never made a secret of the
authorship in his correspondence with Oriental scholars in every part of
the world. He promptly wrote to the journal in question, explaining the
reasons there were for anonymity, and pointing to the two prefaces with
which the first fasciculus had been given to the world. The editor readily
admitted his mistake and made a satisfactory apology.

Now that the translation has been completed, there can no longer be any
reason for withholding the name of the translator. The entire translation
is practically the work of one hand. In portions of the Adi and the Sabha
Parvas, I was assisted by Babu Charu Charan Mookerjee. About four forms of
the Sabha Parva were done by Professor Krishna Kamal Bhattacharya, and
about half a fasciculus during my illness, was done by another hand. I
should however state that before passing to the printer the copy received
from these gentlemen I carefully compared every sentence with the original,
making such alterations as were needed for securing a uniformity of style
with the rest of the work.

I should here observe that in rendering the Mahabharata into English I
have derived very little aid from the three Bengali versions that are
supposed to have been executed with care. Every one of these is full of
inaccuracies and blunders of every description. The Santi in particular
which is by far the most difficult of the eighteen Parvas, has been made a
mess of by the Pundits that attacked it. Hundreds of ridiculous blunders
can be pointed out in both the Rajadharma and the Mokshadharma sections.
Some of these I have pointed out in footnotes.

I cannot lay claim to infallibility. There are verses in the Mahabharata
that are exceedingly difficult to construe. I have derived much aid from
the great commentator Nilakantha. I know that Nilakantha's authority is
not incapable of being challenged. But when it is remembered that the
interpretations given by Nilakantha came down to him from preceptors of
olden days, one should think twice before rejecting Nilakantha as a guide.

About the readings I have adopted, I should say that as regards the first
half of the work, I have generally adhered to the Bengal texts; as regards
the latter half, to the printed Bombay edition. Sometimes individual
sections, as occurring in the Bengal editions, differ widely, in respect
of the order of the verses, from the corresponding ones in the Bombay
edition. In such cases I have adhered to the Bengal texts, convinced that
the sequence of ideas has been better preserved in the Bengal editions
than the Bombay one.

I should express my particular obligations to Pundit Ram Nath Tarkaratna,
the author of 'Vasudeva Vijayam' and other poems, Pundit Shyama Charan
Kaviratna, the learned editor of Kavyaprakasha with the commentary of
Professor Mahesh Chandra Nayaratna, and Babu Aghore Nath Banerjee, the
manager of the Bharata Karyalaya. All these scholars were my referees on
all points of difficulty. Pundit Ram Nath's solid scholarship is known to
them that have come in contact with him. I never referred to him a
difficulty that he could not clear up. Unfortunately, he was not always at
hand to consult. Pundit Shyama Charan Kaviratna, during my residence at
Seebpore, assisted me in going over the Mokshadharma sections of the Santi
Parva. Unostentatious in the extreme, Kaviratna is truly the type of a
learned Brahman of ancient India. Babu Aghore Nath Banerjee also has from
time to time, rendered me valuable assistance in clearing my difficulties.

Gigantic as the work is, it would have been exceedingly difficult for me
to go on with it if I had not been encouraged by Sir Stuart Bayley, Sir
Auckland Colvin, Sir Alfred Croft, and among Oriental scholars, by the
late lamented Dr. Reinhold Rost, and Mons. A. Barth of Paris. All these
eminent men knew from the beginning that the translation was proceeding
from my pen. Notwithstanding the enthusiasm, with which my poor friend,
Pratapa Chandra Roy, always endeavoured to fill me. I am sure my energies
would have flagged and patience exhausted but for the encouraging words
which I always received from these patrons and friends of the enterprise.

Lastly, I should name my literary chief and friend, Dr. Sambhu C.
Mookherjee. The kind interest he took in my labours, the repeated
exhortations he addressed to me inculcating patience, the care with which
he read every fasciculus as it came out, marking all those passages which
threw light upon topics of antiquarian interest, and the words of praise
he uttered when any expression particularly happy met his eyes, served to
stimulate me more than anything else in going on with a task that
sometimes seemed to me endless.

Kisari Mohan Ganguli

Calcutta


THE MAHABHARATA

ADI PARVA

SECTION I

Om! Having bowed down to Narayana and Nara, the most exalted male being,
and also to the goddess Saraswati, must the word Jaya be uttered.

Ugrasrava, the son of Lomaharshana, surnamed Sauti, well-versed in the
Puranas, bending with humility, one day approached the great sages of
rigid vows, sitting at their ease, who had attended the twelve years'
sacrifice of Saunaka, surnamed Kulapati, in the forest of Naimisha. Those
ascetics, wishing to hear his wonderful narrations, presently began to
address him who had thus arrived at that recluse abode of the inhabitants
of the forest of Naimisha. Having been entertained with due respect by
those holy men, he saluted those Munis (sages) with joined palms, even all
of them, and inquired about the progress of their asceticism. Then all the
ascetics being again seated, the son of Lomaharshana humbly occupied the
seat that was assigned to him. Seeing that he was comfortably seated, and
recovered from fatigue, one of the Rishis beginning the conversation,
asked him, "Whence comest thou, O lotus-eyed Sauti, and where hast thou
spent the time? Tell me, who ask thee, in detail."

Accomplished in speech, Sauti, thus questioned, gave in the midst of that
big assemblage of contemplative Munis a full and proper answer in words
consonant with their mode of life.

Sauti said, "Having heard the diverse sacred and wonderful stories which
were composed in his Mahabharata by Krishna-Dwaipayana, and which were
recited in full by Vaisampayana at the Snake-sacrifice of the high-souled
royal sage Janamejaya and in the presence also of that chief of Princes,
the son of Parikshit, and having wandered about, visiting many sacred
waters and holy shrines, I journeyed to the country venerated by the
Dwijas (twice-born) and called Samantapanchaka where formerly was fought
the battle between the children of Kuru and Pandu, and all the chiefs of
the land ranged on either side. Thence, anxious to see you, I am come into
your presence. Ye reverend sages, all of whom are to me as Brahma; ye
greatly blessed who shine in this place of sacrifice with the splendour of
the solar fire: ye who have concluded the silent meditations and have fed
the holy fire; and yet who are sitting--without care, what, O ye Dwijas
(twice-born), shall I repeat, shall I recount the sacred stories collected
in the Puranas containing precepts of religious duty and of worldly profit,
or the acts of illustrious saints and sovereigns of mankind?"

The Rishi replied, "The Purana, first promulgated by the great Rishi
Dwaipayana, and which after having been heard both by the gods and the
Brahmarshis was highly esteemed, being the most eminent narrative that
exists, diversified both in diction and division, possessing subtile
meanings logically combined, and gleaned from the Vedas, is a sacred work.
Composed in elegant language, it includeth the subjects of other books. It
is elucidated by other Shastras, and comprehendeth the sense of the four
Vedas. We are desirous of hearing that history also called Bharata, the
holy composition of the wonderful Vyasa, which dispelleth the fear of evil,
just as it was cheerfully recited by the Rishi Vaisampayana, under the
direction of Dwaipayana himself, at the snake-sacrifice of Raja
Janamejaya."

Sauti then said, "Having bowed down to the primordial being Isana, to
whom multitudes make offerings, and who is adored by the multitude; who is
the true incorruptible one, Brahma, perceptible, imperceptible, eternal;
who is both a non-existing and an existing-non-existing being; who is the
universe and also distinct from the existing and non-existing universe;
who is the creator of high and low; the ancient, exalted, inexhaustible
one; who is Vishnu, beneficent and the beneficence itself, worthy of all
preference, pure and immaculate; who is Hari, the ruler of the faculties,
the guide of all things moveable and immoveable; I will declare the sacred
thoughts of the illustrious sage Vyasa, of marvellous deeds and worshipped
here by all. Some bards have already published this history, some are now
teaching it, and others, in like manner, will hereafter promulgate it upon
the earth. It is a great source of knowledge, established throughout the
three regions of the world. It is possessed by the twice-born both in
detailed and compendious forms. It is the delight of the learned for being
embellished with elegant expressions, conversations human and divine, and
a variety of poetical measures.

"In this world, when it was destitute of brightness and light, and
enveloped all around in total darkness, there came into being, as the
primal cause of creation, a mighty egg, the one inexhaustible seed of all
created beings. It is called Mahadivya, and was formed at the beginning of
the Yuga, in which we are told, was the true light Brahma, the eternal one,
the wonderful and inconceivable being present alike in all places; the
invisible and subtile cause, whose nature partaketh of entity and non-
entity. From this egg came out the lord Pitamaha Brahma, the one only
Prajapati; with Suraguru and Sthanu. Then appeared the twenty-one
Prajapatis, viz., Manu, Vasishtha and Parameshthi; ten Prachetas, Daksha,
and the seven sons of Daksha. Then appeared the man of inconceivable
nature whom all the Rishis know and so the Viswe-devas, the Adityas, the
Vasus, and the twin Aswins; the Yakshas, the Sadhyas, the Pisachas, the
Guhyakas, and the Pitris. After these were produced the wise and most holy
Brahmarshis, and the numerous Rajarshis distinguished by every noble
quality. So the water, the heavens, the earth, the air, the sky, the
points of the heavens, the years, the seasons, the months, the fortnights,
called Pakshas, with day and night in due succession. And thus were
produced all things which are known to mankind.

"And what is seen in the universe, whether animate or inanimate, of created
things, will at the end of the world, and after the expiration of the Yuga,
be again confounded. And, at the commencement of other Yugas, all things
will be renovated, and, like the various fruits of the earth, succeed each
other in the due order of their seasons. Thus continueth perpetually to
revolve in the world, without beginning and without end, this wheel which
causeth the destruction of all things.

"The generation of Devas, in brief, was thirty-three thousand, thirty-three
hundred and thirty-three. The sons of Div were Brihadbhanu, Chakshus, Atma,
Vibhavasu, Savita, Richika, Arka, Bhanu, Asavaha, and Ravi. Of these
Vivaswans of old, Mahya was the youngest whose son was Deva-vrata. The
latter had for his son, Su-vrata who, we learn, had three sons,--Dasa-
jyoti, Sata-jyoti, and Sahasra-jyoti, each of them producing numerous
offspring. The illustrious Dasa-jyoti had ten thousand, Sata-jyoti ten
times that number, and Sahasra-jyoti ten times the number of Sata-jyoti's
offspring. From these are descended the family of the Kurus, of the Yadus,
and of Bharata; the family of Yayati and of Ikshwaku; also of all the
Rajarshis. Numerous also were the generations produced, and very abundant
were the creatures and their places of abode. The mystery which is
threefold--the Vedas, Yoga, and Vijnana Dharma, Artha, and Kama--also
various books upon the subject of Dharma, Artha, and Kama; also rules for
the conduct of mankind; also histories and discourses with various srutis;
all of which having been seen by the Rishi Vyasa are here in due order
mentioned as a specimen of the book.

"The Rishi Vyasa published this mass of knowledge in both a detailed and an
abridged form. It is the wish of the learned in the world to possess the
details and the abridgement. Some read the Bharata beginning with the
initial mantra (invocation), others with the story of Astika, others with
Uparichara, while some Brahmanas study the whole. Men of learning display
their various knowledge of the institutes in commenting on the composition.
Some are skilful in explaining it, while others, in remembering its
contents.

"The son of Satyavati having, by penance and meditation, analysed the
eternal Veda, afterwards composed this holy history, when that learned
Brahmarshi of strict vows, the noble Dwaipayana Vyasa, offspring of
Parasara, had finished this greatest of narrations, he began to consider
how he might teach it to his disciples. And the possessor of the six
attributes, Brahma, the world's preceptor, knowing of the anxiety of the
Rishi Dwaipayana, came in person to the place where the latter was, for
gratifying the saint, and benefiting the people. And when Vyasa,
surrounded by all the tribes of Munis, saw him, he was surprised; and,
standing with joined palms, he bowed and ordered a seat to be brought. And
Vyasa having gone round him who is called Hiranyagarbha seated on that
distinguished seat stood near it; and being commanded by Brahma
Parameshthi, he sat down near the seat, full of affection and smiling in
joy. Then the greatly glorious Vyasa, addressing Brahma Parameshthi, said,
'O divine Brahma, by me a poem hath been composed which is greatly
respected. The mystery of the Veda, and what other subjects have been
explained by me; the various rituals of the Upanishads with the Angas; the
compilation of the Puranas and history formed by me and named after the
three divisions of time, past, present, and future; the determination of
the nature of decay, fear, disease, existence, and non-existence, a
description of creeds and of the various modes of life; rule for the four
castes, and the import of all the Puranas; an account of asceticism and of
the duties of a religious student; the dimensions of the sun and moon, the
planets, constellations, and stars, together with the duration of the four
ages; the Rik, Sama and Yajur Vedas; also the Adhyatma; the sciences
called Nyaya, Orthoephy and Treatment of diseases; charity and
Pasupatadharma; birth celestial and human, for particular purposes; also a
description of places of pilgrimage and other holy places of rivers,
mountains, forests, the ocean, of heavenly cities and the kalpas; the art
of war; the different kinds of nations and languages: the nature of the
manners of the people; and the all-pervading spirit;--all these have been
represented. But, after all, no writer of this work is to be found on
earth.'

"Brahma said, 'I esteem thee for thy knowledge of divine mysteries, before
the whole body of celebrated Munis distinguished for the sanctity of their
lives. I know thou hast revealed the divine word, even from its first
utterance, in the language of truth. Thou hast called thy present work a
poem, wherefore it shall be a poem. There shall be no poets whose works
may equal the descriptions of this poem, even, as the three other modes
called Asrama are ever unequal in merit to the domestic Asrama. Let Ganesa
be thought of, O Muni, for the purpose of writing the poem.'"

Sauti said, "Brahma having thus spoken to Vyasa, retired to his own abode.
Then Vyasa began to call to mind Ganesa. And Ganesa, obviator of obstacles,
ready to fulfil the desires of his votaries, was no sooner thought of,
than he repaired to the place where Vyasa was seated. And when he had been
saluted, and was seated, Vyasa addressed him thus, 'O guide of the Ganas!
be thou the writer of the Bharata which I have formed in my imagination,
and which I am about to repeat.'

"Ganesa, upon hearing this address, thus answered, 'I will become the
writer of thy work, provided my pen do not for a moment cease writing.'
And Vyasa said unto that divinity, 'Wherever there be anything thou dost
not comprehend, cease to continue writing.' Ganesa having signified his
assent, by repeating the word Om! proceeded to write; and Vyasa began; and
by way of diversion, he knit the knots of composition exceeding close; by
doing which, he dictated this work according to his engagement.

"I am" (continued Sauti) "acquainted with eight thousand and eight hundred
verses, and so is Suka, and perhaps Sanjaya. From the mysteriousness of
their meaning, O Muni, no one is able, to this day, to penetrate those
closely knit difficult slokas. Even the omniscient Ganesa took a moment to
consider; while Vyasa, however, continued to compose other verses in great
abundance.

"The wisdom of this work, like unto an instrument of applying collyrium,
hath opened the eyes of the inquisitive world blinded by the darkness of
ignorance. As the sun dispelleth the darkness, so doth the Bharata by its
discourses on religion, profit, pleasure and final release, dispel the
ignorance of men. As the full-moon by its mild light expandeth the buds of
the water-lily, so this Purana, by exposing the light of the Sruti hath
expanded the human intellect. By the lamp of history, which destroyeth the
darkness of ignorance, the whole mansion of nature is properly and
completely illuminated.

"This work is a tree, of which the chapter of contents is the seed; the
divisions called Pauloma and Astika are the root; the part called Sambhava
is the trunk; the books called Sabha and Aranya are the roosting perches;
the books called Arani is the knitting knots; the books called Virata and
Udyoga the pith; the book named Bhishma, the main branch; the book called
Drona, the leaves; the book called Karna, the fair flowers; the book named
Salya, their sweet smell; the books entitled Stri and Aishika, the
refreshing shade; the book called Santi, the mighty fruit; the book called
Aswamedha, the immortal sap; the book denominated Asramavasika, the spot
where it groweth; and the book called Mausala, is an epitome of the Vedas
and held in great respect by the virtuous Brahmanas. The tree of the
Bharata, inexhaustible to mankind as the clouds, shall be as a source of
livelihood to all distinguished poets."

Sauti continued, "I will now speak of the undying flowery and fruitful
productions of this tree, possessed of pure and pleasant taste, and not to
be destroyed even by the immortals. Formerly, the spirited and virtuous
Krishna-Dwaipayana, by the injunctions of Bhishma, the wise son of Ganga
and of his own mother, became the father of three boys who were like the
three fires by the two wives of Vichitra-virya; and having thus raised up
Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura, he returned to his recluse abode to
prosecute his religious exercise.

"It was not till after these were born, grown up, and departed on the
supreme journey, that the great Rishi Vyasa published the Bharata in this
region of mankind; when being solicited by Janamejaya and thousands of
Brahmanas, he instructed his disciple Vaisampayana, who was seated near
him; and he, sitting together with the Sadasyas, recited the Bharata,
during the intervals of the ceremonies of the sacrifice, being repeatedly
urged to proceed.

"Vyasa hath fully represented the greatness of the house of Kuru, the
virtuous principles of Gandhari, the wisdom of Vidura, and the constancy
of Kunti. The noble Rishi hath also described the divinity of Vasudeva,
the rectitude of the sons of Pandu, and the evil practices of the sons and
partisans of Dhritarashtra.

"Vyasa executed the compilation of the Bharata, exclusive of the episodes
originally in twenty-four thousand verses; and so much only is called by
the learned as the Bharata. Afterwards, he composed an epitome in one
hundred and fifty verses, consisting of the introduction with the chapter
of contents. This he first taught to his son Suka; and afterwards he gave
it to others of his disciples who were possessed of the same
qualifications. After that he executed another compilation, consisting of
six hundred thousand verses. Of those, thirty hundred thousand are known
in the world of the Devas; fifteen hundred thousand in the world of the
Pitris: fourteen hundred thousand among the Gandharvas, and one hundred
thousand in the regions of mankind. Narada recited them to the Devas,
Devala to the Pitris, and Suka published them to the Gandharvas, Yakshas,
and Rakshasas: and in this world they were recited by Vaisampayana, one of
the disciples of Vyasa, a man of just principles and the first among all
those acquainted with the Vedas. Know that I, Sauti, have also repeated
one hundred thousand verses.

"Yudhishthira is a vast tree, formed of religion and virtue; Arjuna is its
trunk; Bhimasena, its branches; the two sons of Madri are its full-grown
fruit and flowers; and its roots are Krishna, Brahma, and the Brahmanas.

"Pandu, after having subdued many countries by his wisdom and prowess, took
up his abode with the Munis in a certain forest as a sportsman, where he
brought upon himself a very severe misfortune for having killed a stag
coupling with its mate, which served as a warning for the conduct of the
princes of his house as long as they lived. Their mothers, in order that
the ordinances of the law might be fulfilled, admitted as substitutes to
their embraces the gods Dharma, Vayu, Sakra, and the divinities the twin
Aswins. And when their offspring grew up, under the care of their two
mothers, in the society of ascetics, in the midst of sacred groves and
holy recluse-abodes of religious men, they were conducted by Rishis into
the presence of Dhritarashtra and his sons, following as students in the
habit of Brahmacharis, having their hair tied in knots on their heads.
'These our pupils', said they, 'are as your sons, your brothers, and your
friends; they are Pandavas.' Saying this, the Munis disappeared.

"When the Kauravas saw them introduced as the sons of Pandu, the
distinguished class of citizens shouted exceedingly for joy. Some, however,
said, they were not the sons of Pandu; others said, they were; while a few
asked how they could be his offspring, seeing he had been so long dead.
Still on all sides voices were heard crying, 'They are on all accounts
welcome! Through divine Providence we behold the family of Pandu! Let
their welcome be proclaimed!' As these acclamations ceased, the plaudits
of invisible spirits, causing every point of the heavens to resound, were
tremendous. There were showers of sweet-scented flowers, and the sound of
shells and kettle-drums. Such were the wonders that happened on the
arrival of the young princes. The joyful noise of all the citizens, in
expression of their satisfaction on the occasion, was so great that it
reached the very heavens in magnifying plaudits.

"Having studied the whole of the Vedas and sundry other shastras, the
Pandavas resided there, respected by all and without apprehension from any
one.

"The principal men were pleased with the purity of Yudhishthira, the
courage of Arjuna, the submissive attention of Kunti to her superiors, and
the humility of the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva; and all the people
rejoiced in their heroic virtues.

"After a while, Arjuna obtained the virgin Krishna at the swayamvara, in
the midst of a concourse of Rajas, by performing a very difficult feat of
archery. And from this time he became very much respected in this world
among all bowmen; and in fields of battle also, like the sun, he was hard
to behold by foe-men. And having vanquished all the neighbouring princes
and every considerable tribe, he accomplished all that was necessary for
the Raja (his eldest brother) to perform the great sacrifice called
Rajasuya.

"Yudhishthira, after having, through the wise counsels of Vasudeva and by
the valour of Bhimasena and Arjuna, slain Jarasandha (the king of Magadha)
and the proud Chaidya, acquired the right to perform the grand sacrifice
of Rajasuya abounding in provisions and offering and fraught with
transcendent merits. And Duryodhana came to this sacrifice; and when he
beheld the vast wealth of the Pandavas scattered all around, the offerings,
the precious stones, gold and jewels; the wealth in cows, elephants, and
horses; the curious textures, garments, and mantles; the precious shawls
and furs and carpets made of the skin of the Ranku; he was filled with
envy and became exceedingly displeased. And when he beheld the hall of
assembly elegantly constructed by Maya (the Asura architect) after the
fashion of a celestial court, he was inflamed with rage. And having
started in confusion at certain architectural deceptions within this
building, he was derided by Bhimasena in the presence of Vasudeva, like
one of mean descent.

"And it was represented to Dhritarashtra that his son, while partaking of
various objects of enjoyment and diverse precious things, was becoming
meagre, wan, and pale. And Dhritarashtra, some time after, out of
affection for his son, gave his consent to their playing (with the
Pandavas) at dice. And Vasudeva coming to know of this, became exceedingly
wroth. And being dissatisfied, he did nothing to prevent the disputes, but
overlooked the gaming and sundry other horried unjustifiable transactions
arising therefrom: and in spite of Vidura, Bhishma, Drona, and Kripa, the
son of Saradwan, he made the Kshatriyas kill each other in the terrific
war that ensued.

"And Dhritarashtra hearing the ill news of the success of the Pandavas and
recollecting the resolutions of Duryodhana, Karna, and Sakuni, pondered for
a while and addressed to Sanjaya the following speech:--

"'Attend, O Sanjaya, to all I am about to say, and it will not become thee
to treat me with contempt. Thou art well-versed in the shastras,
intelligent and endowed with wisdom. My inclination was never to war, not
did I delight in the destruction of my race. I made no distinction between
my own children and the children of Pandu. My own sons were prone to
wilfulness and despised me because I am old. Blind as I am, because of my
miserable plight and through paternal affection, I bore it all. I was
foolish after the thoughtless Duryodhana ever growing in folly. Having
been a spectator of the riches of the mighty sons of Pandu, my son was
derided for his awkwardness while ascending the hall. Unable to bear it
all and unable himself to overcome the sons of Pandu in the field, and
though a soldier, unwilling yet to obtain good fortune by his own exertion,
with the help of the king of Gandhara he concerted an unfair game at dice.

"'Hear, O Sanjaya, all that happened thereupon and came to my knowledge.
And when thou hast heard all I say, recollecting everything as it fell out,
thou shall then know me for one with a prophetic eye. When I heard that
Arjuna, having bent the bow, had pierced the curious mark and brought it
down to the ground, and bore away in triumph the maiden Krishna, in the
sight of the assembled princes, then, O Sanjaya I had no hope of success.
When I heard that Subhadra of the race of Madhu had, after forcible
seizure been married by Arjuna in the city of Dwaraka, and that the two
heroes of the race of Vrishni (Krishna and Balarama the brothers of
Subhadra) without resenting it had entered Indraprastha as friends, then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Arjuna, by his
celestial arrow preventing the downpour by Indra the king of the gods, had
gratified Agni by making over to him the forest of Khandava, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that the five Pandavas
with their mother Kunti had escaped from the house of lac, and that Vidura
was engaged in the accomplishment of their designs, then, O Sanjaya, I had
no hope of success. When I heard that Arjuna, after having pierced the
mark in the arena had won Draupadi, and that the brave Panchalas had
joined the Pandavas, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I
heard that Jarasandha, the foremost of the royal line of Magadha, and
blazing in the midst of the Kshatriyas, had been slain by Bhima with his
bare arms alone, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard
that in their general campaign the sons of Pandu had conquered the chiefs
of the land and performed the grand sacrifice of the Rajasuya, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Draupadi, her voice
choked with tears and heart full of agony, in the season of impurity and
with but one raiment on, had been dragged into court and though she had
protectors, she had been treated as if she had none, then, O Sanjaya, I
had no hope of success. When I heard that the wicked wretch Duhsasana, was
striving to strip her of that single garment, had only drawn from her
person a large heap of cloth without being able to arrive at its end, then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Yudhishthira,
beaten by Saubala at the game of dice and deprived of his kingdom as a
consequence thereof, had still been attended upon by his brothers of
incomparable prowess, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I
heard that the virtuous Pandavas weeping with affliction had followed
their elder brother to the wilderness and exerted themselves variously for
the mitigation of his discomforts, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success.

"'When I heard that Yudhishthira had been followed into the wilderness by
Snatakas and noble-minded Brahmanas who live upon alms, then, O Sanjaya, I
had no hope of success. When I heard that Arjuna, having, in combat,
pleased the god of gods, Tryambaka (the three-eyed) in the disguise of a
hunter, obtained the great weapon Pasupata, then O Sanjaya, I had no hope
of success. When I heard that the just and renowned Arjuna after having
been to the celestial regions, had there obtained celestial weapons from
Indra himself then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
afterwards Arjuna had vanquished the Kalakeyas and the Paulomas proud with
the boon they had obtained and which had rendered them invulnerable even
to the celestials, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard
that Arjuna, the chastiser of enemies, having gone to the regions of Indra
for the destruction of the Asuras, had returned thence successful, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Bhima and the other
sons of Pritha (Kunti) accompanied by Vaisravana had arrived at that
country which is inaccessible to man then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that my sons, guided by the counsels of Karna, while
on their journey of Ghoshayatra, had been taken prisoners by the
Gandharvas and were set free by Arjuna, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that Dharma (the god of justice) having come under
the form of a Yaksha had proposed certain questions to Yudhishthira then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that my sons had failed
to discover the Pandavas under their disguise while residing with Draupadi
in the dominions of Virata, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
When I heard that the principal men of my side had all been vanquished by
the noble Arjuna with a single chariot while residing in the dominions of
Virata, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Vasudeva of the race of Madhu, who covered this whole earth by one foot,
was heartily interested in the welfare of the Pandavas, then, O Sanjaya, I
had no hope of success. When I heard that the king of Matsya, had offered
his virtuous daughter Uttara to Arjuna and that Arjuna had accepted her
for his son, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Yudhishthira, beaten at dice, deprived of wealth, exiled and separated
from his connections, had assembled yet an army of seven Akshauhinis, then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard Narada, declare that
Krishna and Arjuna were Nara and Narayana and he (Narada) had seen them
together in the regions of Brahma, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that Krishna, anxious to bring about peace, for the
welfare of mankind had repaired to the Kurus, and went away without having
been able to effect his purpose, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
When I heard that Karna and Duryodhana resolved upon imprisoning Krishna
displayed in himself the whole universe, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. Then I heard that at the time of his departure, Pritha (Kunti)
standing, full of sorrow, near his chariot received consolation from
Krishna, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Vasudeva and Bhishma the son of Santanu were the counsellors of the
Pandavas and Drona the son of Bharadwaja pronounced blessings on them,
then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When Karna said unto Bhishma--I
will not fight when thou art fighting--and, quitting the army, went away,
then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Vasudeva and
Arjuna and the bow Gandiva of immeasurable prowess, these three of
dreadful energy had come together, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that upon Arjuna having been seized with compunction
on his chariot and ready to sink, Krishna showed him all the worlds within
his body, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that
Bhishma, the desolator of foes, killing ten thousand charioteers every day
in the field of battle, had not slain any amongst the Pandavas then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Bhishma, the
righteous son of Ganga, had himself indicated the means of his defeat in
the field of battle and that the same were accomplished by the Pandavas
with joyfulness, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard
that Arjuna, having placed Sikhandin before himself in his chariot, had
wounded Bhishma of infinite courage and invincible in battle, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that the aged hero Bhishma,
having reduced the numbers of the race of shomaka to a few, overcome with
various wounds was lying on a bed of arrows, then, O Sanjaya, I had no
hope of success. When I heard that upon Bhishma's lying on the ground with
thirst for water, Arjuna, being requested, had pierced the ground and
allayed his thirst, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When Vayu
together with Indra and Suryya united as allies for the success of the
sons of Kunti, and the beasts of prey (by their inauspicious presence)
were putting us in fear, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When
the wonderful warrior Drona, displaying various modes of fight in the
field, did not slay any of the superior Pandavas, then, O Sanjaya, I had
no hope of success. When I heard that the Maharatha Sansaptakas of our
army appointed for the overthrow of Arjuna were all slain by Arjuna
himself, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that our
disposition of forces, impenetrable by others, and defended by Bharadwaja
himself well-armed, had been singly forced and entered by the brave son of
Subhadra, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that our
Maharathas, unable to overcome Arjuna, with jubilant faces after having
jointly surrounded and slain the boy Abhimanyu, then, O Sanjaya, I had no
hope of success. When I heard that the blind Kauravas were shouting for
joy after having slain Abhimanyu and that thereupon Arjuna in anger made
his celebrated speech referring to Saindhava, then, O Sanjaya, I had no
hope of success. When I heard that Arjuna had vowed the death of Saindhava
and fulfilled his vow in the presence of his enemies, then, O Sanjaya, I
had no hope of success. When I heard that upon the horses of Arjuna being
fatigued, Vasudeva releasing them made them drink water and bringing them
back and reharnessing them continued to guide them as before, then, O
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that while his horses were
fatigued, Arjuna staying in his chariot checked all his assailants, then,
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Yuyudhana of the
race of Vrishni, after having thrown into confusion the army of Drona
rendered unbearable in prowess owing to the presence of elephants, retired
to where Krishna and Arjuna were, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of
success. When I heard that Karna even though he had got Bhima within his
