deep.

Then Arcot lifted the ship and headed up through the cloud layer and
into the bright light of the great yellow sun, above the sea of gray
misty clouds.

Arcot signalled Morey, who had come into the control room, to take over
the controls of the ship. "Head out into space, Morey. I want to find
out why Torlos pulled that last stunt. Wade, will you put a new tube in
the invisibility unit?"

"Sure," Wade replied. "By the way, what happened back there? We were
surprised as the very devil to hear you yelling for help; everything
seemed peaceful up to then."

Arcot flexed his bruised hands and grinned ruefully. "Plenty happened."
He went on to explain to Wade and Fuller what had happened in their
meeting with the Satorian Commander.

"Nice bunch of people to deal with," Wade said caustically. "They tried
to get everything and lost it all. We would have given them plenty if
they'd been decent about it. But what sort of war is this that the
people of these two planets are carrying on, anyway?"

"That's the question I intend to settle," replied Arcot. "We haven't had
an opportunity to talk to Torlos yet. He had just admitted to me that he
was a spy for Nansal when the fun began, and we've been too busy to ask
questions ever since. Come on, let's go into the library."

Arcot indicated to Torlos that he was to go with him. Wade and Fuller
followed.

When they had all seated themselves, Arcot began the telepathic
questioning. "Torlos, why did you force Morey to leave the ray and then
destroy the city? You certainly had no reason to kill all the
non-combatant women and children in that city, did you? And why, after I
told you absolutely not to use the heat beam while we were invisible,
did you use the rays on that battleship? You made our invisibility break
down and destroyed a tube. Why did you do this?"

"I am sorry, man of Earth," replied Torlos. "I can only say that I did
not fully understand the effect the rays would have. I did not know how
long we would remain invisible; the thing has been accomplished in our
laboratories, but only for fractions of a second, and I feared we might
become visible soon. That was one of their latest battleships, equipped
with a new, secret, and very deadly weapon. I do not know exactly what
the weapon is, but I knew that ship could be deadly against us, and I
wanted to make sure we were not attacked by it. That is why I used the
beam while your ship was invisible.

"And I did not intend to destroy the city. I was only trying to tear up
the factory that builds these battleships; I only wanted to destroy
their machines. I had no conception of the power of that ray. I was as
horrified to see the city disappear as you were; I only wanted to
protect my people." Torlos smiled bitterly. "I have lived among these
treacherous people for many years, and I cannot say that I had no
provocation to destroy their city and everyone in it. But I had no
intention of doing it, Earthman."

Arcot knew he was sincere. There could be no deception when
communicating telepathically. He wished he had used it when
communicating with the Commanding One of Sator; the trouble would have
been stopped quickly!

"You still do not have any conception of the magnitude of the power of
that beam, Torlos," Arcot told him. "With the rays of this ship, we tore
a sun from its orbit and threw it into another. What you did to that
city, we could do to the whole planet. Do not tamper with forces you do
not understand, Torlos.

"There are forces on this ship that would make the energies of your
greatest battleship seem weak and futile. We can race through space a
billion times faster than the speed of light; we can tear apart and
destroy the atoms of matter; we can rip apart the greatest of planets;
we can turn the hurtling stars and send them where we want them; we can
curve space as we please; we can put out the fires of a sun, if we wish.

"Torlos, respect the powers of this ship, and do not release its
energies unknowingly; they are too great."

Torlos looked around him in awe. He had seen the engines--small,
apparently futile things, compared with the solid might of the giant
engines in his ship--but he had seen explosive charges that he knew
would split any ship open from end to end bounce harmlessly from the
smooth walls of this ship. He had seen it destroy the fleet of magnetic
ships that had formed a supposedly impregnable guard around the
mightiest city of Sator.

Then he himself had touched a button, and the giant city had shot off
into space, leaving behind it only a screaming tornado and a vast chasm
in the crust of the blasted planet.

He could not appreciate the full significance of the velocities Arcot
had told him about--he only knew that he had made a bad mistake in
underrating the powers of this ship! "I will not touch these things
again without your permission, Earthman," Torlos promised earnestly.

The _Ancient Mariner_ drove on through space, rapidly eating up the
millions of miles that separated Nansal from Sator. Arcot sat in the
control room with Morey discussing their passenger.

"You know," Arcot mused, "I've been thinking about that man's strength;
an iron skeleton doesn't explain it all. He has to have muscles to move
that skeleton around."

"He's got muscles, all right," Morey grinned. "But I see what you mean;
muscles that big should tire easily, and his don't seem to. He seems
tireless; I watched him throw those men one after another like bullets
from a machine gun. He threw the last one as violently as the first--and
those men weighed over three hundred pounds! Apparently his muscles felt
no fatigue!"

"There's another thing," pointed out Arcot. "The way he was breathing
and the way he seemed to keep so cool. When I got through there, I was
dripping with sweat; that hot, moist air was almost too much for me. Our
friend? Cool as ever, if not more so.

"And after the fight, he wasn't even breathing heavily!"

"No," agreed Morey. "But did you notice him _during_ the fight? He was
breathing heavily, deeply, and swiftly--not the shallow, panting breath
of a runner, but deep and full, yet faster than I can breathe. I could
hear him breathing in spite of all the noise of the battle."

"I noticed it," Arcot said. "He started breathing _before_ the fight
started. A human being can fight very swiftly, and with tremendous
vigor, for ten seconds, putting forth his best effort, and only breathe
once or twice. For another two minutes, he breathes more heavily than
usual. But after that, he can't just slow down back to normal. He has
used up the surplus oxygen in his system, and that has to be replaced;
he has run into 'oxygen debt'. He has to keep on breathing hard to get
back the oxygen surplus his body requires.

"But not Torlos! No fatigue for him! Why? _Because he doesn't use the
oxygen of the air to do work, and therefore his body is not a chemical
engine!_"

Morey nodded slowly. "I see what you're driving at. His body uses the
heat energy of the air! His muscles turn heat energy into motion the
same way our molecular beams do!"

"Exactly--he lives on heat!" Arcot said. "I've noticed that he seems
almost cold-blooded; his body is at the temperature of the room at all
times. In a sense, he is reptilian, but he's vastly more efficient and
greatly different than any reptile Earth ever knew. He eats food, all
right, but he only needs it to replace his body cells and to fuel his
brain."

"Oh, _brother_," said Morey softly. "No wonder he can do the things he
did! Why, he could have kept up that fight for hours without getting
tired! Fatigue is as unknown to him as cold weather. He'd only need
sleep to replace worn parts. His world is warm and upright on its axis,
so there are no seasons. He couldn't survive in the Arctic, but he's
obviously the ideal form of life for the tropics."

As the two men found out later, Morey was wrong on that last point. The
men of Torlos' race had a small organ, a mass of cells in the lower
abdomen which could absorb food from the bloodstream and oxidize it,
yielding heat, whenever the temperature of the blood dropped below a
certain point. Then they could live very comfortably in the Arctic
zones; they carried their own heaters. Their vast strength was limited
then, however, and they were forced to eat more and were more subject to
fatigue.

Wade and Fuller had been trying to speak with Torlos telepathically, and
had evidently run into difficulty, for Fuller called into the control
room: "Hey, Arcot, come here a minute! I thought telepathy was a
universal language, but this guy doesn't get our ideas at all! And we
can't make out some of his. Just now, he seemed to be thinking of
'nourishment' or 'food', and I found out he was thinking of 'heat'!"

"I'll be right down," Arcot told him, heading for the library.

As he entered, Torlos smiled at him; Arcot picked up his thought easily:
"Your friends do not seem to understand my thoughts."

"We are not made as you are," Arcot explained, "and our thought forms
are different. To you, 'heat' and 'food' are practically the same thing,
but we do not think of them as such."

He continued, explaining carefully to Torlos the differences between
their bodies and their methods of using energy.

"Stone bones!" Torlos thought in amazement. "And chemical engines for
muscles! No wonder you seem so weak. And yet, with your brains, I would
hate to have to fight a war with your people!"

"Which brings me to another point," Arcot continued. "We would like to
know how the war between the people of Sator and the people of Nansal
began. Has it been going on very long?"

Torlos nodded. "I will tell you the story. It is a history that began
many centuries ago; a history of persecution and rebellion. And yet, for
all that, I think it an interesting history.

"Hundreds of years ago, on Nansal ..."




XVIII


Hundreds of years ago, on Nansal, there had lived a wise and brilliant
teacher named Norus. He had developed an ideal, a philosophy of life, a
code of ethics. He had taught the principles of nobility without
arrogance, pride without stubbornness, and humility without servility.

About him had gathered a group of men who began to develop and spread
his ideals. As the new philosophy spread across the planet, more and
more Nansalians adopted it and began to raise their children according
to its tenets.

But no philosophy, however workable, however noble, can hope to convert
everyone. There always remains a hard core of men who feel that "the old
way is the best way". In this case, it was the men whose lives had been
based on cunning, deceit, and treachery.

One of these men, a brilliant, but warped genius, named Sator, had built
the first spaceship, and he and his men had fled Nansal to set up their
own government and free themselves from the persecution they believed
they suffered at the hands of the believers of Norus.

They fled to the second planet, where the ship crashed and the builder,
Sator, was killed. For hundreds of years, nothing was heard of the
emigrants, and the people of Nansal believed them dead. Nansal was at
peace.

But the Satorians managed to live on the alien world, and they built a
civilization there, a civilization based on an entirely different
system. It was a system of cunning. To them, cunning was right. The man
who could plot most cunningly, gain his ends by deceiving his friends
best, was the man who most deserved to live. There were a few
restrictions; they had loyalty, for one thing--loyalty to their country
and their world.

In time, the Satorians rediscovered the space drive, but by this time,
living on the new planet had changed them physically. They were somewhat
smaller than the Nansalians, and lighter in color, for their world was
always sunless. The warm rays of the sun had tanned the skins of the
Nansalians to a darker color.

When the Satorians first came to Nansal, it was presumably in peace.
After so many hundreds of years without war, the Nansalians accepted
them, and trade treaties were signed. For years, the Satorians traded
peacefully.

In the meantime, Satorian spies were working to find the strengths and
weaknesses of Nansal, searching to discover their secret weapons and
processes, if any. And they rigorously guarded their own secrets. They
refused to disclose the secrets of the magnetic beam and the magnetic
space drive.

Finally, there were a few of the more suspicious Nansalians who realized
the danger in such a situation. There were three men, students in one of
the great scientific schools of Nansal, who realized that the situation
should be studied. There was no law prohibiting the men of Nansal from
going to Sator, but it seemed that Nature had raised a more impenetrable
barrier.

All Nansalians who went to Sator died of a mysterious disease. A method
was found whereby a man's body could be sterilized, bacteriologically
speaking, so he could not spread the disease, and this was used on all
Satorians entering Nansal. But you can't sterilize a whole planet.
Nansalians could not go to Sator.

But these three men had a different idea. They carefully studied the
speech and the mannerisms and customs of the Satorians. They learned to
imitate the slang and idioms. They went even further; they picked three
Satorian spaceship navigators and studied them minutely every time they
got a chance, in order to learn their habits and their speech patterns.
The three Satorians were exceptionally large men, almost perfect doubles
of the three Nansalians--and, one by one, the Nansalians replaced them.

They had bleached their faces, and surgeons, working from photographs,
changed their features so that the three Nansalians were exact doubles
of the three astrogators. Then they acted. On three trips, one of the
men that went back as navigator was a Nansalian.

It was six years before they returned to Nansal, but when they finally
did, they had learned two things.

In the first place, the 'disease' which had killed Nansalians who had
come in contact with Satorians on Nansal was nothing but a poison which
acted on contact with the skin. The Nansalians who had gone to Sator had
simply been murdered. There was no disease; it had simply been a
Satorian plot to keep Nansalians from going to Sator.

The second thing they had learned was the secret of the Satorian
magnetic space drive.

It was common knowledge on Sator that their commander would soon lead
them across space to conquer Nansal and settle on a world of clear air
and cloudless skies, where they could see the stars of space at night.
They were waiting only until they could build up a larger fleet and
learned all they could from the Nansalians.

They attacked three years after the three Nansalian spies returned with
their information.

During those three years, Nansal had secretly succeeded in building up a
fleet of the magnetic ships, but it went down quickly before the vastly
greater fleet of the Satorians. Their magnetic rays were deadly, killing
everyone they struck. They could lift the iron-boned Nansalians high
into the air, then drop them hundreds of feet to their death.

The buildings, with their steel and iron frames, went down, crushing
hundreds of others. They practically depopulated the whole planet.

But the warnings of the three spies had been in time. They had enlarged
some of the great natural caverns and dug others out of solid rock. Here
they had built laboratories, factories, and dwelling places far
underground, where the Satorians could never find them.

Enough men reached the caverns before the disaster struck to carry on.
They had been chosen from the strongest, healthiest, and most
intelligent that Nansal had. They lived there for over a century, while
the planet was overrun by the conquerors and the cities were rebuilt by
the Satorians.

During this century, the magnetic ray shield was developed by the hidden
Nansalians. Daring at last to face their conquerors, they built a city
on the surface and protected it with the magnetic force screen.

By the time the Satorians found the city, it was too late. A battle
fleet was mobilized and rushed to the spot, but the city was
impregnable. The great domed power stations were already in operation,
and they were made of nonmagnetic materials, so they could not be pulled
from the ground. The magnetic beams were neutralized by the shield, and
no ship could pass through it without killing every man aboard.

That first city was a giant munitions plant. The Nansalians built
factories there and laughed while the armies of Sator raged impotently
at the magnetic barrier. They tried sending missiles through, but the
induction heating in every metal part of the bombs either caused them to
explode instantly or to drop harmlessly and burn.

In the meantime, the men of Nansal were building their fleet. The
Satorians stepped up production, too, but the Nansalians had developed a
method of projecting the magnetic screen. Any approaching Satorian ship
had its magnetic support cut from under it, and it crashed to the
ground.

It took nearly thirty years of hard work and harder fighting for the
Nansalians to convince the people of Sator that Nansal and the
philosophy of Norus had not only not been wiped out, but was capable of
wiping out the Satorians.

With their screened and protected fleet, the followers of Norus smashed
the Satorian cities, and drove their enemy back to Sator.

There were only three enemy cities left on Nansal when, somehow, they
managed to learn the secret of the magnetic screen.

By this time, the forces of Nansal had increased tremendously, and they
developed the next surprise for the Satorians. One after another, the
three remaining cities were destroyed by a barrage of poison gas.

The fleet of Sator tried to retaliate, but the Nansalians were prepared
for them. Every building had been sealed and filters had been built into
the air conditioning systems.

Shortly, the men of Nansal were again in control of their planet, and
the fleet stood guard over the planet.

The Satorians, beaten technologically, were still not ready to give up.
Falling back on their peculiar philosophy of life, they pulled a trick
the Nansalians would never have thought of. They sued for peace.

The government of Nansal was willing; they had had enough of bloodshed.
They permitted a delegation to arrive. The ship was escorted into the
city and the parleying began.

The Satorian delegation asked for absolutely unreasonable terms. They
demanded fleet bases on Nansal; they demanded an unreasonable rate of
exchange between the two powers, one which would be highly favorable to
Sator; they wanted to impose fantastic restrictions on Nansalian travel
and none whatsoever on their own.

Month followed month and months became years as the diplomats of Nansal
tried, patiently and logically, to show the Satorians how unreasonable
their demands were.

Not once did they suspect that the Satorians had no intention of trying
to get the conditions they asked for. Their sole purpose was to drag the
parleying on and on, bickering, quarreling, demanding, and conceding
just enough to give the Nansalians hope that a treaty might eventually
be consummated.

And during all that time, the factories of Sator were working furiously
to build the greatest fleet that had ever crossed the space between the
two planets!

When they were ready to attack, the Satorian delegation told Nansal
frankly that they would not treaty with them. The day the delegation
left, the Satorian fleet swept down upon Nansal!

The Nansalians were again beaten back into their cities, safe behind
their magnetic screens, but unable to attack. But the forces of Sator
had not won easily--they had, in fact, not won at all. Their supply line
was too long and their fleet had suffered greatly at the hands of the
defenders of Nansal.

For a long while, the balance of power was so nearly equal that neither
side dared attack.
