away between them scathless. Fiercely though they lusted for my life,
brimming with hate though they made their cries, no man dared to rush
in and raise a hand against me. Neither did they follow. When we reached
the outskirts of the crowd, and the ranks thinned, they had a mind, many
of them, to surge along in our wake; but Zaemon whirled the Symbol back
before their faces with a blaze of lurid light, and they fell to their
knees, grovelling, and pressed on us no more.

The rain still fell, and in the light of the camp fires as we passed
them, the wet gleamed on the old man's wasted body. And far before us
through the darkness loomed the vast bulk of the Sacred Mountain, with
the ring of eternal fires encincturing its crest. I sighed as I thought
of the old peaceful days I had spent in its temple and groves.

But there was to be no more of that studious leisure now. There was work
to be done, work for Atlantis which did not brook delay. And so when we
had progressed far out into the waste, and there was none near to view
(save only the most High Gods), we found the place where the passage
was, whose entrance is known only to the Seven amongst the Priests; and
there we parted, Zaemon to his hermitage in the dangerous lands, and I
by this secret way back into the capital.




9. PHORENICE, GODDESS


Now the passage, though its entrance had been cunningly hidden by man's
artifice, was one of those veins in which the fiery blood of our mother,
the Earth, had aforetime coursed. Long years had passed since it carried
lava streams, but the air in it was still warm and sulphurous, and there
was no inducement to linger in transit. I lit me a lamp which I found
in an appointed niche, and walked briskly along my ways, coughing, and
wishing heartily I had some of those simples which ease a throat that
has a tendency to catarrh. But, alas! all that packet of drugs which
were my sole spoil from the vice-royalty of Yucatan were lost in the
sea-fight with Dason's navy, and since landing in Atlantis there had
been little enough time to think for the refinements of medicine.

The network of earth-veins branched prodigiously, and if any but one of
us Seven Priests had found a way into its recesses by chance, he would
have perished hopelessly in the windings, or have fallen into one of
those pits which lead to the boil below. But I carried the chart of the
true course clearly in my head, remembering it from that old initiation
of twenty years back, when, as an appointed viceroy, I was raised to the
highest degree but one known to our Clan, and was given its secrets and
working implements.

The way was long, the floor was monstrous uneven, and the air, as I have
said, bad; and I knew that day would be far advanced before the signs
told me that I had passed beneath the walls, and was well within
the precincts of the city. And here the vow of the Seven hampered my
progress; for it is ordained that under no circumstances, whatever the
stress, shall egress be made from this passage before mortal eye. One
branch after another did I try, but always found loiterers near the
exits. I had hoped to make my emergence by that path which came inside
the royal pyramid. But there was no chance of coming up unobserved here;
the place was humming like a hive. And so, too, with each of the
five next outlets that I visited. The city was agog with some strange
excitement.

But I came at last to a temple of one of the lesser Gods, and stood
behind the image for a while making observation. The place was empty;
nay, from the dust which robed all the floors and the seats of the
worshippers, it had been empty long enough; so I moved all that was
needful, stepped out, and closed all entry behind me. A broom lay
unnoticed on one of the pews, and with this I soon disguised all route
of footmark, and took my way to the temple door. It was shut, and priest
though I was, the secret of its opening was beyond me.

Here was a pretty pass. No one but the attendant priests of the temple
could move the mechanism which closed and opened the massive stone which
filled the doorway; and if all had gone out to attend this spectacle,
whatever it might be, that was stirring the city, why there I should be
no nearer enlargement than before.

There was no sound of life within the temple precincts; there were
evidences of decay and disuse spread broadcast on every hand; but
according to the ancient law there should be eternally one at least on
watch in the priests' dwellings, so down the passages which led to them
I made my way. It would have surprised me little to have found even
these deserted. That the old order was changed I knew, but I was only
then beginning to realise the ruthlessness with which it had been swept
away, and how much it had given place to the new.

However, there can be some faithful men remaining even in an age of
general apostasy, and on making my way to the door of the dwelling
(which lay in the roof of the temple) I gave the call, and presently it
was opened to me. The man who stood before me, peering dully through
the gloom, had at least remained constant to his vows, and I made the
salutation before him with a feeling of respect.

His name was Ro, and I remembered him well. We had passed through the
sacred college together, and always he had been known as the dullard.
He had capacity for learning little of the cult of the Gods, less of
the arts of ruling, less still of the handling of arms; and he had been
appointed to some lowly office in this obscure temple, and had risen to
being its second priest and one of its two custodians merely through the
desertion of all his colleagues. But it was not pleasant to think that a
fool should remain true where cleverer men abandoned the old beliefs.

Ro did before me the greater obeisance. He wore his beard curled in the
prevailing fashion, but it was badly done. His clothing was ill-fitting
and unbrushed. He always had been a slovenly fellow. "The temple door
is shut," he said, "and I only have the secret of its opening. My lord
comes here, therefore, by the secret way, and as one of the Seven. I am
my lord's servant."

"Then I ask this small service of you. Tell me, what stirs the city?"

"That impious Phorenice has declared herself Goddess, and declares that
she will light the sacrifice with her own divine fire. She will do it,
too. She does everything. But I wish the flames may burn her when she
calls them down. This new Empress is the bane of our Clan, Deucalion,
these latter days. The people neglect us; they bring no offerings; and
now, since these rebels have been hammering at the walls, I might have
gone hungry if I had not some small store of my own. Oh, I tell you, the
cult of the true Gods is well-nigh oozed quite out of the land."

"My brother, it comes to my mind that the Priests of our Clan have been
limp in their service to let these things come to pass."

"I suppose we have done our best. At least, we did as we were taught.
But if the people will not come to hear your exhortations, and neglect
to adore the God, what hold have you over their religion? But I tell
you, Deucalion, that the High Gods try our own faith hard. Come into the
dwelling here. Look there on my bed."

I saw the shape of a man, untidily swathed in reddened bandages.

"This is all that is left of the poor priest that was my immediate
superior in this cure. It was his turn yesterday to celebrate the weekly
sacrifice to our Lord the Sun with the circle of His great stones.
Faugh! Deucalion, you should have seen how he was mangled when they
brought him back to me here."

"Did the people rise on him? Has it come to that?"

"The people stayed passive," said Ro bitterly, "what few of them had
interest to attend; but our Lord the Sun saw fit to try His minister
somewhat harshly. The wood was laid; the sacrifice was disposed upon it
according to the prescribed rites; the procession had been formed round
the altar, and the drums and the trumpets were speaking forth, to let
all men know that presently the smoke of their prayer would be wafted
up towards Those that sit in the great places in the heavens. But then,
above the noise of the ceremonial, there came the rushing sound of
wings, and from out of the sky there flew one of those great featherless
man-eating birds, of a bigness such as seldom before has been seen."

"An arrow shot in the eye, or a long-shafted spear receives them best."

"Oh, all men know what they were taught as children, Deucalion; but
these priests were unarmed, according to the rubric, which ordains that
they shall intrust themselves completely to the guardianship of the
High Gods during the hours of sacrifice. The great bird swooped down,
settling on the wood pyre, and attacked the sacrifice with beak and
talon. My poor superior here, still strong in his faith, called loudly
on our Lord the Sun to lend power to his arm, and sprang up on the altar
with naught but his teeth and his bare arms for weapons. It may be
that he expected a miracle--he has not spoke since, poor soul, in
explanation--but all he met were blows from leathery wings, and rakings
from talons which went near to disembowelling him. The bird brushed him
away as easily as we could sweep aside a fly, and there he lay bleeding
on the pavement beside the altar, whilst the sacrifice was torn and
eaten in the presence of all the people. And then, when the bird was
glutted, it flew away again to the mountains."

"And the people gave no help?"

"They cried out that the thing was a portent, that our Lord the Sun
was a God no longer if He had not power or thought to guard His own
sacrifice; and some cried that there was no God remaining now, and
others would have it that there was a new God come to weigh on the
country, which had chosen to take the form of a common man-eating bird.
But a few began to shout that Phorenice stood for all the Gods now in
Atlantis, and that cry was taken up till the stones of the great
circle rang with it. Some may have made proclamations because they were
convinced; many because the cry was new, and pleased them; but I am sure
there were not a few who joined in because it was dangerous to leave
such an outburst unwelcomed. The Empress can be hard enough to those who
neglect to give her adulation."

"The Empress is Empress," I said formally, "and her name carries
respect. It is not for us to question her doings."

"I am a priest," said Ro, "and I speak as I have been taught, and defend
the Faith as I have been commanded. Whether there is a Faith any longer,
I am beginning to doubt. But, anyway, it yields a poor enough livelihood
nowadays. There have been no offerings at this temple this five months
past, and if I had not a few jars of corn put by, I might have starved
for anything the pious of this city cared. And I do not think that the
affair of that sacrifice is likely to put new enthusiasm into our cold
votaries."

"When did it happen?"

"Twenty hours ago. To-day Phorenice conducts the sacrifice herself.
That has caused the stir you spoke about. The city is in the throes of
getting ready one of her pageants."

"Then I must ask you to open the temple doors and give me passage. I
must go and see this thing for myself."

"It is not for me to offer advice to one of the Seven," said Ro
doubtfully.

"It is not."

"But they say that the Empress is not overpleased at your absence," he
mumbled. "I should not like harm to come in your way, Deucalion," he
said aloud.

"The future is in the hands of the most High Gods, Ro, and I at least
believe that They will deal out our fates to each of us as They in Their
infinite wisdom see best, though you seem to have lost your faith. And
now I must be your debtor for a passage out through the doors. Plagues!
man, it is no use your holding out your hand to me. I do not own a coin
in all the world."

He mumbled something about "force of habit" as he led the way down
towards the door, and I responded tartly enough about the unpleasantness
of his begging customs. "If it were not for your sort and your customs,
the Priests' Clan would not be facing this crisis to-day."

"One must live," he grumbled, as he pressed his levers, and the massive
stone in the doorway swung ajar.

"If you had been a more capable man, I might have seen the necessity,"
said I, and passed into the open and left him. I could never bring
myself to like Ro.

A motley crowd filled the street which ran past the front of this
obscure temple, and all were hurrying one way. With what I had been
told, it did not take much art to guess that the great stone circle of
our Lord the Sun was their mark, and it grieved me to think of how many
venerable centuries that great fane had upreared before the weather and
the earth tremors, without such profanation as it would witness to-day.
And also the thought occurred to me, "Was our Great Lord above drawing
this woman on to her destruction? Would He take some vast and final act
of vengeance when she consummated her final sacrilege?"

But the crowd pressed on, thrilled and excited, and thinking little
(as is a crowd's wont) on the deeper matters which lay beneath the bare
spectacle. From one quarter of the city walls the din of an attack from
the besiegers made itself clearly heard from over the house, and the
temples and the palaces intervening, but no one heeded it. They had
grown callous, these townsfolk, to the battering of rams, and the flight
of fire-darts, and the other emotions of a bombardment. Their nerves,
their hunger, their desperation, were strung to such a pitch that little
short of an actual storm could stir them into new excitement over the
siege.

All were weaponed. The naked carried arms in the hopes of meeting some
one whom they could overcome and rob; those that had a possession walked
ready to do a battle for its ownership. There was no security, no trust;
the lesson of civilisation had dropped away from these common people as
mud is washed from the feet by rain, and in their new habits and their
thoughts they had gone back to the grade from which savages like those
of Europe have never yet emerged. It was a grim commentary on the
success of Phorenice's rule.

The crowd merged me into their ranks without question, and with them I
pressed forward down the winding streets, once so clean and trim, now so
foul and mud-strewn. Men and women had died of hunger in these streets
these latter years, and rotted where they lay, and we trod their bones
underfoot as we walked. Yet rising out of this squalor and this misery
were great pyramids and palaces, the like of which for splendour and
magnificence had never been seen before. It was a jarring admixture.

In time we came to the open space in the centre of the city, which even
Phorenice had not dared to encroach upon with her ambitious building
schemes, and stood on the secular ground which surrounds the most
ancient, the most grand, and the breast of all this world's temples.

Since the beginning of time, when man first emerged amongst the beasts,
our Lord the Sun has always been his chiefest God, and legend says that
He raised this circle of stones Himself to be a place where votaries
should offer Him worship. It is the fashion amongst us moderns not to
take these old tales in a too literal sense, but for myself, this one
satisfies me. By our wits we can lift blocks weighing six hundred men,
and set them as the capstones of our pyramids. But to uprear the stones
of that great circle would be beyond all our art, and much more would
it be impossible to-day, to transport them from their distant quarries
across the rugged mountains.

There were nine-and-forty of the stones, alternating with spaces, and
set in an accurate circle, and across the tops of them other stones were
set, equally huge. The stones were undressed and rugged; but the huge
massiveness of them impressed the eye more than all the temples and
daintily tooled pyramids of our wondrous city. And in the centre of the
circle was that still greater stone which formed the altar, and round
which was carved, in the rude chiselling of the ancients, the snake and
the outstretched hand.

The crowd which bore me on came to a standstill before the circle of
stones. To trespass beyond this is death for the common people; and for
myself, although I had the right of entrance, I chose to stay where I
was for the present, unnoticed amongst the mob, and wait upon events.

For long enough we stood there, our Lord the Sun burning high and
fiercely from the clear blue sky above our heads. The din of the rebels'
attack upon the walls came to us clearly, even above the gabble of the
multitude, but no one gave attention to it. Excitement about what was to
befall in the circle mastered every other emotion.

I learned afterways that so pressing was the rebels' attack, and so
destructive the battering of their new war engines, that Phorenice had
gone off to the walls first to lend awhile her brilliant skill for its
repulse, and to put heart into the defenders. But as it was, the day had
burned out to its middle and scorched us intolerably, before the noise
of the drums and horns gave advertisement that the pageant had formed in
procession; and of those who waited in the crowd, many had fainted with
exhaustion and the heat, and not a few had died. But life was cheap in
the city of Atlantis now, and no one heeded the fallen.

Nearer and nearer drew the drums and the braying of the other music,
and presently the head of a glittering procession began to arrive and
dispose itself in the space which had been set apart. Many a thousand
poor starving wretches sighed when they saw the wanton splendour of it.
But these lords and these courtiers of this new Atlantis had no concern
beyond their own bellies and their own backs, except for their one alien
regard--their simpering affection for Phorenice.

I think, though, their loyalty for the Empress was real enough, and
it was not to be wondered at, since everything they had came from her
lavish hands. Indeed, the woman had a charm that cannot be denied, for
when she appeared, riding in the golden castle (where I also had ridden)
on the back of her monstrous shaggy mammoth, the starved sullen faces
of the crowd brightened as though a meal and sudden prosperity had been
bestowed upon them; and without a word of command, without a trace of
compulsion, they burst into spontaneous shouts of welcome.
