unfortunate guests of that floating light that he would be very glad to
take them ashore, but that he could not do so until evening, as, besides
effecting "the relief," he meant to take advantage of the calm weather
to give a fresh coat of paint to one or two buoys, and renew their
chains and sinkers, and expressed a hope that the delay would not put
them to much inconvenience.

Stanley Hall, between whom and the superintendent there sprang up an
intimate and sympathetic friendship almost at first sight, assured him
that so far from putting him to inconvenience it would afford him the
greatest pleasure to spend the day on board.  Billy Towler heard this
arrangement come to with an amount of satisfaction which was by no means
shared by his employer, who was anxious to report the loss of the Nora
without delay, and to claim the insurance money as soon as possible.  He
judged it expedient, however, to keep his thoughts and anxieties to
himself, and only vented his feelings in a few deep growls, which,
breaking on the ears of Billy Towler, filled the heart of that youthful
sinner with additional joy.

"Wot a savage he is!" said Dick Moy, looking at Jones, and addressing
himself to Billy.

"Ah, ain't he just!" replied the urchin.

"Has he not bin good to 'ee?" asked the big seaman, looking down with a
kindly expression at the small boy.

"Middlin'," was Billy's cautious reply.  "I say, Neptune," he added,
looking up into Dick's face, "wot's yer name?"

"It ain't Neptune, anyhow," replied Dick.  "That's wot we've called the
big black Noofoundland dog you sees over there a-jumping about Jim
Welton as if he had falled in love with him."

"Why is it so fond of him?" asked Billy.

Dick replied to this question by relating the incident of the dog's
rescue by Jim.

"Werry interestin'.  Well, but wot _is_ your name?" said Billy,
returning to the point.

"Dick."

"Of course I know that; I've heerd 'em all call ye that often enough,
but I 'spose you've got another?"

"Moy," said the big seaman.

"Moy, eh?" cried Billy, with a grin, "that _is_ a funny name, but there
ain't enough of it for my taste."

The conversation was interrupted at this point by the superintendent,
who, having been for many years in command of an East Indiaman, was
styled "Captain."  He ordered the mate and men whose turn it was to be
"relieved" to get into the tender along with the strangers.  Soon
afterwards the vessel steamed away over the glassy water, and Billy, who
had taken a fancy to the big lamplighter, went up to him and said--

"Well, Dick Moy, where are we agoin' to just now?"

Dick pointed to a black speck on the water, a considerable distance
ahead of them.

"We're agoin' to that there buoy, to lift it and put down a noo un."

"Oh, that's a boy, is it? and are them there boys too?" asked Billy,
looking round at the curious oval and conical cask-like things, of
gigantic proportions, which lumbered the deck and filled the hold of the
tender.

"Ay, they're all buoys."

"None of 'em girls?" inquired the urchin gravely.

"No, none of 'em," replied Dick with equal gravity, for to him the joke
was a very stale one.

"No? that's stoopid now; I'd 'ave 'ad some of 'em girls for variety's
sake--wot's the use of 'em?" asked the imp, who pretended ignorance, in
order to draw out his burly companion.

"To mark the channels," replied Dick.  "We puts a red buoy on one side
and a checkered buoy on t'other, and if the vessels keeps atween 'em
they goes all right--if not, they goes ashore."

"H'm, that's just where it is now," said Billy.  "If _I_ had had the
markin' o' them there channels I'd 'ave put boys on one side an' girls
on t'other all the way up to London--made a sort o' country dance of it,
an' all the ships would 'ave gone up the middle an' down agin, d'ye
see?"

"Port, port a little," said the captain at that moment.

"Port it is, sir," answered Mr Welton, senior, who stood at the wheel.

The tender was now bearing down on one of the numerous buoys which mark
off the channels around the Goodwin sands, and it required careful
steering in order to avoid missing it on the one hand, or running into
it on the other.  A number of men stood on the bow of the vessel, with
ropes and boat-hooks, in readiness to catch and make fast to it.  These
men, with the exception of two or three who formed the permanent crew of
the tender, were either going off to "relieve" their comrades and take
their turn on board the floating lights, or were on their way to land,
having been "relieved"--such as George Welton the mate, Dick Moy, and
Jerry MacGowl.  Among them were several masters and mates belonging to
the light-vessels of that district--sedate, grave, cheerful, and
trustworthy men, all of them--who had spent the greater part of their
lives in the service, and were by that time middle-aged or elderly, but
still, with few exceptions, as strong and hardy as young men.

Jerry, being an unusually active and powerful fellow, took a prominent
part in all the duties that devolved on the men at that time.

That these duties were not light might have been evident to the most
superficial observer, for the buoys and their respective chains and
sinkers were of the most ponderous and unwieldy description.

Referring to this, Stanley Hall said, as he stood watching the progress
of the work, "Why, captain, up to this day I have been in the habit of
regarding buoys as trifling affairs, not much bigger or more valuable
than huge barrels or washing-tubs, but now that I see them close at
hand, and hear all you tell me about them, my respect increases
wonderfully."

"It will be increased still more, perhaps," replied the captain, "when I
tell you the cost of some of them.  Now, then, MacGowl, look out--are
you ready?"

"All ready, sir."

"Port a little--steady."

"Steady!" replied Mr Welton.

"Arrah! howld on--och! stiddy--heave--hooray!" cried the anxious
Irishman as he made a plunge at the buoy which was floating alongside
like a huge iron balloon, bumping its big forehead gently, yet heavily,
against the side of the tender, and, in that simple way conveying to the
mind of Stanley an idea of the great difficulty that must attend the
shifting of buoys in rough weather.

The buoy having been secured, an iron hook and chain of great strength
were then attached to the ring in its head.  The chain communicated with
a powerful crane rigged up on the foremast, and was wrought by a steam
windlass on deck.

"You see we require stronger tackle," said the captain to Stanley, while
the buoy was being slowly raised.  "That buoy weighs fully
three-quarters of a ton, and cost not less, along with its chain and
sinker, than 150 pounds, yet it is not one of our largest.  We have what
we call monster buoys, weighing considerably more than a ton, which cost
about 300 pounds apiece, including a 60-fathom chain and a
30-hundred-weight sinker.  Those medium-sized ones, made of wood and
hooped like casks, cost from 80 pounds to 100 pounds apiece without
appendages.  Even that small green fellow lying there, with which I
intend to mark the Nora, if necessary, is worth 25 pounds, and as there
are many hundreds of such buoys all round the kingdom, you can easily
believe that the guarding of our shores is somewhat costly."

"Indeed it must be," answered Stanley; "and if such
insignificant-looking things cost so much, what must be the expense of
maintaining floating lights and lighthouses?"

"I can give you some idea of that too," said the captain--

"Look out!" exclaimed the men at that moment.

"Och! be aisy," cried Jerry, ducking as he spoke, and thus escaping a
blow from the buoy, which would have cracked his head against the
vessel's side like a walnut.

"Heave away, lad!"

The man at the windlass obeyed.  The irresistible steam-winch caused the
huge chain to grind and jerk in its iron pulley, and the enormous
globular iron buoy came quietly over the side, black here and brown
there, and red-rusted elsewhere; its green beard of sea-weed dripping
with brine, and its sides grizzled with a six-months' growth of
barnacles and other shell-fish.

It must not be supposed that, although the engine did all the heavy
lifting, the men had merely to stand by and look on.  In the mere
processes of capturing the buoy and making fast the chains and hooks,
and fending off, etcetera, there was an amount of physical effort--
straining and energising--on the part of the men, that could scarcely be
believed unless seen.  Do not fancy, good reader, that we are attempting
to make much of a trifle in this description.  Our object is rather to
show that what might very naturally be supposed to be trifling and easy
work, is, in truth, very much the reverse.

The buoy having been lifted, another of the same size and shape, but
freshly painted, was attached to the chain, tumbled over the side, and
left in its place.  In this case the chain and sinker did not require
renewing, but at the next [one] visited it was found that buoy, chain,
and sinker had to be lifted and renewed.

And here again, to a landsman like Stanley, there was much to interest
and surprise.  If a man, ignorant of such matters, were asked what he
would do in the event of his having to go and shift one of those buoys,
he might probably reply, "Well, I suppose I would first get hold of the
buoy and hoist it on board, and then throw over another in its place;"
but it is not probable that he would reflect that this process involved
the violent upturning of a mass of wood or metal so heavy that all the
strength of the dozen men who had to struggle with it was scarce
sufficient to move gently even in the water; that, being upturned, an
inch chain had to be unshackled--a process rendered troublesome, owing
to the ponderosity of the links which had to be dealt with, and the
constrained position of the man who wrought,--and that the chain and
sinker had to be hauled out of the sand or mud into which they had sunk
so much, that the donkey-engine had to strain until the massive chains
seemed about to give way, and the men stood in peril of having their
heads suddenly cut open.

Not to be too prolix on this subject, it may be said, shortly, that when
the chain and sinker of the next buoy were being hauled in, a three-inch
rope snapped and grazed the finger of a man, fortunately taking no more
than a little of the skin off, though it probably had force enough to
have taken his hand off if it had struck him differently.  Again they
tried, but the sinker had got so far down into the mud that it would not
let go.  The engine went at last very slowly, for it was applying almost
the greatest strain that the chains could bear, and the bow of the
tender was hauled considerably down into the sea.  The men drew back a
little, but, after a few moments of suspense, the motion of the vessel
gradually loosened the sinker and eased the strain.

"There she goes, handsomely," cried the men, as the engine again resumed
work at reasonable speed.

"We sometimes lose chains and sinkers altogether in that way," remarked
Dick Moy to Billy, who stood looking on with heightened colour and
glowing eyes, and wishing with all the fervour of his small heart that
the whole affair would give way, in order that he might enjoy the
_tremendous_ crash which he thought would be sure to follow.

"Would it be a great loss?" he asked.

"It would, a wery great un," said Dick; "that there chain an' sinker is
worth nigh fifty or sixty pound."

While this work was being done, the captain was busy with his telescope,
taking the exact bearings of the buoy, to ascertain whether or not it
had shifted its position during the six months' conflict with tide and
tempest that it had undergone since last being overhauled.  Certain
buildings on shore coming into line with other prominent buildings, such
as steeples, chimneys, and windmills, were his infallible guides, and
these declared that the buoy had not shifted more than a few feet.  He
therefore gave the order to have the fresh buoy, with its chain and
sinker, ready to let go.

The buoy in question,--a medium one about eight feet high, five feet in
diameter, and conical in shape--stood at the edge of the vessel, like an
extinguisher for the biggest candle that ever was conceived in the
wildest brain at Rome.  Its sinker, a square mass of cast-iron nearly a
ton in weight, lay beside it, and its two-inch chain, every link whereof
was eight or ten inches long, and made of the toughest malleable iron,
was coiled carefully on the main-hatch, so that nothing should impede
its running out.

"All ready?" cried the captain, taking a final glance through the
telescope.

"All ready, sir," replied the men, several of whom stood beside the
buoy, prepared to lay violent hands on it, while two stood with iron
levers under the sinker, ready to heave.

"Stand here, Billy, an' you'll see it better," said Dick Moy, with a sly
look, for Dick had by this time learned to appreciate the mischievous
spirit of the urchin.

"Let go!" cried the captain.

"Let go!" echoed the men.

The levers were raised; the thrust was given.  Away went the sinker;
overboard went the buoy; out went the chain with a clanging roar and a
furious rush, and up sprang a column of white spray, part of which fell
in-board, and drenched Billy Towler to the skin!

As well might Dick Moy have attempted to punish a pig by throwing it
into the mud as to distress Billy by sousing him with water!  It was to
him all but a native element.  In fact, he said that he believed himself
to be a hamphiberous hanimal by nature, and was of the opinion that he
should have been born a merman.

"Hooray! shower-baths free, gratis, for nothink!" he yelled, as soon as
he had re-caught his breath.  "Any more o' that sort comin'?" he cried,
as he pulled off his shirt and wrung it.

"Plenty more wery like it," said Dick, chuckling, "and to be had wery
much on the same terms."

"Ah, if you'd only jine me--it would make it so much more pleasant,"
retorted the boy; "but it would take a deal more water to kiver yer huge
carcase."

"That boy will either make a first-rate man, or an out-and-out villain,"
observed the captain to Stanley, as they stood listening to his chaffing
remarks.

"He'll require a deal of taming," said Jim Welton, who was standing by;
"but he's a smart, well-disposed little fellow as far as I know him."

Morley Jones, who was seated on the starboard bulwarks not far off;
confided his opinion to no one, but he was observed to indulge in a
sardonic grin, and to heave his shoulders as if he were agitated with
suppressed laughter when this last remark was made.

The steamer meanwhile had been making towards another of the floating
lights, alongside of which some time was spent in transferring the full
water-casks, receiving the "empties," etcetera, and in changing the men.
The same process was gone through with the other vessels, and then, in
the afternoon, they returned towards Ramsgate harbour.  On the way they
stopped at one of the large buoys which required to be painted.  The
weather being suitable for that purpose, a boat was lowered, black and
white paint-pots and brushes were put into her, and Jack Shales, Dick
Moy, and Jerry MacGowl were told off to perform the duty.  Stanley Hall
also went for pastime, and Billy Towler slid into the boat like an eel,
without leave, just as it pushed off.

"Get out, ye small varmint!" shouted Jerry; but the boy did not obey;
the boat was already a few feet off from the vessel, and as the captain
either did not see or did not care, Billy was allowed to go.

"You'll only be in the way, an' git tired of yer life before we're half
done," said Dick Moy.

"Never mind, he shall keep me company," said Stanley, laughing.  "We
will sit in judgment on the work as it proceeds--won't we, Billy?"

"Well, sir," replied the boy, with intense gravity, "that depends on
whether yer fine-hart edication has bin sufficiently attended to; but
I've no objection to give you the benefit o' my adwice if you gits into
difficulties."

A loud laugh greeted this remark, and Billy, smiling with condescension,
said he was gratified by their approval.

A few minutes sufficed to bring them alongside the buoy, which was one
of the largest size, shaped like a cone, and painted in alternate
stripes of white and black.  It rose high above the heads of the men
when they stood up beside it in the boat.  It was made of timber, had a
