numerals cannot be ascertained, no proof exists that the ancestors of these
peoples ever used either finger or toe counting; and the sweeping statement
that any vigesimal scale is the outgrowth of the use of these natural
counters is not susceptible of proof. But so many examples are met with in
which the origin is clearly of this nature, that no hesitation is felt in
putting the above forward as a general explanation for the existence of
this kind of counting. Any other origin is difficult to reconcile with
observed facts, and still more difficult to reconcile with any rational
theory of number system development. Dismissing from consideration the
quinary scale, let us briefly examine once more the natural process of
evolution through which the decimal and the vigesimal scales come into
being. After the completion of one count of the fingers the savage
announces his result in some form which definitely states to his mind the
fact that the end of a well-marked series has been reached. Beginning
again, he now repeats his count of 10, either on his own fingers or on the
fingers of another. With the completion of the second 10 the result is
announced, not in a new unit, but by means of a duplication of the term
already used. It is scarcely credible that the unit unconsciously adopted
at the termination of the first count should now be dropped, and a new one
substituted in its place. When the method here described is employed, 20 is
not a natural unit to which higher numbers may be referred. It is wholly
artificial; and it would be most surprising if it were adopted. But if the
count of the second 10 is made on the toes in place of the fingers, the
element of repetition which entered into the previous method is now
wanting. Instead of referring each new number to the 10 already completed,
the savage is still feeling his way along, designating his new terms by
such phrases as "1 on the foot," "2 on the other foot," etc. And now, when
20 is reached, a single series is finished instead of a double series as
before; and the result is expressed in one of the many methods already
noticed--"one man," "hands and feet," "the feet finished," "all the fingers
of hands and feet," or some equivalent formula. Ten is no longer the
natural base. The number from which the new start is made is 20, and the
resulting scale is inevitably vigesimal. If pebbles or sticks are used
instead of fingers, the system will probably be decimal. But back of the
stick and pebble counting the 10 natural counters always exist, and to them
we must always look for the origin of this scale.

In any collection of the principal vigesimal number systems of the world,
one would naturally begin with those possessed by the Celtic races of
Europe. These races, the earliest European peoples of whom we have any
exact knowledge, show a preference for counting by twenties, which is
almost as decided as that manifested by Teutonic races for counting by
tens. It has been conjectured by some writers that the explanation for this
was to be found in the ancient commercial intercourse which existed between
the Britons and the Carthaginians and Phoenicians, whose number systems
showed traces of a vigesimal tendency. Considering the fact that the use of
vigesimal counting was universal among Celtic races, this explanation is
quite gratuitous. The reason why the Celts used this method is entirely
unknown, and need not concern investigators in the least. But the fact that
they did use it is important, and commands attention. The five Celtic
languages, Breton, Irish, Welsh, Manx, and Gaelic, contain the following
well-defined vigesimal scales. Only the principal or characteristic
numerals are given, those being sufficient to enable the reader to follow
intelligently the growth of the systems. Each contains the decimal element
also, and is, therefore, to be regarded as a mixed decimal-vigesimal
system.


  IRISH.[329]

    10.  deic.
    20.  fice.
    30.  triocad      = 3-10
    40.  da ficid     = 2-20.
    50.  caogad       = 5-10.
    60.  tri ficid    = 3-20.
    70.  reactmoga    = 7-10.
    80.  ceitqe ficid = 4-20.
    90.  nocad        = 9-10.
   100.  cead.
  1000.  mile.


  GAELIC.[330]

    10.  deich.
    20.  fichead.
    30.  deich ar fichead         = 10 + 20.
    40.  da fhichead              = 2-20.
    50.  da fhichead is deich     = 40 + 10.
    60.  tri fichead              = 3-20.
    70.  tri fichead is deich     = 60 + 10.
    80.  ceithir fichead          = 4-20.
    90.  ceithir fichead is deich = 80 + 10.
   100.  ceud.
  1000.  mile.


  WELSH.[331]

    10.  deg.
    20.  ugain.
    30.  deg ar hugain      = 10 + 20.
    40.  deugain            = 2-20.
    50.  deg a deugain      = 10 + 40.
    60.  trigain            = 3-20.
    70.  deg a thrigain     = 10 + 60.
    80.  pedwar ugain       = 4-20.
    90.  deg a pedwar ugain = 80 + 10.
   100.  cant.


  MANX.[332]

    10.  jeih.
    20.  feed.
    30.  yn jeih as feed    = 10 + 20.
    40.  daeed              = 2-20.
    50.  jeih as daeed      = 10 + 40.
    60.  three-feed         = 3-20.
    70.  three-feed as jeih = 60 + 10.
    80.  kiare-feed         = 4-20.
   100.  keead.
  1000.  thousane, or jeih cheead.


  BRETON.[333]

    10.  dec.
    20.  ueguend.
    30.  tregond             = 3-10.
    40.  deu ueguend         = 2-20.
    50.  hanter hand         = half hundred.
    60.  tri ueguend         = 3-20.
    70.  dec ha tri ueguend  = 10 + 60.
    80.  piar ueguend        = 4-20.
    90.  dec ha piar ueguend = 10 + 80.
   100.  cand.
   120.  hueh ueguend    = 6-20.
   140.  seih ueguend    = 7-20.
   160.  eih ueguend     = 8-20.
   180.  nau ueguend     = 9-20.
   200.  deu gand        = 2-100.
   240.  deuzec ueguend  = 12-20.
   280.  piarzec ueguend = 14-20.
   300.  tri hand, or pembzec ueguend.
   400.  piar hand       = 4-100.
  1000.  mil.

These lists show that the native development of the Celtic number systems,
originally showing a strong preference for the vigesimal method of
progression, has been greatly modified by intercourse with Teutonic and
Latin races. The higher numerals in all these languages, and in Irish many
of the lower also, are seen at a glance to be decimal. Among the scales
here given the Breton, the legitimate descendant of the ancient Gallic, is
especially interesting; but here, just as in the other Celtic tongues, when
we reach 1000, the familiar Latin term for that number appears in the
various corruptions of _mille_, 1000, which was carried into the Celtic
countries by missionary and military influences.

In connection with the Celtic language, mention must be made of the
persistent vigesimal element which has held its place in French. The
ancient Gauls, while adopting the language of their conquerors, so far
modified the decimal system of Latin as to replace the natural _septante_,
70, _octante_, 80, _nonante_, 90, by _soixante-dix_, 60-10, _quatre-vingt_,
4-20, and _quatrevingt-dix_, 4-20-10. From 61 to 99 the French method of
counting is wholly vigesimal, except for the presence of the one word
_soixante_. In old French this element was still more pronounced.
_Soixante_ had not yet appeared; and 60 and 70 were _treis vinz_, 3-20, and
_treis vinz et dis_, 3-20 and 10 respectively. Also, 120 was _six vinz_,
6-20, 140 was _sept-vinz_, etc.[334] How far this method ever extended in
the French language proper, it is, perhaps, impossible to say; but from the
name of an almshouse, _les quinze-vingts_,[335] which formerly existed in
Paris, and was designed as a home for 300 blind persons, and from the
_pembzek-ueguent_, 15-20, of the Breton, which still survives, we may infer
that it was far enough to make it the current system of common life.

Europe yields one other example of vigesimal counting, in the number system
of the Basques. Like most of the Celtic scales, the Basque seems to become
decimal above 100. It does not appear to be related to any other European
system, but to be quite isolated philologically. The higher units, as
_mila_, 1000, are probably borrowed, and not native. The tens in the Basque
scale are:[336]

    10.  hamar.
    20.  hogei.
    30.  hogei eta hamar     = 20 + 10.
    40.  berrogei            = 2-20.
    50.  berrogei eta hamar  = 2-20 + 10.
    60.  hirurogei           = 3-20.
    70.  hirurogei eta hamar = 3-20 + 10.
    80.  laurogei            = 4-20.
    90.  laurogei eta hamar  = 4-20 + 10.
   100.  ehun.
  1000.  _milla_.

Besides these we find two or three numeral scales in Europe which contain
distinct traces of vigesimal counting, though the scales are, as a whole,
decidedly decimal. The Danish, one of the essentially Germanic languages,
contains the following numerals:

    30.  tredive            = 3-10.
    40.  fyrretyve          = 4-10.
    50.  halvtredsindstyve  = half (of 20) from 3-20.
    60.  tresindstyve       = 3-20.
    70.  halvfierdsindstyve = half from 4-20.
    80.  fiirsindstyve      = 4-20.
    90.  halvfemsindstyve   = half from 5-20.
   100.  hundrede.

Germanic number systems are, as a rule, pure decimal systems; and the
Danish exception is quite remarkable. We have, to be sure, such expressions
in English as _three score_, _four score_, etc., and the Swedish,
Icelandic, and other languages of this group have similar terms. Still,
these are not pure numerals, but auxiliary words rather, which belong to
the same category as _pair_, _dozen_, _dizaine_, etc., while the Danish
words just given are the ordinary numerals which form a part of the
every-day vocabulary of that language. The method by which this scale
expresses 50, 70, and 90 is especially noticeable. It will be met with
again, and further examples of its occurrence given.

In Albania there exists one single fragment of vigesimal numeration, which
is probably an accidental compound rather than the remnant of a former
vigesimal number system. With this single exception the Albanian scale is
of regular decimal formation. A few of the numerals are given for the sake
of comparison:[337]

    30.  tridgiete    = 3-10.
    40.  dizet        = 2-20.
    50.  pesedgiete   = 5-10.
    60.  giastedgiete = 6-10, etc.

Among the almost countless dialects of Africa we find a comparatively small
number of vigesimal number systems. The powers of the negro tribes are not
strongly developed in counting, and wherever their numeral scales have been
taken down by explorers they have almost always been found to be decimal or
quinary-decimal. The small number I have been able to collect are here
given. They are somewhat fragmentary, but are as complete as it was
possible to make them.


  AFFADEH.[338]

    10.  dekang.
    20.  degumm.
    30.  piaske.
    40.  tikkumgassih      = 20 x 2.
    50.  tikkumgassigokang = 20 x 2 + 10.
    60.  tikkumgakro       = 20 x 3.
    70.  dungokrogokang    = 20 x 3 + 10.
    80.  dukumgade         = 20 x 4.
    90.  dukumgadegokang   = 20 x 4 + 10.
   100.  miah (borrowed from the Arabs).


  IBO.[339]

    10.  iri.
    20.  ogu.
    30.  ogu n-iri    = 20 + 10,
          or iri ato  = 10 x 3.
    40.  ogu abuo     = 20 x 2,
          or iri anno = 10 x 4.
   100.  ogu ise      = 20 x 5.


  VEI.[340]

    10.  tan.
    20.  mo bande         = a person finished.
    30.  mo bande ako tan = 20 + 10.
    40.  mo fera bande    = 2 x 20.
   100.  mo soru bande    = 5 persons finished.


  YORUBA.[341]

    10.  duup.
    20.  ogu.
    30.  ogbo.
    40.  ogo-dzi = 20 x 2.
    60.  ogo-ta  = 20 x 3.
    80.  ogo-ri  = 20 x 4.
   100.  ogo-ru  = 20 x 5.
   120.  ogo-fa  = 20 x 6.
   140.  ogo-dze = 20 x 7.
   160.  ogo-dzo = 20 x 8, etc.


  EFIK.[342]

    10.  duup.
    20.  edip.
    30.  edip-ye-duup = 20 + 10.
    40.  aba  = 20 x 2.
    60.  ata  = 20 x 3.
    80.  anan = 20 x 4.
   100.  ikie.

The Yoruba scale, to which reference has already been made, p. 70, again
shows its peculiar structure, by continuing its vigesimal formation past
100 with no interruption in its method of numeral building. It will be
remembered that none of the European scales showed this persistency, but
passed at that point into decimal numeration. This will often be found to
be the case; but now and then a scale will come to our notice whose
vigesimal structure is continued, without any break, on into the hundreds
and sometimes into the thousands.


  BONGO.[343]

    10.  kih.
    20.  mbaba kotu  = 20 x 1.
    40.  mbaba gnorr = 20 x 2.
   100.  mbaba mui   = 20 x 5.


  MENDE.[344]

    10.  pu.
    20.  nu yela gboyongo mai = a man finished.
    30.  nu yela gboyongo mahu pu = 20 + 10.
    40.  nu fele gboyongo = 2 men finished.
   100.  nu lolu gboyongo = 5 men finished.


  NUPE.[345]

    10.  gu-wo.
    20.  esin.
    30.  gbonwo.
    40.  si-ba = 2 x 20.
    50.  arota.
    60.  sita  = 3 x 20.
    70.  adoni.
    80.  sini  = 4 x 20.
    90.  sini be-guwo = 80 + 10.
   100.  sisun = 5 x 20.


  LOGONE.[346]

    10.  chkan.
    20.  tkam.
    30.  tkam ka chkan      = 20 + 10.
    40.  tkam ksde          = 20 x 2.
    50.  tkam ksde ka chkan = 40 + 10.
    60.  tkam gachkir       = 20 x 3.
   100.  mia (from Arabic).
  1000.  debu.


  MUNDO.[347]

    10.  nujorquoi.
    20.  tiki bere.
    30.  tiki bire nujorquoi  = 20 + 10.
    40.  tiki borsa           = 20 x 2.
    50.  tike borsa nujorquoi = 40 + 10.


  MANDINGO.[348]

    10.  tang.
    20.  mulu.
    30.  mulu nintang       = 20 + 10.
    40.  mulu foola         = 20 x 2.
    50.  mulu foola nintang = 40 + 10.
    60.  mulu sabba         = 20 x 3.
    70.  mulu sabba nintang = 60 + 10.
    80.  mulu nani          = 20 x 4.
    90.  mulu nani nintang  = 80 + 10.
   100.  kemi.

This completes the scanty list of African vigesimal number systems that a
patient and somewhat extended search has yielded. It is remarkable that the
number is no greater. Quinary counting is not uncommon in the "Dark
Continent," and there is no apparent reason why vigesimal reckoning should
be any less common than quinary. Any one investigating African modes of
counting with the material at present accessible, will find himself
hampered by the fact that few explorers have collected any except the first
ten numerals. This leaves the formation of higher terms entirely unknown,
and shows nothing beyond the quinary or non-quinary character of the
system. Still, among those which Stanley, Schweinfurth, Salt, and others
have collected, by far the greatest number are decimal. As our knowledge of
African languages is extended, new examples of the vigesimal method may be
brought to light. But our present information leads us to believe that they
will be few in number.

In Asia the vigesimal system is to be found with greater frequency than in
Europe or Africa, but it is still the exception. As Asiatic languages are
much better known than African, it is probable that the future will add but
little to our stock of knowledge on this point. New instances of counting
by twenties may still be found in northern Siberia, where much ethnological
work yet remains to be done, and where a tendency toward this form of
numeration has been observed to exist. But the total number of Asiatic
vigesimal scales must always remain small--quite insignificant in
comparison with those of decimal formation.

In the Caucasus region a group of languages is found, in which all but
three or four contain vigesimal systems. These systems are as follows:


  ABKHASIA.[349]

    10.  zpha-ba.
    20.  gphozpha         = 2 x 10.
    30.  gphozphei zphaba = 20 + 10.
    40.  gphin-gphozpha   = 2 x 20.
    60.  chin-gphozpha    = 3 x 20.
    80.  phsin-gphozpha   = 4 x 20.
   100.  sphki.


  AVARI

    10.  antsh-go.
    20.  qo-go.
    30.  lebergo.
    40.  khi-qogo           = 2 x 20.
    50.  khiqojalda antshgo = 40 + 10.
    60.  lab-qogo           = 3 x 20.
    70.  labqojalda antshgo = 60 + 10.
    80.  un-qogo            = 4 x 20.
   100.  nusgo.


  KURI

    10.  tshud.
    20.  chad.
    30.  channi tshud = 20 + 10.
    40.  jachtshur.
    50.  jachtshurni tshud = 40 + 10.
    60.  put chad          = 3 x 20.
    70.  putchanni tshud   = 60 + 10.
    80.  kud-chad          = 4 x 20.
    90.  kudchanni tshud   = 80 + 10.
   100.  wis.


  UDI

    10.  witsh.
    20.  qa.
    30.  sa-qo-witsh   = 20 + 10.
    40.  pha-qo        = 2 x 20.
    50.  pha-qo-witsh  = 40 + 10.
    60.  chib-qo       = 3 x 20.
    70.  chib-qo-witsh = 60 + 10.
    80.  bip-qo        = 4 x 20.
    90.  bip-qo-witsh  = 80 + 10.
   100.  bats.
  1000.  hazar (Persian).


  TCHETCHNIA

