more after that till I came to my senses, and found you bathing my
temples, and Ralph wringing his hands over me."

But although Peterkin was often unfortunate in the way of getting
tumbles, he was successful on the present occasion in hunting, and
returned before evening with three very nice little hogs.  I also was
successful in my visit to the mud-flats, where I killed several ducks.
So that when we launched and loaded our boat at sunrise the following
morning, we found our store of provisions to be more than sufficient.
Part had been cooked the night before, and on taking note of the
different items, we found the account to stand thus:

  10 Bread-fruits (two baked, eight unbaked).
  20 Yams (six roasted, the rest raw).
  6 Taro-roots.
  50 Fine large plums.
  6 Cocoa-nuts, ripe.
  6 Ditto, green (for drinking).
  4 Large ducks and two small ones, raw.
  3 Cold roast pigs, with stuffing.

I may here remark that the stuffing had been devised by Peterkin
specially for the occasion.  He kept the manner of its compounding a
profound secret, so I cannot tell what it was; but I can say, with much
confidence, that we found it to be atrociously bad, and after the first
tasting, scraped it carefully out and threw it overboard.  We calculated
that this supply would last us for several days; but we afterwards found
that it was much more than we required, especially in regard to the
cocoa-nuts, of which we found large supplies wherever we went.  However,
as Peterkin remarked, it was better to have too much than too little, as
we knew not to what straits we might be put during our voyage.

It was a very calm, sunny morning when we launched forth and rowed over
the lagoon towards the outlet in the reef, and passed between the two
green islets that guarded the entrance.  We experienced some difficulty
and no little danger in passing the surf of the breaker, and shipped a
good deal of water in the attempt; but once past the billow, we found
ourselves floating placidly on the long, oily swell that rose and fell
slowly as it rolled over the wide ocean.

Penguin Island lay on the other side of our own island, at about a mile
beyond the outer reef, and we calculated that it must be at least twenty
miles distant by the way we should have to go.  We might, indeed, have
shortened the way by coasting round our island inside of the lagoon, and
going out at the passage in the reef nearly opposite to Penguin Island;
but we preferred to go by the open sea--first, because it was more
adventurous, and secondly, because we should have the pleasure of again
feeling the motion of the deep, which we all loved very much, not being
liable to sea-sickness.

"I wish we had a breeze," said Jack.

"So do I," cried Peterkin, resting on his oar and wiping his heated
brow; "pulling is hard work.  Oh dear, if we could only catch a hundred
or two of these gulls, tie them to the boat with long strings, and make
them fly as we want them, how capital it would be!"

"Or bore a hole through a shark's tail and reeve a rope through it, eh?"
remarked Jack.  "But, I say, it seems that my wish is going to be
granted, for here comes a breeze.  Ship your oar, Peterkin.--Up with the
mast, Ralph; I'll see to the sail.  Mind your helm; look out for
squalls!"

This last speech was caused by the sudden appearance of a dark-blue line
on the horizon, which, in an incredibly short space of time, swept down
on us, lashing up the sea in white foam as it went.  We presented the
stern of the boat to its first violence, and in a few seconds it
moderated into a steady breeze, to which we spread our sail and flew
merrily over the waves.  Although the breeze died away soon afterwards,
it had been so stiff while it lasted that we were carried over the
greater part of our way before it fell calm again; so that when the
flapping of the sail against the mast told us that it was time to resume
the oars, we were not much more than a mile from Penguin Island.

"There go the soldiers!" cried Peterkin as we came in sight of it.  "How
spruce their white trousers look this morning!  I wonder if they will
receive us kindly?--D'you think they are hospitable, Jack?"

"Don't talk, Peterkin, but pull away, and you shall see shortly."

As we drew near to the island, we were much amused by the manoeuvres and
appearance of these strange birds.  They seemed to be of different
species: for some had crests on their heads, while others had none; and
while some were about the size of a goose, others appeared nearly as
large as a swan.  We also saw a huge albatross soaring above the heads
of the penguins.  It was followed and surrounded by numerous flocks of
sea-gulls.  Having approached to within a few yards of the island, which
was a low rock, with no other vegetation on it than a few bushes, we lay
on our oars and gazed at the birds with surprise and pleasure, they
returning our gaze with interest.  We now saw that their soldierlike
appearance was owing to the stiff erect manner in which they sat on
their short legs--"bolt-upright," as Peterkin expressed it.  They had
black heads, long, sharp beaks, white breasts, and bluish backs.  Their
wings were so short that they looked more like the fins of a fish, and
indeed we soon saw that they used them for the purpose of swimming under
water.  There were no quills on these wings, but a sort of scaly
feathers, which also thickly covered their bodies.  Their legs were
short, and placed so far back that the birds, while on land, were
obliged to stand quite upright in order to keep their balance; but in
the water they floated like other water-fowl.  At first we were so
stunned with the clamour which they and other sea-birds kept up around
us that we knew not which way to look, for they covered the rocks in
thousands; but as we continued to gaze, we observed several quadrupeds
(as we thought) walking in the midst of the penguins.

"Pull in a bit," cried Peterkin, "and let's see what these are.  They
must be fond of noisy company to consort with such creatures."

To our surprise, we found that these were no other than penguins which
had gone down on all fours, and were crawling among the bushes on their
feet and wings, just like quadrupeds.  Suddenly one big old bird, that
had been sitting on a point very near to us, gazing in mute
astonishment, became alarmed, and scuttling down the rocks, plumped or
fell, rather than ran, into the sea.  It dived in a moment, and, a few
seconds afterwards, came out of the water far ahead with such a spring,
and such a dive back into the sea again, that we could scarcely believe
it was not a fish that had leaped in sport.

"That beats everything!" said Peterkin, rubbing his nose, and screwing
up his face with an expression of exasperated amazement.  "I've heard of
a thing being neither fish, flesh, nor fowl; but I never did expect to
live to see a brute that was all three together--at once--in one!  But
look there!" he continued, pointing with a look of resignation to the
shore--"look there! there's no end to it.  What has that brute got under
its tail?"

We turned to look in the direction pointed out, and there saw a penguin
walking slowly and very sedately along the shore with an egg under its
tail.  There were several others, we observed, burdened in the same way;
and we found afterwards that these were a species of penguin that always
carried their eggs so.  Indeed, they had a most convenient cavity for
the purpose, just between the tail and the legs.  We were very much
impressed with the regularity and order of this colony.  The island
seemed to be apportioned out into squares, of which each penguin
possessed one, and sat in stiff solemnity in the middle of it, or took a
slow march up and down the spaces between.  Some were hatching their
eggs, but others were feeding their young ones in a manner that caused
us to laugh not a little.  The mother stood on a mound or raised rock,
while the young one stood patiently below her on the ground.  Suddenly
the mother raised her head and uttered a series of the most discordant
cackling sounds.

"She's going to choke," cried Peterkin.

But this was not the case, although, I confess, she looked like it.  In
a few seconds she put down her head and opened her mouth, into which the
young one thrust its beak and seemed to suck something from her throat.
Then the cackling was renewed, the sucking continued, and so the
operation of feeding was carried on till the young one was satisfied;
but what she fed her little one with we could not tell.

"Now, just look yonder!" said Peterkin in an excited tone.  "If that
isn't the most abominable piece of maternal deception I ever saw!  That
rascally old lady penguin has just pitched her young one into the sea,
and there's another about to follow her example."

This indeed seemed to be the case, for on the top of a steep rock close
to the edge of the sea we observed an old penguin endeavouring to entice
her young one into the water; but the young one seemed very unwilling to
go, and notwithstanding the enticements of its mother, moved very slowly
towards her.  At last she went gently behind the young bird and pushed
it a little towards the water, but with great tenderness, as much as to
say, "Don't be afraid, darling; I won't hurt you, my pet!"  But no
sooner did she get it to the edge of the rock, where it stood looking
pensively down at the sea, than she gave it a sudden and violent push,
sending it headlong down the slope into the water, where its mother left
it to scramble ashore as it best could.  We observed many of them
employed in doing this, and we came to the conclusion that this is the
way in which old penguins teach their children to swim.

Scarcely had we finished making our remarks on this, when we were
startled by about a dozen of the old birds hopping in the most clumsy
and ludicrous manner towards the sea.  The beach here was a sloping
rock, and when they came to it some of them succeeded in hopping down in
safety, but others lost their balance and rolled and scrambled down the
slope in the most helpless manner.  The instant they reached the water,
however, they seemed to be in their proper element.  They dived, and
bounded out of it and into it again with the utmost agility; and so,
diving and bounding and sputtering--for they could not fly--they went
rapidly out to sea.

On seeing this, Peterkin turned with a grave face to us and said, "It's
my opinion that these birds are all stark, staring mad, and that this is
an enchanted island.  I therefore propose that we should either put
about ship and fly in terror from the spot, or land valorously on the
island and sell our lives as dearly as we can."

"I vote for landing; so pull in, lads!" said Jack, giving a stroke with
his oar that made the boat spin.  In a few seconds we ran the boat into
a little creek, where we made her fast to a projecting piece of coral,
and running up the beach, entered the ranks of the penguins, armed with
our cudgels and our spear.  We were greatly surprised to find that
instead of attacking us, or showing signs of fear at our approach, these
curious birds did not move from their places until we laid hands on
them, and merely turned their eyes on us in solemn, stupid wonder as we
passed.  There was one old penguin, however, that began to walk slowly
towards the sea; and Peterkin took it into his head that he would try to
interrupt its progress, so he ran between it and the sea and brandished
his cudgel in its face.  But this proved to be a resolute old bird.  It
would not retreat; nay, more, it would not cease to advance, but battled
with Peterkin bravely, and drove him before it until it reached the sea.
Had Peterkin used his club he could easily have felled it, no doubt;
but as he had no wish to do so cruel an act merely out of sport, he let
the bird escape.

We spent fully three hours on this island in watching the habit of these
curious birds; but when we finally left them, we all three concluded,
after much consultation, that they were the most wonderful creatures we
had ever seen, and further, we thought it probable that they were the
most wonderful creatures in the world!



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

AN AWFUL STORM AND ITS CONSEQUENCES--NARROW ESCAPE--A ROCK PROVES A SURE
FOUNDATION--A FEARFUL NIGHT AND A BRIGHT MORNING--DELIVERANCE FROM
DANGER.

It was evening before we left the island of the penguins.  As we had
made up our minds to encamp for the night on a small island whereon grew
a few cocoa-nut trees, which was about two miles off, we lay-to our oars
with some energy.  But a danger was in store for us which we had not
anticipated.  The wind, which had carried us so quickly to Penguin
Island, freshened as evening drew on to a stiff breeze, and before we
had made half the distance to the small island, it became a regular
gale.  Although it was not so directly against us as to prevent our
rowing in the course we wished to go, yet it checked us very much; and
although the force of the sea was somewhat broken by the island, the
waves soon began to rise and to roll their broken crests against our
small craft, so that she began to take in water, and we had much ado to
keep ourselves afloat.  At last the wind and sea together became so
violent that we found it impossible to make the island; so Jack suddenly
put the head of the boat round, and ordered Peterkin and me to hoist a
corner of the sail, intending to run back to Penguin Island.

"We shall at least have the shelter of the bushes," he said as the boat
flew before the wind, "and the penguins will keep us company."

As Jack spoke, the wind suddenly shifted and blew so much against us
that we were forced to hoist more of the sail in order to beat up for
the island, being by this change thrown much to leeward of it.  What
made matters worse was that the gale came in squalls, so that we were
more than once nearly upset.

"Stand by, both of you!" cried Jack in a quick, earnest tone.  "Be ready
to deuce the sail.  I very much fear we won't make the island after
all."

Peterkin and I were so much in the habit of trusting everything to Jack
that we had fallen into the way of not considering things, especially
such things as were under Jack's care.  We had, therefore, never doubted
for a moment that all was going well, so that it was with no little
anxiety that we heard him make the above remark.  However, we had no
time for question or surmise, for at the moment he spoke a heavy squall
was bearing down upon us, and as we were then flying with our lee
gunwale dipping occasionally under the waves, it was evident that we
should have to lower our sail altogether.  In a few seconds the squall
struck the boat; but Peterkin and I had the sail down in a moment, so
that it did not upset us.  But when it was past we were more than
half-full of water.  This I soon bailed out, while Peterkin again
hoisted a corner of the sail.  But the evil which Jack had feared came
upon us.  We found it quite impossible to make Penguin Island.  The gale
carried us quickly past it towards the open sea, and the terrible truth
flashed upon us that we should be swept out and left to perish miserably
in a small boat in the midst of the wide ocean.

This idea was forced very strongly upon us, because we saw nothing in
the direction whither the wind was blowing us save the raging billows of
the sea; and indeed we trembled as we gazed around us, for we were now
beyond the shelter of the islands, and it seemed as though any of the
huge billows, which curled over in masses of foam, might swallow us up
in a moment.  The water also began to wash in over our sides, and I had
to keep constantly bailing; for Jack could not quit the helm, nor
Peterkin the sail, for an instant, without endangering our lives.  In
the midst of this distress Jack uttered an exclamation of hope, and
pointed towards a low island or rock which lay directly ahead.  It had
been hitherto unobserved, owing to the dark clouds that obscured the sky
and the blinding spray that seemed to fill the whole atmosphere.

As we neared this rock we observed that it was quite destitute of trees
and verdure, and so low that the sea broke completely over it.  In fact,
it was nothing more than the summit of one of the coral formations,
which rose only a few feet above the level of the water, and was, in
stormy weather, all but invisible.  Over this island the waves were
breaking in the utmost fury, and our hearts sank within us as we saw
that there was not a spot where we could thrust our little boat without
its being dashed to pieces.

"Show a little bit more sail!" cried Jack as we swept past the weather
side of the rock with fearful speed.

"Ay, ay!" answered Peterkin, hoisting about a foot more of our sail.

Little though the addition was, it caused the boat to lie over and creak
so loudly, as we cleft the foaming waves, that I expected to be upset
every instant; and I blamed Jack in my heart for his rashness.  But I
did him injustice; for although during two seconds the water rushed
inboard in a torrent, he succeeded in steering us sharply round to the
leeward side of the rock, where the water was comparatively calm and the
force of the breeze broken.

"Out your oars now, lads!  That's well done!  Give way!"  We obeyed
instantly.  The oars splashed into the waves together.  One good, hearty
pull, and we were floating in a comparatively calm creek that was so
narrow as to be barely able to admit our boat.  Here we were in perfect
safety, and as we leaped on shore and fastened our cable to the rocks, I
thanked God in my heart for our deliverance from so great danger.  But
although I have said we were now in safety, I suspect that few of my
readers would have envied our position.  It is true we had no lack of
food; but we were drenched to the skin; the sea was foaming round us,
and the spray flying over our heads, so that we were completely
enveloped, as it were, in water; the spot on which we had landed was not
more than twelve yards in diameter, and from this spot we could not move
without the risk of being swept away by the storm.  At the upper end of
the creek was a small hollow or cave in the rock, which sheltered us
from the fury of the winds and waves; and as the rock extended in a sort
of ledge over our heads, it prevented the spray from falling upon us.

"Why," said Peterkin, beginning to feel cheery again, "it seems to me
that we have got into a mermaid's cave, for there is nothing but water
all round us; and as for earth and sky, they are things of the past."

Peterkin's idea was not inappropriate, for what with the sea roaring in
white foam up to our very feet, and the spray flying in white sheets
continually over our heads, and the water dripping heavily from the
ledge above like a curtain in front of our cave, it did seem to us very
much more like being below than above water.

"Now, boys," cried Jack, "bestir yourselves, and let's make ourselves
comfortable.--Toss out our provisions, Peterkin; and here, Ralph, lend a
hand to haul up the boat.  Look sharp!"

"Ay, ay, captain!" we cried as we hastened to obey, much cheered by the
hearty manner of our comrade.

Fortunately the cave, although not very deep, was quite dry, so that we
