neck. Some added to this costume, already so characteristic, a detail
that was even more significant; they knotted around their necks a thread
of scarlet silk, fine as the blade of a razor, which, as in Faust's
Marguerite, at the Witches' Sabbath, indicated the cut of the knife
between the throat and the collar bone.

As for the men who were in the same case, they wore the collars of their
coats turned down behind, those of their shirt wide open, their necks
bare, and their hair, cut short.

But many had other rights of entrance to this ball besides that of
having Victims in their families; some had made victims themselves.
These latter were increasing. There were present men of forty or
forty-five years of age, who had been trained in the boudoirs of the
beautiful courtesans of the seventeenth century--who had known Madame du
Barry in the attics of Versailles, Sophie Arnoult with M. de Lauraguais,
La Duthe with the Comte d'Artois--who had borrowed from the courtesies
of vice the polish with which they covered their ferocity. They were
still young and handsome; they entered a salon, tossing their perfumed
locks and their scented handkerchiefs; nor was it a useless precaution,
for if the odor of musk or verbena had not masked it they would have
smelled of blood.

There were men there twenty-five or thirty years old, dressed with
extreme elegance, members of the association of Avengers, who seemed
possessed with the mania of assassination, the lust of slaughter, the
frenzy of blood, which no blood could quench--men who, when the order
came to kill, killed all, friends or enemies; men who carried their
business methods into the business of murder, giving their bloody checks
for the heads of such or such Jacobins, and paying on sight.

There were younger men, eighteen and twenty, almost children, but
children fed, like Achilles, on the marrow of wild beasts, like Pyrrhus,
on the flesh of bears; here were the pupil-bandits of Schiller, the
apprentice-judges of the Sainte-Vehme--that strange generation that
follows great political convulsions, like the Titans after chaos, the
hydras after the Deluge; as the vultures and crows follow the carnage.

Here was the spectre of iron impassible, implacable, inflexible, which
men call Retaliation; and this spectre mingled with the guests. It
entered the gilded salons; it signalled with a look, a gesture, a nod,
and men followed where it led. It was, as says the author from whom we
have borrowed these hitherto unknown but authentic details, "a merry
lust for extermination."

The Terror had affected great cynicism in clothes, a Spartan austerity
in its food, the profound contempt of a barbarous people for arts and
enjoyments. The Thermidorian reaction was, on the contrary, elegant,
opulent, adorned; it exhausted all luxuries, all voluptuous pleasures,
as in the days of Louis XV.; with one addition, the luxury of vengeance,
the lust of blood.

Freron's name was given to the youth of the day, which was called the
jeunesse Freron, or the _jeunesse doree_ (gilded youth). Why Freron? Why
should he rather than others receive that strange and fatal honor?

I cannot tell you--my researches (those who know me will do me the
justice to admit that when I have an end in view, I do not count
them)--my researches have not discovered an answer. It was a whim of
Fashion, and Fashion is the one goddess more capricious than Fortune.

Our readers will hardly know to-day who Freron was. The Freron who was
Voltaire's assailant was better known than he who was the patron of
these elegant assassins; one was the son of the other. Louis Stanislas
was son of Elie-Catherine. The father died of rage when Miromesnil,
Keeper of the Seals, suppressed his journal. The other, irritated by
the injustices of which his father had been the victim, had at first
ardently embraced the revolutionary doctrines. Instead of the "Annee
Litteraire," strangled to death in 1775, he created the "Orateur du
Peuple," in 1789. He was sent to the Midi on a special mission, and
Marseilles and Toulon retain to this day the memory of his cruelty.
But all was forgotten when, on the 9th Thermidor, he proclaimed himself
against Robespierre, and assisted in casting from the altar the Supreme
Being, the colossus who, being an apostle, had made himself a god.
Freron, repudiated by the Mountain, which abandoned him to the heavy
jaws of Moise Bayle; Freron, disdainfully repulsed by the Girondins,
who delivered him over to the imprecations of Isnard; Freron, as the
terrible and picturesque orator of the Var said, "Freron naked and
covered with the leprosy of crime," was accepted, caressed and petted by
the Thermidorians. From them he passed into the camp of the royalists,
and without any reason whatever for obtaining that fatal honor, found
himself suddenly at the head of a powerful party of youth, energy and
vengeance, standing between the passions of the day, which led to all,
and the impotence of the law, which permitted all.

It was to the midst of this _jeunesse_ Freron, mouthing its words,
slurring its r's, giving its "word of honor" about everything, that
Morgan now made his way.

It must be admitted that this _jeunesse_, in spite of the clothes it
wore, in spite of the memories these clothes evoked, was wildly gay.
This seems incomprehensible, but it is true. Explain if you can that
Dance of Death at the beginning of the fifteenth century, which, with
all the fury of a modern galop, led by Musard, whirled its chain through
the very Cemetery of the Innocents, and left amid its tombs fifty
thousand of its votaries.

Morgan was evidently seeking some one.

A young dandy, who was dipping into the silver-gilt comfit-box of
a charming victim, with an ensanguined finger, the only part of his
delicate hand that had escaped the almond paste, tried to stop him, to
relate the particulars of the expedition from which he had brought back
this bloody trophy. But Morgan smiled, pressed his other hand which
was gloved, and contented himself with replying: "I am looking for some
one."

"Important?"

"Company of Jehu."

The young man with the bloody finger let him pass. An adorable Fury, as
Corneille would have called her, whose hair was held up by a dagger with
a blade as sharp as a needle, barred his way, saying: "Morgan, you are
the handsomest, the bravest, the most deserving of love of all the men
present. What have you to say to the woman who tells you that?"

"I answer that I love," replied Morgan, "and that my heart is too narrow
to hold one hatred and two loves." And he continued on his search.

Two young men who were arguing, one saying, "He was English," the other,
"He was German," stopped him.

"The deuce," cried one; "here is the man who can settle it for us."

"No," replied Morgan, trying to push past them; "I'm in a hurry."

"There's only a word to say," said the other. "We have made a bet,
Saint-Amand and I, that the man who was tried and executed at the
Chartreuse du Seillon, was, according to him, a German, and, according
to me, an Englishman."

"I don't know," replied Morgan; "I wasn't there. Ask Hector; he presided
that night."

"Tell us where Hector is?"

"Tell me rather where Tiffauges is; I am looking for him."

"Over there, at the end of the room," said the young man, pointing to a
part of the room where the dance was more than usually gay and animated.
"You will recognize him by his waistcoat; and his trousers are not to be
despised. I shall have a pair like them made with the skin of the very
first hound I meet."

Morgan did not take time to ask in what way Tiffauges' waistcoat was
remarkable, or by what queer cut or precious material his trousers had
won the approbation of a man as expert in such matters as he who had
spoken to him. He went straight to the point indicated by the young
man, saw the person he was seeking dancing an ete, which seemed, by the
intricacy of its weaving, if I may be pardoned for this technical term,
to have issued from the salons of Vestris himself.

Morgan made a sign to the dancer. Tiffauges stopped instantly, bowed
to his partner, led her to her seat, excused himself on the plea of
the urgency of the matter which called him away, and returned to take
Morgan's arm.

"Did you see him," Tiffauges asked Morgan.

"I have just left him," replied the latter.

"Did you deliver the King's letter?"

"To himself."

"Did he read it?"

"At once."

"Has he sent an answer?"

"Two; one verbal, one written; the second dispenses with the first."

"You have it?"

"Here it is."

"Do you know the contents?"

"A refusal."

"Positive?"

"Nothing could be more positive."

"Does he know that from the moment he takes all hope away from us we
shall treat him as an enemy?"

"I told him so."

"What did he answer?"

"He didn't answer; he shrugged his shoulders."

"What do you think his intentions are?"

"It's not difficult to guess."

"Does he mean to keep the power himself?"

"It looks like it."

"The power, but not the throne?"

"Why not the throne?"

"He would never dare to make himself king."

"Oh! I can't say he means to be absolutely king, but I'll answer for it
that he means to be something."

"But he is nothing but a soldier of fortune!"

"My dear fellow, better in these days to be the son of his deeds, than
the grandson of a king."

The young man thought a moment.

"I shall report it all to Cadoudal," he said.

"And add that the First Consul said these very words: 'I hold the Vendee
in the hollow of my hand, and if I choose in three months not another
shot will be fired.'"

"It's a good thing to know."

"You know it; let Cadoudal know it, and take measures."

Just then the music ceased; the hum of the dancers died away; complete
silence prevailed; and, in the midst of this silence, four names were
pronounced in a sonorous and emphatic voice.

These four names were Morgan, Montbar, Adler and d'Assas.

"Pardon me," Morgan said to Tiffauges, "they are probably arranging some
expedition in which I am to take part. I am forced, therefore, to my
great regret, to bid you farewell. Only before I leave you let me look
closer at your waistcoat and trousers, of which I have heard--curiosity
of an amateur; I trust you will excuse it."

"Surely!" exclaimed the young Vendean, "most willingly."




CHAPTER XXVII. THE BEAR'S SKIN

With a rapidity and good nature that did honor to his courtesy, he went
close to the candelabra, which were burning on the chimney-piece. The
waistcoat and trousers seemed to be of the same stuff; but what was that
stuff? The most experienced connoisseur would have been puzzled.

The trousers were tight-fitting as usual, of a light tint between buff
and flesh color; the only remarkable thing about them was the absence
of the seam, and the closeness with which they clung to the leg.
The waistcoat, on the other hand, had two characteristic signs which
attracted attention; it had been pierced by three balls, which had the
holes gaping, and these were stained a carmine, so like blood, that it
might easily have been mistaken for it. On the left side was painted a
bloody heart, the distinguishing sign of the Vendeans. Morgan examined
the two articles with the closest attention, but without result.

"If I were not in such a hurry," said he, "I should like to look into
the matter for myself. But you heard for yourself; in all probability,
some news has reached the committee; government money probably. You
can announce it to Cadoudal; only we shall have to take it first.
Ordinarily, I command these expeditions; if I delay, some one may take
my place. So tell me what your waistcoat and trousers are made of."

"My dear Morgan," replied the Vendean, "perhaps you have heard that my
brother was captured near Bressure, and shot by the Blues?"

"Yes, I know that."

"The Blues were retreating; they left the body at the corner of the
hedge. We were pursuing them so closely that we arrived just after them.
I found the body of my brother still warm. In one of his wounds a sprig
was stuck with these words: 'Shot as a brigand by me, Claude Flageolet,
corporal of the Third Battalion of Paris.' I took my brother's body, and
had the skin removed from his breast. I vowed that this skin, pierced
with three holes, should eternally cry vengeance before my eyes. I made
it my battle waistcoat."

"Ah!" exclaimed Morgan, with a certain astonishment, in which, for
the first time, was mingled something akin to terror--"Ah! then that
waistcoat is made of your brother's skin? And the trousers?"

"Oh!" replied the Vendean, "the trousers, that's another matter.
They are made of the skin of Claude Flageolet, corporal of the Third
Battalion of Paris."

At that moment the voice again called out, in the same order, the names
of Morgan, Montbar, Adler and d'Assas.

Morgan rushed out of the study, crossed the dancing-hall from end
to end, and made his way to a little salon on the other side of the
dressing-room. His three companions, Montbar, Adler and d'Assas, were
there already. With them was a young man in the government livery of
a bearer of despatches, namely a green and gold coat. His boots were
dusty, and he wore a visored cap and carried the despatch-box, the
essential accoutrements of a cabinet courier.

One of Cassini's maps, on which could be followed the whole lay of the
land, was spread on the table.

Before saying why this courier was there, and with what object the map
was unfolded, let us cast a glance at the three new personages whose
names had echoed through the ballroom, and who are destined to play an
important part in the rest of this history.

The reader already knows Morgan, the Achilles and the Paris of this
strange association; Morgan, with his blue eyes, his black hair, his
tall, well-built figure, graceful, easy, active bearing; his eye, which
was never without animation; his mouth, with its fresh lips and white
teeth, that was never without a smile; his remarkable countenance,
composed of mingling elements that seemed so foreign to each
other--strength and tenderness, gentleness and energy; and, through it
all, that bewildering expression of gayety that was at times alarming
when one remembered that this man was perpetually rubbing shoulders with
death, and the most terrifying of all deaths--that of the scaffold.

As for d'Assas, he was a man from thirty-five to thirty-eight years of
age, with bushy hair that was turning gray, and mustaches as black as
ebony. His eyes were of that wonderful shade of Indian eyes, verging
on maroon. He was formerly a captain of dragoons, admirably built for
struggle, whether physical or moral, his muscles indicating strength,
and his face, obstinacy. For the rest, a noble bearing, great elegance
of manners, scented like a dandy, carrying, either from caprice or
luxury, a bottle of English smelling-salts, or a silver-gilt vinaigrette
containing the most subtle perfumes.

Montbar and Adler, whose real names were unknown, like those of d'Assas
and Morgan, were commonly called by the Company "the inseparables."
Imagine Damon and Pythias, Euryalus and Nisus, Orestes and Pylades at
twenty-two--one joyous, loquacious, noisy, the other melancholy,
silent, dreamy; sharing all things, dangers, money, mistresses; one the
complement of the other; each rushing to all extremes, but forgetting
self when in peril to watch over the other, like the Spartan youths on
the sacred legions--and you will form an idea of Montbar and Adler.

It is needless to say that all three were Companions of Jehu. They had
been convoked, as Morgan suspected, on business of the Company.

On entering the room, Morgan went straight to the pretended bearer of
despatches and shook hands with him.

"Ah! the dear friend," said the latter, with a stiff movement, showing
that the best rider cannot do a hundred and fifty miles on post-hacks
with impunity. "You are taking it easy, you Parisians. Hannibal at
Capua slept on rushes and thorns compared to you. I only glanced at
the ballroom in passing, as becomes a poor cabinet courier bearing
despatches from General Massena to the citizen First Consul; but it
seemed to me you were a fine lot of victims! Only, my poor friends, you
will have to bid farewell to all that for the present; disagreeable,
unlucky, exasperating, no doubt, but the House of Jehu before all."

"My dear Hastier--" began Morgan.

"Stop!" cried Hastier. "No proper names, if you please, gentlemen. The
Hastiers are an honest family in Lyons, doing business, it is said, on
the Place des Terreaux, from father to son, and would be much humiliated
to learn that their heir had become a cabinet courier, and rode the
highways with the national pack on his back. Lecoq as much as you
please, but not Hastier. I don't know Hastier; and you, gentlemen,"
continued the young man, addressing Montbar, Adler and d'Assas, "do you
know him?"

"No," replied the three young men, "and we ask pardon for Morgan, who
did wrong."

"My dear Lecoq," exclaimed Morgan.

"That's right," interrupted Hastier. "I answer to that name! Well, what
did you want to tell me?"

"I wanted to say that if you are not the antipodes of the god
Harpocrates, whom the Egyptians represent with a finger on his lips,
you will, instead of indulging in a lot of declamations, more or less
flowery, tell us why this costume, and why that map?"

"The deuce!" retorted the young man. "If you don't know already, it's
your fault and not mine. If I hadn't been obliged to call you twice,
caught as you doubtless were in the toils of some beautiful Eumenides
imploring vengeance of a fine young man for the death of her old
parents, you'd know as much as these gentlemen, and I wouldn't have
to sing an encore. Well, here's what it is: simply of the remaining
treasure of the Berne bears, which General Lecourbe is sending to the
citizen First Consul by order of General Massena. A trifle, only a
hundred thousand francs, that they don't dare send over the Jura on
account of M. Teysonnet's partisans, who, they pretend, are likely to
seize it; so it will be sent by Geneva, Bourg, Macon, Dijon, and Troyes;
a much safer way, as they will find when they try it."

"Very good!"

"We were informed of this by Renard, who started from Gex at full speed,
and transmitted the news to l'Hirondelle, who is at present stationed at
Chalon-sur-Saone. He transmitted it to me, Lecoq, at Auxerre, and I have
done a hundred and fifty miles to transmit it in turn to you. As for the
secondary details, here they are. The treasure left Berne last octodi,
28th Nivose, year VIII. of the Republic triple and indivisible. It
should reach Genoa to-day, duodi, and leave to-morrow, tridi, by the
diligence from Geneva to Bourg; so that, by leaving this very night, by
the day after to-morrow, quintide, you can, my dear sons of Israel,
meet the treasure of messires the bears between Dijon and Troyes, near
Bar-sur-Seine or Chatillon. What say you?"

"By heavens!" cried Morgan, "we say that there seems to be no room for
argument left; we say we should never have permitted ourselves to touch
the money of their Highnesses the bears of Berne so long as it remained
in their coffers; but as it has changed hands once, I see no objection
to its doing so a second time. Only how are we to start?"

"Haven't you a post-chaise?"

"Yes, it's here in the coach-house."

"Haven't you horses to get you to the next stage?"

"They are in the stable."

"Haven't you each your passports."

"We have each four."

"Well, then?"

"Well, we can't stop the diligence in a post-chaise. We don't put
ourselves to too much inconvenience, but we don't take our ease in that
way."

"Well, and why not?" asked Montbar; "it would be original. I can't see
why, if sailors board from one vessel to another, we couldn't board a
diligence from a post-chaise. We want novelty; shall we try it, Adler?"

"I ask nothing better," replied the latter, "but what will we do with
the postilion?"

"That's true," replied Montbar.

"The difficulty is foreseen, my children," said the courier; "a
messenger has been sent to Troyes. You will leave your post-chaise at
Delbauce; there you will find four horses all saddled and stuffed with
oats. You will then calculate your time, and the day after to-morrow,
or rather to-morrow, for it is past midnight, between seven and eight in
the morning, the money of Messires Bruin will pass an anxious quarter of
an hour."

"Shall we change our clothes?" inquired d'Assas.

"What for?" replied Morgan. "I think we are very presentable as we are.
No diligence could be relieved of unnecessary weight by better dressed
fellows. Let us take a last glance at the map, transfer a pate, a cold
chicken, and a dozen of champagne from the supper-room to the pockets
of the coach, arm to the teeth in the arsenal, wrap ourselves in warm
cloaks, and--clack! postilion!"

"Yes!" cried Montbar, "that's the idea."

"I should think so," added Morgan. "We'll kill the horses if necessary,
and be back at seven in the evening, in time to show ourselves at the
opera."

"That will establish an alibi," observed d'Assas.

"Precisely," said Morgan, with his imperturbable gayety. "How could men
who applaud Mademoiselle Clotilde and M. Vestris at eight o'clock in the
evening have been at Bar and Chatillon in the morning settling accounts
with the conductor of a diligence? Come, my sons, a last look at the map
to choose our spot."

The four young men bent over Cassini's map.

"If I may give you a bit of topographical advice," said the courier, "it
would be to put yourselves in ambush just beyond Massu; there's a ford
opposite to the Riceys--see, there!"

And the young man pointed out the exact spot on the map.

"I should return to Chacource, there; from Chacource you have a
department road, straight as an arrow, which will take you to Troyes; at
Troyes you take carriage again, and follow the road to Sens instead of
that to Coulommiers. The donkeys--there are plenty in the provinces--who
saw you in the morning won't wonder at seeing you again in the evening;
you'll get to the opera at ten instead of eight--a more fashionable
hour--neither seen nor recognized, I'll warrant you."

"Adopted, so far as I am concerned," said Morgan.

"Adopted!" cried the other three in chorus.

Morgan pulled out one of the two watches whose chains were dangling from
his belt; it was a masterpiece of Petitot's enamel, and on the outer
case which protected the painting was a diamond monogram. The pedigree
of this beautiful trinket was as well established as that of an Arab
horse; it had been made for Marie-Antoinette, who had given it to the
Duchesse de Polastron, who had given it to Morgan's mother.

"One o'clock," said Morgan; "come, gentlemen, we must relay at Lagny at
three."

From that moment the expedition had begun, and Morgan became its leader;
he no longer consulted, he commanded.

D'Assas, who in Morgan's absence commanded, was the first to obey on his
return.

Half an hour later a closed carriage containing four young men wrapped
in their cloaks was stopped at the Fontainebleau barrier by the
post-guard, who demanded their passports.

"Oh, what a joke!" exclaimed one of them, putting his head out of the
window and affecting the pronunciation of the day. "Passpawts to dwive
to Gwobois to call on citizen _Ba-as_? 'Word of fluted honor!' you're
cwazy, fwend! Go on, dwiver!"

The coachman whipped up his horses and the carriage passed without
further opposition.




CHAPTER XXVIII. FAMILY MATTERS

Let us leave our four _hunters_ on their way to Lagny--where, thanks to
the passports they owed to the obligingness of certain clerks in citizen
Fouche's employ, they exchanged their own horses for post-horses and
their coachman for a postilion--and see why the First Consul had sent
for Roland.

After leaving Morgan, Roland had hastened to obey the general's orders.
He found the latter standing in deep thought before the fireplace. At
the sound of his entrance General Bonaparte raised his head.

"What were you two saying to each other?" asked Bonaparte, without
preamble, trusting to Roland's habit of answering his thought.

"Why," said Roland, "we paid each other all sorts of compliments, and
parted the best friends in the world."

"How does he impress you?"

"As a perfectly well-bred man."

"How old do you take him to be?"

"About my age, at the outside."

"So I think; his voice is youthful. What now, Roland, can I be mistaken?
Is there a new royalist generation growing up?"

"No, general," replied Roland, shrugging his shoulders; "it's the
remains of the old one."

"Well, Roland, we must build up another, devoted to my son--if ever I
have one."

Roland made a gesture which might be translated into the words, "I don't
object." Bonaparte understood the gesture perfectly.

"You must do more than not object," said he; "you must contribute to
it."

A nervous shudder passed over Roland's body.

"In what way, general?" he asked.

"By marrying."

Roland burst out laughing.

"Good! With my aneurism?" he asked.

Bonaparte looked at him, and said: "My dear Roland, your aneurism looks
to me very much like a pretext for remaining single."

"Do you think so?"

"Yes; and as I am a moral man I insist upon marriage."

"Does that mean that I am immoral," retorted Roland, "or that I cause
any scandal with my mistresses?"

"Augustus," answered Bonaparte, "created laws against celibates,
depriving them of their rights as Roman citizens."

"Augustus--"

"Well?"

"I'll wait until you are Augustus; as yet, you are only Caesar."

Bonaparte came closer to the young man, and, laying his hands on his
shoulders, said: "Roland, there are some names I do not wish to see
extinct, and among them is that of Montrevel."

"Well, general, in my default, supposing that through caprice or
obstinacy I refuse to perpetuate it, there is my little brother."

"What! Your brother? Then you have a brother?"

"Why, yes; I have a brother! Why shouldn't I have brother?"

"How old is he?"

"Eleven or twelve."

"Why did you never tell me about him?"

"Because I thought the sayings and doings of a youngster of that age
could not interest you."

"You are mistaken, Roland; I am interested in all that concerns my
friends. You ought to have asked me for something for your brother."

"Asked what, general?"

"His admission into some college in Paris."

"Pooh! You have enough beggars around you without my swelling their
number."

"You hear; he is to come to Paris and enter college. When he is old
enough, I will send him to the Ecole Militare, or some other school
which I shall have founded before then."

"Faith, general," said Roland, "just as if I had guessed your good
intentions, he is this very day on the point of, starting for Paris."

"What for?"

"I wrote to my mother three days ago to bring the boy to Paris. I
intended to put him in college without mentioning it, and when he was
old enough to tell you about him--always supposing that my aneurism had
not carried me off in the meantime. But in that case--"

"In that case?"

"Oh! in that case I have left a bit of a will addressed to you, and
recommending to your kindness my mother, and the boy and the girl--in
short, the whole raft."

"The girl! Who is she?"

"My sister."

"So you have a sister also?"

"Yes."

"How old is she?"

"Seventeen."

"Pretty?"

"Charming."

"I'll take charge of her establishment."

Roland began to laugh.

"What's the matter?" demanded the First Consul.

"General, I'm going to put a placard over the grand entrance to the
Luxembourg."

"What will you put on the placard?"

"'Marriages made here.'"

"Why not? Is it any reason because you don't wish to marry for your
sister to remain an old maid? I don't like old maids any better than I
do old bachelors."

"I did not say, general, that my sister should remain an old maid; it's
quite enough for one member of the Montrevel family to have incurred
your displeasure."

"Then what do you mean?"

"Only that, as the matter concerns my sister, she must, if you will
allow it, be consulted."

"Ah, ha! Some provincial love-affair, is there?"

"I can't say. I left poor Amelie gay and happy, and I find her pale and
sad. I shall get the truth out of her; and if you wish me to speak to
you again about the matter, I will do so."

"Yes, do so--when you get back from the Vendee."

"Ah! So I am going to the Vendee?"

"Why, is that, like marriage, repugnant, to you?"

"Not in the least."

"Then you are going to the Vendee."

"When?"

"Oh, you need not hurry, providing you start to-morrow."

"Excellent; sooner if you wish. Tell me what I am to do there."

"Something of the utmost importance, Roland."

"The devil! It isn't a diplomatic mission, I presume?"

"Yes; it is a diplomatic mission for which I need a man who is not a
diplomatist."

"Then I'm your man, general! Only, you understand, the less a
diplomatist I am, the more precise my instructions must be."

"I am going to give them to you. Do you see that map?"

And he showed the young man a large map of Piedmont stretched out on the
floor, under a lamp suspended from the ceiling.

"Yes, I see it," replied Roland, accustomed to follow the general along
the unexpected dashes of his genius; "but it is a map of Piedmont."

"Yes, it's a map of Piedmont."

"So there is still a question of Italy?"

"There is always a question of Italy."

"I thought you spoke of the Vendee?"

"Secondarily."

"Why, general, you are not going to send me to the Vendee and go
yourself to Italy, are you?"

"No; don't be alarmed."

"All right; but I warn you, if you did, I should desert and join you."

"I give you permission to do so; but now let us go back to Melas."

"Excuse me, general; this is the first time you have mentioned him."

"Yes; but I have been thinking of him for a long time. Do you know where
I shall defeat him?"

"The deuce! I do."

"Where?"

"Wherever you meet him."

Bonaparte laughed.

"Ninny!" he said, with loving familiarity. Then, stooping over the map,
he said to Roland, "Come here."

Roland stooped beside him. "There," resumed Bonaparte; "that is where I
shall fight him."

"Near Alessandria?"

"Within eight or nine miles of it. He has all his supplies, hospitals,
artillery and reserves in Alessandria; and he will not leave the
neighborhood. I shall have to strike a great blow; that's the only
condition on which I can get peace. I shall cross the Alps"--he pointed
to the great Saint-Bernard--"I shall fall upon Melas when he least
expects me, and rout him utterly."

"Oh! trust you for that!"

"Yes; but you understand, Roland, that in order to quit France with an
easy mind, I can't leave it with an inflammation of the bowels--I can't
leave war in the Vendee."

"Ah! now I see what you are after. No Vendee! And you are sending me to
the Vendee to suppress it."

"That young man told me some serious things about the Vendee. They
are brave soldiers, those Vendeans, led by a man of brains, Georges
Cadoudal. I have sent him the offer of a regiment, but he won't accept."

"Jove! He's particular."

"But there's one thing he little knows."

"Who, Cadoudal?"

"Yes, Cadoudal. That is that the Abbe Bernier has made me overtures."

"The Abbe Bernier?"

"Yes."

"Who is the Abbe Bernier?"

"The son of a peasant from Anjou, who may be now about thirty-three or
four years of age. Before the insurrection he was curate of Saint-Laud
at Angers. He refused to take the oath and sought refuge among the
Vendeans. Two or three times the Vendee was pacificated; twice she
was thought dead. A mistake! the Vendee was pacificated, but the Abbe
Bernier had not signed the peace; the Vendee was dead, but the Abbe
Bernier was still alive. One day the Vendee was ungrateful to him.
He wished to be appointed general agent to the royalist armies of the
interior; Stofflet influenced the decision and got his old master,
Comte Colbert de Maulevrier, appointed in Bernier's stead. When, at
two o'clock in the morning, the council broke up, the Abbe Bernier had
disappeared. What he did that night, God and he alone can tell; but
at four o'clock in the morning a Republican detachment surrounded the
farmhouse where Stofflet was sleeping, disarmed and defenceless. At
half-past four Stofflet was captured; eight days later he was executed
at Angers. The next day Autichamp took command, and, to avoid making the
same blunder as Stofflet, he appointed the Abbe Bernier general agent.
Now, do you understand?"

"Perfectly."

"Well, the Abbe Bernier, general agent of the belligerent forces, and
furnished with plenary powers by the Comte d'Artois--the Abbe Bernier
has made overtures to me."

"To you, to Bonaparte, to the First Consul he deigns to--? Why, that's
very kind of the Abbe Bernier? Have you accepted them?"

"Yes, Roland; if the Vendee will give me peace, I will open her churches
and give her back her priests."

"And suppose they chant the _Domine, salvum fac regem?_"

"That would be better than not singing at all. God is omnipotent, and he
will decide. Does the mission suit you, now that I have explained it?"

"Yes, thoroughly."

"Then, here is a letter for General Hedouville. He is to treat with the
Abbe Bernier as the general-in-chief of the Army of the West. But you
are to be present at all these conferences; he is only my mouthpiece,
you are to be my thought. Now, start as soon as possible; the sooner you
get back, the sooner Melas will be defeated."

"General, give me time to write to my mother, that's all."

"Where will she stop?"

"At the Hotel des Ambassadeurs."

