Republican party for President, 1884; died at Washington, January 27,
1893.


       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER VI

PIONEERS


The settlers in America did not find an unoccupied country of which they
were free to take possession, but a land in which dwelt a savage and
warlike people, who had been named Indians, because the first voyagers
supposed that it was the Indies they had discovered. The name has clung,
in spite of the attempts of scientists to fasten upon them the name
Amerinds, to distinguish them from the inhabitants of India. Indians
they will probably always remain, a standing evidence of the confusion
of thought of the early voyagers.

That the Indians owned the country there can be no question; but
civilization has never stopped to consider the claims of savage peoples,
and it did not in this case. Might made right; besides, the Indians,
consisting of scattered, semi-nomadic tribes, seemed to have no use for
the great territory they occupied. Indeed, they themselves, at first,
welcomed the white-skinned newcomers; but they soon grew jealous of
encroachments which never ceased, and at last fought step by step for
their country. They were driven back, defeated, exterminated. But in the
early years, no settlement was safe, and every man was, in a sense, a
pioneer.

The French, in their eagerness for empire, allied themselves with the
Indians, supplied them with arms, and offered a bounty for scalps; and
for nearly three quarters of a century, a bitter and bloody contest was
waged, which ended only with the expulsion of the French from the
continent. Deprived of their ally, the Indians retreated beyond the
mountains, where their war parties gathered to drive back the white
invader. Those years on the frontier developed a race of men accustomed
to danger and ready for any chance; and towering head and shoulders
above them all stands the mighty figure of Daniel Boone, the most famous
of American pioneers. About him cluster legends and tales innumerable,
some true, many false; but one thing is certain; for boldness, cunning
and knowledge of woodcraft and Indian warfare he had no equal.

Born in Pennsylvania, but moving at an early age to the little frontier
settlement of Holman's Ford, in North Carolina, the boy had barely
enough schooling to enable him to read and write. His real books were
the woods, and he studied them until they held no secrets from him. He
was a born hunter, a lover of the wild life of the forest, impatient of
civilization, and truly at home only in the wilderness. The cry of the
panther, the war-whoop of the Indian, were music to him; that was his
nature--to love adventure, to court danger, to welcome the thrill of the
pulse which peril brings. Understand him: he was not the man to incur
foolish risks; but he incurred necessary ones without a second thought.
He was near death no doubt a hundred times, yet lived to die in his
bed. But he was at his best, he really lived, only when the wilderness
held him and when his life depended upon his care and watchfulness.

[Illustration: Boone]

In 1755, Boone married and built a log cabin far up the Yadkin, where he
had no neighbors; but as the years passed, other families settled near;
the smoke of other cabins rose above the woods; his fields were bounded
by rude fences; he could scarcely stir out without encountering some
neighbor. It was too crowded for Daniel Boone; he felt the same
sensation that your nature lover feels to-day in the midst of a teeming
city--a sense of suffocation and disgust--and he finally determined to
move still further westward, and to cross the mountains into Kentucky,
concerning whose richness many stories had reached his ears. He
persuaded six men to accompany him, and on the first day of May, 1769,
set forth on the perilous journey which was to mark the beginning of his
life-work.

Up to that time, the Alleghany Mountains had marked a boundary beyond
which white settlers dared not go, for to the west lay great reaches of
forest, uninhabited except for wild beasts and still wilder bands of
roving Indians. Into this forest, Boone and his companions plunged, and
after some weeks of wandering, emerged into the beautiful and fertile
country of Kentucky--a country not owned by any Indian tribe, but
visited only by wandering war- and hunting-parties from the nations
living north of the Ohio or south of the Tennessee. The party found
game in abundance, especially great droves of buffalo, and spent some
months in hunting and exploring. A roving war-party stumbled upon one of
Boone's companions, and forthwith killed him; a second soon met the same
fate, and Boone himself had more than one narrow escape. The danger grew
so great, that the other members of the party returned over the
mountains, and Boone was, for a time, left alone, as he himself put it,
"without company of any fellow-creature, or even a horse or dog."

His brother joined him after a time, and the two spent the winter
together. Game furnished abundant food, and the only danger was from the
Indians, but that was an ever-present one. Sometimes they slept in
hollow trees, at other times, they changed their resting-place every
night, and after making a fire, would go off for a mile or two in the
woods to sleep. Unceasing vigilance was the price of safety. When spring
came, Boone's brother returned over the mountains, and again he was left
alone. Three months later the brother came back, bringing a party of
hunters, but no one was inclined to settle in so dangerous a locality,
the struggle to possess which was so fierce that it became known as "the
dark and bloody ground."

In 1773, Boone himself started to lead a band of settlers over the
mountains, but while passing through the frowning defiles of the
Cumberland Gap, they were attacked by Indians and driven back, two of
Boone's sons being among the slain. Hunting parties crossed the
mountains from time to time after that, and made great inroads on the
vast herds of game, but the Indians were in arms everywhere, and not
until they had been defeated at the battle of Point Pleasant, the
bloodiest in the history of Virginia with its Indian foe, did they sue
for peace.

The coming of peace marked a new era in the development of the western
country. Some years before, a company of men headed by Richard
Henderson, had conceived the grandiose project of founding in the west a
great colony, and had purchased from the Cherokee Indians a vast tract
of land, which they named Transylvania. It included all the land between
the Cumberland and Kentucky rivers, and Daniel Boone was selected to
blaze a way into the wilderness, to mark out a road, and start the first
settlement. He got a party together, crossed the mountains, and on April
1, 1775, began to build a fort on the left bank of the Kentucky river,
calling it Fort Boone, afterwards Boonesborough. Some settlers moved in,
but the outbreak of the Revolution and the consequent renewal of Indian
hostilities under encouragement from the British put a stop to
immigration.

The fort, alone and unprotected in the wilderness, was soon attacked by
a great war-party, but managed to beat off the assailants. Shortly
afterwards, while leading an expedition to the Blue Licks, on the
Licking river, to secure a supply of salt, Boone became separated from
his men, and was surprised and captured by an Indian war-party. The joy
of the savages at this capture may be imagined, for they had in their
hands their most intrepid foe. After being exhibited to the British at
Detroit, he was brought back to the Indian settlements north of the
Ohio, and formally adopted into an Indian family, for the savages
desired, if possible, to make this mighty hunter and warrior one of
themselves. And Boone might have really adopted Indian life, which
appealed to him in many ways, but one day he found that preparations
were on foot for another great expedition against Boonesborough.
Watching his opportunity, he managed to escape, and reached the fort in
time to warn it of the impending attack. He covered the distance, 160
miles, in four days, eating but a single meal upon the road--a turkey
which he managed to shoot.

He came to Boonesborough like one risen from the dead. The fort was at
once put into a state of defense, and endured the most savage assault
ever directed against it, the Indians numbering nearly five hundred,
while the garrison mustered but sixty-five. The siege lasted for nine
days, when the Indians, despairing of overcoming a resistance so
desperate, retired.

The succeeding years were full of adventure and hair-breadth escapes,
which cannot even be mentioned here. On one occasion, Boone and his
brother, Squire, were surprised by Indians; the latter was killed and
scalped and Boone escaped with the greatest difficulty. At the battle of
Blue Licks, two years later, two sons fought at his side, one of whom
was killed and the other severely wounded. But Boone seemed to bear a
charmed life. His years in the wilderness had developed in him an
almost supernatural keenness of sight and hearing; and constant peril
from the Indians had made him very careful. Whenever he went into the
woods after game or Indians, he had perpetually to keep watch to make
sure that he was not being hunted in turn. Every turkey-call might mean
a lurking savage, every cracking twig might mean an approaching foe.

On one occasion, his daughter and two other girls were carried off by
Indians, and Boone, raising a small company, followed the trail of the
fugitives without resting for two days and a night; then came to where
the Indians had killed a buffalo calf and were camped around it, never
dreaming of danger. So Boone and his men crept up on them, shot down the
Indians and rescued the girls. On still another occasion, he was pursued
by Indians, who used a tracking dog to follow his trail. Boone turned,
shot the dog, and then made good his escape. Such incidents might be
related by the dozen. No wonder Boone was considered one of the most
valuable men on the frontier, and was a very tower of strength in
defending it against the Indians.

The end, however, was sad enough. When Kentucky was admitted to the
Union, Boone's titles to the land he had laid out for himself were
declared to be defective; it was all taken from him, and he moved first
to Ohio, and then to Missouri, where he spent his last years. He was
hale and hearty almost to the end, leading a hunting-party to the mouth
of the Kansas when he was eighty-two years old, and completely tiring
out its younger members. Nearly at the end of his life, Congress
recognized his services to his country by granting him eight hundred and
fifty acres of land in Missouri, and on this grant, the last years of
his life were spent. Chester Harding visited him just before the end and
painted a portrait of him which remains the best delineation of the
redoubtable old pioneer, whose striking face tells of the resolute will,
and unshrinking courage which made the settlement of Kentucky possible.

Scarcely less prominent than Boone on the Kentucky frontier, and with a
career in many ways even more adventurous, was Simon Kenton. Born in
Virginia in 1755, he had grown to young manhood, rough and uncultivated,
and with little evidence of having been raised in a civilized community.
At the age of sixteen, he had a desperate affray with a neighbor named
William Veach, during which he caught Veach around the body, whirled him
into the air, and dashed him to the ground with such violence, that he
thought he had broken his neck. Not daring to return home or to linger
in the neighborhood, for fear his crime would be discovered and he
himself arrested and hanged, he plunged into the wilderness and made his
way westward over the mountains, changing his name to Simon Butler.

The two or three years following were spent by him in roaming along the
Ohio valley, sometimes alone, sometimes with two or three companions,
and always surrounded by danger. On one occasion, his camp was surprised
by Indians, and he and his companion were forced to flee for their
lives without weapons of any kind, and with no clothing but their
shirts. For six days and nights, they wandered without fire or food,
suffering from the cold, for it was the dead of winter, and so torn and
lacerated that on the last two days they covered only six miles, most of
it on hands and knees. Staggering and crawling forward, they came out at
last upon the Ohio river, and by good fortune fell in with a
hunting-party and were saved.

Kenton's life was full of just such incidents. Daniel Boone found in him
a most valuable ally, incapable of fear and with a knowledge of
woodcraft surpassed only by Boone himself. Kenton was inside Boone's
fort whenever it was in danger, and on one occasion saved Boone's life.
Let us tell the story, for it is typical of the border warfare in which
both Boone and Kenton were so expert.

One morning, having loaded their guns for a hunt, Kenton and two
companions were standing in the gate of Fort Boone, when two men, who
were driving in some horses from a near-by field, were fired upon by
Indians. They fled toward the fort, the Indians after them, and one of
them was overtaken and killed and was being scalped, when Kenton and his
companions ran up, killed one of the Indians and pursued the others to
the edge of the clearing. Boone, meanwhile, had heard the firing, and
came hurrying out with reinforcements, only, a moment later, to be cut
off from the fort by a strong body of savages. There was nothing to do
but to cut their way back through them, and in the charge, Boone
received a ball through the leg, breaking the bone. As he fell, the
Indian leader raised his tomahawk to kill him, but Kenton, seeing his
comrade's peril, shot the Indian through the heart, and succeeded in
dragging Boone inside the fort.

During the Dunmore war, Kenton ranged the Indian country as a spy,
carrying his life in his hand, and accompanied George Rogers Clark on
his famous Illinois campaign. A short time later, with one or two
others, he started on an expedition to run off some horses from the
Miami villages, and had nearly succeeded, when he was captured. The
Indians hated him more bitterly than they hated Boone himself, and they
prepared to enjoy themselves at his expense. They bound him to a wild
horse and chased the horse through the forest until their captive's face
was torn and bleeding from the lashing of the branches; they staked him
down at night so that he could not move hand or foot, and when they
reached their town, the whole population turned out to make him run the
gauntlet. The Indians formed in a double line, about six feet apart,
each armed with a heavy club, and Kenton was forced to run between them.
He had not gone far when he saw ahead of him an Indian with drawn knife,
prepared to plunge it into him as he passed. By a mighty effort, he
broke through the line, but was soon recaptured, lashed with whips,
pelted with stones, branded with red-hot irons, and condemned to be
burnt at the stake.

But before killing him, the Indians concluded to lend him to other towns
to have some sport with, so he was taken from town to town, compelled to
run the gauntlet at each one, and subjected to a variegated list of
tortures. Three or four times, he was tied to a stake for the final
execution, but each time the Indians decided to wait a while longer.
Finally, an Englishman got the Indians to consent to send Kenton for a
visit to Detroit, and he spent the winter there. Then, with two other
captives, and with the help of a kind-hearted Irish woman, he managed to
escape, and made his way back to Kentucky--over four hundred miles
through the Indian country, narrowly escaping death a hundred times--in
thirty-three days.

There he learned that he need not have fled from Pennsylvania, that the
man with whom he had fought years before was not dead, but had
recovered. For the first time since his appearance in the west, he
assumed his real name, and was known thereafter as Simon Kenton. Soon
afterwards he returned to his old home, and brought the whole family
back with him to Kentucky. One would have thought he had had enough of
fighting, but he was with Wayne at the Fallen timbers and with William
Henry Harrison at the battle of the Thames. Sadly enough, the last years
of this old hero were passed in want. His land in Kentucky was taken
from him by speculators because he had failed to have it properly
registered, and he was imprisoned for debt on the spot where he had
reared the first cabin in northern Kentucky.

In the spring of 1824, an old, tattered, weather-beaten figure appeared
on the streets of Frankfort, the capital of Kentucky. So strange and
wild it was that a gang of street boys gathered and ran hooting after
it. Men laughed--till suddenly, one of them, looking again, recognized
Simon Kenton. In a moment a guard of honor was formed, and the tattered
figure was conducted to the Capitol, placed in the speaker's chair, and
for the first and only time in his life, Simon Kenton received some
portion of the respect and homage to which his deeds entitled him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Boone and Kenton, with a handful of hardy and fearless pioneers, laid
the foundations of Kentucky; but in the history of the "Old Northwest,"
the country north of the Ohio and east of the Mississippi, one name
stands out transcendent; the name of a man as daring, as brave, as
resourceful as any on the border--George Rogers Clark. He was greater
than Boone or Kenton in that he had a wider vision; they saw only the
duties of the present; he saw the possibilities of the future, and his
exploits form one of the most thrilling chapters of American history.

Clark, a Virginian by birth, started out in life as a surveyor, and
early in 1775, removed to Kentucky to follow his profession. There was,
no doubt, plenty of surveying to be done there, since the whole country
was an uncharted wilderness, but the beginning of the Revolution was
accompanied by an immediate outbreak of Indian hostilities, so serious
that the very existence of the Kentucky settlements was threatened.
Soon all but two of them, Boonesborough and Harrodsburg, had to be
abandoned. Boone was, of course, in command at his fort, and Clark, who
had seen some service in Dunmore's war, became the natural leader at
Harrod's. His influence rapidly increased, and he was chosen as a
delegate to journey to Williamsburg and urge upon Virginia the needs of
the western colony, which lay within her chartered limits.

Clark set off without delay on the long and dangerous journey, reached
Williamsburg, gained an audience of Patrick Henry, the governor of
Virginia, and painted the needs of Kentucky in such colors that he soon
gained the sympathy of the impulsive and warm-hearted governor, and
together they secured from the Assembly a large gift of lead and powder
for the protection of the frontier. More than that, they succeeded in
making Virginia acknowledge her responsibility for the new colony by
constituting it the county of Kentucky. This, it may be added, put an
end forever to Henderson's dream of the independent colony of
Transylvania.

Clark got his powder and ball safe to Harrodsburg just in time to repel
a desperate Indian assault; but it was evident that there would be no
safety for the Kentucky settlements so long as England controlled the
country north of the Ohio. All that region formed a part of what was
known as the Province of Quebec. Here and there dotted through it were
quaint little towns of French Creoles, the most important being
Detroit, Vincennes on the Wabash, and Kaskaskia and Kahokia on the
Illinois. These French villages were ruled by British officers
commanding small bodies of regular soldiers, and keeping the Indians in
a constant state of war against their Kentucky neighbors, furnishing
them with arms and ammunition, and rewarding them for every expedition
they undertook against the Americans. They had no idea that any band of
Americans which could be mustered west of the mountains would dare to
attack them, and so were careless in their guard, and maintained only
small garrisons at the various forts.

All this Clark found out by means of spies which he sent through the
country, and finally, having his plan matured, he went again to Virginia
in December, 1777, and laid before Governor Henry his whole idea,
explaining in detail why he thought it could be carried out
successfully. Henry was at once enthused with it, so daring and full of
promise he thought it, and he enlisted the aid of Thomas Jefferson. The
result was that when Clark set out on his return journey, it was with
orders not only to defend Kentucky, but to attack Kaskaskia and the
other British posts, and he carried with him L1,200 in paper money, and
