
"Genevieve;" and she pronounced it very slowly.

"It is rather odd," said Hepsa, trying to repeat the name; "but I want
to know if you ever laid down on the ground when it rained, and
listened."

"No!"

"Well, it is real beautiful; in the grass, it sounds _like bells_--it
sounds better where the grass is tall."

"I wish I could hear it," said Genevieve, sadly; "but my mother wouldn't
like to have me lie on the ground when it rained."

"How would she know it," asked Hepsa, "if you didn't tell her?"

"Why, Hepsa, I shouldn't want to if she wouldn't like it--I shouldn't
want to at all."

"I suppose, then, she won't let you come to hear me read?"

"O, yes she will, I know! I'll ask her, and she will kiss me, and say
yes."

So Hepsa told her where she lived, and Genevieve went into the house,
and Hepsa went home, feeling very happy about the flowers, and thinking
of the things her new friend had told her.

"She says I must love Tom, and that is so queer; but if the God who gave
me Tom, is the One who comes so near to me sometimes, I'll try; and,
perhaps, if I hadn't called Tom such names this morning, he wouldn't
have killed my poor cat." So Genevieve's words had sunk into Hepsa's
heart already.

Genevieve went to her mother, and told her what a strange little girl
she had found that morning, and that she had promised to go and teach
her to read, that she might know about God.

[Illustration: GENEVIEVE READING THE BIBLE TO HEPSA.]

On the next day she took some of her books, and, with some of her
prettiest playthings for a present to Hepsa, she went in search of
the house down the lane, on the other side of the village.

She found a gentler pupil than on the day before; and Hepsa's hair was
laid smoothly upon her forehead, her face clean, and though there were
some tatters in her dress, Genevieve did not much mind them.

The baby was in his cradle, fast asleep, and Genevieve went and knelt
down by the side of it, and looked at it carefully, as though she was
afraid of awaking it, and then whispered to Hepsa her admiration of the
little hands, which lay cunningly upon the quilt, and said how much she
wanted to kiss him; would he wake, she wondered, if she just kissed his
cheek, and didn't make any noise? Hepsa told her no; so she kissed him;
and then, after looking at him to see how sweetly he slept,--now
frowning, and now smiling in his dreams,--she went away with Hepsa, and
they talked a great while together, telling each other what the other
didn't know. Genevieve was often shocked and grieved at Hepsa's
undutiful remarks about her father, mother and brother; and when she
felt they didn't love Hepsa, as her own dear father and mother loved
her, still she could not understand why Hepsa did not love them better.
She was often a good deal perplexed to know what she should say to the
strange child; but of one thing she felt always certain, that her new
companion needed to have her heart cleansed and purified before she
could be loved well. She felt a strong love for Hepsa, and longed to
teach her more of God, and show her how to read, that she might teach
herself.

Hepsa was amazed when her friend took out the playthings from the bag
and gave them to her; no one had before shown her such kindness; and
Genevieve thought in her heart she was just as happy giving those things
to Hepsa, as when they were given to her.

Poor Hepsa had never been to school, and so she didn't even know the
alphabet; but Genevieve sat down patiently to teach her, and found truly
that much patience was necessary to accomplish the work she had
undertaken. Hepsa would soon grow discouraged when she found so much to
learn, and saw her little teacher reading so readily; and her mother
would often scold when she saw Hepsa with a book in her hand, declaring
it was foolish nonsense; but, as time went on, and the first
difficulties were overcome, and her mother began to find Hepsa growing
very gentle, and Tom had less occasion to plague his sister, they all
felt that the books Hepsa had studied, and the little girl who came so
often to see her, were kind friends, and love began to bind them all
together. Hepsa no longer wore torn clothes; Genevieve's mother had
given her some neat dresses, and Genevieve had given her needles and
thread, and taught her to sew, and now many a rent was carefully mended,
and even Tom began to look neater than formerly. She was careful too to
keep the room nicely, and one day was amply rewarded for this, when Tom
came in before she had had time to do it, and complained of its being
dirty. "Tom begins to like a clean room," she said to herself with joy,
and received his few harsh words as though they had been those of love.
The baby too was always clean, for she knew Genevieve always depended
upon kissing him.

Hepsa's father was not a good man; he was unkind to his poor wife and
children; so it was no wonder Tom had gone on, following the example
constantly placed before him; but he was a child yet, and when he saw
how Hepsa began to love him, that she grieved without being angry when
he was unkind to her, it could not but touch his heart. He was half
ashamed, too, when she saved for him some of the good things Genevieve
had brought her. At first, 't is true, he thought little about it, but
when often, after he had been so ugly to her, she came just the same,
and offered him half of her orange, or a part of her nuts, he began to
feel that he was a naughty boy, and that Hepsa was better than she used
to be.

It was very natural he should ask her the reason of this, and very
natural, too, that she should answer in this way:

"Why, Tom, I have learned a great deal about God from Genevieve, and
then she has taught me to read, and I have learned a great deal that
way. Tom, where do you think Susan went when she died?"

Tom couldn't tell. Susan was an elder sister of theirs, whom they had
loved very dearly, and who had died some two years before.

"Well, Tom; there are angels who take all the children, as soon as they
die, and show them wonderful things, and teach them, so they can go into
a beautiful place called heaven, and live with God. Well, if you begin
to be good here, and love people, you will go into that heaven sooner,
when you die, than if you are naughty, and don't think about these
things while you are here. I want to go there very much, and so I try to
be good, though I don't always make out well." Tom looked thoughtful at
his sister's words, and then said:

"I think that little Genevieve will go very fast, when she dies. But I
don't think father will get there very soon, now I tell you!"

"O, but Tom," said Hepsa sadly, "we must not think who will not go, but
how _we_ may go."

"I wish I knew how to read," said Tom; "but I never can go to school,
father makes me saw so much wood."

Then Hepsa asked him to let her teach him; and, after a good deal of
hesitation, he told her he didn't care if she did.

Some time after this, Genevieve's father and mother went away from that
place, and she parted from Hepsa with many tears in her eyes, and much
grief in her heart. "If I never see you again," she said, "don't forget
we are both going into the gardens up there," and Hepsa always
remembered.

Genevieve was a very quiet girl, but she was always ready to do
something to please her dear mother, and at night brought her father's
slippers from the closet, and placed them ready by his chair. She did,
too, many little things for the servants, who all loved her very dearly;
so when, a few years afterwards, she fell sick, and nothing they could
do for her was able to make her any better, but the doctor said she must
die, they all wept very much, and no comfort or joy could come into
their hearts. But Genevieve gently kissed them, and told them a
beautiful peace had come into her heart, for that, in the night, Christ
often came to her, and told her how the angel was all ready to take her
into his beautiful garden, and teach her out of his great golden books.

At last, one morning she died, and they laid her away in the garden near
by the fountain; and they planted the mignonette and myrtle, that,
mingling with the moss, it might grow over her grave.

And her mother said in her heart, "Let her lie here, that, as often as I
come hither, I may be reminded of the more beautiful gardens of God, to
which she has flown. And when, in the cool night, the stars look down,
the soft fragrance of the mignonette shall tell them of her loveliness,
and the myrtle and the moss of the constant love twining together the
souls of the mother and the daughter."

It was as Christ had said; the angel stood ready, and when Genevieve
closed her eyes in death, he caught her in his arms, and placed her
before the Great Gate, which led into the gardens around the kingdom of
heaven. A great many men, women and children stood about it, waiting for
it to be opened, when suddenly a very bright angel, brighter than any
she had ever seen in her dreams, came among them, seated on glorious
clouds.

Then one by one did the crowd go before him, telling him what things
they had done on earth, in order to be admitted into the gardens, to be
prepared still more for the heavens. One said he had built a large
college, given it a large sum of money, and called it by his name, that
the world might see his works, and praise the Lord. Another told him how
he had toiled in heathen lands, and dwelt among savages, that they might
know and love God; another that he had prophesied; another that he had
built a hospital for the poor, and had sheltered them from the cold
winds; another still that he had delivered slaves from cruel masters,
and brought them to the light of freedom. O, there cannot be counted all
the men and women who came before the angel, and told of the things they
had accomplished! And, as the words came upon Genevieve, her heart
trembled for fear, and had it not been for the remembrance of those kind
tones of Christ, poor Genevieve would have shrieked aloud.

What should she do? Rapidly she recalled every act of her life; but
nowhere in it could she find one act worthy to be brought before the
great bright angel. Alas! she had neither founded colleges nor
hospitals; she had never toiled in heathen lands, nor prophesied, nor
delivered slaves from bondage. Alas! must she lose those gardens when
still so near?

The angel's glance fell upon Genevieve, and she drooped down in fear;
but what was her surprise when the angel came down from the cloud, and
raising her up, said, in tones of loving cadence,

"Look, little one, thy work was accepted long ago!" and, looking as he
bade her, she saw Hepsa at her side, to whom, so long ago, she had
spoken of heaven, when she had found her a dirty, ignorant girl.

"You have worked well," said the angel tenderly. "Go now into the
garden, and ere long I will come to put you into the Christ's arms."

So Hepsa and Genevieve together walked through the gates, and the angels
who would be their teachers went with them; but I cannot tell you of the
beauty and glory of those scenes. I only beg you too to work well, that
the angel may speak as lovingly to you.




THE GARDEN OF GOD;

OR,

THE BABY'S FIRST SMILE.


In a very lovely little cottage, around which grew sweet-briers and
rose-trees, and up whose windows climbed honeysuckles and jessamines,
lived a mother with her baby.

The mother was a young woman, with golden hair, kind blue eyes, and fair
white skin. There was always a look of love in her eye, and in the
gentle tones of her voice the most soothing tenderness. People said the
baby looked like her; but he cried so much that his face was continually
distorted, and so the resemblance was not of any use to him.

Now there was a great deal of discussion about the baby's looks, as to
which he most resembled, his father or mother; some decided in favor of
his father, who was a tall man, with black hair, and black eyes, and
large, sharp features. It was a difficult question to answer, inasmuch
as the baby had yet but a very few hairs on his head, and his features
were not easily distinguishable; and as each person's decision affected
only his own opinion, there was a great deal of discussion and comparing
of the poor baby's little face with those of his parents, and, through
dint of being often shown them, the father and mother began to find the
most remarkable resemblance to each other in their little child.

Well, one day he had been crying very hard, and his poor mother was
nearly worn sick with trying to quiet him. She had walked all over the
house, shown him everything on the tables, taken up books and shaken
them before his eyes, carried him to the windows and cried "See there!
see there!" with fresh tones of love and pity, without his seeming to be
in the least edified by it all. She tossed him before the looking-glass;
but he did not seem to be comforted by the glimpse of himself, done up
in a blanket, which he caught; until, at last, after putting everything
into every place in which it didn't belong, and trying to make him look
at things he didn't care to see, she resolutely put him in the cradle,
rocked him with his head moving now on this and now on that side of the
pillow, until he fell fast asleep.

He had no sooner closed his eyes to sleep than he left his baby's body
in the cradle, and ran straight off to the gardens of God in heaven,
towards that place where dwell the angel-children who are yet to go down
and live upon the earth. As he came near the tall flowers, whose golden
petals were spread, and in whose cups lay sweet dew, he clapped his
hands with joy, and a bright smile lay on his lips, which before had
been distorted with grief.

Not far from him there rose a bright fountain, which, falling, dashed
its water gently down into a broad, silvery basin beneath. In the midst
of the falling spray a large bird, with long, blue plumage, played, now
diving beneath the water, and now catching the drops as they fell from
the fountain. Then came other birds, some in gay scarlet plumage, with
white feathers about their necks and at the tips of their wings and
tails; they, too, played in the fountain, and chased each other over
the sparkling waters.

Then there were tall trees, of such a bright green as is seldom seen on
the earth, and on them were fruits which looked a little like those we
see here, but a thousand times more beautiful, for they shone like
precious stones. About everything was a glory which it is impossible to
describe.

At a little distance was a troop of fair children at play, and when they
had seen the little child from the earth they ran towards him, and would
have kissed him joyously, but that they saw the tears he had so recently
shed still standing upon his cheeks; at this, sorrow shone over their
faces, and tears like pearls entered their own eyes, as, in the
tenderest manner, they asked him the cause of his grief.

"Do not ask me, dear brothers and sisters," he entreated; "I wish only
to think how I am with you now for a little while, and I long to forget
the earth-scenes." Speaking thus he kissed them all, and led them away
off among the bright fields.

Very gayly they played a long time; they plucked the golden apples from
the trees, and threw them far up in the sky, and the apples bounded so
lightly that they still went on, till at last they dropped down to the
earth into some dark rooms where poor people lived, who, when they found
them, rejoiced exceedingly.

Then they went riding on the clouds, and the light of their faces gave a
brightness to the edge of the clouds, so that the people on the earth
loved to stand watching them, never fancying what a troop of
angel-children were frolicking on them.

At last they became weary of this sport, and bent their way quite
towards the earth. At this our earth-child saddened, and did not wing
his flight as quickly as the others did. Upon this they looked around
upon him and said:

"Why tarry you? Do you not know we go to the earth, to do there what our
dear Teacher bids us? You have played with us, and will you not now do
the work which you have so often done with us before?" So he sped on
with them, but his voice was silent and his heart wept.

They soon came to the earth, and then, unseen by any one, they made
their way towards a little, dingy house, in one room of which sat a
little boy upon a bench, driving pegs into the sole of a boot. On one
side lay all the boots in which he had driven pegs, and on the other a
great many more in which he must still drive them. He looked sad and
pale, and the sweat lay in large drops upon his forehead. By his side
sat a large, stout man, with his shirt-sleeves rolled up, displaying
strong, brawny arms, while his face was red and stern. He was also at
work, but watched the boy well, and if he saw his arm rested for a
moment he would give him a little push, bidding him mind his work; and
so the poor boy had to drive the pegs into the soles of the boots, even
though he was weary and his face pale and sad.

Then the angel-children, seized with one feeling of love and pity (for
they could remember how the poor boy used to be one of them and play in
the garden of God), soared above him. One came down and wiped off the
drops of sweat from his brow; another passed his soft hands over the
boy's face, and rested him; and another put comforting thoughts into his
soul.

Then the master looked up, and when he saw how the boy seemed suddenly
refreshed, he told him it was good to work and silly to be tired; and
when the boy heard these hard words, tears came into his eyes, and he
thought of his mother who used so tenderly to care for him, but had now
been gone long to the home of the angels.

Then some of the angel-children wiped away the tears which had come into
the boy's eyes, and another shook his beautiful wings over his head, so
that at once a cool breeze fell over him and hopeful words entered his
soul. Some of the children moved his arm up and down as he drove the
pegs into the boot, and he wondered how easily he was able to work.

All this time our earth-child stood apart, nodding his head sadly, and
when the others asked him the cause, he answered, "O, you do not know
how hard it is to live on the earth! See this poor boy; how far
different was it with him when he played with us in the gardens up
there!"

The children were silent; they knew not how to comfort him. They
thought, too, of the time when they should live on the earth.

Then they flew along and came to a large city, in which lived many
homeless children, who were led about by unkind and evil spirits; and
passed constantly by men and women, who did not so much as give them one
kind word.

As the angel-children wandered among them they shuddered: such strange
