
A gleam of intelligence shot across the ill-favoured face of the gypsy.

"Ha! you're a wise woman.  Come, out with your plan, and see if I'm not
game to do it."

"There's no plan worth speakin' of," rejoined the woman, somewhat
mollified by her companion's complimentary remarks.  "All you've to do
is to go down the road to-morrow, catch him, and bring him to me.  I'll
see to it that he don't make his voice heard until we've done with this
part of the country.  Then we can slip the knot, and let the brat go
free."

"I'll do it!" said the man, sitting down on a stone and beginning to
fill his pipe.

"I thought he was dead!" said the woman.

"So did I; but he's not dead yet, an' don't look as if he'd die soon."

"Maybe," said the woman, "he won't remember ye.  It's full five year now
sin' he was took away."

"Won't he?" retorted the man, with an angry look, which did not tend to
improve his disagreeable visage.  "Hah!  I heerd him say he'd know me if
he saw me in a crowd o' ten thousand.  I would ha' throttled the cub
then and there, but the place was too public."

A short silence ensued, during which the gypsies ate their food with the
zest of half-starved wolves.

"You'd better go down and see old Moggy," suggested the woman, when the
man had finished his repast and resumed his pipe.  "If the brat escapes
you to-morrow, it may be as well to let the old jade know that you'll
murder both him and her, if he dares to blab."

The man shook his head.  "No use!" said he.  But the woman repeated her
advice in a tone that was equivalent to a command, so the man rose up
sulkily and went.

He was not a little surprised, on drawing near to the hut, to find it in
a state of bustle, and apparently in possession of the Sudberrys.  Not
daring to show himself; he slunk back to his encampment, and informed
his female companion of what he had seen.

"All the more reason to make sure work of him on the road to-morrow!"
said she, with a dark frown.

"So I mean to!" replied the man doggedly.  With these amiable sentiments
and intentions animating their breasts, this pair crept into their booth
and went to rest in the bosom of their family.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 20.

MYSTERIOUS MATTERS--A HAPPY RETURN, ETCETERA.

The morning which followed the events narrated in the last chapter broke
with unclouded splendour.  It was the second of the four bright days
which relieved the monotony of those six dreary weeks of rain.

Rejoicing in the glorious aspect of earth and sky, and in the fresh
scents which the rain had called forth from every shrub and flower on
the mountains, Mr Sudberry dashed about the White House--in and out--
awaiting the assembling of the family to breakfast with great
impatience.  His coat-tails that morning proved the means of
annihilating the sugar-basin--the last of the set which had graced the
board on his arrival in the Highlands, and which had been left, for some
time past, "blooming alone," all its former companions having been
shattered and gone long ago.

According to custom, Mr Sudberry went forward to the barometrical
banjo, intending to tap it--not that he expected correct information
_now_.  No; he had found out its falsehood, and was prepared to smile at
anything it should say.  He opened his eyes, however, and exclaimed
"Hallo!" with unwonted energy, on observing that, as if in sheer
defiance of the weather, of truth, and of public opinion, its index
aimed point-blank at "stormy!"

He speedily discovered that this tremendous falsehood was the result of
a careful intestine examination, to which the instrument had been
privately subjected by Master Jacky the evening before; in the course of
which examination the curious boy, standing below the barometer, did,
after much trouble, manage to cut the bulb which held the mercury.  That
volatile metal, being set free, at once leaped into its liberator's
bosom, and gushed down between his body and his clothes to the floor!

"I'll thrash him to within an inch--"

Mr Sudberry clinched his teeth and his fists, and burst out of the
room, (it was at this moment that the last of the set became "faded and
gone"), and rushed towards the nursery.  "No, I won't," he muttered,
suddenly wheeling round on his heel and returning slowly to the parlour.
"I'll say nothing whatever about it."  And Mr Sudberry kept his word--
Jacky never heard of it from that day to this!

Seizing the opportunity of the fine day, Mr Sudberry and George went
out to fish.  They fished with worm now, the streams being too much
swollen for fly.

Meanwhile, Master Jacky sauntered down alone, in a most free-and-easy
independent manner, to visit old Moggy, who was thought to be in a dying
state--at least the doctor said so, and it was to be presumed that he
was right.

Jacky had regularly constituted himself sick nurse to the old woman.
Despite the entreaties of Flora and his sister, who feared that the
disease might be infectious, he could not be prevailed on to remain
away.  His nursing did not, indeed, consist in doing much that was
useful.  He confined himself chiefly to playing on the river-banks near
the hut, and to making occasional inquiries as to how the patient was
getting on.  Sometimes he also assisted Flora in holding sundry cups,
and glasses, and medicine bottles, and when Flora was away he amused
himself by playing practical jokes on the young woman who had
volunteered to act as regular nurse to the old invalid.

Towards the afternoon, Jacky put his hands behind his back--he would
have put them under his coat-tails if he had had any, for he was very
old-mannish in his tendencies--and sauntered down the road towards the
pass.  At this same time it chanced that another little boy, more than
twice Jacky's age, was walking smartly along the same road towards the
same pass from the other side of it.  There were as yet several miles
between the two boys, but the pace at which the elder walked bid fair to
bring them face to face within an hour.  The boy whom we now introduce
was evidently a sailor.  He wore blue trousers, a blue vest with little
brass buttons, a blue jacket with bigger brass buttons, and a blue cap
with a brass button on either side--each brass button, on coat, cap, and
vest, having an anchor of, (apparently), burnished gold in the centre of
it.  He had clear blue eyes, brown curly hair, and an easy, offhand
swagger, which last was the result of a sea-faring life and example; but
he had a kindly and happy, rather than a boastful or self-satisfied,
expression of face, as he bowled along with his hands in his pockets,
kicking all the stones out of his way, and whistling furiously.
Sometimes he burst into a song, and once or twice he laughed, smote his
thigh, and cheered, but never for a moment did he slacken his pace,
although he had walked many a mile that day.

Curiously enough, at this same time, a man was crouching behind some
bushes in the centre of the pass towards which these two boys were
approaching.  This man had a pair of grey eyes which might have been
beautiful had they not been small and ferocious-looking, and a nose
which might have been aquiline had the bridge not been broken, and a
head of shaggy hair which might have been elegant had it been combed,
oiled, curled, and dyed, and a general appearance which might have been
prepossessing had it not been that of a thorough blackguard.  This
lovely specimen of humanity sat down on a rock, and waited, and
fidgeted; and the expression of his sweet face betrayed, from time to
time, that he was impatient, and anything but easy in his mind.

As Jack walked very leisurely and stopped frequently to play, his
progress towards the pass was slow, and as our waiting friend, whom the
reader no doubt recognises as the gypsy, could not see far along the
road in that direction, he was not aware of his approach.  On the other
hand, the sailor-boy came on fast, and the road was so open and straight
in that direction that the gypsy saw him when he was far enough away to
seem like a mere blue spot in the distance.

Presently he gained the entrance to the pass and began the ascent, which
was gradual, with a riotous windlass song, in which the sentiments, yo!
heave! and ho! were most frequently expressed.  As he drew near, the
gypsy might have been observed to grin a smile that would have been
quite captivating but for some obstinate peculiarity about the muscles
of the mouth which rendered it very repulsive.

Next moment the sailor-boy was abreast of him.  The moment after that
the bushes parted, and the gypsy confronted his victim, cutting a
tremendous "heave!" short in the middle, and converting the "ho!" that
should have followed, into a prolonged whistle of astonishment.

"Hah! my lad, you remember me, it seems?"

"Remember you?  Yes, I just do!" answered the boy, in whose countenance
every trace of boyishness was instantly swallowed up in an intense gaze
of manly determination.

This mute but meaning glance had such a strange effect upon the gypsy
that he actually cowered for a moment, and looked as if he were afraid
he was going to "catch it."  However, he forced a laugh and said--

"Come, Billy, you needn't look so cross.  You know I was hard put to it
w'en I sent you aboord the `Fair Nancy,' and you shouldn't ought to owe
me a grudge for puttin' ye in the way o' makin' yer fortin'."

The man kept edging towards the boy as he spoke, but the boy observed
this and kept edging away, regarding the man with compressed lips and
dilated eyes, but not vouchsafing a word in reply.

"I say, Billy, it's unkind, you know, to forget old times like this.  I
want to shake hands; and there's my old woman up on the hill as wants to
see you again."

Suddenly the fierce look left the boy's face, and was replaced by a
wild, waggish expression.

"Oh! your old woman wants to see me, does she?  And you want to shake
hands, do you?  Now look here, Growler; I see through you!  You thought
to catch a flat, and you'll find you've caught a tartar; or, rather,
that the tartar has caught _you_.  But I've grown merciful since I went
to sea," (the lad tucked-up his wristbands at this point, as if he
really meditated a hand-to-hand encounter with his huge antagonist).  "I
_do_ remember old times, and I know how richly you deserve to be hanged;
but I don't want to mix up my home-coming, if I can help it, with dirty
work.  Now, I'll tell you what--I'll give you your choice o' two
courses.  Either take yourself off and be out o' hail of this part of
the country within twelve hours, or walk with me to the nearest police
station and give yourself up.  There--I'll give you exactly two minutes
to think over it."

The youthful salt here pulled out an enormous double-case silver watch
with an air of perfect nonchalance, and awaited the result.  For a few
seconds the gypsy was overwhelmed by the lad's coolness; then he burst
into a gruff laugh and rushed at him.  He might as well have run at a
squirrel.  The boy sprang to one side, crossed the road at a bound, and,
still holding the watch, said--

"Half a minute gone!"

Again the man rushed at his small opponent with similar result, and a
cool remark, that another half minute was gone.  This so exasperated the
gypsy, that he ran wildly after the boy for half a minute, but the
latter was as active as a kitten, and could not be caught.

"Time's up; two minutes and a quarter; so don't say that I'm not
merciful.  Now, follow me to the constable."

So saying, Billy, as the man had called him, turned his back towards the
pass, and ran off at full speed towards the village.  The gypsy followed
him at once, feeling that his only chance lay in capturing the boy; but
so artfully did Billy hang back and allow his pursuer to come close up,
that he had almost succeeded in enticing him into the village, when the
man became suddenly aware of his folly, and stopped.  Billy stopped too.

"What! you're not game to come on?"

The man shook his fist, and, turning his face towards the pass, ran back
towards his booth in the hills, intending to take the boy's first piece
of advice, and quit that part of the country.  But Billy had no idea of
letting him off thus.  He now became the pursuer.  However fast the
gypsy ran, the sailor-lad kept up with him.  If the man halted, as he
frequently did in a breathless condition, and tried to gain over his
adversary, Billy also stopped, said he was in no hurry, thrust his hands
into his jacket pockets, and began to whistle.  Thus he kept him in view
until they once more stood in the pass.  Here the man sat down on a
large stone, thoroughly exhausted.  The boy sat down on another stone
opposite to him, looking quite fresh and jolly.  Five years of hearty
devotion to a noble calling had prepared the muscles of the little
sailor for that day's exercise.  The same number of years spent in
debauchery and crime had _not_ prepared the vagabond giant for that
day's work.

"What has brought you back?" said Growler, savagely.

"To see the old granny whom you stole me from," replied the boy.  "Also,
to have the satisfaction of puttin' you in limbo; although I did not
expect to have this pleasure."

"Ha! ha!" laughed Growler, sarcastically, "you'll fail in both.  It's
not so easy to put me in limbo as you think--and your grandmother is
dyin'."

"That's false!" cried Billy, springing half way across the road and
shaking his little fist at his enemy--"you know it is.  The landlord of
the `Blue Boar' told me he saw her at church strong and well last
Sunday."

"She's dyin', however, may be _dead_," said the man, with a sneer so
full of triumph, that it struck a chill to the heart of the poor boy.

Just at that moment, Jacky Sudberry turned slowly round a sharp angle of
the road, and stood there transfixed, with his eyes like two saucers,
and his mouth as round as an o.

The sight of this intruder distracted Billy's attention for a moment.
Growler at once bounded over the low wall and dived into the underwood.
Billy hesitated to follow him, for the last piece of information weighed
heavily on his mind.  That moment's hesitation was sufficient for the
gypsy to make good his retreat.  Although Billy leaped the wall the next
moment, and darted hither and thither through the copse, he failed to
catch sight of him again, and finally returned to the road, where he
found Jacky seated on a stone, pondering in a state of bewilderment on
what he had seen.

"Well, my boy, how goes it?" cried the sailor heartily, as he came
forward, wiping his heated brow with a blue spotted cotton handkerchief.

"All right!" was Jacky's prompt reply.  "I say, was you fightin' with
that man?"

"Ay, that was I, and I've not done with him yet."

Jacky breathed hard and looked upon the young sailor-lad with a deep
reverential awe, feeling that he was in the presence of a real Jack the
Giant-killer.

"He runn'd away!" said Jacky in amazement.  "Did you hit him hard?"

"Not with my fists; they ain't big enough for that yet.  We've only had
a sparring-match with words and legs."

Jacky glanced at Billy's legs as if he regarded them in the light of
dire engines of destruction.  Indeed, his active mind jumped at once to
the conclusion that the sailor's must be a kicking mode of warfare; but
he was too much amazed to make any rejoinder.

"Now, my boy, I'm going this way, so I'll bid you good-day," said Billy.
Jacky informed him that he was going the same way,--having only been
taking a stroll,--and would willingly go back: whereupon Billy put his
arm round his shoulder, as boys are wont to do, and Jacky grasped Billy
round the waist, and thus they wandered home together.

"I say, you're a funny chap," observed the young sailor, in a comic
vein, as they went along.

"So are you," replied Jacky, with intense gravity, being deeply serious.

Billy laughed; but as the two friends at that moment emerged from the
pass and came in sight of the White House, the laugh was suddenly
checked, and was followed by a sound that was not unlike choking.  Jacky
looked up in alarm, and was surprised to see tears hopping over his
companion's brown cheeks.  To find a lad who could put a giant to flight
was wonderful enough, but to find one who could cry without any reason
at all was beyond belief.  Jacky looked perplexed and said, "I say,
what's the matter?"

"Oh! nothing; only this is my old home, and my scrimmage with that
villain has made me come plump on it without thinkin'.  I was born here.
I know every stone and bush.  I--I--there's the old--"

He choked again at this point, and Jacky, whose mind was only opening,
stood looking on in silent wonder.

"My old granny lives here; old Moggy--"

The expression of Jacky's face caused Billy to stop.

"Why, what's wrong, boy?"

"Is--is--o-old Moggy _your_ granny?" cried Jacky, eagerly, stumbling
over his words as if he had come upon stepping-stones in the dark.

"Ay; what then?"

"Eh!  _I_ know her."

"Do you, my boy?"

"Ye-yes; sh-she's dyin'!"

The result of this remark was that the sailor-boy turned deadly pale,
and stared at his little friend without being able to utter a word.
Mere human nature taught Jacky that he had made a mistake in being so
precipitate: but home education had not taught him to consider the
feelings of others.  He felt inclined to comfort his new friend, but
knew not how to do it.  At last a happy thought occurred to him, and he
exclaimed eagerly--

"B-but _sh-she's not dead yet_!"

"Does she live in the same cottage?" asked the boy, in a low, husky
voice, not considering that his companion could not know what cottage
she had occupied in former days.  Jacky, also ignoring this fact, nodded
his head violently, being past speech with excitement, and pointed in
the direction of the hut.

Without another word, Billy, (more correctly speaking, Willie), at once
took to his heels, and was followed by Jacky as fast as his short legs
could carry him.

Flora Macdonald was administering a glass of hot wine and water to her
patient, when the door was quickly, yet gently, opened, and a sailor-lad
sprang into the room, fell on his knees beside the lowly couch, seized
the old woman's hand, gazed for a few seconds into her withered face,
and then murmuring, "Granny, it's me," laid his head on her shoulder and
burst into tears.

Flora gently drew the boy away.

"Willie, is it possible; can it be you?"

"Is she dyin'?" said Willie, looking up in Flora's face with an
expression of agony.

"I trust not, dear boy; but the doctor says she is very ill, and must be
kept quiet."

"Hoot, awa' wi' the doctor!  He's wrang," cried old Moggy, suddenly
raising herself with great energy on one elbow; "don't I see my ain
Willie there, as I've seen him in my dreams mony and mony a night?"
(Flora grasped Willie's arm to prevent his running towards her, and
pointed to Jacky, who had at that moment entered the room, and was at
once recognised by Moggy.) "Ay, little did I think when I said yestreen,
`Thy wull be done,' that He wad send my ain laddie back again!"

She folded Jacky, who had gone to the bedside, in her arms, and was with
difficulty prevailed on to let him go.  It was quite evident that her
mind was wandering.

The effect of this little episode on Willie was powerful and twofold.  A
pang of jealousy at first shot through his heart like a flash of
lightning; but when he perceived that the loving embrace was meant for
his old self he broke down, and the tears once more tumbled over his
brown cheeks.

"She cannot recognise you just now, dear Willie," said Flora, deeply
touched by the sorrow of the lad; "and, even if she could, I fear it
would do her harm by exciting her too much.  Come, my poor fellow,"
(leading him softly to the door), "I am just going up to visit a kind
English family, where they will be only too glad to put you up until it
is safe to let her know that you have returned."

"But she may die, and never know that I have returned," said Willie,
almost passionately, as he hung back.

"She is in God's loving hands, Willie."

"Can I not stay and help you to nurse her?" asked the boy, in pitiful
tones.

Flora shook her head, and Willie meekly suffered himself to be led out
of the hut.

This, then, was the home-coming that he had longed for so intensely;
that he had dreamed of so often when far away upon the sea!  No sooner
was he in the open air than he burst away from Flora without a word, and
