These changed their shapes with remarkable quickness. After an
immersion of 48 hrs. they were again examined, and their movements were
so plain that they could easily be seen under a weak power. The leaves
were now placed in water, and after 24 hrs. (i.e. 72 hrs. from their
first immersion) the little masses of protoplasm, which had become of a
dingy purple, were still in strong movement, changing their shapes,
coalescing, and again separating.

In 8 hrs. after these two leaves had been placed in water (i.e. in 56
hrs. after their immersion in the solution) they began to re-expand,
and by the next morning were more expanded. After an additional day
(i.e. on the fourth day after their immersion in the solution) they
were largely, but not quite fully [page 208] expanded. The tentacles
were now examined, and the aggregated masses were almost wholly
redissolved; the cells being filled with homogeneous purple fluid, with
the exception here and there of a single globular mass. We thus see how
completely the protoplasm had escaped all injury from the poison. As
the glands were soon rendered quite white, it occurred to me that their
texture might have been modified in such a manner as to prevent the
poison passing into the cells beneath, and consequently that the
protoplasm within these cells had not been at all affected. Accordingly
I placed another leaf, which had been immersed for 48 hrs. in the
poison and afterwards for 24 hrs. in water, in a little solution of one
part of carbonate of ammonia to 218 of water; in 30 m. the protoplasm
in the cells beneath the glands became darker, and in the course of 24
hrs. the tentacles were filled down to their bases with dark-coloured
spherical masses. Hence the glands had not lost their power of
absorption, as far as the carbonate of ammonia is concerned.

From these facts it is manifest that the poison of the cobra, though so
deadly to animals, is not at all poisonous to Drosera; yet it causes
strong and rapid inflection of the tentacles, and soon discharges all
colour from the glands. It seems even to act as a stimulant to the
protoplasm, for after considerable experience in observing the
movements of this substance in Drosera, I have never seen it on any
other occasion in so active a state. I was therefore anxious to learn
how this poison affected animal protoplasm; and Dr. Fayrer was so kind
as to make some observations for me, which he has since published.*
Ciliated epithelium from the mouth of a frog was placed in a solution
of .03 gramme to 4.6 cubic cm. of water; others being placed at the
same time in pure water for comparison. The movements of the cilia in
the solution seemed at first increased, but soon languished, and after
between 15 and 20 minutes ceased; whilst those in the water were still
acting vigorously. The white corpuscles of the blood of a frog, and the
cilia on two infusorial animals, a Paramaecium and Volvox, were
similarly affected by the poison. Dr. Fayrer also found that the muscle
of a frog lost its irritability after an immersion of 20 m. in the
solution, not then responding to a strong electrical current. On the
other hand, the movements of the cilia on the mantle of an Unio were
not always arrested, even when left for a consider-

* 'Proceedings of Royal Society,' Feb. 18, 1875.  [page 209]

able time in a very strong solution. On the whole, it seems that the
poison of the cobra acts far more injuriously on the protoplasm of the
higher animals than on that of Drosera.

There is one other point which may be noticed. I have occasionally
observed that the drops of secretion round the glands were rendered
somewhat turbid by certain solutions, and more especially by some
acids, a film being formed on the surfaces of the drops; but I never
saw this effect produced in so conspicuous a manner as by the cobra
poison. When the stronger solution was employed, the drops appeared in
10 m. like little white rounded clouds. After 48 hrs. the secretion was
changed into threads and sheets of a membranous substance, including
minute granules of various sizes.

Camphor.--Some scraped camphor was left for a day in a bottle with
distilled water, and then filtered. A solution thus made is said to
contain 1/1000 of its weight of camphor; it smelt and tasted of this
substance. Ten leaves were immersed in this solution; after 15 m. five
of them were well inflected, two showing a first trace of movement in
11 m. and 12 m.; the sixth leaf did not begin to move until 15 m. had
elapsed, but was fairly well inflected in 17 m. and quite closed in 24
m.; the seventh began to move in 17 m., and was completely shut in 26
m.  The eighth, ninth, and tenth leaves were old and of a very dark red
colour, and these were not inflected after an immersion of 24 hrs.; so
that in making experiments with camphor it is necessary to avoid such
leaves. Some of these leaves, on being left in the solution for 4 hrs.,
became of a rather dingy pink colour, and secreted much mucus; although
their tentacles were closely inflected, the protoplasm within the cells
was not at all aggregated. On another occasion, however, after a longer
immersion of 24 hrs., there was well marked aggregation.  A solution
made by adding two drops of camphorated spirits to an ounce of water
did not act on one leaf; whereas thirty minims added to an ounce of
water acted on two leaves immersed together.

M. Vogel has shown* that the flowers of various plants do not wither so
soon when their stems are placed in a solution of camphor as when in
water; and that if already slightly withered, they recover more
quickly. The germination of certain seeds is also accelerated by the
solution. So that camphor acts as a stimulant, and it is the only known
stimulant for plants. I

* 'Gardener's Chronicle,' 1874, p. 671. Nearly similar observations
were made in 1798 by B.  S. Barton.  [page 210]

wished, therefore, to ascertain whether camphor would render the leaves
of Drosera more sensitive to mechanical irritation than they naturally
are. Six leaves were left in distilled water for 5 m. or 6 m., and then
gently brushed twice or thrice, whilst still under water, with a soft
camel-hair brush; but no movement ensued. Nine leaves, which had been
immersed in the above solution of camphor for the times stated in the
following table, were next brushed only once with the same brush and in
the same manner as before; the results are given in the table. My first
trials were made by brushing the leaves whilst still immersed in the
solution; but it occurred to me that the viscid secretion round the
glands would thus be removed, and the camphor might act more
effectually on them. In all the following trials, therefore, each leaf
was taken out of the solution, waved for about 15 s. in water, then
placed in fresh water and brushed, so that the brushing would not allow
the freer access of the camphor; but this treatment made no difference
in the results.

Column 1 : Number of Leaves.  Column 2 : Length of Immersion in the
Solution of Camphor.  Column 3 : Length of Time between the Act of
Brushing and the Inflection of the Tentacles.  Column 4 : Length of
Time between the Immersion of the Leaves in the Solution and the First
Sign of the Inflection of the Tentacles.

1 : 5 m. : 3 m. considerable inflection; 4 m. all the tentacles except
3 or 4 inflected. : 8 m.

2 : 5 m. : 6 m. first sign of inflection. : 11 m.

3 : 5 m. : 6 m. 30 s. slight inflection; 7 m. 30 s. plain inflection. :
11 m. 30 s.

4 : 4 m. 30 s. : 2 m. 30 s. a trace of inflection; 3 m. plain; 4 m.
strongly marked. : 7 m.

5 : 4 m. : 2 m. 30 s. a trace of inflection; 3 m. plain inflection. : 6
m. 30 s.

6 : 4 m. : 2 m. 30 s. decided inflection; 3 m. 30 s. strongly marked. :
6 m. 30 s.

7 : 4 m. : 2 m. 30 s. slight inflection; 3 m. plain; 4 m. well marked.
: 6 m. 30 s.

8 : 3 m. : 2 m. trace of inflection; 3 m. considerable, 6 m. strong
inflection. : 5 m.

9 : 3 m. : 2 m. trace of inflection; 3 m. considerable, 6 m. strong
inflection. : 5 m.

Other leaves were left in the solution without being brushed; one of
these first showed a trace of inflection after 11 m.; a second after 12
m.; five were not inflected until 15 m. had [page 211] elapsed, and two
not until a few minutes later. On the other hand, it will be seen in
the right-hand column of the table that most of the leaves subjected to
the solution, and which were brushed, became inflected in a much
shorter time. The movement of the tentacles of some of these leaves was
so rapid that it could be plainly seen through a very weak lens.

Two or three other experiments are worth giving. A large old leaf,
after being immersed for 10 m. in the solution, did not appear likely
to be soon inflected; so I brushed it, and in 2 m. it began to move,
and in 3 m. was completely shut. Another leaf, after an immersion of 15
m., showed no signs of inflection, so was brushed, and in 4 m. was
grandly inflected. A third leaf, after an immersion of 17 m., likewise
showed no signs of inflection; it was then brushed, but did not move
for 1 hr.; so that here was a failure. It was again brushed, and now in
9 m. a few tentacles became inflected; the failure therefore was not
complete.

We may conclude that a small dose of camphor in solution is a powerful
stimulant to Drosera. It not only soon excites the tentacles to bend,
but apparently renders the glands sensitive to a touch, which by itself
does not cause any movement. Or it may be that a slight mechanical
irritation not enough to cause any inflection yet gives some tendency
to movement, and thus reinforces the action of the camphor. This latter
view would have appeared to me the more probable one, had it not been
shown by M. Vogel that camphor is a stimulant in other ways to various
plants and seeds.

Two plants bearing four or five leaves, and with their roots in a
little cup of water, were exposed to the vapour of some bits of camphor
(about as large as a filbert-nut), under a vessel holding ten fluid oz.
After 10 hrs. no inflection ensued; but the glands appeared to be
secreting more copiously. The leaves were in a narcotised condition,
for on bits of meat being placed on two of them, there was no
inflection in 3 hrs. 15 m., and even after 13 hrs. 15 m. only a few of
the outer tentacles were slightly inflected; but this degree of
movement shows that the leaves had not been killed by an exposure
during 10 hrs. to the vapour of camphor.

Oil of Caraway.--Water is said to dissolve about a thousandth part of
its weight of this oil. A drop was added to an ounce of water and the
bottle occasionally shaken during a day; but many minute globules
remained undissolved. Five leaves were immersed in this mixture; in
from 4 m. to 5 m. there was some inflection, which became moderately
pronounced in two or [page 212] three additional minutes. After 14 m.
all five leaves were well, and some of them closely, inflected. After 6
hrs. the glands were white, and much mucus had been secreted. The
leaves were now flaccid, of a peculiar dull-red colour, and evidently
dead. One of the leaves, after an immersion of 4 m., was brushed, like
the leaves in the camphor, but this produced no effect. A plant with
its roots in water was exposed under a 10-oz. vessel to the vapour of
this oil, and in 1 hr. 20 m. one leaf showed a trace of inflection.
After 5 hrs. 20 m. the cover was taken off and the leaves examined; one
had all its tentacles closely inflected, the second about half in the
same state; and the third all sub-inflected. The plant was left in the
open air for 42 hrs., but not a single tentacle expanded; all the
glands appeared dead, except here and there one, which was still
secreting. It is evident that this oil is highly exciting and poisonous
to Drosera.

Oil of Cloves.--A mixture was made in the same manner as in the last
case, and three leaves were immersed in it. After 30 m. there was only
a trace of inflection which never increased.  After 1 hr. 30 m. the
glands were pale, and after 6 hrs. white. No doubt the leaves were much
injured or killed.

Turpentine.--Small drops placed on the discs of some leaves killed
them, as did likewise drops of creosote. A plant was left for 15 m.
under a 12-oz. vessel, with its inner surface wetted with twelve drops
of turpentine; but no movement of the tentacles ensued. After 24 hrs.
the plant was dead.

Glycerine.--Half-minims were placed on the discs of three leaves: in 2
hrs. some of the outer tentacles were irregularly inflected; and in 19
hrs. the leaves were flaccid and apparently dead; the glands which had
touched the glycerine were colourless. Minute drops (about 1/20 of a
minim) were applied to the glands of several tentacles, and in a few
minutes these moved and soon reached the centre. Similar drops of a
mixture of four dropped drops to 1 oz.  of water were likewise applied
to several glands; but only a few of the tentacles moved, and these
very slowly and slightly. Half-minims of this same mixture placed on
the discs of some leaves caused, to my surprise, no inflection in the
course of 48 hrs. Bits of meat were then given them, and next day they
were well inflected; notwithstanding that some of the discal glands had
been rendered almost colourless. Two leaves were immersed in the same
mixture, but only for 4 hrs.; they were not inflected, and on being
afterwards left for 2 hrs. 30 m. in a solution (1 gr. to 1 oz.) of
carbonate of ammonia, their glands were blackened, their tentacles
inflected, and the protoplasm within their cells aggregated. It appears
[page 213] from these facts that a mixture of four drops of glycerine
to an ounce of water is not poisonous, and excites very little
inflection; but that pure glycerine is poisonous, and if applied in
very minute quantities to the glands of the outer tentacles causes
their inflection.

The Effects of Immersion in Water and in various Solutions on the
subsequent Action of Phosphate and Carbonate of Ammonia.--We have seen
in the third and seventh chapters that immersion in distilled water
causes after a time some degree of aggregation of the protoplasm, and a
moderate amount of inflection, especially in the case of plants which
have been kept at a rather high temperature. Water does not excite a
copious secretion of mucus.  We have here to consider the effects of
immersion in various fluids on the subsequent action of salts of
ammonia and other stimulants. Four leaves which had been left for 24
hrs. in water were given bits of meat, but did not clasp them. Ten
leaves, after a similar immersion, were left for 24 hrs. in a powerful
solution (1 gr. to 20 oz.) of phosphate of ammonia, and only one showed
even a trace of inflection. Three of these leaves, on being left for an
additional day in the solution, still remained quite unaffected. When,
however, some of these leaves, which had been first immersed in water
for 24 hrs., and then in the phosphate for 24 hrs. were placed in a
solution of carbonate of ammonia (one part to 218 of water), the
protoplasm in the cells of the tentacles became in a few hours strongly
aggregated, showing that this salt had been absorbed and taken effect.

A short immersion in water for 20 m. did not retard the subsequent
action of the phosphate, or of splinters of glass placed on the glands;
but in two instances an immersion for 50 m.  prevented any effect from
a solution of camphor. Several leaves which had been left for 20 m. in
a solution of one part of white sugar to 218 of water were placed in
the phosphate solution, the action of which was delayed; whereas a
mixed solution of sugar and the phosphate did not in the least
interfere with the effects of the latter. Three leaves, after being
immersed for 20 m. in the sugar solution, were placed in a solution of
carbonate of ammonia (one part to 218 of water); in 2 m. or 3 m. the
glands were blackened, and after 7 m. the tentacles were considerably
inflected, so that the solution of sugar, though it delayed the action
of the phosphate, did not delay that of the carbonate. Immersion in a
similar solution of gum arabic for 20 m. had no retarding action on the
phosphate. Three leaves were left for 20 m. in a mixture of one part of
alcohol to seven parts of water, [page 214] and then placed in the
phosphate solution: in 2 hrs. 15 m. there was a trace of inflection in
one leaf, and in 5 hrs. 30 m. a second was slightly affected; the
inflection subsequently increased, though slowly. Hence diluted
alcohol, which, as we shall see, is hardly at all poisonous, plainly
retards the subsequent action of the phosphate.

It was shown in the last chapter that leaves which did not become
inflected by nearly a day's immersion in solutions of various salts and
acids behaved very differently from one another when subsequently
placed in the phosphate solution. I here give a table summing up the
results.

Column 1 : Name of the Salts and Acids in Solution.  Column 2 : Period
of Immersion of the Leaves in Solutions of one part to 437 of water.
Column 3 : Effects produced on the Leaves by their subsequent Immersion
for stated periods in a Solution of one part of phosphate of ammonia to
8750 of water, or 1 gr. to 20 oz.

Rubidium chloride. : 22 hrs. : After 30 m. strong inflection of the
tentacles.

Potassium carbonate : 20 m. : Scarcely any inflection until 5 hrs. had
elapsed.

Calcium acetate. : 24 hrs. : After 24 hrs. very slight inflection.

Calcium nitrate. : 24 hrs. : Do. do.

Magnesium acetate. : 22 hrs. : Some slight inflection, which became
well pronounced in 24 hrs.

Magnesium nitrate. : 22 hrs. : After 4 hrs. 30 m. a fair amount of
inflection, which never increased.

Magnesium chloride : 22 hrs. : After a few minutes great inflection;
after 4 hrs. all four leaves with almost every tentacle closely
inflected.

Barium acetate. : 22 hrs. : After 24 hrs. two leaves out of four
slightly inflected.

Barium nitrate. : 22 hrs. : After 30 m. one leaf greatly, and two
others moderately, inflected; they remained thus for 24 hrs.

Strontium acetate. : 22 hrs. : After 25 m. two leaves greatly
inflected; after 8 hrs. a third leaf moderately, and the fourth very
slightly, inflected. All four thus remained for 24 hrs.

Strontium nitrate. : 22 hrs. : After 8 hrs. three leaves out of five
moderately inflected; after 24 hrs. all five in this state; but not one
closely inflected.

Aluminium chloride : 24 hrs. : Three leaves which had either been
slightly or not at all affected by the chloride became after 7 hrs. 30
m. rather closely inflected.  [page 215]

Column 1 : Name of the Salts and Acids in Solution.  Column 2 : Period
of Immersion of the Leaves in Solutions of one part to 437 of water.
Column 3 : Effects produced on the Leaves by their subsequent Immersion
for stated periods in a Solution of one part of phosphate of ammonia to
8750 of water, or 1 gr. to 20 oz.

Aluminium nitrate. : 24 hrs. : After 25 hrs. slight and doubtful
effect.

Lead chloride. : 23 hrs. : After 24 hrs. two leaves somewhat inflected,
the third very little; and thus remained.

Manganese chloride : 22 hrs. : After 48 hrs. not the least inflection.

Lactic acid. : 48 hrs. : After 24 hrs. a trace of inflection in a few
tentacles, the glands of which had not been killed by the acid.

Tannic acid. : 24 hrs. : After 24 hrs. no inflection.

Tartaric acid. : 24 hrs. : Do. do.

Citric acid. : 24 hrs. : After 50 m. tentacles decidedly inflected, and
after 5 hrs. strongly inflected; so remained for the next 24 hrs.

Formic acid. : 22 hrs. : Not observed until 24 hrs. had elapsed;
tentacles considerably inflected, and protoplasm aggregated.

In a large majority of these twenty cases, a varying degree of
inflection was slowly caused by the phosphate. In four cases, however,
the inflection was rapid, occurring in less than half an hour or at
most in 50 m. In three cases the phosphate did not produce the least
effect. Now what are we to infer from these facts? We know from ten
trials that immersion in distilled water for 24 hrs. prevents the
subsequent action of the phosphate solution. It would, therefore,
appear as if the solutions of chloride of manganese, tannic and
tartaric acids, which are not poisonous, acted exactly like water, for
the phosphate produced no effect on the leaves which had been
previously immersed in these three solutions. The majority of the other
solutions behaved to a certain extent like water, for the phosphate
produced, after a considerable interval of time, only a slight effect.
On the other hand, the leaves which had been immersed in the solutions
of the chloride of rubidium and magnesium, of acetate of strontium,
nitrate of barium, and citric acid, were quickly acted on by the
phosphate. Now was water absorbed from these five weak solutions, and
yet, owing to the presence of the salts, did not prevent the subsequent
action of the phosphate? Or [page 216] may we not suppose* that the
interstices of the walls of the glands were blocked up with the
molecules of these five substances, so that they were rendered
impermeable to water; for had water entered, we know from the ten
trials that the phosphate would not afterwards have produced any
effect? It further appears that the molecules of the carbonate of
ammonia can quickly pass into glands which, from having been immersed
for 20 m. in a weak solution of sugar, either absorb the phosphate very
slowly or are acted on by it very slowly. On the other hand, glands,
however they may have been treated, seem easily to permit the
subsequent entrance of the molecules of carbonate of ammonia. Thus
leaves which had been immersed in a solution (of one part to 437 of
water) of nitrate of potassium for 48 hrs.--of sulphate of potassium
for 24 hrs.--and of the chloride of potassium for 25 hrs.--on being
placed in a solution of one part of carbonate of ammonia to 218 of
water, had their glands immediately blackened, and after 1 hr. their
tentacles somewhat inflected, and the protoplasm aggregated.  But it
would be an endless task to endeavour to ascertain the wonderfully
diversified effects of various solutions on Drosera.

Alcohol (one part to seven of water).--It has already been shown that
half-minims of this strength placed on the discs of leaves do not cause
any inflection; and that when two days afterwards the leaves were given
bits of meat, they became strongly inflected. Four leaves were immersed
in this mixture, and two of them after 30 m. were brushed with a
camel-hair brush, like the leaves in the solution of camphor, but this
produced no effect.

* See Dr. M. Traube's curious experiments on the production of
artificial cells, and on their permeability to various salts, described
in his papers: "Experimente zur Theorie der Zellenbildung und
Endosmose," Breslau, 1866; and "Experimente zur physicalischen Erklrung
der Bildung der Zellhaut, ihres Wachsthums durch Intussusception,"
Breslau, 1874. These researches perhaps explain my results. Dr. Traube
commonly employed as a membrane the precipitate formed when tannic acid
comes into contact with a solution of gelatine. By allowing a
precipitation of sulphate of barium to take place at the same time, the
membrane becomes "infiltrated" with this salt; and in consequence of
the intercalation of molecules of sulphate of barium among those of the
gelatine precipitate, the molecular interstices in the membrane are
made smaller. In this altered condition, the membrane no longer allows
the passage through it of either sulphate of ammonia or nitrate of
barium, though it retains its permeability for water and chloride of
ammonia.  [page 217]

Nor did these four leaves, on being left for 24 hrs. in the diluted
alcohol, undergo any inflection. They were then removed; one being
placed in an infusion of raw meat, and bits of meat on the discs of the
other three, with their stalks in water. Next day one seemed a little
injured, whilst two others showed merely a trace of inflection. We
must, however, bear in mind that immersion for 24 hrs. in water
prevents leaves from clasping meat. Hence alcohol of the above strength
is not poisonous, nor does it stimulate the leaves like camphor does.

The vapour of alcohol acts differently. A plant having three good
leaves was left for 25 m.  under a receiver holding 19 oz. with sixty
minims of alcohol in a watch-glass. No movement ensued, but some few of
the glands were blackened and shrivelled, whilst many became quite
pale. These were scattered over all the leaves in the most irregular
manner, reminding me of the manner in which the glands were affected by
the vapour of carbonate of ammonia.  Immediately on the removal of the
receiver particles of raw meat were placed on many of the glands, those
which retained their proper colour being chiefly selected. But not a
single tentacle was inflected during the next 4 hrs. After the first 2
hrs. the glands on all the tentacles began to dry; and next morning,
after 22 hrs., all three leaves appeared almost dead, with their glands
dry; the tentacles on one leaf alone being partially inflected.

A second plant was left for only 5 m. with some alcohol in a
watch-glass, under a 12-oz.  receiver, and particles of meat were then
placed on the glands of several tentacles. After 10 m. some of them
began to curve inwards, and after 55 m. nearly all were considerably
inflected; but a few did not move. Some anaesthetic effect is here
probable, but by no means certain. A third plant was also left for 5 m.
under the same small vessel, with its whole inner surface wetted with
about a dozen drops of alcohol. Particles of meat were now placed on
the glands of several tentacles, some of which first began to move in
25 m.; after 40 m. most of them were somewhat inflected, and after 1
hr. 10 m. almost all were considerably inflected.  From their slow rate
of movement there can be no doubt that the glands of these tentacles
had been rendered insensible for a time by exposure during 5 m. to the
vapour of alcohol.

Vapour of Chloroform.--The action of this vapour on Drosera is very
variable, depending, I suppose, on the constitution or age of the
plant, or on some unknown condition. It sometimes causes the tentacles
to move with extraordinary rapidity, and sometimes produces no such
effect. The glands are sometimes [page 218] rendered for a time
insensible to the action of raw meat, but sometimes are not thus
affected, or in a very slight degree. A plant recovers from a small
dose, but is easily killed by a larger one.

A plant was left for 30 m. under a bell-glass holding 19 fluid oz.
(539.6 ml.) with eight drops of chloroform, and before the cover was
removed, most of the tentacles became much inflected, though they did
not reach the centre. After the cover was removed, bits of meat were
placed on the glands of several of the somewhat incurved tentacles;
these glands were found much blackened after 6 hrs. 30 m., but no
further movement ensued. After 24 hrs. the leaves appeared almost
dead.

A smaller bell-glass, holding 12 fluid oz. (340.8 ml.), was now
employed, and a plant was left for 90 s. under it, with only two drops
of chloroform. Immediately on the removal of the glass all the
tentacles curved inwards so as to stand perpendicularly up; and some of
them could actually be seen moving with extraordinary quickness by
little starts, and therefore in an unnatural manner; but they never
reached the centre. After 22 hrs. they fully re-expanded, and on meat
being placed on their glands, or when roughly touched by a needle, they
promptly became inflected; so that these leaves had not been in the
least injured.

Another plant was placed under the same small bell-glass with three
drops of chloroform, and before two minutes had elapsed, the tentacles
began to curl inwards with rapid little jerks. The glass was then
removed, and in the course of two or three additional minutes almost
every tentacle reached the centre. On several other occasions the
vapour did not excite any movement of this kind.

There seems also to be great variability in the degree and manner in
which chloroform renders the glands insensible to the subsequent action
of meat. In the plant last referred to, which had been exposed for 2 m.
to three drops of chloroform, some few tentacles curved up only to a
perpendicular position, and particles of meat were placed on their
glands; this caused them in 5 m. to begin moving, but they moved so
slowly that they did not reach the centre until 1 hr. 30 m. had
elapsed. Another plant was similarly exposed, that is, for 2 m. to
three drops of chloroform, and on particles of meat being placed on the
glands of several tentacles, which had curved up into a perpendicular
position, one of these began to bend in 8 m., but afterwards moved very
slowly; whilst none of the other tentacles [page 219] moved for the
next 40 m. Nevertheless, in 1 hr. 45 m. from the time when the bits of
meat had been given, all the tentacles reached the centre. In this case
some slight anaesthetic effect apparently had been produced. On the
following day the plant had perfectly recovered.

Another plant bearing two leaves was exposed for 2 m. under the 19-oz.
vessel to two drops of chloroform; it was then taken out and examined;
again exposed for 2 m. to two drops; taken out, and re-exposed for 3 m.
to three drops; so that altogether it was exposed alternately to the
air and during 7 m. to the vapour of seven drops of chloroform. Bits of
meat were now placed on thirteen glands on the two leaves. On one of
these leaves, a single tentacle first began moving in 40 m., and two
others in 54 m. On the second leaf some tentacles first moved in 1 hr.
11 m. After 2 hrs. many tentacles on both leaves were inflected; but
none had reached the centre within this time. In this case there could
not be the least doubt that the chloroform had exerted an anaesthetic
influence on the leaves.

On the other hand, another plant was exposed under the same vessel for
a much longer time, viz. 20 m., to twice as much chloroform. Bits of
meat were then placed on the glands of many tentacles, and all of them,
with a single exception, reached the centre in from 13 m. to 14 m. In
this case, little or no anaesthetic effect had been produced; and how
to reconcile these discordant results, I know not.

Vapour of Sulphuric Ether.--A plant was exposed for 30 m. to thirty
minims of this ether in a vessel holding 19 oz.; and bits of raw meat
were afterwards placed on many glands which had become pale-coloured;
but none of the tentacles moved. After 6 hrs. 30 m. the leaves appeared
sickly, and the discal glands were almost dry. By the next morning many
of the tentacles were dead, as were all those on which meat had been
placed; showing that matter had been absorbed from the meat which had
