Project Gutenberg's Stories of Great Inventors, by Hattie E. Macomber

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Stories of Great Inventors
       Fulton, Whitney, Morse, Cooper, Edison

Author: Hattie E. Macomber

Release Date: October 13, 2006 [EBook #19533]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES OF GREAT INVENTORS ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






       *       *       *       *       *

    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                          |
    |                                                              |
    | This children's book has a new paragraph for every sentence, |
    | and other unusual formatting.                                |
    |                                                              |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation and quotation marks in the original |
    | document have been preserved.                                |
    |                                                              |
    | A number of obvious typographical errors have been corrected |
    | in this text. For a complete list, please see the end of     |
    | this document.                                               |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




     _Young Folk's Library of Choice Literature_

                        STORIES OF

                     GREAT INVENTORS

            FULTON
                   WHITNEY
                           MORSE
                                 COOPER
                                        EDISON

                            BY

                    HATTIE E. MACOMBER

              EDUCATIONAL PUBLISHING COMPANY
                          BOSTON
             NEW YORK  CHICAGO  SAN FRANCISCO




                       COPYRIGHTED
            By EDUCATIONAL PUBLISHING COMPANY
                           1897




CONTENTS.


                                                        PAGE
Robert Fulton                                              7

Eli Whitney                                               41

Samuel Morse                                              79

Peter Cooper                                             121

Thomas A. Edison                                         147




  [Illustration: FULTON.]




ROBERT FULTON.


This story is about a giant.

Do you believe in them?

He peeps out of your coffee cup in the morning.

He cheers you upon a cold day in winter.

But the boys and girls were not so well acquainted with him a
hundred years ago.

About that long ago, far to the north and east, a queer boy lived.

He sat in his grandmother's kitchen many an hour, watching the
tea-kettle.

He seemed to be idle.

But he was really very busy.

He was talking very earnestly to the giant.

The giant was a prisoner.

No one knew how to free him.

Many had often tried to do this and failed.

He was almost always invisible.

But when he did appear, it was in the form of a very old man.

This old man had long, white hair, and a beard which seemed to
enwrap him like a cloak--a cloak as white as snow.

So his name is The White Giant.

The boy's name was James Watt.

He lived in far-away Scotland.

He sat long, listening to the White Giant as he told him many
wonderful things.

The way in which the giant first showed himself to James was very
strange.

James noticed that the lid of the tea-kettle was acting very
strangely.

It rose and fell, fluttered and danced.

Now, James had lived all his life among people who believed in
witches and fairies.

So he was watching for them.

And he thought there was somebody in the kettle trying to get out.

So he said, "Who are you and what do you want?"

"Space, freedom, and something to do," cried the giant.

"If you will only let me out, I'll work hard for you.

I'll draw your carriages and ships.

I'll lift all your weights.

I'll turn all the wheels of your factories.

I'll be your servant always, in a thousand other ways."

  [Illustration: JOHN FITCH'S STEAMBOAT, 1788.
  By permission of Providence & Stonington Steamship Co.]

If you have now guessed the common name of this giant, we will call
him Steam.

At the time James Watt lived, there were no steam boats, steam
mills, nor railways.

And this boy, though his grandmother scolded, thought much about the
giant in the tea-kettle.

And he became the inventor of the first steam engine that was of any
use to the world.

So, little by little, people came to know that steam is a great,
good giant.

They tried in many different ways to make him useful.

They wished very much to make him run a boat.

One man tried to run his boat in a queer way.

He made something like a duck's foot to push it through the water.

Another moved his boat by forcing a stream of water in at the bow
and out at the stern.

Then came a man named John Fitch.

He made his engine run a number of oars so as to paddle the boat
forward.

He grew very poor.

People laughed at him.

But he said, "When I shall be forgotten, steam boats will run up the
rivers and across the seas."

Then people laughed the harder and called him "a crank."

Mr. Fitch's boat was tried in 1787.

Now, in 1765, there happened a good thing for this old world.

A little baby boy was born in that year.

Perhaps you wonder why it was such a good thing for the world.

Some of you will know why when you read that this baby's name was
Robert Fulton.

His father was poor.

His father was a farmer in Pennsylvania.

Mr. Fulton had two little girls older than baby Robert.

When Robert was grown larger he had three sisters and one brother.

But their father died when they were all small.

Robert did not go to school till he was eight years old.

His mother taught him at home.

He knew how to read and write, and a very little arithmetic.

His first teacher was a Mr. Johnson.

Mr. Johnson was a Quaker.

He thought Robert a dull pupil.

Robert did not learn his lessons very well.

But Mr. Johnson soon found that he was never idle.

He did not care to play at recess.

He stayed in and used his pencil in drawing.

He often spent hours in this way.

Robert soon became fond of going into the machine shops.

He understood machinery very quickly.

The men always gave him a welcome.

He didn't get into mischief.

He often helped the men with his neat drawings.

One day Robert was late in getting to school.

The master asked the reason.

Robert answered that he had been in Mr. Miller's shop pounding out
lead for a lead pencil.

Mr. Johnson then encouraged him in doing such useful things.

In a few days, all the pupils in the school had pencils made in that
way.

Mr. Johnson urged Robert to give more attention to his studies.

Robert said, "My head is so full of thoughts of my own that I
haven't room there for the thoughts from dusty books."

As he was not idle, no doubt this was true.

When Robert was thirteen, the boys in the town had a great
disappointment.

It was nearly July.

Of course the boys expected to celebrate the Fourth.

But a notice was put up.

This notice urged the people not to illuminate their homes.

It was very warm weather.

The people then had only candles with which to light their homes.

Candles were very scarce.

But Robert had some.

He took them to a shop and exchanged them for powder.

The owner of the store asked him why he gave up the candles, which
were so scarce and dear.

Robert said, "I am a good citizen, and if our officers do not wish
us to illuminate the town, I shall respect their wishes."

He found some pieces of paste-board.

He rolled these himself.

In this way he made some rockets.

The store-keeper told him he would find it impossible to do this.

"No, sir," Robert answered, "there is nothing impossible."

His rockets were a success, and the people were astonished.

Robert bought at different times small quantities of quicksilver.

The men in the machine shops were curious to know what he did with
it.

But they could not find out.

For this reason they called him "Quicksilver Bob."

Robert was interested in guns.

Sometimes he would tell the workmen how to improve them.

The men liked him so well that they were always willing to try
whatever he advised.

Robert was fond of fishing.

One of the workmen often went fishing with his father.

This man sometimes took Robert.

They had only an old flat boat.

The boys had to pole the boat from place to place.

It was hard work.

They were sometimes very tired.

Robert, soon after one fishing excursion, went away to visit an
aunt.

He was gone a week.

While away he made a complete model of a little fishing boat.

This boat had paddle wheels.

The model was placed in the garret.

Many years afterward his aunt was proud to have it as an ornament on
her parlor table.

Of course the boys arranged a set of paddle wheels for their fishing
boat.

After this they enjoyed their fishing much more than before.

Robert Fulton's boyhood was during the Revolutionary War.

He made many queer pictures of the Hessian soldiers.

These Hessians were Germans, who had been hired by the British to
help them fight the Americans.

The people who wished our country to belong to England were called
Tories.

Those who wished America to be free were called Whigs.

The Whig boys often fought the Tory boys on the soldiers' camp
ground.

The soldiers grew tired of this.

They stretched a rope to keep the boys out.

Robert drew a picture in which the Whigs crossed the rope and
whipped the Tories.

The boys all thought it a good picture.

So they tried to make it real.
