desire of plunder.

Antonius[129] determined upon the latter course and ordered the
rampart to be invested. The attack began at a distance with a volley
of stones and darts, with the greater loss to the Flavians, on whom
the enemy's weapons were thrown with advantage from above. Antonius
presently assigned portions of the rampart and the gates to the
legions that by this mode of attack in different quarters, valor and
cowardice might be distinguished, and a spirit of emulation in honor
animate the army. The third and seventh legions took their station
nearest the road to Bedriacum; the seventh and eighth Claudian, a
portion more to the right hand of the rampart; the thirteenth were
carried by their own impetuosity to the gate that looked toward
Brixia.[130] Some delay then took place while they supplied themselves
from the neighboring villages with pickaxes, spades, and hooks, and
scaling-ladders. They then formed a close military shell with their
shields raised above their heads, and under that cover advanced to the
ramparts. The Roman art of war was seen on both sides. The Vitellians
rolled down massy stones, with which, having disjoined and shaken the
shell, they inserted their long poles and spears; till at last, the
whole frame and texture of the shields being dissolved, they strewed
the ground with numbers of the crusht and mangled assailants....

Severe in the extreme was the conflict maintained by the third and
the seventh legions. Antonius in person led on a select body of
auxiliaries to the same quarter. The Vitellians were no longer able to
sustain the shock of men all bent on victory, and seeing their darts
fall on the military shell, and glide off without effect, at last they
rolled down their battering-engine on the heads of the besiegers. For
the moment, it dispersed and overwhelmed the party among which, it
fell; but it also drew after it, in its fall, the battlements and
upper parts of the rampart. An adjoining tower, at the same time,
yielded to the effect of stones which struck it, and left a breach, at
which the seventh legion, in the form of a wedge, endeavored to force
their way, while the third hewed down the gate with axes and swords.
The first man that entered, according to all historians, was Caius
Volusius, a common soldier of the third legion. He gained the summit
of the rampart, and, bearing down all resistance, in the view of all
beckoned with his hand, and cried aloud that the camp was captured.
The rest of the legion followed him with resistless fury, the
Vitellians being panic-struck, and throwing themselves headlong from
the works. The whole space between the camp and the walls of Cremona
was filled with slain.[131]

And now a new form of difficulty was presented by the high walls of
the city, and towers of stone, the gates secured by iron bars, and
troops brandishing their arms; the inhabitants, a large and numerous
body, all devoted to Vitellius; and a conflux of people from all parts
of Italy at the stated fair which was then held. The latter was
regarded by the garrison as an aid, from the increase of numbers; but
inflamed the ardor of the besiegers on the score of booty. Antonius
ordered his men to take combustibles, and set fire to the most elegant
edifices without the city; if, peradventure, the inhabitants, seeing
their mansions destroyed, would be induced to abandon the adverse
cause. In the houses that stood near the walls, of a height to
overlook the works, he placed the bravest of his troops; and from
those stations beams, tiles and firebrands were thrown down to drive
the defenders of the walls from their posts.

The legions under Antonius now formed a military shell, while the rest
poured in a volley of stones and darts; when the spirit of the
besieged gradually gave way. The men highest in rank were willing to
make terms for themselves, lest, if Cremona was taken by storm, they
should receive no quarter, and the conquerors, disdaining vulgar
lives, should fall on the tribunes and centurions, from whom the
largest booty was to be expected. The common men, as usual, careless
about future events, and safe in their obscurity, still held out.
Roaming about the streets, or lurking in private houses, they did not
sue for peace even when they had given up the contest. The principal
officers took down the name and images of Vitellius. Caecina, for he
was still in confinement, they released from his fetters, and desired
his aid in pleading their cause with the conqueror. He heard their
petition with disdain, swelling with insolence, while they importuned
him with tears; the last stage of human misery, when so many brave
and gallant men were obliged to sue to a traitor for protection! They
then hung out from the walls the fillets and badges of supplicants.
When Antonius ordered a cessation of hostilities, the garrison brought
out their eagles and standards; a mournful train of soldiers without
their aims, their eyes riveted to the ground, followed them. The
conquerors gathered round them, and first heaped reproaches upon them,
and threatened violence to their persons; but afterward, when they saw
the passiveness with which they received the insults, and that the
vanquished, abandoning all their former pride, submitted to every
indignity, the thought occurred that these very men lately conquered
at Bedriacum, and used their victory with moderation. But when Caecina
came forth, decorated with his robes, and preceded by his lictors, who
opened a way for him through the crowd, the indignation of the victors
burst into a flame. They reproached him for his pride, his cruelty,
and even for his treachery: so detested is villainy. Antonius opposed
the fury of his men, and sent him under escort to Vespasian.

Meanwhile, the common people of Cremona, in the midst of so many
soldiers, were subjected to grievous oppressions, and were in danger
of being all put to the sword, if the rage of the soldiery had not
been assuaged by the entreaties of their leaders. Antonius called them
to an assembly, when he spoke of the conquerors in lofty terms, and of
the vanquished with humanity; of Cremona he said nothing either way.
But the army, adding to their love of plunder an inveterate aversion
to the people, were bent on the extirpation of the inhabitants. In
the war against Otho they were deemed the abettors of Vitellius; and
afterward, when the thirteenth legion was left among them to build an
amphitheater, with the usual insolence of the lower orders in towns,
they had assailed them with offensive ribaldry. The spectacle of
gladiators exhibited there by Caecina inflamed the animosity against
the people. Their city, too, was now for the second time the seat of
war; and, in the heat of the last engagement, the Vitellians were
thence supplied with refreshments; and some of their women, led into
the field of battle by their zeal for the cause, were slain. The
period, too, of the fair had given to a colony otherwise affluent an
imposing appearance of accumulated wealth. Antonius, by his fame and
brilliant success, eclipsed all the other commanders: the attention of
all was fixt on him alone. He hastened to the baths to wash off the
blood; and on observing that the water was not hot enough, he said
that they would soon grow hotter. The expression was caught up: a
casual word among slaves had the effect of throwing upon him the whole
odium of having given a signal for setting fire to Cremona, which was
already in flames.

Forty thousand armed men had poured into it. The number of drudges and
camp-followers was still greater, and more abandoned to lust and
cruelty. Neither age nor dignity served as a protection; deeds of lust
were perpetrated amidst scenes of carnage, and murder was added to
rape. Aged men and women that had passed their prime, and who were
useless as booty, were made the objects of brutal sport. If a mature
maiden, or any one of comely appearance, fell in their way, after
being torn piecemeal by the rude hands of contending ruffians, they at
last were the occasion of their turning their swords against each
other. While eagerly carrying off money or massy gold from the
temples, they were butchered by others stronger than themselves. Not
content with the treasures that lay open to their view, some forced
the owners to discover their hidden wealth, and dig up their buried
riches. Numbers carried flaming torches, and, as soon as they had
brought forth their booty, in their wanton sport set the gutted houses
and plundered temples on fire. In an army differing in language and
manners, composed of Roman citizens, allies, and foreign auxiliaries,
all the diversities of passions were exhibited. Each had his separate
notions of right and wrong; nor was anything unlawful. Four days did
Cremona minister to their rapacity. When everything else, sacred and
profane, was leveled in the conflagration, the temple of Memphitis
alone remained standing, outside of the walls; saved either by its
situation, or the influence of the deity.

Such was the fate of Cremona, two hundred and eighty-six years from
its foundation. It was built during the consulship of Tiberius
Sempronius and Publius Cornelius, at the time when Hannibal threatened
an irruption into Italy, as a bulwark against the Gauls inhabiting
beyond the Po, or any other power that might break in over the Alps.
The colony, as might be expected, grew and flourished in the number of
its settlers, from the contiguity of rivers, the fertility of its
soil, from alliances and intermarriages with the neighboring people;
never having suffered from foreign wars, but a sad sufferer from civil
dissensions. Antonius, shrinking from the infamy of this horrible
transaction (for the detestation it excited was increasing), issued an
edict forbidding all manner of persons to detain the citizens of
Cremona as prisoners of war. At the same time the booty was rendered
valueless by a resolution adopted throughout Italy, not to purchase
the captives taken on that occasion. The soldiers then began to murder
them. However, when this was known, the prisoners were eagerly
ransomed by their friends and relations. The survivors in a short time
returned to Cremona. The temples and public places were rebuilt, at
the recommendation of Vespasian, by the munificence of the burgesses.




VII

AGRICOLA[132]


Cnaeus Julius Agricola was born at the ancient and illustrious colony
of Forum Julii. Both his grandfathers were imperial procurators, an
office which confers the rank of equestrian nobility. His father,
Julius Graecinus, of the senatorian order, was famous for the study of
eloquence and philosophy; and by these accomplishments he drew on
himself the displeasure of Caius Caesar,[133] for, being commanded to
undertake the accusation of Marcus Silanus--on his refusal, he was
put to death. His mother was Julia Procilla, a lady of exemplary
chastity. Educated with tenderness in her bosom, he passed his
childhood and youth in the attainment of every liberal art. He was
preserved from the allurements of vice, not only by a naturally good
disposition, but by being sent very early to pursue his studies at
Massilia;[134] a place where Grecian politeness and provincial
frugality are happily united. I remember he was used to relate, that
in his early youth he should have engaged with more ardor in
philosophical speculation than was suitable to a Roman and a senator,
had not the prudence of his mother restrained the warmth and vehemence
of his disposition: for his lofty and upright spirit, inflamed by the
charms of glory and exalted reputation, led him to the pursuit with
more eagerness than discretion. Reason and riper years tempered his
warmth; and from the study of wisdom, he retained what is most
difficult to compass--moderation.

He learned the rudiments of war in Britain, under Suetonius Paulinus,
an active and prudent commander, who chose him for his tent companion,
in order to form an estimate of his merit. Nor did Agricola, like many
young men, who convert military service into wanton pastime, avail
himself licentiously or slothfully of his tribunitial title, or his
inexperience, to spend his time in pleasures and absences from duty;
but he employed himself in gaining a knowledge of the country, making
himself known to the army, learning from the experienced, and
imitating the best; neither pressing to be employed through vainglory,
nor declining it through timidity; and performing his duty with equal
solicitude and spirit. At no other time in truth was Britain more
agitated or in a state of greater uncertainty. Our veterans
slaughtered, our colonies burned, our armies cut off--we were then
contending for safety, afterward for victory. During this period,
altho all things were transacted under the conduct and direction of
another, and the stress of the whole, as well as the glory of
recovering the province, fell to the general's share, yet they
imparted to the young Agricola skill, experience, and incentives; and
the passion for military glory entered his soul; a passion ungrateful
to the times, in which eminence was unfavorably construed, and a great
reputation was no less dangerous than a bad one.

Departing thence to undertake the offices of magistracy in Rome, he
married Domitia Decidiana, a lady of illustrious descent, from which
connection he derived credit and support in his pursuit of greater
things. They lived together in admirable harmony and mutual affection;
each giving the preference to the other; a conduct equally laudable in
both, except that a greater degree of praise is due to a good wife, in
proportion as a bad one deserves the greater censure. The lot of
questorship gave him Asia for his province, and the proconsul Salvius
Titianus[135] for his superior; by neither of which circumstances was
he corrupted, altho the province was wealthy and open to plunder, and
the proconsul, from his rapacious disposition, would readily have
agreed to a mutual concealment of guilt. His family was there
increased by the birth of a daughter, who was both the support of his
house, and his consolation; for he lost an elder-born son in
infancy....

On his return from commanding the legion he was raised by Vespasian to
the patrician order, and then invested with the government of
Aquitania, a distinguished promotion, both in respect to the office
itself, and the hopes of the consulate to which it destined him. It is
a common supposition that military men, habituated to the unscrupulous
and summary processes of camps, where things are carried with a strong
hand, are deficient in the address and subtlety of genius requisite in
civil jurisdiction. Agricola, however, by his natural prudence, was
enabled to act with facility and precision even among civilians. He
distinguished the hours of business from those of relaxation. When the
court or tribunal demanded his presence, he was grave, intent, awful,
yet generally inclined to lenity. When the duties of his office were
over, the man of power was instantly laid aside. Nothing of sternness,
arrogance, or rapaciousness appeared; and, what was a singular
felicity, his affability did not impair his authority, nor his
severity render him less beloved. To mention integrity and freedom
from corruption in such a man, would be an affront to his virtues. He
did not even court reputation, an object to which men of worth
frequently sacrifice, by ostentation or artifice: equally avoiding
competition with his colleagues, and contention with the procurators.
To overcome in such a contest he thought inglorious; and to be put
down, a disgrace. Somewhat less than three years were spent in this
office, when he was recalled to the immediate prospect of the
consulate; while at the same time a popular opinion prevailed that the
government of Britain would be conferred upon him; an opinion not
founded upon any suggestions of his own, but upon his being thought
equal to the station. Common fame does not always err, sometimes it
even directs a choice. When Consul,[136] he contracted his daughter, a
lady already of the happiest promise, to myself, then a very young
man; and after his office was expired I received her in marriage. He
was immediately appointed governor of Britain, and the pontificate was
added to his other dignities....

His decease was a severe affliction to his family, a grief to his
friends, and a subject of regret even to foreigners, and those who had
no personal knowledge of him. The common people too, and the class who
little interest themselves about public concerns, were frequent in
their inquiries at his house during his sickness, and made him the
subject of conversation at the forum and in private circles; nor did
any person either rejoice at the news of his death, or speedily forget
it. Their commiseration was aggravated by a prevailing report that he
was taken off by poison. I can not venture to affirm anything certain
of this matter; yet, during the whole course of his illness, the
principal of the imperial freedmen and the most confidential of the
physicians was sent much more frequently than was customary with a
court whose visits were chiefly paid by messages; whether that was
done out of real solicitude, or for the purposes of state inquisition.
On the day of his decease, it is certain that accounts of his
approaching dissolution were every instant transmitted to the emperor
by couriers stationed for the purpose; and no one believed that the
information, which so much pains was taken to accelerate, could be
received with regret. He put on, however, in his countenance and
demeanor, the semblance of grief: for he was now secured from an
object of hatred, and could more easily conceal his joy than his fear.
It was well known that on reading the will, in which he was nominated
co-heir with the excellent wife and most dutiful daughter of Agricola,
he exprest great satisfaction, as if it had been a voluntary testimony
of honor and esteem: so blind and corrupt had his mind been rendered
by continual adulation, that he was ignorant none but a bad prince
could be nominated heir to a good father.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 101: "If by eloquence is meant the ability to persuade, then
Tacitus," according to Cruttwell, "is the most eloquent historian that
ever existed." His portraits, especially those of Tiberius and Nero,
have been severely criticized by French and English writers, but while
his verdicts have been shaken, they have not been reversed. The world
still fails to doubt their substantial reality. Tacitus, adds
Cruttwell, has probably exercised upon readers a greater power than
any other writer of prose whom Rome produced.]

[Footnote 102: From Book I of the "Annals." The Oxford translation
revised.]

[Footnote 103: Marcellus was the son of Octavia by her husband C.
Claudius Marcellus. He married Julia, a daughter of Augustus.]

[Footnote 104: Agrippa was the leading administrative mind under
Augustus, with whom he had served in the Civil War and in the battle
Actium. The Pantheon, the only complete building of Imperial Rome that
still survives, was finished and dedicated by him. He married as his
third wife Julia, the widow of Marcellus.]

[Footnote 105: Nola lay sixteen miles northeast of Naples. The
reference is to Drusus, son of Tiberius, and to Germanicus, at that
time commanding on the Rhine.]

[Footnote 106: From Book III of the "Annals." The Oxford translation
revised.]

[Footnote 107: This Agrippina was the daughter of Agrippa and Julia.
She married Germanicus, became the mother of Caligula, and was a woman
of lofty character, who died by voluntary starvation after having been
exiled by Tiberius.]

[Footnote 108: It has been conjectured that the two children of
Germanicus here referred to were Caligula, who had gone to the East
with his father, and Julia, who was born in Lesbos.]

[Footnote 109: These children were Nero, Drusus, Agrippina and
Drusilla.]

[Footnote 110: Not the Emperor of that name, who was not born until
121 A.D.]

[Footnote 111: Mother of Tiberius by a husband whom she had married
before she married Augustus.]

[Footnote 112: Julia, daughter of Julius Caesar by his wife Cornelia.]

[Footnote 113: From Book XV of the "Annals." The Oxford translation
revised.]

[Footnote 114: Caius Piso, lender of an unsuccessful conspiracy
against Nero in 65. Other famous Romans of the name of Piso are
Lucius, censor, consul and author; another Lucius whose daughter was
married to Julius Caesar; and Cneius, governor of Syria, who was
accused of murdering Germanicus.]

[Footnote 115: Poppaea Sabina, who once was the wife of Otho and
mistress of Nero. She was afterward divorced from Otho and married to
Nero in 62 A.D. She died from the effects of a kick given by Nero.]

[Footnote 116: From Book XV at the "Annals." The Oxford translator
revised.]

[Footnote 117: Nero.]

[Footnote 118: Suetonius relates that, when some one repeated to Nero
the line "When I am dead, let fire devour the world," he replied, "Let
it be whilst I am living." That author asserts that Nero's purpose
sprung in part from his dislike of old buildings and narrow streets.
During the progress of the fire several men of consular rank met
Nero's domestic servants with torches and combustibles which they were
using to start fires, but did not dare to stay their hands. Livy
asserts that, after it was destroyed by the Gauls, Rome had been
rebuilt with narrow winding streets.]

[Footnote 119: A city in the central Apennines, six miles from Lake
Fucinus.]

[Footnote 120: Near the Esquiline.]

[Footnote 121: The house, gardens, baths and the Pantheon of Agrippa
are here referred to. Nero's gardens were near the Vatican.]
