
"Ferdinand!" she exclaimed in surprise.  "Why, I thought he was in
Californy by this time.  How could he write from New York?  I s'pose
he'll explain.  I hope he didn't lose the money I lent him."

The first sentence in the letter was destined to surprise Miss
Deborah yet more.

"Dear aunt," it commenced, "it is so many years since we have met,
that I am afraid you have forgotten me."

"So many years!" repeated Miss Deborah in bewilderment.  "What on
earth can Ferdinand mean?  Why, it's only five weeks yesterday since
he was here.  He must be crazy."

She resumed reading.

"I have often had it in mind to make you a little visit, but I have
been so engrossed by business that I have been unable to get away.  I
am a salesman for A. T. Stewart, whom you must have heard of, as he
is the largest retail dealer in the city.  I have been three years in
his employ, and have been promoted by degrees, till I now receive
quite a good salary, until--and that is the news I have to write
you--I have felt justifed in getting married.  My wedding is fixed
for next week, Thursday.  I should be very glad if you could attend,
though I suppose you would consider it a long journey.  But at any
rate I can assure you that I should be delighted to see you present
on the occasion, and so would Maria.  If you can't come, write to me,
at any rate, in memory of old times.  It is just possible that during
our bridal tour--we are to go to the White Mountains for a week--we
shall call on you.  Let me know if it will be convenient for you to
receive us for a day.

  "Your affectionate nephew,
    "FERDINAND B. KENSINGTON."


Miss Deborah read this letter like one dazed.  She had to read it a
second time before she could comprehend its purport.

"Ferdinand going to be married!  He never said a word about it when
he was here.  And he don't say a word about Californy.  Then again he
says he hasn't seen me for years.  Merciful man!  I see it now--the
other fellow was an impostor!" exclaimed Miss Deborah, jumping, to
her feet in excitement.  "What did he want to deceive an old woman
for?"

It flashed upon her at once.  He came after money, and he had
succeeded only too well.  He had carried away four hundred and fifty
dollars with him.  True, he had left a note, and security.  But
another terrible suspicion had entered the old lady's mind; the ring
might not be genuine.

"I must know at once," exclaimed the disturbed spinster.  "I'll go
over to Brandon, to the jeweller's, and inquire.  If it's paste,
then, Deborah Kensington, you're the biggest fool in Centreville."

Miss Deborah summoned Abner, her farm servant from the field, and
ordered him instantly to harness the horse, as she wanted to go to
Brandon.

"Do you want me to go with you?" asked Abner.

"To be sure, I can't drive so fur, and take care of the horse."

"It'll interrupt the work," objected Abner.

"Never mind about the work," said Deborah, impatiently.  "I must go
right off.  It's on very important business."

"Wouldn't it be best to go after dinner?"

"No, we'll get some dinner over there, at the tavern."

"What's got into the old woman?" thought Abner.  "It isn't like her
to spend money at a tavern for dinner, when she might as well dine at
home.  Interruptin' the work, too!  However, it's her business!"

Deborah was ready and waiting when the horse drove up the door.  She
got in, and they set out.  Abner tried to open a conversation, but he
found Miss Deborah strangely unsocial.  She appeared to take no
interest in the details of farm work of which he spoke.

"Something's on her mind, I guess," thought Abner; and, as we know,
he was right.

In her hand Deborah clutched the ring, of whose genuineness she had
come to entertain such painful doubts.  It might be genuine, she
tried to hope, even if it came from an impostor; but her hope was
small.  She felt a presentiment that it would prove as false as the
man from whom she received it.  As for the story of the manner in
which he became possessed of it, doubtless that was as false as the
rest.

"How blind I was!" groaned Deborah in secret.  "I saw he didn't look
like the family.  What a goose I was to believe that story about his
changin' the color of his hair!  I was an old fool, and that's all
about it."

"Drive to the jeweller's," said Miss Deborah, when they reached
Brandon.

In some surprise, Abner complied.

Deborah got out of the wagon hastily and entered the store.

"What can I do for you, Miss Kensington?" asked the jeweller, who
recognized the old lady.

"I want to show you a ring," said Aunt Deborah, abruptly.  "Tell me
what it's worth."

She produced the ring which the false Ferdinand had intrusted to her.

The jeweller scanned it closely.

"It's a good imitation of a diamond ring," he said.

"Imitation!" gasped Deborah.

"Yes; you didn't think it was genuine?"

"What's it worth?"

"The value of the gold.  That appears to be genuine.  It may be worth
three dollars."

"Three dollars!" ejaculated Deborah.  "He told me it cost six hundred
and fifty."

"Whoever told you that was trying to deceive you."

"You're sure about its being imitation, are you?"

"There can be no doubt about it."

"That's what I thought," muttered the old lady, her face pale and
rigid.  "Is there anything to pay?"

"Oh, no; I am glad to be of service to you."

"Good-afternoon, then," said Deborah, abruptly, and she left the
store.

"Drive home, Abner, as quick as you can," she said.

"I haven't had any dinner," Abner remarked, "You said you'd get some
at the tavern."

"Did I?  Well, drive over there.  I'm not hungry myself, but I'll pay
for some dinner for you."

Poor Aunt Deborah! it was not the loss alone that troubled her,
though she was fond of money; but it was humiliating to think that
she had fallen such an easy prey to a designing adventurer.  In her
present bitter mood, she would gladly have ridden fifty miles to see
the false Ferdinand hanged.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE PLOT AGAINST FLETCHER.

The intimacy between Harry and Oscar Vincent continued, and, as
during the former term, the latter volunteered to continue giving
French lessons to our hero.  These were now partly of a
conversational character, and, as Harry was thoroughly in earnest, it
was not long before he was able to speak quite creditably.

About the first of November, Fitzgerald Fletcher left the Prescott
Academy, and returned to his home in Boston.  It was not because he
had finished his education, but because he felt that he was not
appreciated by his fellow-students.  He had been ambitious to be
elected to an official position in the Clionian Society, but his
aspirations were not gratified.  He might have accepted this
disappointment, and borne it as well as he could, had it not been
aggravated by the elevation of Harry Walton to the presidency.  To be
only a common member, while a boy so far his social inferior was
President, was more than Fitzgerald could stand.  He was so incensed
that upon the announcement of the vote he immediately rose to a point
of order.

"Mr. President," he said warmly, "I must protest against this
election.  Walton is not a member of the Prescott Academy, and it is
unconstitutional to elect him President."

"Will the gentleman point out the constitutional clause which has
been violated by Walton's election?" said Oscar Vincent.

"Mr. President," said Fletcher, "this Society was founded by students
of the Prescott Academy; and the offices should be confined to the
members of the school."

Harry Walton rose and said: "Mr. President, my election has been a
great surprise to myself.  I had no idea that any one had thought of
me for the position.  I feel highly complimented by your kindness,
and deeply grateful for it; but there is something in what Mr.
Fletcher says.  You have kindly allowed me to share in the benefits
of the Society, and that satisfies me.  I think it will be well for
you to make another choice as President."

"I will put it to vote," said the presiding officer.  "Those who are
ready to accept Mr. Walton's resignation will signify it in the usual
way."

Fletcher raised his hand, but he was alone.

"Those who are opposed," said the President.

Every other hand except Harry's was now raised.

"Mr. Walton, your resignation is not accepted," said the presiding
officer.  "I call upon you to assume the duties of your new position."

Harry rose, and, modestly advanced to the chair.  "I have already
thanked you, gentlemen," he said, "for the honor you have conferred
upon me in selecting me as your presiding officer.  I have only to
add that I will discharge its duties to the best of my ability."

All applauded except Fletcher.  He sat with an unpleasant scowl upon
his face, and waited for the result of the balloting for
Vice-President and Secretary.  Had he been elected to either
position, the Clionian would probably have retained his illustrious
name upon its roll.  But as these honors were conferred upon other
members, he formed the heroic resolution no longer to remain a member.

"Mr. President," he said, when the last vote was announced, "I desire
to terminate my connection with this Society."

"I hope Mr. Fletcher will reconsider his determination," said Harry
from the chair.

"I would like to inquire the gentleman's reasons," said Tom Carver.

"I don't like the way in which the Society is managed," said
Fletcher.  "I predict that it will soon disband."

"I don't see any signs of it," said Oscar.  "If the gentleman is
really sincere, he should not desert the Clionian in the hour of
danger."

"I insist upon my resignation," said Fletcher.

"I move that it be accepted," said Tom Carver.

"Second the motion," said the boy who sat next him.

The resignation was unanimously accepted.  Fletcher ought to have
felt gratified at the prompt granting of his request, but he was not.
He had intended to strike dismay into the Society by his proposal to
withdraw, but there was no consternation visible.  Apparently they
were willing to let him go.

He rose from his seat mortified and wrathful.

"Gentlemen," he said, "you have complied with my request, and I am
deeply grateful.  I no longer consider it an honor to belong to the
Clionian.  I trust your new President may succeed as well in his new
office as he has in the capacity of a printer's devil."

Fletcher was unable to proceed, being interrupted by a storm of
hisses, in the midst of which he hurriedly made his exit.

"He wanted to be President himself--that's what's the matter," said
Tom Carver in a whisper to his neighbor.  "But he couldn't blame us
for not wanting to have him."

Other members of the Society came to the same conclusion, and it was
generally said that Fletcher had done himself no good by his
undignified resentment.  His parting taunt levelled at Harry was
regarded as mean and ungenerous, and only strengthened the sentiment
in favor of our hero who bore his honors modestly.  In fact Tom
Carver, who was fond of fun, conceived a project for mortifying
Fletcher, and readily obtained the co-operation of his classmates.

It must be premised that Fitz was vain of his reading and
declamation.  He had a secret suspicion that, if he should choose to
devote his talents to the stage, he would make a second Booth.  This
self-conceit of his made it the more easy to play off the following
joke upon him.

A fortnight later, the young ladies of the village proposed to hold a
Fair to raise funds for some public object.  At the head of the
committee of arrangements was a sister of the doctor's wife, named
Pauline Clinton.  This will explain the following letter which,
Fletcher received the succeeding day:--


"FITZGERALD FLETCHER, ESQ.--Dear Sir: Understanding that you are a
superior reader, we should be glad of your assistance in lending
_eclat_ to the Fair which we propose to hold on the evening of the
29th.  Will you be kind enough to occupy twenty minutes by reading
such selections as in your opinion will be of popular interest?  It
is desirable that you should let me know as soon as possible what
pieces you have selected, that they may be printed on the programme.

  "Yours respectfully,
    "PAULINE CLINTON,
      "(for the Committee)."


This note reached Fletcher at a time when he was still smarting from
his disappointment in obtaining promotion from the Clionian Society.
He read it with a flushed and triumphant face.  He never thought of
questioning its genuineness.  Was it not true that he was a superior
reader?  What more natural than that he should be invited to give
_eclat_ to the Fair by the exercise of his talents!  He felt it to be
a deserved compliment.  It was a greater honor to be solicited to
give a public reading than to be elected President of the Clionian
Society.

"They won't laugh at me now," thought Fletcher.

He immediately started for Oscar's room to make known his new honors.

"How are you, Fitz?" said Oscar, who was in the secret, and guessed
the errand on which he came.

"Very well, thank you, Oscar,"  answered Fletcher, in a stately
manner.

"Anything new with you?" asked Oscar, carelessly.

"Not much," said Fletcher.  "There's a note I just received.

"Whew!" exclaimed Oscar, in affected astonishment.  "Are you going to
accept?"

"I suppose I ought to oblige them," said Fletcher.  "It won't be much
trouble to me, you know."

"To be sure; it's in a good cause.  But how did they hear of your
reading?"

"Oh, there are no secrets in a small village like this," said
Fletcher.

"It's certainly a great compliment.  Has anybody else been invited to
read?"

"I think not," said Fletcher, proudly.  "They rely upon me."

"Couldn't you get a chance for me?  It would be quite an honor, and I
should like it for the sake of the family."

"I shouldn't feel at liberty to interfere with their arrangements,"
said Fletcher, who didn't wish to share the glory with any one.
"Besides, you don't read well enough."

"Well, I suppose I must give it up," said Oscar, in a tone of
resignation.  "By the way, what have you decided to read?"

"I haven't quite made up my mind," said Fletcher, in a tone of
importance.  "I have only just received the invitation, you know."

"Haven't you answered it yet?"

"No; but I shall as soon as I go home.  Good-night, Oscar."

"Good-night, Fitz."

"How mad Fitz will be when he finds he has been sold!" said Oscar to
himself.  "But he deserves it for treating Harry so meanly."




CHAPTER XXIV.

READING UNDER DIFFICULTIES.

On reaching home, Fletcher looked over his "Speaker," and selected
three poems which he thought he could read with best effect.  The
selection made, he sat down to his desk, and wrote a reply to the
invitation, as follows:--


"MISS PAULINE CLINTON: I hasten to acknowledge your polite invitation
to occupy twenty minutes in reading choice selections at your
approaching Fair.  I have paid much attention to reading, and hope to
be able to give pleasure to the large numbers who will doubtless
honor the occasion with their presence.  I have selected three
poems,--Poe's Raven, the Battle of Ivry, by Macaulay, and Marco
Bozarris, by Halleck.  I shall be much pleased if my humble efforts
add _eclat_ to the occasion.

  "Yours, very respectfully,
    "FITZGERALD FLETCHER."


"There," said Fletcher, reading his letter through with satisfaction.
"I think that will do.  It is high-toned and dignified, and shows
that I am highly cultured and refined.  I will copy it off, and mail
it."

Fletcher saw his letter deposited in the post-office, and returned to
his room.

"I ought to practise reading these poems, so as to do it up
handsomely," he said.  "I suppose I shall get a good notice in the
'Gazette.'  If I do, I will buy a dozen papers, and send to my
friends.  They will see that I am a person of consequence in
Centreville, even if I didn't get elected to any office in the high
and mighty Clionian Society."

I am sorry that I cannot reproduce the withering sarcasm which
Fletcher put into his tone in the last sentence.

When Demosthenes was practising oratory, he sought the sea-shore; but
Fitzgerald repaired instead to a piece of woods about half a mile
distant.  It was rather an unfortunate selection, as will appear.

It so happened that Tom Carver and Hiram Huntley were strolling about
the woods, when they espied Fletcher approaching with an open book in
his hand.

"Hiram," said Tom, "there's fun coming.  There's Fitz Fletcher with
his 'Speaker' in his hand.  He's going to practise reading in the
woods.  Let us hide, and hear the fun."

"I'm in for it," said Hiram, "but where will be the best place to
hide?"

"Here in this hollow tree.  He'll be very apt to halt here."

"All right!  Go ahead, I'll follow."

They quickly concealed themselves in the tree, unobserved by
Fletcher, whose eyes were on his book.

About ten feet from the tree he paused.

"I guess this'll be a good place," he said aloud.  "There's no one to
disturb me here.  Now, which shall I begin with?  I think I'll try
The Raven.  But first it may be well to practise an appropriate
little speech.  Something like this:"--

Fletcher made a low bow to the assembled trees, cleared his throat,
and commenced,--

"Ladies and Gentlemen: It gives me great pleasure to appear before
