later period of her story.)

On approaching the coast of Attica, Theseus, intent on Ariadne,
forgot the signal appointed by his father, and neglected to raise
the white sails, and the old king, thinking his son had perished,
put an end to his own life.  Theseus thus became king of Athens.

One of the most celebrated of the adventures of Theseus is his
expedition against the Amazons.  He assailed them before they had
recovered from the attack of Hercules, and carried off their
queen, Antiope.  The Amazons in their turn invaded the country of
Athens and penetrated into the city itself; and the final battle
in which Theseus overcame them was fought in the very midst of
the city.  This battle was one of the favorite subjects of the
ancient sculptors, and is commemorated in several works of art
that are still extant.

The friendship between Theseus and Pirithous was of a most
intimate nature, yet it originated in the midst of arms.
Pirithous had made an irruption into the plain of Marathon, and
carried off the herds of the king of Athens.  Theseus went to
repel the plunderers.  The moment Pirithous beheld him, he was
seized with admiration; he stretched out his hand as a token of
peace, and cried, "Be judge thyself,   what satisfaction dost
thou require?"  "Thy friendship," replied the Athenian, and they
swore inviolable fidelity.  Their deeds corresponded to their
professions, and they ever continued true brothers in arms.  Each
of them aspired to espouse a daughter of Jupiter.  Theseus fixed
his choice on Helen, then but a child, afterwards so celebrated
as the cause of the Trojan war, and with the aid of his friend he
carried her off.  Pirithous aspired to the wife of the monarch of
Erebus; and Theseus, though aware of the danger, accompanied the
ambitious lover in his descent to the underworld.  But Pluto
seized and set them on an enchanted rock at his palace gate,
where they remained till Hercules arrived and liberated Theseus,
leaving Pirithous to his fate.

After the death of Antiope, Theseus married Phaedra, daughter of
Minos, king of Crete.  Phaedra saw in Hippolytus, the son of
Theseus, a youth endowed with all the graces and virtues of his
father, and of an age corresponding to her own.  She loved him,
but he repulsed her advances, and her love was changed to hate.
She used her influence over her infatuated husband to cause him
to be jealous of his son, and he imprecated the vengeance of
Neptune upon him.  As Hippolytus was one day driving his chariot
along the shore, a sea-monster raised himself above the waters,
and frightened the horses so that they ran away and dashed the
chariot to pieces.  Hippolytus was killed, but by Diana's
assistance Aesculapius restored him to life.  Diana removed
Hippolytus from the power of his deluded father and false
stepmother, and placed him in Italy under the protection of the
nymph Egeria.

Theseus at length lost the favor of his people, and retired to
the court of Lycomedes, king of Scyros, who at first received him
kindly, but afterwards treacherously slew him.  In a later age
the Athenian general Cimon discovered the place where his remains
were laid, and caused them to be removed to Athens, where they
were deposited in a temple called the Theseum, erected in honor
of the hero.

The queen of the Amazons whom Theseus espoused is by some called
Hippolyta.  That is the name she bears in Shakespeare's Midsummer
Night's Dream,   the subject of which is the festivities
attending the nuptials of Theseus and Hippolyta.

Mrs. Hemans has a poem on the ancient Greek tradition that the
"Shade of Theseus" appeared strengthening his countrymen at the
battle of Marathon.

Mr. Lewis Morris has a beautiful poem on Helen, in the Epic of
Hades.  In these lines Helen describes how she was seized by
Theseus and his friend:

  ----"There came a night
  When I lay longing for my love, and knew
  Sudden the clang of hoofs, the broken doors,
  The clash of swords, the shouts, the groans, the stain
  Of red upon the marble, the fixed gaze
  Of dead and dying eyes,   that was the time
  When first I looked on death,   and when I woke
  From my deep swoon, I felt the night air cool
  Upon my brow, and the cold stars look down,
  As swift we galloped o'er the darkling plain
  And saw the chill sea-glimpses slowly wake,
  With arms unknown around me.  When the dawn
  Broke swift, we panted on the pathless steeps,
  And so by plain and mountain till we came
       to Athens, ----."

Theseus is a semi-historical personage.  It is recorded of him
that he united the several tribes by whom the territory of Attica
was then possessed into one state, of which Athens was the
capital.  In commemoration of this important event, he instituted
the festival of Panathenaea, in honor of Minerva, the patron
deity of Athens.  This festival differed from the other Grecian
games chiefly in two particulars.  It was peculiar to the
Athenians, and its chief feature was a solemn procession in which
the Peplus or sacred robe of Minerva was carried to the
Parthenon, and suspended before the statue of the goddess.  The
Peplus was covered with embroidery, worked by select virgins of
the noblest families in Athens.  The procession consisted of
persons of all ages and both sexes.  The old men carried olive-
branches in their hands, and the young men bore arms.  The young
women carried baskets on their heads, containing the sacred
utensils, cakes, and all things necessary for the sacrifices.
The procession formed the subject of the bas-reliefs by Phidias
which embellished the outside of the temple of the Parthenon.  A
considerable portion of these sculptures is now in the British
museum among those known as the "Elgin marbles."


OLYMPIC AND OTHER GAMES

We may mention here the other celebrated national games of the
Greeks.  The first and most distinguished were the Olympic,
founded, it was said , by Jupiter himself.  They were celebrated
at Olympia in Elis.  Vast numbers of spectators flocked to them
from every part of Greece, and from Asia, Africa, and Sicily.
They were repeated every fifth year in midsummer, and continued
five days.  They gave rise to the custom of reckoning time and
dating events by Olympiads.  The first Olympiad is generally
considered as corresponding with the year 776 B.C.  The Pythian
games were celebrated in the vicinity of Delphi, the Isthmian on
the Corinthian isthmus, the Nemean at Nemea, a city of Argolis.

The exercises in these games were of five sorts: running,
leaping, wrestling, throwing the quoit, and hurling the javelin,
or boxing.  Besides these exercises of bodily strength and
agility, there were contests in music, poetry, and eloquence.
Thus these games furnished poets, musicians, and authors the best
opportunities to present their productions to the public, and the
fame of the victors was diffused far and wide.


DAEDALUS

The labyrinth from which Theseus escaped by means of the clew of
Ariadne, was built by Daedalus, a most skilful artificer.  It was
an edifice with numberless winding passages and turnings opening
into one another, and seeming to have neither beginning nor end,
like the river Maender, which returns on itself, and flows now
onward, now backward, in its course to the sea.  Daedalus built
the labyrinth for King Minos, but afterwards lost the favor of
the king, and was shut up in a tower.  He contrived to make his
escape from his prison, but could not leave the island by sea, as
the king kept strict watch on all the vessels, and permitted none
to sail without being carefully searched.  "Minos may control the
land and sea,:" said Daedalus, "but not the regions of the air.
I will try that way."  So he set to work to fabricate wings for
himself and his young son Icarus.  He wrought feathers together
beginning with the smallest and adding larger, so as to form an
increasing surface.  The larger ones he secured with thread and
the smaller with wax, and gave the whole a gentle curvature like
the wings of a bird.  Icarus, the boy, stood and looked on,
sometimes running to gather up the feathers which the wind had
blown away, and then handling the wax and working it over with
his fingers, by his play impeding his father in his labors.  When
at last the work was done, the artist, waving his wings, found
himself buoyed upward and hung suspended, poising himself on the
beaten air.  He next equipped his son in the same manner, and
taught him how to fly, as a bird tempts her young ones from the
lofty nest into the air.  When all was prepared for flight, he
said, "Icarus, my son, I charge you to keep at a moderate height,
for if you fly too low the damp will clog your wings, and if too
high the heat will melt them.  Keep near me and you will be
safe."  While he gave him these instructions and fitted the wings
to his shoulders, the face of the father was wet with tears, and
his hands trembled.  He kissed the boy, not knowing that it was
for the last time.  Then rising on his wings he flew off,
encouraging him to follow, and looked back from his own flight to
see how his son managed his wings.  As they flew the ploughman
stopped his work to gaze, and the shepherd learned on his staff
and watched them, astonished at the sight, and thinking they were
gods who could thus cleave the air.

They passed Samos and Delos on the left and Lebynthos on the
right, when the boy, exulting in his career, began to leave the
guidance of his companion and soar upward as if to reach heaven.
The nearness of the blazing sun softened the wax which held the
feathers together, and they came off.  He fluttered with his
arms, but no feathers remained to hold the air.  While his mouth
uttered cries to his father, it was submerged in the blue waters
of the sea, which thenceforth was called by his name.  His father
cried, "Icarus, Icarus, where are you?" At last he saw the
feathers floating on the water, and bitterly lamenting his own
arts, he buried the body and called the land Icaria in memory of
his child.  Daedalus arrived safe in Sicily, where he built a
temple to Apollo, and hung up his wings, an offering to the god.

Daedalus was so proud of his achievements that he could not bear
the idea of a rival.  His sister had placed her son Perdix under
his charge to be taught the mechanical arts.  He was an apt
scholar and gave striking evidences of ingenuity.  Walking
on the seashore he picked up the spine of a fish.  Imitating it,
he took a piece of iron and notched it on the edge, and thus
invented the SAW.  He put two pieces of iron together, connecting
them at one end with a rivet, and sharpening the other ends, and
made a PAIR OF COMPASSES.  Daedalus was so envious of his
nephew's performances that he took an opportunity, when they were
together one day on the top of a high tower, to push him off.
But Minerva, who favors ingenuity, saw him falling, and arrested
his fate by changing him into a bird called after his name, the
Partridge.  This bird does not build his next in the trees, nor
take lofty flights, but nestles in the hedges, and mindful of his
fall, avoids high places.

The death of Icarus is told in the following lines by Darwin:

  "---- with melting wax and loosened strings
  Sunk hapless Icarus on unfaithful wings;
  Headlong he rushed through the affrighted air,
  With limbs distorted and dishevelled hair;
  His scattered plumage danced upon the wave,
  And sorrowing Nereids decked his watery grave;
  O'er his pale corse their pearly sea-flowers shed,
  And strewed with crimson moss his marble bed;
  Struck in their coral towers the passing bell,
  And wide in ocean tolled his echoing knell."


CASTOR AND POLLUX

Castor and Pollux were the offspring of Leda and the Swan, under
which disguise Jupiter had concealed himself.  Leda gave birth to
an egg, from which sprang the twins.  Helen, so famous afterwards
as the cause of the Trojan war, was their sister.

When Theseus and his friend Pirithous had carried off Helen from
Sparta, the youthful heroes Castor and Pollux, with their
followers, hasted to her rescue.  Theseus was absent from Attica,
and the brothers were successful in recovering their sister.

Castor was famous for taming and managing horses, and Pollux for
skill in boxing.  They were united by the warmest affection, and
inseparable in all their enterprises.  They accompanied the
Argonautic expedition.  During the voyage a storm arose, and
Orpheus prayed to the Samothracian gods, and played on his harp,
whereupon the storm ceased and stars appeared on the heads of the
brothers.  From this incident, Castor and Pollux came afterwards
to be considered the patron deities of seamen and voyagers (One
of the ships in which St. Paul sailed was named the Castor and
Pollux.  See Acts xxviii.II.), and the lambent flames, which in
certain sates of the atmosphere play round the sails and masts of
vessels, were called by their names.

After the Argonautic expedition, we find Castor and Pollux
engaged in a war with Idas and Lynceus.  Castor was slain, and
Pollux, inconsolable for the loss of his brother, besought
Jupiter to be permitted to give his own life as a ransom for him.
Jupiter so far consented as to allow the two brothers to enjoy
the boon of life alternately, passing one day under the earth and
the next in the heavenly abodes.  According to another form of
the story, Jupiter rewarded the attachment of the brothers by
placing them among the stars as Gemini, the Twins.

They received divine honors under the name of Dioscuri (sons of
Jove).  They were believed to have appeared occasionally in later
times, taking part with one side or the other, in hard-fought
fields, and were said on such occasions to be mounted on
magnificent white steeds.  Thus, in the early history of Rome,
they are said to have assisted the Romans at the battle of Lake
Regillus, and after the victory a temple was erected in their
honor on the spot where they appeared.

Macaulay, in his Lays of Ancient Rome, thus alludes to the
legend:

  "So like they were, no mortal
  Might one from other know;
  White as snow their armor was,
  Their steeds were white as snow.
  Never on earthly anvil
  Did such rare armor gleam,
  And never did such gallant steeds
  Drink of an earthly stream.
  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

  "Back comes the chief in triumph
  Who in the hour of fight
  Hath seen the great Twin Brethren
  In harness on his right.
  Safe comes the ship to haven
  Through billows and through gales,
  If once the great Twin Brethren
  Sit shining on the sails."

In the poem of Atalanta in Calydon Mr. Swinburne thus describes
the little Helen and Clytemnestra, the sisters of Castor and
Pollux:

  MELEAGER

  "Even such I saw their sisters, one swan white,
  The little Helen, and less fair than she,
  Fair Clytemnestra, grave as pasturing fawns,
  Who feed and fear the arrow; but at whiles,
  As one smitten with love or wrung with joy,
  She laughs and lightens with her eyes, and then
  Weeps; whereat Helen, having laughed, weeps too,
  And the other chides her, and she being chid speaks naught,
  But cheeks and lips and eyelids kisses her,
  Laughing; so fare they, as in their blameless bud,
  And full of unblown life, the blood of gods."

  ALTHEA

  "Sweet days before them, and good loves and lords,
  And tender and temperate honors of the hearth;
  Peace, and a perfect life and blameless bed"



Chapter XIV

Bacchus.  Ariadne

Bacchus was the son of Jupiter and Semele.  Juno, to gratify her
resentment against Semele, contrived a plan for her destruction.
Assuming the form of Beroe, her aged nurse, she insinuated doubts
whether it was indeed Jove himself who came as a lover.  Heaving
a sigh, she said, "I hope it will turn out so, but I can't help
being afraid.  People are not always what they pretend to be.  If
he is indeed Jove, make him give some proof of it.  Ask him to
come arrayed in all his splendors, such as he wears in heaven.
That will put the matter beyond a doubt."  Semele was persuaded
to try the experiment.  She asks a favor, without naming what it
is.  Jove gives his promise and confirms it with the irrevocable
oath, attesting the river Styx, terrible to the gods themselves.
Then she made know her request.  The god would have stopped her
as she spake, but she was too quick for him.  The words escaped,
and he could neither unsay his promise nor her request.  In deep
distress he left her and returned to the upper regions.  There he
clothed himself in his splendors, not putting on all his terrors,
as when he overthrew the giants, but what is known among the gods
as his lesser panoply.  Arrayed in this he entered the chamber of
Semele.  Her mortal frame could not endure the splendors of the
immortal radiance.  She was consumed to ashes.

Jove took the infant Bacchus and gave him in charge to the
Nysaean nymphs, who nourished his infancy and childhood, and for
their care were rewarded by Jupiter by being placed, as the
Hyades, among the stars.  When Bacchus grew up he discovered the
culture of the vine and the mode of extracting its precious
juice; but Juno struck him with madness, and drove him forth a
wanderer through various parts of the earth.  In Phrygia the
goddess Rhea cured him and taught him her religious rites, and he
set out on a progress through Asia teaching the people the
cultivation of the vine.  The most famous part of his wanderings
is his expedition to India, which is said to have lasted several
years.  Returning in triumph he undertook to introduce his
worship into Greece, but was opposed by some princes who dreaded
its introduction on account of the disorders and madness it
brought with it.

As he approached his native city Thebes, Pentheus the king, who
had no respect for the new worship, forbade its rites to be
performed.  But when it was known that Bacchus was advancing, men
and women, but chiefly the latter, young and old poured forth to
meet him and to join his triumphal march.

Mr. Longfellow in his Drinking Song thus describes the march of
Bacchus:

  "Fauns with youthful Bacchus follow;
  Ivy crowns that brow, supernal
  As the forehead of Apollo,
  And possessing youth eternal.

  "Round about him fair Bacchantes,
  Bearing cymbals, flutes and thyrses,
  Wild from Naxian groves or Zante's
  Vineyards, sing delirious verses."

It was in vain Pentheus remonstrated, commanded, and threatened.
"Go," said he to his attendants, "seize this vagabond leader of
the rout and bring him to me.  I will soon make him confess his
false claim of heavenly parentage and renounce his counterfeit
worship."  It was in vain his nearest friends and wisest
counselors remonstrated and begged him not to oppose the god.
Their remonstrances only made him more violent.

But now the attendants returned whom he had despatched to seize
Bacchus.  They had been driven away by the Bacchanals, but had
succeeded in taking one of them prisoner, whom, with his hands
tied behind him, they brought before the king.  Pentheus
beholding him, with wrathful countenance said, "Fellow!  You
shall speedily be put to death, that your fate may be a warning
to others; but though I grudge the delay of your punishment,
speak, tell us who you are, and what are these new rites you
presume to celebrate."

The prisoner unterrified responded, "My name is Acetes; my
country is Maeonia; my parents were poor people, who had no
fields or flocks to leave me, but they left me their fishing rods
and nets and their fisherman's trade.  This I followed for some
time, till growing weary of remaining in one place, I learned the
pilot's art and how to guide my course by the stars.  It happened
as I was sailing for Delos, we touched at the island of Dia and
went ashore.  Next morning I sent the men for fresh water and
myself mounted the hill to observe the wind; when my men returned
bringing with them a prize, as they thought, a boy of delicate
appearance, whom they had found asleep.  They judged he was a
noble youth, perhaps a king's son, and they might get a liberal
ransom for him.  I observed his dress, his walk, his face.  There
was something in them which I felt sure was more than mortal.  I
said to my men, 'What god there is concealed in that form I know
not, but some one there certainly is.  Pardon us, gentle deity,
for the violence we have done you, and give success to our
undertakings.'  Dictys, one of my best hands for climbing the
mast and coming down by the ropes, and Melanthus, my steersman,
and Epopeus the leader of the sailors' cry, one and all
exclaimed, 'Spare your prayers for us.'  So blind is the lust of
gain!  When they proceeded to put him on board I resisted them.
'This ship shall not be profaned by such impiety,' said I. 'I
have a greater share in her than any of you.'  But Lycabas, a
turbulent fellow, seized me by the throat and attempted to throw
me overboard, and I scarcely saved myself by clinging to the
ropes.  The rest approved the deed.

"Then Bacchus, for it was indeed he, as if shaking off his
drowsiness, exclaimed, 'What are you doing with me?  What is this
fighting about?  Who brought me here?  Where are you going to
carry me?'  One of them replied, 'fear nothing; tell us where you
wish to go and we will take you there.'  "Naxos is my home,' said
Bacchus; 'take me there and you shall be well rewarded.'  They
promised so to do, and told me to pilot the ship to Naxos.  Naxos
lay to the right, and I was trimming the sails to carry us there,
when some by signs and others by whispers signified to me their
will that I should sail in the opposite direction, and take the
boy to Egypt to sell him for a slave.  I was confounded and said,
'Let some one else pilot the ship;' withdrawing myself from any
further agency in their wickedness.  They cursed me, and one of
them exclaiming, 'Don't flatter yourself that we depend on you
for our safety,' took my place as pilot, and bore away from
Naxos.

"Then the god, pretending that he had just become aware of their
treachery, looked out over the sea and said in a voice of
weeping, 'Sailors, these are not the shores you promised to take
me to; yonder island is not my home.  What have I done that you
should treat me so?  It is small glory you will gain by cheating
a poor boy.'  I wept to hear him, but the crew laughed at both of
us, and sped the vessel fast over the sea.  All at once   strange
as it may seem, it is true   the vessel stopped, in the mid sea,
as fast as if it was fixed on the ground.  The men, astonished,
pulled at their oars, and spread more sail, trying to make
progress by the aid of both, but all in vain.  Ivy twined round
the oars and hindered their motion, and clung with its heavy
clusters of berries to the sails.  A vine, laden with grapes, ran
up the mast, and along the sides of the vessel.  The sound of
flutes was heard and the odor of fragrant wine spread all around.
The god himself had a chaplet of vine leaves, and bore in his
hand a spear wreathed with ivy.  Tigers crouched at his feet, and
lynxes and spotted panthers played around him.  The sailors were
seized with terror or madness; some leaped overboard; others,
preparing to do the same, beheld their companions in the water
undergoing a change, their bodies becoming flattened and ending
in a crooked tail.  One exclaimed, 'What miracle is this!' and as
he spoke his mouth widened, his nostrils expanded, and scales
covered all his body.  Another endeavoring to pull the oar felt
his hands shrink up, and presently to be no longer hands but
fins; another trying to raise his arms to a rope found he had no
arms, and curving his mutilated body, jumped into the sea.  What
had been his legs became the two ends of a crescent-shaped tail.
The whole crew became dolphins and swam about the ship, now upon
the surface, now under it, scattering the spray, and spouting the
water from their broad nostrils.  Of twenty men I alone was left.
The god cheered me, as I trembled with fear.  'Fear not,' said
he; 'steer toward Naxos.'  I obeyed, and when we arrived there, I
kindled the altars and celebrated the sacred rites of Bacchus."

Pentheus here exclaimed, "We have wasted time enough on this
silly story.  Take him away and have him executed without delay."
Acetes was led away by the attendants and shut up fast in prison;
but while they were getting ready the instruments of execution,
the prison doors opened of their own accord and the chains fell
from his limbs, and when the guards looked for him he was no
where to be found.

Pentheus would take no warning, but instead of sending others,
determined to go himself to the scene of the solemnities.  The
mountain Cithaeron was all alive with worshippers, and the cries
of the Bacchanals resounded on every side.  The noise roused the
anger of Pentheus as the sound of a trumpet does the fire of a
war-horse.  He penetrated the wood and reached an open space
where the wildest scene of the orgies met his eyes.  At the same
moment the women saw him; and first among them his own mother,
Agave, blinded by the god, cried out, "See there the wild boar,
the hugest monster that prowls in these woods!  Come on, sisters!
I will be the first to strike the wild boar."  The whole band
rushed upon him, and while he now talks less arrogantly, now
excuses himself, and now confesses his crime and implores pardon,
they press upon and wound him.  In vain he cries to his aunts to
protect him from his mother.  Autonoe seized one arm, Ino the
other, and between them he was torn to pieces, while his mother
shouted, "Victory!  Victory!  We have done it; the glory is
ours!"

So the worship of Bacchus was established in Greece.

There is an allusion to the story of Bacchus and the mariners in
Milton's Comus, at line 46.  The story of Circe will be found in
Chapter XXII.

  "Bacchus that first from out the purple grape
  Crushed the sweet poison of misused wine,
  After the Tuscan mariners transformed,
  Coasting the Tyrrhene shore as the winds listed
  On Circe's island fell; (who knows not Circe,
  The daughter of the Sun?  Whose charmed cup
  Whoever tasted lost his upright shape,
  And downward fell into a grovelling swine.)"


ARIADNE

We have seen in the story of Theseus how Ariadne, the daughter of
King Minos, after helping Theseus to escape from the labyrinth,
was carried by him to the island of Naxos and was left there
asleep, while Theseus pursued his way home without her.  Ariadne,
on waking and finding herself deserted, abandoned herself to
grief.  But Venus took pity on her, and consoled her with the
promise that she should have an immortal lover, instead of the
mortal one she had lost.

The island where Ariadne was left was the favorite island of
Bacchus, the same that he wished the Tyrrhenian mariners to carry
him to, when they so treacherously attempted to make prize of
him.  As Ariadne sat lamenting her fate, Bacchus found her,
consoled her and made her his wife as Minerva had prophesied to
Theseus.  As a marriage present he gave her a golden crown,
enriched with gems, and when she died, he took her crown and
threw it up into the sky.  As it mounted the gems grew brighter
and were turned into stars, and preserving its form Ariadne's
crown remains fixed in the heavens as a constellation, between
the kneeling Hercules and the man who holds the serpent.

Spenser alludes to Ariadne's crown, though he has made some
mistakes in his mythology.  It was at the wedding of Pirithous,
and not Theseus, that the Centaurs and Lapithae quarrelled.

  "Look how the crown which Ariadne wore
  Upon her ivory forehead that same day
  That Theseus her unto his bridal bore,
  When the bold Centaurs made that bloody fray
  With the fierce Lapiths which did them dismay;
  Being now placed in the firmament,
  Through the bright heaven doth her beams display,
  And is unto the stars an ornament,
  Which round about her move in order excellent."



Chapter XV

The Rural Deities.  Erisichthon.  Rhoecus.  The Water Deities.
Camenae.  Winds.

Pan, the god of woods and fields, of flocks and shepherds, dwelt
