relationships, and upon the basis of such relationships are enabled to
classify them or unite them into groups so as to indicate the degree
to which they are related. This constitutes the division of Botany
usually known as Classification or "Systematic Botany."

Finally, we may study the functions or workings of an organism: how it
feeds, breathes, moves, reproduces. This is "Physiology," and like
classification must be preceded by a knowledge of the structures
concerned.

For the study of the gross anatomy of plants the following articles
will be found of great assistance: 1. a sharp knife, and for more
delicate tissues, a razor; 2. a pair of small, fine-pointed scissors;
3. a pair of mounted needles (these can be made by forcing ordinary
sewing needles into handles of pine or other soft wood); 4. a hand
lens; 5. drawing-paper and pencil, and a note book.

For the study of the lower plants, as well as the histology of the
higher ones, a compound microscope is indispensable. Instruments with
lenses magnifying from about 20 to 500 diameters can be had at a cost
varying from about $20 to $30, and are sufficient for any ordinary
investigations.

Objects to be studied with the compound microscope are usually
examined by transmitted light, and must be transparent enough to allow
the light to pass through. The objects are placed upon small glass
slips (slides), manufactured for the purpose, and covered with
extremely thin plates of glass, also specially made. If the body to be
examined is a large one, thin slices or sections must be made. This
for most purposes may be done with an ordinary razor. Most plant
tissues are best examined ordinarily in water, though of course
specimens so mounted cannot be preserved for any length of time.[1]

[1] For the mounting of permanent preparations, see Chapter XIX.

In addition to the implements used in studying the gross anatomy, the
following will be found useful in histological work: 1. a small
camel's-hair brush for picking up small sections and putting water in
the slides; 2. small forceps for handling delicate objects; 3.
blotting paper for removing superfluous water from the slides and
drawing fluids under the cover glass; 4. pieces of elder or sunflower
pith, for holding small objects while making sections.

In addition to these implements, a few reagents may be recommended for
the simpler histological work. The most important of these are
alcohol, glycerine, potash (a strong solution of potassium hydrate in
water), iodine (either a little of the commercial tincture of iodine
in water, or, better, a solution of iodine in iodide of potassium),
acetic acid, and some staining fluid. (An aqueous or alcoholic
solution of gentian violet or methyl violet is one of the best.)

A careful record should be kept by the student of all work done, both
by means of written notes and drawings. For most purposes pencil
drawings are most convenient, and these should be made with a
moderately soft pencil on unruled paper. If it is desired to make the
drawings with ink, a careful outline should first be made with a hard
pencil and this inked over with India-ink or black drawing ink. Ink
drawings are best made upon light bristol board with a hard,
smooth-finished surface.

When obtainable, the student will do best to work with freshly
gathered specimens; but as these are not always to be had when wanted,
a few words about gathering and preserving material may be of service.

Most of the lower green plants (_algae_) may be kept for a long time in
glass jars or other vessels, provided care is taken to remove all
dead specimens at first and to renew the water from time to time. They
usually thrive best in a north window where they get little or no
direct sunshine, and it is well to avoid keeping them too warm.

Numbers of the most valuable fungi--_i.e._ the lower plants that are
not green--grow spontaneously on many organic substances that are kept
warm and moist. Fresh bread kept moist and covered with a glass will
in a short time produce a varied crop of moulds, and fresh horse
manure kept in the same way serves to support a still greater number
of fungi.

Mosses, ferns, etc., can be raised with a little care, and of course
very many flowering plants are readily grown in pots.

Most of the smaller parasitic fungi (rusts, mildews, etc.) may be kept
dry for any length of time, and on moistening with a weak solution of
caustic potash will serve nearly as well as freshly gathered specimens
for most purposes.

When it is desired to preserve as perfectly as possible the more
delicate plant structures for future study, strong alcohol is the best
and most convenient preserving agent. Except for loss of color it
preserves nearly all plant tissues perfectly.




CHAPTER II.

THE CELL.


If we make a thin slice across the stem of a rapidly growing
plant,--_e.g._ geranium, begonia, celery,--mount it in water, and
examine it microscopically, it will be found to be made up of numerous
cavities or chambers separated by delicate partitions. Often these
cavities are of sufficient size to be visible to the naked eye, and
examined with a hand lens the section appears like a piece of fine
lace, each mesh being one of the chambers visible when more strongly
magnified. These chambers are known as "cells," and of them the whole
plant is built up.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--A single cell from a hair on the stamen of the
common spiderwort (_Tradescantia_), x 150. _pr._ protoplasm; _w_, cell
wall; _n_, nucleus.]

  In order to study the structure of the cell more exactly we will
  select such as may be examined without cutting them. A good example
  is furnished by the common spiderwort (Fig. 1). Attached to the base
  of the stamens (Fig. 85, _B_) are delicate hairs composed of chains
  of cells, which may be examined alive by carefully removing a stamen
  and placing it in a drop of water under a cover glass. Each cell
  (Fig. 1) is an oblong sac, with a delicate colorless wall which
  chemical tests show to be composed of cellulose, a substance closely
  resembling starch. Within this sac, and forming a lining to it, is
  a thin layer of colorless matter containing many fine granules.
  Bands and threads of the same substance traverse the cavity of the
  cell, which is filled with a deep purple homogeneous fluid. This
  fluid, which in most cells is colorless, is called the cell sap, and
  is composed mainly of water. Imbedded in the granular lining of the
  sac is a roundish body (_n_), which itself has a definite membrane,
  and usually shows one or more roundish bodies within, besides an
  indistinctly granular appearance. This body is called the nucleus of
  the cell, and the small one within it, the nucleolus.

  The membrane surrounding the cell is known as the cell wall, and in
  young plant cells is always composed of cellulose.

  The granular substance lining the cell wall (Fig. 1, _pr._) is
  called "protoplasm," and with the nucleus constitutes the living
  part of the cell. If sufficiently magnified, the granules within the
  protoplasm will be seen to be in active streaming motion. This
  movement, which is very evident here, is not often so conspicuous,
  but still may often be detected without difficulty.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--An _Amoeba_. A cell without a cell wall. _n_,
nucleus; _v_, vacuoles, x 300.]

The cell may be regarded as the unit of organic structure, and of
cells are built up all of the complicated structures of which the
bodies of the highest plants and animals are composed. We shall find
that the cells may become very much modified for various purposes, but
at first they are almost identical in structure, and essentially the
same as the one we have just considered.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Hairs from the leaf stalk of a wild geranium.
_A_, single-celled hair. _B_ and _C_, hairs consisting of a row of
cells. The terminal rounded cell secretes a peculiar scented oil that
gives the plant its characteristic odor. _B_, x 50; _C_, x 150.]

Very many of the lower forms of life consist of but a single cell
which may occasionally be destitute of a cell wall. Such a form is
shown in Figure 2. Here we have a mass of protoplasm with a nucleus
(_n_) and cavities (vacuoles, _v_) filled with cell sap, but no cell
wall. The protoplasm is in constant movement, and by extensions of a
portion of the mass and contraction of other parts, the whole creeps
slowly along. Other naked cells (Fig. 12, _B_; Fig. 16, _C_) are
provided with delicate thread-like processes of protoplasm called
"cilia" (sing. _cilium_), which are in active vibration, and propel
the cell through the water.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--_A_, cross section. _B_, longitudinal section
of the leaf stalk of wild geranium, showing its cellular structure.
_Ep._ epidermis. _h_, a hair, x 50. _C_, a cell from the prothallium
(young plant) of a fern, x _150_. The contents of the cell contracted
by the action of a solution of sugar.]

  On placing a cell into a fluid denser than the cell sap (_e.g._ a
  ten-per-cent solution of sugar in water), a portion of the water
  will be extracted from the cell, and we shall then see the
  protoplasm receding from the wall (Fig. 4, _C_), showing that it is
  normally in a state of tension due to pressure from within of the
  cell sap. The cell wall shows the same thing though in a less
  degree, owing to its being much more rigid than the protoplasmic
  lining. It is owing to the partial collapsing of the cells,
  consequent on loss of water, that plants wither when the supply of
  water is cut off.

As cells grow, new ones are formed in various ways. If the new cells
remain together, cell aggregates, called tissues, are produced, and
of these tissues are built up the various organs of the higher plants.
The simplest tissues are rows of cells, such as form the hairs
covering the surface of the organs of many flowering plants (Fig. 3),
and are due to a division of the cells in a single direction. If the
divisions take place in three planes, masses of cells, such as make up
the stems, etc., of the higher plants, result (Fig. 4, _A_, _B_).




CHAPTER III.

CLASSIFICATION OF PLANTS.--PROTOPHYTES.


For the sake of convenience it is desirable to collect into groups
such plants as are evidently related; but as our knowledge of many
forms is still very imperfect, any classification we may adopt must be
to a great extent only provisional, and subject to change at any time,
as new forms are discovered or others become better understood.

The following general divisions are usually accepted: I. Sub-kingdom
(or Branch); II. Class; III. Order; IV. Family; V. Genus; VI. Species.

To illustrate: The white pine belongs to the highest great division
(sub-kingdom) of the plant kingdom. The plants of this division all
produce seeds, and hence are called "spermaphytes" ("seed plants").
They may be divided into two groups (classes), distinguished by
certain peculiarities in the flowers and seeds. These are named
respectively "gymnosperms" and "angiosperms," and to the first our
plant belongs. The gymnosperms may be further divided into several
subordinate groups (orders), one of which, the conifers, or
cone-bearing evergreens, includes our plant. This order includes
several families, among them the fir family (_Abietineae_), including
the pines and firs. Of the sub-divisions (_genera_, sing. _genus_) of
the fir family, one of the most familiar is the genus _Pinus_, which
embraces all the true pines. Comparing different kinds of pines, we
find that they differ in the form of the cones, arrangement of the
leaves, and other minor particulars. The form we have selected differs
from all other native forms in its cones, and also in having the
leaves in fives, instead of twos or threes, as in most other kinds.
Therefore to distinguish the white pine from all other pines, it is
given a "specific" name, _strobus_.

The following table will show more plainly what is meant:


                         Sub-kingdom,
                        _Spermaphyta_.
         /--------------------^---------------------\
          Includes all spermaphytes, or seed plants.

                            Class,
                        _Gymnospermae_.
                 /------------^------------\
                   All naked-seeded plants.

                            Order,
                         _Coniferae_.
               /--------------^--------------\
                 All cone-bearing evergreens.

                           Family,
                         _Abietineae_.
                     /--------^--------\
                      Firs, Pines, etc.

                            Genus,
                           _Pinus_.
                          /---^---\
                            Pines.

                           Species,
                          _Strobus_.
                        /-----^-----\
                         White Pine.


SUB-KINGDOM I.

PROTOPHYTES.

The name Protophytes (_Protophyta_) has been applied to a large number
of simple plants, which differ a good deal among themselves. Some of
them differ strikingly from the higher plants, and resemble so
remarkably certain low forms of animal life as to be quite
indistinguishable from them, at least in certain stages. Indeed, there
are certain forms that are quite as much animal as vegetable in their
attributes, and must be regarded as connecting the two kingdoms. Such
forms are the slime moulds (Fig. 5), _Euglena_ (Fig. 9), _Volvox_
(Fig. 10), and others.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--_A_, a portion of a slime mould growing on a
bit of rotten wood, x 3. _B_, outline of a part of the same, x 25.
_C_, a small portion showing the densely granular character of the
protoplasm, x 150. _D_, a group of spore cases of a slime mould
(_Trichia_), of about the natural size. _E_, two spore cases, x 5. The
one at the right has begun to open. _F_, a thread (capillitium) and
spores of _Trichia_, x 50. _G_, spores. _H_, end of the thread, x 300.
_I_, zooespores of _Trichia_, x 300. i, ciliated form; ii, amoeboid
forms. _n_, nucleus. _v_, contractile vacuole. _J_, _K_, sporangia of
two common slime moulds. _J_, _Stemonitis_, x 2. _K_, _Arcyria_, x 4.]

Other protophytes, while evidently enough of vegetable nature, are
nevertheless very different in some respects from the higher plants.

The protophytes may be divided into three classes: I. The slime moulds
(_Myxomycetes_); II. The Schizophytes; III. The green monads
(_Volvocineae_).


CLASS I.--THE SLIME MOULDS.

These curious organisms are among the most puzzling forms with which
the botanist has to do, as they are so much like some of the lowest
forms of animal life as to be scarcely distinguishable from them, and
indeed they are sometimes regarded as animals rather than plants. At
certain stages they consist of naked masses of protoplasm of very
considerable size, not infrequently several centimetres in diameter.
These are met with on decaying logs in damp woods, on rotting leaves,
and other decaying vegetable matter. The commonest ones are bright
yellow or whitish, and form soft, slimy coverings over the substratum
(Fig. 5, _A_), penetrating into its crevices and showing sensitiveness
toward light. The plasmodium, as the mass of protoplasm is called, may
be made to creep upon a slide in the following way: A tumbler is
filled with water and placed in a saucer filled with sand. A strip of
blotting paper about the width of the slide is now placed with one end
in the water, the other hanging over the edge of the glass and against
one side of a slide, which is thus held upright, but must not be
allowed to touch the side of the tumbler. The strip of blotting paper
sucks up the water, which flows slowly down the surface of the slide
in contact with the blotting paper. If now a bit of the substance upon
which the plasmodium is growing is placed against the bottom of the
slide on the side where the stream of water is, the protoplasm will
creep up against the current of water and spread over the slide,
forming delicate threads in which most active streaming movements of
the central granular protoplasm may be seen under the microscope, and
the ends of the branches may be seen to push forward much as we saw in
the amoeba. In order that the experiment may be successful, the whole
apparatus should be carefully protected from the light, and allowed to
stand for several hours. This power of movement, as well as the power
to take in solid food, are eminently animal characteristics, though
the former is common to many plants as well.

After a longer or shorter time the mass of protoplasm contracts and
gathers into little heaps, each of which develops into a structure
that has no resemblance to any animal, but would be at once placed
with plants. In one common form (_Trichia_) these are round or
pear-shaped bodies of a yellow color, and about as big as a pin head
(Fig. 5, _D_), occurring in groups on rotten logs in damp woods.
Others are stalked (_Arcyria_, _Stemonitis_) (Fig. 5, _J_, _K_), and
of various colors,--red, brown, etc. The outer part of the structure
is a more or less firm wall, which breaks when ripe, discharging a
powdery mass, mixed in most forms with very fine fibres.

  When strongly magnified the fine dust is found to be made up of
  innumerable small cells with thick walls, marked with ridges or
  processes which differ much in different species. The fibres also
  differ much in different genera. Sometimes they are simple,
  hair-like threads; in others they are hollow tubes with spiral
  thickenings, often very regularly placed, running around their
  walls.

  The spores may sometimes be made to germinate by placing them in a
  drop of water, and allowing them to remain in a warm place for about
  twenty-four hours. If the experiment has been successful, at the end
  of this time the spore membrane will have burst, and the contents
  escaped in the form of a naked mass of protoplasm (Zooespore) with a
  nucleus, and often showing a vacuole (Fig. 5, _v_), that
  alternately becomes much distended, and then disappears entirely. On
  first escaping it is usually provided with a long, whip-like
  filament of protoplasm, which is in active movement, and by means of
  which the cell swims actively through the water (Fig. 5, _I_ i).
  Sometimes such a cell will be seen to divide into two, the process
  taking but a short time, so that the numbers of these cells under
  favorable conditions may become very large. After a time the lash is
  withdrawn, and the cell assumes much the form of a small amoeba (_I_
  ii).

The succeeding stages are difficult to follow. After repeatedly
dividing, a large number of these amoeba-like cells run together,
coalescing when they come in contact, and forming a mass of protoplasm
that grows, and finally assumes the form from which it started.

  Of the common forms of slime moulds the species of _Trichia_ (Figs.
  _D_, _I_) and _Physarum_ are, perhaps, the best for studying the
  germination, as the spores are larger than in most other forms, and
  germinate more readily. The experiment is apt to be most successful
