The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astounding Stories of Super-Science April
1930, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Astounding Stories of Super-Science April 1930

Author: Various

Editor: Harry Bates

Release Date: July 12, 2009 [EBook #29390]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTOUNDING STORIES, APRIL 1930 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Meredith Bach, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







 20c

 ASTOUNDING STORIES OF SUPER-SCIENCE

 _On Sale the First Thursday of Each Month_

  W. M. CLAYTON, Publisher
  HARRY BATES, Editor
  DOUGLAS M. DOLD, Consulting Editor


The Clayton Standard on a Magazine Guarantees:

  _That_ the stories therein are clean, interesting, vivid; by leading
  writers of the day and purchased under conditions approved by the
  Authors' League of America;

  _That_ such magazines are manufactured in Union shops by American
  workmen;

  _That_ each newsdealer and agent is insured a fair profit;

  _That_ an intelligent censorship guards their advertising pages.


_The other Clayton magazines are:_

ACE-HIGH MAGAZINE, RANCH ROMANCES, COWBOY STORIES, CLUES, FIVE-NOVELS
MONTHLY, WIDE WORLD ADVENTURES, ALL STAR DETECTIVE STORIES, FLYERS,
RANGELAND LOVE STORY MAGAZINE, SKY-HIGH LIBRARY MAGAZINE, WESTERN
ADVENTURES, MISS 1930, _and_ FOREST AND STREAM

_More Than Two Million Copies Required to Supply the Monthly Demand for
Clayton Magazines._




 VOL. II, No. 1                 CONTENTS                        APRIL, 1930


 COVER DESIGN                              H. W. WESSOLOWSKI

 _Painted in Water-colors from a Scene in "Monsters of Moyen."_


 THE MAN WHO WAS DEAD                      THOMAS H. KNIGHT               9

 _As Jerry's Eyes Fell on the Creature's Head, He Shuddered--for the
 Face Was Nothing but Bone, with Dull-brown Skin Stretched Taut over It.
 A Skeleton That Was Alive!_


 MONSTERS OF MOYEN                         ARTHUR J. BURKS               18

 _"The Western World Shall be Next!" Was the Dread Ultimatum of the
 Half-monster, Half-god Moyen._


 VAMPIRES OF VENUS                         ANTHONY PELCHER               47

 _Leslie Larner, an Entomologist Borrowed from the Earth, Pits Himself
 Against the Night-flying Vampires That Are Ravaging the Inhabitants
 of Venus._


 BRIGANDS OF THE MOON                      RAY CUMMINGS                  60

 _Out of Awful Space Tumbled the Space-ship Planetara Towards the
 Moon, Her Officers Dead, With Bandits at Her Helm--and the Controls
 Out of Order!_


 THE SOUL SNATCHER                         TOM CURRY                    101

 _From Twenty Miles Away Stabbed the "Atom-filtering" Rays to Allen
 Baker in His Cell in the Death House._


 THE RAY OF MADNESS                        CAPTAIN S. P. MEEK           112

 _Dr. Bird Uncovers a Dastardly Plot, Amazing in its Mechanical
 Ingenuity, Behind the Apparently Trivial Eye Trouble of the
 President._


 THE READERS' CORNER                       ALL OF US                    127

 _A Meeting Place for Readers of Astounding Stories._


Single Copies, 20 Cents (In Canada, 25 Cents) Yearly Subscription, $2.00

Issued monthly by Publishers' Fiscal Corporation, 80 Lafayette St., New
York, N. Y. W. M. Clayton, President; Nathan Goldmann, Secretary.
Application for entry as second-class mail pending at the Post Office at
New York, under Act of March 3, 1879. Title registered as a Trade Mark
in the U. S. Patent Office. Member Newsstand Group--Men's List. For
advertising rates address E. R. Crowe & Co., Inc., 25 Vanderbilt Ave.,
New York; or 225 North Michigan Ave., Chicago.




The Man Who Was Dead

_By Thomas H. Knight_

[Illustration: "_I was dead._"]

  As Jerry's eyes fell on the creature's head, he shuddered--for the
  face was nothing but bone, with dull-brown skin stretched taut over
  it. A skeleton that was alive!


It was a wicked night, the night I met the man who had died. A bitter,
heart-numbing night of weird, shrieking wind and flying snow. A few
black hours I will never forget.

"Well, Jerry, lad!" my mother said to me as I pushed back from the table
and started for my sheepskin coat and the lantern in the corner of the
room. "Surely you're not going out a night like this? Goodness gracious,
Jerry, it's not fit!"

"Can't help it, Mother," I replied. "Got to go. You've never seen me
miss a Saturday night yet, have you now?"

"No. But then I've never seen a night like this for years either. Jerry,
I'm really afraid. You may freeze before you even get as far as--"

"Ah, come now, Mother," I argued. "They'd guy me to death if I didn't
sit in with the gang to-night. They'd chaff me because it was too cold
for me to get out. But I'm no pampered sissy, you know, and I want to
see--"

"Yes," she retorted bitingly, "I know. You want to go and bask in that
elegant company. Our stove's just as good as the one down at that dirty
old store," continued my persistent and anxious parent, "and it's
certainly not very flattering to think that you leave us on a night like
this to--Who'll be there, anyway?"

"Oh, the usual five or six I suppose," I answered as I adjusted the wick
of my lantern, hearing as I did the snarl and cut of the wind through
the evergreens in the yard.

"That black-whiskered sphinx, Hammersly, will he be there?"

"Yes, he'll be there, I'm pretty sure."

"Hm-m!" she exclaimed, her expression now carrying all the contempt for
my judgment and taste she intended it should. "Button your coat up good
around your neck, then, if you must go to see your precious Hammersly
and the rest of them. Have you ever heard that man say anything yet?
Does he speak at all, Jerry?" Then her gentle mind, not at all
accustomed to hard thoughts or contemptuous remarks, quickly changed.
"Funny thing about that fellow," she mused. "He's got something on his
mind. Don't you think so, Jerry?"

"Y-es, yes I do. And I've often wondered what it could be. He
certainly's a queer stick. Got to admit that. Always brooding. Good
fellow all right, and, for a 'sphinx' as you call him, likable. But I
wonder what is eating him?"

"What do you suppose it could be, Jerry boy?" questioned Mother
following me to the door, the woman of her now completely forgetting her
recent criticisms and, perhaps, the rough night her son was about to
step into. "Do you suppose the poor chap has a--a--broken heart, or
something like that? A girl somewhere who jilted him? Or maybe he loves
someone he has no right to!" she finished excitedly, the plates in her
hand rattling.

"Maybe it's worse than that," I ventured. "P'r'aps--I've no right to say
it--but p'r'aps, and I've often thought it, there's a killing he wants
to forget, and can't!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I heard my mother's sharp little "Oh!" as I shut the door behind me and
the warmth and comfort of the room away. Outside it was worse than the
whistle of the wind through the trees had led me to expect. Black as
pitch it was, and as cold as blazes. For the first moment or two,
though, I liked the feel of the challenge of the night and the racing
elements, was even a little glad I had added to the dare of the
blackness the thought of Hammersly and his "killing." But I had not gone
far before I was wishing I did not have to save my face by putting in an
appearance at the store that night.

Every Saturday night, with the cows comfortable in their warm barn, and
my own supper over, I was in the habit of taking my place on the keg or
box behind the red-hot stove in Pruett's store. To-night all the snow
was being hurled clear of the fields to block the roads full between the
old, zigzag fences. The wind met me in great pushing gusts, and while it
flung itself at me I would hang against it, snow to my knees, until the
blow had gone along, when I could plunge forward again. I was glad when
I saw the lights of the store, glad when I was inside.

They met me with mock applause for my pluck in facing the night, but for
all their sham flattery I was pleased I had come, proud, I must admit,
that I had been able to plough my heavy way through the drifts to reach
them. I saw at a glance that my friends were all there, and I saw too
that there was a strange man present.

       *       *       *       *       *

A very tall man he was, gaunt and awkward as he leaned into the angle of
the two counters, his back to a dusty show-case. He attracted my
attention at once. Not merely because he appeared so long and pointed
and skinny, but because, of all ridiculous things in that frozen
country, he wore a hard derby hat! If he had not been such a queer
character it would have been laughable, but as it was it was--creepy.
For the man beneath that hard hat was about as queer a looking character
as I have ever seen. I supposed he was a visitor at the store, or a
friend of one of my friends, and that in a little while I would be
introduced. But I was not.

I took my place in behind the stove, feeling at once, though I am far
from being unsociable usually, that the man was an intruder and would
spoil the evening. But despite his cold, dampening presence we were soon
at it, hammer and tongs, discussing the things that are discussed behind
hospitable stoves in country stores on bad nights. But I could never
lose sight of the fact that the stranger standing there, silent as the
grave, was, to say the least, a queer one. Before long I was sure he was
no friend or guest of anyone there, and that he not only cast a pall
over me but over all of us. I did not like it, nor did I like him.
Perhaps it would have been just as well after all, I thought, had I
heeded my mother and stayed home.

Jed Counsell was the one who, innocently enough, started the thing that
changed the evening, that had begun so badly, into a nightmare.

"Jerry," he said, leaning across to me, "thinkin' of you s'afternoon.
Readin' an article about reincarnation. Remember we were arguin' it last
week? Well, this guy, whoever he was I've forgot, believes in it. Says
it's so. That people _do_ come back." With this opening shot Jed sat
back to await my answer. I liked these arguments and I liked to bear my
share in them, but now, instead of immediately answering the challenge,
I looked around to see if any other of our circle were going to answer
Jed. Then, deciding it was up to me, I shrugged off the strange feeling
the man in the corner had cast over me, and prepared to view my
opinions.

"That's just that fellow's belief, Jed," I said. "And just as he's got
his so have I mine. And on this subject at least I claim my opinion is
as good as anybody's." I was just getting nicely started, and a little
forgetting my distaste for the man in the corner, when the fellow
himself interrupted. He left his leaning place, and came creaking across
the floor to our circle around the store. I say he came "creaking" for
as he came he did creak. "Shoes," I naturally, almost unconsciously
decided, though the crazy notion was in my mind that the cracking I
heard did sound like bones and joints and sinews badly in need of oil.
The stranger sat his groaning self down among us, on a board lying
across a nail keg and an old chair. Only from the corner of my eye did I
see his movement, being friendly enough, despite my dislike, not to
allow too marked notice of his attempt to be sociable seem inhospitable
on my part. I was about to start again with my argument when Seth
Spears, sitting closest to the newcomer, deliberately got up from the
bench and went to the counter, telling Pruett as he went that he had to
have some sugar. It was all a farce, a pretext, I knew. I've known Seth
for years and had never known him before to take upon himself the buying
for his wife's kitchen. Seth simply would not sit beside the man.

       *       *       *       *       *

At that I could keep my eyes from the stranger no longer, and the next
moment I felt my heart turn over within me, then lie still. I have seen
"walking skeletons" in circuses, but never such a man as the one who was
then sitting at my right hand. Those side-show men were just lean in
comparison to the fellow who had invaded our Saturday night club. His
thighs and his legs and his knees, sticking sharply into his trousers,
looked like pieces of inch board. His shoulders and his chest seemed as
flat and as sharp as his legs. The sight of the man shocked me. I sprang
to my feet thoroughly frightened. I could not see much of his face,
sitting there in the dark as he was with his back to the yellow light,
but I could make out enough of it to know that it was in keeping with
the rest of him.

In a moment or two, realizing my childishness, I had fought down my fear
and, pretending that a scorching of my leg had caused my hurried
movement, I sat down again. None of the others said a word, each waiting
for me to continue and to break the embarrassing silence. Hammersly,
black-whiskered, the "sphinx" as my mother had called him, watched me
closely. Hating myself not a little bit for actually being the sissy I
had boasted I was not, I spoke hurriedly, loudly, to cover my confusion.

"No sir, Jed!" I said, taking up my argument. "When a man's dead, he's
dead! There's no bringing him back like that highbrow claimed. The old
heart may be only hitting about once in every hundred times, and if they
catch it right at the last stroke they may bring it back then, but once
she's stopped, Jed, she's stopped for good. Once the pulse has gone, and
life has flickered out, it's out. And it doesn't come back in any form
at all, not in this world!"

I was glad when I had said it, thereby asserting myself and downing my
foolish fear of the man whose eyes I felt burning into me. I did not
turn to look at him but all the while I felt his gimlety eyes digging
into my brain.

Then he spoke. And though he sat right next to me his voice sounded like
a moan from afar off. It was the first time we had heard this thing that
once may have been a voice and that now sounded like a groan from a
closely nailed coffin. He reached a hand toward my knee to enforce his
words, but I jerked away.
