The Project Gutenberg eBook, A History of American Christianity, by
Leonard Woolsey Bacon


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A History of American Christianity


Author: Leonard Woolsey Bacon



Release Date: December 22, 2006  [eBook #20160]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HISTORY OF AMERICAN
CHRISTIANITY***


E-text prepared by Dave Morgan, Daniel J. Mount, Lisa Reigel, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net/c/) from digital material generously made available
by the Christian Classics Ethereal Library (http://www.ccel.org/)



Note: The digital material used for the preparation of this file,
      including images of the original pages, are available through
      the Christian Classics Ethereal Library. See
      http://www.ccel.org/ccel/bacon_lw/history.html


Transcriber's notes:

      Greek words in this text have been transliterated and placed
      between +marks+.

      Words in italics are surrounded with underscores.

      A list of corrections made is at the end of the text.





The American Church History Series

Consisting of a Series of Denominational Histories Published Under the
Auspices of the American Society of Church History

General Editors

REV. PHILIP SCHAFF, D. D., LL. D.
RT. REV. H. C. POTTER, D. D., LL. D.
REV GEO. P. FISHER, D. D., LL. D.
BISHOP JOHN F. HURST, D. D., LL. D.
REV. E. J. WOLF, D. D.
HENRY C. VEDDER, M. A.
REV. SAMUEL M. JACKSON, D. D., LL. D.

Volume XIII

American Church History


A HISTORY OF AMERICAN CHRISTIANITY

by

LEONARD WOOLSEY BACON







New York
The Christian Literature Co.
MDCCCXCVII
Copyright, 1897, by
The Christian Literature Co.




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE
CHAP. I.--PROVIDENTIAL PREPARATION FOR THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA      1-5

     Purpose of the long concealment of America, 1. A medieval
     church in America, 2. Revival of the Catholic Church, 3,
     especially in Spain, 4, 5.


CHAP. II.--SPANISH CHRISTIANITY IN AMERICA                          6-15

     Vastness and swiftness of the Spanish conquests, 6. Conversion
     by the sword, 7. Rapid success and sudden downfall of missions
     in Florida, 9. The like story in New Mexico, 12, and in
     California, 14.


CHAP. III.--FRENCH CHRISTIANITY IN AMERICA                         16-29

     Magnificence of the French scheme of western empire, 16.
     Superior dignity of the French missions, 19. Swift expansion
     of them, 20. Collision with the English colonies, and triumph
     of France, 21. Sudden and complete failure of the French
     church, 23. Causes of failure: (1) Dependence on royal
     patronage, 24. (2) Implication in Indian feuds, 25. (3)
     Instability of Jesuit efforts, 26. (4) Scantiness of French
     population, 27. Political aspect of French missions, 28.
     Recent French Catholic immigration, 29.


CHAP. IV.--ANTECEDENTS OF PERMANENT CHRISTIAN COLONIZATION         30-37

     Controversies and parties in Europe, 31, and especially in
     England, 32. Disintegration of Christendom, 34. New experiment
     of church life, 35. Persecutions promote emigration, 36, 37.


CHAP. V.--PURITAN BEGINNINGS OF THE CHURCH IN VIRGINIA             38-53

     The Rev. Robert Hunt, chaplain to the Virginia colony, 38.
     Base quality of the emigration, 39. Assiduity in religious
     duties, 41. Rev. Richard Buck, chaplain, 42. Strict Puritan
     regime of Sir T. Dale and Rev. A. Whitaker, 43. Brightening
     prospects extinguished by massacre, 48. Dissolution of the
     Puritan "Virginia Company" by the king, 48. Puritan ministers
     silenced by the royal governor, Berkeley, 49. The governor's
     chaplain, Harrison, is converted to Puritan principles, 49.
     Visit of the Rev. Patrick Copland, 50. Degradation of church
     and clergy, 51. Commissary Blair attempts reform, 52.
     Huguenots and Scotch-Irish, 53.


CHAP. VI.--MARYLAND AND THE CAROLINAS                              54-67

     George Calvert, Lord Baltimore, 54; secures grant of Maryland,
     55. The second Lord Baltimore organizes a colony on the basis
     of religious liberty, 56. Success of the two Jesuit priests,
     57. Baltimore restrains the Jesuits, 58, and encourages the
     Puritans, 59. Attempt at an Anglican establishment, 61.
     Commissary Bray, 61. Tardy settlement of the Carolinas, 62. A
     mixed population, 63. Success of Quakerism, 65. American
     origin of English missionary societies, 66.


CHAP. VII.--DUTCH CALVINISTS AND SWEDISH LUTHERANS                 68-81

     Faint traces of religious life in the Dutch settlements, 69.
     Pastors Michaelius, Bogardus, and Megapolensis, 70. Religious
     liberty, diversity, and bigotry, 72. The Quakers persecuted,
     73. Low vitality of the Dutch colony, 75. Swedish colony on
     the Delaware, 76; subjugated by the Dutch, 77. The Dutch
     evicted by England, 78. The Dutch church languishes, 79.
     Attempts to establish Anglicanism, 79. The S. P. G., 80.


CHAP. VIII.--THE CHURCH IN NEW ENGLAND                            82-108

     Puritan and Separatist, 82. The Separatists of Scrooby, 83.
     Mutual animosity of the two parties, 84. Spirit of John
     Robinson, 85. The "social compact" of the Pilgrims, in state,
     87; and in church, 88. Feebleness of the Plymouth colony, 89.
     The Puritan colony at Salem, 90. Purpose of the colonists, 91.
     Their right to pick their own company, 92. Fellowship with the
     Pilgrims, 93. Constituting the Salem church, and ordination of
     its ministers, 95. Expulsion of schismatics, 97. Coming of the
     great Massachusetts colony bringing the charter, 98. The New
     England church polity, 99. Nationalism of the Puritans, 100.
     Dealings with Roger Williams, Mrs. Hutchinson, and the
     Quakers, 101. Diversities among the colonies, 102. Divergences
     of opinion and practice in the churches, 103. Variety of sects
     in Rhode Island, 106, with mutual good will, 107. Lapse of the
     Puritan church-state, 108.


CHAP. IX.--THE MIDDLE COLONIES AND GEORGIA                       109-126

     Dutch, Puritan, Scotch, and Quaker settlers in New Jersey,
     109. Quaker corporation and government, 110. Quaker reaction
     from Puritanism, 113. Extravagance and discipline, 114.
     Quakerism in continental Europe, 115. Penn's "Holy
     Experiment," 116. Philadelphia founded, 117. German sects,
     118. Keith's schism, and the mission of the "S. P. G.," 119.
     Lutheran and Reformed Germans, 120. Scotch-Irish, 121.
     Georgia, 122. Oglethorpe's charitable scheme, 123. The
     Salzburgers, the Moravians, and the Wesleys, 124. George
     Whitefield, 126.


CHAP. X.--THE EVE OF THE GREAT AWAKENING                         127-154

     Fall of the New England theocracy, 128. Dissent from the
     "Standing Order": Baptist, 130; Episcopalian, 131. In New
     York: the Dutch church, 134; the English, 135; the
     Presbyterian, 136. New Englanders moving west, 137. Quakers,
     Huguenots, and Palatines, 139. New Jersey: Frelinghuysen and
     the Tennents, 141. Pennsylvania: successes and failures of
     Quakerism, 143. The southern colonies: their established
     churches, 148; the mission of the Quakers, 149. The gospel
     among the Indians, 150. The church and slavery, 151.


CHAP. XI.--THE GREAT AWAKENING                                   155-180

     Jonathan Edwards at Northampton, 156. An Awakening, 157.
     Edwards's "Narrative" in America and England, 159. Revivals in
     New Jersey and Pennsylvania, 160. Apostolate of Whitefield,
     163. Schism of the Presbyterian Church, 166. Whitefield in New
     England, 168. Faults and excesses of the evangelists, 169.
     Good fruits of the revival, 173. Diffusion of Baptist
     principles, 173. National religious unity, 175. Attitude of
     the Episcopal Church, 177. Zeal for missions, 179.


CHAP. XII.--CLOSE OF THE COLONIAL ERA                            181-207

     Growth of the New England theology, 181. Watts's Psalms, 182.
     Warlike agitations, 184. The Scotch-Irish immigration, 186.
     The German immigration, 187. Spiritual destitution, 188.
     Zinzendorf, 189. Attempt at union among the Germans, 190.
     Alarm of the sects, 191. Muehlenberg and the Lutherans, 191.
     Zinzendorf and the Moravians, 192. Schlatter and the Reformed,
     195. Schism made permanent, 197. Wesleyan Methodism, 198.
     Francis Asbury, 200. Methodism gravitates southward and grows
     apace, 201. Opposition of the church to slavery, 203; and to
     intemperance, 205. Project to introduce bishops from England,
     resisted in the interest of liberty, 206.


CHAP. XIII.--RECONSTRUCTION                                      208-229

     Distraction and depression after the War of Independence, 208.
     Forlorn condition of the Episcopalians, 210. Their republican
     constitution, 211. Episcopal consecration secured in Scotland
     and in England, 212. Feebleness of American Catholicism, 214.
     Bishop Carroll, 215. "Trusteeism," 216. Methodism becomes a
     church, 217. Westward movement of Christianity, 219. Severance
     of church from state, 221. Doctrinal divisions; Calvinist and
     Arminian, 222. Unitarianism, 224. Universalism, 225. Some
     minor sects, 228.


CHAP. XIV.--THE SECOND AWAKENING                                 230-245

     Ebb-tide of spiritual life, 230. Depravity and revival at the
     West, 232. The first camp-meetings, 233. Good fruits, 237.
     Nervous epidemics, 239. The Cumberland Presbyterians, 241. The
     antisectarian sect of The Disciples, 242. Revival at the East,
     242. President Dwight, 243.


CHAP. XV.--ORGANIZED BENEFICENCE                                 246-260

     Missionary spirit of the revival, 246. Religious earnestness
     in the colleges, 247. Mills and his friends at Williamstown,
     248; and at Andover, 249. The Unitarian schism in
     Massachusetts, 249. New era of theological seminaries, 251.
     Founding of the A. B. C. F. M., 252; of the Baptist Missionary
     Convention, 253. Other missionary boards, 255. The American
     Bible Society, 256. Mills, and his work for the West and for
     Africa, 256. Other societies, 258. Glowing hopes of the
     church, 259.


CHAP. XVI.--CONFLICTS WITH PUBLIC WRONGS                         261-291

     Working of the voluntary system of church support, 261.
     Dueling, 263. Crime of the State of Georgia against the
     Cherokee nation, implicating the federal government, 264.
     Jeremiah Evarts and Theodore Frelinghuysen, 267. Unanimity of
     the church, North and South, against slavery, 268. The
     Missouri Compromise, 270. Antislavery activity of the church,
     at the East, 271; at the West, 273; at the South, 274.
     Difficulty of antislavery church discipline, 275. The southern
     apostasy, 277. Causes of the sudden revolution of sentiment,
     279. Defections at the North, and rise of a pro-slavery party,
     282. The Kansas-Nebraska Bill; solemn and unanimous protest of
     the clergy of New England and New York, 284. Primeval
     temperance legislation, 285. Prevalence of drunkenness, 286.
     Temperance reformation a religious movement, 286. Development
     of "the saloon," 288. The Washingtonian movement and its
     drawbacks, 289. The Prohibition period, 290.


CHAP. XVII.--A DECADE OF CONTROVERSIES AND SCHISMS               292-314

     Dissensions in the Presbyterian Church, 292. Growing strength
     of the New England element, 293. Impeachments of heresy, 294.
     Benevolent societies, 295. Sudden excommunication of nearly
     one half of the church by the other half, 296. Heresy and
     schism among Unitarians: Emerson, 298; and Parker, 300.
     Disruption, on the slavery question, of the Methodists, 301;
     and of the Baptists, 303. Resuscitation of the Episcopal
     Church, 304. Bishop Hobart and a High-church party, 306. Rapid
     growth of this church, 308. Controversies in the Roman
     Catholic Church, 310. Contention against Protestant
     fanaticism, 312.


CHAP. XVIII.--THE GREAT IMMIGRATION                              315-339

     Expansion of territory and increase of population in the early
     part of the nineteenth century, 315. Great volume of
     immigration from 1840 on, 316. How drawn and how driven, 316.
     At first principally Irish, then German, then Scandinavian,
     318. The Catholic clergy overtasked, 320. Losses of the
     Catholic Church, 321. Liberalized tone of American
     Catholicism, 323. Planting the church in the West, 327.
     Sectarian competitions, 328. Protestant sects and Catholic
     orders, 329. Mormonism, 335. Millerism, 336. Spiritualism,
     337.


CHAP. XIX.--THE CIVIL WAR                                        340-350

     Material prosperity, 340. The Kansas Crusade, 341. The revival
     of 1857, 342. Deepening of the slavery conflict, 345. Threats
     of war, 347. Religious sincerity of both sides, 348. The
     church in war-time, 349.


CHAP. XX.--AFTER THE CIVIL WAR                                   351-373

     Reconstructions, 351. The Catholic Church, 352. The Episcopal
     Church, 352. Persistent divisions among Methodists, Baptists,
     and Presbyterians, 353. Healing of Presbyterian schisms, 355.
     Missions at the South, 355. Vast expansion of church
     activities, 357. Great religious and educational endowments,
     359. The enlisting of personal service: The Sunday-school,
     362. Chautauqua, 363. Y. M. C. A., 364. Y. W. C. A., 366. W.
     C. T. U., 367. Women's missionary boards, 367. Nursing orders
     and schools, 368. Y. P. S. C. E., and like associations, 368.
     "The Institutional Church," 369. The Salvation Army, 370. Loss
     of "the American Sabbath," 371.


CHAP. XXI.--THE CHURCH IN THEOLOGY AND LITERATURE                374-397

     Unfolding of the Edwardean theology, 374. Horace Bushnell,
     375. The Mercersburg theology, 377. "Bodies of divinity," 378.
     Biblical science, 378. Princeton's new dogma, 380. Church
     history, 381. The American pulpit, 382. "Applied
     Christianity," 385. Liturgics, 386. Hymns, 387. Other
     liturgical studies, 388. Church music, 391. The Moravian
     liturgies, 394. Meager productiveness of the Catholic Church,
     394. The Americanizing of the Roman Church, 396.


CHAP. XXII.--TENDENCIES TOWARD A MANIFESTATION OF UNITY          398-420

     Growth of the nation and national union, 398. Parallel growth
     of the church, 399; and ecclesiastical division, 400. No
     predominant sect, 401. Schism acceptable to politicians, 402;
     and to some Christians, 403. Compensations of schism, 404.
     _Nisus_ toward manifest union, 405. Early efforts at
     fellowship among sects, 406. High-church protests against
     union, 407. The Evangelical Alliance, 408. Fellowship in
     non-sectarian associations, 409. Cooperation of leading sects
     in Maine, 410. Various unpromising projects of union: I. Union
     on sectarian basis, 411. II. Ecumenical sects, 412. III.
     Consolidation of sects, 413. The hope of manifested unity,
     416. Conclusion, 419.




A HISTORY OF AMERICAN CHRISTIANITY.




CHAPTER I.

PROVIDENTIAL PREPARATIONS FOR THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA--SPIRITUAL
REVIVAL THROUGHOUT CHRISTENDOM, AND ESPECIALLY IN THE CHURCH OF SPAIN.


The heroic discovery of America, at the close of the fifteenth century
after Christ, has compelled the generous and just admiration of the
world; but the grandeur of human enterprise and achievement in the
discovery of the western hemisphere has a less claim on our admiration
than that divine wisdom and controlling providence which, for reasons
now manifested, kept the secret hidden through so many millenniums, in
spite of continual chances of disclosure, until the fullness of time.

How near, to "speak as a fool," the plans of God came to being defeated
by human enterprise is illustrated by unquestioned facts. The fact of
medieval exploration, colonization, and even evangelization in North
America seems now to have emerged from the region of fanciful conjecture
into that of history. That for four centuries, ending with the
fifteenth, the church of Iceland maintained its bishops and other
missionaries and built its churches and monasteries on the frozen coast
of Greenland is abundantly proved by documents and monuments. Dim but
seemingly unmistakable traces are now discovered of enterprises, not
only of exploration and trade, but also of evangelization, reaching
along the mainland southward to the shores of New England. There are
vague indications that these beginnings of Christian civilization were
extinguished, as in so many later instances, by savage massacre. With
impressive coincidence, the latest vestige of this primeval American
Christianity fades out in the very year of the discovery of America by
Columbus.[2:1]

By a prodigy of divine providence, the secret of the ages had been kept
from premature disclosure during the centuries in which, without knowing
it, the Old World was actually in communication with the New. That was
high strategy in the warfare for the advancement of the kingdom of God
in the earth. What possibilities, even yet only beginning to be
accomplished, were thus saved to both hemispheres! If the discovery of
America had been achieved four centuries or even a single century
earlier, the Christianity to be transplanted to the western world would
have been that of the church of Europe at its lowest stage of decadence.
The period closing with the fifteenth century was that of the dense
darkness that goes before the dawn. It was a period in which the
lingering life of the church was chiefly manifested in feverish
complaints of the widespread corruption and outcries for "reformation of
the church in head and members." The degeneracy of the clergy was
nowhere more manifest than in the monastic orders, that had been
originally established for the express purpose of reviving and purifying
the church. That ancient word was fulfilled, "Like people, like priest."
But it was especially in the person of the foremost official
representative of the religion of Jesus Christ that that religion was
most dishonored. The fifteenth century was the era of the infamous
popes. By another coincidence which arrests the attention of the reader
of history, that same year of the discovery by Columbus witnessed the
accession of the most infamous of the series, the Borgia, Alexander VI.,
to his short and shameful pontificate.

Let it not be thought, as some of us might be prone to think, that the
timeliness of the discovery of the western hemisphere, in its relation
to church history, is summed up in this, that it coincided with the
Protestant Reformation, so that the New World might be planted with a
Protestant Christianity. For a hundred years the colonization and
evangelization of America were, in the narrowest sense of that large
word, Catholic, not Protestant. But the Catholicism brought hither was
that of the sixteenth century, not of the fifteenth. It is a most
one-sided reading of the history of that illustrious age which fails to
recognize that the great Reformation was a reformation _of_ the church
as well as a reformation _from_ the church. It was in Spain itself, in
which the corruption of the church had been foulest, but from which all
symptoms of "heretical pravity" were purged away with the fiercest zeal
as fast as they appeared,--in Spain under the reign of Ferdinand and
Isabella the Catholic,--that the demand for a Catholic reformation made
itself earliest and most effectually felt. The highest ecclesiastical
dignitary of the realm, Ximenes, confessor to the queen, Archbishop of
Toledo, and cardinal, was himself the leader of reform. No changes in
the rest of Christendom were destined for many years to have so great
an influence on the course of evangelization in North America as those
which affected the church of Spain; and of these by far the most
important in their bearing on the early course of Christianity in
America were, first, the purifying and quickening of the miserably
decayed and corrupted mendicant orders,--ever the most effective arm in
the missionary service of the Latin Church,--and, a little later, the
founding of the Society of Jesus, with its immense potency for good and
for evil. At the same time the court of Rome, sobered in some measure,
by the perilous crisis that confronted it, from its long orgy of simony,
nepotism, and sensuality, began to find time and thought for spiritual
duties. The establishment of the "congregations" or administrative
boards, and especially of the _Congregatio de Propaganda Fide_, or board
of missions, dates chiefly from the sixteenth century. The revived
interest in theological study incident to the general spiritual
quickening gave the church, as the result of the labors of the Council
of Trent, a well-defined body of doctrine, which nevertheless was not so
narrowly defined as to preclude differences and debates among the
diverse sects of the clergy, by whose competitions and antagonisms the
progress of missions both in Christian and in heathen lands was destined
to be so seriously affected.

An incident of the Catholic Reformation of the sixteenth
century--inevitable incident, doubtless, in that age, but none the less
deplorable--was the engendering or intensifying of that cruel and
ferocious form of fanaticism which is defined as the combination of
religious emotion with the malignant passions. The tendency to
fanaticism is one of the perils attendant on the deep stirring of
religious feeling at any time; it was especially attendant on the
religious agitations of that period; but most of all it was in Spain,
where, of all the Catholic nations, corruption had gone deepest and
spiritual revival was most earnest and sincere, that the manifestations
of fanaticism were most shocking. Ferdinand and Isabella the Catholic
were distinguished alike by their piety and their part in the promotion
of civilization, and by the horrors of bloody cruelty perpetrated by
their authority and that of the church, at the instigation of the
sincere and devout reformer Ximenes. In the memorable year 1492 was
inaugurated the fiercest work of the Spanish Inquisition, concerning
