'All right,' said I. 'You've done your work, old man; but you
mustn't lay here, or they may light upon you and guess what's been
up.'

So we lugged him on to his feet, gave him another prod, which sent
him limping off; and on we went on our course, sure that we were at
last safe, for we had thrown the bloodhound altogether off our
trail. For a mile or so we kept right away from our course, for
fear that they should keep straight on, and, missing the scent,
lead the dog across the trail, and so pick it up again; then we
turned and made straight for the road.

'I don't think, Rube,' I said after awhile, 'that we shall strike
the road far off where we left it at Pepita's.'

'No, I expect not, Seth. We had better bear a little more to the
south, for they will most likely make for Pepita's, and day will
soon be breaking now.'

'We'd better not strike the road at all, Rube; likely enough, they
will follow it down for a few miles in hopes of picking us up.'

'I hope they will,' Rube said; 'and I expect so. Won't it be a
lark, just?'

'What do you mean, Rube?'

'Mean? Why, didn't the Cap tell us to leave San Miguel before
daybreak, and to ride to meet him? It warn't likely that he meant
us to ride more than ten miles or so; so that he will be within
that distance of San Miguel by an hour after daybreak, and will be
at Pepita's half an hour later. If them fellows ride on, they are
safe to fall into as nice a trap as--'

'Jehoshophat!' said I. 'You're right, Rube. Let's make tracks. It
can't be more than another four or five miles to the road, and day
will break in half an hour.'

'How strong do you reckon them, Seth?'

'Fifty or sixty,' said I, 'by the regular sound of the horses.'

'That's about what I guessed,' Rube said. 'There are forty of our
chaps, and they will be fresh. We'll give 'em goss.'

"We had now long ceased to hear the baying of the dog, which had
been most unpleasantly clear when we got off the old hoss that had
done us such a good turn. We made sure, too, that we were well
ahead, for they would likely wait an hour in trying to pick up the
trail again. Daylight came at last; and when it was light enough to
see we stopped and took a look from a slight rise, and there,
across the plain, we could see the road just where we expected.
Nothing was moving upon it, nor, looking back, could we see any
sign of the Mexicans. Away to the left, a mile or so, we could see
a clump of trees, and something like the roof of a house among
them. This, we had no doubt, was Pepita's. About a mile down the
road the other way was a biggish wood, through which the road ran."

'Let's make for that wood, Rube, and wait; the Cap will be up in
another half-hour, and it ain't likely the Mexicans will be along
much before that. They're likely to stop for a drink at Pepita's.'

In another ten minutes we were in shelter in the wood, taking care
not to get upon the road, in case the Mexicans should come along
with the hound before our men. We hadn't been there twenty minutes
before we both heard a trampling of horses; but it was a minute or
two more before we could decide which way they were coming. At
last, to our great comfort, we found it was the right way. Just
before they came up I had an idea I caught a sound from the other
way, but I couldn't have sworn to it. We lay till the troop came
fairly up, as it might be another party of Mexicans; but it was all
right, and we jumped out, with a cheer, into the middle of them.
Mighty surprised they were to see us, on foot, and all dust and
sweat. Rube's face, too, was tied up; and altogether we didn't look
quite ourselves. They all began to talk at once; but I held up my
hand urgent, and when they saw it was something particular they
shut up, and I said to the Cap: 'Don't ask no questions, Cap; I'll
tell you all arterwards. El Zeres with about fifty of his men will
be here in about three minutes, I reckon. They've ridden thirty
miles, and the beasts ain't fresh; so it's your own fault if one
gets away.'

The Cap didn't waste a moment in words. He ordered half his men to
ride back two hundred yards, and to charge when they heard his
whistle; and he and the rest turned off into the wood, which was
very thick, and screened 'em from any one passing. Rube and I, not
having horses, were no good for a charge; so we went on in the
wood, as near as we could guess, halfway between them, so as to be
ready to jump out and join in the skrimmage. It all takes some time
to tell, but it didn't take two minutes to do, and in another
minute we could hear the Mexicans close. On they came: we knew now
that they had passed the Cap, and we clutched our rifles tight and
peered out through the leaves. On they came, and we could see El
Zeres riding first, with the bloodhound trotting along by the side
of his horse. Just as he was opposite we heard a loud, shrill
whistle, and the Mexicans halted with a look of uneasiness. They
weren't left to wonder long, for in a moment there was a trampling
of horses, and down came our fellows on both sides of them. Just
before they got up we stepped forward with our rifles up.

'El Zeres!' Rube shouted, and startled as the Mexican was, he
looked round. He had just time to see who it was, when Rube's ball
hit him in the head, and down he went as dead as a stone. The hound
turned and came right at us with a deep growl of rage. I sent a
ball through his chest and rolled him over, and just as I did so
our fellows came down upon the Mexicans. It was a fierce fight, for
the Mexicans were in a trap, and knew that there was no mercy for
them. Rube and I sprang out and paid a good many of 'em off for the
scare they had given us. We wiped them right out to the last man,
losing only six ourselves. I don't know as ever I see a better
skrimmage while it lasted. After it was over Rube and I mounted two
of their horses, and rode on with the rest of them to San Miguel;
but before we started off we told our story to the Cap, and he sent
a couple of men back with a dispatch to the general, asking for
five hundred men to destroy El Zeres' band at a blow. We stopped at
Pepita's, and I never see a girl have a much worse scare than we
gave her. She made sure it was El Zeres, and came running out to
see if he had caught us; and when she found that she had fallen
into the hands of the Rangers, and that we were among them, she was
as white as a shirt in a minute. She was plucky enough, though; for
as soon as she could get her tongue she cursed us like a wild
woman. I expect she made sure we should have shot her for her
treachery--and a good many of our bands would have done so right on
end--but the Rangers never touched women. However, she warn't to go
scot free; so we got fire, and set the house and stable in a blaze.

As we rode off Rube shouted out, 'If you change your mind again
about coming with me to Missouri, you just drop me a line, Pepita.'

"I thought, as I looked at her, it was lucky for Rube she hadn't a
rifle in her hand; she'd have shot him if she had been hung for it
a minute afterward. We rode on to San Miguel, took Colonel Cabra
prisoner, with his papers, and sent him back under an escort. At
dusk the same day we got on our horses and rode back to where
Pepita's house had stood, and where our captain expected the troops
he had sent for. In half an hour they came up. They had a couple of
hours to rest their horses, and then Rube and I led them straight
to the Mexican camp. No doubt they heard us coming when we were
close, but made sure it was El Zeres, and so didn't disturb
themselves; and it warn't till we had wheeled round and fairly
surrounded them that they smelt a rat. But it was too late then,
for in another minute we were down upon them, and I don't believe
twenty out of the whole lot got away. It was, altogether, one of
the most successful businesses in the whole war. And I think that's
about all the story."

"Oh, thank you very much, Seth. It is a most exciting story. And
what became of Rube?"

"Rube married a year after we got back to the States, and took up a
clearing and settled down. It was then I felt lonesome, and made up
my mind to go south for awhile. I promised Rube that I would go and
settle down by him after a bit, and I've concluded that it's about
time to do so. I've saved a few hundred dollars out here, and I am
going to start to-morrow morning at daybreak to catch the steamer
at Rosario. I shall go up straight from Buenos Ayres to New
Orleans, and a steamer will take me up the river in three days to
Rube's location. Good-by, all of you. I told your father this
afternoon."

There was a hearty leave-taking, and many expressions of regret at
his leaving; and after a shake of the hand, and many good wishes,
the young Hardys went up to the house, really sorry to part with
their Yankee friend.




CHAPTER VIII.

FARM WORK AND AMUSEMENTS.


Although but two months had elapsed since the ground was plowed up
and planted, the progress made by the crop of maize and pumpkins
was surprising: the former, especially, was now nearly six feet
high. This rapid growth was the result of the extreme fertility of
the virgin soil, aided by the late abundant supply of water, and
the heat of the sun. The maize had given them all a great deal to
do; for when it was about six inches high it had to be thinned out
so that the plants were nine or ten inches apart. This had been
done by the united strength of the party, Mr. Hardy and the boys
working for two hours each morning, and as much in the evening. The
girls also had assisted, and the peons had worked the whole day,
except from eleven to three, when the heat was too great even for
them. Many hands make light work, and in consequence the whole
ground under maize cultivation was thinned in little over a week.
Latterly the maize had grown so fast that the boys declared they
could almost see it grow, and at the end of two months after sowing
it was all in flower. The maize, or Indian corn, strongly resembles
water rushes in appearance, and the feathery blossom also resembles
that of the rush. Indian corn forms the main article of food in
South America, and in all but the Northern States of North America.
It is equally useful and common in India, and in other tropical
countries.

Scarcely less is it used in Italy, and other parts of southern
Europe. It was first introduced into Europe from the East by the
great family of Polenta, who ruled the important town of Ravenna
for nearly two hundred years. Ground maize is still called Polenta
throughout Italy; and the great family will live in the name of the
useful cereal they introduced when all memory of their warlike
deeds is lost except to the learned.

One evening when Mr. Hardy, with his wife and children, was
strolling down in the cool of the evening to look with pleasure
upon the bright green of their healthy and valuable crops, Hubert
said:

"Isn't Indian corn, papa, the great yallow heads covered with
grain-like beads one sees in corn-dealers' shops in England?"

"Yes, Hubert."

"Well, if that is so, I cannot make out how those long delicate
stems can bear the weight. They bend over like corn to every puff
of wind. It does not seem possible that they could bear a quarter
of the weight of their heavy yellow heads."

"Nor could they, Hubert; but nature has made a wise and very
extraordinary provision for this difficulty. All other plants and
trees with which I am acquainted have their fruits or seeds where
the blossom before grew. In maize it is placed in an entirely
different part of the plant. In a very short time you will
see--indeed you may see now in most of the plants--the stalk begin
to thicken at a foot or eighteen inches from the ground, and in a
little time it will burst; and the head of maize, so enveloped in
leaves that it looks a mere bunch of them, will come forth. It will
for a time grow larger and larger, and then the plant will wither
and die down to the place from which the head springs. The part
that remains will dry up until the field appears covered with dead
stumps, with bunches of dead leaves at the top. Then it is ready
for the harvest."

"What a strange plant, papa! I quite long for the time when the
heads will come out. What are you going to plant upon that bit of
land you have got ready for sowing now? It is about six acres."

"I mean to plant cotton there, Hubert. I have sent to Buenos Ayres
for seeds of what are called Carolina Upland, and I expect them
here in a few days."

"But it takes a great deal of labor, does it not, papa?"

"The calculation in the Northern States, Hubert, is that one man
can cultivate eight acres of cotton, assisted by his wife and
children at certain periods; and that as his labor is not always
required, he can with his family cultivate another eight or ten
acres of other produce; so that about half of a peon's labor will
be required, and in the hoeing and picking time we can all help."

"Is not machinery required to separate the seeds from the cotton?"
Charley asked.

"It is not absolutely necessary, Charley, although it is of course
economical when the cultivation is carried on upon a large scale.
The variety I am going to try is sometimes called 'bowed' Carolina,
because it used to be cleaned by placing it upon a number of
strings stretched very tight, which were struck with a sort of bow,
and the vibration caused the seed to separate from the cotton. I
have a drawing of one of these contrivances in a book up at the
house, and when the time comes you fellows shall make me one. It
will be work for us to do indoors when the weather is too hot to be
out. Of course if I find that it succeeds, and pays well, I shall
take on more hands, get proper machinery, and extend the
cultivation. I intend to plant the rows rather wide apart, so as to
use the light plow with the ridge boards between them, instead of
hoeing, to save labor."

"How much cotton do they get from an acre?" Mrs. Hardy asked.

"In the Southern States they expect twelve hundred pounds upon new
ground--that is, twelve hundred pounds of pods, which make about
three hundred of cleaned cotton. When I have got the cotton fairly
in the ground I mean to plant an acre or two of tobacco, and the
same quantity of sugar cane, as an experiment. But before I do that
we must make a garden up at the house: that is a really urgent
need."

"Couldn't we grow rice here, papa?"

"No doubt we could, Hubert; but I do not mean to try it. To succeed
with rice, we should have to keep the ground on which it grew in a
state of swamp, which would be very unhealthy. That is why I do not
irrigate the fields oftener than is absolutely necessary. Anything
approaching swampy, or even wet lands, in a climate like this,
would be almost certain to breed malaria. Besides, we should be
eaten alive by mosquitoes. No, I shall certainly not try rice.
Other tropical productions I shall some day give a trial to.
Ginger, vanilla, and other things would no doubt flourish here. I
do not believe that any of them would give an extraordinary rate of
profit, for though land is cheap, labor is scarce. Still it would
be interesting, and would cause a little variety and amusement in
our work, which is always an important point, and no doubt there
would be generally some profit, though occasionally we may make a
total failure."

Very often at daybreak the girls would go down with their brothers
to the river, and watch the waterfowl on its surface; they were so
amusing as they dabbled and played in the water, unsuspicious of
danger. Their favorites, though, were the beautiful scarlet
flamingoes, with their slender legs, and their long, graceful
necks, and whose great employment seemed to be to stand quiet in
the water, where it was only two or three inches deep, and to preen
their glossy red feathers. Over and over again the girls wished
that they could get a few waterfowl, especially flamingoes, to tame
them, in order that they might swim on the dam pond and come and be
fed; and the boys had several talks with each other as to the most
practicable way of capturing some of them. At last they thought of
making a sort of enclosure of light boughs, with an entrance into
which birds could easily pass, but through which they could not
easily return, and to scatter grain up to and into the enclosure,
to entice the birds to enter. On explaining this plan to Mr. Hardy,
he said that he had no doubt that it would succeed in capturing
birds, but that when caught it would be impossible to tame
full-grown wild-fowl, and that the only plan was to find their
nests, and take the eggs or very young birds. This they determined
to do; and as the bushes close to the river were too thick to
permit an examination from the shore, they started one morning
early, and, going down to the river, entered it, and waded along
for a considerable distance. They discovered two swans' nests, and
several of different descriptions of ducks. In some the birds were
sitting upon their eggs, in others the young brood were just
hatched, and scuttled away into the bushes with the parent birds
upon being disturbed.
