Then he said that surely he wished (but this I need tell none else) that
he had been there in my place to hear Guthlac read it. Also that he was
minded to make the old rhyme more Christian-like, if he could, writing
parts of it afresh. And this he has done since, so that any man may read
it; but it is not so good as the old one [ix].

Now we came to the bishop's chamber, and he went in, calling me after
him in a minute or so. I could hear Ealhstan's voice and that of another
as I waited outside.

The other was Eanulf the Ealdorman, and as I entered he rose up and
faced me.

"So, Heregar," he said, "you are bishop's man now, and out of my power.
I am glad of it," and so saying he reached me out his hand and wrung
mine, and looked very friendly as he did so.

"I have heard of your doings," he said, "and thank you for them. And I
will see this matter of yours looked into, for I think, as the bishop
believes, that there has been a plot against you for plain reasons
enough. However, that must stand over as yet. But come with me to the
hall and I will right you with the thanes there."

At that I thanked him, knowing that things were going right with me, and
the bishop smiled, as well pleased, but said nothing, as Eanulf took me
by the arm, and we went together to the great hall, where the thanes,
some twenty of them, were talking together. At once I saw several whose
faces had burnt themselves, as it were, into my mind at the Moot; but
none of Matelgar's friends among them.

They were quiet when their leader went in, and he wasted no time, but
spoke in his own direct way.

"See here, thanes; here is Heregar, whom we outlawed but the other day.
Take my word and Ealhstan's and Osric's for it that there was a mistake.
We know now that there is no truer man, for he has proved it, as some of
you know-he being the man who lit the huts at Stert in face of the
Danes, and being likewise the Saint of Cannington--"

"Aye, it is so," said several voices, and others laughed. Then, like
honest Saxons as they were, they came crowding and laughing to shake
hands with an outlawed saint, as one said; so that I was overdone almost
with their kindness, and knew not what to say or do.

But Eanulf pushed me forward among them, saying that I, being bishop's
man, was no more concern of his, outlaw or no outlaw, and that saints
were beyond him. So he too laughed, and went back to the bishop; and I
found Wulfhere and Wislac, and soon I was one of my own sort again, and
the bad past seemed very far away.

But Wislac looked at me and said: "You have spoilt a fine tale I had to
take home with me; but maybe I need not tell the ending. Howbeit, I
always did hold that there was none so much difference between a
fighting saint and one of ourselves."

And that seemed to satisfy him.



CHAPTER XII. THE GREAT LEVY.


It was not long before Eanulf made up his mind to action, and he was
closeted with the bishop all that morning. Then, after the midday meal,
he called a council of all who were there, and we sat in the great hall
to hear his plans.

Ealhstan came with him, and these two sat at the upper end of the hall,
and we on the benches round the walls, for the long tables had been
cleared.

When all was ready, Eanulf stood up and told the thanes, for some were
men who had had no part in Osric's levy, all about the fighting, and how
it had ended. And having done that, he asked for the advice of such as
would have aught to say.

Very soon an old thane rose up and said that he thought all would be
well if forces were so posted as to prevent the Danes coming beyond the
land they then held.

And several growled assent to that; and one said that Danes bided in one
place no long time, but would take ship again and go elsewhere.

That, too, seemed to please most, and I saw Eanulf bite his lip, for he
was a man who loved action. And Wulfhere, too, shifted in his seat, as
if impatient.

Then they went back to the first proposal, and began to name places
where men might be posted to keep the Danes in Parret valley at least,
till they went away.

Then at last Wulfhere grew angry, and rose up, looking very red.

"And what think you will Parret valley be like when they have done their
will therein? Does no man remember the going back to his place when
these strangers had bided in it for a while, after they beat us in Dorset?"

There were two thanes who had lands in that part, and they flushed, so
that one might easily know they remembered; but they said naught.

Then Eanulf spake, very plainly:

"I am for raising the levy of Somerset again, and stronger, and driving
them out; but I cannot do it without your help."

Then there was silence, and the thanes looked at one another for so long
that I waxed impatient, and being headstrong, maybe, got up and spoke:

"Landless I am, and maybe not to be hearkened to, but nevertheless I
will say what it seems to me that a man should say. Into this land of
peace these men from over seas have come wantonly, slaying our friends,
burning our houses, driving our cattle, making such as escape them take
to the woods like hunted wild beasts. Where is Edred the Thane? Where is
Matelgar? Where twenty others you called friends? Dead by Combwich, and
none to bury them. The Danes have their arms, the wolves their bodies.
Is no vengeance to be taken for this? Or shall the Danes sail away
laughing, saying that the hearts of the Saxons are as water?"

Then there rose an angry growl at that, and I was glad to hear it. So
was Eanulf, as it seemed. And Wulfhere got up and stood beside me and
spoke.

"This is good talk, and now I will add a word. Why came back the Danes
here? Because after we were beaten before, we let them do their worst,
and hindered them not; therefore come they back even now--aye, and if
we drive them not from us, hither will they come yet again, till we may
not call the land our own from year to year. I say with the ealdorman,
let us up and drive them out, showing them what Saxons are made of.
What? Are we done fighting after they have scattered one hastily
gathered levy? Shame there is none to us in being so beaten once, but I
hold it shame to let them so easily have the mastery."

Then there was a murmur, but not all of assent; though I could see that
many would side with us. Whereon Wislac rose up slowly, and looking
round, said:

"I am a stranger, but having been present at the beating the other day,
yonder, am minded to see if I may yet go home on the winning side. And
it would be shame, even as these two thanes have said, not to give a
guest a chance to have his pleasure. I pray you, thanes, pluck up
spirit, and follow the ealdorman."

Now, though Wislac's words seemed idle at the beginning, there was that
in his last words which brought several of the younger thanes to their
feet, looking angrily at him, and one asked if he meant to call that
assembly "nidring".

"Not I," said Wislac, smiling peacefully, "seeing that you have done
naught to deserve that foul name; but being a beaten man, as I said, I
need a chance to prove that I am not 'nidring' myself, so please you."

And they could not take offence at his tone, yet they saw well what he
meant; and this in the end touched them very closely, for they were in
the same case as he, but with more right, being of Somerset, to wipe out
their defeat. But maybe there would have been a quarrel if Eanulf had
not spoken.

"Peace, thanes," he said. "Heregar is right, and we must avenge our
dead. Wulfhere is right, and for the land's sake we must give these
Danes a lesson to bide at home. Wislac is right, and this defeat must be
wiped out. Now say if you will help me to raise the levy afresh?"

"Aye, we will," said the thanes, but there was not that heartiness in
their tones that one might have looked for.

In truth, though, it was no want of courage, but the thought of the
easier plan of waiting, that held them back.

Then Ealhstan the Bishop rose up and faced us all, with his eyes
shining, and his right hand gripping his crosier so tightly that his
knuckles shone white.

"What, my sons, shall it be said of you, as it is said of us Dorset
folk, that you let the Danes bide in your land and work their worst on
you and yours? I tell you that since we went back and saw, as we still
see, their track over our homes, our folk burn to take revenge on them;
and I, being what I am, think no wrong of counselling revenge on heathen
folk. Listen, for ye are men."

And then he told us in burning words such a tale of what must be were
these heathen to have their way, such things that he himself had seen
and known after Charnmouth fight, that we would fain at last be up and
drive them away without waiting for the levy.

And at last he said:

"Eanulf, this will I do. I will gather the Dorset levy and lead them to
your help, and so will we make short work of these heathen."

Then all the thanes shouted that they would not be behind in the matter;
and so their cool Saxon blood was fired to that white rage which is
quenched but in victory or death.

Now after that there was talk of nothing but of making the levy as soon
as might be, and Eanulf, thanking everyone, and most of all the bishop,
straightway gave his orders; and before that night the war arrow was
speeding through all Somerset and Dorset likewise, and word was sent to
Osric and the other sheriffs that the gathering place named was at the
hill of Brent.

Now of those days that followed there is little to say. The other thanes
left, each to gather his own men, vowing vengeance on the Danes; but
before they went there was hardly one who did not seek out Wulfhere,
Wislac, and myself, and in some way or another tell us that we had
spoken right. One fiery young thane, indeed, was minded to fight Wislac,
but the Mercian turned the quarrel very skilfully, and in the end agreed
with the thane that the matter should be settled by the number of Danes
each should slay, "which," said Wislac, "will be as good sport and more
profitable than pounding one another, and quite as good proof that
neither of us may be held nidring."

So that ended very well.

But every day came in reports, brought by fugitives, of the Danes and
their doings, which made our blood boil. At last came one who brought a
message for myself, could I be found. It was from the aunt of Alswythe,
the Prioress of Bridgwater, telling of her safety and that of her nuns,
at Taunton. And I begged the bishop to let me tell this good news to
Alswythe, and so gained speech with her once more. Yet would the abbess
be present, reading the while; but I might tell my love all that had
befallen me, and she rejoiced, bidding me go fight and win myself renown
in the good cause of my own country.

And when I left her I felt that I must indeed be strong for the sake of
her, and by reason of her words, which would be in my mind ever.

Now one day when I went to see the horses and ride out with Wulfhere and
Wislac, the collier came and hung about, seeming to wish to ask
somewhat. And when I noticed this and bade him speak, he prayed me that
I would give him arms, and let him follow me to the coming fighting.
Arms, save those I wore, I had none, but I promised him such as I could
buy him with what remained of the money I had found, which might be
enough, seeing that we lived at free quarters with the bishop, and had
little expense. As for the other money, I left that with the abbess
after I had seen Alswythe, for it was less mine than hers.

But I asked Dudda if he were able to use a sword. Whereupon he grinned,
and said that Brother Guthlac tended the abbot's mule, and had taught
him much when he came to the stables daily. He also showed me a bruised
arm and broken head in token of hard play with the ash plant between
them.

"Here is the said Guthlac," said Wulfhere; and there was the reader of
Beowulf coming, with frock and sleeves tucked up, from out the stables.
So I called him, and asked him to try a bout with the collier, telling
him why.

At first he denied all knowledge of carnal warfare, but I reminded him
of his reading of Beowulf, saying that, if he knew naught of fighting,
the verses would have had none of that fire in them. So, in the end,
they went to it, and I saw that Guthlac was well used to sword play, and
was satisfied also with his pupil.

Then I asked Guthlac whence he got his skill in arms, and why he was
shut up thus inside four walls.

"Laziness, Thane," he answered, telling me nothing of the first matter
at all. Nor would he. But I found afterwards that he had been lamed
once, and tended by the monks, and so had bided in the abbey, liking the
life, though he had been a stout housecarle to some thane or other.

Then Wislac must ask him if there were any more of his sort in the
abbey, and seeing that we meant no harm, and looking on me as an ally in
that matter of the reading, he said there were five more, "whom Heregar
the Thane knew, if he would remember, reading certain Scriptures at
supper time."

And I found that these six kindred spirits had managed to get themselves
told off to amuse me while I waited that day, so that they might hear of
the fighting.

So we laughed and rode out, and I thought no more of Guthlac and his
brethren till the time came when I remembered them gladly.

All day long during that week came pouring in the Dorset levies in
answer to the bishop's summons. Hard and wiry men they were, and as I
could well see, a very much harder set than Osric's first levy, for
these were veterans. Ealhstan's word had gone out that all men who would
wipe out the defeat of Charnmouth should gather to him, and these were
the men who had fought there, and only longed to try their strength
again against their conquerors of that disastrous day.

Day by day, also, would Ealhstan go out into the marketplace, and there
speak burning words to them, bidding them remember the days gone by, and
the valour of their fathers who won the land for them, and to have ever
in mind that this war was not of Christian against Christian, but
against heathen men who were profaning the houses of God wherever they
came.

Many more things did he say, ever finding something fresh wherewith to
stir their courage, but ever, also, did he bid them remember how the
Danes had won by discipline more than courage, and to pay heed to that
as their leaders bade them.

Also, day by day, he bade the thanes who had seen fighting, train their
men as well as they might, and they worked well at that. Moreover, he
could teach them much, reading to us at times from a great Latin book of
the wars of Caesar such things as seemed like to be useful, putting it
into good Saxon as he went on.

Then, as the week drew to an end, there began to be questions as to who
should be leader of the Dorset men. And many said that Osric should be
the man, for he was an Ealdorman of Dorset. But when the bishop sent to
Brent for him, and asked him to lead his men, Osric doubted; and what he
said to the other thanes, and to us three, made them send us to the
bishop with somewhat to ask.

So we, finding him ever ready to hear what was wanted, put the question
to him plainly as they had bidden us. And that was, that he himself
should lead the levy of Dorset.

Now Tatwine, the old abbot, sat with him and heard this, and straightway
he began to tremble, and cry out that such work was unfit for a bishop.

So the bishop said to me, very quietly, but with a look in his eyes
which seemed to show that this was what he longed for:

"Heregar, my son, go and tell the thanes what the abbot says, and ask if
they will go without me."

All the thanes were waiting to hear the bishop's answer to our request,
and I told them this, and they knew at once what answer to give, for
they said, or Osric said for them, while all applauded:

"We will not go against these heathens unless the bishop leads us. Else
must Somerset fight her own battles."

So with that word I went back to the bishop, and told him.

"So, Tatwine, my brother, you see how it is. Needs must that I go, else
were it shame to us that heathen men should have freedom in a Christian
land."

But Tatwine groaned, and, maybe knowing the bishop well, said no more.

Then Ealhstan bade him remember all the saints who had warred against
the heathen, and were held blameless--nay, rather, the holier.

"Therefore," said he, "I am in good company, and will surely go."

Whereupon Tatwine rose up and went out, saying that he should go to the
abbey and seek protection for the bishop, and men say he bided there
almost night and day, praying until all was past. Certainly I saw him no
more in his accustomed places, save at mass.

When he had gone the bishop smiled a little, looking after him, and then
spoke to us.

"I may tell my council that this is what I should love. Nevertheless, it
will not be I who lead, but you three. For the counsel must be
Wulfhere's, and the coolness Wislac's, and the rest Heregar's, who will
by no means bide that we run away. Now, I think that you three will make
a good leader of me."

On that we thanked him for his words, and we followed him out to the
hall. And there the thanes shouted and cheered as he came, and still
more when he prayed them to follow him to victory or a warrior's death.
And that they swore to do, not loudly, but in such sort that none could
mistake that they would surely do so.

Then he bade them muster their men by the first light in the morning,
and so he would lead them first of all to Brent, to join the ealdorman.
And Osric should be his second in command.

That pleased all, and soon we were left alone with him again, but we
could hear outside the cheering of men now and then, as some thane
gathered his following and told them the name of their leader.

So we three went out presently and saw to our horses, and then I was
wondering about arms for Dudda, for I had left the matter too long, and
it seemed there were few weapons remaining for sale in the town by
reason of men of the levy buying or borrowing what they lacked in
equipment. And the poor fellow hung about sadly, thinking he should find
none in the end, and swearing he would follow me even had he naught but
a quarterstaff in his hand.

But when we went back to the abbey, the bishop sent for us, and we were
taken into a room we had not seen before, and there on the table were
