for mankind, and (likewise) the Accursed Tree in the Qur'an. We warn
them, but it increaseth them in naught save gross impiety.

S: And when We said to you: Surely your Lord encompasses men; and We did
not make the vision which We showed you but a trial for men and the
cursed tree in the Quran as well; and We cause them to fear, but it
only adds to their great inordinacy.

017.061
Y: Behold! We said to the angels: "Bow down unto Adam": They bowed down
except Iblis: He said, "Shall I bow down to one whom Thou didst create
from clay?"

P: And when We said unto the angels: Fall down prostrate before Adam and
they fell prostrate all save Iblis, he said: Shall I fall prostrate
before that which Thou hast created of clay?

S: And when We said to the angels: Make obeisance to Adam; they made
obeisance, but Iblis (did it not). He said: Shall I make obeisance to
him whom Thou hast created of dust?

017.062
Y: He said: "Seest Thou? this is the one whom Thou hast honoured above
me! If Thou wilt but respite me to the Day of Judgment, I will surely
bring his descendants under my sway - all but a few!"

P: He said: Seest Thou this (creature) whom Thou hast honoured above me,
if Thou give me grace until the Day of Resurrection I verily will seize
his seed, save but a few.

S: He said: Tell me, is this he whom Thou hast honored above me? If Thou
shouldst respite me to the day of resurrection, I will most certainly
cause his progeny to perish except a few.

017.063
Y: (Allah) said: "Go thy way; if any of them follow thee, verily Hell
will be the recompense of you (all)- an ample recompense."

P: He said: Go, and whosoever of them followeth thee - lo! hell will be
your payment, ample payment.

S: He said: Be gone! for whoever of them will follow you, then surely
hell is your recompense, a full recompense:

017.064
Y: "Lead to destruction those whom thou canst among them, with thy
(seductive) voice; make assaults on them with thy cavalry and thy
infantry; mutually share with them wealth and children; and make
promises to them." But Satan promises them nothing but deceit.

P: And excite any of them whom thou canst with thy voice, and urge thy
horse and foot against them, and be a partner in their wealth and
children, and promise them. Satan promiseth them only to deceive.

S: And beguile whomsoever of them you can with your voice, and collect
against them your forces riding and on foot, and share with them in
wealth and children, and hold out promises to them; and the Shaitan
makes not promises to them but to deceive:

017.065
Y: "As for My servants, no authority shalt thou have over them:" Enough
is thy Lord for a Disposer of affairs.

P: Lo! My (faithful) bondmen - over them thou hast no power, and thy
Lord sufficeth as (their) guardian.

S: Surely (as for) My servants, you have no authority over them; and
your Lord is sufficient as a Protector.

017.066
Y: Your Lord is He That maketh the Ship go smoothly for you through the
sea, in order that ye may seek of his Bounty. For he is unto you most
Merciful.

P: (O mankind), your Lord is He Who driveth for you the ship upon the
sea that ye may seek of His bounty. Lo! He was ever Merciful toward
you.

S: Your Lord is He Who speeds the ships for you in the sea that you may
seek of His grace; surely He is ever Merciful to you.

017.067
Y: When distress seizes you at sea, those that ye call upon - besides
Himself - leave you in the lurch! but when He brings you back safe to
land, ye turn away (from Him). Most ungrateful is man!

P: And when harm toucheth you upon the sea, all unto whom ye cry (for
succour) fail save Him (alone), but when He bringeth you safe to land,
ye turn away, for man was ever thankless.

S: And when distress afflicts you in the sea, away go those whom you
call on except He; but when He brings you safe to the land, you turn
aside; and man is ever ungrateful.

017.068
Y: Do ye then feel secure that He will not cause you to be swallowed up
beneath the earth when ye are on land, or that He will not send against
you a violent tornado (with showers of stones) so that ye shall find no
one to carry out your affairs for you?

P: Feel ye then secure that He will not cause a slope of the land to
engulf you, or send a sand-storm upon you, and then ye will find that
ye have no protector?

S: What! Do you then feel secure that He will not cause a tract of land
to engulf you or send on you a tornado? Then you shall not find a
protector for yourselves.

017.069
Y: Or do ye feel secure that He will not send you back a second time to
sea and send against you a heavy gale to drown you because of your
ingratitude, so that ye find no helper. Therein against Us?

P: Or feel ye secure that He will not return you to that (plight) a
second time, and send against you a hurricane of wind and drown you for
your thanklessness, and then ye will not find therein that ye have any
avenger against Us?

S: Or, do you feel secure that He will (not) take you back into it
another time, then send on you a fierce gale and thus drown you on
account of your ungratefulness? Then you shall not find any aider
against Us in the matter.

017.070
Y: We have honoured the sons of Adam; provided them with transport on
land and sea; given them for sustenance things good and pure; and
conferred on them special favours, above a great part of our creation.

P: Verily we have honoured the Children of Adam. We carry them on the
land and the sea, and have made provision of good things for them, and
have preferred them above many of those whom We created with a marked
preferment.

S: And surely We have honored the children of Adam, and We carry them in
the land and the sea, and We have given them of the good things, and We
have made them to excel by an appropriate excellence over most of those
whom We have created.

017.071
Y: One day We shall call together all human beings with their
(respective) Imams: those who are given their record in their right
hand will read it (with pleasure), and they will not be dealt with
unjustly in the least.

P: On the day when We shall summon all men with their record, whoso is
given his book in his right hand - such will read their book and they
will not be wronged a shred.

S: (Remember) the day when We will call every people with their Imam;
then whoever is given his book in his right hand, these shall read
their book; and they shall not be dealt with a whit unjustly.

017.072
Y: But those who were blind in this world, will be blind in the
hereafter, and most astray from the Path.

P: Whoso is blind here will be blind in the Hereafter, and yet further
from the road.

S: And whoever is blind in this, he shall (also) be blind in the
hereafter; and more erring from the way.

017.073
Y: And their purpose was to tempt thee away from that which We had
revealed unto thee, to substitute in our name something quite
different; (in that case), behold! they would certainly have made thee
(their) friend!

P: And they indeed strove hard to beguile thee (Muhammad) away from that
wherewith We have inspired thee, that thou shouldst invent other than
it against Us; and then would they have accepted thee as a friend.

S: And surely they had purposed to turn you away from that which We have
revealed to you, that you should forge against Us other than that, and
then they would certainly have taken you for a friend.

017.074
Y: And had We not given thee strength, thou wouldst nearly have inclined
to them a little.

P: And if We had not made thee wholly firm thou mightest almost have
inclined unto them a little.

S: And had it not been that We had already established you, you would
certainly have been near to incline to them a little;

017.075
Y: In that case We should have made thee taste an equal portion (of
punishment) in this life, and an equal portion in death: and moreover
thou wouldst have found none to help thee against Us!

P: Then had we made thee taste a double (punishment) of living and a
double (punishment) of dying, then hadst thou found no helper against
Us.

S: In that case We would certainly have made you to taste a double
(punishment) in this life and a double (punishment) after death, then
you would not have found any helper against Us.

017.076
Y: Their purpose was to scare thee off the land, in order to expel thee;
but in that case they would not have stayed (therein) after thee,
except for a little while.

P: And they indeed wished to scare thee from the land that they might
drive thee forth from thence, and then they would have stayed (there)
but a little after thee.

S: And surely they purposed to unsettle you from the land that they
might expel you from it, and in that case they will not tarry behind
you but a little.

017.077
Y: (This was Our) way with the messengers We sent before thee: thou wilt
find no change in Our ways.

P: (Such was Our) method in the case of those whom We sent before thee
(to mankind), and thou wilt not find for Our method aught of power to
change.

S: (This is Our) course with regard to those of Our messengers whom We
sent before you, and you shall not find a change in Our course.

017.078
Y: Establish regular prayers - at the sun's decline till the darkness of
the night, and the morning prayer and reading: for the prayer and
reading in the morning carry their testimony.

P: Establish worship at the going down of the sun until the dark of
night, and (the recital of) the Qur'an at dawn. Lo! (the recital of)
the Qur'an at dawn is ever witnessed.

S: Keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the
night and the morning recitation; surely the morning recitation is
witnessed.

017.079
Y: And pray in the small watches of the morning: (it would be) an
additional prayer (or spiritual profit) for thee: soon will thy Lord
raise thee to a Station of Praise and Glory!

P: And some part of the night awake for it, a largess for thee. It may
be that thy Lord will raise thee to a praised estate.

S: And during a part of the night, pray Tahajjud beyond what is
incumbent on you; maybe your Lord will raise you to a position of great
glory.

017.080
Y: Say: "O my Lord! Let my entry be by the Gate of Truth and Honour, and
likewise my exit by the Gate of Truth and Honour; and grant me from Thy
Presence an authority to aid (me)."

P: And say: My Lord! Cause me to come in with a firm incoming and to go
out with a firm outgoing. And give me from Thy presence a sustaining
Power.

S: And say: My Lord! make me to enter a goodly entering, and cause me to
go forth a goodly going forth, and grant me from near Thee power to
assist (me).

017.081
Y: And say: "Truth has (now) arrived, and Falsehood perished: for
Falsehood is (by its nature) bound to perish."

P: And say: Truth hath come and falsehood hath vanished away. Lo!
falsehood is ever bound to vanish.

S: And say: The truth has come and the falsehood has vanished; surely
falsehood is a vanishing (thing).

017.082
Y: We send down (stage by stage) in the Qur'an that which is a healing
and a mercy to those who believe: to the unjust it causes nothing but
loss after loss.

P: And We reveal of the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy for
believers though it increase the evil-doers in naught save ruin.

S: And We reveal of the Quran that which is a healing and a mercy to the
believers, and it adds only to the perdition of the unjust.

017.083
Y: Yet when We bestow Our favours on man, he turns away and becomes
remote on his side (instead of coming to Us), and when evil seizes him
he gives himself up to despair!

P: And when We make life pleasant unto man, he turneth away and is
averse; and when ill toucheth him he is in despair.

S: And when We bestow favor on man, he turns aside and behaves proudly,
and when evil afflicts him, he is despairing.

017.084
Y: Say: "Everyone acts according to his own disposition: But your Lord
knows best who it is that is best guided on the Way."

P: Say: Each one doth according to his rule of conduct, and thy Lord is
Best Aware of him whose way is right.

S: Say: Every one acts according to his manner; but your Lord best knows
who is best guided in the path.

017.085
Y: They ask thee concerning the Spirit (of inspiration). Say: "The
Spirit (cometh) by command of my Lord: of knowledge it is only a little
that is communicated to you, (O men!)"

P: They are asking thee concerning the Spirit. Say: The Spirit is by
command of my Lord, and of knowledge ye have been vouchsafed but
little.

S: And they ask you about the soul. Say: The soul is one of the commands
of my Lord, and you are not given aught of knowledge but a little.

017.086
Y: If it were Our Will, We could take away that which We have sent thee
by inspiration: then wouldst thou find none to plead thy affair in that
matter as against Us,-

P: And if We willed We could withdraw that which We have revealed unto
thee, then wouldst thou find no guardian for thee against Us in respect
thereof.

S: And if We please, We should certainly take away that which We have
revealed to you, then you would not find for it any protector against
Us.

017.087
Y: Except for Mercy from thy Lord: for his bounty is to thee (indeed)
great.

P: (It is naught) save mercy from thy Lord. Lo! His kindness unto thee
was ever great.

S: But on account of mercy from your Lord-- surely His grace to you is
abundant.

017.088
Y: Say: "If the whole of mankind and jinns were to gather together to
produce the like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like
thereof, even if they backed up each other with help and support."

P: Say: Verily, though mankind and the jinn should assemble to produce
the like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like thereof though
they were helpers one of another.

S: Say: If men and jinn should combine together to bring the like of
this Quran, they could not bring the like of it, though some of them
were aiders of others.

017.089
Y: And We have explained to man, in this Qur'an, every kind of
similitude: yet the greater part of men refuse (to receive it) except
with ingratitude!

P: And verily We have displayed for mankind in this Qur'an all kind of
similitudes, but most of mankind refuse aught save disbelief.

S: And certainly We have explained for men in this Quran every kind of
similitude, but most men do not consent to aught but denying.

017.090
Y: They say: "We shall not believe in thee, until thou cause a spring to
gush forth for us from the earth,"

P: And they say: We will not put faith in thee till thou cause a spring
to gush forth from the earth for us;

S: And they say: We will by no means believe in you until you cause a
fountain to gush forth from the earth for us.

017.091
Y: "Or (until) thou have a garden of date trees and vines, and cause
rivers to gush forth in their midst, carrying abundant water;"

P: Or thou have a garden of date-palms and grapes, and cause rivers to
gush forth therein abundantly;

S: Or you should have a garden of palms and grapes in the midst of which
you should cause rivers to flow forth, gushing out.

017.092
Y: "Or thou cause the sky to fall in pieces, as thou sayest (will
happen), against us; or thou bring Allah and the angels before (us)
face to face:"

P: Or thou cause the heaven to fall upon us piecemeal, as thou hast
pretended, or bring Allah and the angels as a warrant;

S: Or you should cause the heaven to come down upon us in pieces as you
think, or bring Allah and the angels face to face (with us).

017.093
Y: "Or thou have a house adorned with gold, or thou mount a ladder right
into the skies. No, we shall not even believe in thy mounting until
thou send down to us a book that we could read." Say: "Glory to my
Lord! Am I aught but a man,- a messenger?"

P: Or thou have a house of gold; or thou ascend up into heaven, and even
then we will put no faith in thine ascension till thou bring down for
us a book that we can read. Say (O Muhammad): My Lord be Glorified! Am
I aught save a mortal messenger?

S: Or you should have a house of gold, or you should ascend into heaven,
and we will not believe in your ascending until you bring down to us a
book which we may read. Say: Glory be to my Lord; am I aught but a
mortal messenger?

017.094
Y: What kept men back from belief when Guidance came to them, was
nothing but this: they said, "Has Allah sent a man (like us) to be
(His) Messenger?"

P: And naught prevented mankind from believing when the guidance came
unto them save that they said: Hath Allah sent a mortal as (His)
messenger?

S: And nothing prevented people from believing when the guidance came to
them except that they said: What! has Allah raised up a mortal to be a
messenger?

017.095
Y: Say, "If there were settled, on earth, angels walking about in peace
and quiet, We should certainly have sent them down from the heavens an
angel for a messenger."

P: Say: If there were in the earth angels walking secure, We had sent
down for them from heaven an angel as messenger.

S: Say: Had there been in the earth angels walking about as settlers, We
would certainly have sent down to them from the heaven an angel as a
messenger.

017.096
Y: Say: "Enough is Allah for a witness between me and you: for He is
well acquainted with His servants, and He sees (all things)."

P: Say: Allah sufficeth for a witness between me and you. Lo! He is
Knower, Seer of His slaves.

S: Say: Allah suffices as a witness between me and you; surely He is
Aware of His servants, Seeing.

017.097
Y: It is he whom Allah guides, that is on true Guidance; but he whom He
leaves astray - for such wilt thou find no protector besides Him. On
the Day of Judgment We shall gather, them together, prone on their
faces, blind, dumb, and deaf: their abode will be Hell: every time it
shows abatement, We shall increase from them the fierceness of the
Fire.

P: And he whom Allah guideth, he is led aright; while, as for him whom
He sendeth astray, for them thou wilt find no protecting friends beside
Him, and We shall assemble them on the Day of Resurrection on their
faces, blind, dumb and deaf; their habitation will be hell; whenever it
abateth, We increase the flame for them.

S: And whomsoever Allah guides, he is the follower of the right way, and
whomsoever He causes to err, you shall not find for him guardians
besides Him; and We will gather them together on the day of
resurrection on their faces, blind and dumb and deaf; their abode is
hell; whenever it becomes allayed We will add to their burning.

017.098
Y: That is their recompense, because they rejected Our signs, and said,
"When we are reduced to bones and broken dust, should we really be
raised up (to be) a new Creation?"

P: That is their reward because they disbelieved Our revelations and
said: When we are bones and fragments shall we, forsooth, be raised up
as a new creation?

S: This is their retribution because they disbelieved in Our
communications and said What! when we shall have become bones and
decayed particles, shall we then indeed be raised up into a new
creation?

017.099
Y: See they not that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, has
power to create the like of them (anew)? Only He has decreed a term
appointed, of which there is no doubt. But the unjust refuse (to
receive it) except with ingratitude.

P: Have they not seen that Allah Who created the heavens and the earth
is Able to create the like of them, and hath appointed for them an end
whereof there is no doubt? But the wrong-doers refuse aught save
disbelief.

S: Do they not consider that Allah, Who created the heavens and the
earth, is able to create their like, and He has appointed for them a
doom about which there is no doubt? But the unjust do not consent to
aught but denying.

017.100
Y: Say: "If ye had control of the Treasures of the Mercy of my Lord,
behold, ye would keep them back, for fear of spending them: for man is
(every) niggardly!"

P: Say (unto them): If ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my
Lord, ye would surely hold them back for fear of spending, for man was
ever grudging.

S: Say: If you control the treasures of the mercy of my Lord, then you
would withhold (them) from fear of spending, and man is niggardly.

017.101
Y: To Moses We did give Nine Clear Signs: As the Children of Israel:
when he came to them, Pharaoh said to him: "O Moses! I consider thee,
indeed, to have been worked upon by sorcery!"

P: And verily We gave unto Moses nine tokens, clear proofs (of Allah's
Sovereignty). Do but ask the Children of Israel how he came unto them,
then Pharaoh said unto him: Lo! I deem thee one bewitched, O Moses.

S: And certainly We gave Musa nine clear signs; so ask the children of
Israel. When he came to them, Firon said to him: Most surely I deem
you, O Musa, to be a man deprived of reason.

017.102
Y: Moses said, "Thou knowest well that these things have been sent down
by none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth as eye-opening
evidence: and I consider thee indeed, O Pharaoh, to be one doomed to
destruction!"

P: He said: In truth thou knowest that none sent down these (portents)
save the Lord of the heavens and the earth as proofs, and lo! (for my
part) I deem thee lost, O Pharaoh.

S: He said: Truly you know that none but the Lord of the heavens and the
earth has sent down these as clear proof and most surely I believe you,
O Firon, to be given over to perdition.

017.103
Y: So he resolved to remove them from the face of the earth: but We did
drown him and all who were with him.

P: And he wished to scare them from the land, but We drowned him and
those with him, all together.

S: So he desired to destroy them out of the earth, but We drowned him
and those with him all together;

017.104
Y: And We said thereafter to the Children of Israel, "Dwell securely in
the land (of promise)": but when the second of the warnings came to
pass, We gathered you together in a mingled crowd.

P: And We said unto the Children of Israel after him: Dwell in the land;
but when the promise of the Hereafter cometh to pass We shall bring you
as a crowd gathered out of various nations.

S: And We said to the Israelites after him: Dwell in the land: and when
the promise of the next life shall come to pass, we will bring you both
together in judgment.

017.105
Y: We sent down the (Qur'an) in Truth, and in Truth has it descended:
and We sent thee but to give Glad Tidings and to warn (sinners).

P: With truth have We sent it down, and with truth hath it descended.
And We have sent thee as naught else save a bearer of good tidings and
a warner.

S: And with truth have We revealed it, and with truth did it come; and
We have not sent you but as the giver of good news and as a warner.

017.106
Y: (It is) a Qur'an which We have divided (into parts from time to
time), in order that thou mightest recite it to men at intervals: We
have revealed it by stages.

P: And (it is) a Qur'an that We have divided, that thou mayst recite it
unto mankind at intervals, and We have revealed it by (successive)
revelation.

S: And it is a Quran which We have revealed in portions so that you may
read it to the people by slow degrees, and We have revealed it,
revealing in portions.

017.107
Y: Say: "Whether ye believe in it or not, it is true that those who were
given knowledge beforehand, when it is recited to them, fall down on
their faces in humble prostration,"

P: Say: Believe therein or believe not, lo! those who were given
knowledge before it, when it is read unto them, fall down prostrate on
their faces, adoring,

S: Say: Believe in it or believe not; surely those who are given the
knowledge before it fall down on their faces, making obeisance when it
is recited to them.

017.108
Y: "And they say: 'Glory to our Lord! Truly has the promise of our Lord
been fulfilled!'"

P: Saying: Glory to our Lord! Verily the promise of our Lord must be
fulfilled.

S: And they say: Glory be to our Lord! most surely the promise of our
Lord was to be fulfilled.

017.109
Y: They fall down on their faces in tears, and it increases their
(earnest) humility.

P: They fall down on their faces, weeping, and it increaseth humility in
them.

S: And they fall down on their faces weeping, and it adds to their
humility.

017.110
Y: Say: "Call upon Allah, or call upon Rahman: by whatever name ye call
upon Him, (it is well): for to Him belong the Most Beautiful Names.
Neither speak thy Prayer aloud, nor speak it in a low tone, but seek a
middle course between."

P: Say (unto mankind): Cry unto Allah, or cry unto the Beneficent, unto
whichsoever ye cry (it is the same). His are the most beautiful names.
And thou (Muhammad), be not loud-voiced in thy worship nor yet silent
therein, but follow a way between.

S: Say: Call upon Allah or call upon, the Beneficent Allah; whichever
you call upon, He has the best names; and do not utter your prayer with
a very raised voice nor be silent with regard to it, and seek a way
between these.

017.111
Y: Say: "Praise be to Allah, who begets no son, and has no partner in
(His) dominion: Nor (needs) He any to protect Him from humiliation:
yea, magnify Him for His greatness and glory!"

P: And say: Praise be to Allah, Who hath not taken unto Himself a son,
and Who hath no partner in the Sovereignty, nor hath He any protecting
friend through dependence. And magnify Him with all magnificence.

S: And say: (All) praise is due to Allah, Who has not taken a son and
Who has not a partner in the kingdom, and Who has not a helper to save
Him from disgrace; and proclaim His greatness magnifying (Him).

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 18:

                             AL-KAHF (THE CAVE)
 Total Verses: 110 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

018.001
Y: Praise be to Allah, Who hath sent to His Servant the Book, and hath
allowed therein no Crookedness:

P: Praise be to Allah Who hath revealed the Scripture unto His slave,
and hath not placed therein any crookedness,

S: (All) praise is due to Allah, Who revealed the Book to His servant
and did not make in it any crookedness.

018.002
Y: (He hath made it) Straight (and Clear) in order that He may warn (the
godless) of a terrible Punishment from Him, and that He may give Glad
Tidings to the Believers who work righteous deeds, that they shall have
a goodly Reward,

P: (But hath made it) straight, to give warning of stern punishment from
Him, and to bring unto the believers who do good works the news that
theirs will be a fair reward,

S: Rightly directing, that he might give warning of severe punishment
from Him and give good news to the believers who do good that they
shall have a goodly reward,

018.003
Y: Wherein they shall remain for ever:

P: Wherein they will abide for ever;

S: Staying in it for ever;

018.004
Y: Further, that He may warn those (also) who say, "Allah hath begotten
a son":

P: And to warn those who say: Allah hath chosen a son,

S: And warn those who say: Allah has taken a son.

018.005
Y: No knowledge have they of such a thing, nor had their fathers. It is
a grievous thing that issues from their mouths as a saying what they
say is nothing but falsehood!

P: (A thing) whereof they have no knowledge, nor (had) their fathers,
Dreadful is the word that cometh out of their mouths. They speak naught
but a lie.

S: They have no knowledge of it, nor had their fathers; a grievous word
it is that comes out of their mouths; they speak nothing but a lie.

018.006
Y: Thou wouldst only, perchance, fret thyself to death, following after
them, in grief, if they believe not in this Message.

P: Yet it may be, if they believe not in this statement, that thou
(Muhammad) wilt torment thy soul with grief over their footsteps.

S: Then maybe you will kill yourself with grief, sorrowing after them,
if they do not believe in this announcement.

018.007
Y: That which is on earth we have made but as a glittering show for the
earth, in order that We may test them - as to which of them are best in
conduct.

P: Lo! We have placed all that is on the earth as an ornament thereof
that We may try them: which of them is best in conduct.

S: Surely We have made whatever is on the earth an embellishment for it,
so that We may try them (as to) which of them is best in works.

018.008
Y: Verily what is on earth we shall make but as dust and dry soil
(without growth or herbage).

P: And lo! We shall make all that is thereon a barren mound.

S: And most surely We will make what is on it bare ground without
herbage.

018.009
Y: Or dost thou reflect that the Companions of the Cave and of the
Inscription were wonders among Our Sign?

P: Or deemest thou that the People of the Cave and the Inscription are a
wonder among Our portents?

S: Or, do you think that the Fellows of the Cave and the Inscription
were of Our wonderful signs?

018.010
Y: Behold, the youths betook themselves to the Cave: they said, "Our
Lord! bestow on us Mercy from Thyself, and dispose of our affair for us
in the right way!"

P: When the young men fled for refuge to the Cave and said: Our Lord!
Give us mercy from Thy presence, and shape for us right conduct in our
plight.

S: When the youths sought refuge in the cave, they said: Our Lord! grant
us mercy from Thee, and provide for us a right course in our affair.

018.011
Y: Then We draw (a veil) over their ears, for a number of years, in the
Cave, (so that they heard not):

P: Then We sealed up their hearing in the Cave for a number of years.

S: So We prevented them from hearing in the cave for a number of years.

018.012
Y: Then We roused them, in order to test which of the two parties was
best at calculating the term of years they had tarried!

P: And afterward We raised them up that We might know which of the two
parties would best calculate the time that they had tarried.

S: Then We raised them up that We might know which of the two parties
was best able to compute the time for which they remained.

018.013
Y: We relate to thee their story in truth: they were youths who believed
in their Lord, and We advanced them in guidance:

P: We narrate unto thee their story with truth. Lo! they were young men
who believed in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance.

S: We relate to you their story with the truth; surely they were youths
who believed in their Lord and We increased them in guidance.

018.014
Y: We gave strength to their hearts: Behold, they stood up and said:
"Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and of the earth: never shall we
call upon any god other than Him: if we did, we should indeed have
uttered an enormity!"

P: And We made firm their hearts when they stood forth and said: Our
Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We cry unto no God
beside Him, for then should we utter an enormity.

S: And We strengthened their hearts with patience, when they stood up
and said: Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth; we will by
no means call upon any god besides Him, for then indeed we should have
said an extravagant thing.

018.015
Y: "These our people have taken for worship gods other than Him: why do
they not bring forward an authority clear (and convincing) for what
they do? Who doth more wrong than such as invent a falsehood against
Allah?"

P: These, our people, have chosen (other) gods beside Him though they
bring no clear warrant (vouchsafed) to them. And who doth greater wrong
than he who inventeth a lie concerning Allah?

S: These our people have taken gods besides Him; why do they not produce
any clear authority in their support? Who is then more unjust than he
who forges a lie against Allah?

018.016
Y: "When ye turn away from them and the things they worship other than
Allah, betake yourselves to the Cave: Your Lord will shower His mercies
on you and disposes of your affair towards comfort and ease."

P: And when ye withdraw from them and that which they worship except
Allah, then seek refuge in the Cave; your Lord will spread for you of
His mercy and will prepare for you a pillow in your plight.

S: And when you forsake them and what they worship save Allah, betake
yourselves for refuge to the cave; your Lord will extend to you largely
of His mercy and provide for you a profitable course in your affair.

018.017
Y: Thou wouldst have seen the sun, when it rose, declining to the right
from their Cave, and when it set, turning away from them to the left,
while they lay in the open space in the midst of the Cave. Such are
among the Signs of Allah: He whom Allah, guides is rightly guided; but
he whom Allah leaves to stray,- for him wilt thou find no protector to
lead him to the Right Way.

P: And thou mightest have seen the sun when it rose move away from their
cave to the right, and when it set go past them on the left, and they
were in the cleft thereof. That was (one) of the portents of Allah. He
whom Allah guideth, he indeed is led aright, and he whom He sendeth
astray, for him thou wilt not find a guiding friend.

S: And you might see the sun when it rose, decline from their cave
towards the right hand, and when it set, leave them behind on the left
while they were in a wide space thereof. This is of the signs of Allah;
whomsoever Allah guides, he is the rightly guided one, and whomsoever
He causes to err, you shall not find for him any friend to lead (him)
aright.

018.018
Y: Thou wouldst have deemed them awake, whilst they were asleep, and We
turned them on their right and on their left sides: their dog
stretching forth his two fore-legs on the threshold: if thou hadst come
up on to them, thou wouldst have certainly turned back from them in
flight, and wouldst certainly have been filled with terror of them.

P: And thou wouldst have deemed them waking though they were asleep, and
We caused them to turn over to the right and the left, and their dog
stretching out his paws on the threshold. If thou hadst observed them
closely thou hadst assuredly turned away from them in flight, and hadst
been filled with awe of them.

S: And you might think them awake while they were asleep and We turned
them about to the right and to the left, while their dog (lay)
outstretching its paws at the entrance; if you looked at them you would
certainly turn back from them in flight, and you would certainly be
filled with awe because of them.

018.019
Y: Such (being their state), we raised them up (from sleep), that they
might question each other. Said one of them, "How long have ye stayed
(here)?" They said, "We have stayed (perhaps) a day, or part of a day."
(At length) they (all) said, "Allah (alone) knows best how long ye have
stayed here.... Now send ye then one of you with this money of yours to
the town: let him find out which is the best food (to be had) and bring
some to you, that (ye may) satisfy your hunger therewith: And let him
behave with care and courtesy, and let him not inform any one about
you."

P: And in like manner We awakened them that they might question one
another. A speaker from among them said: How long have ye tarried? They
said: We have tarried a day or some part of a day, (Others) said: Your
Lord best knoweth what ye have tarried. Now send one of you with this
your silver coin unto the city, and let him see what food is purest
there and bring you a supply thereof. Let him be courteous and let no
man know of you.

S: And thus did We rouse them that they might question each other. A
speaker among them said: How long have you tarried? They said: We have
tarried for a day or a part of a day. (Others) said: Your Lord knows
best how long you have tarried. Now send one of you with this silver
(coin) of yours to the city, then let him see which of them has purest
food, so let him bring you provision from it, and let him behave with
gentleness, and by no means make your case known to any one:

018.020
Y: "For if they should come upon you, they would stone you or force you
to return to their cult, and in that case ye would never attain
prosperity."

P: For they, if they should come to know of you, will stone you or turn
you back to their religion; then ye will never prosper.

S: For surely if they prevail against you they would stone you to death
or force you back to their religion, and then you will never succeed.

018.021
Y: Thus did We make their case known to the people, that they might know
that the promise of Allah is true, and that there can be no doubt about
the Hour of Judgment. Behold, they dispute among themselves as to their
affair. (Some) said, "Construct a building over them": Their Lord knows
best about them: those who prevailed over their affair said, "Let us
surely build a place of worship over them."

P: And in like manner We disclosed them (to the people of the city) that
they might know that the promise of Allah is true, and that, as for the
Hour, there is no doubt concerning it. When (the people of the city)
disputed of their case among themselves, they said: Build over them a
building; their Lord knoweth best concerning them. Those who won their
point said: We verily shall build a place of worship over them.

S: And thus did We make (men) to get knowledge of them that they might
know that Allah's promise is true and that as for the hour there is no
doubt about it. When they disputed among themselves about their affair
and said: Erect an edifice over them-- their Lord best knows them.
Those who prevailed in their affair said: We will certainly raise a
masjid over them.

018.022
Y: (Some) say they were three, the dog being the fourth among them;
(others) say they were five, the dog being the sixth,- doubtfully
guessing at the unknown; (yet others) say they were seven, the dog
being the eighth. Say thou: "My Lord knoweth best their number; It is
but few that know their (real case)." Enter not, therefore, into
controversies concerning them, except on a matter that is clear, nor
consult any of them about (the affair of) the Sleepers.

P: (Some) will say: They were three, their dog the fourth, and (some)
say: Five, their dog the sixth, guessing at random; and (some) say:
Seven, and their dog the eighth. Say (O Muhammad): My Lord is Best
Aware of their number. None knoweth them save a few. So contend not
concerning them except with an outward contending, and ask not any of
them to pronounce concerning them.

S: (Some) say: (They are) three, the fourth of them being their dog; and
(others) say: Five, the sixth of them being their dog, making
conjectures at what is unknown; and (others yet) say: Seven, and the
eighth of them is their dog. Say: My Lord best knows their number, none
knows them but a few; therefore contend not in the matter of them but
with an outward contention, and do not question concerning them any of
them.

018.023
Y: Nor say of anything, "I shall be sure to do so and so tomorrow"-

P: And say not of anything: Lo! I shall do that tomorrow,

S: And do not say of anything: Surely I will do it tomorrow,

018.024
Y: Without adding, "So please Allah!" and call thy Lord to mind when
thou forgettest, and say, "I hope that my Lord will guide me ever
closer (even) than this to the right road."

P: Except if Allah will. And remember thy Lord when thou forgettest, and
say: It may be that my Lord guideth me unto a nearer way of truth than
this.

S: Unless Allah pleases; and remember your Lord when you forget and say:
Maybe my Lord will guide me to a nearer course to the right than this.

018.025
Y: So they stayed in their Cave three hundred years, and (some) add nine
(more)

P: And (it is said) they tarried in their Cave three hundred years and
add nine.

S: And they remained in their cave three hundred years and (some) add
(another) nine.

018.026
Y: Say: "Allah knows best how long they stayed: with Him is (the
knowledge of) the secrets of the heavens and the earth: how clearly He
sees, how finely He hears (everything)! They have no protector other
than Him; nor does He share His Command with any person whatsoever."

P: Say: Allah is Best Aware how long they tarried. His is the Invisible
of the heavens and the earth. How clear of sight is He and keen of
hearing! They have no protecting friend beside Him, and He maketh none
to share in His government.

S: Say: Allah knows best how long they remained; to Him are (known) the
unseen things of the heavens and the earth; how clear His sight and how
clear His hearing! There is none to be a guardian for them besides Him,
and He does not make any one His associate in His Judgment.

018.027
Y: And recite (and teach) what has been revealed to thee of the Book of
thy Lord: none can change His Words, and none wilt thou find as a
refuge other than Him.

P: And recite that which hath been revealed unto thee of the Scripture
of thy Lord. There is none who can change His words, and thou wilt find
no refuge beside Him.

S: And recite what has been revealed to you of the Book of your Lord,
there is none who can alter His words; and you shall not find any
refuge besides Him.

018.028
Y: And keep thy soul content with those who call on their Lord morning
and evening, seeking His Face; and let not thine eyes pass beyond them,
seeking the pomp and glitter of this Life; no obey any whose heart We
have permitted to neglect the remembrance of Us, one who follows his
own desires, whose case has gone beyond all bounds.

P: Restrain thyself along with those who cry unto their Lord at morn and
evening, seeking His Countenance; and let not thine eyes overlook them,
desiring the pomp of the life of the world; and obey not him whose
heart We have made heedless of Our remembrance, who followeth his own
lust and whose case hath been abandoned.

S: And withhold yourself with those who call on their Lord morning and
evening desiring His goodwill, and let not your eyes pass from them,
desiring the beauties of this world's life; and do not follow him whose
heart We have made unmindful to Our remembrance, and he follows his low
desires and his case is one in which due bounds are exceeded.

018.029
Y: Say, "The truth is from your Lord": Let him who will believe, and let
him who will, reject (it): for the wrong-doers We have prepared a Fire
whose (smoke and flames), like the walls and roof of a tent, will hem
them in: if they implore relief they will be granted water like melted
brass, that will scald their faces, how dreadful the drink! How
uncomfortable a couch to recline on!

P: Say: (It is) the truth from the Lord of you (all). Then whosoever
will, let him believe, and whosoever will, let him disbelieve. Lo! We
have prepared for disbelievers Fire. Its tent encloseth them. If they
ask for showers, they will be showered with water like to molten lead
which burneth the faces. Calamitous the drink and ill the
resting-place!

S: And say: The truth is from your Lord, so let him who please believe,
and let him who please disbelieve; surely We have prepared for the
iniquitous a fire, the curtains of which shall encompass them about;
and if they cry for water, they shall be given water like molten brass
which will scald their faces; evil the drink and ill the resting-place.

018.030
Y: As to those who believe and work righteousness, verily We shall not
suffer to perish the reward of any who do a (single) righteous deed.

P: Lo! as for those who believe and do good works - Lo! We suffer not
the reward of one whose work is goodly to be lost.

S: Surely (as for) those who believe and do good, We do not waste the
reward of him who does a good work.

018.031
Y: For them will be Gardens of Eternity; beneath them rivers will flow;
they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold, and they will wear
green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade: They will recline
therein on raised thrones. How good the recompense! How beautiful a
couch to recline on!

P: As for such, theirs will be Gardens of Eden, wherein rivers flow
beneath them; therein they will be given armlets of gold and will wear
green robes of finest silk and gold embroidery, reclining upon throne
therein. Blest the reward, and fair the resting-place!

S: These it is for whom are gardens of perpetuity beneath which rivers
flow, ornaments shall be given to them therein of bracelets of gold,
and they shall wear green robes of fine silk and thick silk brocade
interwoven with gold, reclining therein on raised couches; excellent
the recompense and goodly the resting place.

018.032
Y: Set forth to them the parable of two men: for one of them We provided
two gardens of grape-vines and surrounded them with date palms; in
between the two We placed corn-fields.

P: Coin for them a similitude: Two men, unto one of whom We had assigned
two gardens of grapes, and We had surrounded both with date-palms and
had put between them tillage.

S: And set forth to them a parable of two men; for one of them We made
two gardens of grape vines, and We surrounded them both with palms, and
in the midst of them We made cornfields.

018.033
Y: Each of those gardens brought forth its produce, and failed not in
the least therein: in the midst of them We caused a river to flow.

P: Each of the gardens gave its fruit and withheld naught thereof. And
We caused a river to gush forth therein.

S: Both these gardens yielded their fruits, and failed not aught
thereof, and We caused a river to gush forth in their midst,

018.034
Y: (Abundant) was the produce this man had: he said to his companion,
in the course of a mutual argument: "more wealth have I than you, and
more honour and power in (my following of) men."

P: And he had fruit. And he said unto his comrade, when he spake with
him: I am more than thee in wealth, and stronger in respect of men.

S: And he possessed much wealth; so he said to his companion, while he
disputed with him: I have greater wealth than you, and am mightier in
followers.

018.035
Y: He went into his garden in a state (of mind) unjust to his soul: He
said, "I deem not that this will ever perish,"

P: And he went into his garden, while he (thus) wronged himself. He
said: I think not that all this will ever perish.

S: And he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself. He said: I
do not think that this will ever perish,

018.036
Y: "Nor do I deem that the Hour (of Judgment) will (ever) come: Even if
I am brought back to my Lord, I shall surely find (there) something
better in exchange."

P: I think not that the Hour will ever come, and if indeed I am brought
back unto my Lord I surely shall find better than this as a resort.

S: And I do not think the hour will come, and even if I am returned to
my Lord I will most certainly find a returning place better than this.

018.037
Y: His companion said to him, in the course of the argument with him:
"Dost thou deny Him Who created thee out of dust, then out of a
sperm-drop, then fashioned thee into a man?"

P: His comrade, when he (thus) spake with him, exclaimed: Disbelievest
thou in Him Who created thee of dust, then of a drop (of seed), and
then fashioned thee a man?

S: His companion said to him while disputing with him: Do you disbelieve
in Him Who created you from dust, then from a small seed, then He made
you a perfect man?

018.038
Y: "But (I think) for my part that He is Allah, My Lord, and none shall
I associate with my Lord."

P: But He is Allah, my Lord, and I ascribe unto my Lord no partner.

S: But as for me, He, Allah, is my Lord, and I do not associate anyone
with my Lord.

018.039
Y: "Why didst thou not, as thou wentest into thy garden, say:
'Allah's will (be done)! There is no power but with Allah!' If thou dost
see me less than thee in wealth and sons,"

P: If only, when thou enteredst thy garden, thou hadst said: That which
Allah willeth (will come to pass)! There is no strength save in Allah!
Though thou seest me as less than thee in wealth and children,

S: And wherefore did you not say when you entered your garden: It is as
Allah has pleased, there is no power save in Allah? If you consider me
to be inferior to you in wealth and children,

018.040
Y: "It may be that my Lord will give me something better than thy
garden, and that He will send on thy garden thunderbolts (by way of
reckoning) from heaven, making it (but) slippery sand!-"

P: Yet it may be that my Lord will give me better than thy garden, and
will send on it a bolt from heaven, and some morning it will be a
smooth hillside,

S: Then maybe my Lord will give me what is better than your garden, and
send on it a thunderbolt from heaven so that it shall become even
ground without plant,

018.041
Y: "Or the water of the garden will run off underground so that thou
wilt never be able to find it."

P: Or some morning the water thereof will be lost in the earth so that
thou canst not make search for it.

S: Or its waters should sink down into the ground so that you are unable
to find it.

018.042
Y: So his fruits (and enjoyment) were encompassed (with ruin), and he
remained twisting and turning his hands over what he had spent on his
property, which had (now) tumbled to pieces to its very foundations,
and he could only say, "Woe is me! Would I had never ascribed partners
to my Lord and Cherisher!"

P: And his fruit was beset (with destruction). Then began he to wring
his hands for all that he had spent upon it, when (now) it was all
ruined on its trellises, and to say: Would that I had ascribed no
partner to my Lord!

S: And his wealth was destroyed; so he began to wring his hands for what
he had spent on it, while it lay, having fallen down upon its roofs,
and he said: Ah me! would that I had not associated anyone with my
Lord.

018.043
Y: Nor had he numbers to help him against Allah, nor was he able to
deliver himself.

P: And he had no troop of men to help him as against Allah, nor could he
save himself.

S: And he had no host to help him besides Allah nor could he defend
himself.

018.044
Y: There, the (only) protection comes from Allah, the True One. He is
the Best to reward, and the Best to give success.

P: In this case is protection only from Allah, the True, He is Best for
reward, and best for consequence.

S: Here is protection only Allah's, the True One; He is best in (the
giving of) reward and best in requiting.

018.045
Y: Set forth to them the similitude of the life of this world: It is
like the rain which we send down from the skies: the earth's vegetation
absorbs it, but soon it becomes dry stubble, which the winds do
scatter: it is (only) Allah who prevails over all things.

P: And coin for them the similitude of the life of the world as water
which We send down from the sky, and the vegetation of the earth
mingleth with it and then becometh dry twigs that the winds scatter.
Allah is able to do all things.

S: And set forth to them parable of the life of this world: like water
which We send down from the cloud so the herbage of the earth becomes
tangled on account of it, then it becomes dry broken into pieces which
the winds scatter; and Allah is the holder of power over all things.

018.046
Y: Wealth and sons are allurements of the life of this world: But the
things that endure, good deeds, are best in the sight of thy Lord, as
rewards, and best as (the foundation for) hopes.

P: Wealth and children are an ornament of the life of the world. But the
good deeds which endure are better in thy Lord's sight for reward, and
better in respect of hope.

S: Wealth and children are an adornment of the life of this world; and
the ever-abiding, the good works, are better with your Lord in reward
and better in expectation.

018.047
Y: One Day We shall remove the mountains, and thou wilt see the earth as
a level stretch, and We shall gather them, all together, nor shall We
leave out any one of them.

P: And (bethink you of) the Day when we remove the hills and ye see the
earth emerging, and We gather them together so as to leave not one of
them behind.

S: And the day on which We will cause the mountains to pass away and you
will see the earth a levelled plain and We will gather them and leave
not any one of them behind.

018.048
Y: And they will be marshalled before thy Lord in ranks, (with the
announcement), "Now have ye come to Us (bare) as We created you first:
aye, ye thought We shall not fulfill the appointment made to you to meet
(Us)!":

P: And they are set before thy Lord in ranks (and it is said unto them):
Now verily have ye come unto Us as We created you at the first. But ye
thought that We had set no tryst for you.

S: And they shall be brought before your Lord, standing in ranks: Now
certainly you have come to Us as We created you at first. Nay, you
thought that We had not appointed to you a time of the fulfillment of
the promise.

018.049
Y: And the Book (of Deeds) will be placed (before you); and thou wilt
see the sinful in great terror because of what is (recorded) therein;
they will say, "Ah! woe to us! what a Book is this! It leaves out
nothing small or great, but takes account thereof!" They will find all
that they did, placed before them: And not one will thy Lord treat with
injustice.

P: And the Book is placed, and thou seest the guilty fearful of that
which is therein, and they say: What kind of a Book is this that
leaveth not a small thing nor a great thing but hath counted it! And
they find all that they did confronting them, and thy Lord wrongeth
no-one.

S: And the Book shall be placed, then you will see the guilty fearing
from what is in it, and they will say: Ah! woe to us! what a book is
this! it does not omit a small one nor a great one, but numbers them
(all); and what they had done they shall find present (there); and your
Lord does not deal unjustly with anyone.

018.050
Y: Behold! We said to the angels, "Bow down to Adam": They bowed down
except Iblis. He was one of the jinns, and he broke the Command of his
Lord. Will ye then take him and his progeny as protectors rather than
Me? And they are enemies to you! Evil would be the exchange for the
wrong-doers!

P: And (remember) when We said unto the angels: Fall prostrate before
Adam, and they fell prostrate, all save Iblis. He was of the jinn, so
he rebelled against his Lord's command. Will ye choose him and his seed
for your protecting friends instead of Me, when they are an enemy unto
you? Calamitous is the exchange for evil-doers.

S: And when We said to the angels: Make obeisance to Adam; they made
obeisance but Iblis (did it not). He was of the jinn, so he
transgressed the commandment of his Lord. What! would you then take him
and his offspring for friends rather than Me, and they are your
enemies? Evil is (this) change for the unjust.

018.051
Y: I called them not to witness the creation of the heavens and the
earth, nor (even) their own creation: nor is it for helpers such as Me
to take as lead (men) astray!

P: I made them not to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth,
nor their own creation; nor choose I misleaders for (My) helpers.

S: I did not make them witnesses of the creation of the heavens and the
earth, nor of the creation of their own souls; nor could I take those
who lead (others) astray for aiders.

018.052
Y: One Day He will say, "Call on those whom ye thought to be My
partners," and they will call on them, but they will not listen to
them; and We shall make for them a place of common perdition.

P: And (be mindful of) the Day when He will say: Call those partners of
Mine whom ye pretended. Then they will cry unto them, but they will not
hear their prayer, and We shall set a gulf of doom between them.

S: And on the day when He shall say: Call on those whom you considered
to be My associates. So they shall call on them, but they shall not
answer them, and We will cause a separation between them.

018.053
Y: And the Sinful shall see the fire and apprehend that they have to
fall therein: no means will they find to turn away therefrom.

P: And the guilty behold the Fire and know that they are about to fall
therein, and they find no way of escape thence.

S: And the guilty shall see the fire, then they shall know that they are
going to fall into it, and they shall not find a place to which to turn
away from it.

018.054
Y: We have explained in detail in this Qur'an, for the benefit of
mankind, every kind of similitude: but man is, in most things,
contentious.

P: And verily We have displayed for mankind in this Qur'an all manner of
similitudes, but man is more than anything contentious.

S: And certainly We have explained in this Quran every kind of example,
and man is most of all given to contention.

018.055
Y: And what is there to keep back men from believing, now that Guidance
has come to them, nor from praying for forgiveness from their Lord, but
that (they ask that) the ways of the ancients be repeated with them, or
the Wrath be brought to them face to face?

P: And naught hindereth mankind from believing when the guidance cometh
unto them, and from asking forgiveness of their Lord unless (it be that
they wish) that the judgment of the men of old should come upon them or
(that) they should be confronted with the Doom.

S: And nothing prevents men from believing when the guidance comes to
them, and from asking forgiveness of their Lord, except that what
happened to the ancients should overtake them, or that the chastisement
should come face to face with them.

018.056
Y: We only send the messengers to give Glad Tidings and to give
warnings: But the unbelievers dispute with vain argument, in order
therewith to weaken the truth, and they treat My Signs as a jest, as
also the fact that they are warned!

P: We send not the messengers save as bearers of good news and warners.
Those who disbelieve contend with falsehood in order to refute the
Truth thereby. And they take Our revelations and that wherewith they
are threatened as a jest.

S: And We do not send messengers but as givers of good news and warning,
and those who disbelieve make a false contention that they may render
null thereby the truth, and they take My communications and that with
which they are warned for a mockery.

018.057
Y: And who doth more wrong than one who is reminded of the Signs of his
Lord, but turns away from them, forgetting the (deeds) which his hands
have sent forth? Verily We have set veils over their hearts lest they
should understand this, and over their ears, deafness, if thou callest
them to guidance, even then will they never accept guidance.

P: And who doth greater wrong than he who hath been reminded of the
revelations of his Lord, yet turneth away from them and forgetteth what
his hands send forward (to the Judgment)? Lo! on their hearts We have
placed coverings so that they understand not, and in their ears a
deafness. And though thou call them to the guidance, in that case they
can never be led aright.

S: And who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the communications
of his Lord, then he turns away from them and forgets what his two
hands have sent before? Surely We have placed veils over their hearts
lest they should understand it and a heaviness in their ears; and if
you call them to the guidance, they will not ever follow the right
course in that case.

018.058
Y: But your Lord is Most Forgiving, Full of Mercy. If He were to call
them (at once) to account for what they have earned, then surely He
would have hastened their punishment: but they have their appointed
time, beyond which they will find no refuge.

P: Thy Lord is the Forgiver, Full of Mercy. If He took them to task
(now) for what they earn, He would hasten on the doom for them; but
theirs is an appointed term from which they will find no escape.

S: And your Lord is Forgiving, the Lord of Mercy; were He to punish them
for what they earn, He would certainly have hastened the chastisement
for them; but for them there is an appointed time from which they shall
not find a refuge.

018.059
Y: Such were the populations we destroyed when they committed
iniquities; but we fixed an appointed time for their destruction.

P: And (all) those townships! We destroyed them when they did wrong, and
We appointed a fixed time for their destruction.

S: And (as for) these towns, We destroyed them when they acted unjustly,
and We have appointed a time for their destruction.

018.060
Y: Behold, Moses said to his attendant, "I will not give up until I
reach the junction of the two seas or (until) I spend years and years
in travel."

P: And when Moses said unto his servant: I will not give up until I
reach the point where the two rivers meet, though I march on for ages.

S: And when Musa said to his servant: I will not cease until I reach the
junction of the two rivers or I will go on for years.

018.061
Y: But when they reached the Junction, they forgot (about) their Fish,
which took its course through the sea (straight) as in a tunnel.

P: And when they reached the point where the two met, they forgot their
fish, and it took its way into the waters, being free.

S: So when they had reached the junction of the two (rivers) they forgot
their fish, and it took its way into the sea, going away.

018.062
Y: When they had passed on (some distance), Moses said to his attendant:
"Bring us our early meal; truly we have suffered much fatigue at this
(stage of) our journey."

P: And when they had gone further, he said unto his servant: Bring us
our breakfast. Verily we have found fatigue in this our journey.

S: But when they had gone farther, he said to his servant: Bring to us
our morning meal, certainly we have met with fatigue from this our
journey.

018.063
Y: He replied: "Sawest thou (what happened) when we betook ourselves to
the rock? I did indeed forget (about) the Fish: none but Satan made me
forget to tell (you) about it: it took its course through the sea in a
marvellous way!"

P: He said: Didst thou see, when we took refuge on the rock, and I
forgot the fish - and none but Satan caused me to forget to mention it
- it took its way into the waters by a marvel.

S: He said: Did you see when we took refuge on the rock then I forgot
the fish, and nothing made me forget to speak of it but the Shaitan,
and it took its way into the river; what a wonder!

018.064
Y: Moses said: "That was what we were seeking after:" So they went back
on their footsteps, following (the path they had come).

P: He said: This is that which we have been seeking. So they retraced
their steps again.

S: He said: This is what we sought for; so they returned retracing their
footsteps.

018.065
Y: So they found one of Our servants, on whom We had bestowed Mercy from
Ourselves and whom We had taught knowledge from Our own Presence.

P: Then found they one of Our slaves, unto whom We had given mercy from
Us, and had taught him knowledge from Our presence.

S: Then they found one from among Our servants whom We had granted mercy
from Us and whom We had taught knowledge from Ourselves.

018.066
Y: Moses said to him: "May I follow thee, on the footing that thou teach
me something of the (Higher) Truth which thou hast been taught?"

P: Moses said unto him: May I follow thee, to the end that thou mayst
teach me right conduct of that which thou hast been taught?

S: Musa said to him: Shall I follow you on condition that you should
teach me right knowledge of what you have been taught?

018.067
Y: (The other) said: "Verily thou wilt not be able to have patience with
me!"

P: He said: Lo! thou canst not bear with me.

S: He said: Surely you cannot have patience with me

018.068
Y: "And how canst thou have patience about things about which thy
understanding is not complete?"

P: How canst thou bear with that whereof thou canst not compass any
knowledge?

S: And how can you have patience in that of which you have not got a
comprehensive knowledge?

018.069
Y: Moses said: "Thou wilt find me, if Allah so will, (truly) patient:
nor shall I disobey thee in aught."

P: He said: Allah willing, thou shalt find me patient and I shall not in
aught gainsay thee.

S: He said: If Allah pleases, you will find me patient and I shall not
disobey you in any matter.

018.070
Y: The other said: "If then thou wouldst follow me, ask me no questions
about anything until I myself speak to thee concerning it."

P: He said: Well, if thou go with me, ask me not concerning aught till I
myself make mention of it unto thee.

S: He said: If you would follow me, then do not question me about any
thing until I myself speak to you about it.

018.071
Y: So they both proceeded: until, when they were in the boat, he
scuttled it. Said Moses: "Hast thou scuttled it in order to drown those
in it? Truly a strange thing hast thou done!"

P: So they twain set out till, when they were in the ship, he made a
hole therein. (Moses) said: Hast thou made a hole therein to drown the
folk thereof? Thou verily hast done a dreadful thing.

S: So they went (their way) until when they embarked in the boat he made
a hole in it. (Musa) said: Have you made a hole in it to drown its
inmates? Certainly you have done a grievous thing.

018.072
Y: He answered: "Did I not tell thee that thou canst have no patience
with me?"

P: He said: Did I not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me?

S: He said: Did I not say that you will not be able to have patience
with me?

018.073
Y: Moses said: "Rebuke me not for forgetting, nor grieve me by raising
difficulties in my case."

P: (Moses) said: Be not wroth with me that I forgot, and be not hard
upon me for my fault.

S: He said: Blame me not for what I forgot, and do not constrain me to a
difficult thing in my affair.

018.074
Y: Then they proceeded: until, when they met a young man, he slew him.
Moses said: "Hast thou slain an innocent person who had slain none?
Truly a foul (unheard of) thing hast thou done!"

P: So they twain journeyed on till, when they met a lad, he slew him.
(Moses) said: What! Hast thou slain an innocent soul who hath slain no
man? Verily thou hast done a horrid thing.

S: So they went on until, when they met a boy, he slew him. (Musa) said:
Have you slain an innocent person otherwise than for manslaughter?
Certainly you have done an evil thing.

018.075
Y: He answered: "Did I not tell thee that thou canst have no patience
with me?"

P: He said: Did I not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me?

S: He said: Did I not say to you that you will not be able to have
patience with me?

018.076
Y: (Moses) said: "If ever I ask thee about anything after this, keep me
not in thy company: then wouldst thou have received (full) excuse from
my side."

P: (Moses) said: If I ask thee after this concerning aught, keep not
company with me. Thou hast received an excuse from me.

S: He said: If I ask you about anything after this, keep me not in your
company; indeed you shall have (then) found an excuse in my case.

018.077
Y: Then they proceeded: until, when they came to the inhabitants of a
town, they asked them for food, but they refused them hospitality. They
found there a wall on the point of falling down, but he set it up
straight. (Moses) said: "If thou hadst wished, surely thou couldst have
exacted some recompense for it!"

P: So they twain journeyed on till, when they came unto the folk of a
certain township, they asked its folk for food, but they refused to
make them guests. And they found therein a wall upon the point of
falling into ruin, and he repaired it. (Moses) said: If thou hadst
wished, thou couldst have taken payment for it.

S: So they went on until when they came to the people of a town, they
asked them for food, but they refused to entertain them as guests. Then
they found in it a wall which was on the point of falling, so he put it
into a right state. (Musa) said: If you had pleased, you might
certainly have taken a recompense for it.

018.078
Y: He answered: "This is the parting between me and thee: now will I
tell thee the interpretation of (those things) over which thou wast
unable to hold patience."

P: He said: This is the parting between thee and me! I will announce
unto thee the interpretation of that thou couldst not bear with
patience.

S: He said: This shall be separation between me and you; now I will
inform you of the significance of that with which you could not have
patience.

018.079
Y: "As for the boat, it belonged to certain men in dire want: they plied
on the water: I but wished to render it unserviceable, for there was
after them a certain king who seized on every boat by force."

P: As for the ship, it belonged to poor people working on the river, and
I wished to mar it, for there was a king behind them who is taking
every ship by force.

S: As for the boat, it belonged to (some) poor men who worked on the
river and I wished that I should damage it, and there was behind them a
king who seized every boat by force.

018.080
Y: "As for the youth, his parents were people of Faith, and we feared
that he would grieve them by obstinate rebellion and ingratitude (to
Allah and man)."

P: And as for the lad, his parents were believers and we feared lest he
should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief.

S: And as for the boy, his parents were believers and we feared lest he
should make disobedience and ingratitude to come upon them:

018.081
Y: "So we desired that their Lord would give them in exchange (a son)
better in purity (of conduct) and closer in affection."

P: And we intended that their Lord should change him for them for one
better in purity and nearer to mercy.

S: So we desired that their Lord might give them in his place one better
than him in purity and nearer to having compassion.

018.082
Y: "As for the wall, it belonged to two youths, orphans, in the Town;
there was, beneath it, a buried treasure, to which they were entitled:
their father had been a righteous man: So thy Lord desired that they
should attain their age of full strength and get out their treasure - a
mercy (and favour) from thy Lord. I did it not of my own accord. Such
is the interpretation of (those things) over which thou wast unable to
hold patience."

P: And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and
there was beneath it a treasure belonging to them, and their father had
been righteous, and thy Lord intended that they should come to their
full strength and should bring forth their treasure as a mercy from
their Lord; and I did it not upon my own command. Such is the
interpretation of that wherewith thou couldst not bear.

S: And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and
there was beneath it a treasure belonging to them, and their father was
a righteous man; so your Lord desired that they should attain their
maturity and take out their treasure, a mercy from your Lord, and I did
not do it of my own accord. This is the significance of that with which
you could not have patience.

018.083
Y: They ask thee concerning Zul-qarnain. Say, "I will rehearse to you
something of his story."

P: They will ask thee of Dhu'l-Qarneyn. Say: I shall recite unto you a
remembrance of him.

S: And they ask you about Zulqarnain. Say: I will recite to you an
account of him.

018.084
Y: Verily We established his power on earth, and We gave him the ways
and the means to all ends.

P: Lo! We made him strong in the land and gave him unto every thing a
road.

S: Surely We established him in the land and granted him means of access
to every thing.

018.085
Y: One (such) way he followed,

P: And he followed a road

S: So he followed a course.

018.086
Y: Until, when he reached the setting of the sun, he found it set in a
spring of murky water: Near it he found a People: We said: "O
Zul-qarnain! (thou hast authority,) either to punish them, or to treat
them with kindness."

P: Till, when he reached the setting-place of the sun, he found it
setting in a muddy spring, and found a people thereabout. We said: O
Dhu'l-Qarneyn! Either punish or show them kindness.

S: Until when he reached the place where the sun set, he found it going
down into a black sea, and found by it a people. We said: O Zulqarnain!
either give them a chastisement or do them a benefit.

018.087
Y: He said: "Whoever doth wrong, him shall we punish; then shall he be
sent back to his Lord; and He will punish him with a punishment
unheard-of (before)."

P: He said: As for him who doeth wrong, we shall punish him, and then he
will be brought back unto his Lord, Who will punish him with awful
punishment!

S: He said: As to him who is injust, we will chastise him, then shall he
be returned to his Lord, and He will chastise him with an exemplary
chastisement:

018.088
Y: "But whoever believes, and works righteousness,- he shall have a
goodly reward, and easy will be his task as We order it by our
Command."

P: But as for him who believeth and doeth right, good will be his
reward, and We shall speak unto him a mild command.

S: And as for him who believes and does good, he shall have goodly
reward, and We will speak to him an easy word of Our command.

018.089
Y: Then followed he (another) way,

P: Then he followed a road

S: Then he followed (another) course.

018.090
Y: Until, when he came to the rising of the sun, he found it rising on a
people for whom We had provided no covering protection against the sun.

P: Till, when he reached the rising-place of the sun, he found it rising
on a people for whom We had appointed no shelter therefrom.

S: Until when he reached the land of the rising of the sun, he found it
rising on a people to whom We had given no shelter from It;

018.091
Y: (He left them) as they were: We completely understood what was before
him.

P: So (it was). And We knew all concerning him.

S: Even so! and We had a full knowledge of what he had.

018.092
Y: Then followed he (another) way,

P: Then he followed a road

S: Then he followed (another) course.

018.093
Y: Until, when he reached (a tract) between two mountains, he found,
beneath them, a people who scarcely understood a word.

P: Till, when he came between the two mountains, he found upon their
hither side a folk that scarce could understand a saying.

S: Until when he reached (a place) between the two mountains, he found
on that side of them a people who could hardly understand a word.

018.094
Y: They said: "O Zul-qarnain! the Gog and Magog (People) do great
mischief on earth: shall we then render thee tribute in order that thou
mightest erect a barrier between us and them?"

P: They said: O Dhu'l-Qarneyn! Lo! Gog and Magog are spoiling the land.
So may we pay thee tribute on condition that thou set a barrier between
us and them?

S: They said: O Zulqarnain! surely Gog and Magog make mischief in the
land. Shall we then pay you a tribute on condition that you should
raise a barrier between us and them.

018.095
Y: He said: "(The power) in which my Lord has established me is better
(than tribute): Help me therefore with strength (and labour): I will
erect a strong barrier between you and them:"

P: He said: That wherein my Lord hath established me is better (than
your tribute). Do but help me with strength (of men), I will set
between you and them a bank.

S: He said: That in which my Lord has established me is better,
therefore you only help me with workers, I will make a fortified
barrier between you and them;

018.096
Y: "Bring me blocks of iron." At length, when he had filled up the space
between the two steep mountain-sides, He said, "Blow (with your
bellows)" Then, when he had made it (red) as fire, he said: "Bring me,
that I may pour over it, molten lead."

P: Give me pieces of iron - till, when he had levelled up (the gap)
between the cliffs, he said: Blow! - till, when he had made it a fire,
he said: Bring me molten copper to pour thereon.

S: Bring me blocks of iron; until when he had filled up the space
between the two mountain sides, he said: Blow, until when he had made
it (as) fire, he said: Bring me molten brass which I may pour over it.

018.097
Y: Thus were they made powerless to scale it or to dig through it.

P: And (Gog and Magog) were not able to surmount, nor could they pierce
(it).

S: So they were not able to scale it nor could they make a hole in it.

018.098
Y: He said: "This is a mercy from my Lord: But when the promise of my
Lord comes to pass, He will make it into dust; and the promise of my
Lord is true."

P: He said: This is a mercy from my Lord; but when the promise of my
Lord cometh to pass, He will lay it low, for the promise of my Lord is
true.

S: He said: This is a mercy from my Lord, but when the promise of my
Lord comes to pass He will make it level with the ground, and the
promise of my Lord is ever true.

018.099
Y: On that day We shall leave them to surge like waves on one another:
the trumpet will be blown, and We shall collect them all together.

P: And on that day we shall let some of them surge against others, and
the Trumpet will be blown. Then We shall gather them together in one
gathering.

S: And on that day We will leave a part of them in conflict with another
part, and the trumpet will be blown, so We will gather them all
together;

018.100
Y: And We shall present Hell that day for Unbelievers to see, all spread
out,-

P: On that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers, plain to view,

S: And We will bring forth hell, exposed to view, on that day before the
unbelievers.

018.101
Y: (Unbelievers) whose eyes had been under a veil from remembrance of
Me, and who had been unable even to hear.

P: Those whose eyes were hoodwinked from My reminder, and who could not
bear to hear.

S: They whose eyes were under a cover from My reminder and they could
not even hear.

018.102
Y: Do the Unbelievers think that they can take My servants as protectors
besides Me? Verily We have prepared Hell for the Unbelievers for
(their) entertainment.

P: Do the disbelievers reckon that they can choose My bondmen as
protecting friends beside Me? Lo! We have prepared hell as a welcome
for the disbelievers.

S: What! do then those who disbelieve think that they can take My
servants to be guardians besides Me? Surely We have prepared hell for
the entertainment of the unbelievers.

018.103
Y: Say: "Shall we tell you of those who lose most in respect of their
deeds?"-

P: Say: Shall We inform you who will be the greatest losers by their
works?

S: Say: Shall We inform you of the greatest losers in (their) deeds?

018.104
Y: "Those whose efforts have been wasted in this life, while they
thought that they were acquiring good by their works?"

P: Those whose effort goeth astray in the life of the world, and yet
they reckon that they do good work.

S: (These are) they whose labor is lost in this world's life and they
think that they are well versed in skill of the work of hands.

018.105
Y: They are those who deny the Signs of their Lord and the fact of their
having to meet Him (in the Hereafter): vain will be their works, nor
shall We, on the Day of Judgment, give them any weight.

P: Those are they who disbelieve in the revelations of their Lord and in
the meeting with Him. Therefor their works are vain, and on the Day of
Resurrection We assign no weight to them.

S: These are they who disbelieve in the communications of their Lord and
His meeting, so their deeds become null, and therefore We will not set
up a balance for them on the day of resurrection.

018.106
Y: That is their reward, Hell, because they rejected Faith, and took My
Signs and My Messengers by way of jest.

P: That is their reward: hell, because they disbelieved, and made a jest
of Our revelations and Our messengers.

S: Thus it is that their recompense is hell, because they disbelieved
and held My communications and My messengers in mockery.

018.107
Y: As to those who believe and work righteous deeds, they have, for
their entertainment, the Gardens of Paradise,

P: Lo! those who believe and do good works, theirs are the Gardens of
Paradise for welcome,

S: Surely (as for) those who believe and do good deeds, their place of
entertainment shall be the gardens of paradise,

018.108
Y: Wherein they shall dwell (for aye): no change will they wish for from
them.

P: Wherein they will abide, with no desire to be removed from thence.

S: Abiding therein; they shall not desire removal from them.

018.109
Y: Say: "If the ocean were ink (wherewith to write out) the words of my
Lord, sooner would the ocean be exhausted than would the words of my
Lord, even if we added another ocean like it, for its aid."

P: Say: Though the sea became ink for the Words of my Lord, verily the
sea would be used up before the words of my Lord were exhausted, even
though We brought the like thereof to help.

S: Say: If the sea were ink for the words of my Lord, the sea would
surely be consumed before the words of my Lord are exhausted, though We
were to bring the like of that (sea) to add thereto.

018.110
Y: Say: "I am but a man like yourselves, (but) the inspiration has come
to me, that your Allah is one Allah: whoever expects to meet his Lord,
let him work righteousness, and, in the worship of his Lord, admit no
one as partner."

P: Say: I am only a mortal like you. My Lord inspireth in me that your
Allah is only One Allah. And whoever hopeth for the meeting with his
Lord, let him do righteous work, and make none sharer of the worship
due unto his Lord.

S: Say: I am only a mortal like you; it is revealed to me that your god
is one Allah, therefore whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he should do
good deeds, and not join any one in the service of his Lord.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 19:

                               MARYAM (MARY)
 Total Verses: 98 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

019.001
Y: Kaf. Ha. Ya. 'Ain. Sad.

P: Kaf. Ha. Ya. A'in. Sad.

S: Kaf Ha Ya Ain Suad.

019.002
Y: (This is) a recital of the Mercy of thy Lord to His servant Zakariya.

P: A mention of the mercy of thy Lord unto His servant Zachariah.

S: A mention of the mercy of your Lord to His servant Zakariya.

019.003
Y: Behold! he cried to his Lord in secret,

P: When he cried unto his Lord a cry in secret,

S: When he called upon his Lord in a low voice,

019.004
Y: Praying: "O my Lord! infirm indeed are my bones, and the hair of my
head doth glisten with grey: but never am I unblest, O my Lord, in my
prayer to Thee!"

P: Saying: My Lord! Lo! the bones of me wax feeble and my head is
shining with grey hair, and I have never been unblest in prayer to
Thee, my Lord.

S: He said: My Lord! surely my bones are weakened and my head flares
with hoariness, and, my Lord! I have never been unsuccessful in my
prayer to Thee:

019.005
Y: "Now I fear (what) my relatives (and colleagues) (will do) after me:
but my wife is barren: so give me an heir as from Thyself,"-

P: Lo! I fear my kinsfolk after me, since my wife is barren. Oh, give me
from Thy presence a successor,

S: And surely I fear my cousins after me, and my wife is barren,
therefore grant me from Thyself an heir,

019.006
Y: "(One that) will (truly) represent me, and represent the posterity of
Jacob; and make him, O my Lord! one with whom Thou art well-pleased!"

P: Who shall inherit of me and inherit (also) of the house of Jacob. And
make him, my Lord, acceptable (unto Thee).

S: Who should inherit me and inherit from the children of Yaqoub, and
make him, my Lord, one in whom Thou art well pleased.

019.007
Y: (His prayer was answered): "O Zakariya! We give thee good news of a
son: His name shall be Yahya: on none by that name have We conferred
distinction before."

P: (It was said unto him): O Zachariah! Lo! We bring thee tidings of a
son whose name is John; we have given the same name to none before
(him).

S: O Zakariya! surely We give you good news of a boy whose name shall be
Yahya: We have not made before anyone his equal.

019.008
Y: He said: "O my Lord! How shall I have a son, when my wife is barren
and I have grown quite decrepit from old age?"

P: He said: My Lord! How can I have a son when my wife is barren and I
have reached infirm old age?

S: He said: O my Lord! when shall I have a son, and my wife is barren,
and I myself have reached indeed the extreme degree of old age?

019.009
Y: He said: "So (it will be) thy Lord saith, 'that is easy for Me: I did
indeed create thee before, when thou hadst been nothing!'"

P: He said: So (it will be). Thy Lord saith: It is easy for Me, even as
I created thee before, when thou wast naught.

S: He said: So shall it be, your Lord says: It is easy to Me, and indeed
I created you before, when you were nothing.

019.010
Y: (Zakariya) said: "O my Lord! give me a Sign." "Thy Sign," was the
answer, "Shall be that thou shalt speak to no man for three nights,
although thou art not dumb."

P: He said: My Lord! Appoint for me some token. He said: Thy token is
that thou, with no bodily defect, shalt not speak unto mankind three
nights.

S: He said: My Lord! give me a sign. He said: Your sign is that you will
not be able to speak to the people three nights while in sound health.

019.011
Y: So Zakariya came out to his people from him chamber: He told them by
signs to celebrate Allah's praises in the morning and in the evening.

P: Then he came forth unto his people from the sanctuary, and signified
to them: Glorify your Lord at break of day and fall of night.

S: So he went forth to his people from his place of worship, then he
made known to them that they should glorify (Allah) morning and
evening.

019.012
Y: (To his son came the command): "O Yahya! take hold of the Book with
might": and We gave him Wisdom even as a youth,

P: (And it was said unto his son): O John! Hold fast the Scripture. And
we gave him wisdom when a child,

S: O Yahya! take hold of the Book with strength, and We granted him
wisdom while yet a child,

019.013
Y: And piety (for all creatures) as from Us, and purity: He was devout,

P: And compassion from Our presence, and purity; and he was devout,

S: And tenderness from Us and purity, and he was one who guarded
(against evil),

019.014
Y: And kind to his parents, and he was not overbearing or rebellious.

P: And dutiful toward his parents. And he was not arrogant, rebellious.

S: And dutiful to his parents, and he was not insolent, disobedient.

019.015
Y: So Peace on him the day he was born, the day that he dies, and the
day that he will be raised up to life (again)!

P: Peace on him the day he was born, and the day he dieth and the day he
shall be raised alive!

S: And peace on him on the day he was born, and on the day he dies, and
on the day he is raised to life.

019.016
Y: Relate in the Book (the story of) Mary, when she withdrew from her
family to a place in the East.

P: And make mention of Mary in the Scripture, when she had withdrawn
from her people to a chamber looking East,

S: And mention Marium in the Book when she drew aside from her family to
an eastern place;

019.017
Y: She placed a screen (to screen herself) from them; then We sent her
our angel, and he appeared before her as a man in all respects.

P: And had chosen seclusion from them. Then We sent unto her Our Spirit
and it assumed for her the likeness of a perfect man.

S: So she took a veil (to screen herself) from them; then We sent to her
Our spirit, and there appeared to her a well-made man.

019.018
Y: She said: "I seek refuge from thee to (Allah) Most Gracious: (come
not near) if thou dost fear Allah."

P: She said: Lo! I seek refuge in the Beneficent One from thee, if thou
art Allah-fearing.

S: She said: Surely I fly for refuge from you to the Beneficent Allah,
if you are one guarding (against evil).

019.019
Y: He said: "Nay, I am only a messenger from thy Lord, (to announce) to
thee the gift of a holy son."

P: He said: I am only a messenger of thy Lord, that I may bestow on thee
a faultless son.

S: He said: I am only a messenger of your Lord: That I will give you a
pure boy.

019.020
Y: She said: "How shall I have a son, seeing that no man has touched me,
and I am not unchaste?"

P: She said: How can I have a son when no mortal hath touched me,
neither have I been unchaste?

S: She said: When shall I have a boy and no mortal has yet touched me,
nor have I been unchaste?

019.021
Y: He said: "So (it will be): Thy Lord saith, 'that is easy for Me: and
(We wish) to appoint him as a Sign unto men and a Mercy from Us': It is
a matter (so) decreed."

P: He said: So (it will be). Thy Lord saith: It is easy for Me. And (it
will be) that We may make of him a revelation for mankind and a mercy
from Us, and it is a thing ordained.

S: He said: Even so; your Lord says: It is easy to Me: and that We may
make him a sign to men and a mercy from Us, and it is a matter which
has been decreed.

019.022
Y: So she conceived him, and she retired with him to a remote place.

P: And she conceived him, and she withdrew with him to a far place.

S: So she conceived him; then withdrew herself with him to a remote
place.

019.023
Y: And the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree:
She cried (in her anguish): "Ah! would that I had died before this!
would that I had been a thing forgotten and out of sight!"

P: And the pangs of childbirth drove her unto the trunk of the
palm-tree. She said: Oh, would that I had died ere this and had become
a thing of naught, forgotten!

S: And the throes (of childbirth) compelled her to betake herself to the
trunk of a palm tree. She said: Oh, would that I had died before this,
and had been a thing quite forgotten!

019.024
Y: But (a voice) cried to her from beneath the (palm-tree): "Grieve not!
for thy Lord hath provided a rivulet beneath thee;"

P: Then (one) cried unto her from below her, saying: Grieve not! Thy
Lord hath placed a rivulet beneath thee,

S: Then (the child) called out to her from beneath her: Grieve not,
surely your Lord has made a stream to flow beneath you;

019.025
Y: "And shake towards thyself the trunk of the palm-tree: It will let
fall fresh ripe dates upon thee."

P: And shake the trunk of the palm-tree toward thee, thou wilt cause
ripe dates to fall upon thee.

S: And shake towards you the trunk of the palmtree, it will drop on you
fresh ripe dates:

019.026
Y: "So eat and drink and cool (thine) eye. And if thou dost see any man,
say, 'I have vowed a fast to (Allah) Most Gracious, and this day will I
enter into not talk with any human being'"

P: So eat and drink and be consoled. And if thou meetest any mortal,
say: Lo! I have vowed a fast unto the Beneficent, and may not speak
this day to any mortal.

S: So eat and drink and refresh the eye. Then if you see any mortal,
say: Surely I have vowed a fast to the Beneficent Allah, so I shall not
speak to any man today.

019.027
Y: At length she brought the (babe) to her people, carrying him (in her
arms). They said: "O Mary! truly an amazing thing hast thou brought!"

P: Then she brought him to her own folk, carrying him. They said: O
Mary! Thou hast come with an amazing thing.

S: And she came to her people with him, carrying him (with her). They
said: O Marium! surely you have done a strange thing.

019.028
Y: "O sister of Aaron! Thy father was not a man of evil, nor thy mother
a woman unchaste!"

P: O sister of Aaron! Thy father was not a wicked man nor was thy mother
a harlot.

S: O sister of Haroun! your father was not a bad man, nor, was your
mother an unchaste woman.

019.029
Y: But she pointed to the babe. They said: "How can we talk to one who
is a child in the cradle?"

P: Then she pointed to him. They said: How can we talk to one who is in
the cradle, a young boy?

S: But she pointed to him. They said: How should we speak to one who was
a child in the cradle?

019.030
Y: He said: "I am indeed a servant of Allah: He hath given me revelation
and made me a prophet;"

P: He spake: Lo! I am the slave of Allah. He hath given me the Scripture
and hath appointed me a Prophet,

S: He said: Surely I am a servant of Allah; He has given me the Book and
made me a prophet;

019.031
Y: "And He hath made me blessed wheresoever I be, and hath enjoined on
me Prayer and Charity as long as I live;"

P: And hath made me blessed wheresoever I may be, and hath enjoined upon
me prayer and almsgiving so long as I remain alive,

S: And He has made me blessed wherever I may be, and He has enjoined on
me prayer and poor-rate so long as I live;

019.032
Y: "(He) hath made me kind to my mother, and not overbearing or
miserable;"

P: And (hath made me) dutiful toward her who bore me, and hath not made
me arrogant, unblest.

S: And dutiful to my mother, and He has not made me insolent, unblessed;

019.033
Y: "So peace is on me the day I was born, the day that I die, and the
day that I shall be raised up to life (again)"!

P: Peace on me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the day I
shall be raised alive!

S: And peace on me on the day I was born, and on the day I die, and on
the day I am raised to life.

019.034
Y: Such (was) Jesus the son of Mary: (it is) a statement of truth, about
which they (vainly) dispute.

P: Such was Jesus, son of Mary: (this is) a statement of the truth
concerning which they doubt.

S: Such is Isa, son of Marium; (this is) the saying of truth about which
they dispute.

019.035
Y: It is not befitting to (the majesty of) Allah that He should beget a
son. Glory be to Him! when He determines a matter, He only says to it,
"Be", and it is.

P: It befitteth not (the Majesty of) Allah that He should take unto
Himself a son. Glory be to Him! When He decreeth a thing, He saith unto
it only: Be! and it is.

S: It beseems not Allah that He should take to Himself a son, glory
be to Him; when He has decreed a matter He only says to it "Be," and it
is.

019.036
Y: Verily Allah is my Lord and your Lord: Him therefore serve ye: this
is a Way that is straight.

P: And lo! Allah is my Lord and your Lord. So serve Him. That is the
right path.

S: And surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, therefore serve Him; this
is the right path.

019.037
Y: But the sects differ among themselves: and woe to the unbelievers
because of the (coming) Judgment of a Momentous Day!

P: The sects among them differ: but woe unto the disbelievers from the
meeting of an awful Day.

S: But parties from among them disagreed with each other, so woe to
those who disbelieve, because of presence on a great day.

019.038
Y: How plainly will they see and hear, the Day that they will appear
before Us! but the unjust today are in error manifest!

P: See and hear them on the Day they come unto Us! yet the evil-doers
are to-day in error manifest.

S: How clearly shall they hear and how clearly shall they see on the day
when they come to Us; but the unjust this day are in manifest error.

019.039
Y: But warn them of the Day of Distress, when the matter will be
determined: for (behold,) they are negligent and they do not believe!

P: And warn them of the Day of anguish when the case hath been decided.
Now they are in a state of carelessness, and they believe not.

S: And warn them of the day of intense regret, when the matter shall
