leave you here for a few weeks. This good lady will take good care
of you."

Herbert stole a glance at Mrs. Barton, who was watching him with
mingled contempt and impatience, but he did not become any more
reconciled to the prospect. He reiterated his request.

"I have had enough of this," said Ford, sternly. "You will stop
making a fuss if you know what is best for yourself. Good-by! You
will hear from me soon."

Herbert realized the uselessness of his resistance, and sank
despondently upon the grass.

"Is he goin' to stay here, marm?" asked Abner, curiously.

"Yes; he's goin' to board with us."

"Ho, ho!" laughed Abner; "he'll have a nice boardin' place!"

"Abner, you jest shut up, or I'll take a stick to you! You needn't
make him any more homesick than he is. Just try ef you can't amuse
him."

"Say, Sam, I guess we'll have a stavin' time together," said Abner,
really pleased to have a companion. "What'll we do? Want to play
leapfrog?"

"I don't feel like playing," answered Herbert, despondently.

"We might go fishin'," suggested Abner. "There's a pond only a
quarter of a mile from here."

"I don't know how to fish," said Herbert.

"Don't know how to fish? What do you know how to do?"

"We don't have any chance in New York."

"Say," exclaimed Abner, with sudden interest, "is New York a nice
place?"

"I wish I was back there. I never shall be happy anywhere's else."

"Tell me what you fellows do there. I dunno but I'd like to go
myself."

Before Herbert had a chance to answer Mrs. Barton broke in:

"Abner, you take care of Sam while I go to the village."

"What are you goin' there for, marm?"

"I'm going to buy some sausages for dinner. We haven't got anything
in the house."

"Me and Sam will go, if you'll give us the money."

"I know you too well, Abner Barton. I won't trust you with the
money. Ef I gave you a five-dollar bill, I'd never see any on't back
again."

"Say, mam, you haven't got a five-dollar bill, have you?" asked
Abner, with distended eyes.

"Never you mind!"

"I'll tell dad ef you don't give me some."

"You jest dare to do it!" returned Mrs. Barton, in a menacing tone.
"Your father ain't got nothin' to do with it. It's money for Sam's
board."

"My name isn't Sam," expostulated Herbert, who had a natural
preference for his own appellation.

"That's what I'm goin' to call you. You can call yourself George
Washington, or General Jackson, ef you want to. Mebbe you're
Christopher Columbus."

"My name is Herbert Reynolds," said Herbert, annoyed.

"That's what you call yourself to-day. There's no knowin' who you'll
be to-morrow."

"Don't you believe me, Mrs. Barton?" asked Herbert, distressed.

"No, I don't. The man who brung you--I dis-remember his name--"

"Willis Ford."

"Well, Willis Ford, then! It seems you know his name. Well, he told
me you was loony, and thought you was somebody else than your own
self."

"He told you that I was crazy?" ejaculated Herbert.

"Yes; and I have no doubt it's so."

"It's a wicked lie!" exclaimed Herbert, indignantly; "and I'd like
to tell him so to his face."

"Well, you won't have a chance for some time. But I can't stand here
talkin'. I must be goin' to the store. You two behave yourselves
while I'm gone!"

Herbert felt so dull and dispirited that he did not care to speak,
but Abner's curiosity had been excited about New York, and he plied
his young companion with questions, which Herbert answered wearily.
Though he responded listlessly, and did not say any more than he
felt obliged to, he excited Abner's interest.

"I mean to go to New York some time," he said. "Is it far?"

"It's as much as a thousand miles. It may be more."

"Phew! That's a big distance. How did you come?"

"We came in the cars."

"Did it cost much?"

"I don't know. Mr. Ford paid for the tickets."

"Has he got plenty of money?"

"I don't think he has. He used to be pa's clerk."

"I wish we had enough money. You and me would start some fine
mornin', and mebbe your father would give me something to do when we
got there."

For the first time Herbert began to feel an interest in the
conversation.

"Oh, I wish we could," he said, fervently. "I know pa would give you
a lot of money for bringing me back."

"Do you really think he would?" asked Abner, briskly.

"I know he would. But your mother wouldn't let us go."

"She wouldn't know it," said Abner, winking.

"You wouldn't run away from home?" questioned Herbert.

"Why wouldn't I? What's to keep me here? Marm's always scoldin', and
dad gets drunk whenever he has any money to spend for drink. I
reckon they wouldn't care much if I made myself scarce."

Herbert was not sure whether he ought not to feel shocked. He
admitted to himself, however, that if he had a father and mother
answering the description of Abner's, that he would not so much
regret leaving them. At any rate, Abner's words awoke a hope of
sometime getting away from the place he already hated, and returning
to his city home, now more valued than ever.

"We can't go without money," he said, in a troubled voice.

"Couldn't we walk?"

"It's too far, and I'm not strong."

"I could walk it, ef I took time enough," asserted Abner,
positively. "Hello! there's dad!"

Herbert looked up, and, following Abner's glance, saw a man
approaching the farmhouse. Mr. Barton--for it was he--was a tall
man, shabbily attired, his head crowned with a battered hat, whose
gait indicated a little uncertainty, and betrayed some difficulty
about the maintenance of his equilibrium.

"Is that your father?" asked Herbert.

"It's the old man, sure enough. He's about half full."

"What's that?"

"He's been drinkin', as usual; but he didn't drink enough to make
him tight. Guess his funds give out."

Herbert was rather shocked at Abner's want of respect in speaking of
his father, but even to him Mr. Barton hardly seemed like a man who
could command a son's respect.

"Wonder whether dad met marm on the way?" said Abner, musing.

By this time, Mr. Barton had entered the yard, and caught sight of
his son and Herbert.

"Abner," said he, in a thick voice, "who's that boy?"

"Then he didn't meet marm," thought Abner. "He's a boy that's goin'
to board with us, dad," he answered.

"You don't say! Glad to make your acquaintance, boy," he said,
straightening up.

"Thank you, sir," answered Herbert, faintly.



CHAPTER XXX -- A MODEL HOUSEHOLD



"When did you come?" asked Barton, steadying himself against a tree.

"Half an hour ago," answered Abner, for Herbert was gazing, with a
repulsion he found it difficult to conceal, at Barton, whose flushed
face and thick utterance indicated his condition very clearly.

"Who came with him?" continued Barton.

"You'd better ask marm. She attended to the business. It was a young
man."

"Where is she?"

"Gone to the village to buy some sassiges for dinner."

"Good!" exclaimed Barton, in a tone of satisfaction. "I'll stay at
home to dinner to-day. Did the man pay your mother any money?"

"I s'pose so, or she wouldn't be buyin' sassiges. Old Schickman
won't trust us any more."

"The money should have been paid to me. I'll see about it when your
marm comes back from the store."

"You'd spend it all for drink, dad," said Abner.

"How dare you speak so to your father, you ungrateful young dog!"

He essayed to reach Abner to strike him, but his dutiful son dodged
easily, and his father, being unsteady on his legs, fell on the
ground.

Abner laughed, but Herbert was too much shocked to share in his
enjoyment.

"Come here and help me up, you Abner!" said his father.

"Not much, dad! If you hadn't tried to lick me you wouldn't have
fallen!"

"Let me help you, sir!" said Herbert, conquering his instinctive
disgust and approaching the fallen man.

"You're a gentleman!" murmured Barton, as he took the little boy's
proffered hand and, after considerable ado, raised himself to a
standing position. "You're a gentleman; I wish I had a boy like
you."

Herbert could not join in the wish. He felt that a father like Joel
Barton would be a great misfortune.

But just then Mrs. Barton entered the yard, marching with long
strides like a man's.

"Here's marm!" announced Abner.

Barton steadied himself as he turned to look at his wife.

"I want to see you, Mrs. B.," he said. "When are you goin' to have
dinner?"

"Never, if I depended on you to supply the vittles!" she answered,
bluntly.

"Don't speak so before a stranger," said Barton, with a hiccough.
"You hurt my feelin's."

"Your feelin's are tough, and so are mine by this time."

"What have you got there?"

"Some sassiges. Ef you want your share, you'll have to be on time. I
shan't save you any."

"How much money did the man pay you, Mrs. B.?"

"That's my business!" retorted his wife, shortly.

"Mrs. B.," said her husband, straightening up, "I want you to
understand that I'm the master of this house, and it's my right to
take care of the money. You'll oblige me by handin' it over."

"I'll do nothing of the sort, Joel Barton! You'd only spend it for
drink."

"Would you grudge me the few pennies I spend for drink? My system
requires it. That's what the doctor says."

"Then you must find the money for it yourself. My system requires
something to eat, and, ef I take a boarder, he's got to have
something to eat, too."

"Mrs. B., I didn't think your heart was so hard," said Barton, in a
maudlin tone.

"Look here, Joel Barton; you might as well stop such foolish talk.
It won't do no good. I can't stay here all day. I must go and be
gettin' dinner."

Had Barton succeeded in raising money from his wife, he would
probably have returned at once to the tavern, and his place would
have been vacant at the dinner table. Failing in this, he lay back
and fell asleep, and was not roused till dinner time.

Mrs. Barton was a fair cook, and Herbert ate with an unexpected
relish. It is needless to say that Abner also did full justice to
the meal.

"I say, Sam," he said, "I'm glad you've come."

Herbert was hardly prepared to agree with him.

"Now we'll have to live better," Abner explained. "Mam and I
gen'ally have to skirmish round for vittles. We don't often get
meat."

This frank confession rather alarmed Herbert. He was not over
self-indulgent, but he had never lacked for nourishing food, and the
prospect of an uncertain supply was not encouraging.

When dinner was over--there was no second course--they left the
table. Joel Barton made a fresh attempt to extort a small sum from
his wife, but was met with an inflexible refusal. Mrs. Barton proved
deaf alike to entreaties and threats. She was a strong, resolute
woman, and not one to be intimidated.

When Barton left the house, his look of disappointment had given
place to one of cunning.

"Come here, Abner!" he said, beckoning to his son and heir.

"What for?"

"Never you mind."

"But I do mind. Do you want to catch hold of me?"

"No; it's only a little matter of business. It's for your good."

Abner accompanied his father as far as the fence.

"Now, what do you want?" he asked, with his eyes warily fixed on his
father.

"I want you to find out where your marm keeps that money," said
Barton, in a coaxing tone.

"What for?"

"You're to take it and bring it to me."

"And go without eatin'?"

"I'll buy the provisions myself. I'm the head of the family."

"Do you want me to hook money from marm?"

"'Twon't be hookin'. The money by right belongs to me. Ain't I the
head of the family?"

"I dunno about that. Marm's the boss, and always has been," chuckled
Abner.

Joel frowned, but immediately tried another attack.

"Of course I'll give you some of it, Abner," he resumed. "If there's
five dollars I'll give you a quarter."

"I'll see about it, dad."

"Get it for me before evenin', if you can. I shall need it then."

Abner returned to Herbert, and frankly related the conversation that
had taken place between himself and his father.

Herbert was shocked. He did not know what to think of the singular
family he had got into.

"You won't do it, will you?" he asked, startled.

"No, I won't. I want a quarter bad enough, but I'd rather mam would
keep the money. She'll spend it for vittles, and dad would spend it
for drink. Wouldn't you like to go a-fishin'? It's fine weather, and
we'll have fun."

Herbert assented, not knowing how to dispose of his time. Abner
turned the conversation again on New York. What Herbert had already
told him had powerfully impressed his imagination.

"Haven't you got any money?" he asked.

"No," answered Herbert. "Mr. Ford took away all I had, except this."

He drew from his pocket a nickel.

"That won't do no good," said Abner, disappointed. "Stop a minute,
though," he added, after a minute's pause. "Wouldn't your folks send
you some money, if you should write to them?"

"Yes," answered Herbert, his face brightening. "Why didn't I think
of that before? If I could get me paper and ink I'd write at once to
papa. I know he'd either send the money or come for me."

"We'll go to the post office," said Abner. "There you can buy some
paper and a postage stamp. You've got just money enough. There's a
