and doting, the prey of every fresh adventurer, the slave of her own
slaves.... 'And the kings of the earth, who had sinned with her, hated
the harlot, and made her desolate and naked, and devoured her flesh, and
burned her with fire. For God had put into their hearts to fulfil His
will, and to agree, and to give their kingdom to the beast, until the
words of God should be fulfilled.'.... Everywhere sensuality, division,
hatred, treachery, cruelty, uncertainty, terror; the vials of God's
wrath poured out. Where was to be the end of it all? asked every man
of his neighbour, generation after generation; and received for answer
only, 'It is better to die than to live.'

And yet in one ship out of that sad fleet, there was peace; peace amid
shame and terror; amid the groans of the wounded, and the sighs of
the starving; amid all but blank despair. The great triremes and
quinqueremes rushed onward past the lagging transports, careless, in the
mad race for safety, that they were leaving the greater number of their
comrades defenceless in the rear of the flight; but from one little
fishing-craft alone no base entreaties, no bitter execrations greeted
the passing flash and roll of their mighty oars. One after another, day
by day, they came rushing up out of the northern offing, each like a
huge hundred-footed dragon, panting and quivering, as if with terror, at
every loud pulse of its oars, hurling the wild water right and left
with the mighty share of its beak, while from the bows some gorgon or
chimaera, elephant or boar, stared out with brazen eyes toward the coast
of Africa, as if it, too, like the human beings which it carried, was
dead to every care but that of dastard flight. Past they rushed, one
after another; and off the poop some shouting voice chilled all hearts
for a moment, with the fearful news that the Emperor's Neapolitan fleet
was in full chase.... And the soldiers on board that little vessel
looked silently and steadfastly into the silent steadfast face of the
old Prefect, and Victoria saw him shudder, and turn his eyes away--and
stood up among the rough fighting men, like a goddess, and cried aloud
that 'the Lord would protect His own'; and they believed her, and
were still; till many days and many ships were passed, and the little
fishing-craft, outstripped even by the transports and merchantmen, as it
strained and crawled along before its single square-sail, was left alone
upon the sea.

And where was Raphael Aben-Ezra?

He was sitting, with Bran's head between his knees, at the door of a
temporary awning in the vessel's stern, which shielded the wounded men
from sun and spray; and as he sat he could hear from within the tent the
gentle voices of Victoria and her brother, as they tended the sick like
ministering angels, or read to them words of divine hope and comfort-in
which his homeless heart felt that he had no share....

'As I live, I would change places now with any one of those poor mangled
ruffians to have that voice speaking such words to me....and to believe
them.'.... And he went on perusing the manuscript which he held in his
hand. ...............

'Well!' he sighed to himself after a while 'at least it is the most
complimentary, not to say hopeful, view of our destinies with which I
have met since I threw away my curse's belief that the seed of David was
fated to conquer the whole earth, and set up a second Roman Empire
at Jerusalem, only worse than the present one, in that the devils of
superstition and bigotry would be added to those of tyranny and rapine.'

A hand was laid on his shoulder, and a voice asked' 'And what may this
so hopeful view be?'

'Ah! my dear General!' said Raphael, looking up. 'I have a poor bill
of fare whereon to exercise my culinary powers this morning. Had it not
been for that shark who was so luckily deluded last night, I should have
been reduced to the necessity of stewing my friend the fat decurion's
big boots.'

'They would have been savoury enough, I will warrant, after they had
passed under your magical hand.'

'It is a comfort, certainly, to find that after all one did learn
something useful in Alexandria! So I will even go forward at once, and
employ my artistic skill.'

'Tell me first what it was about which I heard you just now
soliloquising, as so hopeful a view of some matter or other?'

'Honestly--if you will neither betray me to your son and daughter,
nor consider me as having in anywise committed myself--it was Paul of
Tarsus's notion of the history and destinies of our stiff-necked nation.
See what your daughter has persuaded me into reading!' And he held up a
manuscript of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

'It is execrable Greek. But it is sound philosophy, I cannot deny. He
knows Plato better than all the ladies and gentlemen in Alexandria put
together, if my opinion on the point be worth having.'

'I am a plain soldier, and no judge on that point, sir. He may or may
not know Plato; but I am right sure that he knows God.'

'Not too fast,' said Raphael with a smile. 'You do not know, perhaps,
that I have spent the last ten years of my life among men who professed
the same knowledge?'

'Augustine, too, spent the best ten years of his life among such; and
yet he is now combating the very errors which he once taught.'

'Having found, he fancies, something better!'

'Having found it, most truly. But you must talk to him yourself, and
argue the matter over, with one who can argue. To me such questions are
an unknown land.'

'Well.... Perhaps I may be tempted to do even that. At least a
thoroughly converted philosopher--for poor dear Synesius is half heathen
still, I often fancy, and hankers after the wisdom of the Egyptian--will
be a curious sight; and to talk with so famous and so learned a man
would always be a pleasure; but to argue with him, or any other human
being, none whatsoever.'

'Why, then?'

'My dear sir, I am sick of syllogisms, and probabilities, and pros and
contras. What do I care if, on weighing both sides, the nineteen pounds
weight of questionable arguments against, are overbalanced by the twenty
pounds weight of equally questionable arguments for? Do you not see that
my belief of the victorious proposition will be proportioned to the one
over-balancing pound only, while the whole other nineteen will go for
nothing?'

'I really do not.'

'Happy are you, then. I do, from many a sad experience. No, my worthy
sir. I want a faith past arguments; one which, whether I can prove it
or not to the satisfaction of the lawyers, I believe to my own
satisfaction, and act on it as undoubtingly and unreasoningly as I
do upon my own newly-rediscovered personal identity. I don't want to
possess a faith. I want a faith which will possess me. And if I ever
arrived at such a one, believe me, it would be by some such practical
demonstration as this very tent has given me.'

'This tent?'

'Yes, sir, this tent; within which I have seen you and your children
lead a life of deeds as new to me the Jew, as they would be to Hypatia
the Gentile. I have watched you for many a day, and not in vain. When I
saw you, an experienced officer, encumber your flight with wounded men,
I was only surprised. But since I have seen you and your daughter,
and, strangest of all, your gay young Alcibiades of a son, starving
yourselves to feed those poor ruffians--performing for them, day and
night, the offices of menial slaves--comforting them, as no man ever
comforted me--blaming no one but yourselves, caring for every one but
yourselves, sacrificing nothing but yourselves; and all this without
hope of fame or reward, or dream of appeasing the wrath of any god or
goddess, but simply because you thought it right.... When I saw that,
sir, and more which I have seen; and when, reading in this book here,
I found most unexpectedly those very grand moral rules which you were
practising, seeming to spring unconsciously, as natural results, from
the great thoughts, true or false, which had preceded them; then, sir, I
began to suspect that the creed which could produce such deeds as I have
watched within the last few days, might have on its side not merely a
slight preponderance of probabilities, but what the Jews used once to
call, when we believed in it--or in anything--the mighty power of God.'

And as he spoke, he looked into the Prefect's face with the look of a
man wrestling in some deadly struggle; so intense and terrible was the
earnestness of his eye, that even the old soldier shrank before it.

'And therefore,' he went on, 'therefore, sir, beware of your own
actions, and of your children's. If, by any folly or baseness, such as I
have seen in every human being whom I ever met as yet upon this accursed
stage of fools, you shall crush my new-budding hope that there is
something somewhere which will make me what I know that I ought to be,
and can be--If you shall crush that, I say, by any misdoing of yours,
you had better have been the murderer of my firstborn; with such a
hate--a hate which Jews alone can feel--will I hate you and yours.'

'God help us and strengthen us!'said the old warrior in a tone of noble
humility.

'And now,' said Raphael, glad to change the subject, after this unwonted
outburst, 'we must once more seriously consider whether it is wise to
hold on our present course. If you return to Carthage, or to Hippo--'

'I shall be beheaded.'

'Most assuredly. And how much soever you may consider such an event a
gain to yourself, yet for the sake of your son and your daughter--'

'My dear sir,' interrupted the Prefect, 'you mean kindly. But do not, do
not tempt me. By the Count's side I have fought for thirty years, and by
his side I will die, as I deserve.'

'Victorius! Victoria!' cried Raphael; 'help me! Your father,' he went
on, as they came out from the tent, 'is still decided on losing his own
head, and throwing away ours, by going to Carthage.'

'For my sake--for our sakes--father!' cried Victoria, clinging to him.

'And for my sake, also, most excellent sir,' said Raphael, smiling
quietly. 'I have no wish to be so uncourteous as to urge any help which
I may have seemed to afford you. But I hope that you will recollect that
I have a life to lose, and that it is hardly fair of you to imperil it
as you intend to do. If you could help or save Heraclian, I should be
dumb at once. But now, for a mere point of honour to destroy fifty good
soldiers, who know not their right hands from their left--Shall I ask
their opinion?'

'Will you raise a mutiny against me, sir?' asked the old man sternly.

'Why not mutiny against Philip drunk, in behalf of Philip sober? But
really, I will obey you.... only you must obey us.... What is Hesiod's
definition of the man who will neither counsel himself nor be counselled
by his friends?.... Have you no trusty acquaintances in Cyrenaica, for
instance?'

The Prefect was silent.

'Oh, hear us, my father! Why not go to Euodius? He is your old
comrade--a well-wisher, too, to this.... this expedition.... And
recollect, Augustine must be there now. He was about to sail for
Berenice, in order to consult Synesius and the Pentapolitan bishops,
when we left Carthage.'

And at the name of Augustine the old man paused.

'Augustine will be there; true. And this our friend must meet him.
And thus at least I should have his advice. If he thinks it my duty to
return to Carthage, I can but do so, after all. But the soldiers!'

'Excellent sir,' said Raphael, 'Synesius and the Pentapolitan
landlords--who can hardly call their lives their own, thanks to the
Moors--will be glad enough to feed and pay them, or any other brave
fellows with arms in their hands, at this moment. And my friend
Victorius, here, will enjoy, I do not doubt, a little wild campaigning
against marauding blackamoors.'

The old man bowed silently. The battle was won.

The young tribune, who had been watching his father's face with the most
intense anxiety caught at the gesture, and hurrying forward, announced
the change of plan to the soldiery. It was greeted with a shout of joy,
and in another five minutes the sails were about, the rudder shifted,
and the ship on her way towards the western point of Sicily, before a
steady north-west breeze.

'Ah!' cried Victoria, delighted. 'And now you will see Augustine! You
must promise me to talk to him!'

'This, at least, I will promise, that whatsoever the great sophist shall
be pleased to say, shall meet with a patient hearing from a brother
sophist. Do not be angry at the term. Recollect that I am somewhat
tired, like my ancestor Solomon, of wisdom and wise men, having found
it only too like madness and folly. And you cannot surely expect me to
believe in man, while I do not yet believe in God?'

Victoria sighed. 'I will not believe you. Why always pretend to be worse
than you are?'

'That kind souls like you may be spared the pain of finding me worse
than I seem.... There, let us say no more; except that I heartily wish
that you would hate me!'

'Shall I try?'

'That must be my work, I fear, not yours. However, I shall give you good
cause enough before long' doubt it not.'

Victoria sighed again, and retired into the tent to nurse the sick.

'And now, sir,' said the Prefect, turning to Raphael and his son; 'do
not mistake me. I may have been weak, as worn-out and hopeless men are
wont to be; but do not think of me as one who has yielded to adversity
in fear for his own safety. As God hears me, I desire nothing better
than to die; and I only turn out of my course on the understanding that
if Augustine so advise, my children hold me free to return to Carthage
and meet my fate. All I pray for is, that my life may be spared until I
can place my dear child in the safe shelter of a nunnery.'

'A nunnery?'

'Yes, indeed; I have intended ever since her birth to dedicate her to
the service of God. And in such times as these, what better lot for a
defenceless girl?'

'Pardon me!' said Raphael; 'but I am too dull to comprehend what
benefit or pleasure your Deity will derive from the celibacy of your
daughter.... Except, indeed, on one supposition, which, as I have some
faint remnants of reverence and decency reawakening in me just now, I
must leave to be uttered only by the pure lips of sexless priests.'

'You forget, sir, that you are speaking to a Christian.'

'I assure you, no! I had certainly been forgetting it till the last two
minutes, in your very pleasant and rational society. There is no danger
henceforth of my making so silly a mistake.'

'Sir!' said the Prefect, reddening at the undisguised contempt of
Raphael's manner...., 'When you know a little more of St. Paul's
Epistles, you will cease to insult the opinions and feelings of those
who obey them, by sacrificing their most precious treasures to God.'

'Oh, it is Paul of Tarsus, then, who gives you the advice! I thank you
for informing me of the fact; for it will save me the trouble of any
future study of his works. Allow me, therefore, to return by your hands
this manuscript of his with many thanks from me to that daughter of
yours, by whose perpetual imprisonment you intend to give pleasure to
your Deity. Henceforth the less communication which passes between me
and any member of your family, the better.' And he turned away.

'But, my dear sir!' said the honest soldier, really chagrined, 'you must
not!--we owe you too much, and love you too well, to part thus for the
caprice of a moment. If any word of mine has offended you--forget it,
and forgive me, I beseech you!' and he caught both Raphael's hands in
his own.

'My very dear sir,' answered the Jew quietly; 'let me ask the same
forgiveness of you; and believe me, for the sake of past pleasant
passages, I shall not forget my promise about the mortgage.... But-here
we must part. To tell you the truth, I half an hour ago was fearfully
near becoming neither more nor less than a Christian. I had actually
deluded myself into the fancy that the Deity of the Galileans might be,
after all, the God of our old Hebrew forefathers--of Adam and Eve, of
Abraham and David, and of the rest who believed that children and
the fruit of the womb were an heritage and gift which cometh of the
Lord--and that Paul was right--actually right--in his theory that the
church was the development and fulfilment of our old national polity....
I must thank you for opening my eyes to a mistake which, had I not been
besotted for the moment, every monk and nun would have contradicted by
the mere fact of their existence, and reserve my nascent faith for some
Deity who takes no delight in seeing his creature: stultify the primary
laws of their being. Farewell!'

And while the Prefect stood petrified with astonishment, he retired to
the further extremity of the deck, muttering to himself--

'Did I not know all along that this gleam was too sudden and too bright
to last? Did I not know that he, too, would prove himself like all the
rest--an ass?.... Fool! to have looked for common sense on such an earth
as this!.... Back to chaos again, Raphael Aben-Ezra, and spin ropes of
sand to the end of the farce!'

And mixing with the soldiers, he exchanged no word with the Prefect and
his children, till they reached the port of Berenice; and then putting
the necklace into Victoria's hands, vanished among the crowds upon the
quay, no one knew whither.



CHAPTER XVIII: THE PREFECT TESTED


WHEN we lost sight of Philammon, his destiny had hurled him once more
among his old friends the Goths, in search of two important elements of
human comfort, freedom and a sister. The former be found at once, in a
large hall where sundry Goths were lounging and toping, into the nearest
corner of which he shrank, and stood, his late terror and rage forgotten
altogether in the one new and absorbing thought--His sister might be in
that house!.... and yielding to so sweet a dream, he began fancying to
himself which of all those gay maidens she might be who had become in
one moment more dear, more great to him, than all things else in heaven
or earth. That fair-haired, rounded Italian? That fierce, luscious,
aquiline-faced Jewess? That delicate, swart, sidelong-eyed Copt? No.
She was Athenian, like himself. That tall, lazy Greek girl, then, from
beneath whose sleepy lids flashed, once an hour, sudden lightnings,
revealing depths of thought and feeling uncultivated, perhaps even
unsuspected, by their possessor. Her? Or that, her seeming sister? Or
the next?.... Or--Was it Pelagia herself, most beautiful and most
sinful of them all? Fearful thought! He blushed scarlet at the bare
imagination: yet why, in his secret heart, was that the most pleasant
hypothesis of them all? And suddenly flashed across him that observation
of one of the girls on board the boat, on his likeness to Pelagia.
Strange, that he had never recollected it before! It must be so! and
yet on what a slender thread, woven of scattered hints and surmises,
did that 'must' depend! He would be sane! he would wait; he would
have patience. Patience, with a sister yet unfound, perhaps perishing?
Impossible!

Suddenly the train of his thoughts was changed perforce:--

'Come! come and see! There's a fight in the streets,' called one of the
damsels down the stairs, at the highest pitch of her voice.

'I shan't go,' yawned a huge fellow, who was lying on his back on a
sofa.

'Oh come up, my hero,' said one of the girls. 'Such a charming riot, and
the Prefect himself in the middle of it! We have not had such a one in
the street this month.'

'The princes won't let me knock any of these donkey-riders on the
head, and seeing other people do it only makes me envious. Give me the
wine-jug--curse the girl! she has run upstairs!'

The shouting and trampling came nearer; and in another minute Wulf came
rapidly downstairs, through the hall into the harem-court, and into the
presence of the Amal.

'Prince--here is a chance for us. These rascally Greeks are murdering
their Prefect under our very windows.'

'The lying cur! Serve him right for cheating us. He has plenty of
guards. Why can't the fool take care of himself?'

'They have all run away, and I saw some of them hiding among the mob. As
I live, the man will be killed in five minutes more.'

'Why not?'

'Why should he, when we can save him and win his favour for ever? The
men's fingers are itching far a fight; it's a bad plan not to give
hounds blood now and then, or they lose the knack of hunting.'

'Well, it wouldn't take five minutes.'

'And heroes should show that they can forgive when an enemy is in
distress.'

'Very true! Like an Amal too!' And the Amal sprang up and shouted to his
men to follow him.

'Good-bye, my pretty one. Why, Wulf,' cried he, as he burst out into the
court, 'here's our monk again! By Odin, you're welcome, my handsome boy!
come along and fight too, young fellow; what were those arms given you
for?'

'He is my man,' said Wulf, laying his hand on Philammon's shoulder,
'and blood he shall taste.' And out the three hurried, Philammon, in his
present reckless mood, ready for anything.

'Bring your whips. Never mind swords. Those rascals are not worth it,'
shouted the Amal, as he hurried down the passage brandishing his heavy
thong, some ten feet in length, threw the gate open, and the next moment
recoiled from a dense crush of people who surged in--and surged out
again as rapidly as the Goth, with the combined force of his weight
and arm, hewed his way straight through them, felling a wretch at every
blow, and followed up by his terrible companions.

They were but just in time. The four white blood-horses were plunging
and rolling over each other, and Orestes reeling in his chariot, with
a stream of blood running down his face, and the hands of twenty wild
monks clutching at him. 'Monks again!' thought Philammon and as he saw
among them more than one hateful face, which he recollected in Cyril's
courtyard on that fatal night, a flush of fierce revenge ran through
him.

'Mercy!' shrieked the miserable Prefect--'I am a Christian! I swear that
I am a Christian! the Bishop Atticus baptized me at Constantinople!'

'Down with the butcher! down with the heathen tyrant, who refuses the
adjuration on the Gospels rather than be reconciled to the patriarch!
Tear him out of the chariot!' yelled the monks.

The craven hound!' said the Amal, stopping short, 'I won't help him!'
But in an instant Wulf rushed forward, and struck right and left; the
monks recoiled, and Philammon, burning to prevent so shameful a scandal
to the faith to which he still clung convulsively, sprang into the
chariot and caught Orestes in his arms.

'You are safe, my lord; don't struggle,' whispered he, while the monks
flew on him. A stone or two struck him, but they only quickened his
determination, and in another moment the whistling of the whips round
his head, and the yell and backward rush of the monks, told him that he
was safe. He carried his burden safely within the doorway of Pelagia's
house, into the crowd of peeping and shrieking damsels, where twenty
pairs of the prettiest hands in Alexandria seized on Orestes, and drew
him into the court.

'Like a second Hylas, carried off by the nymphs!' simpered he, as he
vanished into the harem, to reappear in five minutes, his head bound rip
with silk handkerchiefs, and with as much of his usual impudence as he
could muster.

'Your Excellency--heroes all--I am your devoted slave. I owe you life
itself; and more, the valour of your succour is only surpassed by the
deliciousness of your cure. I would gladly undergo a second wound to
enjoy a second time the services of such hands, and to see such feet
busying themselves on my behalf.'

'You wouldn't have said that five minutes ago, quoth the Amal, looking
at him very much as a bear might at a monkey.

'Never mind the hands and feet, old fellow, they are none of yours!'
bluntly observed a voice from behind' probably Smid's, and a laugh
ensued.

'My saviours, my brothers!' said Orestes, politely ignoring the
laughter. 'How can I repay you? Is there anything in which my office
here enables me--I will not say to reward, for that would be a term
beneath your dignity as free barbarians--but to gratify you?'

'Give us three days' pillage of the quarter!' shouted some one.

'Ah, true valour is apt to underrate obstacles; you forget your small
numbers.'

'I say,' quoth the Amal--'I say, take care, Prefect.--If you mean to
tell me that we forty couldn't cut all the throats in Alexandria in
three days, and yours into the bargain, and keep your soldiers at bay
all the time--'

'Half of them would join us!' cried some one. 'They are half our own
flesh and blood after all!'

'Pardon me, my friends, I do not doubt it a moment. I know enough of the
world never to have found a sheep-dog yet who would not, on occasion,
help to make away with a little of the mutton which he guarded. Eh, my
venerable sir?' turning to Wulf with a knowing bow.

Wulf chuckled grimly, and said something to the Amal in German about
being civil to guests.

'You will pardon me, my heroic friends,' said Orestes, 'but, with your
kind permission, I will observe that I am somewhat faint and disturbed
by late occurrences. To trespass on your hospitality further would be
an impertinence. If, therefore, I might send a slave to find some of my
apparitors-'

'No, by all the gods!' roared the Amal, 'you're my guest now--my lady's
at least. And no one ever went out of my house sober yet if I could help
it. Set the cooks to work, my men! The Prefect shall feast with us like
an emperor, and we'll send him home to-night as drunk as he can wish.
Come along, your Excellency; we're rough fellows, we Goths; but by the
Valkyrs, no one can say that we neglect our guests!'

'It is a sweet compulsion,' said Orestes, as he went in.

'Stop, by the bye! Didn't one of you men catch a monk.?'

'Here he is, prince, with his elbows safe behind him.' And a tall,
haggard, half-naked monk was dragged forward.

'Capital! bring him in. His Excellency shall judge him while dinner's
cooking' and Smid shall have the hanging of him. He hurt nobody in the
scuffle; he was thinking of his dinner.'

'Some rascal bit a piece out of my leg, and I tumbled down,' grumbled
Smid.

'Well, pay out this fellow for it, then. Bring a chair, slaves! Here,
your Highness, sit there and judge.'

'Two chairs!' said some one; 'the Amal shan't stand before the emperor
himself.'

'By all means, my dear friends. The Amal and I will act as the two
Caesars, with divided empire. I presume we shall have little difference
of opinion as to the hanging of this worthy.'

'Hanging's too quick for him.'

'Just what I was about to remark--there are certain judicial
formalities, considered generally to be conducive to the stability, if
not necessary to the existence, of the Roman empire--'

'I say, don't talk so much,' shouted a Goth, 'If you want to have the
hanging of him yourself, do. We thought we would save you trouble.'

'Ah, my excellent friend, would you rob me of the delicate pleasure of
revenge? I intend to spend at least four hours to-morrow in killing this
pious martyr. He will have a good time to think, between the beginning
and the end of the rack.'

'Do you hear that, master monk?' said Smid, chucking him under the
chin, while the rest of the party seemed to think the whole business
an excellent joke, and divided their ridicule openly enough between the
Prefect and his victim.

'The man of blood has said it. I am a martyr,' answered the monk in a
dogged voice.

'You will take a good deal of time in becoming one.'

'Death may be long, but glory is everlasting.'

'True. I forgot that, and will save you the said glory, if I can help
it, for a year or two. Who was it struck me with the stone?'

No answer.

'Tell me, and the moment he is in my lictors' hands I pardon you
freely.'

The monk laughed. 'Pardon? Pardon me eternal bliss, and the things
unspeakable, which God has prepared for those who love Him? Tyrant and
butcher! I struck thee, thou second Dioclesian--I hurled the stone--I,
Ammonius. Would to heaven that it had smitten thee through, thou Sisera,
like the nail of Jael the Kenite!'

'Thanks, my friend. Heroes, you have a cellar for monks as well as for
wine? I will trouble you with this hero's psalm-singing tonight, and
send my apparitors for him in the morning.'

'If he begins howling when we are in bed, your men won't find much of
him left in the morning,' said the Amal. 'But here come the slaves,
announcing dinner.'

'Stay,' said Orestes; 'there is one more with whom I have an account to
settle--that young philosopher there.'

'Oh, he is coming in, too. He never was drunk in his life, I'll warrant,
poor fellow, and it's high time for him to begin.' And the Amal laid
a good-natured bear's paw on Philammon's shoulder, who hung back in
perplexity, and cast a piteous look towards Wulf.

Wulf answered it by a shake of the head which gave Philammon courage
to stammer out a courteous refusal. The Amal swore an oath at him which
made the cloister ring again, and with a quiet shove of his heavy hand,
sent him staggering half across the court: but Wulf interposed.

'The boy is mine, prince. He is no drunkard, and I will not let him
become one. Would to heaven,' added he, under his breath, 'that I could
say the same to some others. Send us out our supper here, when you are
done. Half a sheep or so will do between us, and enough of the strongest
to wash it down with. Smid knows my quantity.'

'Why in heaven's name are you not coming in?'

'That mob will be trying to burst the gates again before two hours are
out; and as some one must stand sentry, it may as well be a man who will
not have his ears stopped up by wine and women's kisses. The boy will
stay with me.'

So the party went in, leaving Wulf and Philammon alone in the outer
hall.

There the two sat for some half hour, casting stealthy glances at each
other, and wondering perhaps, each of them vainly enough, what was going
on in the opposite brain. Philammon, though his heart was full of his
sister, could not help noticing the air of deep sadness which hung about
the scarred and weather-beaten features of the old warrior. The grimness
which he had remarked on their first meeting seemed to be now changed
into a settled melancholy. The furrows round his mouth and eyes had
