what'll become of them. I see how it is, they must have got in with the
last lot that I took--under assumed names, very likely. I've been more
than once on the point of calling that man Campo up and questioning him. I
was surprised by his hangdog look the first time I saw him. But I have
been so busy."

"You'll have to get busy in another sense if you mean to save this ship
and your life," said the captain earnestly.

"So I shall. Are you armed? No? Then take these--and use 'em when I give
the word."

He handed the captain two heavy automatic pistols, and put a pair in his
own side pockets.

"Now," he continued, "the first thing is to make sure that we've got the
right men--and _all of them_. Call in Joseph Smith."

The captain went to the door, and as he approached it there was a knock.
He turned the key and cautiously opened a crack to look out. The door was
instantly slammed in his face, and six men rushed in, with Campo, a burly,
black-browed fellow, at their head. Three of the men threw the captain on
his back, and pinioned his hands before he could draw a weapon, while
Campo and the others sprang toward Cosmo Versal, Campo pointing a pistol
at his head.

"It's all up, Mr. Versal!" cried Campo with a sneer. "I'll take command of
this ship, and you'll go fish for nebulas."

Cosmo had one advantage; he was behind his desk, and it was a broad and
long one, and placed almost against the wall. They could not get at him
without getting round the desk. Campo did not fire, though he might have
shot Cosmo in his tracks; but evidently he was nourishing the idea of
making him walk the plank. With a sign he commanded his co-conspirators
to flank the desk at each end, while he kept Cosmo covered with his
pistol.

But with a lightning movement, Cosmo dropped under the desk, and, favored
by his slight form and his extreme agility, darted like a cat past Campo's
legs, and, almost before the latter could turn round, was out of the open
door. Campo fired at the retreating form, but the bullet went wide of the
mark. The pistol was practically noiseless, and the sound reached no ears
in the staterooms.

It happened that a switch controlling the lights in the gangway was on the
wall by Cosmo's door, and in passing he swiftly reached up and turned it
off. Thus he was in complete darkness, and when Campo darted out of the
door he could not see the fugitive. He could hear his footsteps, however,
and with two of his companions he rushed blindly after him, firing two or
three shots at random. But Cosmo had turned at the first cross passage,
and then at the next, this part of the Ark being a labyrinth of corridors,
and the pursuers quickly lost all trace of him.

Campo and his companions made their way back to Cosmo's cabin, where their
fellows were guarding Captain Arms. They found the switch in the passage
and turned on the light. They were almost immediately joined by several
other conspirators conducting Joseph Smith, bound and gagged. They held a
short consultation, and Campo, with many curses, declared that Cosmo
Versal must be caught at all hazards.

"The big-headed fiend!" he cried, gnashing his teeth. "Let me get my
grippers on him and I'll squelch him like a bug!"

They threw Joseph Smith into the room beside the helpless captain, after
taking the latter's pistols, locked the door from the outside, and
hurried off on their search. In the passages they encountered several
more of their friends. They now numbered fifteen, all armed. This may
seem a small number to undertake to capture the Ark; but it must be
remembered that among the thousand-odd inmates, exclusive of the crew,
only about one in three was a man, and the majority of these were
peaceable scientists who, it was to be presumed, had no fight in them.

At any rate, Campo, with the reckless courage of his kind, felt confident
that if he could get Cosmo Versal, with the captain and Joseph Smith, out
of the way, he could easily overmaster the others. He had not much fear
of the crew, for he knew that they were not armed, and he had succeeded
in winning over three of their number, the only ones he had thought
at all dangerous, because he had read their character. More than half
the crew were employed about the engines or on the animal deck, and most
of the others were simply stewards who would not stand before the pistols.

But, while the mutineers were hurriedly searching the corridors, Cosmo
had run straight to the bridge, where he found two of his men in charge,
and whence he sent an electric call to all the men employed in the
navigation of the vessel. They came running from various directions, but
a dozen of them were caught in the passages by the mutineers and bound
before they could comprehend what had happened. Seven, however, succeeded
in reaching the bridge, and among these was Jim Waters.

"There's a mutiny," said Cosmo. "We've got to fight for our lives. Have
you got arms?"

Not one had a weapon except Waters, who displayed a pistol half as long
as his arm.

"Here, Peterson, take this," said Cosmo, handing a pistol to one of the
two mariners who had been on the bridge. "They will be here in a minute.
If Campo had been a sailor, he'd have had possession here the first thing.
I'll turn off all lights."

With that he pressed a button which put out every lamp in the ark. But
there was a full moon, and they concealed themselves in the shadows.

Presently they heard the mutineers approaching, stumbling and cursing in
the darkness. Cosmo directed Peterson and Waters to place themselves at
his side, and told them to fire when he gave the word.

The next instant four men appeared crossing a moonlit place at the foot of
the steps on the outside of the dome.

"Wait," whispered Cosmo. "The pistols go at a pull. We can sweep down a
dozen in ten seconds. Let them all get in sight first."

Half a minute later there were twelve men climbing the steps and cautiously
looking up.

"Fire!" cried Cosmo, setting the example, and three streams of blue flame
pulsated from the bridge. The sound of the bullets striking made more
noise than the explosions.

Five or six of the men below fell, knocking down their comrades, and a
loud curse burst from the lips of Campo, who had a bullet through his arm.

The mutineers tumbled in a heap at the bottom, and instantly Cosmo,
switching on all lights, led the way down upon them. His men, who had no
arms, seized anything they could get their hands on that would serve to
strike a blow, and followed him.

The conspirators were overwhelmed by the suddenness and fury of the attack.

Four of them were killed outright and five were wounded, one so severely
that he survived only a few hours.

Cosmo's quick and overwhelming victory was due to the fact that the
mutineers, in mounting the steps, could not see him and his men in the
shadows, and when the automatic weapons, which fired three shots per
second by repeated pressure of the trigger, from a chamber containing
twenty-one cartridges, once opened on them they could do nothing in the
hail of missiles, especially when crowded together on the steps.

Campo was the only one who had any fight left in him. He struck Cosmo a
blow on the head that felled him, and then darted out upon the forepart
of the dome, running on the cleats, and made his way to the top.

Cosmo was on his feet in a second and rushing in pursuit, closely followed
by Jim Waters. The fugitive ran for the ratlines leading to the lookout on
the central mast. He climbed them like a squirrel, and the man in the
cro'nest, amazed at the sight below him, stared at the approaching
mutineer, unable to utter a cry. Campo, who, as the moonbeams showed, now
had a knife in his teeth, rapidly approached, and the lookout shrank in
terror. But before Campo could reach the cro'nest, a blinding light
dazzled his eyes. Cosmo had shouted an order to Peterson to run back to
the bridge and turn a searchlight upon the mast. Then Campo heard a
thundering voice below him:

"Take another step and I'll blow you into the sea!"

He glanced below, and saw Cosmo and Waters covering him with their
pistols.

"Not another step!" roared Cosmo again. "Come down, and I'll give you a
trial for your life."

Campo hesitated; but, seeing that he could be shot down, and finding a
gleam of hope in Cosmo's words, he turned and came slowly down. The
moment he touched the bottom he was seized by Waters and another man,
and, under Cosmo's directions, his hands were bound behind his back.

Ten minutes later the members of the crew who had been caught by the
mutineers in the gangways were all unbound, and then Cosmo broke open the
door of his cabin, the key having been lost or thrown away by Campo, and
the captain and Joseph Smith were released.

"Well, we've got 'em," said Cosmo grimly to the captain. "The mutiny is
at an end, and there'll never be another."

In the meantime many of the passengers had been aroused by the unaccustomed
noises, although the pistols had not made enough sound to be heard from
the place where they were fired. Nightcapped heads appeared on all sides,
and some, in scanty clothing, were wandering in the passageways, demanding
what the trouble was. Cosmo, the captain, and Joseph Smith reassured them,
saying that there was no danger, and that something had happened which
would be explained in the morning.

The prisoners--and the whole fifteen were finally captured--were locked up
in a strong room, and a surgeon was sent to dress their wounds. Cosmo
Versal and the captain resumed their accustomed places on the bridge,
where they talked over the affair, and Cosmo explained his plans for the
morrow.

"I'll give him his trial, as I promised," Cosmo said in conclusion, "and
you'll see what it will be. _Mutiny aboard this Ark!_" And he struck the
rail a violent blow with his fist.

The next morning directly after breakfast Cosmo called all passengers and
crew into the grand saloon, where many wondering looks were exchanged and
many puzzling questions asked. When the mutineers, with hands tied behind
their backs and their many bandages on arms and legs, were led in,
exclamations of astonishment were heard, and some of the timid ones shrank
away in fear.

Cosmo lost no time with preliminaries.

"These men," he said, taking his stand upon the platform, "have mutinied
and tried to capture the Ark. This fellow"--pointing to Campo--"was the
concocter and leader of the plot. He intended to throw me and Captain
Arms, and all of you whom he did not wish to retain for his fiendish
purposes, into the sea. But Heaven has delivered them into our hands. I
have promised them a trial, and they shall have it. But it will be a
trial in which justice shall not be cheated. I find that a moral poison
has stolen into this selected company, and I will eliminate it for once
and all."

The expressions of amazement and alarm redoubled in intensity.

"Professor Abel Able, Professor Jeremiah Moses, Sir Wilfrid Athelstone,
Costake Theriade," Cosmo continued, "you will please come forward to act
as members of the jury, of which I name myself also a member. I shall be
both judge and juror here, but I will hear what the rest of you may have
to say."

The men named stepped forward with some evidences of embarrassment, and
Cosmo gravely gave them seats beside him. Then he commanded that the
prisoners should confront the jury, and, heavily guarded, they were led to
the front.

The brutishness of Campo's face had never struck the passengers who had
seen him before as it did now. He looked a veritable jailbird. At the same
time he was evidently in terror for his life. He muttered something which
nobody understood.

Cosmo, who had informed himself of all the circumstances from Waters, and
by privately questioning the others, had satisfied himself that the entire
scheme of the mutiny was of Campo's contrivance, and that they had been led
into it solely by his persuasion and threats, ordered Waters to speak. The
seaman told a straight story of what he had heard and seen. Cosmo himself
then related the events of the night. When he had finished he turned to
Campo and demanded what he had to say.

Campo again muttered under his breath, but made no attempt to defend
himself, simply saying:

"You promised me a trial."

"And haven't I given you a trial?" demanded Cosmo with flashing eyes. "You
thought you held the world in your grasp. It is _I_ that hold it in _my_
grasp, and _you_, too! You were going to make us 'walk the plank.' It is
_you_ who are going to walk it! Is that the verdict?" (turning to the four
jurymen).

Some of them nodded, some simply stared at Cosmo, surprised by the
vehemence of his manner.

"Enough," he said. "As to you," addressing the other prisoners, "you have
had your lesson; see that you don't forget it! Release them, and lead Campo
to the promenade deck."

Nobody thought that Cosmo would literally execute his threat to make the
mutineer walk the plank, but, as he had told Captain Arms, they didn't know
him. They were about to see that in Cosmo Versal they had not only a
prophet, a leader, and a judge, but an inexorable master also.

A plank was prepared and placed sloping from the rail.

"Walk!" said Cosmo firmly.

To everybody's surprise Campo, with blinded eyes, started immediately up
the plank, followed its full length with quick, unfaltering step, and
plunging from the end, disappeared in the sea.

Many had turned away, unable to look, but many also saw the tragedy to the
end. Then a profound sigh was heard from the whole company of the
spectators. As they turned away, talking in awed voices, they felt, as
never before, that the world had shrunk to the dimensions of the Ark, and
that Cosmo Versal was its dictator.

That same afternoon Cosmo arranged one of his "conferences," and nobody
dared to be absent, although all minds were yet too much excited to follow
the discussions which few could understand. But at length Costake Theriade
concentrated their attention by a wild burst of eloquence about the wonders
of the inter-atomic forces. Sir Athelstone, unable to endure the applause
that greeted his rival, abruptly sprang to his feet, his round face red
with anger, and shouted:

"I say, you know, this is twaddle!"

"Will the Englishman interrupt not?" cried Theriade, with his eyes ablaze.
"Shall I project not the Sir Englishman to the feeshes?"

He looked as if he were about to try to execute his threat, and Sir
Athelstone assumed a boxing attitude; but before hostilities could begin a
loud shout from the deck, followed by cries and exclamations, caused
everybody to rush out of the saloon.

Those who succeeded in getting a glimpse over the shoulders of the members
of the crew, who were already lined up along the only portion of the
bulwarks available for seeing the part of the ocean on which attention
seemed to be fixed, stared open-mouthed at a round-backed mass of shining
metal, with a circular aperture on the top, the cover of which was canted
to one side, and there stood a man, waving a gold-laced red kepi, and
bowing and smiling with great civility.




CHAPTER XVII

THE _JULES VERNE_


The swell of the sea caused the strange-looking craft to rise and sink a
little, and sometimes the water ran bubbling all around the low rim of the
aperture, in the center of which the red-capped man stood, resting on some
invisible support, repeating his salutations and amicable smiles, and
balancing his body to the rocking of the waves with the unconscious
skill of a sailor.

The Ark was running slowly, but it would very soon have left the stranger
in its wake if he had not also been in motion. It was evident that the
object under his feet must be a submersible vessel of some kind, although
it was of a type which Captain Arms, standing beside Cosmo on the bridge,
declared that he had never set eyes on before. It lay so low in the water
that nothing could be seen of its motive machinery, but it kept its place
alongside the Ark with the ease of a dolphin, and gradually edged in closer
and closer.

When it was so near that he could be heard speaking in a voice hardly
raised above the ordinary pitch, the man, first again lifting his cap with
an easy gesture, addressed Cosmo Versal by name, using the English language
with a scarcely perceptible accent:

"M. Versal, I offer you my felicitations upon the magnificent appearance of
your Ark, and I present my compliments to the ladies and gentlemen of your
company."

And then he bowed once more to the passengers, who were almost crowding
each other over the side in their eagerness to both see and hear.

"Thank you," responded Cosmo, "but who are you?"

"Capitaine Yves de Beauxchamps, of the French army."

"Where's the navy, then?" blurted out Captain Arms.

De Beauxchamps glanced at the speaker a little disdainfully, and then
replied gravely:

"Alas! At the bottom of the sea--with all the other navies."

"And how have you escaped?" demanded Cosmo Versal.

"As you see, in a submersible."

"Can it be possible!" exclaimed Cosmo. "And you have been in the sea ever
since the beginning of the flood?"

"Since the first rise of the ocean on the coast at Brest."

"Have you no companions?"

"Six--in truth, seven."
