robe, beat her breast, and lacerated it with her nails.  Then, pressing
her own beautiful face on her lover's wound to stanch the flowing blood,
she lavished upon him all the endearing names which she had bestowed on
their love.

His terrible suffering made her forget her own and the sad fate
impending.  Tears of pity fell like the refreshing drops of a shower upon
the still unwithered blossoms of their love, and brought those which,
during the preceding night, had revived anew, to their last magnificent
unfolding.

Boundless, limitless as her former passion for this man, was now the
grief with which his agonizing death filled her heart.

All that Mark Antony had been to her in the heyday of life, all their
mutual experiences, all that each had received from the other, had
returned to her memory in clear and vivid hues during the banquet which
had closed a few hours ago.  Now these scenes, condensed into a narrow
compass, again passed before her mental vision, but only to reveal more
distinctly the depth of misery of this hour.  At last anguish forced even
the clearest memories into oblivion: she saw nothing save the tortures of
her lover; her brain, still active, revealed solely the gulf at her feet,
and the tomb which yawned not only for Antony, but for herself.

Unable to think of the happiness enjoyed in the past or to hope for it in
the future, she gave herself up to uncontrolled despair, and no woman of
the people could have yielded more absolutely to the consuming grief
which rent her heart, or expressed it in wilder, more frantic language,
than did this great Queen, this woman who as a child had been so
sensitive to the slightest suffering, and whose after-life had certainly
not taught her to bear sorrow with patience.  After Charmian, at the
dying man's request, had given him some wine, he found strength to speak
coherently, instead of moaning and sighing.

He tenderly urged Cleopatra to secure her own safety, if it could be done
without dishonour, and mentioned Proculejus as the man most worthy of her
confidence among the friends of Octavianus.  Then he entreated her not to
mourn for him, but to consider him happy; for he had enjoyed the richest
favours of Fortune.  He owed his brightest hours to her love; but he had
also been the first and most powerful man on earth.  Now he was dying in
the arms of Love, honourable as a Roman who succumbed to Romans.

In this conviction he died after a short struggle.

Cleopatra had watched his last breath, closed his eyes, and then thrown
herself tearlessly on her lover's body.  At last she fainted, and lay
unconscious with her head upon his marble breast.

The private secretary had witnessed all this, and then returned with
tearful eyes to the second story.  There he met Gorgias, who had climbed
the scaffolding, and told him what he had seen and heard from the stairs.
But his story was scarcely ended when a carriage stopped at the Corner of
the Muses and an aristocratic Roman alighted.  This was the very
Proculejus whom the dying Antony had recommended to the woman he
loved as worthy of her confidence.

"In fact," Gorgias continued, "he seemed in form and features one of the
noblest of his haughty race.  He came commissioned by Octavianus, and is
said to be warmly devoted to the Caesar, and a well-disposed man.  We
have also heard him mentioned as a poet and a brother-in-law of Maecenas.
A wealthy aristocrat, he is a generous patron of literature, and also
holds art and science in high esteem.  Timagenes lauds his culture and
noble nature.  Perhaps the historian was right; but where the object in
question is the state and its advantage, what we here regard as worthy of
a free man appears to be considered of little moment at the court of
Octavianus.  The lord to whom he gives his services intrusted him with a
difficult task, and Proculejus doubtless considered it his duty to make
every effort to perform it--and yet----If I see aright, a day will come
when he will curse this, and the obedience with which he, a free man,
aided Caesar  But listen.

"Erect and haughty in his splendid suit of armour, he knocked at the door
of the tomb.  Cleopatra had regained consciousness and asked--she must
have known him in Rome--what he desired.

"He had come, he answered courteously, by the command of Octavianus, to
negotiate with her, and the Queen expressed her willingness to listen,
but refused to admit him into the mausoleum.

"So they talked with each other through the door.  With dignified
composure, she asked to have the sons whom she had given to Antony--not
Caasarion--acknowledged as Kings of Egypt.

"Proculejus instantly promised to convey her wishes to Caesar, and gave
hopes of their fulfilment.

"While she was speaking of the children and their claims--she did not
mention her own future--the Roman questioned her about Mark Antony's
death, and then described the destruction of the dead man's army and
other matters of trivial importance.  Proculejus did not look like a
babbler, but I felt a suspicion that he was intentionally trying to hold
the attention of the Queen.  This proved to be his design; he had been
merely waiting for Cornelius Gallus, the commander of the fleet, of whom
you have heard.  He, too, ranks among the chief men in Rome, and yet he
made himself the accomplice of Proculejus.

"The latter retired as soon as he had presented the new-comer to the
hapless woman.

"I remained at my post and now heard Gallus assure Cleopatra of his
master's sympathy.  With the most bombastic exaggeration he described how
bitterly Octavianus mourned in Mark Antony the friend, the brother-in-
law, the co-ruler and sharer in so many important enterprises.  He had
shed burning tears over the tidings of his death.  Never had more sincere
ones coursed down any man's cheeks.

"Gallus, too, seemed to me to be intentionally prolonging the
conversation.

"Then, while I was listening intently to understand Cleopatra's brief
replies, my foreman, who, when the workmen were driven away by the
Romans, had concealed himself between two blocks of granite, came to me
and said that Proculejus had just climbed a ladder to the scaffold in the
rear of the monument.  Two servants followed, and they had all stolen
down into the hall.

"I hastily started up.  I had been lying on the floor with my head
outstretched to listen.

"Cost what it might, the Queen must be warned.  Treachery was certainly
at work here.

"But I came too late.

"O Dion!  If I had only been informed a few minutes before, perhaps
something still more terrible might have happened, but the Queen would
have been spared what now threatens her.  What can she expect from the
conqueror who, in order to seize her alive, condescends to outwit a
noble, defenceless woman, who has succumbed to superior power?

"Death would have released the unhappy Queen from sore trouble and
horrible shame.  And she had already raised the dagger against her life.
Before my eyes she flung aloft her beautiful arm with the flashing steel,
which glittered in the light of the candles in the many-branched
candelabra beside the sarcophagi.  But I will try to remain calm!  You
shall hear what happened in regular order.  My thoughts grow confused as
the terrible scene recurs to my memory.  To describe it as I saw it, I
should need to be a poet, an artist in words; for what passed before me
happened on a stage--you know, it was a tomb.  The walls were of dark
stone-dark, too, were the pillars and ceiling--all dark and glittering;
most portions were smoothly polished stone, shining like a mirror.  Near
the sarcophagi, and around the candelabra as far as the vicinity of the
door, where the rascally trick was played, the light was brilliant as in
a festal hall.  Every blood-stain on the hand, every scratch, every wound
which the desperate woman had torn with her own nails on her bosom, which
gleamed snow-white from her black robes, was distinctly visible.  Farther
away, on the right and left, the light was dim, and near the side walls
the darkness was as intense as in a real tomb.  On the smooth porphyry
columns, the glittering black marble and serpentine--here, there, and
everywhere--flickered the wavering reflection of the candlelight.  The
draught kept it continually in motion, and it wavered to and fro in the
hall, like the restless souls of the damned.  Wherever the eye turned it
met darkness.  The end of the hall seemed black--black as the anteroom of
Hades--yet through it pierced a brilliant moving bar; sunbeams which
streamed from the stairway into the tomb and amid which danced tiny
motes.  How the scene impressed the eye!  The home of gloomy Hecate!  And
the Queen and her impending fate.  A picture flooded with light, standing
forth in radiant relief against the darkness of the heavy, majestic forms
surrounding it in a wide circle.  This tomb in this light would be a
palace meet for the gloomy rule of the king of the troop of demons
conjured up by the power of a magician--if they have a ruler.  But where
am I wandering?  'The artist!'  I hear you  exclaim  again, 'the  artist!
Instead of rushing forward and interposing, he stands studying the light
and its effects in the royal tomb.'  Yes, yes; I had come too late, too
late--far too late!  On the stairs leading to the lower story of the
building I saw it, but I was not to blame for the delay--not in the
least!

"At first I had been unable to see the men--or even a shadow; but I
beheld plainly in the brightest glare of the light the body of Mark
Antony on the couch and, in the dusk farther towards the right, Iras and
Charmian trying to raise a trapdoor.  It was the one which closed the
passage leading to the combustible materials stored in the cellar.  A
sign from the Queen had commanded them to fire it.  The first steps of
the staircase, down which I was hastening, were already behind me--then--
then Proculejus, with two men, suddenly dashed from the intense darkness
on the other side.  Scarcely able to control myself, I sprang down the
remaining steps, and while Iras's shrill cry, 'Poor Cleopatra, they will
capture you!' still rang in my ears, I saw the betrayed Queen turn from
the door through which, resolved on death, she was saying something to
Gallus, perceive Proculejus close behind her, thrust her hand into her
girdle, and with the speed of lightning--you have already heard so--throw
up her arm with the little dagger to bury the sharp blade in her breast.
What a picture!  In the full radiance of the brilliant light, she
resembled a statue of triumphant victory or of noble pride in great deeds
accomplished; and then, then, only an instant later, what an outrage was
inflicted!

"Like a robber, an assassin, Proculejus rushed upon her, seized her arm,
and wrested the weapon from her grasp.  His tall figure concealed her
from me.  But when, struggling to escape from the ruffian's clutch, she
again turned her face towards the hall, what a transformation had
occurred!  Her eyes--you know how large they are--were twice their usual
size, and blazed with scorn, fury, and hatred for the traitor.  The
cheering light had become a consuming fire.  So I imagine the vengeance,
the curse which calls down ruin upon the head of a foe.  And Proculejus,
the great lord, the poet whose noble nature is praised by the authors on
the banks of the Tiber, held the defenceless woman, the worthy daughter
of a brilliant line of kings, in a firm grasp, as if it required the
exertion of all his strength to master this delicate embodiment of
charming womanhood.  True, the proud blood of the outwitted lioness urged
her to resist this profanation, and Proculejus--an enviable honour--made
her feel the superior strength of his arm.  I am no prophet, but Dion, I
repeat, this shameful struggle and the glances which flashed upon him
