"Pirates, I suppose?" said Bladud.

"Ay--and not much chance of escaping them.  Give another haul on the
sail-rope, mate, and pull, men, pull, if you would save your liberty--
for these brutes have no mercy."

The sail was tightened up a few inches, and the vessel was put more
directly before the wind.  The way in which the slaves bent to the oars
showed that the poor fellows fully understood the situation.

For a few minutes Captain Arkal watched the result in stern silence.
Then, with an unwonted look and tone of bitterness, he said in a low
voice--

"No--I thought as much.  She sails faster than we do.  Now, friend
Bladud, you shall presently have a chance of proving whether your royal
blood is better than that of other men."

To this remark the prince made no other reply than by a good-natured
smile as he took up the bronze helmet which lay beside his sword on the
thwart and placed it on his head.

Captain Arkal regarded him with a sort of grim satisfaction as he
followed up the action by buckling on his sword.

The sword in question was noteworthy.  It was a single-handed weapon of
iron, made in Egypt, to suit the size and strength of its owner, and was
large enough to have served as a two-handed sword for most men.

"You can throw a javelin, no doubt?" asked the captain, as he watched
the young man's leisurely preparations for the expected combat.

"Yes, I have practised throwing the spear a good deal--both in peace and
war."

"Good.  I have got one here that will suit you.  It belonged to my
grandfather, who was a stout man, and made powerful play with it during
a neighbouring tribe's raid--when I was a baby--to the discomfort, I
have been told, and surprise of his foes.  I always keep it by me for
luck, and have myself used it on occasion, though I prefer a lighter one
for ordinary use.  Here it is--a pretty weapon," he continued, drawing a
javelin of gigantic proportions from under the gunwale and handing it to
Bladud.  "But we must proceed with caution in this matter.  Take off
your helmet at present, and try to look frightened if you can."

"I fear me that will be difficult, captain."

"Not in the least.  Look here, nothing is easier when you get used to
it."

As he spoke Arkal caused his stern visage to relax into a look of such
amiable sheepishness that Bladud could not repress a sudden laugh which
recalled and intensified the captain's fierce expression instantly.

"Learn to subdue yourself, young man," he muttered sternly.  "If these
pirates hear laughter, do you think they can be made to believe we are
afraid of them?"

"Forgive me, captain; if you had seen your own face, you would have
joined in the laugh.  I will be more careful.  But how do you mean to
proceed, and what do you wish me to do?"

Captain Arkal, who was restored to good-humour by this compliment to his
power of expression, as well as by the modesty with which the prince
received his rebuke, explained his intentions--in low, earnest tones,
however, for they were by that time drawing near to the piratical craft.

Having got well ahead of the _Penelope_, it had backed its sail and lay
still, awaiting her coming up.

"Creep to the bow, Bladud, with your helmet off, and show as little of
your bulk as may be.  Show only your head above the bulwarks, and look
as miserable as I did just now--more so if you can.  Take your sword,
javelin, and shield with you.  I need say no more to a man of war.  Use
them when you see your opportunity."

Bladud received his orders in silence, and obeyed them with that
unquestioning and unhesitating promptitude which is one of the surest
evidences of fitness to command.  Meanwhile the mate, who was accustomed
to his captain's habits, and needed no instructions, had caused the
sailors to lay their shields and swords out of sight at their feet, so
that they might approach the pirates in the character of simple traders
who were completely cowed by the appearance of the foe.  To increase
this aspect of fear, the sail was lowered as they drew near, and the
oars were used to complete the distance that yet intervened between the
two vessels.

This humble and submissive approach did not, however, throw the pirates
quite off their guard.  They stood to their arms and prepared to spring
on board their victim when close enough.  As the pirate vessel lay
motionless on the water she presented her broadside to the trader.  The
captain took care to steer so that this relative position should be
maintained.  The pirate chief, a huge man in rude armour, with a
breast-plate of thick bull-hide and a shield of the same on his left
arm, gave orders to pull the oars on one side of his vessel so that the
two might be brought alongside.

They were about fifty yards apart at the moment.  Before the order could
be carried into effect, however, Arkal uttered a low hiss.  Instantly
the double banks of oars bent almost to the breaking point, and the
_Penelope_ leaped forward like a sentient creature.  Each man seized
sword and shield and sprang up, and Bladud, forgetting both helmet and
shield in the hurry of the moment, poised the mighty javelin which had
so astonished its owner's enemies in days gone by, and in another moment
hurled it shrieking through the air.  It flew straight as a thunderbolt
at the pirate chief; pierced through shield and breastplate, and came
out at his back, sending him headlong into the arms of his horrified
crew.

The whole incident was so sudden that the pirates had scarcely time to
recover from their surprise when the bow of the _Penelope_ crashed into
the side of their vessel and stove it in, for the trader, like some of
the war-vessels of the period, was provided with a ram for this very
purpose.

As the _Penelope_ recoiled from the shock, a yell of rage burst from the
pirates, and a volley of javelins and stones followed, but, owing to the
confusion resulting from the shock, these were ill-directed, and such of
them as found their mark were caught on the shields.  Before another
discharge could be made, the pirate vessel heeled over and sank, leaving
her crew of miscreants struggling in the sea.  Some of them--being,
strange to say, unable to swim--were drowned.  Others were killed in the
water, while a few, taking their swords in their teeth, swam to the
trader and made desperate attempts to climb on board.  Of course they
failed, and in a few minutes nothing remained of the pirate vessel to
tell of the tragedy that had been enacted, except an oar or two and a
few spars left floating on the sea.

"Would that all the sea-robbers in these parts could be as easily and
thoroughly disposed of," remarked the captain, as he gave orders to
re-hoist the sail.  "Ho!  Bladud, my worthy prince, come aft here.  What
detains you?"

But Bladud did not answer to the call.  A stone from the enemy had
fallen on his defenceless head and knocked him down insensible.

Four of the men now raised him up.  As they did so, one of the men--the
small seaman, Maikar--was found underneath him in a state of
semi-consciousness.  While they carried Bladud aft, the little sailor
began to gasp and sneeze.

"Not killed, I see," remarked the mate, looking into his face with some
anxiety.

"No, not quite," sighed Maikar, drawing a long breath, and raising
himself on one elbow, with a slightly dazed look, "but I never was so
nearly burst in all my life.  If an ox had fallen on me he could not
have squeezed me flatter.  Do, two of you, squeeze me the other way, to
open me out a little; there's no room in me left to breathe--scarcely
room to think."

"Oh! your battles are not yet over, I see," said the mate, going off to
the stern of the vessel, where he found Bladud just recovering
consciousness and smiling at the remarks of the captain, who busied
himself in stanching the wound, just over his frontal bone, from which
blood was flowing freely.

"H'm! this comes of sheer recklessness.  I told you to take off your
helmet, but I did not tell you to keep it off.  Man, you launched that
javelin well!--better than I could have done it myself.  Indeed, I doubt
if my old grandfather could have done it with such telling effect--
straight through and through.  I saw full a hand-breadth come out at the
villain's back.  What say you, mate?  Little Maikar wounded?"

"No, not wounded, but nearly burst, as he says himself; and no wonder,
for Bladud fell upon him."

"Didn't I tell you, mate," said the captain, looking up with a grin,
"that nothing will kill little Maikar?  Go to, man, you pretend to be a
judge of men; yet you grumbled at me for engaging him as one of our
crew.  Do you feel better now, prince?"

"Ay, greatly better, thank you," replied Bladud, putting his hand gently
on the bandages with which the captain had skilfully bound his head.

"That is well.  I think, now, that food will do you service.  What say
you?"

"Nay, with your leave, I prefer sleep," said the prince, stretching
himself out on the deck.  "A little rest will suffice, for my head is
noted for its thickness, and my brain for its solidity--at least so my
good father was wont to say; and I've always had great respect for his
opinion."

"Ah, save when it ran counter to your own," suggested Arkal; "and
especially that time when you ran away from home and came out here in
the long ship of my trading friend."

"I have regretted that many a time since then, and I am now returning
home to offer submission."

"D'you think that he'll forgive you?"

"I am sure he will, for he is a kind man; and I know he loves me, though
he has never said so."

"I should like to know that father of yours.  I like your description of
him--so stern of face, yet so kind of heart, and with such an
unchangeable will when he sees what is right.  But what _is_ right, and
what is wrong?"

"Ay--what is--who can tell?  Some people believe that the gods make
their will known to man through the Delphic Oracle."

"Boh!" exclaimed the captain with a look of supreme contempt.

The turn of thought silenced both speakers for a time; and when Captain
Arkal turned to resume the conversation, he found that his friend was
sound asleep.

CHAPTER THREE.

ON THE VOYAGE.

Weather has always been, and, we suppose, always will be, capricious.
Its uncertainty of character--in the Levant, as in the Atlantic, in days
of old as now, was always the same--smiling to-day; frowning to-morrow;
playful as a lamb one day; raging like a lion the next.

After the rough handling experienced by the _Penelope_ at the beginning
of her voyage, rude Boreas kindly retired, and spicy breezes from Africa
rippled the sea with just sufficient force to intensify its heavenly
blue, and fill out the great square-sail so that there was no occasion
to ply the oars.  One dark, starlight but moonless night, a time of
quiet talk prevailed from stem to stern of the vessel as the grizzled
mariners spun long yarns of their prowess and experiences on the deep,
for the benefit of awe-stricken and youthful shipmates whose careers
were only commencing.

"You've heard, no doubt, of the great sea-serpent?" observed little
Maikar, who had speedily recovered from the flattening to which Bladud
had subjected him, and was busy enlivening a knot of young fellows in
the bow of the ship.

"Of course we have!" cried one; "father used to tell me about it when I
was but a small boy.  He never saw it himself, though he had been to the
Tin Isles and Albion more than once; but he said he had met with men who
had spoken with shipmates who had heard of it from men who had seen it
only a few days before, and who described it exactly."

"Ah!" remarked another, "but I have met a man who had seen it himself on
his first voyage, when he was quite a youth; and he said it had a bull's
head and horns, with a dreadful long body all over scales, and something
like an ass's tail at the end."

"Pooh!--nonsense!" exclaimed little Maikar, twirling his thumbs, for
smoking had not been introduced into the world at that period--and
thumb-twirling would seem to have served the ancient world for leisurely
pastime quite as well, if not better--at least we are led to infer so
from the fact that Herodotus makes no mention of anything like a vague,
mysterious sensation of unsatisfied desire to fill the mouth with smoke
in those early ages, which he would certainly have done had the taste
for smoke been a natural craving, and thumb-twirling an unsatisfactory
occupation.  This absolute silence of the "Father of History," we think,
almost proves our point.  "Nonsense!" repeated little Maikar.  "The
youth of the man who told you about the serpent accounts for his wild
description, for youth is prone to strange imaginings and--"

"It seems to me," interrupted a grave man, who twirled his thumbs in
that slow, deliberate way in which a contemplative man smokes--"it seems
to me that there's no more truth about the great sea-serpent than there
is about the golden fleece.  I don't believe in either of them."

"Don't you?  Well, all I can say is," returned the little man, gazing
fixedly in the grave comrade's face, "that I saw the great sea-serpent
with my own eyes!"

"No! did you?" exclaimed the group, drawing their heads closer together
with looks of expectancy.

"Ay, that did I, mates; but you mustn't expect wild descriptions about
monsters with bulls' horns and asses' tails from me.  I like truth, and
the truth is, that the brute was so far away at the time we saw it, that
not a man of us could tell exactly what it was like, and when we tried
the description, we were all so different, that we gave it up; but we
were all agreed on this point, that it certainly _was_ the serpent."

The listeners seemed rather disappointed at this meagre account and
sudden conclusion of what had bidden fair to become a stirring tale of
the sea; but Maikar re-aroused their expectations by stating his firm
belief that it was all nonsense about there being only one sea-serpent.

"Why, how could there be only one?" he demanded, ceasing to twirl, in
order that he might clench his fist and smite his knee with emphasis.
"Haven't you got a grandfather?" he asked, turning suddenly to the grave
man.

"Certainly, I've got two of them if you come to that," he answered,
taken rather aback by the brusque and apparently irrelevant nature of
the question.

"Just so--two of them," repeated the little man, "and don't you think it
likely that the sea serpent must have had two grandfathers also?"

"Undoubtedly--and two grandmothers as well.  Perhaps he's got them yet,"
replied the grave man with a contemplative look over the side, where the
rippling sea gleamed with phosphoric brilliancy.

"Exactly so," continued Maikar in an eager tone, "and of course these
also must have had two grandfathers besides a mother each, and it is
more than likely that the great sea-serpent himself is the father of a
large family."

"Which implies a wife," suggested one of the seamen.

"Not necessarily," objected an elderly seaman, who had once been to the
lands lying far to the north of Albion, and had acquired something of
that tendency to object to everything at all times which is said to
characterise the people of the far North.  "Not necessarily," he
repeated, "for the serpent may be a bachelor with no family at all."

There was a short laugh at this, and an illogical man of the group made
some irrelevant observation which led the conversation into a totally
different channel, and relegated the great sea-serpent, for the time
being, to oblivion!

While the men were thus engaged philosophising in the bow, Bladud and
the captain were chatting in subdued voices in the stern.

"It is impossible," said the latter, in reply to a remark made by the
former, "it is impossible for me to visit your father's court this year,
though it would please me much to do so, but my cargo is intended for
the south-western Cassiterides.  To get round to the river on the banks
of which your home stands would oblige me to run far towards the cold
regions, into waters which I have not yet visited--though I know them
pretty well by hearsay.  On another voyage I may accomplish it, but not
on this one."

"I am sorry for that, Arkal, because things that are put off to another
time are often put off altogether.  But the men of the Tin Isles often
visit my father's town in their boats with copper and tin, and there are
tracks through the forest which horses can traverse.  Could you not
visit us overland?  It would not be a journey of many weeks, and your
trusty mate might look after the ship in your absence.  Besides, the
diggers may not have enough of the metal ready to fill your ship, so you
may be idle a long time.  What say you?"

Captain Arkal frowned, as was his wont when considering a knotty
question, and shook his head.

"I doubt if I should be wise to venture so much," he said; "moreover, we
are not yet at the end of our voyage.  It is of little use troubling
one's-self about the end of anything while we are only at the
beginning."

"Nevertheless," rejoined Bladud, "to consider the possible end while yet
at the beginning, seems not unreasonable, though, undoubtedly, we may
never reach the end.  Many a fair ship sets sail and never returns."

