some one of the notables, and get heavier irons put on yourself, besides
another touch, perhaps, of the bastinado.  Be wise, and consider well
what you intend to do."

"Thank you, friend, for your warning.  It is well timed.  If you had not
spoken I would certainly have gone forth to-morrow unprepared."

"But what is your preparation?  What will you do?" persisted the
Frenchman.

"What _can_ I do?" replied Sommers.  "Have you not just shown me that I
am utterly helpless?  In such a case there is only one course left--
namely, to go to Him who can succour the helpless.  I will ask counsel
of God.  The pride you have referred to I admit, though it is by no
means confined to my own countrymen!  Too long have I given way to it,
and acted independently of my Maker.  Perhaps God sent me here to
convince me of my sin and helplessness."

"There is no God.  I do not believe in a God," said Laronde calmly.

"Why not?" asked Sommers, in surprise.

"Because," replied Laronde bitterly, "if there was a God He could not
stand by and see me suffering such prolonged and awful misery."

"If, instead of misery, you had been placed during the last twelve years
in supreme felicity, would you have believed in a God?" asked Sommers.

Laronde was silent.  He saw that the reason which he had given for
disbelief was untenable, and he was too straightforward to quibble about
it.

"I don't know," he said at last angrily.  "No doubt there are hundreds
of men in happy and favourable circumstances who say, as I do, that they
don't believe in a God.  I don't know.  All I do know is that I am
supremely miserable!"

"Now you are reasonable," returned the merchant, "for you talk of what
you do know, and you admit that in regard to God you `don't know,' but
you began by stating that `there is no God.'  Ah, my friend, I
sympathise with you in your terrible sorrow, even as you have
sympathised with me in mine, but don't let us give way to despair and
cast the only Refuge that remains to us behind our backs.  I will not
ask you to join me in praying to One, in whom you say you do not
believe, but I will pray _for_ you."

Hugh Sommers got upon his knees and then and there--in the dark and dank
prison-house--prayed most earnestly for guidance and spiritual light in
the name of Jesus.  At first the Frenchman listened with what we may
style kindly contempt, and then with surprise, for the Englishman drew
to the conclusion of his very brief prayer without any mention of his
own name.  Just at the close, however, Sommers said, "O God! show to my
friend here that he is wrong, and that Thou art Love."

It was with eager and trembling heart next day that Hugh Sommers
watched, during the noontide meal, for the coming of his mysterious
black friend, and it was with no less anxiety and trembling of heart
that Hester approached her father at the same hour.

"Now mind how you doos," said the doubtful Sally, as she glanced keenly
at Hester's face.  "Mind, I'll hab no marcy on you if you gibs way!"

Hester made no reply, for she was drawing near to her father, and saw
that he was gazing at her with fixed intensity.  She raised her heart to
God and received strength to pass without a word or look, dropping the
biscuits as on the previous day.  The man, however, proved less capable
of self-restraint than the girl, for he could not resist whispering,
"Hester!"

The poor girl turned towards him as if by an irresistible impulse, but
her black guardian angel was equal to the emergency.  Seizing Hester by
the shoulder, she pushed her violently forward, storming at her loudly
as on the former occasion.

"What, you black t'ing!  Hab you neber seen slabes before?  You no
better'n de white folk, wastin' ob your purcious time.  My! won't you
get a whackin' fro' missis w'en you gits home!"

Recovering herself, Hester at once submitted.

At first the poor father was about to start up and run to embrace his
child, as well as to rescue her from her rude companion, but, being what
is termed a "sharp man of business," he received into his mind, as it
were, a flash of light, and sat still.  If this flash had been analysed
it would probably have produced the following thoughts--"biscuits!
kindness! companion a friend! ignorance impossible! violence
unaccountable! a ruse, perhaps! sit still!"

Thought, they say, is swifter than light.  At all events, it was swift
enough on the present occasion to prevent the shadow of a suspicion
arising in the minds either of slaves or guards, who seemed to be rather
amused at what they fancied was the bad temper of Sally.

Next day the biscuit-dropping was repeated without the scene that had
followed, and so wisely was this affair managed by all the parties
concerned, that it was carried on for several weeks without a hitch.
Under the influence of hope and improved fare, Hugh Sommers became so
much brighter in spirits and better in health, and so much more
tractable, that his guards at length removed his heavy fetters and
allowed him to toil with free limbs, like the majority of the slaves.
Hester also became almost cheerful under the wonderful influence of
hope.  But Hester and her father were each overwhelmed, more or less, by
a wet blanket at that time, and, strange to say, their wet blankets
happened to be their best friends.

In the case of Hester, it was Sally.  The more hopeful and cheery Hester
became, the more did her black friend shake her woolly head and look
dismal.

"Why, Sally, dear, what's the matter with you?" asked the former one
day, as they sat together in the bower on the roof, after returning from
their visit to the slave-gang.

A shake of the girl's head and an unutterable expression in her
magnificent black eyes made Hester quite uneasy.

"Do tell me, Sally.  Is there anything the matter with you?"

"De matter wid me?  Oh no!  Not'ing's neber de matter wid me--'cept when
I eats too much--but it's you an' your fadder I's t'inkin' ob."

"But we are both getting on very well, Sally, are we not?  I am quite
safe here, and darling father is growing stronger and fatter every day,
thank God! and then our hope is very strong.  Why should you be
anxious?"

Sally prefaced her reply with one of the professional gasps wherewith
she was wont to bring down the iron pestle.

"Well, now, you white folks am de greatest ijits eber was born.  Do you
t'ink you'll deliber your fadder from de Moors by feedin' him on
biscuits an' _hope_?  What's de end ob all dis to come to? das what I
want to know.  Ob course you can't go on for eber.  You sure to be
cotched at last, and de whole affair'll bust up.  You'll be tooked away,
an' your fadder'll be t'rowed on de hooks or whacked to deaf.  Oh!  I's
most mis'rable!"

The poor creature seemed inclined to howl at this point, but she
constrained herself and didn't.

In the gloom of the cheerless Bagnio, Hugh Sommers found his wet blanket
in Edouard Laronde.

"But it is unwise to look only at the bright side of things," said the
Frenchman, after sympathising with his friend's joy in having discovered
his daughter so unexpectedly and in such a curious manner.  "No doubt,
from her disguise, she must, as you say, be in hiding, and in
comparative safety with friends, else she could not be moving so freely
about this accursed city, but what is to be the end of it all?"

Laronde unconsciously echoed Sally's question to Hester, but Hugh
Sommers had not as much to say in reply as his daughter, for he was too
well acquainted with the possibilities of life to suppose that biscuits
and hope would do much towards the "end," although valuable auxiliaries
in the meantime.

"I see not the end, Laronde," he said, after a pause; "but the end is in
the hands of God, and I will trust Him."

"So is the middle, and so is the beginning, as well as the end,"
returned Laronde cynically; "why, then, are you so perplexed and anxious
about these if the end is, as you seem to think, so sure?  Why don't you
trust God all through?"

"I do trust God all through, my friend, but there is this difference--
that with the end I have nothing to do save to wait patiently and
trustfully, whereas with the beginning and middle it is my duty to act
and energise hopefully."

"But why your anxiety if the whole matter is under safe guidance?"
persisted the Frenchman.

"Because, while I am absolutely certain that God will do His part wisely
and well, I am by no means sure that I shall do my part either well or
wisely.  You forget, Laronde, that we are free agents as well as sinful
and foolish, more or less, so that there is legitimate room for anxiety,
which only becomes evil when we give way to it, or when it goes the
length of questioning the love, wisdom, and power of the Creator!"

"All mystery, all mystery, Sommers; you are only theorising about what
you do not, cannot, know anything.  You have no ground for what you
hold."

"As you confess never to have studied, or even seriously contemplated,
the ground on which I hold it, there is--don't you think?--a slight
touch of presumption on your part in criticising so severely what you do
not, cannot, understand?  I profess to have _good_ reasons for what I
hold; you profess merely to disbelieve it.  Is there not a vast
difference here?"

"Perhaps there is, but I'm too sleepy to see it.  Would you oblige me by
putting your foot on that centipede?  He has made three ineffectual
attempts to pass the night under my wing.  Make sure work of him.
Thanks.  Now I will try to sleep.  Oh! the weary, heart-sickness of hope
deferred!  Good-night, Sommers."

"Good-night."



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A BRAVE DASH FOR LIFE AND FREEDOM.

"Geo'ge, come wid me," said Peter the Great one afternoon, with face so
solemn that the heart of the young midshipman beat faster as he followed
his friend.

They were in Ben-Ahmed's garden at the time--for the middy had been
returned to his owner after a night in the common prison, and a threat
of much severer treatment if he should ever again venture to lay his
infidel hands on one of the faithful.

Having led the middy to the familiar summer house, where most of their
earnest or important confabulations were held, Peter sat down and
groaned.

"What's wrong now?" asked the middy, with anxious looks.

"Oh!  Geo'ge, eberyt'ing's wrong," he replied, flinging himself down on
a rustic seat with a reckless air and rolling his eyes horribly.
"Eberyt'ing's wrong.  De world's all wrong togidder--upside down and
inside out."

The middy might have laughed at Peter's expression if he had not been
terribly alarmed.

"Come, Peter, tell me.  Is Hester safe?"

"I don' know, Geo'ge."

"Don't know!  Why d'you keep me in such anxiety?  Speak, man, speak!
What has happened?"

"How kin I speak, Geo'ge, w'en I's a'most busted wid runnin' out here to
tell you?"

The perspiration that stood on Peter's sable brow, and the heaving of
his mighty chest, told eloquently of the pace at which he had been
running.

"Dis is de way ob it, Geo'ge.  I had it all fro' de lips ob Sally
herself, what saw de whole t'ing."  As the narrative which Peter the
Great had to tell is rather too long to be related in his own "lingo,"
we will set it down in ordinary language.

One day while Hester was, as usual, passing her father, and in the very
act of dropping the customary supply of food, she observed that one of
the slaves had drawn near and was watching her with keen interest.  From
the slave's garb and bearing any one at all acquainted with England
could have seen at a glance that he was a British seaman, though hard
service and severe treatment, with partial starvation, had changed him
much.  He was in truth the stout sailor-like man who had spoken a few
words to Foster the day he landed in Algiers, and who had contemptuously
asserted his utter ignorance of gardening.

The slaves, we need hardly say, were not permitted to hold intercourse
with each other for fear of their combining to form plans of rebellion
and escape, but it was beyond the power of their drivers to be
perpetually on the alert, so that sometimes they did manage to exchange
a word or two without being observed.

That afternoon it chanced that Sommers had to carry a stone to a certain
part of the wall.  It was too heavy for one man to lift, the sailor was
therefore ordered to help him.  While bearing the burden towards the
wall, the following whispered conversation took place.

"I say, old man," observed the sailor, "the little girl that gives you
biscuits every day is no more a nigger than I am."

"Right!" whispered the merchant anxiously, for he had supposed that no
one had observed the daily gift; "she is my daughter."

"I guessed as much by the cut o' your jibs.  But she's in danger, for I
noticed that one o' the drivers looked at her suspiciously to-day, and
once suspicion is roused the villains never rest.  Is there no means of
preventing her coming this way to-morrow?"

"None.  I don't even know where she comes from or goes to.  God help
her!  If suspected, she is lost, for she will be sure to come
to-morrow."

"Don't break down, old man; they'll observe you.  If she is taken are
you willing to fight?"

"Yes," answered the merchant sternly.

"I am with you, then.  Your name?"

"Sommers.  Yours?"

"Brown."

A driver had been coming towards them, so that the last few words had
been spoken in low whispers.  A sharp cut of the whip on the shoulders
of each showed that the driver had observed them talking.  They received
it in absolute silence and without any outward display of feeling.  To
that extent, at all events, they had both been "tamed."

But the stout seaman had been for many weeks acting a part.  At first,
like Sommers, he had been put in heavy irons on account of his violence
and ferocity; but after many weeks of childlike submission on his part,
the irons were removed.  Despite the vigilance of the guards, a plot had
been hatched by the gang to which Brown belonged, and it was almost,
though not quite, ripe for execution when the events we are describing
occurred.  Poor Hester's action next day precipitated matters and caused
the failure of the plot--at least to some extent.

She had gone as usual with Sally to visit the slave-gang, and had
dropped her biscuits, when her anxious father said, in a low but hurried
voice, "Pass quickly, and don't come again for some time!"

Hester involuntarily stopped.

"Darling father!" she said, restraining herself with difficulty from
leaping into his arms, "why--oh! why am I not--"

She had only got thus far when the janissary, whose suspicions had been
aroused, pounced upon her, and, seizing her by the wrist, looked keenly
into her face.

"Ho! ho!" he exclaimed, glancing from the girl to her sire, "what
mystery have we here?  Come, we must investigate this."

Poor Hester winced from the pain of the rude soldier's grip as he
proceeded to drag her away.  Her father, seeing that further concealment
was impossible, and that final separation was inevitable, became
desperate.  With the bound of an enraged tiger he sprang on the soldier
and throttled him.  Both being powerful men they fell on the ground in a
deadly struggle, at which sight Hester could only look on with clasped
hands in helpless terror.

But the British seaman was at hand.  He had feared that some such
mischief would arise.  Seeing that two other soldiers were running to
the aid of their fallen comrade, he suddenly gave the signal for the
revolt of the slaves.  It was premature.  Taken by surprise, the
half-hearted among the conspirators paid no attention to it, while the
timid stood more or less bewildered.  Only a few of the resolute and
reckless obeyed the call, but these furnished full employment for their
guards, for, knowing that failure meant death, if not worse, they fought
like fiends.

Meanwhile the first of the two soldiers who came running, sword in hand,
towards Sommers, was met by Brown.  With a piece of wood in his left
hand, that worthy parried the blow that was delivered at his head.  At
the same time he sent his right fist into the countenance of his
adversary with such force that he became limp and dropped like an empty
topcoat.  This was fortunate, for the companion janissary was close to
him when he wheeled round.  The blazing look of the seaman, however,
induced so much caution in the Turk that, instead of using his sword, he
drew a long pistol from his girdle and levelled it.  Brown leaped upon
him, caught the pistol as it exploded just in time to turn the muzzle
aside, wrenched the weapon from his foe's grasp, and brought the butt of
it down with such a whack on his head that it laid him beside his
comrade.

Turning quickly to the still struggling pair, he saw that the janissary
was black in the face, and that Sommers was compressing his throat with
both hands and had his knee on his stomach, while Hester and Sally were
looking on horrified, but hopeful.  At the same time he saw fresh
soldiers running up the street to reinforce the guard.

"Hester," he said sharply, and seizing the girl's hand, "come, bolt with
me.  I've knowed your father a good while.  Quick!"
