And when I contrasted the prosperity of Mizora--a prosperity that
reached every citizen in its vast territory--with the varied phases of
life that are found in my own land, it urged me to inquire if there
could be hope for such happiness within its borders.

To the Preceptress, whose sympathies I knew were broad as the lap of
nature, I at last went with my desire and perplexities. A sketch of my
country's condition was the inevitable prelude. I gave it without once
alluding to the presence of Man. She listened quietly and attentively.
Her own land lay like a charming picture before her. I spoke of its
peaceful happiness, its perfected refinement, its universal wealth, and
paramount to all its other blessings, its complete ignorance of social
ills. With them, love did not confine itself to families, but encircled
the Nation in one embrace. How dismal, in contrast, was the land that
had given me birth.

"But one eminent distinction exists among us as a people," I added in
conclusion. "We are not all of one race."

I paused and looked at the Preceptress. She appeared lost in reverie.
Her expression was one of solicitude and approached nearer to actual
pain than anything I had ever noticed upon it before. She looked up and
caught my eye regarding her. Then she quietly asked:

"_Are there men in your country?_"




PART SECOND.




CHAPTER I.


I answered in the affirmative, and further added that I had a husband
and a son.

The effect of a confession so simple, and so natural, wounded and amazed
me.

The Preceptress started back with a look of loathing and abhorrence; but
it was almost instantly succeeded by one of compassion.

"You have much to learn," she said gently, "and I desire not to judge
you harshly. _You_ are the product of a people far back in the darkness
of civilization. _We_ are a people who have passed beyond the boundary
of what was once called Natural Law. But, more correctly, we have become
mistresses of Nature's peculiar processes. We influence or control them
at will. But before giving you any further explanation I will show you
the gallery containing the portraits of our very ancient ancestors."

She then conducted me into a remote part of the National College, and
sliding back a panel containing a magnificent painting, she disclosed a
long gallery, the existence of which I had never suspected, although I
knew their custom of using ornamented sliding panels instead of doors.
Into this I followed her with wonder and increasing surprise. Paintings
on canvas, old and dim with age; paintings on porcelain, and a peculiar
transparent material, of which I have previously spoken, hung so thick
upon the wall you could not have placed a hand between them. They were
all portraits of men. Some were represented in the ancient or mediaeval
costumes of my own ancestry, and some in garbs resembling our modern
styles.

Some had noble countenances, and some bore on their painted visages the
unmistakable stamp of passion and vice. It is not complimentary to
myself to confess it, but I began to feel an odd kind of companionship
in this assembly of good and evil looking men, such as I had not felt
since entering this land of pre-eminently noble and lovely women.

As I gazed upon them, arrayed in the armor of some stern warrior, or the
velvet doublet of some gay cavalier, the dark eyes of a debonair knight
looked down upon me with familiar fellowship. There was pride of birth,
and the passion of conquest in every line of his haughty, sensuous face.
I seemed to breathe the same moral atmosphere that had surrounded me in
the outer world.

_They_ had lived among noble and ignoble deeds I felt sure. _They_ had
been swayed by conflicting desires. _They_ had known temptation and
resistance, and reluctant compliance. _They_ had experienced the
treachery and ingratitude of humanity, and had dealt in it themselves.
_They_ had known joy as I had known it, and their sorrow had been as my
sorrows. _They_ had loved as I had loved, and sinned as I had sinned,
and suffered as I had suffered.

I wept for the first time since my entrance into Mizora, the bitter
tears of actual experience, and endeavored to convey to the Preceptress
some idea of the painful emotion that possessed me.

"I have noticed," she said, "in your own person and the descriptions you
have given of your native country, a close resemblance to the people and
history of our nation in ages far remote. These portraits are very old.
The majority of them were painted many thousands of years ago. It is
only by our perfect knowledge of color that we are enabled to preserve
them. Some have been copied by expert artists upon a material
manufactured by us for that purpose. It is a transparent adamant that
possesses no refractive power, consequently the picture has all the
advantage of a painting on canvas, with the addition of perpetuity. They
can never fade nor decay."

"I am astonished at the existence of this gallery," I exclaimed. "I have
observed a preference for sliding panels instead of doors, and that they
were often decorated with paintings of rare excellence, but I had never
suspected the existence of this gallery behind one of them."

"Any student," said the Preceptress, "who desires to become conversant
with our earliest history, can use this gallery. It is not a secret, for
nothing in Mizora is concealed; but we do not parade its existence, nor
urge upon students an investigation of its history. They are so far
removed from the moral imbecility that dwarfed the nature of these
people, that no lesson can be learned from their lives; and their time
can be so much more profitably spent in scientific research and study."

"You have not, then, reached the limits of scientific knowledge?" I
wonderingly inquired, for, to me, they had already overstepped its
imaginary pale.

"When we do we shall be able to create intellect at will. We govern to a
certain extent the development of physical life; but the formation of
the brain--its intellectual force, or capacity I should say--is beyond
our immediate skill. Genius is yet the product of long cultivation."

I had observed that dark hair and eyes were as indiscriminately mingled
in these portraits as I had been accustomed to find them in the living
people of my own and other countries. I drew the Preceptress' attention
to it.

"We believe that the highest excellence of moral and mental character is
alone attainable by a fair race. The elements of evil belong to the dark
race."

"And were the people of this country once of mixed complexions?"

"As you see in the portraits? Yes," was the reply.

"And what became of the dark complexions?"

"We eliminated them."

I was too astonished to speak and stood gazing upon the handsome face of
a young man in a plumed hat and lace-frilled doublet. The dark eyes had
a haughty look, like a man proud of his lineage and his sex.

"Let us leave this place," said the Preceptress presently. "It always
has a depressing effect upon me."

"In what way?" I asked.

"By the degradation of the human race that they force me to recall."

I followed her out to a seat on one of the small porticoes.

In candidly expressing herself about the dark complexions, my companion
had no intention or thought of wounding my feelings. So rigidly do they
adhere to the truth in Mizora that it is of all other things
pre-eminent, and is never supposed to give offense. The Preceptress but
gave expression to the belief inculcated by centuries of the teachings
and practices of her ancestors. I was not offended. It was her
conviction. Besides, I had the consolation of secretly disagreeing with
her. I am still of the opinion that their admirable system of
government, social and political, and their encouragement and provision
for universal culture of so high an order, had more to do with the
formation of superlative character than the elimination of the dark
complexion.

The Preceptress remained silent a long time, apparently absorbed in the
beauty of the landscape that stretched before us. The falling waters of
a fountain was all the sound we heard. The hour was auspicious. I was so
eager to develop a revelation of the mystery about these people that I
became nervous over my companion's protracted silence. I felt a delicacy
in pressing inquiries concerning information that I thought ought to be
voluntarily given. Inquisitiveness was regarded as a gross rudeness by
them, and I could frame no question that I did not fear would sound
impertinent. But at last patience gave way and, at the risk of
increasing her commiseration for my barbarous mental condition, I asked:

"Are you conversant with the history of the times occupied by the
originals of the portraits we have just seen?"

"I am," she replied.

"And would you object to giving me a condensed recital of it?"

"Not if it can do you any good?"

"What has become of their descendants--of those portraits?"

"They became extinct thousands of years ago."

She became silent again, lost in reverie. The agitation of my mind was
not longer endurable. I was too near the acme of curiosity to longer
delay. I threw reserve aside and not without fear and trembling faltered
out:

"Where are the men of this country? Where do they stay?"

_"There are none_," was the startling reply. "_The race became extinct
three thousand years ago._"




CHAPTER II.


I trembled at the suggestion of my own thoughts. Was this an enchanted
country? Where the lovely blonde women fairies--or some weird beings of
different specie, human only in form? Or was I dreaming?

"I do not believe I understand you," I said. "I never heard of a country
where there were no men. In my land they are so very, very important."

"Possibly," was the placid answer.

"And you are really a nation of women?"

"Yes," she said. "And have been for the last three thousand years."

"Will you tell me how this wonderful change came about?"

"Certainly. But in order to do it, I must go back to our very remote
ancestry. The civilization that I shall begin with must have resembled
the present condition of your own country as you describe it. Prisons
and punishments were prevalent throughout the land."

I inquired how long prisons and places of punishment had been abolished
in Mizora.

"For more than two thousand years," she replied. "I have no personal
knowledge of crime. When I speak of it, it is wholly from an historical
standpoint. A theft has not been committed in this country for many many
centuries. And those minor crimes, such as envy, jealousy, malice and
falsehood, disappeared a long time ago. You will not find a citizen in
Mizora who possesses the slightest trace of any of them.

"Did they exist in earlier times?"

"Yes. Our oldest histories are but records of a succession of dramas in
which the actors were continually striving for power and exercising all
of those ancient qualities of mind to obtain it. Plots, intrigues,
murders and wars, were the active employments of the very ancient rulers
of our land. As soon as death laid its inactivity upon one actor,
another took his place. It might have continued so; and we might still
be repeating the old tragedy but for one singular event. In the history
of your own people you have no doubt observed that the very thing
plotted, intrigued and labored for, has in accomplishment proved the
ruin of its projectors. You will remark this in the history I am about
to relate.

"Main ages ago this country was peopled by two races--male and female.
The male race were rulers in public and domestic life. Their supremacy
had come down from pre-historic time, when strength of muscle was the
only master. Woman was a beast of burden. She was regarded as inferior
to man, mentally as well as physically. This idea prevailed through
centuries of the earlier civilization, even after enlightenment had
brought to her a chivalrous regard from men. But this regard was
bestowed only upon the women of their own household, by the rich and
powerful. Those women who had not been fortunate enough to have been
born in such a sphere of life toiled early and late, in sorrow and
privation, for a mere pittance that was barely sufficient to keep the
flame of life from going out. Their labor was more arduous than men's,
and their wages lighter.

"The government consisted of an aristocracy, a fortunate few, who were
continually at strife with one another to gain supremacy of power, or an
acquisition of territory. Wars, famine and pestilence were of frequent
occurrence. Of the subjects, male and female, some had everything to
render life a pleasure, while others had nothing. Poverty, oppression
and wretchedness was the lot of the many. Power, wealth and luxury the
dower of the few.

"Children came into the world undesired even by those who were able to
rear them, and often after an attempt had been made to prevent their
coming alive. Consequently numbers of them were deformed, not only
physically, but mentally. Under these conditions life was a misery to
the larger part of the human race, and to end it by self-destruction was
taught by their religion to be a crime punishable with eternal torment
by quenchless fire.

"But a revolution was at hand. Stinted toil rose up, armed and wrathful,
against opulent oppression. The struggle was long and tragical, and was
waged with such rancor and desperate persistence by the
insurrectionists, that their women and children began to supply the
places vacated by fallen fathers, husbands and brothers. It ended in
victory for them. They demanded a form of government that should be the
property of all. It was granted, limiting its privileges to adult male
citizens.

"The first representative government lasted a century. In that time
civilization had taken an advance far excelling the progress made in
three centuries previous. So surely does the mind crave freedom for its
perfect development. The consciousness of liberty is an ennobling
element in human nature. No nation can become universally moral until it
is absolutely FREE.

"But this first Republic had been diseased from its birth. Slavery had
existed in certain districts of the nation. It was really the remains of
a former and more degraded state of society which the new government, in
the exultation of its own triumphant inauguration, neglected or lacked
the wisdom to remedy. A portion of the country refused to admit slavery
within its territory, but pledged itself not to interfere with that
which had. Enmities, however, arose between the two sections, which,
after years of repression and useless conciliation, culminated in
another civil war. Slavery had resolved to absorb more territory, and
the free territory had resolved that it should not. The war that
followed in consequence severed forever the fetters of the slave and was
the primary cause of the extinction of the male race.
