plain words of St John, and see that to love their neighbour is to love 
God, and to love God is to love their neighbour.  So says St John clearly 
enough twice over.  "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth 
in God, and God in him."  The two things are one, and the one cannot be 
without the other.

Does this seem strange to you?  Oh, my friends, it need not seem strange, 
if you will but consider who God is, and who man is.  Thou lovest God?  
Then, if thou lovest Him, thou must needs love all that He has made.  And 
what has He made?  All things, except sin; and what sin is He has told 
thee.  He has given thee ten commandments, and let no man give thee an 
eleventh commandment out of his own conceit and will worship; calling 
unclean what God hath made clean, and cursing what God hath blessed.  
Thou lovest God?  Then thou lovest all that is good; for God is good, and 
from Him all good things come.  But what is good?  All is good except 
sin; for it is written, "God saw every thing that He had made, and, 
behold, it was very good."  Therefore, if thou lovest God, thou must love 
all things, for all things are of Him, and by Him, and through Him; and 
in Him all live and move and have their being.  Then thou wilt truly love 
God.  Thou wilt be content with God; and so thy love will cast out fear.  
Thou wilt trust God; thou wilt have the mind of God; thou wilt be 
satisfied with God's working, from the rise and fall of great nations to 
the life and death of the smallest gnat which dances in the sun; thou 
wilt say for ever, and concerning all things, I know in whom I have 
believed.  It is the good Lord, let Him do what seemeth Him good.

Again.  Thou lovest thy neighbour; thou lovest wife and child; thou 
lovest thy friends; thou lovest or wishest to love all men, and to do 
them good.  Then thou lovest God.  For what is it that thou lovest in thy 
neighbour?  Not that which is bad in him?  No, but that which is good.  
Thou lovest him for his kindliness, his honesty, his helpfulness,--for 
some good quality in him.  But from whom does that good come, save from 
Christ and from the Spirit of Christ, from whom alone come all good 
gifts?  Yes, if you will receive it;--when we love our neighbours, it is 
God in them, Christ in them, whom we love,--Christ in them, the hope of 
glory.

What, some one will ask, when a man loves a fair face, does he love 
Christ then?  Ah! my friends, that is not true love, as all know well 
enough if they will let their own hearts tell them truth.  True love is 
when two people love each other for the goodness which is in them.  True 
love is the love which endures after beauty has faded, and youth, and 
health, and all that seems to make life worth having is gone.  Have we 
not seen ere now two old people, worn, crippled, diseased, yet living on 
together, helping each other, nursing each other, tottering on hand in 
hand to the grave, dying, perhaps, almost together,--because neither 
cared to live when the other is gone before, and loving all the while as 
truly and tenderly as in the days of youth?  They know not why.  No; but 
God knows why.  It is Christ in each other whom they love;--Christ, the 
hope of glory.  Yes, we have seen that, surely; and seen in it one of the 
most beautiful, the most divine sights upon earth,--one which should 
teach us, if we will look at it aright, that when we love our neighbour 
truly, it is the divine part in him, the spark of eternal goodness in 
him,--what St Paul says is Christ in him,--which we admire, and cling to, 
and love.

But by that rule we cannot love every one, for every one is not good.  Be 
not too sure of that.  All are not good, alas! but in all there is some 
good.  It may be a very little,--a hope of glory in them, even though 
that hope be very faint.  It may be dying out; it may die altogether, and 
their souls may become utterly base and evil, and be lost for ever.  
Still, while there is life there is hope, even for the worst; and just as 
far as our hearts are full of the Spirit of God, we shall see the Spirit 
of God striving with the souls even of the worst men, and love them for 
that.  Just as far as we have the likeness of Christ in us, we shall be 
quick to catch the least gleam of His likeness in our neighbours, and 
love them for that.  Just as far as our hearts are full of love we shall 
see something worth loving in every human being we meet, and love them 
for that.  I know it is difficult.  It is not gotten in a day, that wide 
and deep spirit of love to all mankind which St Paul had; which made him 
weep with those who wept and rejoice with those who rejoiced, and become 
all things to all men, if by any means he might save some.  Before our 
eyes are cleansed and purged to see some trace of good in every man, our 
hearts must be cleansed and purged from all selfishness, and bigotry, and 
pride, and fancifulness, and anger, so that they may be filled with the 
loving Spirit of God.  As long as a taint of selfishness or pride remains 
in us, we shall be in continual danger of hating those whom God does not 
hate, despising those whom God does not despise, and condemning those 
whom God does not condemn.  But if self is cast out of us, and the Spirit 
of God and of Christ enthroned in our hearts, then we shall love our 
brother, and in loving him love God, who made him; and so, dwelling in 
love, we shall dwell in God, and God in us:--to which true and only 
everlasting life may He of His mercy bring us, either in this world or in 
the world to come.  Amen.



SERMON XVIII.  COURAGE



Chester Cathedral, 1871.

Acts iv. 13, 18-20.  "Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, 
and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled; 
and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus. . . .  
And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in 
the name of Jesus.  But Peter and John answered and said unto them, 
Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than 
unto God, judge ye.  For we cannot but speak the things which we have 
seen and heard."

Last Thursday was St Peter's Day.  The congregation on that day was, as 
far as I could perceive, no larger than usual; and this is not a matter 
of surprise.  Since we gave up at the Reformation the superstitious 
practice of praying to the saints, saints' days have sunk--and indeed 
sunk too much--into neglect.  For most men's religion has a touch of 
self-interest in it; and therefore when people discovered that they could 
get nothing out of St Peter or St John by praying to them, they began to 
forget the very memory, many of them, of St Peter, St John, and other 
saints and apostles.  They forget, too often, still, that though praying 
to any saint, or angel, or other created being, is contrary both to 
reason and to Scripture; yet it is according to reason and to Scripture 
to commemorate them.  That is to remember them, to study their 
characters, and to thank God for them--both for the virtues which He 
bestowed on them, and the example which He has given us in them.

For these old saints lived and died for our example.  They are, next of 
course to the Lord Himself, the ideals, the patterns, of Christian life--
the primeval heroes of our holy faith.  They shew to us of what stuff the 
early Christians were made; what sort of stone--to use St Paul's own 
figure,--the Lord chose wherewith to build up His Church.  They are our 
spiritual ancestors, for they spread the Gospel into all lands; and they 
spread it, remember always, not only by preaching what they knew, but by 
being what they were.  Their characters, their personal histories, are as 
important to us as their writings; nay, in the case of St Peter, even 
more important.  For if these two epistles of his had been lost, and 
never handed down to us, St Peter himself would have remained, as he is 
drawn in the Gospels and the Acts, a grand and colossal human figure, 
every line and feature of which is full of meaning and full of teaching 
to us.

Now I think that the quality--the grace of God--which St Peter's 
character and story specially force on our notice, is, the true courage 
which comes by faith.  I say, the courage which comes by faith.  There is 
a courage which does not come by faith.  There is brute courage, which 
comes from hardness of heart, from stupidity, obstinacy, or anger, which 
does not see danger, or does not feel pain.  That is the courage of the 
brute.  One does not blame it, or call it wrong.  It is good in its 
place, as all natural things are, which God has made.  It is good enough 
for the brutes, but it is not good enough for man.  You cannot trust it 
in man.  And the more a man is what a man should be, the less he can 
trust it.  The more mind and understanding a man has, so as to be able to 
foresee danger, and measure it, the more chance there is of his brute 
courage giving way.  The more feeling a man has, the more keenly he feels 
pain of body, or pain of mind, such as shame, loneliness, the dislike, 
ridicule, and contempt of his fellow men; in a word, the more of a man he 
is, and the less of a mere brute, the more chance there is of his brute 
courage breaking down, just when he wants it most to keep him up, by 
leaving him to play the coward and come to shame.  Yes.  To go through 
with a difficult and dangerous undertaking, a man wants more than brute 
courage.  He wants spiritual courage--the courage which comes by faith.  
He needs to have faith in what he is doing; to be certain that he is 
doing his duty, to be certain that he is in the right.  Certain that 
right will conquer, certain that God will make it conquer, by him or by 
some one else; certain that he will either conquer honourably, or fail 
honourably, for God is with him.  In a word, to have true courage, man 
needs faith in God.

To give one example.  Look at the class of men who, in all England, 
undergo the most fearful dangers; who know not at what hour of any night 
they may not be called up to the most serious labour and responsibility, 
with the chance of a horrible and torturing death.  I mean the firemen of 
our great cities, than whom there are no steadier, braver, nobler-hearted 
men.  Not a week passes without one or more of these firemen, in trying 
to save life and property, doing things which are altogether heroic.  
What do you fancy keeps them up to their work?  High pay?  The amusement 
and excitement of fires?  The vanity of being praised for their courage?  
My friends, those would be but paltry weak motives, which would not keep 
a man's heart calm and his head clear under such responsibility and 
danger as theirs.  No.  It is the sense of duty,--the knowledge that they 
are doing a good and a noble work in saving the lives of human beings and 
the wealth of the nation,--the knowledge that they are in God's hands, 
and that no real evil can happen to him who is doing right,--that to him 
even death at his post is not a loss, but a gain.  In short, faith in 
God, more or less clear, is what gives those men their strong and quiet 
courage.  God grant that you and I, if ever we have dangerous work to do, 
may get true courage from the same fountain of ghostly strength.

Now, St Peter's history is, I think, a special example of this.  He was 
naturally, it seems, a daring man,--a man of great brute courage.  So far 
so good; but he had to be taught, by severe lessons, that his brute 
courage was not enough,--that he wanted spiritual courage, the courage 
which came by faith, and that if that failed him, the brute courage would 
fail too.

He throws himself into the lake, to walk upon the water to Christ; and as 
soon as he is afraid he begins to sink.  The Lord saves him, and tells 
him why he had sank.  Because he had doubted, his faith had failed him.  
So he found out the weakness of courage without faith.  Then, again, he 
tells our Lord, "Though all men shall be offended of Thee, yet will I 
never be offended.  I am ready to go with Thee both into prison, and to 
death."  And shortly after, his mere animal courage breaks out again, and 
does what little it can do, and little enough.  He draws sword, single-
handed, on the soldiers in the garden, and cuts down a servant of the 
high priest's, and perhaps would have flung his life away, desperately 
and uselessly, had not our Lord restrained him.  But when the fit of 
excitement is past, his animal courage deserts him, and his moral courage 
too, and he denies his Lord.  So he found out that he was like too many,-
-full of bodily courage, perhaps, but morally weak.  He had to undergo a 
great change.  He had to be converted by the Holy Spirit of God, and 
strengthened by that Spirit, to have a boldness which no worldly courage 
can give.  Then, when he was strong himself, he was able to strengthen 
his brethren.  Then he was able, ignorant and unlearned man as he was, to 
stand up before the high priests and rulers of his nation, and to say, 
simply and firmly, without boasting, without defiance, "Whether it be 
right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge 
ye.  For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard."  
Yes, my friends, it is the courage which comes by faith which makes truly 
brave men,--men like St Peter and St John.  He who can say, I am right, 
can say likewise, God is on my side, and I will not fear what man can do 
to me.

"We will not fear," said the Psalmist, "though the earth be removed, and 
though the hills be carried into the midst of the sea."  "The just man, 
who holds firm to his purpose," says a wise old heathen, "he will not be 
shaken from his solid mind by the rage of the mob bidding him do base 
things or the frowns of the tyrant who persecutes him.  Though the world 
were to crumble to pieces round him, its ruins would strike him without 
making him tremble."  "Whether it be right," said Peter and John to the 
great men and judges of the Jews, "to hearken to God more than to you, 
judge ye.  We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard."  
We cannot but speak what we know to be true.

It was that courage which enabled our forefathers,--and not the great men 
among them, not the rich, not even the learned, save a few valiant 
bishops and clergy, but for the most part poor, unlearned, labouring men 
and women,--to throw off the yoke of Popery, and say, "Reason and 
Scripture tell us that it is absurd and wrong to worship images and pray 
to saints,--tell us that your doctrines are not true.  And we will say so 
in spite of the Pope and all his power,--in spite of torture and a fiery 
death.  We cannot palter; we cannot dissemble; we cannot shelter 
ourselves under half-truths, and make a covenant with lies. 'Whether it 
be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than to God, judge 
ye.  We cannot but speak the things which we know to be true.'"

So it has been in all ages, and so it will be for ever.  Faith, the 
certainty that a man is right, will give him a courage which will enable 
him to resist, if need be, the rich ones, the strong ones, the learned 
ones of the earth.  It has made poor unlearned men heroes and deliverers 
of their countrymen from slavery and ignorance.  It has made weak women 
martyrs and saints.  It has enabled men who made great discoveries to 
face unbelief, ridicule, neglect, poverty; knowing that their worth would 
be acknowledged at last, their names honoured at last as benefactors by 
the very men who laughed at them and reviled them.  It has made men, shut 
up in prison for long weary years for doing what was right and saying 
what was true, endure manfully for the sake of some good cause, and say,-
-


   "Stone walls do not a prison make,
   Nor iron bars a cage;
Minds innocent and quiet take
   That for an hermitage.
If I have freedom in my thought,
   And in my love am free,
Angels alone, that soar above,
   Enjoy such liberty."


Yes; settle it in your hearts, all of you.  There is but one thing which 
you have to fear in earth or heaven,--being untrue to your better selves, 
and therefore untrue to God.  If you will not do the thing you know to be 
right, and say the thing you know to be true, then indeed you are weak.  
You are a coward, and sin against God, and suffer the penalty of your 
cowardice.  You desert God, and therefore you cannot expect Him to stand 
by you.

But if you will do the thing you know to be right, and say the thing you 
know to be true, then what can harm you?  Who will harm you, asks St 
Peter himself, "if you be followers of that which is good?  For the eyes 
of the Lord are over the righteous, and His ears are open to their 
prayers.  But if ye suffer for righteousness' sake, happy are ye; and be 
not afraid of those who try to terrify you, neither be troubled, but 
sanctify the Lord God in your hearts.  Remember that He is just and holy, 
and a rewarder of all who diligently seek Him.  Worship Him in your 
hearts, and all will be well.  For says David again, "Lord, who shall 
dwell in Thy tabernacle, or who shall rest upon Thy holy hill?  Even he 
that leadeth an uncorrupt life, and doeth the thing which is right, and 
speaketh the truth from his heart.  Whoso doeth these things shall never 
fall."

Yes, my friends; there is a tabernacle of God in which, even in this 
life, He will hide us from the strife of tongues.  There is a hill of God 
on which, even in the midst of labour and anxiety, we may rest both day 
and night.  Even Jesus Christ, the Rock of Ages,--He who is the 
Righteousness itself, the Truth itself; and whosoever does righteousness 
and speaks truth dwells in Christ in this life, as well as in the life to 
come; and Christ will strengthen him by His Holy Spirit to stand in the 
evil day, if it shall come, and having done all, to stand.  My dear 
friends, if any of you are minded to be good men and women, pray for the 
Holy Spirit of God.  First for the spirit of love to give you good 
desires; then the spirit of faith, to make you believe deeply in the 
living God, who rewards every man according to his work; and then for the 
spirit of strength, to enable you to bring these desires to good effect.

Pray for that spirit, I say; for we all need help.  There are too many 
people in the world--too many, perhaps, among us here--who are not what 
they ought to be, and what they really wish to be, because they are weak.  
They see what is right, and admire it; but they have not courage or 
determination to do it.  Most sad and pitiable it is to see how much 
weakness of heart there is in the world--how little true moral courage.  
I suppose that the reason is, that there is so little faith; that people 
do not believe heartily and deeply enough in the absolute necessity of 
doing right and being honest.  They do not believe heartily and deeply 
enough in God to trust Him to defend and reward them, if they will but be 
true to Him, and to themselves.  And therefore they have no moral 
courage.  They are weak.  They are kind, perhaps, and easy; easily led 
right; but, alas! just as easily led wrong.  Their good resolutions are 
not carried out; their right doctrines not acted up to; and they live 
pitiful, confused, useless, inconsistent lives; talking about religion, 
and yet denying the power of religion in their daily lives; playing with 
holy and noble thoughts and feelings, without giving themselves up to 
them in earnest, to be led by the Spirit of God, to do all the good works 
which God has prepared for them to walk in.  Pray all of you, then, for 
the spirit of faith, to believe really in God; and for the spirit of 
ghostly strength, to obey God honestly.  No man ever asked earnestly for 
that spirit but what he gained it at last.  And no man ever gained it but 
what he found the truth of St Peter's own words, "Who will harm you if ye 
be followers of that which is good?"



SERMON XIX.  GOOD DAYS



Eversley, 1867.  Westminster, Sept. 27, 1872.

1 Peter iii. 8-12.  "Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of 
another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous:  Not rendering evil 
for evil, or railing for railing:  but contrariwise blessing; knowing 
that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.  For he 
that will love life and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from 
evil, and his lips that they speak no guile:  Let him eschew evil, and do 
good; let him seek peace, and ensue it.  For the eyes of the Lord are 
over the righteous, and His ears are open unto their prayers:  but the 
face of the Lord is against them that do evil."

This is one of the texts which is apt to puzzle people who do not read 
their Bibles carefully enough.  They cannot see what the latter part of 
it has to do with the former.

St. Peter says that we Christians are called that we should inherit a 
blessing.  That means, of course, they say, the blessing of salvation, 
everlasting life in heaven.  But then St. Peter quotes from the 34th 
Psalm.  "For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain 
his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile."  Now that 
Psalm, they say, speaks of blessing and happiness in this life.  Then why 
does St. Peter give it as a reason for expecting blessing and happiness 
in the life to come?  And then, they say, to make it fit in, it must be 
