as usual, but without any fierce visitor. Their food that day was flour
and water, and to cook it Thor was forced to use some of his barricade.
Loo attempted some feeble joke, guessed she was light enough to fly now
and tried to rise, but she got no farther than the edge of the bunk.
The same preparations were made, and the night wore on, but early in
the morning, Thor was again awakened rudely by the sound of lapping
water by his bed, and there, as before, were the glowing eyeballs, the
great head, the gray form relieved by the dim light from the dawning
window.

Thor put all his strength into what was meant for a bold shout, but it
was merely a feeble screech. He rose slowly and called out: "Loo,
Margat! The Lynx--here's the Lynx again!"

"May God help ye, for we can't," was the answer.

"Sssh-hi!" Thor tried again to drive the Beast away. It leaped on to
the table by the window and stood up growling under the useless gun.
Thor thought it was going to leap through the glass as it faced the
window a moment; but it turned and glared toward the Boy, for he could
see both eyes shining. He rose slowly to the side of his bunk and he
prayed for help, for he felt it was kill or be killed. He struck a
match and lighted his pine-root candle, held that in his left hand and
in his right took the old fish-spear, meaning to fight, but he was so
weak he had to use the fish-spear as a crutch. The great Beast stood on
the table still, but was crouching a little as though for a spring. Its
eyes glowed red in the torchlight. Its short tail was switching from
side to side and its growling took a higher pitch. Thor's knees were
smiting together, but he levelled the spear and made a feeble lunge
toward the brute. It sprang at the same moment, not at him, as he first
thought--the torch and the boy's bold front had had effect--it went
over his head to drop on the ground beyond and at once to slink under
the bunk.

This was only a temporary repulse. Thor set the torch on a ledge of the
logs, then took the spear in both hands. He was fighting for his life,
and he knew it. He heard the voices of the women feebly praying. He saw
only the glowing eyes under the bed and heard the growling in higher
pitch as the Beast was nearing action. He steadied himself by a great
effort and plunged the spear with all the force he could give it.

It struck something softer than the logs: a hideous snarl came forth.
The boy threw all his weight on the weapon; the Beast was struggling to
get at him; he felt its teeth and claws grating on the handle, and in
spite of himself it was coming on; its powerful arms and claws were
reaching for him now; he could not hold out long. He put on all his
force, just a little more it was than before; the Beast lurched, there
was a growling, a crack, and a sudden yielding; the rotten old
spear-head had broken off, the Beast sprang out--at him--past
him--never touched him, but across through the hole and away, to be
seen no more.

Thor fell on the bed and lost all consciousness.

He lay there he knew not how long, but was awakened in broad daylight
by a loud, cheery voice:

"Hello! Hello!--are ye all dead? Loo! Thor! Margat!"

He had no strength to answer, but there was a trampling of horses
outside, a heavy step, the door was forced open, and in strode Corney,
handsome and hearty as ever. But what a flash of horror and pain came
over his face on entering the silent shanty!

"Dead?" he gasped. "Who's dead--where are you? Thor?" Then, "Who is it?
Loo? Margat?"

"Corney--Corney," came feebly from the bunk. "They're in there. They're
awful sick. We have nothing to eat."

"Oh, what a fool I be!" said Corney again and again. "I made sure ye'd
go to Ellerton's and get all ye wanted."

"We had no chance, Corney; we were all three brought down at once,
right after you left. Then the Lynx came and cleared up the Hens, and
all in the house, too."

"Well, ye got even with her," and Corney pointed to the trail of blood
across the mud floor and out under the logs.

Good food, nursing, and medicine restored them all.

A month or two later, when the women wanted a new leaching-barrel, Thor
said: "I know where there is a hollow basswood as big as a hogshead."

He and Corney went to the place, and when they cut off what they
needed, they found in the far end of it the dried-up bodies of two
little Lynxes with that of the mother, and in the side of the old one
was the head of a fish-spear broken from the handle.




LITTLE WARHORSE

The History of a Jack-rabbit

The Little Warhorse knew practically all the Dogs in town. First, there
was a very large brown Dog that had pursued him many times, a Dog that
he always got rid of by slipping through a hole in a board fence.
Second, there was a small active Dog that could follow through that
hole, and him he baffled by leaping a twenty-foot irrigation ditch that
had steep sides and a swift current. The Dog could not make this leap.
It was "sure medicine" for that foe, and the boys still call the place
"Old Jacky's Jump." But there was a Greyhound that could leap better
than the Jack, and when he could not follow through a fence, he jumped
over it. He tried the Warhorse's mettle more than once, and Jacky only
saved himself by his quick dodging, till they got to an Osage hedge,
and here the Greyhound had to give it up. Besides these, there was in
town a rabble of big and little Dogs that were troublesome, but easily
left behind in the open.

In the country there was a Dog at each farm-house, but only one that
the Warhorse really feared; that was a long-legged, fierce, black Dog,
a brute so swift and pertinacious that he had several times forced the
Warhorse almost to the last extremity.

For the town Cats he cared little; only once or twice had he been
threatened by them. A huge Tom-cat flushed with many victories came
crawling up to where he fed one moonlight night. Jack Warhorse saw the
black creature with the glowing eyes, and a moment before the final
rush, he faced it, raised up on his haunches,--his hind legs,--at full
length on his toes,--with his broad ears towering up yet six inches
higher; then letting out a loud churrr-churrr, his best attempt at a
roar, he sprang five feet forward and landed on the Cat's head, driving
in his sharp hind nails, and the old Tom fled in terror from the weird
two-legged giant. This trick he had tried several times with success,
but twice it turned out a sad failure: once, when the Cat proved to be
a mother whose Kittens were near; then Jack Warhorse had to flee for
his life; and the other time was when he made the mistake of landing
hard on a Skunk.

But the Greyhound was the dangerous enemy, and in him the Warhorse
might have found his fate, but for a curious adventure with a happy
ending for Jack.

He fed by night; there were fewer enemies about then, and it was easier
to hide; but one day at dawn in winter he had lingered long at an
alfalfa stack and was crossing the open snow toward his favorite form,
when, as ill-luck would have it, he met the Greyhound prowling outside
the town. With open snow and growing daylight there was no chance to
hide, nothing but a run in the open with soft snow that hindered the
Jack more than it did the Hound.

Off they went--superb runners in fine fettle. How they skimmed across
the snow, raising it in little puff-puff-puffs, each time their nimble
feet went down. This way and that, swerving and dodging, went the
chase. Everything favored the Dog,--his empty stomach, the cold
weather, the soft snow,--while the Rabbit was handicapped by his heavy
meal of alfalfa. But his feet went puff--puff so fast that a dozen of
the little snow-jets were in view at once. The chase continued in the
open; no friendly hedge was near, and every attempt to reach a fence
was cleverly stopped by the Hound. Jack's ears were losing their bold
up-cock, a sure sign of failing heart or wind, when all at once these
flags went stiffly up, as under sudden renewal of strength. The
Warhorse put forth all his power, not to reach the hedge to the north,
but over the open prairie eastward. The Greyhound followed, and within
fifty yards the Jack dodged to foil his fierce pursuer; but on the next
tack he was on his eastern course again, and so tacking and dodging, he
kept the line direct for the next farm-house, where was a very high
board fence with a hen-hole, and where also there dwelt his other hated
enemy, the big black Dog. An outer hedge delayed the Greyhound for a
moment and gave Jack time to dash through the hen-hole into the yard,
where he hid to one side. The Greyhound rushed around to the low gate,
leaped over that among the Hens, and as they fled cackling and
fluttering, some Lambs bleated loudly. Their natural guardian, the big
black Dog, ran to the rescue, and Warhorse slipped out again by the
hole at which he had entered. Horrible sounds of Dog hate and fury were
heard behind him in the hen-yard, and soon the shouts of men were
added. How it ended he did not know or seek to learn, but it was
remarkable that he never afterward was troubled by the swift Greyhound
that formerly lived in Newchusen.


II

Hard times and easy times had long followed in turn and been taken as
matters of course; but recent years in the State of Kaskado had brought
to the Jack-rabbits a succession of remarkable ups and downs. In the
old days they had their endless fight with Birds and Beasts of Prey,
with cold and heat, with pestilence and with flies whose sting bred a
loathsome disease, and yet had held their own. But the settling of the
country by farmers made many changes.

Dogs and guns arriving in numbers reduced the ranks of Coyotes, Foxes,
Wolves, Badgers, and Hawks that preyed on the Jack, so that in a few
years the Rabbits were multiplied in great swarms; but now Pestilence
broke out and swept them away. Only the strongest--the
double-seasoned--remained. For a while a Jack-rabbit was a rarity; but
during this time another change came in. The Osage-orange hedges
planted everywhere afforded a new refuge, and now the safety of a
Jack-rabbit was less often his speed than his wits, and the wise ones,
when pursued by a Dog or Coyote, would rush to the nearest hedge
through a small hole and escape while the enemy sought for a larger one
by which to follow. The Coyotes rose to this and developed the trick of
the relay chase. In this one Coyote takes one field, another the next,
and if the Rabbit attempts the "hedge-ruse" they work from each side
and usually win their prey. The Rabbit remedy for this, is keen eyes to
see the second Coyote, avoidance of that field, then good legs to
distance the first enemy.

Thus the Jack-rabbits, after being successively numerous, scarce, in
myriads, and rare, were now again on the increase, and those which
survived, selected by a hundred hard trials, were enabled to flourish
where their ancestors could not have outlived a single season.

Their favorite grounds were, not the broad open stretches of the big
ranches, but the complicated, much-fenced fields of the farms, where
these were so small and close as to be like a big straggling village.

One of these vegetable villages had sprung up around the railway
station of Newchusen. The country a mile away was well supplied with
Jack-rabbits of the new and selected stock. Among them was a little
lady Rabbit called "Bright-eyes," from her leading characteristic as
she sat gray in the gray brush. She was a good runner, but was
especially successful with the fence-play that baffled the Coyotes. She
made her nest out in an open pasture, an untouched tract of the ancient
prairie. Here her brood were born and raised. One like herself was
bright-eyed, in coat of silver-gray, and partly gifted with her ready
wits, but in the other, there appeared a rare combination of his
mother's gifts with the best that was in the best strain of the new
Jack-rabbits of the plains.

This was the one whose adventures we have been following, the one that
later on the turf won the name of Little Warhorse and that afterward
achieved a world-wide fame.

Ancient tricks of his kind he revived and put to new uses, and ancient
enemies he learned to fight with new-found tricks.

When a mere baby he discovered a plan that was worthy of the wisest
Rabbit in Kaskado. He was pursued by a horrible little Yellow Dog, and
he had tried in vain to get rid of him by dodging among the fields and
farms. This is good play against a Coyote, because the farmers and the
Dogs will often help the Jack, without knowing it, by attacking the
Coyote. But now the plan did not work at all, for the little Dog
managed to keep after him through one fence after another, and Jack
Warhorse, not yet full-grown, much less seasoned, was beginning to feel
the strain. His ears were no longer up straight, but angling back and
at times drooping to a level, as he darted through a very little hole
in an Osage hedge, only to find that his nimble enemy had done the same
without loss of time. In the middle of the field was a small herd of
cattle and with them a calf.

There is in wild animals a curious impulse to trust any stranger when
in desperate straits. The foe behind they know means death. There is
just a chance, and the only one left, that the stranger may prove
friendly; and it was this last desperate chance that drew Jack Warhorse
to the Cows.

It is quite sure that the Cows would have stood by in stolid
indifference so far as the Rabbit was concerned, but they have a
deep-rooted hatred of a dog, and when they saw the Yellow Cur coming
bounding toward them, their tails and noses went up; they sniffed
angrily, then closed up ranks, and led by the Cow that owned the Calf,
they charged at the Dog, while Jack took refuge under a low thorn-bush.
The Dog swerved aside to attack the Calf, at least the old Cow thought
he did, and she followed him so fiercely that he barely escaped from
that field with his life.

It was a good old plan--one that doubtless came from the days when
Buffalo and Coyote played the parts of Cow and Dog. Jack never forgot
it, and more than once it saved his life.

In color as well as in power he was a rarity.

Animals are colored in one or other of two general plans: one that
matches them with their surroundings and helps them to hide--this is
called "protective"; the other that makes them very visible for several
purposes--this is called "directive." Jack-rabbits are peculiar in
being painted both ways. As they squat in their form in the gray brush
or clods, they are soft gray on their ears, head, back, and sides; they
match the ground and cannot be seen until close at hand--they are
protectively colored. But the moment it is clear to the Jack that the
approaching foe will find him, he jumps up and dashes away. He throws
off all disguise now, the gray seems to disappear; he makes a lightning
change, and his ears show snowy white with black tips, the legs are
white, his tail is a black spot in a blaze of white. He is a
black-and-white Rabbit now. His coloring is all directive. How is it
done? Very simply. The front side of the ear is gray, the back, black
and white. The black tail with its white halo, and the legs, are tucked
below. He is sitting on them. The gray mantle is pulled down and
enlarged as he sits, but when he jumps up it shrinks somewhat, all his
black-and-white marks are now shown, and just as his colors formerly
whispered, "I am a clod," they now shout aloud, "I am a Jack-rabbit."

Why should he do this? Why should a timid creature running for his life
thus proclaim to all the world his name instead of trying to hide?
There must be some good reason. It must pay, or the Rabbit would never
have done it.

The answer is, if the creature that scared him up was one of his own
kind--i.e., this was a false alarm--then at once, by showing his
national colors, the mistake is made right. On the other hand, if it be
a Coyote, Fox, or Dog, they see at once, this is a Jack-rabbit, and
know that it would be waste of time for them to pursue him. They say in
effect, "This is a Jack-rabbit, and I cannot catch a Jack in open
race." They give it up, and that, of course, saves the Jack a great
deal of unnecessary running and worry. The black-and-white spots are
the national uniform and flag of the Jacks. In poor specimens they are
apt to be dull, but in the finest specimens they are not only larger,
but brighter than usual, and the Little Warhorse, gray when he sat in
