     and isn't a bit afraid of them, and she believes the doctor, and is
     perfectly happy. As to Irene, nothing would induce her to do
     anything of the kind to Miss Frost now, for she would get it hot
     from me if she did. I should like to stay with Irene for the next
     few months at any rate, and if you want me to get on very fast
     indeed with my music, and to take up my drawing systematically,
     some of the masters who attend at the Merrimans' could come on
     here, couldn't they? I think that could be arranged. Dear Lady Jane
     is so fond of me, and I really think I am doing a little bit of
     good in the world, so you won't be angry even if the Professor
     writes you a horrid letter about your own

     "ROSAMUND."

When this letter was despatched Rosamund felt quite light and happy, and
she went out into the garden to talk to Miss Frost. Miss Frost looked
already quite six or seven years younger than she had done on the day of
Rosamund's arrival. She was no longer in terror of her life. Rosamund
suggested to her that she should lock her door at nights, which the poor
lady did very willingly. She told her there was not the slightest danger
of anything happening, as nothing would induce Irene to give her any
more frights.

"But if you are nervous, do lock your door," she said; "and if you
really want pills for your indigestion, I will keep them for you, and
see they are not meddled with."

Miss Frost had attended to all Rosamund's directions, for this masterful
young woman was really ruling the entire house. The servants, too,
seemed very much brighter and better. Lady Jane was heard to laugh
constantly, and was even induced to play some old-fashioned music on the
old piano in the drawing-room.

As to Irene, she wore white dresses and blue dresses and pink dresses,
and was not once seen in the obnoxious red.

"That dress you can put on the day I leave The Follies," Rosamund had
said to her young friend. "No, I am not going to hide it or put it away.
It can hang in your wardrobe; but you are not to wear it while I am
here, for I dislike it. I want you to be pretty and beautiful, and an
influence for good, as God meant you to be."

Now, all these things told upon Irene; but most of all was she amazed
and lifted out of herself when both Miss Frost and Rosamund discovered
that she had as quick and clever a mind as she had a beautiful face. It
is true she hardly knew anything. She could read and write, and had read
a great many books; but all the ordinary subjects of education had been
set aside by the willful child.

Rosamund now suggested that they should both compete for a small prize.
She chose a subject which she herself knew nothing about, therefore she
said they were very nearly equal. They both did compete, and perhaps
Rosamund did not exactly put forth her full powers; but, anyhow, in the
end Irene won, and her delight was beyond bounds. She rushed down to her
mother's boudoir and showed her the beautifully bound volume of
Kingsley's _Water Babies_ which was the prize she had won.

"I have got it through merit," she said. "Think of my getting anything
through merit!"

Lady Jane very nearly cried, but she restrained herself, for Rosamund
followed; whose face, with its slightly flushed cheeks and its eyes full
of light and happiness, showed Lady Jane what a splendid character her
young friend possessed. How could she ever thank God enough for having
sent such a girl to her house?

Yes, lessons went on well, and Irene especially made great progress in
her musical studies. She had always been fond of music as a little
child. In her wildest moods, when Lady Jane had played for her she had
become quiet, and crept close to her mother, laid her charming little
head against her mother's knee, and listened with wide-open eyes. As she
grew a little older she began to practice for herself, inventing her own
melodies--nonsense, of course, but still with a certain promise in them.

Now Rosamund suggested that Irene should give up music with Miss Frost,
for Miss Frost's style was by no means encouraging, and should take her
lessons from the first-rate master who came twice a week from Dartford.
It was amazing how quickly Irene made progress under this tuition. In
the first place, Mr. Fortescue would not hear of any nonsense. He did
not mind Irene's airs or her little attempts to subdue him; he simply
desired her to do things, and when she failed he pounded her soundly on
her knuckles.

"That is not the way to bring out that note," he would say; and then he
would sit down to the piano himself, and ring out great melodies in the
most splendid style, until the enthusiastic child almost danced with
pleasure.

"Oh, is there any chance of my playing like that?" she once exclaimed.

"Every chance, and a great deal better, if you really take to it with
all your heart and soul," was his response.

Rosamund was also intensely fond of music, and the girls were happy over
their musical studies; in short, Irene, from having an aimless life, in
which she did nothing but torment others, was now leading a full and
happy existence. She had her distinct hours for work and distinct hours
for play. She had a companion who delighted her; and toads, wasps,
spiders, and even leeches lost their charm.

One day, to Rosamund's great delight, Irene suggested that Fuzz and Buzz
and all their children should go back to the nearest chemist. This was
no sooner thought of than done. Certainly it was a very great step in
Irene's reform; but it must not be supposed that such a character could
become good all of a sudden. It takes a lifetime, and perhaps more than
a lifetime, to make any of us really good, and Irene was not by nature a
very amiable child. She had been terribly spoiled, it is true, and but
for Rosamund might have been an annoyance and a torment to every one as
long as she lived. But she had splendid points in her character, and
these were coming slowly to the fore.

Still, there were times when she was exceedingly naughty. Rosamund,
having written to her mother, and so set her mind completely at rest,
thought no longer of the sort of disgrace in which she was living as
regarded the Merrimans. She was now anxious that Irene should make
friends.

"There is no use whatever," she said, "in shutting a girl like Irene up
with me. She ought to know the Singletons. I will ask Lady Jane if we
may drive over some day and see them. Why shouldn't we go to-day? Irene
has been quite good this morning. I dare say I could manage it. She
won't like meeting Miss Carter; but she must get over that feeling.
There's nothing for it but for her to live like ordinary girls. If she
refuses, I shall beg of Lady Jane to take us both from The Follies, to
take a house somewhere else for at least six months, and to let us make
new friends. But that does seem ridiculous, when The Follies is such a
lovely place, and Irene's real home. Of course, I can't always stay with
her, although I mean to stay for the present."

Rosamund ran up to Lady Jane, who was pacing up and down on the terrace.
Irene, as usual, was in her boat. She was floating idly about the lake.
The day was intensely hot. She wore a graceful white frock and her
pretty white shady hat; her little white hand was dabbling in the water,
and her graceful little figure was looking almost like a nymph of the
stream.

Lady Jane turned with a beaming face to Rosamund.

"What is it now, my dear?" she said.

"Well, of course, you have heard the good news. Everything is all right
at the Merrimans', neither Irene nor I have taken the infection, none of
the other girls have taken it, Jane is getting well again, and I have
written a full account of everything to mother."

"That doesn't mean, my darling Rosamund, that you are going to leave us?
I really couldn't consent to part with you. I can never, never express
all that you have been to me," said poor Lady Jane, her eyes filling
with tears.

"Well, I can only part from you by going back to mother, for they won't
receive me any more at the Merrimans'."

"But why not, Rosamund?"

"Because I have taken up with Irene. But we needn't go into that now.
What I want to know is, may Irene and I have the governess-cart, and may
Miss Frost go with us, and may we drive over to the Singletons'?"

"Of course you may, Rosamund. But I am afraid it will be you and Miss
Frost alone, for nothing would induce Irene to set foot inside that
place. She has always refused, notwithstanding every effort of our dear
clergyman to invite her to visit them. I have asked the children here,
for they are nice children; but they are too much afraid of her to come.
I do not think you will find the visit a success, even if you do induce
Irene to accompany you."

"But I think I shall," said Rosamund calmly. "You know," she added,
"Irene is not what she was."

"Indeed she is not. She is very different. I am beginning at last to
enjoy my life and to appreciate her society. How beautiful she is, and
how you have brought out her beauty!"

"Her beauty was given her by God," said Rosamund. "But, of course, now
that she is learning, and becoming intelligent, and thinking good
thoughts instead of bad thoughts, all these things must be reflected on
her face. I want her to have other friends besides me, for I cannot
always be with her, and I cannot tell you what a splendid girl I think
Maud Singleton is."

"But then there is poor Miss Carter. Irene nearly killed her."

"Miss Carter is quite well and happy at the Singletons', and they just
adore her, and Irene ought to apologize to her. I mean to make her when
I get the chance. Perhaps not to-day. Anyhow, may we go?"

"You certainly may, and I wish you all success."

Rosamund danced away, and ran down the winding path to the edge of the
lake.

"Irene, I want you to come in," she said. "I want to speak to you."

Irene rowed lazily back to the shore. She still sat in her boat and
looked up at Rosamund.

"Will you get in?" she said. "There is a little breeze on the water;
there is none on the land. What are you looking so solemn about?"

"I am not solemn at all. I want us to have fun this afternoon. It is
rather dull here, just two girls all by themselves. I don't think that I
can stay with you much longer unless you allow me to have other
friends."

"Good gracious!" said Irene. "Perhaps I'd better get out. You look so
very solemn."

"No, I'm not solemn exactly; but I want to have other friends. Will you
get out, and may I talk to you?"

Irene jumped with alacrity out of the boat, and Rosamund helped her to
moor it.

"Now, what is it?" said Irene.

"Well, Irene, it is just this: I want to go and see the Singletons this
afternoon, and your mother says we may have the governess-cart, and if
they ask us to stay to tea we may stay."

"We? What do you mean by 'we'?"

Irene backed away, her face crimson, her eyes dancing with all their old
malignancy.

"I mean," said Rosamund, "you and I and Miss Frost."

"You mean that I am to go to the house where Carter is--Carter, whom I
nearly killed?"

"I want you to come with me. Won't you, darling?"

"I wish you wouldn't speak in that coaxing voice. People don't speak in
such a tender way to me. But no, I can't go. I really can't. I'd be
afraid. I can't meet Carter."

"But if you come with me you needn't say much. We'll go together, and
you'll find it quite pleasant. I do want to talk to other girls, for you
know I've given up all my friends for you, or practically given them up
for your sake."

"I wish you wouldn't throw in my face all that you have done for my
sake. You had better go, and let me get back to my wild ways. I had
great fun with my toads and frogs and spiders and leeches, and having
everybody looking at me with scared faces. On the whole, I had much more
fun than I have now. I was thinking about that as I was floating in the
boat, and the thought of Frost came over me, and I wondered what she
would do if I took her into a current in the middle of the lake and
frightened her as I frightened Carter. Perhaps even the thought of her
little brother and sister wouldn't keep her here any longer. Well, I
was thinking those thoughts; but then I thought of you, and somehow or
other I felt it worth while to be good just for the sake of your
presence; and in many ways you have made my life more interesting. But
if you want me to be friends with those Leaves; if you want me to see
that dreadful, that terrible Carter again; and then if you want me to go
to the Merrimans', and shake hands with that Lucy, and be agreeable to
all those people, I really can't."

"Very well, Irene, you can please yourself."

Rosamund turned on her heel and walked away. Irene stood and watched
her. She stood perfectly still for a minute, her face changing color,
her lips working, her eyes flashing. Then she took up a great sod of wet
grass and flung it after Rosamund, making a deep stain on her pretty
muslin dress. Rosamund did not take the slightest notice. She walked
calmly back to the house, went up to her own room, and sat there quite
still. Irene got back into the boat.

"I do wish Frost was somewhere near," she thought to herself. "I won't
go and see those Leaves; nothing will induce me to. Horrid, affected
creatures! And then to see Carter's frightened eyes looking at me!
Haven't I seen them in my dreams until I am sick of the sight of them?
And Rosamund wants me to go and see them again! Why, Carter, poor thing!
would nearly die of fright, and every one of the Leaves would get into
their native trees and disappear from view! Oh, Rosamund is all very
well, but she isn't worth that! I wish I hadn't given those leeches back
to the chemist. He wasn't a bit grateful, either, and I spent a whole
pound on them. I can be just as obnoxious as ever. I know more than I
did, and that will help me to be even more wicked than I used to be. I
can clear the entire house now of every single servant, and I will, too,
if Rosamund goes."

If Rosamund goes! Rosamund with the bright, resolute eyes, the cheerful,
fearless face, the kind, soothing hand, and gentle manner; Rosamund, who
was not in any way goody-goody, and yet had exercised such a softening
influence on wild Irene!

"She will go. Of course she will go. She always keeps her word," thought
the child, and tears filled her bright eyes.

She ceased to paddle, bent slightly over the boat, and looked down at
her reflection in the water.

"She says I am beautiful, too. I wish I wasn't beautiful. I don't want
to be anything; only I like pleasing her. If Rosamund goes there'll be
nothing worth knowing or caring for in Irene. If Rosamund goes!"

The girl suddenly dashed the tears from her eyes. What did the Leaves
matter? Why shouldn't she endure a bad quarter of an hour looking at
Miss Carter's terrified eyes? She couldn't live without Rosamund!

Accordingly, she pulled rapidly back to the shore, moored her boat, and
rushed helter-skelter up to the house. Her mother met her in the hall.

"What is the matter, Irene dear?" she said.

"Nothing," said Irene. "Don't keep me. I want to speak to Rosamund."

Like a whirlwind, the wild little girl dashed through the house, up the
winding stairs, down the corridor, until she burst into Rosamund's room.
There she flung herself on the ground at her friend's feet, twined her
arms round her waist, laid her head on her knee, and burst into tears.

"I will do anything you wish, for I can't live without you!" sobbed
Irene.




CHAPTER XV.

A DRIVE TO THE RECTORY.


Rosamund was wonderfully wise for her years. She did not make a great
fuss over Irene's tears. She did not soothe or pet her overmuch; she
merely said, "I am glad you have come to your senses," and then she got
up and began to prepare for lunch; so that Irene, feeling like a beaten
child, and yet with a sense of happiness which she had never experienced
before in the whole course of her life, went off to her own room,
smoothed out her tangled hair, tidied her dress, and came down to lunch
also, looking quite like a little ordinary Christian child--the sort of
child who might have been first to a kindergarten and then at a good
school--not the wild, obnoxious, terrible little creature whom every
servant and every governess alike dreaded.

James was looking fat and strong, because for the last fortnight Irene
had not taken the slightest notice of him. The other servants were
becoming happy once more. They all worshiped Rosamund; and, truth to
tell, Rosamund could not but enjoy her meed of popularity. Still, to-day
she was feeling rather nervous. Nevertheless, she was quite determined
to carry out her scheme.

As soon as lunch was over, therefore, she went up to Miss Frost. Irene
had danced away into the garden. She was the sort of girl who, having
once made up her mind to do a thing, did it thoroughly. Now, she hated
the Leaves beyond measure; she dreaded Miss Carter beyond measure; but
she dreaded Rosamund still more. Accordingly, she secured a basket and
a pair of scissors, and cut and cut from the choicest flowers until her
basket was full. One of the gardeners came out and began to remonstrate
with Irene on picking so many roses with buds attached to them; but
Irene told him in a very tart voice to mind his own business, and in
some fear the man withdrew. Then she went into the fruit-house and
secured the earliest peaches which were coming into their finest bloom.
And having collected what she considered her peace-offering, she sat
down on a little wooden bench to wait for Rosamund and her governess.

Meanwhile Rosamund was having a talk with Miss Frost.

"Do you know where we are going to-day?" she asked.

"No," replied Miss Frost.

"Well, you have got to do exactly what I wish. I am most anxious that
Irene should have other friends besides me."

"Oh, she will never, never under any circumstances have a friend in the
very least like you," said Miss Frost. "You have made her! You have
saved her! You are her idol! I am sure we all love you most dearly; but
as to Irene, it is wonderful the influence you have over her."

"We needn't talk of that now," said Rosamund. "I can't give up every one
