long ago. I have a bad cold, and I was trying to pass the time by
going to sleep. I haven't seen anything, Mr. Dove."

"Let me look into your eyes, miss," said Dove; "open them wide, and
let me look well into them."

"Oh! you frighten me, Mr. Dove," said Daisy, beginning to cry. "I was
very lonely, and I'd have liked you to come up half an hour ago; but
you look so queer now, and you speak in such a rough voiced--what is
the matter? Perhaps you were bringing up some of those books for
Jasmine. Oh! I don't know why you should speak to me like that."

Dove's brow cleared; he began to believe that the child had really
been asleep, and had not seen the peculiar manner in which he had been
employing himself for the last ten minutes.

"Look here, miss," he said, "I don't mean to be rough to you, you
pretty little lady. Look here, what I was after was all kindness. I
only spoke rough as a bit of a joke. I has got some lollipops in my
pocket for a nice little maid; I wonder now who these yere lollipops
are for?"

"For me, perhaps?" said Daisy, who, although she could not have
swallowed a sweety to save her life at that moment, had sense enough
to know that her wisest plan was to propitiate Dove.

"You're fond of lollipops then, missie? you didn't think as 'twas
because poor Dove guessed that, that he travelled up all these weary
stairs? Kind of him, wasn't it? but you're real fond of lollipops,
ain't you, missy?"

"Some kinds," answered Daisy, who was really a most fastidious child,
and who shrank from the sticky-looking sweetmeats proffered to her by
Dove. "I like the very best chocolate creams; Primrose brings them to
me sometimes, but they are rather expensive. Oh! and I like sticky
sweets too," she continued seeing an ominous frown gathering on Dove's
brow. "I'm very much obliged to you, Mr. Dove." Then making a great
effort, she put out her little white hand to take one of the sweeties.

But Dove drew back quickly.

"No, no," he said, "not till they're arned--by no means until they're
arned. You don't suppose as a poor man--a poor man with a large
family, and an only love of a wife--can afford to bring sweeties all
for nothing to rich little ladies like yourself. No, no, miss; you arn
them, and you shall have them."

"But I'd rather not, please," said Daisy, "I'm not _very_ hungry for
sweeties to-day on account of my cold, and I think, on the whole, you
had better keep them, Mr. Dove. Indeed, I don't know how to earn
them--Primrose and Jasmine say I'm too young to earn."

Here Dove drew himself up to his full height, and stared hard at the
child.

"There's one way of arning," he said, "and one only. Look you here,
Miss Daisy Mainwaring, you are young, but you ain't no fool. Ef you
please, miss, you has got to make me a promise--you has got to say
that you will never tell, not to Miss Primrose nor to Miss Jasmine,
nor to no one, that you've seen me in this room. I don't wish it to be
known. I has my reasons, and _whatever_ happens, you are never to
tell. Ef you make me the promise true and faithful, why you shall have
the sweeties, and I'll stick up for you, and be your friend through
thick and thin. You'll have Dove for your friend, Miss Daisy, and I
can tell you he ain't a friend to be lightly put aside. But if you
ever tell--and however secret you do it, I have got little birds who
will whisper it back to me--why, then Dove will be your enemy. You
don't know what that means, and you won't like to know. I was my own
boy Tommy's enemy once, and I locked him up in the dark for
twenty-four hours, where no one could hear him screaming. Now, miss,
you had better make me your friend; I'm real desperate in earnest, so
you promise me."

Daisy's face had grown deadly white, her breath came in gasps, her
eyes were fixed on the cruel man.

"You promise me, miss?"

"Oh yes, Mr. Dove."

"That's right, missy. Now you say these words after me:--'Mr. Dove, I
promise never to tell as you came up to my room to give me the nice
sweeties. I'll never tell nobody in all the wide world, so help me,
God.'"

"Oh, I don't like that last part," said little Daisy. "I'll say
it--I'll say all the words, only not the last ones, and I'll keep my
promise as true as true; only please, please, please, Mr. Dove, don't
ask me to say the last words, for I don't think it's quite reverent to
say them just to keep a secret about sweeties."

"Well, missy, as you please. Now put your hands in mine, and say all
the other words."

Daisy did so.

"That's right, miss; now my mind's easy. I have got your promise,
miss, and I'll keep the little birds a-watching to find out if ever
you go near to breathing it. There's a dark cellar, too, most handy
for them children who turn out to be Dove's enemies, and _you_ know
where the people who tell lies go to. Now, good-bye, miss--eat up your
sweeties."




CHAPTER XXVI.

A DELIGHTFUL PLAN.


Neither Primrose nor Jasmine could quite understand their little
sister that night--her cold was worse, but that fact Primrose
accounted for by Jasmine's imprudence in taking her out; but what
neither she nor Jasmine could understand was Daisy's great
nervousness--her shrinking fear of being left for a moment by herself,
and the worried and anxious look which had settled down on her usually
quiet little face. Primrose determined to do what she had never done
yet since they had come to London--she would commit the unheard-of
extravagance of calling in a doctor.

"I think Daisy is very feverish," she said to Jasmine; "only that it
seems impossible, I would say she has got some kind of shock, and was
trying to conceal something. You are quite sure that you locked the
door when you left her alone here this afternoon, Jasmine?"

"Oh, yes," answered Jasmine, "and I found it locked all right when I
came back. I was rather longer away than I meant to be, for I did such
a venturesome thing, Primrose--I took my 'Ode to Adversity' to the
Editor of _The Downfall_. I saw him, too--he was a red-faced man, with
such a loud voice, and he didn't seem at all melancholy--he said he
would look at the poem, but he wasn't _very_ encouraging. I told him
what Mrs. Dove said about his readers liking tearful things, and he
gave quite a rude laugh; however, I shouldn't be surprised if the poem
was taken; if it fails in that quarter, I must only try one of the
very best magazines. Oh, what was I saying about Daisy? I think she
was asleep when I came back--she was lying very quiet, only her cheeks
were rather flushed. Of course, Primrose, nothing happened to our
little Daisy; if there did, she would tell us."

"I will send for the doctor, at any rate," said Primrose; "I don't
like her look. I will send for the doctor, and--and--"

But Primrose's brave voice broke, and she turned her face away.

Jasmine ran up to her, and put her arms round her neck.

"What is it, Rose darling?--are you really troubled about Daisy? or
are you thinking of the expense? I wonder what a London doctor will
charge? Have you got any money to pay him, Primrose?"

"I've got Mr. Danesfield's money," said Primrose; "I have always kept
it for an emergency. I had hoped never to need it, but if the real
emergency comes it is right to spend it. Yes, Jasmine, I can pay the
doctor and you had better go down and ask the Doves the name of one,
for I don't know a single doctor in London."

"Yes," said Jasmine, "I'll run down at once."

Mr. and Mrs. Dove were greatly concerned when they heard of Daisy's
illness--in especial, Mr. Dove was concerned, and expressed himself
willing to do all in his power for the sweet, pretty little lady. He
said he knew a doctor of the name of Jones, who was a dab hand with
children, and if the young ladies liked he would run round to Dr.
Jones's house, and fetch him in at once.

Jasmine thought Mr. Dove very good-natured, and she expressed her
great gratitude to him for the trouble he was about to take, and
requested him to seek Dr. Jones and to bring him to see Daisy without
a moment's delay. Accordingly, in a very short time the doctor of
Dove's selection stood by Daisy's bedside and pronounced her to be
suffering from nothing whatever but a common cold, ordered some
medicine for her cough, and went away with the assurance that she
would be as cheerful as ever on the morrow. But Daisy was not cheerful
the next day; and day after day passed without bringing back either
her sweet calm, or any of the brightness which used to characterize
her little face. Daisy possessed in a certain degree Primrose's
characteristics, but she was naturally more highly strung and more
nervous than her eldest sister. After a little time her cold got
better, but her nightly terrors, the look of watchfulness and anxiety,
grew and deepened as the time wore on. Daisy's sweet little face was
altering, and Primrose at last resolved to dismiss Dr. Jones, who was
doing the child no good whatever, and to consult Miss Egerton about
the little one. It may be added that Primrose was able to pay Dr.
Jones's account without breaking into Mr. Danesfield's money.

Miss Egerton from the very first had taken a great interest in the
girls, and when Primrose went to her, and told her pitiful little
story, the kind governess's eyes filled with tears.

"My dear," she said, in conclusion, "whatever is or is not the matter
with that nice little sister of yours, I am sure she wants one thing,
and that is change. Now, I am not so greatly taken with those rooms of
yours, Primrose. You remember I paid you a visit at Christmas, and you
tried to show me all the beauties of your apartments. They were
neatly kept, dear, and were clean, and were furnished with some
little attempt at taste, but the ceilings were very low, the window
sashes fitted badly, and there was such a draught from under the
door--and, my dear child, now that you have come to me in confidence I
may as well tell you that I did _not_ admire your landlady Mrs. Dove."

"She is rather fond of borrowing money, certainly," said Primrose,
in a thoughtful voice, "but on the whole I believe she is
good-natured--she lends Jasmine books, and yesterday she baked a cake
herself for Daisy, and her husband brought it up to her."

"All the same," repeated Miss Egerton, "I don't admire the woman. I
have never seen the man; but I would rather you were in a nice house.
Now I have a proposal to make. I too have got some attics--they are
quite as large as Mrs. Dove's, and can soon be made as cheerful. I can
also promise you that the windows will not shake, nor will a draught
as keen as a knife come in from under the door. My attics, however, I
grieve to say, are unfurnished. Now, my dear, what do you pay at Mrs.
Dove's?"

"Twelve shillings a week," said Primrose.

"That is a great deal for such rooms; I knew you were being imposed
upon. Now, I would let you have mine for five, only somehow or other
you must contrive to help me to furnish them. I can give you a carpet
for your sitting-room, and a warm rug for your bedroom floor, and I
believe I can supply you with bedsteads and beds, and there is a
famous deep cupboard in the sitting-room, and two in the bedroom where
you could easily keep all your clothes; but do you think you could
provide the rest of the furniture? I would help you to get it as cheap
as possible and would show you how to make old things look like new;
for, my dear, I've gone through the contriving experience a long time
ago. Now what do you say to my plan? You will not be cheated, you will
be cared for, and you will be in the house of a friend--for I want to
be your friend, my dear girl."

"Oh, how kind you are!" said Primrose, her eyes glistening. "Yes, you
know how to give real help--the kind of help we girls want. I should
love your plan, but I must try and find out if we really have the
money. How much money will it take to put in very simple
furniture--just enough for us to go on with, Miss Egerton?"

"You might manage it for ten pounds, dear, perhaps even for less, if
you have that sum by you; you will soon save it in your lowered rent.
Go home, and think it over, Primrose. I know Daisy will be much, much
better in my house than at the Doves'. Go and think about it, and let
me know what you decide to-morrow."

Primrose thanked Miss Egerton, and went back to her lodgings with a
full heart. This offer from so good a friend had come, she felt, at
the right moment. Accept it she must; find the ten pounds she must;
and once again she thought with a feeling of satisfaction of Mr.
Danesfield's letter, and felt glad that she had been able to pay Dr.
Jones's bill without breaking into its contents.

She went upstairs, and instantly told Jasmine of the proposed change.

"But we can't do it," said Jasmine; "you know that we have not ten
pounds to spare."

"I think," said Primrose, "that perhaps the time has come when we
should open that letter Mr. Danesfield put into my hand the morning we
left Rosebury. You know, Jasmine, how we determined to keep it, and
return it to him unopened some day if we possibly could; but we also
resolved to use it if a time of necessity really came--we resolved not
to be proud about this. You know, Jasmine, it has come over me more
than once lately that I have been headstrong in coming to London, only
I could not endure being dependent on any one."

"Of course you could not, darling," said Jasmine. "I am certain you
have done right; of course we are rather depressed now with
difficulties, but I think yours was a grand plan. I have a kind of
feeling, Primrose, that our worst days are over; I think it more than
probable you will have a great run on your china-painting bye-and-bye,
and if _The Downfall_ and the other magazines begin to wish for my
poetry, why, of course, I shall earn two or three guineas a week. I am
told that a guinea is not at all a large sum for a good poem, and I
have no doubt I could write two or three a week; and then my novel--it
is really going to be very good. Mr. Dove says that he would recommend
me to put it in a newspaper first, and then offer it to a publisher to
bring out as a book. I said I would only let my first work appear in a
very high-class newspaper. I never much cared for newspaper stories,
but I might put up with one of the illustrated weekly papers if it
paid me well. Yes, Primrose, I feel hopeful; and I have not the
smallest doubt that we can earn the ten pounds for our furniture very
quickly, so let us borrow the money out of Mr. Danesfield's letter.
But Rose, darling, how do you know there is any money in the letter?
You have never opened it and you can't see inside."

"I've never opened it, certainly," said Primrose, "but from a hint Mr.
Danesfield gave me on the last day I saw him, I believe there are
three five-pound notes in the letter. Of course I am not sure, but I
am nearly sure."

"Well, let us get the letter and open it," said Jasmine, "and then our
minds will be at rest. Oh! there is Daisy waking out of her nice nap.
Daisy, darling, would you not like to go and live at Miss Egerton's?
You know you are fond of Miss Egerton, and she is turning out a very
kind friend. Won't you like to live always in her nice house, Daisy
love?"

Daisy's little face had flushed painfully when Jasmine began to talk,
now it turned white, and her lips trembled.

"Are there--are there any little birds there?" she asked.

"Oh, Eyebright, what a silly question! Primrose had she not better
have her beef-tea. I think Miss Egerton keeps a canary, but I am not
sure."

"I'd rather not have any little birds about," said Daisy, with great
emphasis, "and I'd greatly, greatly love to go. I like Miss Egerton.
When shall we go, Primrose?"

"In a day or two," said Primrose. "We have just got to buy a little
furniture, and I'm going to open my trunk now, and get a letter out
which I know has money in it. Yes, we'll very soon go away from here,
darling, and Miss Egerton has thought of this delightful plan
entirely to please you. She says you will be much, much better when
you are out of this house. Oh, Daisy! how bright your eyes look, and
how pleased you seem."

"Yes," said Daisy, "I am delighted; we need never walk down this
street again, need we, Primrose? and we need never to have anything to
say to the Doves, most particularly to Mr. Dove; not but that he's
very kind, and he's--oh, yes! he's my friend; yes, of course he told
me he was my friend, but we needn't ever see him again, ever, _ever_
again, Primrose, darling?"

"Oh, Daisy! what a funny child you are! If Mr. Dove is your friend,
why should you not wish to see him? He is not my friend, however;
indeed, I may say frankly that I don't like him at all. Now drink up
your beef-tea, darling."




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE POOR DOVES.


The next morning early Primrose opened her trunk, and unlocking a
certain little morocco case, which contained her mother's letter about
her lost brother, one or two trinkets which had belonged to that same
mother, and Mr. Danesfield's envelope, she took the latter out of the
case, and slipped it into her pocket. After breakfast she went round
to see Miss Egerton.

"An old friend," she said, "in the village where we lived--I would
rather not say his name--gave me this. I believe it contains money. I
have a kind of idea that it contains three bank notes for L5 each. I
have never opened it, and I never wish to. I meant to return it some
day to this kind friend--yes, I know he meant to be very kind. This is
what he has written on the outside of the envelope."

Miss Egerton read aloud--"When you want me, use me; don't return me,
and never abuse me."

"There must be money here, my dear," she said.

"Yes, I know there is money," said Primrose, "for he wanted to press
fifteen pounds on me when I went to say good-bye; but I was too proud
to accept it, so now I think he has thought of this way of helping us.
We could buy our furniture out of some of that money, Miss Egerton."

"Quite so, dear," said Miss Egerton, in a very cheerful voice. "Give
me the letter, Primrose, and I will put it carefully away for you; you
need not open it just at this moment. I will order just as little
furniture as possible, and have it sent in to-day, and then when the
bill comes you shall pay out of this envelope. I should not be
surprised if we did our furnishing for seven pounds; I thought of so
many nice, cheap little expedients last night. Now go home, dear, and
come to me again in the evening, and I will tell you what I have done.
I have no doubt I can have your rooms ready by to-morrow; is Daisy
pleased at the idea of coming?"

"Yes, she is delighted," said Primrose; "her dear little face quite
changed when I spoke about it. I am sure you are right, Miss Egerton,
and the change will do her lots of good."

"I mean to make your attics quite charming," said Miss Egerton. "They
shall be converted into a kind of beautiful palace for my brave young
