Then he passed to Thord, and took his hard hand and said:

"Good are words that come from an honest heart. I have learned a
lesson tonight where I thought to have learned none."

"I marvel that you needed to learn that," Thord said gruffly.

"So do I, friend," answered Neot; "but one is apt to go too far in
a matter which one has at heart, sometimes before one is aware.
Then is a word in season welcome."

Then he thanked Harek for his songs, and went, the Saxons bowing as
he passed down the long table with Odda.

"That is a wise man and a holy," said Thord.

"Ay, truly," answered the thane who had told me about him. "I mind
when he and Alfred the king were the haughtiest and most
overbearing of princes. But when Neot found out that his pride and
wrath and strength were getting the mastery in his heart, he thrust
himself down there to overcome them. So he grows more saintlike
every day, and has wrought a wondrous change in the king himself.
He is the only man to whom Alfred will listen in reproof."

"That is likely," I said, not knowing aught of the holy bishops who
were the king's counsellors; "kings brook little of that sort. But
why does he wear yon strange dress?"

"He has taken vows on him, and is a hermit," the thane said; but I
did not know what he meant at the time.

It was some Saxon way, I supposed, and cared not to ask more.

So it came to pass that I met one of the two most wonderful men in
England, and I was to see the other on the morrow. Yet I had no
thought that I should care to stay in the land, for it seemed
certain from what Odda told me that peace would be made, and peace
was not my business nor that of my men.

So in a way I was sorry that the war was at an end, seeing that we
came for fighting and should have none.

Then came a thought to me that made me laugh at myself. I was glad,
after all, that we were not going sword foremost into Exeter town,
because of the Lady Thora, who was there. I suppose it would not
have been reasonable had I not had that much thought for the brave
maiden whom I had helped out of danger once.



Chapter VI. Alfred the King.


Odda the ealdorman and I rode gaily into the king's camp in the
bright August morning, with Harek and Kolgrim and Thord beside us,
and after us fifty of my men in their best array; which was saying
much, for Einar the jarl was generous, and we had spoiled Halfdan,
the king's son, moreover. So there was a shouting when we came to
the camp, and men ran together to stare at the vikings and their
king.

In the midst of the camp, which was strong enough, and looked out
on the old city, flew a banner whereon was a golden dragon--the
banner of Wessex. And it stood before a great pavilion, which was
the court for the time, and where we should find the king waiting
for us. There were several other tents joined to this great one, so
that into them the king might retire; and there was a wide space,
round which walked spearmen as sentries, between it and any other
tent.

Some Devon thanes met us, and our men dismounted at the same time
as we. Then Odda led us four to the door of the pavilion, and we
were ushered in with much ceremony.

Inside the great tent was like a round hall, carpeted, and
tapestry-hung in a way I had never seen before. There were many
richly-dressed nobles present, and most of these were grouped round
a high place over against the door, where I saw at once that the
king sat on a throne in all state.

Now, coming from bright sunshine into the cool shadow of the place,
I was dazzled at first; but Kolgrim's eyes were quick, and we had
hardly crossed the threshold, if I might call it so, when he
plucked at my cloak.

"Master," he whispered, "let me bide with the men; this is no place
for me."

"Hush," I whispered; "the king is yonder."

"Ay, master--let me go--the king is Godred whom I jested with."

Harek was smiling, and he pulled Kolgrim forward.

"Have no fear," he said; "those who play bowls expect rubs."

Then the king came down from his throne and towards us. He had on
gilded armour beneath his long, ermine-trimmed blue cloak, and that
pleased me. He had sword and seax, but no helm, though that was on
a table by the throne--for he wore a crown.

Then I too saw that Godred, as he called himself, was, as the scald
had guessed rightly, the king, and I was a little angry that he had
tricked me thus. But he was laughing at Kolgrim as he came, and my
anger passed at once. King or thane, here was a pleasant greeting
enough.

He held out his hand to Odda first and then to me. The Saxon kissed
it, bending one knee, which was doubtless right for him, as owning
allegiance thereto. But I shook hands in our own way, saying:

"Skoal to Alfred the king."

Which seemed to please him, for he answered:

"Welcome to King Ranald. I am glad my letter brought you. My
counsellor, Godred, feared you might not care to come."

"The letter turned the scale, lord king," I said. "Yet I would have
you remember what I said yesterday about my kingship."

"Ay, cousin, I mind it," he answered, laughing. "Also I mind that a
king's son is a king's son, whatever else he may be called."

Then he shook hands with Harek, and after that turned to Kolgrim,
holding out his hand also to him.

"Concerning sails," he said gravely, "I have many questions to ask
you. Is it to the starboard hand that the bolt rope goes, or to the
other board?"

"I pray you to forget my foolishness, lord king," cried Kolgrim,
growing very red and shame faced.

"That I shall not," the king answered, laughing. "I owe you thanks
for such a jest as I have not played on a man for many a long day.
Truly I have been more light hearted for my laugh ever since."

"Ay, lord, you had the laugh of me," Kolgrim said, grinning
uneasily.

Then the king nodded gaily to him and asked who Thord was.

"This is my master in sea craft," said Odda. "Verily I fear him as
I have feared no man since I was at school. But he cured the
seasickness of me."

"Maybe I forgot the sickness when I sent landsmen to sea in all
haste," said the king. "Nevertheless, Thord, how fought they when
blows were going?"

"Well enough, king. And I will say that what I tried to teach them
they tried to learn," answered Thord.

"Wherein is hope. You think that I may have good seamen in time,
therefore?"

"Ay, lord. It is in the blood of every man of our kin to take to
the sea. They are like hen-bred ducklings now, and they do but want
a duck to lead them pondwards. Then may hen cackle in vain for
them."

The king laughed.

"Faith," he said, "I--the hen--drove Odda into the pond. He is,
according to his own account, a poor duckling."

"Let him splash about a little longer, lord king," said Thord.

But Odda spoke with a long face.

"Not so, King Alfred, if you love me. Landsman am I, and
chicken-hearted at sea. Keep the gamecock to mind the farmyard;
there be more birds than ducks needed."

"Make a song hereof, Harek," said the king. "Here is word play
enough for any scald."

Then sang Harek, laughing, and ever ready with verses:

"The gamecock croweth bravely,
And guardeth hawk-scared hen roost;
But when the sea swan swimmeth
Against the shoreward nestings,
There mighty mallard flappeth,
And frayeth him from foray;
Yet shoreward if he winneth,
The gamecock waits to meet him."

"That is in my favour," said Odda. "Mind you the scald's words, I
pray you, lord king, and send me to my right place, even with hawk
on one side and swan on the other."

So a pleasant laugh went round, and then the king went back to his
throne, and spoke words of open thanks to us of the fleet who had
gained him such victory. Good words they were, neither too few nor
too many, such as would make every man who heard them long to hear
the like of himself again.

Now, while he was speaking, men came to the tent door and waited
for his words to end; and then one came forward and told a noble,
who seemed to be ordering the state which was kept, that Danish
lords had come to speak with the king.

It seemed that this was expected, for when he heard it, Alfred bade
that they should be brought in.

There were six of them in all, and they were in handsome dresses,
but without mail, though not unarmed. The leader of them was Jarl
Osmund, whom I had seen for a moment in Wareham street. I thought
that his handsome face was careworn, as though peace would be
welcome to him. But he and all his comrades carried themselves
bravely.

Now there was long converse between the king and these chiefs, and
it seemed that peace would be made.

Yet Alfred's face was hard as he spoke to them--not like the bright
looks with which he had jested with us just now, or the earnest
kingly regard which had gone with his words of thanks.

Presently the Danes said that the whole force would retire into
Mercia beyond Thames, harming none by the way, and keeping peace
thereafter, if the conditions were honourable.

Then the king flashed out into scorn:

"What honour is to be looked for by oath breakers?"

"We are not oath breakers, King Alfred," Osmund said, looking him
in the face.

"Once did the Danes swear to me on their holy ring, which seems to
me to be their greatest oath, and they broke the peace so made.
What is that but that they are forsworn?"

"We swore nought to you, lord king," Osmund said. "Half of the men
with us came newly from across the sea but a week or so since.
Guthrum and those who swore are in their own land."

Then the king glanced at me, suddenly, as it would seem,
remembering what I had told him of the freedom of the chiefs.

"Ha! now I mind me of a word spoken in time," he said. "It has
seemed to me that there was oath breaking; maybe I was wrong. I
will take your words that you have not done so. Is that amends
enough?"

"It is well said, lord king," Osmund answered gravely.

"But," Alfred went on, "I must have the word of every chief who is
in Exeter, and they must speak for every man. Tell me in all truth
if there are those who would not make peace with me?"

Then said Osmund:

"Some will not, but they are few."

"What if you make peace and they do not? what shall you do with
them?"

"They must go their own way; we have no power over them."

"Has not Guthrum?"

"No more than we. A free Dane cannot be hound, unless he chooses,
by another man's word."

Then Alfred said plainly:

"I cannot treat for peace till I have the word of every chief in
Exeter. Go your ways and let that be known."

So Osmund bowed, and went out with his fellows. And when he had
gone, the king turned to me.

"Have I spoken aright, King Ranald?"

"In the best way possible, lord king," I answered.

"Go after those Danish lords," the king said to one of his thanes,
"and bid them to feast with me tonight, for I think that I have
said too much to them."

So they were bidden to the king's feast presently, and I suppose
they could do nought but come, for it was plain that he meant to
honour them. After they had gone back into the town, Alfred spoke
with my men, and what he said pleased them well.

Then he went to his resting tent, and I walked with Odda to his
quarters, and sat there, waiting for the king to send for me to
speak with him, as I expected. But word came that he would wait
till he had heard more of the Danish answer to his message before
we spoke together of that he had written of to me. So he prayed me
to wait in the camp till he had seen the Danes again, and told Odda
to find quarters for us.

"So we shall have a good talk together," the ealdorman said. "I am
glad you are not going back to the ships yet."

So was I, for all this fresh life that I had not seen before
pleased me. Most of all I wished to see more of Alfred and the
state in which he lived.

Now, just when I was ready for the feast, and was sitting with
Odda, there came a guard to the tent and said that the chief of the
Danes was seeking King Ranald.

Then Odda said:

"What wills he? we have no traffic with Danes."

"He would speak with King Ranald," the man said.

Then said I:
