The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mad Planet, by Murray Leinster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mad Planet

Author: Murray Leinster

Release Date: February 28, 2011 [EBook #35425]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAD PLANET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            THE MAD PLANET

                          by Murray Leinster

                              The Argosy

                            _June 12, 1920_


In All His lifetime of perhaps twenty years, it had never occurred to
Burl to wonder what his grandfather had thought about his surroundings.
The grandfather had come to an untimely end in a rather unpleasant
fashion which Burl remembered vaguely as a succession of screams coming
more and more faintly to his ears while he was being carried away at the
top speed of which his mother was capable.

Burl had rarely or never thought of the old gentleman since. Surely
he had never wondered in the abstract of what his great grandfather
thought, and most surely of all, there never entered his head
such a purely hypothetical question as the one of what his
many-times-great-grandfather--say of the year 1920--would have thought
of the scene in which Burl found himself.

He was treading cautiously over a brownish carpet of fungus growth,
creeping furtively toward the stream which he knew by the generic title
of "water." It was the only water he knew. Towering far above his head,
three man-heights high, great toadstools hid the grayish sky from his
sight. Clinging to the foot-thick stalks of the toadstools were still
other fungi, parasites upon the growth that had once been parasites
themselves.

Burl himself was a slender young man wearing a single garment twisted
about his waist, made from the wing-fabric of a great moth the members
of his tribe had slain as it emerged from its cocoon. His skin was fair,
without a trace of sunburn. In all his lifetime he had never seen the
sun, though the sky was rarely hidden from view save by the giant fungi
which, with monster cabbages, were the only growing things he knew.
Clouds usually spread overhead, and when they did not, the perpetual
haze made the sun but an indefinitely brighter part of the sky, never a
sharply edged ball of fire. Fantastic mosses, misshapen fungus growths,
colossal molds and yeasts, were the essential parts of the landscape
through which he moved.

Once as he had dodged through the forest of huge toadstools, his
shoulder touched a cream-colored stalk, giving the whole fungus a tiny
shock. Instantly, from the umbrella-like mass of pulp overhead, a fine
and impalpable powder fell upon him like snow. It was the season when
the toadstools sent out their spores, or seeds, and they had been
dropped upon him at the first sign of disturbance.

Furtive as he was, he paused to brush them from his head and hair. They
were deadly poison, as he knew well.

Burl would have been a curious sight to a man of the twentieth century.
His skin was pink, like that of a child, and there was but little hair
upon his body. Even that on top of his head was soft and downy. His
chest was larger than his forefathers' had been, and his ears seemed
almost capable of independent movement, to catch threatening sounds from
any direction. His eyes, large and blue, possessed pupils which could
dilate to extreme size, allowing him to see in almost complete darkness.

He was the result of the thirty thousand years' attempt of the human
race to adapt itself to the change that had begun in the latter half of
the twentieth century.

At about that time, civilization had been high, and apparently secure.
Mankind had reached a permanent agreement among itself, and all men had
equal opportunities to education and leisure. Machinery did most of the
labor of the world, and men were only required to supervise its
operation. All men were well-fed, all men were well-educated, and it
seemed that until the end of time the earth would be the abode of a
community of comfortable human beings, pursuing their studies and
diversions, their illusions and their truths. Peace, quietness, privacy,
freedom were universal.

Then, just when men were congratulating themselves that the Golden Age
had come again, it was observed that the planet seemed ill at ease.
Fissures opened slowly in the crust, and carbonic acid gas--the carbon
dioxide of chemists--began to pour out into the atmosphere. That gas had
long been known to be present in the air, and was considered necessary
to plant life. Most of the plants of the world took the gas and absorbed
its carbon into themselves, releasing the oxygen for use again.

Scientists had calculated that a great deal of the earth's increased
fertility was due to the larger quantities of carbon dioxide released by
the activities of man in burning his coal and petroleum. Because of
those views, for some years no great alarm was caused by the continuous
exhalation from the world's interior.

Constantly, however, the volume increased. New fissures constantly
opened, each one adding a new source of carbon dioxide, and each one
pouring into the already laden atmosphere more of the gas--beneficent in
small quantities, but as the world learned, deadly in large ones.

The percentage of the heavy, vapor-like gas increased. The whole body of
the air became heavier through its admixture. It absorbed more moisture
and became more humid. Rainfall increased. Climates grew warmer.
Vegetation became more luxuriant--but the air gradually became less
exhilarating.

Soon the health of mankind began to be affected. Accustomed through long
ages to breathe air rich in oxygen and poor in carbon dioxide, men
suffered. Only those who lived on high plateaus or on tall mountaintops
remained unaffected. The plants of the earth, though nourished and
increasing in size beyond those ever seen before, were unable to dispose
of the continually increasing flood of carbon dioxide.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the middle of the twenty-first century it was generally recognized
that a new carboniferous period was about to take place, when the
earth's atmosphere would be thick and humid, unbreathable by man, when
giant grasses and ferns would form the only vegetation.

When the twenty-first century drew to a close the whole human race began
to revert to conditions closely approximating savagery. The low-lands
were unbearable. Thick jungles of rank growth covered the ground. The
air was depressing and enervating. Men could live there, but it was a
sickly, fever-ridden existence. The whole population of the earth
desired the high lands and as the low country became more unbearable,
men forgot their two centuries of peace.

They fought destructively, each for a bit of land where he might live
and breathe. Then men began to die, men who had persisted in remaining
near sea-level. They could not live in the poisonous air. The danger
zone crept up as the earth-fissures tirelessly poured out their steady
streams of foul gas. Soon men could not live within five hundred feet of
sea level. The low-lands went uncultivated, and became jungles of a
thickness comparable only to those of the first carboniferous period.

Then men died of sheer inanition at a thousand feet. The plateaus and
mountaintops were crowded with folk struggling for a foothold and food
beyond the invisible menace that crept up, and up--

These things did not take place in one year, or in ten. Not in one
generation, but in several. Between the time when the chemists of the
International Geophysical Institute announced that the proportion of
carbon dioxide in the air had increased from .04 per cent to .1 per cent
and the time when at sea-level six per cent of the atmosphere was the
deadly gas, more than two hundred years intervened.

Coming gradually, as it did, the poisonous effects of the deadly stuff
increased with insidious slowness. First the lassitude, then the
heaviness of brain, then the weakness of body. Mankind ceased to grow in
numbers. After a long period, the race had fallen to a fraction of its
former size. There was room in plenty on the mountaintops--but the
danger-level continued to creep up.

There was but one solution. The human body would have to inure itself to
the poison, or it was doomed to extinction. It finally developed a
toleration for the gas that had wiped out race after race and nation
after nation, but at a terrible cost. Lungs increased in size to secure
the oxygen on which life depended, but the poison, inhaled at every
breath, left the few survivors sickly and filled with a perpetual
weariness. Their minds lacked the energy to cope with new problems or
transmit the knowledge which in one degree or another, they possessed.

And after thirty thousand years, Burl, a direct descendant of the first
president of the Universal Republic, crept through a forest of
toadstools and fungus growths. He was ignorant of fire, or metals, of
the uses of stone and wood. A single garment covered him. His language
was a scanty group of a few hundred labial sounds, conveying no
abstractions and few concrete things.

He was ignorant of the uses of wood. There was no wood in the scanty
territory furtively inhabited by his tribe. With the increase in heat
and humidity the trees had begun to die out. Those of northern climes
went first, the oaks, the cedars, the maples. Then the pines--the
beeches went early--the cypresses, and finally even the forests of the
jungles vanished. Only grasses and reeds, bamboos and their kin, were
able to flourish in the new, steaming atmosphere. The thick jungles gave
place to dense thickets of grasses and ferns, now become treeferns
again.

And then the fungi took their place. Flourishing as never before,
flourishing on a planet of torrid heat and perpetual miasma, on whose
surface the sun never shone directly because of an ever-thickening bank
of clouds that hung sullenly overhead, the fungi sprang up. About the
dank pools that festered over the surface of the earth, fungus growths
began to cluster. Of every imaginable shade and color, of all monstrous
forms and malignant purposes, of huge size and flabby volume, they
spread over the land.

The grasses and ferns gave place to them. Squat footstools, flaking
molds, evil-smelling yeasts, vast mounds of fungi inextricably mingled
as to species, but growing, forever growing and exhaling an odor of dark
places.

The strange growths now grouped themselves in forests, horrible
travesties on the vegetation they had succeeded. They grew and grew with
feverish intensity beneath a clouded or a haze-obscured sky, while
above them fluttered gigantic butterflies and huge moths, sipping
daintily of their corruption.

The insects alone of all the animal world above water, were able to
endure the change. They multiplied exceedingly, and enlarged themselves
in the thickened air. The solitary vegetation--as distinct from fungus
growths--that had survived, was now a degenerate form of the cabbages
that had once fed peasants. On those rank, colossal masses of foliage,
the stolid grubs and caterpillars ate themselves to maturity, then swung
below in strong cocoons to sleep the sleep of metamorphosis from which
they emerged to spread their wings and fly.

The tiniest butterflies of former days had increased their span until
their gaily colored wings should be described in terms of feet, while
the larger emperor moths extended their purple sails to a breadth of
yards upon yards. Burl himself would have been dwarfed beneath the
overshadowing fabric of their wings.

It was fortunate that they, the largest flying creatures, were harmless
or nearly so. Burl's fellow tribesmen sometimes came upon a cocoon just
about to open, and waited patiently beside it until the beautiful
creature within broke through its matted shell and came out into the
sunlight.

Then, before it had gathered energy from the air, and before its wings
had swelled to strength and firmness, the tribesmen fell upon it,
tearing the filmy, delicate wings from its body and the limbs from its
carcass. Then, when it lay helpless before them, they carried away the
juicy, meat-filled limbs to be eaten, leaving the still living body to
stare helplessly at this strange world through its many faceted eyes,
and become a prey to the voracious ants who would soon clamber upon it
and carry it away in tiny fragments to their underground city.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not all the insect world was so helpless or so unthreatening. Burl knew
of wasps almost the length of his own body who possessed stings that
were instantly fatal. To every species of wasp, however, some other
insect is predestined prey, and the furtive members of Burl's tribe
feared them but little as they sought only the prey to which their
instinct led them.

Bees were similarly aloof. They were hard put to it for existence, those
