
"He might have seen some resemblance--that is, if he had ever met your
father.  Ah!  it was a sad day for us all when your poor father died.
We should have been in a very different position," the widow sighed.

"Yes, mother," said Ben; "but when I get older I will try to supply my
father's place, and relieve you from care and trouble."

"You are doing that in a measure now, my dear boy," said Mrs. Barclay
affectionately.  "You are a great comfort to me."

Ben's answer was to go up to his mother and kiss her.  Some boys of
his age are ashamed to show their love for the mother who is devoted
to them, but it a false shame, that does them no credit.

"Still, mother, you work too hard," said Ben.  "Wait till I am a man,
and you shall not need to work at all."

Mrs. Barclay had been a widow for five years.  Her husband had been a
commercial traveler, but had contracted a fever at Chicago, and died
after a brief illness, without his wife having the satisfaction of
ministering to him in his last days.  A small sum due him from his
employers was paid over to his family, but no property was discovered,
though his wife had been under the impression that her husband
possessed some.  He had never been in the habit of confiding his
business affairs to her, and so, if he had investments of any kind,
she could not learn anything about them.  She found herself,
therefore, with no property except a small cottage, worth, with its
quarter acre of land, perhaps fifteen hundred dollars.  As Ben was too
small to earn anything, she had been compelled to raise about seven
hundred dollars on mortgage, which by this time had been expended for
living.  Now, Ben was earning four dollars a week, and, with her own
earnings, she was able to make both ends meet without further
encroachments upon her scanty property; but the mortgage was a source
of anxiety to her, especially as it was held by Squire Davenport, a
lawyer of considerable means, who was not overscrupulous about the
methods by which he strove to increase his hoards.  Should he at any
time take it into his head to foreclose, there was no one to whom Mrs.
Barclay could apply to assume the mortgage, and she was likely to be
compelled to sacrifice her home.  He had more than once hinted that he
might need the money but as yet had gone no further.

Mrs. Barclay had one comfort, however, and a great one.  This was a
good son.  Ben was always kind to his mother--a bright, popular,
promising boy--and though at present he was unable to earn much, in a
few years he would be able to earn a good income, and then his mother
knew that she would be well provided for.  So she did not allow
herself to borrow trouble but looked forward hopefully, thanking God
for what He had given her.

"Won't you go up to the Town Hall with me, mother?" asked Ben.  I am
sure you would enjoy it."

"Thank you, Ben, for wishing me to have a share in your amusements,"
his mother replied, "but I have a little headache this evening, and I
shall be better off at home."

"It isn't on account of the expense you decline, mother, is it?  You
know Mr. Crawford gave me a dollar, and the tickets are but
twenty-five cents."

"No, it isn't that, Ben.  If it were a concert I might be tempted to
go in spite of my headache, but a magical entertainment would not
amuse me as much as it will you."

"Just as you think best, mother; but I should like to have you go.
You won't feel lonely, will you?"

"I am used to being alone till nine o'clock, when you are at the
store."

This conversation took place at the supper table.  Ben went directly
from the store to the Town Hall, where he enjoyed himself as much as
he anticipated.  If he could have foreseen how his mother was to pass
that evening, it would have destroyed all is enjoyment.




CHAPTER III
MRS. BARCLAY'S CALLERS


About half-past eight o'clock Mrs. Barclay sat with her work in her
hand.  Her headache was better, but she did not regret not having
accompanied Ben to the Town Hall.

"I am glad Ben is enjoying himself," she thought, "but I would rather
stay quietly at home.  Poor boy!  he works hard enough, and needs
recreation now and then."

Just then a knock was heard at the outside door.

"I wonder who it can be?" thought the widow.  "I supposed everybody
would be at the Town Hall.  It may be Mrs. Perkins come to borrow
something."

Mrs. Perkins was a neighbor much addicted to borrowing, which was
rather disagreeable, but might have been more easily tolerated but
that she seldom returned the articles lent.

Mrs. Barclay went to the door and opened it, fully expecting to see
her borrowing neighbor.  A very different person met her view.  The
ragged hat, the ill-looking face, the neglected attire, led her to
recognize the tramp whom Ben had described to her as having attempted
to rob him in the afternoon.  Terrified, Mrs. Barclay's first impulse
was to shut the door and bolt it.  But her unwelcome visitor was too
quick for her.  Thrusting his foot into the doorway, he interposed an
effectual obstacle in the way of shutting the door.

"No, you don't, ma'am!" he said, with as laugh.  "I understand your
little game.  You want to shut me out."

"What do you want?" asked the widow apprehensively.

"What do I want?" returned the tramp.  "Well, to begin with, I want
something to eat--and drink," he added, after a pause.

"Why don't you go to the tavern?" asked Mrs. Barclay, anxious for him
to depart.

"Well, I can't afford it.  All the money I've got is a bogus dollar
your rogue of a son gave me this afternoon."

"You stole it from him," said the widow indignantly.

"What's the odds if I did.  It ain't of no value.  Come, haven't you
anything to eat in the house?  I'm hungry as a wolf."

"And you look like one!" thought Mrs. Barclay, glancing at his
unattractive features; but she did not dare to say it.

There seemed no way of refusing, and she was glad to comply with his
request, if by so doing she could soon get rid of him.

"Stay here," she said, "and I'll bring you some bread and butter and
cold meat."

"Thank you, I'd rather come in," said the tramp, and he pushed his way
through the partly open door.

She led the way uneasily into the kitchen just in the rear of the
sitting room where she had been seated.

"I wish Ben was here," she said to herself, with sinking heart.

The tramp seated himself at the kitchen table, while Mrs. Barclay,
going to the pantry, brought out part of a loaf of bread, and butter,
and a few slices of cold beef, which she set before him.  Without
ceremony he attacked the viands and ate as if half famished.  When
about half through, he turned to the widow, and asked:

"Haven't you some whisky in the house?"

"I never keep any," answered Mrs. Barclay.

"Rum or gin, then?"  I ain't partic'lar.  I want something to warm me
up."

"I keep no liquor of any kind.  I don't approve of drink, or want Ben
to touch it."

"Oh, you belong to the cold water army, do you?" said the tramp with a
sneer.  "Give me some coffee, then."

"I have no fire, and cannot prepare any."

"What have you got, then?" demanded than unwelcome guest impatiently.

"I can give you a glass of excellent well water."

"[illegible] Do you want to choke me?" returned the tramp in disgust.

"Suppose I mix you some molasses and water," suggested the widow,
anxious to propitiate her dangerous guest.

"Humph!  Well, that will do, if you've got nothing better.  Be quick
about it, for my throat is parched."

As soon as possible the drink was prepared and set beside his plate.
He drained it at a draught, and called for a second glass, which was
supplied him.  Presently, for all things must have an end, the tramp's
appetite seemed to be satisfied.  He threw himself back in his chair,
stretched his legs, and, with his hands in his pockets, fixed his eyes
on the widow.

"I feel better," he said.

"I am glad to hear it," said Mrs. Barclay.  "Now, if you'll be kind
enough, leave the house, for I expect Ben back before long."

"And you don't want him to get hurt," laughed the tramp.  "Well, I do
owe him a flogging for a trick he played on me."

"Oh, pray, go away!" said Mrs. Barclay, apprehensively.  "I have given
you some supper, and that ought to satisfy you."

"I can't go away till I've talked to you a little on business."

"Business!  What business can you have with me?"

"More than you think.  You are the widow of John Barclay, ain't you?"

"Yes; did you know my husband?"

"Yes; that is, I saw something of him just before he died."

"Can you tell me anything about his last moments?" asked the widow,
forgetting the character of her visitor, and only thinking of her
husband.

"No, that isn't in my line.  I ain't a doctor nor yet a minister.  I
say, did he leave any money?"

"Not that we have been able to find out.  He owned this hone, but left
no other property."

"That you know of," said the tramp, significantly.

"Do you know of any?" asked Mrs. Barclay eagerly.  "How did you happen
to know him?"

"I was the barkeeper in the hotel where he died.  It was a small
house, not one of your first-class hotels."

"My husband was always careful of his expenses.  He did not spend
money unnecessarily.  With his prudence we all thought he must have
some investments, but we could discover none."

"Have you got any money in the house?" asked the tramp, with seeming
abruptness.

"Why do you ask?" returned the widow, alarmed.  "Surely, you would not
rob me?"

"No, I don't want to rob you.  I want to sell you something."

"I don't care to buy.  It takes all our money for necessary expenses."

"You don't ask what I have to sell."

"No, because I cannot buy it, whatever it may be."

"It is--a secret," said the tramp.

"A secret!" repeated Mrs. Barclay, bewildered.

"Yes, and a secret worth buying.  Your husband wasn't so poor as you
think.  He left stock and papers representing three thousand dollars,
and I am the only man who can put you in the way of getting it."

Mrs. Barclay was about to express her surprise, when a loud knock was
head at the outer door.

"Who's that?" demanded the tramp quickly.  "Is it the boy?"

"No, he would not knock."

"Then, let me get out of this," he said, leaping to his feet.  "Isn't
there a back door?"

"Yes, there it is."

He hurried to the door, unbolted it, and made his escape into the open
beyond the house, just as the knock was repeated.

Confused by what she had heard, and the strange conduct of her
visitor, the widow took the lamp and went to the door.  To her
surprise she found on opening it, two visitors, in one of whom she
recognized Squire Davenport, already referred to as holding a mortgage
on her house.  The other was a short, dark-complexioned man, who
looked like a mechanic.

"Excuse me the lateness of my call, Mrs. Barclay," said the squire
smoothly.  "I come on important business.  This is Mr. Kirk, a cousin
of my wife."

"Walk in, gentlemen," said Mrs. Barclay.

"This is night of surprises," she thought to herself.




CHAPTER IV
UNPLEASANT BUSINESS


It was now nine o'clock, rather a late hour for callers in the
country, and Mrs. Barclay waited not without curiosity to hear the
nature of the business which had brought her two visitors at that
time.

"Take seats, gentlemen," she said, with the courtesy habitual to her.

Squire Davenport, who was disposed to consider that he had a right to
the best of everything, seated himself in the rocking-chair, and
signed his companion to a cane chair beside him.

"Mr. Kirk," he commenced, "is thinking of coming to Pentonville to
live."

"I am glad to hear it," said Mrs. Barclay politely.  Perhaps she would
not have said this if she had known what was coming next.

"He is a carpenter," continued the squire, "and, as we have none in
the village except old Mr. Wade, who is superannuated, I think he will
find enough to do to keep him busy."

"I should think so," assented the widow.

"If he does not, I can employ him a part of the time on my land."

"What has all this to do with me?" thought Mrs. Barclay.

She soon learned.

"Of course he will need a house," pursued the squire, "and as his
family is small, he thinks this house will just suit him."

"But I don't wish to sell," said the widow hurriedly.  "I need this
house for Ben and myself."

"You could doubtless find other accommodations.  I dare say you could
hire a couple of rooms from Elnathan Perkins."

"I wouldn't live in that old shell," said Mrs. Barclay rather
indignantly, "and I am sure Ben wouldn't."

"I apprehend Benjamin will have no voice in the matter," said Squire
Davenport stiffly.  "He is only a boy."

"He is my main support, and my main adviser," said Mrs. Barclay, with
spirit, "and I shall not take any step which is disagreeable to him."

Mr. Kirk looked disappointed, but the squire gave him an assuring
look, as the widow could see.

"Perhaps you may change your mind," said the squire significantly.  "I
am under the impression that I hold a mortgage on this property."

"Yes, sir," assented Mrs. Barclay apprehensively.

"For the sum of seven hundred dollars, if I am not mistaken."

"Yes, sir."

"I shall have need of this money for other purposes, and will trouble
you to take it up."

"I was to have three months' notice," said the widow, with a troubled
look.

"I will give you three months' notice to-night," said the squire.

"I don't know where to raise the money," faltered Mrs. Barclay.

"Then you had better sell to my friend here.  He will assume the
mortgage and pay you three hundred dollars."

"But that will be only a thousand dollars for the place."

"A very fair price, in my opinion, Mrs. Barclay."

"I have always considered it worth fifteen hundred dollars," said the
widow, very much disturbed.

"A fancy price, my dear madam; quite an absurd price, I assure you.
What do you say, Kirk?"

"I quite agree with you, squire," said Kirk, in a strong, nasal tone.
"But then, women don't know anything of business."

"I know that you and your cousin are trying to take advantage of my
poverty," said Mrs. Barclay bitterly.  "If you are a carpenter, why
don't you build a house for yourself, instead of trying to deprive me
of mine?"

"That's my business," said Kirk rudely.

"Mr. Kirk cannot spare the time to build at present," said the squire.

"Then why doesn't he hire rooms from Elnathan Perkins, as you just
recommended to me?"

"They wouldn't suit him," said the squire curtly.  "He has set his
mind on this house."

