"Five dollars," repeated Paul. "Take it back, then, and wait till A. T.
Stewart wants one. I haven't got five dollars to throw away."

But the pawnbroker did not expect to get his first price. He named it,
in order to have a chance to fall.

"Stay," he said, as Paul made a motion to leave; "what will you give me
for it?"

"I'll give you a dollar and a half," said Paul, turning back.

"A dollar and a half!" exclaimed Eliakim, holding up both hands in
horror. "Do you want to ruin me?"

"No, I think you want to ruin me. I am willing to pay a fair price."

"You may have it for three dollars and a half."

"No doubt you'd be glad to get that. Come, Phil, we'll go."

"Stay; you may have it for three dollars, though I shall lose by it."

"So should I, if I paid you that price. I can wait till some other
time."

But Eliakim did not intend to let this chance slip. He had found the
fiddle rather unsalable, and feared if he lost his chance of disposing
of it, it might remain on his hands for a year more. He was willing,
therefore, to take less than the profit he usually calculated upon in
the sale of articles which remained unredeemed.

"You may have it for two dollars and a half," he said.

As far as Paul could judge, though he did not know much about the price
of violins, this was a reasonable price. But he knew that Eliakim must
have got it for considerably less, or he would not so soon have come
down to this sum. He did not hesitate, therefore, to try to get it a
little cheaper.

"I'll give you two dollars and a quarter," he said, "and not a penny
more."

Eliakim tried hard to get ten cents more, but Paul saw that he was sure
of his purchase, and remained obdurate. So, after a pretense of putting
up the fiddle, the pawnbroker finally said, "You may have it, but I tell
you that I shall lose money."

"All right," said Paul; "hand it over."

"Where is the money?" asked Eliakim, cautiously.

Paul drew from his pocket a two-dollar bill and twenty-five cents in
currency, and received the fiddle. The pawnbroker scrutinized the money
closely, fearing that it might be bad; but finally, making up his mind
on that point, deposited it in his money drawer.

"Well, Phil, we may as well go," said Paul. "We've got through our
business."

The pawnbroker heard this, and a sudden suspicion entered his mind that
Paul had been too sharp for him.

"I might have got twenty-five cents more," he thought regretfully; and
this thought disturbed the complacency he felt at first.

"Well, Phil, how do you like it?" asked Paul, as they emerged into the
street.

"Let me try it," said Phil, eagerly.

He struck up a tune, which he played through, his face expressing the
satisfaction he felt.

"Is it as good as your old one?"

"It is much better," said Phil. "I will pay you for it;" and he drew out
the money the sailors had given him in the morning.

"No, Phil," said his friend, "you may need that money. Keep it, and pay
me when you have more."

"But I shall be away."

"You will come to the city some day. When you do you will know where to
find me. Now go and play a tune to Jimmy. He is waiting for you. If you
remain in the streets, your old enemy, Tim Rafferty, may want to borrow
your fiddle again."

"You are very kind to me, Paolo," said Phil, raising his dark eyes with
a sudden impulse of gratitude.

"It's nothing, Phil," said Paul, modestly; "you would do the same for me
if I needed it."

"Yes, I would," said Phil; "but I am poor, and I cannot help you."

"You won't be poor always, Phil," said Paul, cheerfully, "nor I either,
I hope. I mean to be a merchant some time on a bigger scale than now. As
for you, you will be a great player, and give concerts at the Academy of
Music."

Phil laughed, but still seemed pleased at the prophecy.

"Well, Phil, I must bid you good-by for a little while, or my clerks
will be cheating me. I will see you at supper."

"Addio, Paolo," said Phil.

"Addio," said Paul, laughing. "Wouldn't I make a good Italian?"

Paul returned to his stand, and Phil took the direction of Mrs.
Hoffman's rooms. While on his way he heard the sound of a hand-organ,
and, looking across the way, saw, with some uneasiness, his old enemy
Pietro, playing to a crowd of boys.

"I hope he won't see me," said Phil to himself.

He was afraid Pietro would remember his old violin, and, seeing the
difference in the instrument he now had, inquire how he got it. He
might, if not satisfied on this point, take Phil home with him, which
would be fatal to his plans. He thought it prudent, therefore, to
turn down the next street, and get out of sight as soon as possible.
Fortunately for him Pietro had his back turned, so that he did not
observe him. Nothing would have pleased him better than to get the
little fiddler into trouble, for, besides being naturally malicious, he
felt that an exhibition of zeal in his master's service would entitle
him to additional favors at the hands of the padrone, whom he hoped some
day to succeed.

"Oh, what a beautiful fiddle!" said Jimmy, in admiration, as Phil
reappeared. "Do you think I could play on it?"

Phil shook his head, smiling.

"Don't let Jimmy have it. He would only spoil it," said Mrs. Hoffman. "I
don't think he would succeed as well in music as in drawing."

"Will you play something?" asked Jimmy.

Phil willingly complied, and for half an hour held Jimmy entranced with
his playing. The little boy then undertook to teach Phil how to draw,
but at this Phil probably cut as poor a figure as his instructor would
have done at playing on the violin.

So the afternoon wore away, happily for all three, and at five Paul
made his appearance. When supper was over Phil played again, and this
attracting the attention of the neighbors, Mrs. Hoffman's rooms were
gradually filled with visitors, who finally requested Phil to play some
dancing tunes. Finding him able to do so, an impromptu dance was got
up, and Mrs. Hoffman, considerably to her surprise, found that she was
giving a dancing-party. Paul, that nothing might be left out, took a
companion with him and they soon reappeared with cake and ice cream,
which were passed around amid great hilarity; and it was not until
midnight that the last visitor went out, and the sound of music and
laughter was hushed.

"You are getting fashionable in your old age, mother," said Paul, gayly.
"I think I shall send an account of your party to the Home Journal."

"I believe it is usual to describe the dresses of the ladies," said Mrs.
Hoffman, smiling.

"Oh, yes, I won't forget that. Just give me a piece of paper and see how
I will do it."

Paul, whose education, I repeat here, was considerably above that of
most boys in his position, sat down and hastily wrote the following
description, which was read to the great amusement of his auditors:

"Mrs. Hoffman, mother of the well-known artist, Jimmy Hoffman, Esq.,
gave a fashionable party last evening. Her spacious and elegant
apartments were crowded with finely dressed gentlemen and ladies from
the lower part of the city. Signor Filippo, the great Italian musician,
furnished the music. Mrs. Hoffman appeared in a costly calico dress, and
had a valuable gold ring on one of her fingers. Her son, the artist,
was richly dressed in a gray suit, purchased a year since. Miss Bridget
Flaherty, of Mott Street, was the belle of the occasion, and danced with
such grace and energy that the floor came near giving away beneath her
fairy tread. [Miss Flaherty, by the way, weighed one hundred and eighty
pounds.] Mr. Mike Donovan, newspaper merchant, handed round refreshments
with his usual graceful and elegant deportment. Miss Matilda Wiggins
appeared in a magnificent print dress, imported from Paris by A. T.
Stewart, and costing a shilling a yard. No gloves were worn, as they
are now dispensed with in the best society. At a late hour the guests
dispersed. Mrs. Hoffman's party will long be remembered as the most
brilliant of the season."

"I did not know you had so much talent for reporting, Paul," said his
mother. "You forgot one thing, however."

"What is that?"

"You said nothing of yourself."

"I was too modest, mother. However, if you insist upon it, I will do so.
Anything at all to please you."

Paul resumed his writing and in a short time had the following:

"Among those present we observed the handsome and accomplished Paul
Hoffman, Esq., the oldest son of the hostess. He was elegantly dressed
in a pepper-and-salt coat and vest, blue necktie, and brown breeches,
and wore a six-cent diamond breastpin in the bosom of his shirt. His
fifteen-cent handkerchief was perfumed with cologne which he imported
himself at a cost of ten cents per bottle. He attracted general
admiration."

"You seem to have got over your modesty, Paul," said his mother.

"I am sleepy," said Jimmy, drowsily rubbing his eyes.

As this expressed the general feeling, they retired to bed at once, and
in half an hour were wandering in the land of dreams.



CHAPTER XVII

THE PADRONE IS ANXIOUS

The next morning Paul and Phil rose later that usual. They slept longer,
in order to make up for the late hour at which they retired. As they sat
down to breakfast, at half-past eight, Paul said: "I wonder whether the
padrone misses you, Phil?"

"Yes," said Phil; "he will be very angry because I did not come back
last night."

"Will he think you have run away?"

"I do not know. Some of the boys stay away sometimes, because they are
too far off to come home."

"Then he may expect you to-night. I suppose he will have a beating ready
for you."

"Yes, he would beat me very hard," said Phil, "if he thought I did not
mean to come back."

"I should like to go and tell him that he need not expect you. I should
like to see how he looks."

"He might beat you, too, Paolo."

"I should like to see him try it," said Paul, straightening up with a
consciousness of strength. "He might find that rather hard."

Phil looked admiringly at the boy who was not afraid of the padrone.
Like his comrades, he had been accustomed to think of the padrone as
possessed of unlimited power, and never dreamed of anybody defying him,
or resisting his threats. Though he had determined to run away, his soul
was not free from the tyranny of his late taskmaster, and he thought
with uneasiness and dread of the possibility of his being conveyed back
to him.

"Well, mother," said Paul, glancing at the clock as he rose from the
breakfast table, "it is almost nine o'clock--rather a late hour for a
business man like me."

"You are not often so late, Paul."

"It is lucky that I am my own employer, or I might run the risk of
being discharged. I am afraid the excuse that I was at Mrs. Hoffman's
fashionable party would not be thought sufficient. I guess I won't have
time to stop to shave this morning."

"You haven't got anything to shave," said Jimmy.

"Don't be envious, Jimmy. I counted several hairs this morning. Well,
Phil, are you ready to go with me? Don't forget your fiddle."

"When shall we see you again, Philip?" said Mrs. Hoffman.

"I do not know," said the little minstrel.

"Shall you not come to the city sometimes?"

"I am afraid the padrone would catch me," said Phil.

"Whenever you do come, Phil," said Paul, "come right to me. I will take
care of you. I don't think the padrone will carry us both off, and he
would have to take me if he took you."

"Good-by, Philip," said Mrs. Hoffman, offering her hand. "I hope you
will prosper."

"So do I, Phil," said Jimmy.

Phil thus took with him the farewells and good wishes of two friends
who had been drawn to him by his attractive face and good qualities. He
could not help wishing that he might stay with them permanently, but he
knew that this could not be. To remain in the same city with the padrone
was out of the question.

Meanwhile we return to the house which Phil had forsaken, and inquire
what effect was produced by his non-appearance.

It was the rule of the establishment that all the boys should be back
by midnight. Phil had generally returned an hour before that time. When,
therefore, it was near midnight, the padrone looked uneasily at the
clock.

"Have you seen Filippo?" he asked, addressing his nephew.

"No, signore," answered Pietro. "Filippo has not come in."

"Do you think he has run away?" asked the padrone, suspiciously.

"I don't know," said Pietro.

"Have you any reason to think he intended to run away?"

"No," said Pietro.

"I should not like to lose him. He brings me more money than most of the
boys."

"He may come in yet."

"When he does," said the padrone, frowning, "I will beat him for being
so late. Is there any boy that he would be likely to tell, if he meant
to run away?"

"Yes," said Pietro, with a sudden thought, "there is Giacomo."

"The sick boy?"

"Yes. Filippo went in this morning to speak to him. He might have told
him then."
