too, as much as we can." So he called to them. "Hark ye, good people,"
says the joiner; "we find by your talk that you are flying from the same
dreadful enemy as we are. Do not be afraid of us; we are only three poor
men of us. If you are free from the distemper, you shall not be hurt by
us. We are not in the barn, but in a little tent here on the outside,
and we will remove for you; we can set up our tent again immediately
anywhere else." And upon this a parley began between the joiner, whose
name was Richard, and one of their men, whose said name was Ford.

     _Ford._ And do you assure us that you are all sound men?

     _Rich._ Nay, we are concerned to tell you of it, that you may not
     be uneasy, or think yourselves in danger; but you see we do not
     desire you should put yourselves into any danger, and therefore I
     tell you that we have not made use of the barn; so we will remove
     from it, that you may be safe and we also.

     _Ford._ That is very kind and charitable; but if we have reason to
     be satisfied that you are sound, and free from the visitation, why
     should we make you remove, now you are settled in your lodging,
     and, it may be, are laid down to rest? We will go into the barn, if
     you please, to rest ourselves awhile, and we need not disturb you.

     _Rich._ Well, but you are more than we are. I hope you will assure
     us that you are all of you sound too, for the danger is as great
     from you to us as from us to you.

     _Ford._ Blessed be God that some do escape, though it be but few!
     What may be our portion still, we know not, but hitherto we are
     preserved.

     _Rich._ What part of the town do you come from? Was the plague come
     to the places where you lived?

     _Ford._ Ay, ay, in a most frightful and terrible manner, or else we
     had not fled away as we do; but we believe there will be very few
     left alive behind us.

     _Rich._ What part do you come from?

     _Ford._ We are most of us from Cripplegate Parish; only two or
     three of Clerkenwell Parish, but on the hither side.

     _Rich._ How, then, was it that you came away no sooner?

     _Ford._ We have been away some time, and kept together as well as
     we could at the hither end of Islington, where we got leave to lie
     in an old uninhabited house, and had some bedding and conveniences
     of our own, that we brought with us; but the plague is come up into
     Islington too, and a house next door to our poor dwelling was
     infected and shut up, and we are come away in a fright.

     _Rich._ And what way are you going?

     _Ford._ As our lot shall cast us, we know not whither; but God will
     guide those that look up to him.

They parleyed no further at that time, but came all up to the barn, and
with some difficulty got into it. There was nothing but hay in the barn,
but it was almost full of that, and they accommodated themselves as well
as they could, and went to rest; but our travelers observed that before
they went to sleep, an ancient man, who, it seems, was the father of one
of the women, went to prayer with all the company, recommending
themselves to the blessing and protection of Providence before they went
to sleep.

It was soon day at that time of the year; and as Richard the joiner had
kept guard the first part of the night, so John the soldier relieved
him, and he had the post in the morning. And they began to be acquainted
with one another. It seems, when they left Islington, they intended to
have gone north away to Highgate, but were stopped at Holloway, and
there they would not let them pass; so they crossed over the fields and
hills to the eastward, and came out at the Boarded River, and so,
avoiding the towns, they left Hornsey on the left hand, and Newington on
the right hand, and came into the great road about Stamford Hill on that
side, as the three travelers had done on the other side. And now they
had thoughts of going over the river in the marshes, and make forwards
to Epping Forest, where they hoped they should get leave to rest. It
seems they were not poor, at least not so poor as to be in want: at
least, they had enough to subsist them moderately for two or three
months, when, as they said, they were in hopes the cold weather would
check the infection, or at least the violence of it would have spent
itself, and would abate, if it were only for want of people left alive
to be infected.

This was much the fate of our three travelers, only that they seemed to
be the better furnished for traveling, and had it in their view to go
farther off; for, as to the first, they did not propose to go farther
than one day's journey, that so they might have intelligence every two
or three days how things were at London.

But here our travelers found themselves under an unexpected
inconvenience, namely, that of their horse; for, by means of the horse
to carry their baggage, they were obliged to keep in the road, whereas
the people of this other band went over the fields or roads, path or no
path, way or no way, as they pleased. Neither had they any occasion to
pass through any town, or come near any town, other than to buy such
things as they wanted for their necessary subsistence; and in that,
indeed, they were put to much difficulty, of which in its place.

But our three travelers were obliged to keep the road, or else they must
commit spoil, and do the country a great deal of damage in breaking down
fences and gates to go over inclosed fields, which they were loath to do
if they could help it.

Our three travelers, however, had a great mind to join themselves to
this company, and take their lot with them; and, after some discourse,
they laid aside their first design, which looked northward, and resolved
to follow the other into Essex. So in the morning they took up their
tent and loaded their horse, and away they traveled all together.

They had some difficulty in passing the ferry at the riverside, the
ferryman being afraid of them; but, after some parley at a distance, the
ferryman was content to bring his boat to a place distant from the
usual ferry, and leave it there for them to take it. So, putting
themselves over, he directed them to leave the boat, and he, having
another boat, said he would fetch it again; which it seems, however, he
did not do for above eight days.

Here, giving the ferryman money beforehand, they had a supply of
victuals and drink, which he brought and left in the boat for them, but
not without, as I said, having received the money beforehand. But now
our travelers were at a great loss and difficulty how to get the horse
over, the boat being small, and not fit for it, and at last could not do
it without unloading the baggage and making him swim over.

From the river they traveled towards the forest; but when they came to
Walthamstow, the people of that town denied[197] to admit them, as was
the case everywhere; the constables and their watchmen kept them off at
a distance, and parleyed with them. They gave the same account of
themselves as before; but these gave no credit to what they said, giving
it for a reason, that two or three companies had already come that way
and made the like pretenses, but that they had given several people the
distemper in the towns where they had passed, and had been afterwards so
hardly used by the country, though with justice too, as they had
deserved, that about Brentwood[198] or that way, several of them
perished in the fields, whether of the plague, or of mere want and
distress, they could not tell.

This was a good reason, indeed, why the people of Walthamstow should be
very cautious, and why they should resolve not to entertain anybody that
they were not well satisfied of; but as Richard the joiner, and one of
the other men who parleyed with them, told them, it was no reason why
they should block up the roads and refuse to let the people pass through
the town, and who asked nothing of them but to go through the street;
that, if their people were afraid of them, they might go into their
houses and shut their doors: they would neither show them civility nor
incivility, but go on about their business.

The constables and attendants, not to be persuaded by reason, continued
obstinate, and would hearken to nothing: so the two men that talked with
them went back to their fellows to consult what was to be done. It was
very discouraging in the whole, and they knew not what to do for a good
while; but at last John, the soldier and biscuit baker, considering
awhile, "Come," says he, "leave the rest of the parley to me." He had
not appeared yet: so he sets the joiner, Richard, to work to cut some
poles out of the trees, and shape them as like guns as he could; and in
a little time he had five or six fair muskets, which at a distance would
not be known; and about the part where the lock of a gun is, he caused
them to wrap cloth and rags, such as they had, as soldiers do in wet
weather to preserve the locks of their pieces from rust; the rest was
discolored with clay or mud, such as they could get; and all this while
the rest of them sat under the trees by his direction, in two or three
bodies, where they made fires at a good distance from one another.

While this was doing, he advanced himself, and two or three with him,
and set up their tent in the lane, within sight of the barrier which the
townsmen had made, and set a sentinel just by it with the real gun, the
only one they had, and who[199] walked to and fro with the gun on his
shoulder, so as that the people of the town might see them; also he tied
the horse to a gate in the hedge just by, and got some dry sticks
together and kindled a fire on the other side of the tent, so that the
people of the town could see the fire and the smoke, but could not see
what they were doing at it.

After the country people had looked upon them very earnestly a great
while, and by all that they could see could not but suppose that they
were a great many in company, they began to be uneasy, not for their
going away, but for staying where they were; and above all, perceiving
they had horses and arms (for they had seen one horse and one gun at the
tent, and they had seen others of them walk about the field on the
inside of the hedge by the side of the lane with their muskets, as they
took them to be, shouldered),--I say, upon such a sight as this, you may
be assured they were alarmed and terribly frightened; and it seems they
went to a justice of the peace to know what they should do. What the
justice advised them to, I know not; but towards the evening they called
from the barrier, as above, to the sentinel at the tent.

     "What do you want?" says John.

     "Why, what do you intend to do?" says the constable.

     "To do?" says John; "what would you have us to do?"

     _Const._ Why don't you begone? What do you stay there for?

     _John._ Why do you stop us on the King's highway, and pretend to
     refuse us leave to go on our way?

     _Const._ We are not bound to tell you the reason, though we did let
     you know it was because of the plague.

     _John._ We told you we were all sound, and free from the plague,
     which we were not bound to have satisfied you of, and yet you
     pretend to stop us on the highway.

     _Const._ We have a right to stop it up, and our own safety obliges
     us to it; besides, this is not the King's highway, it is a way upon
     sufferance. You see here is a gate, and if we do let people pass
     here, we make them pay toll.

     _John._ We have a right to seek our own safety as well as you; and
     you may see we are flying for our lives, and it is very unchristian
     and unjust in you to stop us.

     _Const._ You may go back from whence you came, we do not hinder you
     from that.

     _John._ No, it is a stronger enemy than you that keeps us from
     doing that, or else we should not have come hither.

     _Const._ Well, you may go any other way, then.

     _John._ No, no. I suppose you see we are able to send you going,
     and all the people of your parish, and come through your town when
     we will; but, since you have stopped us here, we are content. You
     see we have encamped here, and here we will live. We hope you will
     furnish us with victuals.

     _Const._ We furnish you! What mean you by that?

     _John._ Why, you would not have us starve, would you? If you stop
     us here, you must keep us.

     _Const._ You will be ill kept at our maintenance.

     _John._ If you stint us, we shall make ourselves the better
     allowance.

     _Const._ Why, you will not pretend to quarter upon us by force,
     will you?

     _John._ We have offered no violence to you yet, why do you seem to
     oblige us to it? I am an old soldier, and cannot starve; and, if
     you think that we shall be obliged to go back for want of
     provisions, you are mistaken.

     _Const._ Since you threaten us, we shall take care to be strong
     enough for you. I have orders to raise the county upon you.

     _John._ It is you that threaten, not we; and, since you are for
     mischief, you cannot blame us if we do not give you time for it. We
     shall begin our march in a few minutes.

     _Const._ What is it you demand of us?

     _John._ At first we desired nothing of you but leave to go through
     the town. We should have offered no injury to any of you, neither
     would you have had any injury or loss by us. We are not thieves,
     but poor people in distress, and flying from the dreadful plague in
     London, which devours thousands every week. We wonder how you can
     be so unmerciful.

     _Const._ Self-preservation obliges us.

     _John._ What! To shut up your compassion, in a case of such
     distress as this?

     _Const._ Well, if you will pass over the fields on your left hand,
     and behind that part of the town, I will endeavor to have gates
     opened for you.

     _John._ Our horsemen cannot pass with our baggage that way. It does
     not lead into the road that we want to go, and why should you force
     us out of the road? Besides, you have kept us here all day without
     any provisions but such as we brought with us. I think you ought to
     send us some provisions for our relief.

     _Const._ If you will go another way, we will send you some
     provisions.

     _John._ That is the way to have all the towns in the county stop up
     the ways against us.

     _Const._ If they all furnish you with food, what will you be the
     worse? I see you have tents: you want no lodging.

     _John._ Well, what quantity of provisions will you send us?

     _Const._ How many are you?

     _John._ Nay, we do not ask enough for all our company. We are in
     three companies. If you will send us bread for twenty men and about
     six or seven women for three days, and show us the way over the
     field you speak of, we desire not to put your people into any fear
     for us. We will go out of our way to oblige you, though we are as
     free from infection as you are.

     _Const._ And will you assure us that your other people shall offer
     us no new disturbance?

     _John._ No, no; you may depend on it.

     _Const._ You must oblige yourself, too, that none of your people
     shall come a step nearer than where the provisions we send you
     shall be set down.

     _John._ I answer for it, we will not.

Here he called to one of his men, and bade him order Captain Richard and
his people to march the lower way on the side of the marshes, and meet
them in the forest; which was all a sham, for they had no Captain
Richard or any such company.

Accordingly, they sent to the place twenty loaves of bread and three or
four large pieces of good beef, and opened some gates, through which
they passed; but none of them had courage so much as to look out to see
them go, and as it was evening, if they had looked, they could not have
seen them so as to know how few they were.

This was John the soldier's management; but this gave such an alarm to
the county, that, had they really been two or three hundred, the whole
county would have been raised upon them, and they would have been sent
to prison, or perhaps knocked on the head.

They were soon made sensible of this, for two days afterwards they found
