
HUNTING SONG


    Waken, lords and ladies gay,
    On the mountain dawns the day;
    All the jolly chase is here
    With hawk and horse and hunting-spear;
    Hounds are in their couples yelling,
    Hawks are whistling, horns are knelling,
    Merrily, merrily mingle they,
    'Waken, lords and ladies gay.'

    Waken, lords and ladies gay,
    The mist has left the mountain gray,
    Springlets in the dawn are steaming,
    Diamonds on the brake are gleaming,
    And foresters have busy been
    To track the buck in thicket green;
    Now we come to chant our lay,
    'Waken, lords and ladies gay.'

    Waken, lords and ladies gay,
    To the greenwood haste away;
    We can show you where he lies,
    Fleet of foot and tall of size;
    We can show the marks he made
    When 'gainst the oak his antlers frayed;
    You shall see him brought to bay:
    'Waken, lords and ladies gay.'

    Louder, louder chant the lay,
    Waken, lords and ladies gay!
    Tell them youth and mirth and glee
    Run a course as well as we;
    Time, stern huntsman! who can baulk,
    Staunch as hound and fleet as hawk;
    Think of this, and rise with day,
    Gentle lords and ladies gay!

Scott




It is not what he has, nor even what he does, which directly expresses
the worth of a man, but what he is.

Amiel




BORDER BALLAD


    March, march, Ettrick and Teviotdale,
      Why, my lads, dinna ye march forward in order!
    March, march, Eskdale and Liddesdale,
      All the Blue Bonnets are bound for the Border.
        Many a banner spread
        Flutters above your head,
      Many a crest that is famous in story;
        Mount and make ready then,
        Sons of the mountain glen,
    Fight for the Queen and our old Scottish glory!

    Come from the hills where your hirsels[1] are grazing,
      Come from the glen of the buck and the roe;
    Come to the crag where the beacon is blazing,
      Come with the buckler, the lance, and the bow;
        Trumpets are sounding,
        War-steeds are bounding,
      Stand to your arms, and march in good order;
        England shall many a day
        Tell of the bloody fray
    When the Blue Bonnets came over the Border.

Scott

FOOTNOTES:
[1] Cattle




THE GREAT NORTHERN DIVER


The weird, long call, or the shrill, demoniacal laugh coming out of the
night tells of the sleepless activity of the loon. The whip-poor-will in
the adjacent shrubbery seems companionable, and there is a friendly
spirit in the short, shrill tremolo of the night-hawk from the invisible
sky. Even the plaint of the screech-owl has a tone of human sympathy.
But the dreary cadence of the loon is the voice of the inhospitable
night, repelling every thought of human association. It does not
entreat, it does not warn; yet there is a fascination in its
expressionless strength. Over the black water, under the lowering sky,
or through the bright still moonlight, the same unfeeling tone fills the
ear of night. And sometimes, when the lingering moon sheds a broad trail
of light along the still waters of the lake, the graceful swimmer will
glide across and disappear in the darkness, breaking the bright
reflection into a multitude of chasing, quivering, trailing threads of
silver. Throughout the day, where the cedars come down to meet their
shadows in the dark water, he swims ceaselessly about, sitting low, with
black, glossy neck gracefully curved and displaying its delicate white
markings. Sometimes he stretches himself wearily, flapping his wings,
and displaying his white breast and the handsome, showy markings of his
sides. Though wary and aloof, and without a trace of animation in his
loud, penetrating cries, he shows his kinship by the scrupulous care
with which he preens his handsome feathers--even lying on his back in
the water to comb out and smooth his glossy, white breast.

A hurried cry from overhead may unexpectedly reveal the presence of a
pair of loons in another element, and it is always fascinating to watch
their steady, strained, energetic flight above the tops of the pines,
generally to curve down to some more attractive expanse in the
cedar-girt lake. For the water is the loon's natural element. There is
an amusing deliberateness in his graceful, silent dive. He does not make
the hurried dip of his smaller cousin, the grebe, but more calmly curves
both neck and body, disappearing under the surface in a graceful arch.
Settling down and swimming with only head and neck exposed is an
evidence of suspicion, and is generally followed by a long dive, with a
belated reappearance in some remote part of the lake.

When the mother loon takes her two offspring out for a swim, it is a big
event in the domestic circle. The outing is announced by prolonged and
unusual repetitions of the laughing call. For half an hour the echoes of
the lake are kept alive with sounds portentous of new departures in the
loon world. Then a peculiar object is seen to emerge from the marshy bay
and cross under the shadowy cedars toward the open water. A field-glass
shows it to be the mother loon and her two offspring, the three huddled
so closely together that they are almost indistinguishable. The mother
is unceasing in her care and attention. She strokes the backs of the
young birds with her bill, playing and fussing around and close to them,
as if they could not exist without her constant attention. Now and then
she leans over and lifts a broad, black, webbed foot out of the water,
holding it up distended, as if to endorse the modern theory that the
parent loon teaches her young to swim. They cling to each other and
cling to her, as if afraid of being lost in the great expanse of water
to which they have been so recently introduced.

A short distance away the father swims about in lordly indifference,
diving occasionally and regaling himself on the unsuspecting fish. A
boat comes out from the shore, rowed by an industrious guide, with an
angler, picturesquely protected by mosquito net, sitting in the stern.
The mother loon pushes and urges her indolent pair in the direction of
safety. How slow they must seem as she hurries and encourages them! The
trio moves at a snail's pace compared with her ordinary speed, but the
young ones show no inclination to dive out of harm's way. Their
clinging, crowding tendency serves but to incommode and obstruct her.
And where is the male protector? Alas for the romance of chivalry! When
the boat comes near, he deliberately dives, and, after the usual
protracted wait, reappears in another part of the lake, away from the
danger that alarms and threatens the defenceless trio. But the mother
remains and urges the encumbering young things to speed. They do make
some headway, though slowly, toward the marshy bay from which they
recently emerged with so much loud, wild laughter. The indifference of
the fisherman and the guide does not reassure them, and they never cease
their entangled struggle till lost to sight in the winding lagoon.

S. T. Wood




TO THE CUCKOO


    O blithe New-comer! I have heard,
    I hear thee and rejoice.
    O Cuckoo! shall I call thee Bird,
    Or but a wandering Voice?

    While I am lying on the grass
    Thy twofold shout I hear;
    From hill to hill it seems to pass,
    At once far off, and near.

    Though babbling only to the Vale,
    Of sunshine and of flowers,
    Thou bringest unto me a tale
    Of visionary hours.

    Thrice welcome, darling of the Spring!
    Even yet thou art to me
    No bird, but an invisible thing,
    A voice, a mystery;

    The same whom in my school-boy days
    I listened to; that Cry
    Which made me look a thousand ways
    In bush, and tree, and sky.

    To seek thee did I often rove
    Through woods and on the green;
    And thou wert still a hope, a love;
    Still longed for, never seen.

    And I can listen to thee yet;
    Can lie upon the plain
    And listen, till I do beget
    That golden time again.

    O blessed Bird! the earth we pace
    Again appears to be
    An unsubstantial faery place,
    That is fit home for Thee!

Wordsworth




ON THE GRASSHOPPER AND CRICKET


    The poetry of earth is never dead:
      When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,
      And hide in cooling trees, a voice will run
    From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead;
    That is the Grasshopper's--he takes the lead
      In summer luxury--he has never done
      With his delights; for when tired out with fun

    He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.
    The poetry of earth is ceasing never:
      On a lone winter evening, when the frost
      Has wrought a silence, from the stove there shrills
    The Cricket's song, in warmth increasing ever,
      And seems to one in drowsiness half-lost,
      The Grasshopper's among some grassy hills.

Keats




THE GREAT NORTHWEST


And now let us turn our glance to this great Northwest, whither my
wandering steps are about to lead me. Fully nine hundred miles as bird
would fly, and one thousand two hundred as horse can travel, west of Red
River, an immense range of mountains eternally capped with snow rises in
rugged masses from a vast stream-scarred plain. They who first beheld
these grand guardians of the central prairies named them the Montagnes
des Rochers (Rocky Mountains),--a fitting title for such vast
accumulations of rugged magnificence. From the glaciers and ice-valleys
of this great range of mountains, innumerable streams descend into the
plains. For a time they wander, as if heedless of direction, through
groves and glades and green-spreading declivities; then, assuming
greater fixity of purpose, they gather up many a wandering rill and
start eastward upon a long journey. At length the many detached streams
resolve themselves into two great water systems. Through hundreds of
miles these two rivers pursue their parallel courses, now approaching,
now opening out from each other. Suddenly the southern river bends
towards the north, and, at a point some six hundred miles from the
mountains, pours its volume of water into the northern channel. Then the
united river rolls, in vast, majestic curves, steadily towards the
north-east, turns once more towards the south, opens out into a great
reed-covered marsh, sweeps on into a large cedar-lined lake, and
finally, rolling over a rocky ledge, casts its waters into the northern
end of the great Lake Winnipeg, fully one thousand three hundred miles
from the glacier cradle where it took its birth. This river, which has
along it every diversity of hill and vale, meadow-land and forest,
treeless plain and fertile hillside, is called by the wild tribes who
dwell along its glorious shores, the Saskatchewan or "rapid-flowing
river." But this Saskatchewan is not the only river which drains the
great central region between Red River and the Rocky Mountains. The
Assiniboine or "stony river" drains the rolling prairie-lands five
hundred miles west from Red River; and many a smaller stream, and
rushing, bubbling brook, carries into its devious channel the waters of
that vast country which lies between the American boundary line and the
pine woods of the Lower Saskatchewan.

So much for the rivers; and now for the land through which they flow.
How shall we picture it? how shall we tell the story of that great,
boundless, solitary waste of verdure? The old, old maps, which the
navigators of the sixteenth century formed from the discoveries of Cabot
and Cartier, of Verrazanno and Hudson, played strange pranks with the
geography of the New World. The coast-line, with the estuaries of large
rivers, was tolerably accurate; but the centre of America was
represented as a vast inland sea, whose shores stretched far into the
Polar North--a sea through which lay the much-coveted passage to the
long-sought treasures of the old realms of Cathay. Well, the geographers
of that period erred only in the description of ocean which they placed
in the centre of the continent; for an ocean there is--an ocean through
which men seek the treasures of Cathay even in our own times. But the
ocean is one of grass, and the shores are the crests of mountain ranges
and the dark pine forests of sub-Arctic regions. The great ocean itself
does not present such infinite variety as does this prairie-ocean of
which we speak:--in winter, a dazzling surface of purest snow; in early
summer, a vast expanse of grass and pale pink roses; in autumn, too
often a wild sea of raging fire! No ocean of water in the world can vie
with its gorgeous sunsets; no solitude can equal the loneliness of a
night-shadowed prairie: one feels the stillness, and hears the silence:
the wail of the prowling wolf makes the voice of solitude audible; the
stars look down through infinite silence upon a silence almost as
intense. This ocean has no past;--time has been nought to it, and men
have come and gone, leaving behind them no track, no vestige of their
presence. Some French writer, speaking of these prairies, has said that
the sense of this utter negation of life, this complete absence of
history, has struck him with a loneliness, oppressive and sometimes
terrible in its intensity. Perhaps so, but, for my part, the prairies
had nothing terrible in their aspect, nothing oppressive in their
loneliness. One saw here the world, as it had taken shape and form from
the hands of the Creator. Nor did the scene look less beautiful because
nature alone tilled the earth, and the unaided sun brought forth the
flowers.

October had reached its latest week; the wild geese and swans had taken
their long flight to the south, and their wailing cry no more descended
through the darkness; ice had settled upon the quiet pools and was
settling upon the quick-running streams; the horizon glowed at night
with the red light of moving prairie fires. It was the close of the
Indian Summer, and Winter was coming quickly down, from his far northern
home.

Major W. F. Butler: "The Great Lone Land."


[Illustration: PIONEERS]




RULE, BRITANNIA


    When Britain first, at Heaven's command,
      Arose from out the azure main,
    This was the charter of the land,
      And guardian angels sung this strain:
        Rule, Britannia, rule the waves!
        Britons never will be slaves!

    The nations, not so blest as thee,
      Must in their turns to tyrants fall,
    While thou shalt flourish great and free--
      The dread and envy of them all.

    Still more majestic shalt thou rise,
      More dreadful from each foreign stroke;
    As the loud blast that tears the skies
      Serves but to root thy native oak.

    Thee haughty tyrants ne'er shall tame;
      All their attempts to bend thee down
    Will but arouse thy generous flame,
      But work their woe and thy renown.

    To thee belongs the rural reign;
      Thy cities shall with commerce shine;
    All thine shall be the subject main,
      And every shore it circles thine.

    The Muses, still with Freedom found,
      Shall to thy happy coast repair;
    Blest Isle, with matchless beauty crowned,
