
Illustration: The Burmese make a great effort to capture Pagoda
Hill.

The uproar of the advancing crowd was prodigious. Every man was
yelling, at the top of his voice, imprecations upon the defenders
of the pagoda; who were standing in absolute silence, waiting
eagerly for the word of command. Suddenly the firing broke out
again at the foot of the hill and, immediately, a bright light shot
up from its face.

The edge of the dense mass of Burmese was now but some fifty yards
from the wall that surrounded the foot of the hill, and the
causeway behind was occupied by a solid mass of men. Then came the
sharp order to the artillerymen, and gun after gun poured its
charge of grape into the crowd while, at the same moment, the
infantry began to fire, by companies, in steady volleys. For an
instant the din of the assailants was silenced, then their shouts
rose again and, after a moment's hesitation, they continued their
advance.

But not for long. None but the most disciplined soldiers could have
advanced under that storm of grape and bullets and, in ten minutes,
they fled in wild confusion, leaving the causeway thickly covered
with the dead. Again and again the British cheers rose, loud and
triumphant; then the infantry were told to fall out, but the guns
continued their fire, until the fugitives were well in the forest.

Between the shots the general listened attentively, and examined
the country towards the town through his glasses.

"Everything is quiet," he said. "It is probable that, if those
fellows had carried the hill, they would have made a signal, and
there might have been a general attack. As it is, the affair is
over for the night; and the Invulnerables will have some difficulty
in accounting for their failure, and loss.

"Now, gentlemen, we may as well have up the horses, and ride back.
We hardly expected to get away as soon as this."

"Well, Meinik, what do you think of your Invulnerables, now?"
Stanley said, as the Burman, after picketing his horse, came up to
his room to see if he wanted anything, before lying down on his bed
in the passage.

"I don't know," the Burman replied, gravely. "They may be holy men;
and proof, perhaps, against native weapons; but they are no good
against your cannon and muskets. I understand, now, how it is that
you beat us so easily. Your men all stood quiet, and in order; one
only heard the voices of the officers, and the crash as they fired
together.

"Then, your guns are terrible. I have seen ours firing but, though
our pieces are smaller than yours, your men fire five shots to our
one. I stood by while they were loading. It was wonderful. Nobody
talked, and nobody gave orders. Each man knew what he had to
do--one did something and, directly, another did something and,
almost before the smoke of the last shot was out of the gun, it was
ready to be fired again.

"It is clear to me that we have not learnt how to fight, and that
your way of having only a few men, well taught and knowing exactly
what they have to do, is better than ours of having great numbers,
and letting everyone fight as he pleases. It is bad, every way. The
brave men get to the front, and are killed; and then the others run
away.

"You were right. We shall never turn you out of Rangoon, till
Bandoola comes. He has all our best troops with him, and he has
never been beaten. All the troops know him, and will fight for him
as they will not fight for these princes--who know nothing of war,
and are chosen only because they are the king's brothers. When he
comes, you will see."

"No doubt we shall, Meinik; and you will see that, although they
may make a better fight of it than they have done tonight, it will
be just the same, in the end."

For the next two months the time passed slowly. No attacks were
made by the enemy, after the defeat of the assault upon the pagoda.
Peasants and deserters who came in reported that there was profound
depression among the Burmese troops. Great numbers had left the
colours, and there was no talk of another attack.

The troops being, therefore, relieved of much of their arduous
night duty, the English took the offensive. The stockades on the
Dalla river, and those upon the Panlang branch--the principal
passage into the main stream of the Irrawaddy--were attacked and
carried, the enemy suffering heavily, and many pieces of artillery
being captured.

The rains continued almost unceasingly, and the troops suffered
terribly in health. Scarce three thousand remained fit for duty,
and the greater portion of these were so emaciated and exhausted,
by the effects of the climate, that they were altogether unfit for
active operations.

Three weeks after the fight at the pagoda a vessel came up the
river, with a letter from the officer in command of the troops
assembled to bar the advance of Bandoola against Chittagong, saying
that the Burmese army had mysteriously disappeared. It had gone off
at night, so quietly and silently that our outposts, which were but
a short distance from it, heard no sign or movement, whatever. The
Burmese had taken with them their sick, tents, and stores; and
nothing but a large quantity of grain had been found in their
deserted stockades.

The news was received with satisfaction by the troops. There was
little doubt that the court of Ava--finding that their generals had
all failed in making the slightest impression upon our lines, and
had lost vast numbers of men--had at last turned to the leader who
had conquered province after province for it, and had sent him
orders to march, with his whole army, to bring the struggle to a
close. The soldiers rejoiced at the thought that they were at last
to meet a real Burmese army. Hitherto they had generally stood on
the defensive, and had to fight the climate rather than the foe;
and it seemed to them that the campaign was likely to be
interminable.

The march of the Burmese from Ramoo to Sembeughewn, the nearest
point of the river to the former town, must have been a terrible
one. The distance was over two hundred miles, the rains were
ceaseless, and the country covered with jungles and marshes, and
intersected by rivers. No other army could have accomplished such a
feat. The Burmans, however, accustomed to the unhealthy climate,
lightly clad, and carrying no weight save their arms and sixteen
days' supply of rice, passed rapidly over it.

Every man was accustomed to the use of an axe and to the formation
of rafts and, in an incredibly short time, rivers were crossed,
deep swamps traversed on roads made by closely-packed faggots and,
but a few days after hearing that Bandoola had started, the general
learned, from peasants, that the news had come down that he and a
portion of his army had arrived at Sembeughewn.

Almost at the same time, other parties who travelled down along the
coast reached Donabew, a town on the Irrawaddy, some forty miles in
direct line from Rangoon. This had been named as the rendezvous of
the new army, and to this a considerable proportion of Bandoola's
force made their way direct from Ramoo; it being the custom of the
Burmese to move, when on a march through a country where no
opposition was to be looked for, in separate detachments, each
under its own leader, choosing its own way, and making for a
general rendezvous. Travelling in this manner, they performed the
journey far more rapidly than they could have done moving in one
body, and could better find shelter and food.

Other forces from Prome, Tannoo, and other quarters were known to
be marching towards Donabew. It was soon reported that the dejected
forces around Rangoon had gained courage and confidence, at the
news that Bandoola and his army were coming to their aid, and that
the deserters were returning in large numbers from their villages.
The British sick were sent away in the shipping to Mergy and Tavoy,
two coast towns of which we had taken possession, and both of which
were healthily situated.

The change had a marvellous effect, and men who would have speedily
succumbed to the poisonous exhalations of the swamps round Rangoon
rapidly regained their strength, in their new quarters.



Chapter 9: Victories.


In the meantime, negotiations had been going on with Siam, between
which state and Burma there was the bitterest enmity. It had been
thought that Siam would have willingly grasped the opportunity to
revenge itself for the many losses of territory that it had
suffered at the hands of Burma. This there was no doubt that it
would have been glad to do, but our occupation of several points on
the coast of Tenasserim roused the fears of Siam, and inclined it
to the belief that we might prove an even more dangerous neighbour
than Burma.

The court of Ava had, on its part, also sent urgent messages to the
King of Siam--when misfortunes had, to some extent, lowered its
pride--calling upon him to make common cause with Burma, and to
join it in repelling an enemy who would doubtless be as dangerous
to him as to Burma.

Siam, however, determined to steer a middle course. An army was
assembled, in readiness for any contingency; but Siam believed as
little as Burma, itself, that the British could possibly be
victorious over that power; and feared its vengeance, if she were
to ally herself with us while, upon the other hand, Siam had a long
sea coast, and feared the injury our fleet might inflict upon it,
were it to join Burma. The king, therefore, gave both powers an
assurance of his friendship; and marched his army down to the
frontier of the province of Martaban, which bordered on the great
Salween river on the Tenasserim coast, and lay some two hundred
miles from Rangoon, across the gulf of Martaban.

The intentions of the king being so doubtful, the advance of the
Siamese army in this direction could not be regarded with
indifference by the British. The town of Martaban was the centre of
the Burmese military power in Tenasserim, and the advance towards
it of the Siamese army would place it in direct communication with
that of Burma. On the 13th of October, therefore, a force,
consisting of a wing of the 41st Regiment and the 3rd Madras
Infantry, sailed from Rangoon against the town. The expedition was
delayed by light winds and, when it arrived at the mouth of the
river, found that every preparation had been made for an obstinate
defence. They learned, from a peasant, that strong works had been
erected on every eminence round the town; and that the road from
the coast had been cut, and stockaded.

Approach by this route was impossible, for there were twenty miles
of country to be traversed; and much of this was under water from
the inundations. It was, therefore, determined to go up the river,
although this was so shallow and full of shoals that the navigation
was extremely difficult. At last, after great labour--incurred by
the ships constantly getting ashore--they succeeded in making their
way up to Martaban, and anchored off the town.

A heavy cannonade was carried on, for some time, between the ships
and the enemy's works. Then the troops were embarked in boats,
which rowed for the shore under a very heavy fire from the enemy.
As soon as they landed, and advanced to attack the stockades, the
Burmese lost heart and hastily retreated; while the inhabitants
received the troops as they entered with the warmest welcome--for
they were, for the most part, natives of Pegu, and still
entertained a deep hatred for the Burmese, because of the long
oppression that they had suffered at their hands.

Throughout the rest of Tenasserim, however; and indeed, throughout
the whole country traversed by the troops later on, the inhabitants
appeared to have entirely forgotten their ancient nationality, and
the conquest of their country by the Burmans; and to have become
completely absorbed by them. Throughout the whole time that we
occupied Martaban, the people gave no trouble whatever and, indeed,
offered to raise a force for service with us, if we wished it.

At the end of October the rain ceased--to the intense delight of
the troops--and the cold season set in. November was, however, an
exceptionally deadly month--the occasional days of fine weather
drawing up the exhalations from the swamps--and the number of
deaths was greater than they had been at any previous time. There
was, too, no prospect of a forward movement, at present. The
expedition had come unprovided with boats or other means of
transport, making sure that an abundant supply would be obtained,
in a country where the whole trade was carried on by the rivers.
The promptness with which the native authorities had, on the first
appearance of the fleet, sent every boat away, had disappointed
this anticipation and, although the opening of some of the other
rivers had enabled the local fishermen to bring their boats to
Rangoon, where fish were eagerly purchased, the British troops were
still, up to the end of November, without the means of sending a
hundred men up the river, save in the boats of the fleet.

The Indian authorities--believing that, when the Burmese found
themselves impotent to turn us out of Rangoon, the court of Ava
would be glad to negotiate--had not, until the autumn was drawing
to a close, thought of making any preparations to supply the army
with water carriage. They now, however, began to bestir themselves.
Five hundred boatmen were sent from Chittagong, bringing many boats
down with them, and building others at Rangoon. Transports with
draft cattle sailed from Bengal, and a considerable reinforcement
of troops was on its way to join, at the end of December--for all
the natives agreed that no movement could be made, by land, until
the end of January.

In November, even Bandoola's army was obliged to make its approach
by water. Early in that month it was learned that the Burmese
general had given orders for the advance, and preparations were at
once begun to meet what none doubted would be a very serious
attack. The reinforcements had not yet arrived, and the greatly
diminished force was far too small for the length of the line that
had to be defended. Redoubts were therefore thrown up, pagodas and
other buildings were fortified; and two complete lines of works
constructed, from the great pagoda to the city, one facing east and
the other west.

The post at Kemmendine was strengthened, and was supported by H. M.
sloop Sophie, a company's cruiser, and a strong division of
gunboats. The retention of this post was of great importance, as it
barred the river approach to Rangoon, and prevented the enemy
sending down a huge fleet of war galleys and fire rafts to attack
the town, and set fire to the merchant shipping lying off it.

In the last week of November, smoke was seen to rise from many
points in the forest. Many fugitives came in from their villages,
and reported that Bandoola's army were all on their way down the
river; and by the end of the month some sixty thousand men, with a
large train of artillery and a body of cavalry, were assembled
round our position. Of this force, thirty thousand were armed with
muskets. They had with them, too, a great number of jingals. These
little guns carried ball of from six to twelve ounces, and were
mounted on a light carriage, which two men could wheel with ease.
The cannon were carried to the scene of action on elephants. The
cavalry were seven hundred strong, drawn from the borders of
Manipur.

The rest of the army were armed with swords and spears, and carried
implements for stockading and entrenching. The force was accompanied by
a number of astrologers; and by the Invulnerables--who had, doubtless,
satisfactorily explained their failure to capture the pagoda.

A great semicircle of light smoke, rising from the trees, showed
that the position taken up by Bandoola extended from the river
above Kemmendine to the neighbourhood of Rangoon. On the night of
the 31st, the troops at the pagoda heard a loud and continuous stir
in the forest. It gradually approached and, by morning, great
masses of troops had gathered at the edge of the jungle, within
musket shot of the post. The garrison there were drawn up in
readiness to repel a sudden rush but, just as the sun rose, a din
made by thousands of men engaged in cutting down the trees began,
and it was evident that the Burmese were going to adopt their usual
plan of entrenching themselves behind stockades.

During the time that had elapsed between the repulse of the
Invulnerables and the arrival of Bandoola's army, Stanley's work
was light, and the life dull and monotonous. An hour was spent,
every morning, in examining the fugitives who had, by the retreat
of the Burmese, been enabled to make their way back to the town;
and of women who had escaped from the vigilance of the Burmese
police, and had come in from the villages where they had been held
as hostages for their husbands. Once or twice a week, he went off
with the general to the hospital ship, to inquire into the state of
the sick and to pay a visit to the long line of cots along the main
and lower deck. Almost every day he rode, in spite of the weather,
to one or other of the regimental camps; and soon came to know most
of the officers of the force. His previous experience on the rivers
had done much to acclimatise him, and his health continued good.

On the evening of the 30th he had, at the general's order, ridden
up to the pagoda. It was considered likely that the attack would be
delivered there in the first place and, at three o'clock in the
morning, when it became evident that a large body of men were
approaching through the forest, he galloped back to Rangoon with
the news and, at five, rode out again with Sir A. Campbell.

Among the garrison there was much disappointment when the sound of
wood chopping announced that the Burmese did not intend to attack;
but the general, who had been watching the edge of the jungle
through his glasses, lowered them and put them into their case with
an expression of satisfaction.

"I don't want them to attack, Colonel," he said. "If they do, and
we beat them off, we are no nearer the end than before. That sort
of thing might be carried on for months; as long, in fact, as there
remains a man to bring up. What we want is to inflict such a heavy
blow upon them, that even the court at Ava may become convinced
that they cannot hope to drive us out of Rangoon; in which case
they may consent to negotiate, and we may bring the war to an end.

"Heaven knows that we have suffered enough loss, at present; and I
don't want to have to undertake such a difficult operation as an
advance against Ava. I am glad to see that they have begun to
construct stockades. I do not intend to interfere until they have
completely finished their work, and gained sufficient confidence to
make a general attack on us. Then we shall be able to give them a
heavy lesson.

"Ah, there they are, at work!"

As he spoke, a roar of musketry and artillery broke out suddenly
from Kemmendine, and all eyes were turned in that direction. The
spot was two miles distant, but the forest shut out, alike, the
view of the river and of the works held by us. The exact position,
however, was indicated by the masts of the two war vessels, rising
above the trees.

Soon great wreaths of heavy white smoke rose above the forest, in
and around Kemmendine, shutting out all view. The fire continued
without abatement, and it was evident that the attack was a hot and
determined one. Confident as all felt that the little fort would be
able to defend itself successfully, the great smoke clouds were
watched with some feeling of anxiety; for the garrison was, after
all, but a handful. In momentary intervals of the firing, the yells
and shouts of the natives could be distinctly heard and, once or
twice, after a heavy broadside from the ships of war, the cheers of
the British sailors could be plainly recognized.

After two hours' fighting the din gradually ceased. The clouds of
smoke rolled away, and the masts of the ships became visible, and
the garrison of the pagoda raised three hearty cheers, to tell the
defenders that their successful defence had been watched and
welcomed.

Presently some heavy columns of the enemy issued from the forest,
on the other side of the river; and marched across the plain to
Dalla, which faced Rangoon. They moved with great regularity and
order, led by their chiefs on horseback, their gilded umbrellas
glittering in the rays of the sun. On reaching the bank of the
river opposite Rangoon, they began entrenching themselves and
throwing up stockades and batteries; with the evident intention of
opening fire on the shipping. Soon afterwards large bodies of men
issued from the forest facing the pagoda and, marching along a
slight ridge, that extended from that point to the creek below
Rangoon, took up their position there, and began entrenching
themselves all along the line. Thus the British position was now
completely surrounded; there was, however, no doubt that the main
body of the enemy was still facing the pagoda.

