"It was calculated that they had at least two thousand casualties,
while our own loss amounted to only one hundred and forty-one. They
were not pursued, as the cavalry were required to guard the
baggage."

"It was a grand fight, Major," the colonel said; "but you were at
Maiwand also, were you not?"

"Yes; and it would be hard to find a greater contrast to the fight
I have just described. The two British forces were attacked under
almost precisely similar circumstances. One was splendidly
commanded; and the other, it must be confessed, was badly led.

"There was a good deal against us. The day was in July, and
terribly hot and, at every step the troops took, they found the
power of the sun increasing, until the heat became intense. A
solitary traveller, in such circumstances, would make but poor
travelling; and of course it was vastly worse for troops, advancing
heavily laden and formed in column. The 66th Foot had had tea, and
a light breakfast before starting; but the native troops had had
nothing to eat since the night before. One regiment, indeed, had no
water; but the others had managed to fill their canteens during the
halt at half-past nine.

"The brigade, at the end of the march, were again ordered to change
front. The Grenadiers, which was a pivot regiment, did not slacken
their pace and, consequently, the centre were greatly exhausted in
trying to keep up with it, and were certainly in no condition to
take part in the battle at midday.

"The whole thing was a hideous mistake. General Burrows had brought
his line into such a position that behind him lay a great nullah
and, during the course of the battle, the enemy were enabled to
bring guns up to within five hundred yards on front and flank. It
was a ghastly day. Both flanks were driven back, and the line
became bent into the form of a horseshoe. The two cavalry
regiments, whose support should have been invaluable, behaved badly
and, early in the fight, left the field.

"After the first line gave way, everything went badly. Some of the
troops stood and died on the ground they held, others soon became a
mob of fugitives. The loss, as long as they held their positions,
was comparatively slight; but the grand total mounted up, during
the retreat.

"It was a hideous business, and one that I do not like to recall.
Men staggered along, overpowered by heat and thirst; falling, in
many cases without resistance, under the sabre of the pursuing
enemy. Had these fought properly, it is probable that not a single
man, except the cowardly cavalry, would have reached Kandahar to
tell the tale."

"Thank you, Major. You were also, I believe, in two or three
dashing affairs before Maiwand?"

"Yes, Colonel. Certainly one of the most successful was that which
Cavagnari, who was afterwards murdered at Kabul, made. It was not
much of an affair, but it shows what can be done with dash.

"In 1877 we were making a canal, to tap the Swat river at a point
where it enters British territory. Naturally, the Swat villagers on
the other side of the frontier considered that the operation was a
deep-laid plot for injuring them; and it was at the village of
Sappri that the chief went down, with a number of desperate men,
and murdered all the coolies engaged in the work. Cavagnari issued
orders that the chief must pay a heavy fine, in money and cattle;
and that the actual murderers must be tried for their crime. The
Khan, however, took no notice of the demand.

"Forty miles southeast of Sappri was the British cantonment of
Murdan, where the corps of Guides is permanently quartered. The
greater portion of these were, however, absent on another
expedition; and there remained available a few squadrons of
cavalry, and eleven companies of infantry.

"Cavagnari kept his plans a profound secret. He did not even give
the slightest hint of his intentions to their commanding officer,
Captain Wigram Battye. So well, indeed, was the secret kept, that
the officers were playing a game at racket when they were called
upon to start. The first intimation that the men had of the
movement was the serving out of ball cartridge, when the gates of
the fort were closed in the evening. The old soldiers were well
aware that this meant that fighting was at hand; and they gave a
great shout, which was the first intimation to the officers that
something was on foot. We were as glad as the men.

"Mules had been got in readiness, and the small detachment set off
on its long night march. The mules were picked animals and in good
condition, and were able to keep up with the men. After covering
thirty-two miles in seven hours, we halted at the frontier fort of
Abazai, seven miles south of Sappri.

"Beyond this point the country was impracticable for cavalry; and
the force, now consisting of two hundred and twelve men, dismounted
and marched forward on foot. After seven miles of severe toil, they
arrived in the vicinity of the hostile village; and Captain Battye
placed his men on the surrounding high ground, so as to completely
command the place, and cut off all retreat. His disposition had
been completed without arousing the enemy and, in a short time, day
broke.

"Cavagnari immediately sent in a demand, to the Khan, to surrender
the outlaws and pay the fine. The Khan refused to comply with the
terms. There was a short but desperate fight, in which the Guides
were victorious, the Khan and many of his leading men were killed,
and the village captured. The fine was then exacted, and the troops
marched back to Fort Abazai.

"This was a fine example of a punitive expedition thoroughly well
managed. The movements were made with secrecy and rapidity. Horses,
men, and mules were all in readiness. The cavalry were, on an
emergency, prepared to perform the role of infantry; while the
little party of infantry were ready to ride thirty miles, on mules,
with the cavalry. In this raid the Guides covered forty-eight
miles, without a halt; but the perfect success that attended the
expedition is not often attained, especially when, as in this case,
the force is unprovided with guns. Two or three little mountain
guns make all the difference in expeditions of this kind for,
though the Afridis will stand musketry fire pluckily enough, they
begin to flinch as soon as guns, however small, open upon them.

"There is no more awkward business than an attack upon hill forts
that are well held, for some of them are really formidable. I was
present at the storming of Nilt fort, and the fight near
Chillas--both of them awkward affairs--and in the fight at
Malandrai. There had, for some time, been a state of hostilities
between Malandrai, two miles across the border, and Rustam on our
side of it. Information was received that several of the most
important of the enemy's raiders, and a considerable number of
cattle would, on a certain night, be at Malandrai; and it was
arranged that two companies of Guides should start in the afternoon
for Rustam, twenty-five miles distant, which they would reach after
dark. At this place they were to take a short rest, and were then
to follow the difficult tracks through the hills, and appear on a
commanding spur in the rear of the village, at dawn. The frontal
attack was to be made by six companies, who were to arrive before
the bridge in the small hours of the morning. A squadron of Bengal
cavalry were to move independently, and to cut off any of the enemy
who might escape from the frontal attack.

"The turning party arrived after a march of eighteen hours, through
a terribly rough country. The main body, unfortunately,
miscalculated their distance and, instead of halting in the gorge
leading to the village, in which it was known that pickets had been
placed, they came suddenly upon the enemy's outposts. These fired a
volley, killing the colonel and some of the men. The surprise,
therefore, as a surprise failed; but an attack was made in the
morning, the village taken, and the turning party extricated from
its dangerous position. That is a good example of the difficulty of
attacking a hill fort.

"Another instance is the attack upon Nilt fort. The place was one
of great natural strength; the fort, which was a large one, faced
the junction of three precipitous cliffs, several hundred feet
high, where a great ravine runs into the Hunza river. Owing to the
nature of the ground, the fort could not be seen till the force was
within three hundred yards of it; and fire could not be properly
opened upon it until within two hundred and fifty yards.

"The walls of the fort were of solid stone, cemented by mud, and
strengthened by strong timbers. They were fourteen feet in height,
and eight feet in thickness; and were surmounted by flanking towers
and battlements, which afforded the defenders a perfect cover. In
front of the main gate was a loopholed wall, completely hiding the
gateway; and in front of this again was a very deep ditch, filled
with abattis; while a broad band of abattis filled the space
between the ditch, and a precipitous spur from the adjacent
mountain. This spur was, unfortunately, inaccessible for guns and,
though our infantry mounted it, their fire had no effect upon the
enemy, sheltered as they were behind their battlements.

"It was therefore necessary to make a direct attack, and storm the
fort on a front of only sixty yards. After a vain attempt to make
some impression on the forts with mountain guns, the order was
given to advance; and the Ghoorkhas, two hundred strong, and a
company of sappers dashed forward into the ravine facing the west
wall. A few of them managed to force their way into a weak point of
the abattis, under a heavy fire from the fort; and worked round to
a gateway. This was soon hacked down, and then they burst into the
courtyard.

"Captain Aylmer, R.E., set to work to place a charge of gun cotton
against the main entrenchment of the fort. After repeated failures,
the fuse was lighted and the gate blown in. Captain Aylmer was
severely wounded, in three places; and several of the men killed.

"So far the attack had been so astonishingly bold and quick that
the main body were unaware of the success; and Colonel Duran,
thinking the explosion was caused by the bursting of one of the
enemy's guns, continued steadily firing at the fort. The position
of the twenty men and three officers was precarious, indeed, as
they were thus exposed to a heavy fire from behind, as well as in
front. With splendid heroism, however, they held on to the
advantage they had gained till some reinforcements came up; and
then, pressing on through the shattered gate, they captured the
fort.

"For a fortnight after this the force remained inactive, for no way
of ascending the great ravine was known. At last, however, an
enterprising sepoy discovered a way, and on the 19th of December a
hundred men, under two lieutenants, were ordered to leave Nilt fort
under cover of darkness, drop silently down into the bed of the
ravine, and there await daylight.

"The portion of the enemy's position that had been selected for
attack was on the extreme left, on the crest of a cliff which rose,
without a break, fifteen hundred feet from the bed of the ravine.
Another force, a hundred and thirty-five men and six British
officers, with two guns, was to cover the advance of the storming
party. At eight o'clock in the morning, fire was opened upon the
enemy, as it was anticipated that the storming party were well up
the cliff by this time; but unfortunately, after ascending the
precipice halfway, they reached a point where the cliff was
absolutely impracticable, and were obliged to descend again into
the ravine.

"At two o'clock, having discovered a more practicable way, they
ascended again, foot by foot; their commander working his way up
with admirable judgment, moving from point to point, as opportunity
offered, between the showers of stones. The enemy were now fully
aware that the precipice was being scaled, and it was only the
well-directed fire of the covering party that prevented them from
issuing from their defences, and annihilating the party with rocks
and boulders.

"The summit was reached at half-past eleven, and the first of the
enemy's works captured. They rushed sangar after sangar, taking
them in rear and driving out the enemy pell mell, killing many and
capturing a large number of prisoners. At last the passage of the
great ravine was gained, and the British force enabled to move
forward again.

"The greatest credit was due to Lieutenant Manners-Smith; whose
conduct, in storming the height in broad daylight, was simply
magnificent; and the result showed the manner in which even young
officers can distinguish themselves, and how the native troops will
follow them, unhesitatingly, through dangers which would well appal
even the bravest.

"It is possible, however, to demand too much from our troops; as
was shown in the defence of Chillas. The post was held, in '93, by
three hundred men of the Kashmir Maharajah's bodyguard, under the
command of two British officers, Major Daniels and Lieutenant
Moberley. For some time, Daniels had been warned that he might be
attacked on the night of a Mohammedan feast. It was understood that
this was on the 3rd of March and, when the night passed quietly, it
was considered that the alarm had been a false one. During the next
night, however, a determined attack was made, by about a thousand
men; but was repulsed by steady volleys.

"Major Daniels then determined to take the offensive and attack the
enemy, who were swarming in great numbers into a neighbouring
village. At half-past three Moberley, with thirty-five men, went
out to attack the village. After severe fighting, and some loss, he
effected a lodgment in an outer line of houses; but being himself
badly wounded, and finding the village too strongly held for a
small party to make any further progress, he retired with his
detachment to the fort.

"The enemy continued a heavy fire until half-past eight, when Major
Daniels determined to attack them again; although their numbers
were now swollen to between four thousand and five thousand men. He
had with him only a hundred and forty available men, a number being
required to garrison the fort. Dividing his little force, however,
he attacked the village on two sides. The fight went on for two
hours, during which one of the two attacking parties gained a
partial footing in the village; but wounded men began to struggle
back to the fort, and reported that Major Daniels and many men had
been killed; and the remnants of the attacking party were brought
back, by a native officer, at half-past eleven. The casualties in
killed and wounded were very heavy, including the two British
officers, four native officers, and forty-six rank and file.
Fortunately the natives; believing, no doubt, that reinforcements
would arrive, scattered to their homes without further action.

"Here was a case in which the native troops were ordered to perform
what verged on the impossible. The houses in these native villages
are almost always fortified; and to take a hundred and fifty men,
to attack a place held by five thousand, was asking more than the
best British soldiers could be expected to achieve.

"At any rate, the stories I have told you will give you some idea
of the work we have before us. We may quite assume that such a
force as is now being collected can be trusted to defeat the
Afridis, if they venture to meet us in open fight; but if they
resort solely to harassing tactics, we shall have our work cut out
for us. It must be remembered, too, that the Afridis are far better
fighters, more warlike, and of far better physique than the men
engaged in the fights that I have been speaking of. They are
splendid shots, and are almost all armed with breech-loading
rifles, Sniders and Martinis. Their country is tremendously hilly
and, although it is wholly unknown to us, we do know that there are
ravines to be passed where a handful of men could keep an army at
bay."

"I was with the Sikhim expedition, in '88," one of the captains
said. "At that time I was in the Derbyshires. In this case it was
the wildness of the country, rather than the stoutness of the
defence of the Thibetans, that caused our difficulty. The force
consisted of a mountain battery of four guns, two hundred men of
our regiment, four hundred of the Bengal Infantry, and seven
hundred men of the 32nd Pioneers. The men were all picked and of
good physique, as it was known that the campaign would be a most
arduous one. In addition to the usual entrenching tools, a hundred
and twenty short swords were issued to each regiment, and fifty per
cent of the followers were also supplied. These swords were to be
used for clearing away jungle. The country was very rugged, and the
work had to be done at the altitude of twelve thousand feet, where
the mountains are mostly covered with forest trees and undergrowth.

"The base from which we started was thirty miles northeast of
Darjeeling, and the first objective of the expedition was the fort
of Lingtu, forty miles distant. The advance was made in two
columns; the first consisting of two mountain guns, a hundred men
of the Derbyshires, and three hundred of the 32nd Pioneers, which
were to make for Lingtu; while the rest were to operate towards
Intchi, where the Rajah of Sikhim resided, and thus prevent
reinforcements from being sent to Lingtu.

"The latter column met with no opposition and, after accomplishing
their work, retired. The first column came across the enemy at
Jeluk, five miles short of Lingtu. Here the Thibetans had erected a
strong stockade, at the top of a very steep ascent; and had
barricaded the road with stone breastworks.

"The position was attacked, at seven in the morning, by a hundred
men of the 32nd Pioneers; supported by seventy-eight men of my
regiment. The guns had had to be left behind. The advance was slow
and, owing to the dense bamboo jungle through which we had to pass,
and the steepness of the road, great caution was necessary.

"When we had reached a spot within a few hundred yards of the
stockade, fire was suddenly opened on the Pioneers. These, however,
moved on steadily, without replying till, having worked their way
close up to the stockade, they fired a volley; and then, with a
loud cheer, charged with bayonets fixed. The Derbyshire detachment
moved up into support, and the position was captured after a sharp
struggle.

"A small turning party, under Captain Lumsden, had been detached to
the left but, after proceeding a short distance, they found that
the road had been cleared to where it passed round a precipice; and
that it was defended by a party of the enemy, behind a stone
breastwork, at ten yards' range. Captain Lumsden and several of his
men were knocked over, and the party were brought to a complete
stand. So thick was the jungle that they did not know what was
going on, on either side; and the first intimation they received,
of the capture of the fort, was the descent of a party of
Derbyshires in the rear of the breastworks.

"The stockade, when it was examined, turned out to be a most
formidable one; about two hundred yards long, both flanks resting
on impassable precipices. It was constructed of logs laid
horizontally, with a thick abattis of twelve trees.

"Next morning the advance on Lingtu was continued, in a dense mist.
Information was obtained, from a prisoner, that they would have to
cross a spot where there was a stone shoot, down which an avalanche
of rocks could be hurled by the defenders. They therefore advanced
with great caution, while a party of the Pioneers crept along the
crest of the ridge, and attacked from the rear the party gathered
at the head of the stone shoot. The road was steep and broken, and
the partially-melted snow lay two feet deep on it. The Pioneers
captured the stone shoot without loss, and then pushed on over the
hills and, without firing a shot, charged straight at the fort; and
burst their way through the main gate, before the astonished
Thibetans had realized what was happening.

"Of course, as it was against an enemy of such poor fighting
quality as the Thibetans, this little affair affords no idea of the
resistance that we can expect in the Tirah; but it does show what
can be accomplished by our men, in the face of immense natural
difficulties."



Chapter 8: The Dargai Pass.


There was the greatest joy among the Pioneers, when they received
instructions to prepare for an advance to Khusalghar. Officers and
men alike were in the highest spirits, and not the least pleased
was Lisle, who had begun to tire of the monotony of camp life. The
mention of the place at which they were to assemble put an end to
the discussion, that had long taken place, as to route to be
followed. Six days' easy march along a good road would take them to
Shinawari and, in three or four days more, they would get into the
heart of the Tirah.

Illustration: Map illustrating the Tirah Campaign.

Much would depend on the conduct of the Orakzais, a powerful tribe
whose country lay between Kenmora and that of the Zakka-Khels. The
latter had indeed declared against us, but they were known to be
very half hearted; for they felt that, lying as they did close to
the British frontier, they would be sure to suffer most if we
obtained the upper hand. It was hoped therefore that, after making
a show of resistance, they would try to come to terms with us.

The regiment was told that it would have to provide its own
carriage, and two or three days were spent in buying up all the
ponies and mules in the neighbourhood. All the heavy baggage was
packed up and left in store, and the regiment marched from the town
in light order, with their drums and fifes playing a merry march,
and the men in high spirits.

"It is worth two years in a dull cantonment, Bullen," one of the
lieutenants remarked to Lisle.

"It is glorious," Lisle said, "though I expect we shall have some
hard fighting; for they say that the Zakka-Khels and their allies
can place fifty thousand in the fighting line and, as our column is
reported to be twenty thousand strong, we shall all have our work
to do. In the open they would, of course, have no chance with us
but, as the fighting will be done in guerrilla fashion, from hills
and precipices, our task will be no easy one. The guarding of the
tremendous convoy we must take with us will, in itself, be
extremely difficult."

"Yes, I expect we shall get it hot. The loss is almost sure to be
heavy, but that will not prevent us from turning them out of their
fastnesses."

"I wish they would let us all carry rifles, instead of swords,"
Lisle said. "It will be beastly having nothing to do but wave one's
sword, while they are potting at us. I don't think I should mind
the heaviest fire, if I could reply to it; but to be compelled to
stand by idly, while the men are blazing away, would be enough to
drive me mad."

"I dare say when the fighting begins, Bullen, you will soon find
that there are plenty of rifles disengaged; and I don't see any
reason why an officer should not pick up one of them, and take his
share in firing, till he has to lead the men on to an attack."

Lisle was now nearly eighteen, of medium height, with light active
figure, and likely to be able to undergo any hardships.

On their arrival at Khusalghar, they found that several regiments
were already there, with an enormous amount of stores and baggage.
The officers lost no time in examining the fort, that had been so
nobly held by a party of Sikhs who, having for a long time held the
enemy in check, had fought to the last when they burst in. One by
one the noble fellows fell. One wounded man, lying on a pallet,
shot three of the enemy before he was killed; and the last survivor
of the little force shut himself up in a little chamber, and killed
twenty of his assailants before he was overcome. Not a single man
escaped, and their defence of the little fort is a splendid example
of the fidelity and bravery of our Sikh soldiers.

After a few days' stay at this place, the regiment marched on to
Shinawari; and here remained for some little time, until the column
was made up. It was known that the Zakka-Khels and their allies had
marched down and taken up their position near the Dargai hill; and
