the water in this well is the only means of appeasing the thirst of the
thousands that live in this neighbourhood.  They held a meeting, and
requested me to keep the water from going down lower; so I am holding
it up for the public good."

"What will be your reward?" asked the Wolf.

"They will give me a pension, and save me the trouble of going about
every day in quest of food, not to speak of innumerable other
privileges that will be granted me.  Further, I am not to stay here all
day.  I have asked a kinsman of mine, to whom I have communicated the
secret of holding up the water, to relieve me from time to time.  Of
course he will also get a pension, and have other privileges.  I expect
him here shortly."

"Ah, Reynard, may I relieve you, then?  May I hope to get a pension,
and other privileges?  You know what a sad lot is mine, especially in
winter."

"Certainly," said the Fox, "but you must get a long rope, that I may
come up and let you down."

So the Wolf got a rope.  Up came the Fox, and down went the Wolf; when
the former observed, with a laugh, "My dear sir, you may remain there
till doomsday, or till the owner of the well throws up your carcass,"
and left the place.

"Alas!" said the Wolf, when it was too late, "_greed hath its meed!_"



The Fawn and the Little Tiger

A Fawn met a little Tiger, and said: "What fine stripes you have!"

The little Tiger said: "What fine spots you have!"

Then the Fawn said: "It would be such a nice thing if you and I were to
live together as friends.  We might then roam through the woods as we
like, and be so happy!"

"I think so too," said the Tiger.

The two joined hands, and went out for a long walk.  It was breakfast
time.  The Fawn saw some fine grass in the lawn, and said to himself:
"One should first see his friend fed and then feed."  So he turned to
the Tiger and said, "Will you have some of this fine grass for your
breakfast?"

The Tiger put his nose to the grass but could not bring himself to feed
upon it, because it was against his nature; so he replied, "I am so
sorry, I cannot eat it!"

Then the Fawn said: "Allow me to go home for one moment and ask mamma
for something that would suit you for breakfast."

So the Fawn went home and told the Hind of the happy friendship he had
formed, and of all that had happened since.

The Hind replied, "Child, how lucky it is that you have come away!  You
must know the Tiger is the most deadly enemy we have in the woods."

At these words the Fawn drew near to his dam and trembled.

The Hind said: "_It is indeed lucky to get away from the wicked at the
first hint!_"



The Fox and the Villagers

A Fox that had long been the dread of the village poultry yard was one
day found lying breathless in a field.  The report went abroad that,
after all, he had been caught and killed by some one.  In a moment,
everybody in the village came out to see the dead Fox.  The village
Cock, with all his hens and chicks, was also there, to enjoy the sight.

The Fox then got up, and, shaking off his drowsiness, said: "I ate a
number of hens and chicks last night; hence I must have slumbered
longer than usual."

The Cock counted his hens and chicks, and found a number wanting.
"Alas!" said he, "how is it I did not know of it?"

"My dear sir," said the Fox, as he retreated to the wood, "it was last
night I had a good meal on your hens and chicks, yet you did not know
of it.  A moment ago they found me lying in the field, and you knew of
it at once.  _Ill news travels fast!_"



Tinsel and Lightning

A piece of Tinsel on a rock once said to a Pebble: "You see how bright
I am!  I am by birth related to the lightning."

"Indeed!" said the Pebble; "then accept my humble respects."

Some time after, a flash of lightning struck the rock, and the Tinsel
lost all its brilliancy by the scorching effects of the flash.

"Where is your brilliancy now?" said the Pebble.

"Oh, it is gone to the skies," said the Tinsel, "for I have lent it to
the lightning that came down a moment ago to borrow it of me."

"Dear me!" said the Pebble; "_how many fibs doth good bragging need!_"



The Glow-worm and the Daw

A Jackdaw once ran up to a Glow-worm and was about to seize him.  "Wait
a moment, good friend," said the Worm; "and you shall hear of something
to your advantage."

"Ah! what is it?" said the Daw.

"I am but one of the many Glow-worms that live in this forest.  If you
wish to have them all, follow me," said the Glow-worm.

"Certainly!" said the Daw.

Then the Glow-worm led him to a place in the wood where a fire had been
kindled by some woodmen, and pointing to the sparks flying about, said:
"There you find the Glow-worms warming themselves around a fire.  When
you have done with them, I will show you some more, at a distance from
this place."

The Daw darted at the sparks, and tried to swallow some of them; but
his mouth being burnt by the attempt, he ran away exclaiming, "Ah, the
Glow-worm is a dangerous little creature!"

Said the Glow-worm with pride: "_Wickedness yields to wisdom!_"



The Lion and the Gadfly

Once a Lion was sleeping in his den at the foot of a great mountain
when a Gadfly that had been sipping the blood from his mouth bit him
severely.  The Lion started up with a roar, and catching the Fly in his
huge paws, cried: "Villain, you are at my mercy!  How shall I punish
your impudence?"

"Sire," said the Fly, "if you would pardon me now, and let me live, I
shall be able to show ere long how grateful I am to you."

"Indeed!" said the Lion; "who ever heard of a Gadfly helping a Lion?
But still I admire your presence of mind and grant your life."

Some time after, the Lion, having made great havoc on the cattle of a
neighbouring village, was snoring away in his den after a heavy meal.
The village hunters approached with the object of surrounding him and
putting an end to his depredations.

The Fly saw them, and hurrying into the den, bit the Lion.  He started
up with a roar as before, and cried: "Villain, you will get no pardon
this time!"

"Sire," said the Fly, "the village hunters are on their way to your
den; you can't tarry a moment here without being surrounded and killed."

"Saviour of my life!" cried the lion as he ran up the mountain.
"_There is nothing like forgiving, for it enables the humblest to help
the highest_."



The Sunling

In the good old days a Clown in the East, on a visit to a city kinsman,
while at dinner pointed to a burning candle and asked what it was.  The
city man said, in jest, it was a Sunling, or one of the children of the
sun.

The Clown thought that it was something rare; so he waited for an
opportunity, and hid it in a chest of drawers close by.  Soon the chest
caught fire, then the curtains by its side, then the room, then the
whole house.

After the flames had been put down, the city man and the Clown went
into the burnt building to see what remained.  The Clown turned over
the embers of the chest of drawers.  The city man asked what he was
seeking for.  The Clown said: "It is in this chest that I hid the
bright Sunling; I wish to know if he has survived the flames."

"Alas," said the city man, who now found out the cause of all the
mischief, "_Never jest with fools!_"



The Despot and the Wag

A Despot in the East wished to have a great name as a very munificent
prince, so he gave large presents to every one of note that came to his
court, but at the same time his officers had secret orders to waylay
the recipients of his gifts and recover them.

In this manner many a man had been rewarded and plundered.  Once a wag
came to court, and amused every one by his drolleries.  The King gave
him a great many presents, including a horse.  After taking leave of
the King and his courtiers, the Wag bundled up the presents and put
them over his shoulders, and mounting the horse, facing the tail, was
going out.  The King asked him why he acted in that manner.

"Sire," said the Wag, "simply to see if your officers were coming
behind, that I may at once hand over the bundle to them and go about my
business."

The Despot was abashed, and stopped giving any more presents, saying:
"_Giving is but giving in vain, when we give to take again_."



The Crane and the Fool

In the East there lived a Fool, who went one day to his fields and
said: "I sowed a month ago; should the crops stand two months more, I
shall get three hundred bushels of corn.  But I am in a hurry, so if I
should reap now, I dare say I shall have one hundred bushels at least."

A Crane who heard his words said: "If I were you, I should have all the
three hundred bushels this very day."

"How?" said the Fool.

"Why," said the Crane, "you stored up water in the tank to feed the
crops for three months.  A month has elapsed, so water enough for two
months more remains in the tank.  Should you open the sluices and let
all the water flow into the fields, you will have all the corn at once."

"Are you sure I shall have all the corn at once?" said the Fool.

"Oh, yes," said the Crane, "there is not the slightest doubt.  My
geographical knowledge is extensive, for I have travelled over a great
part of the world; so you may depend on my wide knowledge and
experience."

The Fool then let all the water flow into the fields.  The Crane
invited his kindred, and they together ate all the big fish left in the
tank first, and then, hovering over the fields, picked up all the small
fish that had gone out with the water.  A great portion of the crops
was swept away; what remained was soon buried in the mud.

The Fool sat on the bank of the lake and wept, saying: "The Crane's
geography ruined me."

"My friend," said the Crane, "my geography was as good as your
arithmetic.  _It is all the same whether you fall into the ditch from
this side or that!_"



The Lion and the Goat

A Lion was eating up one after another the animals of a certain
country.  One day an old Goat said: "We must put a stop to this.  I
have a plan by which he may be sent away from this part of the country."

"Pray act up to it at once," said the other animals.

The old Goat laid himself down in a cave on the roadside, with his
flowing beard and long curved horns.  The Lion on his way to the
village saw him, and stopped at the mouth of the cave.

"So you have come, after all," said the Goat.

"What do you mean?" asked the Lion.

"Why, I have long been lying in this cave.  I have eaten up one hundred
elephants, a hundred tigers, a thousand wolves, and ninety-nine lions.
One more lion has been wanting.  I have waited long and patiently.
Heaven has, after all, been kind to me," said the Goat, and shook his
horns and his beard, and made a start as if he were about to spring
upon the Lion.

The latter said to himself: "This animal looks like a Goat, but it does
not talk like one, so it is very likely some wicked spirit in this
shape.  Prudence often serves us better than valour, so for the present
I shall return to the wood," and he turned back.

The Goat rose up and, advancing to the mouth of the cave, said, "Will
you come back to-morrow?"

"Never again," said the Lion.

"Do you think I shall be able to see you, at least, in the wood
to-morrow?"

"Neither in the wood, nor in this neighbourhood any more," said the
Lion, and running to the forest, soon left it with his kindred.

The animals in the country, not hearing him roar any more, gathered
around the Goat, and said: "_The wisdom of one doth save a host_."



The Man and His Piece of Cloth

A Man in the East, where they do not require as much clothing as in
colder climates, gave up all worldly concerns and retired to a wood,
where he built a hut and lived in it.

His only clothing was a Piece of Cloth which he wore round his waist.
But, as ill-luck would have it, rats were plentiful in the wood, so he
had to keep a cat.  The cat required milk to feed it, so a cow had to
be kept.  The cow required tending, so a cowboy was employed.  The boy
required a house to live in, so a house was built for him.  To look
after the house, a maid had to be engaged.  To provide company for the
maid, a few more houses had to be built, and people invited to live in
them.  In this manner a little township sprang up.

The man said: "_The farther we seek to go from the world and its cares,
the more they multiply!_"



The Tiger, the Fox, and the Hunters

A Fox was once caught in a trap.  A hungry Tiger saw him and said, "So
you are here!"

"Only on your account," said the Fox, in a whisper.

"How so?" said the Tiger.

"Why, you were complaining you could not get men to eat, so I got into
this net to-day, that you may have the men when they come to take me,"
said the Fox, and gave a hint that if the Tiger would wait a while in a
thicket close by, he would point out the men to him.

"May I depend upon your word?" said the Tiger.

"Certainly," said the Fox.

The hunters came, and, seeing the Fox in the net, said: "So you are
here!"

"Only on your account," said the Fox, in a whisper.

"How so?" said the men.

"Why, you were complaining you could not get at the Tiger that has been
devouring your cattle.  I got into this net to-day that you may have
him.  As I expected, he came to eat me up, and is in yonder thicket,"
said the Fox, and gave a hint that if they would take him out of the
