The twins hunched forward slightly at their desks. Their eyes brightened
in anticipation. "No-o?..." said the one who had been waiting for
Muldoon. "Why?"

"With some four pages of brokers in the classified directory, you don't
have to advertise for one. And a live wire broker gets that reputation
as a salesman. Without selling, the wire is dead."

The twins beamed at each other.

"Evin," said the one to the left, "I think we've found our man. Will you
go out and tell those waiting?"

They waited for the twin to return.

"I am Robert Reeger, my brother Evin," said the first twin.

Muldoon introduced himself. There was no handshaking.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You are right about the ad," Robert Reeger said. "We worded it that way
for a reason. We wanted a man of quick intelligence. Mind you, now, we
do want a broker, and one who will do no selling. The 'live wire' part
was my brother Evin's thought. He does sometimes have clever ideas."

Robert stopped to beam at his twin. "Just now," Robert returned to
Muldoon, "I won't go into full discussion of our plans. Briefly,
however, we are buyers, buyers, we hope, of a particular area. Because
of what we have in mind to do we would rather it was done quietly and
without any publicity. Had we engaged the services of a large agency
this would not be possible, for, if I may coin a phrase, the trumpet
must blow strongly to announce the coming of genius." He smiled, stroked
his chin, looked up at the ceiling and his lips moved silently as if he
enjoyed repeating the phrase.

"I like that, Robert," Evin said.

"Yes, I thought it was good," Robert said.

They both looked to Muldoon.

Muldoon said nothing.

The twins sighed audibly, in unison.

Robert's lips came forward in a pout. The look of a pouting cherub,
Muldoon thought, one trying to look stern, and only succeeding in
looking naughty-childish. Muldoon suddenly knew of whom the twins
reminded him. Twin Charles Laughtons, without hair.

"You _are_ free to work for us?" Robert asked.

"_With_ you," Muldoon said. "_I_ have the license." He gave them a quick
smile, as if to lessen the sharpness of the tone he had used. "A broker
acts for a client in the purchase or sale of property. He can't be
employed by them."

"Of course," Robert said quickly. "I did not mean to imply any other
action. Now suppose you tell us briefly about yourself."

Muldoon gave them a thumbnail sketch of his career. He noted their
pleased look that he was a one-man agency. At the conclusion, Robert
stood up and came around the desk. He thrust a hand at Muldoon.

Like shaking hands with a piece of warm dough, Muldoon thought.

"I do believe," Robert said as he placed a heavy arm around Muldoon's
shoulder, and walked him to the door, "that we shall have a mutually
happy relationship. You will not be unrewarded, moneywise." He opened
the door, paused, still with his arm around Muldoon, and looked steadily
into Muldoon's eyes. "Yes, I think there will be mutual benefits in our
relationship. Now, in conclusion, will you pick us up at this office
tomorrow morning at nine?"

Muldoon nodded.

"Good! Then 'bye now, Mr. Muldoon, and thanks so much for coming by in
answer to our ad."

The answer to an irritating thought came to Muldoon while he was waiting
for an elevator to take him to the ground floor. He knew where he had
seen the same kind of look as was in Robert Reeger's eyes when they had
parted. In the eyes of a cat Muldoon had once seen toying with a mouse
the cat had caught....

Deena Savory was a redhead, a green-eyed redhead with a kind of
patrician look about her face that came off very well in the photographs
they took of her. Deena was a model, and made three times the money
Kevin Muldoon made.

It had always been a sore point between them, and more than once the
reason for their worst quarrels.

She was also the worst cook in New York.

Monday evenings were spent in Deena's small apartment on East
Fifty-Sixth Street, and she usually cooked dinner for Muldoon.
Invariably it was steak. Deena had no imagination when it came to food.
Even in restaurants she ordered one or another kind of steak.

They were together on the couch, she stretched full-length, her head in
Muldoon's lap. He was telling her about the Reeger twins and what had
happened that morning. His hands caressed her lightly as she spoke, now
across her cheeks, now more intimately.

"... I don't dig them, Honey," he said, as if in recapitulation. "The
Robert twin, f'r instance. 'You will not be unrewarded, moneywise.'
Madison Avenue and Nineteenth Century English...."

She gently took his hand from where he seemed to find most comfort, and
put it up to her cheek. "What's the difference?" she asked. "So long as
there's money in it?"

"Broker's commission," he said. "No more or less."

"You've been getting so much of that, lately?"

