It could have been, of course. Caterpillars breathe like all insects at
every stage of their development. But furry caterpillars breathe through
openings which are covered over with matted fur. Here, that matted fur
acted to filter the air. The eggs of the caterpillars had been laid
before the puffballs were ready to burst. The time of spore-bearing
would be over before the grubs were butterflies or moths. These
creatures were safe against all enemies--even men. But men groped and
blundered in the darkness simply because they did not think to take the
fur garments they wore and hold them to their noses to serve as
gas-masks or air-filters. The time for that would come, but not yet.

With the docility of despair, Burl's tribe followed him through all the
night. When the sky began to pale in the east, they numbly resigned
themselves to death. But still they followed.

And in the very early gray light--when only the very ripest of the red
puffballs spouted toward a still-dark sky--Burl looked harassedly about
him and could have groaned. He was in a little circular clearing, the
deadly red things all about him. There was not yet light enough for
colors to appear. There was merely a vast stillness everywhere, and a
mocking hint of the hot and peppery scent of death-dust--now turned to
mud--all about him.

Burl dropped in bitter discouragement. Soon the misty dust-clouds would
begin to move about; the reddish haze would form above all this
space....

Then, quite suddenly, he lifted his head and whooped. He had heard the
sound of running water.

His followers looked at him with dawning hope. Without a word to them,
Burl began to run. They followed hastily and quickened their pace when
his voice came back in a shout of triumph. In a moment they had emerged
from the tangle of fungus growths to stand upon the banks of a wide
river--the same river whose gleam Burl had seen the day before, from the
farther side of the red puffball plain.

Once before, Burl had floated down a river upon a mushroom raft. That
journey had been involuntary. He had been carried far from his tribe and
Saya, his heart filled with desolation. But now he viewed the
swiftly-running current with delight.

He cast his eyes up and down the bank. Here and there it rose in a low
bluff and thick shelf-fungi stretched out above the water. They were
adaptations of the fungi that once had grown on trees and now fed upon
the incredibly nourishing earth-banks formed of dead growing things.
Burl was busy in an instant, stabbing the relatively hard growths with
his spear and striving to wrench them free. The tribesmen stared
blankly, but at a snapped order they imitated him.

Soon two dozen masses of firm, light fungus lay upon the shore. Burl
began to explain what they were for, but Dor remonstrated. They were
afraid to part from him. If they might embark on the same fungus-raft,
it would be a different matter. Old Tama scolded him shrilly at the
thought of separation. Jon trembled at the mere idea.

Burl cast an apprehensive glance at the sky. Day was rapidly
approaching. Soon the red puffballs would burst and shoot their
dust-clouds into the air. This was no time to make stipulations. Then
Saya spoke softly.

Burl made the suggested great sacrifice. He took the gorgeous velvet
cloak of moth-wing from his shoulder and tore it into a dozen long,
irregular pieces along the lines of the sinews reinforcing it. He
planted his spear upright in the largest raft, fastening the other
cranky craft to it with the improvised lines.

In a matter of minutes the small flotilla of rafts bobbed in the stream.
One by one, Burl settled the folk upon them with stern commands about
movement. Then he shoved them out from the bank. The collection of
uneasy, floating things moved slowly out from shore to where the current
caught them. Burl and Saya sat on the same section of fungus, the other
trustful but frightened tribes-people clustered timorously about.

As they began to move between the mushroom-lined banks of the river,
and as the mist of nighttime lifted from its surface, columns of red
dust spurted sullenly upward on the plain. In the light of dawn the
deadly red haze was forming once more over the puffball plain.

By that time, however, the unstable rafts were speeding down the river,
bobbing and whirling in the stream, with wide-eyed people as their
passengers gazing in wonderment at the shores.

Five miles downstream, the red growths became less numerous and other
forms of fungus took their places. Moulds and rusts covered the ground
as grass did on more favored planets. Toadstools showed their creamy,
rounded heads, and there were malformed things with swollen trunks and
branches mocking the trees that were never seen in these lowlands. Once
the tribesmen saw the grisly bulk of a hunting-spider outlined on the
river-bank.

All through the long day they rode the current, while the insect life
that had been absent in the neighborhood of the death-plain became
abundant again. Bees once more droned overhead, and wasps and
dragonflies. Four-inch mosquitoes appeared, to be driven off with blows.
Glittering beetles made droning or booming noises as they flew. Flies of
every imaginable metallic hue flew about. Huge butterflies danced above
the steaming land and running river in seeming ecstasy at simply being
alive.

All the thousand-and-one forms of insect life flew and crawled and swam
and dived where the people of the rafts could see them. Water-beetles
came lazily to the surface to snap at other insects on the surface. The
shell-covered boats of caddis-flies floated in the eddies and
backwaters.

The day wore on and the shores flowed by. The tribesmen ate of their
food and drank of the river. When afternoon came the banks fell away and
the current slackened. The shores became indefinite. The river merged
itself into a vast swamp from which came a continual muttering.

The water seemed to grow dark when black mud took the place of the clay
that had formed its bed. Then there appeared floating green things which
did not move with the flowing water. They were the leaves of the
water-lilies that managed to survive along with cabbages and a very few
other plants in the midst of a fungus world. Twelve feet across, any one
of the green leaves might have supported the whole of Burl's tribe.

They became so numerous that only a relatively narrow, uncovered stream
flowed between tens of acres of the flat, floating leaves. Here and
there colossal waxen blossoms could be seen. Three men could hide in
those enormous flowers. They exhaled an almost overpowering fragrance
into the air.

And presently the muttering sound that had been heard far away grew in
volume to an intermittent deep-bass roar. It seemed to come from the
banks on either side. It was the discordant croaking of frogs, eight
feet in length, which lived and throve in this swamp. Presently the
tribesfolk saw them: green giants sitting immobile upon the banks, only
opening their huge mouths to croak.

Here in the swamps there was such luxuriance of insect life that a
normal tribal hunting-ground--in which tribesmen were not yet accustomed
to hunt--would seem like a desert by comparison. Myriads of little
midges, no more than three or four inches across their wings, danced
above the water. Butterflies flew low, seemingly enamoured of their
reflections in the glassy water.

The people watched as if their eyes would become engorged by the strange
new things they saw. Where the river split and split and divided again,
there was nothing with which they were familiar. Mushrooms did not grow
here. Moulds, yes. But there were cattails, with stalks like trees,
towering thirty feet above the waterways.

After a long, long time though, the streams began to rejoin each other.
Then low hills loomed through the thicker haze that filled the air here.
The river flowed toward and through them. And here a wall of high
mountains rose toward the sky, but their height could not be guessed.
They vanished in the mist even before the cloud-bank swallowed them.

The river flowed through a river-gate, a water-gap in the mountains.
While day still held fully bright, the bobbing rafts went whirling
through a narrow pass with sheer walls that rose beyond all seeing in
the mist. Here there was even some white water. Above it, spanning a
chasm five hundred feet across, a banded spider had flung its web. The
rafts floated close enough to see the spider, a monster even of its
kind, its belly swollen to a diameter of yards. It hung motionless in
the center of the snare as the humans swept beneath it.

Then the mountains drew back and the tribe was in a valley where, look
as they might, there was no single tawny-red puffball from whose
spreading range the tribesmen were refugees. The rafts grounded and they
waded ashore while still the day held. And there was food here in
plenty.

But darkness fell before they could explore. As a matter of precaution
Burl and his folk found a hiding-place in a mushroom-thicket and hid
until morning. The night-sounds were wholly familiar to them. The noise
of katydids was louder than usual--the feminine sound of that name gives
no hint of the sonorous, deep-toned notes the enlarged creatures
uttered--and that implied more vegetation as compared with straight
fungoid flora. A great many fireflies glowed in the darkness shrouding
the hiding-place, indicating that the huge snails they fed on were
plentiful. The snails would make very suitable prey for the tribesmen
also. But men were not yet established in their own minds as predators.

They were, though, definitely no longer the furtive vermin they had
been. They knew there were such things as weapons. They had killed ants
for food and a pirate-wasp as an exercise in courage. To some degree
they were acquiring Burl's own qualities. But they were still behind
him--and he still had some way to go.

The next day they explored their new territory with a boldness which
would have been unthinkable a few weeks before. The new haven was a
valley, spreading out to a second swamp at its lower end. They could not
know it, but beyond the swamp lay the sea. Exploring, because of
strictly practical purposes and not for the sake of knowledge, they
found a great trap-door in the earth, sure sign of the lair of a spider.
Burl considered that before many days the monster would have to be dealt
with. But he did not yet know how it could be done.

His people were rapidly becoming a tribe of men, but they still needed
Burl to think for them. What he could not think out, so far, could not
be done. But a part of the proof that they needed Burl to think for them
lay in the fact that they did not realize it. They gathered facts about
their environment. The nearest ant-city was miles away. That meant that
they would encounter its scouting foragers rather than working-parties.
The ant-city would be a source of small prey--a notion that would have
been inconceivable a little while ago. There were numerous giant
cabbages in the valley and that meant there were big, defenseless slugs
to spear whenever necessary.

They saw praying-mantises--the adults were eighteen feet tall and as big
as giraffes, but much less desirable neighbors--and knew that they would
have to be avoided. But there were edible mushrooms on every hand. If
one avoided spiders and praying-mantises and the meat-eating beetles; if
one were safely hidden at night against the amorous male spiders who
took time off from courtship to devour anything living that came their
way; and if one lived at high-tension alertness, interpreting every
sound as possible danger and every unknown thing as certain peril--then
one could live quite comfortably in this valley.

For three days the tribesmen felt that they had found a sort of
paradise. Jon had his belly full to bursting all day long. Tet and Dik
became skilled ant-hunters. Dor found a better spear and practiced
thoughtfully with it.

There were no red puffballs here. There was food. Burl's folk could
imagine no greater happiness. Even old Tama scolded only rarely. They
surely could not conceive of any place where a man might walk calmly
about with no danger at all of being devoured. This was paradise!

And it was a deplorable state of affairs. It is not good for human
beings to feel secure and experience contentment. Men achieve only by
their wants or through their fears. Back at their former
foraging-ground, the tribe would never have emulated Burl with any
passion so long as they could survive by traditional behavior. Before
the menace of the red puffballs developed, he had brought them to the
point of killing ants, with him present and ready to assist. They would
have stayed at about that level. The red dust had forced their flight.
During that flight they had achieved what was--compared to their former
timidity--prodigies of valor.

But now they arrived at paradise. There was food. They could survive
here in the fashion of the good old days before they learned the courage
of desperation. They did not need Burl to keep them alive or to feed
them. They tended to disregard him. But they did not disperse. Social
grouping is an instinct in human beings as it is in cattle or in schools
of fish. Also, when Burl was available there was a sense of pleasant
confidence. He had gotten them out of trouble before. If more trouble
came, he would get them out of it again. But why look for trouble?

Burl's tribesmen sank back into a contented lethargy. They found food
and hid themselves until it was all consumed. A part of the valley was
found where they were far enough from visible dangers to feel blissfully
safe. When they did move, though still with elaborate caution, it was
only to forage for food. And they did not need to go far because there
was plenty of food. They slipped back. Happier than they had ever been,
the foragers finally began to forget to take their new spears or clubs
with them. They were furtive vermin in a particularly favorable
environment.

And Burl was infuriated. He had known adulation. He was cherished, to be
sure, but adulation no longer came his way. Even Saya....

An ironically natural change took place in Saya. When Burl was a
chieftain, she looked at him with worshipful eyes. Now that he was as
other men, she displayed coquetry. And Burl was of that peculiarly
direct-thinking sort of human being who is capable of leadership but not
of intrigue. He was vain, of course. But he could not engage in
elaborate maneuvers to build up a romantic situation. When Saya archly
remained with the women of the tribe, he considered that she avoided
him. When she coyly avoided speech with him, he angrily believed that
she did not want his company.

When they had been in the valley for a week Burl went off on a bitter
journey by himself. Part of his motivation, probably, was a childish
resentment. He had been the great man of the tribe. He was no longer so
great because his particular qualities were not needed. And--perhaps
with some unconscious intent to punish them for their lessened
appreciation--he went off in a pet.

He still carried spear and club, but the grandeur of his costume had
deteriorated. His cloak was gone. The moth-antennae he had worn bound to
his forehead were now so draggled that they were ridiculous. He went off
angrily to be rid of his fellows' indifference.

He found the upward slopes which were the valley's literal boundaries.
They promised nothing. He found a minor valley in which a labyrinth
spider had built its shining snare. Burl almost scorned the creature. He
could kill it if he chose, merely by stabbing it though the walls of
its silken nest as it waited for unlucky insects to blunder into the
intricate web. He saw praying-mantises. Once he came upon that
extraordinary egg-container of the mantis tribe: a gigantic leaf-shaped
mass of solidified foam, whipped out of some special plastic compound
which the mantis secretes, and in which the eggs are laid.

He found a caterpillar wrapped in its thick cocoon and, because he was
not foraging and not particularly hungry, he inspected it with care.
With great difficulty he even broke the strand of silk that formed it,
unreeling several feet in curiosity. Had he meditated, Burl would have
seen that this was cord which could be used to build snares as spiders
did. It could also be used to make defenses in which--if built strongly
and well--even hunting-spiders might be tangled and dispatched.

But again he was not knowingly looking for things to be of use. He
coddled his sense of injury against the tribe. He punished them by
leaving them.

He encountered a four-foot praying-mantis that raised its saw-toothed
forelimbs and waited immobile for him to come within reach. He had
trouble getting away without a fight. His spear would have been a clumsy
weapon against so slender a target and the club certainly not quick
enough to counter the insect's lightning-like movements.

He was bothered. That day he hunted ants. The difficulty was mainly that
of finding individual ants, alone, who could be slaughtered without
drawing hordes of others into the fight. Before nightfall he had three
of them--foot-long carcasses--slung at his belt. Near sunset he came
upon another fairly recent praying-mantis hatchling. It was almost an
ambush. The young monster stood completely immobile and waited for him
to walk into its reach.

Burl performed a deliberate experiment--something that had not been done
for a very long time on the forgotten planet. The small, grisly creature
stood as high as Burl's shoulders. It would be a deadly antagonist.
Burl tossed it a dead ant.

It struck so swiftly that the motion of its horrible forearms could not
be seen. Then it ignored Burl, devouring the tidbit.

It was a discovery that was immediately and urgently useful.

On the second day of his aimless journey Burl saw something that would
