The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sinister Paradise, by Robert Moore Williams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Sinister Paradise

Author: Robert Moore Williams

Release Date: May 13, 2010 [EBook #32359]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SINISTER PARADISE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's note:

This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction September
1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.


    _It was like a mirage in reverse, this strange island off the
    California coast--it couldn't always be seen, but it was there--in
    Time._

    [Illustration]




_Sinister Paradise_

By Robert Moore Williams


"There's the island, Parker!" Retch called.

Bill Parker shifted the controls of the 'copter and the big craft swung
in the direction Retch was pointing. Squinting his eyes against the sun
glare rising from the Pacific, Parker clearly saw the island. It was
miles away as yet but it swam like a mirage suspended just above the
surface of the sea.

[Illustration]

The island was not large--Parker guessed it as probably being less than
two miles in circumference--but he could make out a fringe of trees
along the shore and a central peak rising like a cliff in the center.

"I've found it again!" Retch spoke with fierce satisfaction--clenched
fists. Parker heard the indrawn hiss of breath following the words; a
hiss that seemed to hold a promise for the future. Revenge, vengeance,
triumph, or something else? Parker could not determine what emotional
overtone had found expression in Retch's words. But the emotional
overtone was there. Out of the corner of his eyes, Parker glanced at the
man sitting in the seat next to him. What he saw did not please him.

Retch was big. He had the muscular build of a prize fighter. The scar
over his left cheekbone did not add to the attractiveness of his
appearance. He did not, in Parker's opinion, look like the scientist he
had claimed to be.

Parker shrugged such thoughts aside. What difference did it make what
Retch was, or the nature of his business here? He had paid charter
charges on the big helicopter.

"There it is, Parker!" Retch almost screamed the words. As he pointed
again toward the island in the far distance, Parker caught a glimpse of
a pistol in a shoulder holster under the man's arm.

The sight of the gun caused a split second of alarm in the big pilot. He
had not known that Retch was armed. Then the alarm subsided. Parker
pressed his left arm down against his body, assuring himself that his
own gun was where it belonged.

The woman, Mercedes Valdar, seemed to catch some of Retch's excitement.
She leaned forward across Retch's shoulder to stare at the island.
Parker caught another whiff of the musky perfume that she used. He
noticed again what he had realized the first time he met her--that in
any man's language she was a beauty. Aquiline face, smouldering black
eyes, high cheek bones, a delicate brown complexion that hinted at
Indian blood back several generations in the past, she looked like
something out of an exotic movie. The slacks and sport coat that she
wore accentuated the fact that she was a woman.

Parker was aware again of the enigma of her presence. Retch had
introduced her as his secretary. Parker, accepting the man's statement,
had asked no questions. Asking questions in a matter such as this was a
fine way to get a bust in the snoot.

"It ees the island!" Her whisper was sharp. A glow appeared on her face.
"Soon we will be reech!" She slapped Parker heartily on the shoulder.
"Beel, is not that wonderful!"

"It sure is," Parker answered. He was as astonished by the statement as
he was by the slap on the shoulder.

"Shut up, Mercedes!" Retch spoke. "Parker, turn some juice into this
thing."

"She's cruising at about her best speed," Parker answered.

"Then get her faster than cruising speed. We've found the island." His
manner indicated that finding the island was very important but that
something else perhaps of equal importance remained to be done.

"What's the big rush!" Parker countered. "You don't think it will vanish
before we get there, do you?"

A startled look appeared on Retch's face. "No, of course not. That is--"

A thudding jar went through the ship.

"What 'appened?" Mercedes screamed in fear.

With a snarling crash of breaking metal, one of the helicopter blades
was yanked from its mounting above them.

Parker had the dazed impression that he saw the big blade jerked away
through the air. Then, like a leaf suddenly caught in a violent
hurricane, the helicopter began to turn flip-flops in the air.

"Do somesing!" Mercedes cried.

As the ship jumped and began to yaw, she was thrown across the cabin.
Jerking, buckling, jumping, twisting, the big helicopter lurched its way
toward the surface of the sea below. Cutting the power, Parker leaped
from his seat. He knew what was going to happen. He intended to try and
be ready for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Retch, gripping his seat with both hands, yelled. "We're falling!"

"It's not news to me," Parker answered, jerking open the door to the
compartment at the rear. Inside that compartment was a mass of synthetic
fabric. Tossed to the surface of the sea, inflated by the self-contained
flask of gas under pressure, it would make a rubber raft.

"You've left the controls!" Retch barked. "Do something to stop us.
We're going to fall." The man's face was wild with fear as he twisted
his head around to see what Parker was doing.

"You damned right I've left the controls!" Parker answered. "We've lost
the equivalent of a wing in an ordinary plane. If you know any way to
stop a plane from falling you tell me." Working with deft, sure hands,
he pulled the mass of synthetic fabric out of its compartment.

"But we've got to get to that island. We've found it. We've got to get
there while--"

"If we get there, we'll have to swim," Parker answered. "Personally,
I'll consider myself lucky to get there by swimming. Here we go."

The last was spoken as the helicopter began its final plunge to the
surface of the blue water below them.

Parker, with the mass of fabric clutched firmly in both hands, threw
himself flat on the floor.

The 'copter hit with a terrific thud. An instant later, Parker was on
his feet. The life raft was under one hand. With the other hand, he was
reaching for the handle that opened the cabin door.

"We've got to get out of here. This ship will go the bottom like a
rock."

Behind him, Mercedes and Retch were struggling to their feet. Parker
yanked on the handle that opened the cabin door.

The handle did not budge.

The heavy jolt the craft had taken when it struck the surface had
twisted the whole frame.

"Get that door open!" Retch moaned. "We'll be drowned like rats."

"Hell, I'm trying!" Parker answered. He yanked upward with all his
strength.

The door still did not budge.

Outside Parker could see the green water rising around the cabin.

He backed away, ducked his head, threw himself with all his strength
against the door.

Under the driving impact of his body, the door was knocked open. The
mass of synthetic fabric in his arms, Parker catapulted through the
opening and into the sea. He hit with a terrific splash. Mercedes
followed him. Parker, treading water and working with the valve that
would release the gas and inflate the raft, saw that Retch was still
standing in the door of the 'copter.

"What am I going to do?" Retch screamed.

"Jump."

"But I can't swim."

"Then wait until I get this goddamned raft inflated. Ugh!" Parker's
voice went into silence as arms came up out of the water and closed
around his neck with a grip of death.

Mercedes, in a panic that often comes to people catapulted suddenly and
unexpectedly into the water, was grabbing the nearest source of
potential safety.

"Let go!" Even as he spoke, Parker felt her arms close even tighter
around his neck. He knew then that she was not going to let go. She was
pulling him under with her.

Giving one final jerk at the valve of the gas container, Parker found
himself pulled under water.

The arms around his neck seemed to grip like iron. He caught them in
both hands, yanked at them. His hands slipped. He grabbed again. She was
behind him, on his back, so he could not slug her. Meanwhile each
passing second was sending both of them deeper into the sea. He yanked
at her arms again. This time his fingers held. Her grip was broken.

Twisting, he grabbed her hair. Then he began to fight his way to the
surface.

His head broke water. As he gulped air, he realized the blessed sight
before his eyes.

The rubber raft! His last jerk at the valve before Mercedes dragged him
under had opened it.

From the door of the sinking helicopter Retch was staring at the raft.
At the same instant in final desperation, he jumped. His clutching
fingers caught the edge of the rubber raft. Like a frightened river rat,
he pulled himself out of the water.

