"Are any of the people of this place out there on the lake?" the
officer in command of the twenty men asked; as Simon and his party,
bringing bread, fruit, and wine, came down to the waterside.

"No, sir," Simon replied. "We have but eight boats belonging to the
village, and they are all there. We are peaceable people, who till
the soil and fish the lake, and take no part in the doings of the
great towns. We are subjects of King Agrippa, and have no cause for
discontent with him."

"A great many other people have no cause for discontent, old man,"
the officer said; "but they have, nevertheless, risen in rebellion.
However, as your boats are here, and your people seem to have taken
no part in this matter, I have naught to say against you;
especially as your wine is good, and you have brought down plenty
of it."

Simon and his companions withdrew and, with aching hearts, watched
from a distance the massacre upon the lake. The fury, however,
produced among the men in the towns and villages on the shore, at
the sight of the numerous corpses washed ashore, was so great that
many of the young men left their avocations and started for Gamala;
which, relying upon the strength of its position--which was even
stronger than that of Jotapata--was resolved to resist to the last.

Several of the young men of the village, and many from the villages
near, were determined to take this course, maddened by the
slaughter of many friends and relations. John himself was as
furious as any, especially when the news came of the violation of
faith at Tarichea, and of the selling of nigh forty thousand men
into slavery.

"Father," he said, that evening, "I had thought to stay quietly
with you, until the Romans advanced against Jerusalem; but I find I
cannot do so. The massacre at Jotapata was bad enough, but the
slaughter of defenseless men, on the lake, is worse. I pray you,
let me go."

"Would you go into Gamala, and die there, John?" Simon asked.
"Better to die at the Temple, than to throw away your life here."

"I do not intend to go into Gamala, father, nor to throw away my
life--though I care little for it, except for the sake of you and
my mother and Mary--but I would do something; and I would save the
sons of our neighbors, and others, from the fate that assuredly
waits them if they enter Gamala. They know not, as I do, how surely
the walls will go down before the Roman engines; but even did they
know it, so determined are they to fight these slayers of our
countrymen that they would still go.

"What I propose to do is to carry out what I have always believed
to be the true way of fighting the Romans. I will collect a band,
and take to the mountains, and harass them whenever we may find
opportunity. I know the young men from our village will follow me,
if I will lead them; and they will be able to get their friends
along the shore to do the like. In that way the danger will not be
so great for, in the mountains, the Romans would have no chance of
overtaking us while, if we are successful, many will gather round
us, and we may do good service."

"I will not stay you, John, if you feel that the Lord has called
upon you to go; and indeed, you may save, as you say, the lives of
many of our neighbors, by persuading them to take to the hills with
you, instead of shutting themselves up in Gamala. Go down, then, to
the village, and talk to them; and see what they say to your plan."

John had little doubt as to his proposal being accepted by the
younger men of the village. The fact that he had been chosen as one
of the bodyguard of Josephus had, at once, given him importance in
the eyes of his neighbors; and that he should have passed through
the siege of Jotapata, and had escaped, had caused them to regard
him not only as a valiant fighter, but as one under the special
protection of God. Since his return, scarce an evening had passed
without parties coming, from one or other of the villages along the
shore, to hear from his lips the story of the siege.

As soon, then, as he went down to the fishing village, and told the
young men who had determined to leave for Gamala that he thought
badly of such action--but that he intended to raise a band, and
take to the mountains and harass the Romans--they eagerly agreed to
follow him, and to obey his orders. There were eight of them, and
John at once made them take an oath of obedience and fellowship;
swearing in all things to obey his orders, to be true to each other
to death, to be ready to give their lives, when called upon, for
the destruction of the Romans; and never, if they fell into the
hands of the enemy, to betray the secrets of the band, whatever
might be the tortures to which they were exposed.

John could have obtained more than eight men in the village, but he
would only take quite young men.

"I want only men who can undergo fatigue and watching; who can
climb mountains, and run as fast as the Roman horse can gallop.
Besides, for work like this it is necessary that there should be
one leader, and that he should be promptly obeyed. If I take older
men, they will naturally wish to have a voice in the ordering of
things. I have seen enough of military matters to know that, for
prompt decision and swift execution, one head--and one head
only--is necessary. Besides, we may find difficulties in the way of
getting food and, at first, I wish for only a small band. If
success attends us, we shall increase rapidly. Twenty will be quite
enough, to begin with."

As soon as the eight young men--of whom all but two were under
twenty years old--had taken the oath, they started at once to the
villages round.

"Do each of you gather in two, but no more," John said; "and let
them be those whom you know to be strong and active. Do not bring
more; and if four of you bring but one, so much the better. If you
find many more eager to join, you can tell them that we will send
for them, when the time comes, to increase our numbers; and pray
them to abide here, and not to go into Gamala.

"Let each bring his arms and a bag of meal; and meet me, tomorrow
evening at sundown, on the Hieromax River, three miles below
Capitolias--that will be opposite to Abila, which lies on the
mountain side. Let all travel singly, for the Roman horse may be
about. However, as we shall be walking east, while Gamala lies to
the west of south, they will not take us--should we come upon
them--for men going thither to aid in the defense of the town."

The young men started at once on their missions, full of confidence
in John; and feeling certain that, under his leadership, they
should soon come to blows with the Romans; being also, in their
hearts, well satisfied that their warfare would be in the open
country, and they should not be called upon to fight pent up in
walls from which there was no escape.

Having seen his followers off, John returned home, and told Simon
the progress he had made. The old man sighed.

"I do not seek to keep you, John; for your duty to your country
stands, now, in the first rank of all; and it may be that the Lord
preserved you, at Jotapata, because he intends you to do great
deeds for him, here. I do not say spare yourself, or avoid danger,
for our sakes. I only say, do not throw away your life by rashness.
Remember that, young as you are, you are a leader, and be prudent
as well as brave.

"After Gamala has fallen--as fall I fear it will--and the Romans
have moved away from these parts--as they will then do, for there
is no resistance to them, on this side of Jordan, save at that
town--I shall bring your mother and Mary back again; and you will
find us waiting here to welcome you, if you return. If not, my son,
I shall mourn for you, as Jacob mourned for Joseph--and more,
seeing that you are the only prop of my old age--but I shall have
the consolation of knowing that you died for your country."

"You will find in Mary a daughter, father; and you must find a
husband for her, who will take my place. But it may be that if the
Romans march not direct upon Jerusalem--and they say that Vespasian
has arranged that two of the legions shall winter on the sea coast,
at Caesarea, and the third at Scythopolis--it is probable that he
will not move against Jerusalem till the spring. In that case I may
be often here, during the winter. For I will not go down to
Jerusalem until the last thing; for there all is turmoil and
disturbance and, until the time comes when they must lay aside
their private feuds and unite to repel the invader, I will not go
down."

Father and son talked until late in the night. In the morning John
made his preparations for departure. He had told Jonas of his
intentions. The boy listened silently, only saying, "Wherever you
go, John, I am ready to go with you; it makes no difference to me;"
and afterwards went down to the lake side, where he filled his
pouch with smooth pebbles, each of which he selected with great
care for, when herding his goats among the mountains, Jonas had
been always practicing with a sling, and many a cony had fallen
before his unerring aim.

All the lads in the mountains were accustomed to the use of the
sling, but none in Jotapata had approached Jonas in their skill
with this weapon. During the siege he had often astonished John by
the accuracy of his aim; and had several times compelled the Romans
to cease working one of their machines, which specially harassed
the defenders of the wall, by striking down one after another of
those who directed it--his stones seldom failing to strike them
full in the face, the only spot unprotected by their armor.

In the morning, John prepared to start. He and Jonas each carried a
small sack, supported by a strap passing over the shoulders, and
containing some eight pounds of meal and a gourd of water. Jonas
carried no weapon, save a long knife hidden under his garment, and
his sling and pouch of stones. John carried a sword and buckler,
and a horn. Before they started, John knelt before his father and
received his blessing; and Simon, as he bade him adieu, gave him a
small bag of money.

"You will need to buy things in the mountains, lad; and I would not
that you should be driven, like the robber bands, to take food by
force. It is true that they who go not to the war should support
those who risk their lives for their country; but there are many
aged men who, like myself, cannot fight, there are many women whose
husbands are away in Gamala or Jerusalem, and these may not be able
to afford to assist others. Therefore, it is well that you should
have means of paying for what you require; otherwise the curse of
the widow and fatherless may fall upon you.

"And now, farewell, my son! May God have you in his keeping, and
send you home safe to your mother and me!"



Chapter 8: Among The Mountains.


Jonas was in high spirits as they started from the farm. He was
leaving no friends behind and, so long as he had John with him, he
was perfectly contented. He was delighted to be on the move again
for, although he had worked steadily in getting in the harvest,
regular labor was distasteful to him and, accustomed as he had been
to wander, for weeks, free and unchecked with his goats among the
mountains, the regular life and order of the farm were irksome to
him.

John, on the other hand, was silent; replying briefly to the boy's
questions. He felt the danger of the enterprise upon which he had
embarked, and his responsibility as leader; and the thought of the
grief which his father and mother would feel, did ought befall him,
weighed on his mind. Presently, however, he roused himself.

"Now, Jonas, you must keep a sharp lookout round for, if we see any
Roman soldiers in the distance, I must hide my sword and buckler
before they discover us, and you must stow away your sling and
pouch; then we will walk quietly on. If they question us, we are
going to stay with friends at Capitolias and, as there will be
nothing suspicious about us, they will not interfere with us. After
they have passed on, we will go back for our arms. We are not
traveling in the direction of Gamala, and they will have no reason
to doubt our story."

They did not, however, meet any of the parties of Roman horse who
were scouring the country, carrying off grain and cattle for the
use of the army; and they arrived, in the afternoon, on the bank of
the Hieromax. Upon the other side of the river rose the steep
slopes of Mount Galaad, high up on whose side was perched the
little town of Abila.

"Here we can wait, Jonas. We are nearly opposite the town. The
others will, doubtless, soon be here."

It was not long before the band made their appearance, coming along
in twos and threes as they had met on the river bank. By sunset the
last had arrived, and John found that each of his first recruits
had brought two others.

He looked with satisfaction at the band. The greater part of them
had been fishermen. All were strong and active; and John saw that
his order that young men, only, should be taken had been obeyed,
for not one of them was over the age of twenty-three and, as he had
laid it down, as an absolute rule, all were unmarried. All were,
like himself, armed with sword and buckler; and several had brought
with them bags with javelin heads, to be fitted to staves, later
on. All their faces bore a look of determination and, at the same
time, of gladness.

The massacre on the lake had excited the inhabitants of the shore
to fury, and even those who had hitherto held back from the
national cause were now eager to fight against the Romans; but many
shrunk from going to Gamala--which was, indeed, already as full of
fighting men as it could hold--and John's proposal to form a band,
for warfare in the mountains, had exactly suited the more
adventurous spirits.

All present were known to John, personally. Many of them were sons
of friends of Simon; and the others he had met at village
gatherings, or when fishing on the lake. There were warm greetings,
as each accession to the party arrived; and each member of the band
felt his spirits rise higher, at finding that so many of those he
knew, personally, were to be his comrades in the enterprise.

When the last comer had arrived, John said:

"We will now be moving forward. We had best get well up the
mountain, before night falls. It matters not much where we camp,
tonight; tomorrow we can choose a good spot for our headquarters."

It being now the height of the dry season, the river was low, and
they had no difficulty in wading across. Then they struck up the
hill, to the right of Abila, until they had fairly entered the
forests which clothed the lower slopes of the mountains. Then John
gave the word for a halt.

Dead wood was soon collected, and a fire made. Cakes of meal were
baked in the ashes and, after these had been eaten, the party lay
round the fire and, a few minutes later, John rose to his feet.

Illustration: John Incites his Countrymen to Harass the Romans.

"You all know the reason for which we are gathered together here.
We all long for vengeance on the oppressors of our country, the
murderers of our kinsmen and friends, the men who carry off our
women to shame and slavery in Rome. We are all ready to die, for
our country and our God; but we would fain die doing as much harm
to the Romans as we can, fighting like freemen in the open, instead
of rats slaughtered in a cage. That is why, instead of going into
Gamala, we have gathered here.

"I am the youngest among you; but I have so far assumed the
leadership because, in the first place, I have been much with
Josephus, who--although he may now, most unworthily, have gone over
to the Romans to save his life--was yet a wise governor, and a
great leader. From him, I have learned much of the Romans. In the
second place, I have seen more of their warfare than any of you,
having passed through the terrible siege of Jotapata. Lastly, I
believe that God, having saved me almost alone of all the host that
defended the town, has intended me as an instrument for his
service.

"Therefore have I taken upon myself the command, in the first
place, of this band; but at the same time, if you think that I am
too young, and would rather place another at your head, I will
stand aside, and release from their oath those who have already
sworn. I am not self seeking. I crave not the leadership over you,
and will obey whomsoever you may choose for your chief. But to
whomsoever is the leader, prompt obedience must be given; for there
must, even in a band like this, be order and discipline. We work
for a common good, but we must yield to the direction of one will,
and one head.

"Now, what say you? I will walk away, to leave you free to consult
one with another; and will abide by your decision, whatever it be.
Only the decision, once made, must be adhered to. There must be no
after grumbling, no hesitation or drawing back. You must have
absolute confidence, and give absolute obedience, to him whom you
choose. For only so can we hope to succeed in our enterprises."

John had gone but a short way among the trees, when he was called
back again. All had come prepared to follow him. His father had
always been a man of weight and position among the villagers on the
shore and, democratic as were the Jewish institutions, there was
yet a certain respect paid to those of position above their
fellows. John's experience and, especially, his escape from
Jotapata, seemed specially to mark him as one destined to play an
important part. And his quiet resolute bearing, now--the feeling
that he knew what was to be done, and how to do it; that he was, in
fact, their natural leader--came home to all, and it was with
sincerity that they assured him that they accepted him as their
leader.

"Very well," John said, quietly. "Then let those who have not
already taken the oath stand up, and do so."

This was done, and John then said:

"Now, I will tell you more of my plans; although these, of course,
cannot be in any way settled until we see how things turn out. It
is by watching for opportunities and seizing the right moment,
only, that we can hope for success. We are all ready to give our
lives for our country, but we do not wish to throw them away. We
want each of us to do as much as possible. We want to live, so as
to share in the defense of the Temple; therefore, we have to
combine prudence with daring.

"As for an attack upon any strong body of Roman troops, it would be
impossible--unless they attempt to follow us among the mountains.
One of our first duties will be to learn the country well, so that
we may know where to defend ourselves, should they come up after
us; where, from eminences, we can cast down rocks upon them; where
there are crags which we can climb, but up which their heavy-armed
soldiers cannot follow us. This is our first task for, as yet, they
have not commenced the siege of Gamala. When they do so, we must
draw down near them and hide ourselves, mark the position of their
camp, see how their tents are arranged, and where their sentries
are placed.

"Then we can begin work: sometimes falling upon their guards; at
other times creeping in past their sentries, scattering through the
camp and, at a given signal, firing their tents with the brands
from their fires; slaying those who first rush out, and then making
off again to the hills.

"Then, too, they will be sending great numbers of men up the hills,
to cut timber and branches for their embankments, their
breastworks, and the construction of the wattles to protect their
machines. We shall be in hiding and, when a party of men separates
from the rest, we will fall upon these; we will harass their
workers from a distance, always avoiding a regular combat, but
hindering their work, and wearing them out. Thus we may do better
service, to the defenders of Gamala, than if we were within the
walls.

"At present we have only swords, but we must get bows and arrows.
It would not have been safe to have carried them across the plains;
but we can procure them at Abila, or Jabez Galaad. I fear that we
shall not be able to interfere with the provisioning of the
army--for upon the plains we shall have no chance with their
cavalry--but, here in these mountains, stretching away over Peraea
into Arabia and Moab, we can laugh at pursuit by the Romans; and
even Agrippa's light-armed Arabs will have difficulty in following
us, and of them we need have little fear. At Jotapata we proved
ourselves a match for the Romans; and their light-armed troops will
not care to venture against us, alone, as they will not know our
numbers, and will fear being led into ambushes.

"There is one question which we have to consider, and that is food;
as to flesh, we shall have it in abundance. There will be many
flocks of goats, belonging to those in Gamala, straying among the
mountains without an owner; therefore of goats' milk and flesh we
can take abundance, but there will be a scarcity of grain. I have
some money with me, with which we can purchase it at Abila, and the
villages. As for Jabez Galaad, it is too close to Gamala; and the
Romans will probably ascend the hill and destroy it, or place a
guard there. At any rate, the money will be sufficient to purchase
meal for us, for some time--much longer, probably, than Gamala will
be able to hold out--and when that has fallen, it will be time to
arrange about the future. Only let us take nothing without payment;
let us not be like the robber bands, which prey upon the people,
until they long for the Romans as masters.

"Only we must remember that, while we desire now to do the Romans
as much harm as possible, this is but the beginning of our work;
and that we must save ourselves for the future. Gamala is but one
town; and we shall have plenty of opportunities for striking at the
enemy, in the future. We have put our hands to the plow now and, so
long as the war lasts, we will not look back. It may be that our
example may lead others to follow it and, in that case, the Romans'
difficulties will thicken, every day. Were there scores of bands of
determined men, like us, hanging around them; ready to attack small
bodies, whenever they venture away from their camps to gather in
provisions and forage, and to harass them, at night, by constant
alarms, we could wear them out.

"Only, we must always avoid a pitched battle. In irregular fighting
we are as good as they--better, for we can move more quickly--but
when it comes to fighting in order of battle, we have no chance
with them, whatever. Their cavalry, the other day outside Tarichea,
were like wolves among a flock of sheep. Nothing but disaster can
come of fighting in the plain. Every people should fight in the way
that suits them best, and an attempt to meet an enemy in their own
way of fighting is sure to lead to disaster. Let the Roman keep the
plain, with his cavalry and his heavy infantry; let the Jew, light
footed and swift, keep to the hills. He is as much superior, there,
as is the Roman in the plains.

"And now, we must establish signals. We will get horns, at Abila;
and I will fix upon signals. One long note will mean, gather to me;
two, fall back gradually; three, retire at once with all speed, to
the spot agreed upon, before setting out in the morning. Two short
notes will mean, advance and attack in the manner arranged; one
short note, oft repeated, will tell you the Romans are advancing,
sound your horns--for it were well that each provided himself with
a cow's horn, so that the signals can be repeated. If we are
scattered over a hillside among the trees, and the Romans hear
