hath to us.  God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in
God, and God in him.  Herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have boldness in the day of judgment:  because as he is, so are we
in this world.  There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth
out fear:  because fear hath torment.  He that feareth is not made
perfect in love.

The text tells us how to get one of the greatest blessings; a
blessing which all long for, but all do not find; and that is a
happy death.  All wish to die happily; even bad men.  Like Balaam
when he was committing a great sin, they can say, 'Let me die the
death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.'  But
meanwhile, like Balaam, they find it too hard to live the life of
the righteous, which is the only way to die the death of the
righteous.  But something within them (if false preachers will but
leave them alone) tells them that they will not succeed.  Reason and
common sense tell them so:  for how can a man expect to get to a
place without travelling the road which leads to it?  And the Spirit
of God, the Spirit of truth and right, tells them that they will not
succeed:  for how can a man win happiness, save by doing right?
Every one shall 'receive the things done in his body, according to
that he hath done, whether it be good or bad.'  So says Scripture;
and so say men's own hearts, by the inspiration of God's Holy
Spirit.  And therefore such men's fear of death continues.  And why?
The text tells us the secret.  As long as we do not love God, we
shall be tormented with fear of death.  And as long as we do not
love our neighbour, we shall not love God.  We may try, as thousands
have tried, and as thousands try still, to love God without loving
their neighbour; to be very religious, and worship God, and sing His
praises, and think over all His mercy to them, and all that he has
done for them, by the death of His blessed Son Jesus Christ; and so
to persuade themselves and God that they love Him, while they keep
in their hearts selfishness, pride, spite, uncharitableness:  but
they do not succeed.  If they think they succeed, they are only
deceiving themselves.  So says St. John.  'He who loveth not his
brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not
seen?'  But they cannot deceive themselves long.  You will see, if
you watch such people, and still more if you watch yourselves, that
if you do not love your neighbours in spirit and in truth, then
those tormenting fears soon come back again, worse than ever.  Ay,
whenever we indulge ourselves in hard words and cruel judgments, the
thought of God seems darkened to us there and then; the face of God
seems turned from us; and peace of mind and brightness of spirit,
and lightness of soul, do not come back to us, till we have
confessed our sins, and have let the kindly, the charitable, the
merciful thoughts rise up in us once more, as, by the grace of
Christ, they will rise up.

Yes, my friends, as far as I can see, people are filled with the
peace of God just in as far as they are at peace with their fellow-
men.  They are bright, calm, and content, looking forward with
cheerfulness to death, and with a humble and holy boldness to
judgment, just in as far as their hearts are filled with love,
gentleness, kindness, to all that God has made.  They dwell in God,
and God in them, and perfect love has cast out fear.

But if a man does not live in love, then sooner or later he will
hear a voice within him, which whispers, Thou art going wrong; and,
if thou art going wrong, how canst thou end at the right place?
None but the right road can end there.  The wrong road must lead to
the wrong place.

Then the man gets disturbed and terrified in his mind, and tormented
with fears, as the text says.  He knows that the day of judgment is
coming, and he has no boldness to meet it.  He shrinks from the
thought of death, of judgment, of God.  He thinks--How shall I meet
my God?  I do not love my neighbour.  I do not love God; and God
does not love me.  The truth is, that the man cannot love God even
if he will.  He looks on God as his enemy, whom he has offended, who
is coming to take vengeance on him.  And, as long as we are afraid
of any one, and fancy that they hate us, and are going to hurt us,
we cannot love them.  So the man is tormented with fear; fear of
death, fear of judgment, fear of meeting God.

Then he takes to superstition; he runs from preacher to preacher;
and what not?--There is no folly men have not committed, and do not
commit still, to rid themselves of that tormenting fear.  But they
do not rid themselves of it.  Sermons, church-goings, almsgivings;
leaving the Church and turning Dissenters or Roman Catholics;
joining this sect and that sect; nothing will rid a man of his
superstitious fear:  nothing but believing the blessed message of
the text.

And what does the text say?  It says this,--'God is love.'  God does
not hate thee, He loves thee.  He willeth not thy death, O sinner,
but rather that thou shouldest turn from thy wickedness and live.
Thy sins have not made Him hate thee:  but only pity thee; pity thy
folly, which will lead on the road to death, when He wishes to put
thee on the road to life, that thou mayest have boldness in the day
of judgment, instead of shrinking from God like a guilty coward.
And what is the way of life?  Surely the way of Christ, who _is_ the
life.  Live like Him, and thou wilt not need to fear to die.  So
says the text.  We are to have boldness in the day of judgment,
because as Christ is, so are we in this world.  And how was, and is,
and ever will be, Christ in this world?  Full of love; of brotherly-
kindness, charity, forgiveness, peace, and good will to men.  That,
says St. John, is the life which brings a joyful death; for God is
love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.

Oh consider this, my good friends.  Consider this; lest when you
come to die the ghosts of all your sins should rise up at your
bedside, and torment you with fear--the ghosts of every cruel word
which you ever spoke against your fellow men; of every kind action
which you neglected; as well as of every unjust one which you ever
committed.  And, if they do rise up in judgment against you, what
must you do?

Cast yourself upon the love of God, and remember that God is love,
and so loved us that He sent His Son to be the propitiation for our
sins.  Ask Him to forgive you your sins, for the sake of that
precious blood which was shed on the cross:  but not that you may
keep your sins, and may escape the punishment of them.  God forbid.
What use in having your past sins forgiven, if the sinful heart
still remains to run up fresh sins for the future?  No.  Ask Him not
merely to forgive the past, but to mend the future; to create in you
a new heart, which wishes no ill to any human being, and a right
spirit, which desires first and utterly to do right, and is filled
with the Holy Spirit of God, the Spirit of love, by which God made
and redeemed the world, and all that therein is.

So will all tormenting fears cease.  You will feel yourself in the
right way, the way of charity, the way in which Christ walked in
this world, and have boldness in the day of judgment, facing death
without conceit, indeed, but also without superstitious fear.



SERMON XXIII.  THE FLESH AND THE SPIRIT



(Eighth Sunday after Trinity.)

Romans viii. 12.  Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the
flesh, to live after the flesh; for if ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die.

What does walking after the flesh mean?  St. Paul tells us himself,
in Gal. v., where he uses exactly the same form of words which he
does here.  'The works of the flesh,' he says, 'are manifest.'  When
a man gives way to his passions and appetites--when he cares only
about enjoying his own flesh, and the pleasures which he has in
common with the brutes, then there is no mistake about the sort of
life which he will lead--'Now the works of the flesh are manifest,
which are these; adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife,
seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and
such like.'  An ugly list, my friends; and God have mercy on the man
who gives way to them.  For disgraceful as they are to him, and
tormenting also to him in this life, the worst is, that if he gives
way to them, he will die.

I do not mean that he will bring his mortal body to an untimely end;
that he will ruin his own health; or that he will get himself
hanged, though that is likely enough--common enough.  I think St.
Paul means something even worse than that.  The man himself will
die.  Not his body merely:  but his soul, his character, will die.
All in him that God made, all that God intended him to be, will die.
All that his father and mother loved in him, all that they watched
over, and hoped and prayed that it might grow up into life, in order
that he might become the man God meant him to be, all that will die.
His soul and character will become one mass of disease.  He will
think wrong, feel wrong, about everything of which he does think and
feel:  while, about the higher matters, of which every man ought to
know something, he will not think or feel at all.  Love to his
country, love to his own kinsfolk even; above all, love to God, will
die in him, and he will care for nothing but himself, and how to get
a little more foul pleasure before he goes out of this world, he
dare not think whither.  All power of being useful will die in him.
Honour and justice will die in him.  He will be shut up in himself,
in the ugly prison-house of his own lusts and passions, parted from
his fellow-men, caring nothing for them, knowing that they care
nothing for him.  He will have no faith in man or God.  He will
believe no good, he will have no hope, either for himself or for the
world.

This, this is death, indeed; the death of sin; the death in which
human beings may go on for years, walking, eating, and drinking;
worse than those who walk in their sleep, and see nothing, though
their eyes are staring wide.

Oh pitiable sight!  The most pitiable sight in the whole world, a
human soul dead and rotten in sin!  It is a pitiable sight enough,
to see a human body decayed by disease, to see a poor creature
dying, even quietly and without pain.  Pitiable, but not half so
pitiable as the death of a human soul by sin.  For the death of the
body is not a man's own fault.  But that death in life of sin, is a
man's own fault.  In a Christian country, at least, it is a man's
own fault, if he goes about the world, as I have seen many a one go,
having a name to live, and yet dead in trespasses and sins, while
his soul only serves to keep his body alive and moving.  How shall
we escape this death in life?  St. Paul tells us, 'If ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.'

Through the Spirit.  The Spirit of God and of Christ.  Keep that in
mind, for that is the only way, the right way, to mortify and kill
in us these vices and passions, which, unless we kill them, will
kill us.  The only way.  For men have tried other ways in old times,
do try other ways now:  but they fail.  I could mention many plans
which they have tried.  But I will only mention the one which you
and I are likely to try.

A young man runs wild for a few years, as young men are too apt to
do:  but at last he finds that ill-living does not _pay_.  It hurts
his health, his pocket, his character.  He makes himself ill; he
cannot get employed; he has ruin staring him in the face, from his
wild living.  He must mend.  If he intends to keep out of the
workhouse, the gaol, the grave, he must mortify the deeds of the
body.  He must bridle his passions, give up lying about, drinking,
swearing, cheating, running after bad women:  and if he has a strong
will, he does it from mere selfish prudence.  But is he safe?  I
think not, as long as he loves still the bad ways he has given up.
He has given them up, not because he hates them, because he is
ashamed of them, because he knows them to be hateful to God, and
ruinous to his own soul:  but because they do not pay.  The man
himself is not changed.  His heart within is not converted.  The
outside of his life is whitewashed; but his heart may be as foul as
ever; as full as ever of selfishness, greediness, meanness.  And
what happens to him?  Too often, what happened to the man in the
parable, when the unclean spirit went out of him, and came back
again.  The unclean spirit found his home swept and garnished:  but
empty.  All very neat and respectable:  but empty.  There was no
other spirit dwelling there.  No good spirit, who could fight the
unclean spirit and keep him out.  So he took to himself seven other
spirits worse than himself--hypocrisy, cant, cunning, covetousness,
and all the smooth-shaven sins which beset middle-aged and elderly
men; and they dwell there, and so does the unclean spirit of youth
too.

Alas!  How often have I seen men whom that description would fit but
too well--men who have kept themselves respectable till they have
got back their character in the world's eyes:  and when they get
into years, and have risen perhaps in life, and made money, are
looked up to by their fellows:  but what are they at heart?  As
great scoundrels as they were thirty years before--cunning, false,
covetous, and hypocritical--and indulging, perhaps, the unclean
spirit of youth, as much as they dare without being found out.  God
help them! for their last state is worse than their first.  But that
is the fruit of trying to mortify and kill their own vices by mere
worldly prudence, and not by the Spirit of God, which alone can
cleanse the heart of any man, or make him strong enough really to
conquer and kill his sins.

And what is this spirit of God?  We may know in this way.  What says
our Lord in the Gospel?  'The tree is known by its fruits.'  Then if
we know the fruits of the Spirit, we shall surely know something at
least of what the Spirit is like.  What then says St. Paul, 'The
fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance.'  Therefore the Spirit is a
loving spirit--a peaceable, a gentle, a good, a faithful, a sober
and temperate spirit.  And if you follow it, you will live.  If you
give yourselves up honestly, frankly, and fully, to be led by that
good spirit, and obey it when it prompts you with right feelings,
you, your very self, will live.  You will be what God intended you
to be; you will grow as God intended you to grow; grow as Christ
did, in grace; in all which is graceful, amiable, worthy of respect
and love; and therefore in favour with God and man.  Your character
will improve and strengthen day by day; and rise day by day to
fuller, stronger, healthier spiritual life.  You will be able more
and more to keep down low passions, evil tempers, and all the works
of the flesh, when they tempt you; you will despise and hate them
more and more; for having seen the beauty of goodness, you will see
the ugliness of sin.  So the bad passions and tempers, instead of
being merely put to sleep for a while to wake up all the stronger
for their rest, will be really mortified and killed in you.  They
will die out of you; and you, the real _you_ whom God made, will
live and grow continually.  And, instead of having your character
dragged down, diseased, and at last ruined, it will rise and
progress, as you grow older, in the sure and safe road of eternal
life.  To which God bring us all in his mercy!  Amen.



SERMON XXIV.  THE UNRIGHTEOUS MAMMON



(Ninth Sunday after Trinity.)

Luke xvi. 1-8.  And he said also unto his disciples, There was a
certain rich man, which had a steward; and the same was accused unto
him that he had wasted his goods.  And he called him, and said unto
him, How is it that I hear this of thee? give an account of thy
stewardship; for thou mayest be no longer steward.  Then the steward
said within himself, What shall I do? for my lord taketh away from
me the stewardship:  I cannot dig; to beg I am ashamed.  I am
resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship,
they may receive me into their houses.  So he called every one of
his lord's debtors unto him, and said unto the first, How much owest
thou unto my lord?  And he said, An hundred measures of oil.  And he
said unto him, Take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write fifty.
Then said he to another, And how much owest thou?  And he said, An
hundred measures of wheat.  And he said unto him, Take thy bill and
write fourscore.  And the lord commended the unjust steward, because
he had done wisely:  for the children of this world are in their
generation wiser than the children of light.

This parable has always been considered a difficult one to
understand.  Fathers and Divines, in all ages, have tried to explain
it in different ways; and have never, it seems to me, been satisfied
with their own explanations.  They have always felt it strange, that
our Lord should seem to hold up, as an example to us, this steward
who, having been found out in one villainy, escapes, (so it seems,
from the common explanation) by committing a second.  They have not
been able to see either, how we are really to copy the steward.  Our
Lord says, that we are to copy him by making ourselves friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness:  but how?  By giving away a few alms,
or a great many?  Does any rational man seriously believe, that if
his Mammon was unrighteous, that is, if his wealth were ill-gotten,
he would save his soul, and be received into eternal life, for
giving away part of it, or even the whole of it?

No doubt, there always have been men who will try.  Men who, having
cheated their neighbours all their lives, have tried to cheat the
Devil at last, by some such plan as the unjust steward's, but that
plan has never been looked on as either a very honourable or a very
hopeful one.  I think, that if I had been an usurer or a grinder of
the poor all my life, I should not save my soul by founding
almshouses with my money when I died, or even ten years before I
died.  It might be all that I was able to do:  but would it justify
me in the sight of God?  That which saves a soul alive is
repentance; and of repentance there are three parts, contrition,
confession, and satisfaction--in plain English, making the wrong
right, and giving each man back, as far as one can, what one has
taken from him.  To each man, I say; for I have no right to rob one
man and then give to another.  I ought to give back again to the man
whom I have robbed.  I have no right to cheat the rich for the sake
of the poor; and after I have cheated the rich, I do not make
satisfaction, either to god or man, by giving that money to the
poor.  Good old Zaccheus, the publican, knew better what true
satisfaction was like.  He had been gaining money not altogether in
an unjust way, but in a way which did him no credit; he had been
farming the taxes, and he was dissatisfied with his way of life.
Therefore, Behold, Lord, he says, the half of my goods, of what I
have a right to in the world's eyes--what is my own, and I could
keep if I liked--I give to the poor.  But if I have done wrong to
any man, I restore to him fourfold.  Then said the Lord, 'This day
is salvation come to this man's house; forsomuch as he also is a son
of Abraham;' a just and faithful man, who knows what true repentance
is.

But now, my friends, suppose that this was just what our Lord tells
us to do in this parable.  Suppose that this was just what the
unjust steward did.  I only say, suppose; for I know that more
learned men than I explain the difficulty otherwise.  Only I ask you
to hear my explanation.

The steward is accused of wasting his lord's goods.

He will be put out of his stewardship.

He goes to his lord's debtors, and bids them write themselves down
in debt to him at far less sums than they had thought that they
owed.

Now, suppose that these debtors were the very men whom he had been
cheating.  Suppose that he had been overcharging these debtors; and
now, in his need, had found out that honesty was the best policy,
and charged them what they really owed him.  They were, probably,
tenants under his lord, paying their rents in kind, as was often the
custom in the East.  One rented an olive garden, and paid for it so
many measures of oil; another rented corn-land, and paid so many
measures of meal.  Now suppose that the steward, as he easily might,
had been setting these poor men's rents too high, and taking the
surplus himself.  That while he had been charging one tenant a
hundred, he had been paying to his lord only fifty, and so forth.

What does he do, then, in his need?  He does justice to his lord's
debtors.  He tells them what their debts really are.  He sets their
accounts right.  Instead of charging the first man a hundred, he
charges him fifty; instead of charging the second a hundred, he
charges him eighty; and he does not, as far as we are told, conceal
this conduct from his lord.  He rights them as far as he can now.
So he shews that he honestly repents.  He has found out that honesty
is the best policy; that the way to make true friends is to deal
justly by them; and, if he cannot restore what he has taken from
them already (for I suppose he had spent it), at least to confess
his sin to them, and to set the matter right for the time to come.

This, I think, is what our Lord bids us do, if we have wronged any
man, and fouled our hands with the unrighteous mammon, that is, with
ill-gotten wealth.  And I think so all the more from the verses
which come after.  For, when he has said, 'Make yourselves friends
of the mammon of unrighteousness,' he goes on in the very next verse
to say, 'He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful
also in that which is much.  If, therefore, ye have not been
faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust
the true riches?'  Now, surely, this must have something to do with
what goes before.  And, if it has, what can it mean but this--that
the way to make friends out of the mammon of unrighteousness, is to
be faithful in it, just in it, honest in it?

But some one may say, If mammon be unrighteous, how can a man be
righteous and upright in dealing with it?  If money be a bad thing
in itself, how can a man meddle with it with clean hands?

So some people will say, and so some will be glad to say.  But why?
Because they do not want to be righteous, upright, just, and honest
in their money dealings; and, therefore, they are glad to make out
that they could not be upright if they tried; because money being a
bad thing altogether, a man must needs, if he has to do with money,
do things which he knows are wrong.  I say some people are glad to
believe that.  I do not mean any one in this congregation.  God
forbid!  I mean in the world in general.  We do see people,
religious people too, do things about money which they know are
mean, covetous, cruel, and then excuse themselves by saying,--'Well,
of course I would not do so to my own brother; but, in the way of
business, one can't help doing these things.'  Now, I do not quite
believe them.  I have seldom seen the man who cheated his neighbour,
who would not cheat his own brother if he had a chance:  but so they
say.  And, if they be religious people, they will quote Scripture,
and say,--Ah! it is the fault of the unrighteous mammon; and, in
dealing with the unrighteous mammon, we cannot help these little
failings, and so forth:  till they seem to have two quite different
rules of right and wrong; one for the saving of their own souls,
which they keep to when they are hearing sermons, and reading good
books; and the other for money, which they keep to when they have to
pay their debts or transact business.

Now, my dear friends, be not deceived:  God is not mocked.  God
tempts no man.  Man tempts himself by his own lusts and passions.
God does not tempt us when he gives us money, puts us in the way of
earning money, or spending money.  Money is not bad in itself;
wealth is not bad in itself.  If mammon be unrighteous, we make
money into mammon, when we make an idol of it, and worship it more
than God's law of right and justice.  We make it unrighteous, by
being unrighteous, and unjust ourselves.

Money is good; for money stands for capital; for money's worth; for
houses, land, food, clothes, all that man can make; and they stand
for labour, employment, wages; and they stand for human beings, for
the bodily life of man.  Without wealth, where should we be now?  If
God had not given to man the power of producing wealth, where should
we be now?  Not here.  Four-fifths of us would not have been alive
at all.  Instead of eight hundred people in this parish, all more or
less well off, there would be, perhaps, one hundred--perhaps far
less, living miserably on game and roots.  Instead of thirty
millions of civilized people in Great Britain, there would be
