a long time ago, back when I was still at Bairdsley, long before I came
here to the Study Center. He was the consulting psychiatrist, and I
don't think I could ever forget him, even if I tried!

That's why I'm sure something very unpleasant is going on.

Lambertson saw Dr. Custer, too, but the directors sent him to Boston
because Aarons wanted to talk to him. I wasn't supposed to know anything
about it, but Lambertson came down to dinner last night. He wouldn't
even look at me, the skunk. I fixed _him_. I told him I was going to
peek, and then I read him in a flash, before he could shift his mind to
Boston traffic or something. (He knows I can't stand traffic.)

I only picked up a little, but it was enough. There was something very
unpleasant that Aarons had said that I couldn't quite get. They were in
his office. Lambertson had said, "I don't think she's ready for it, and
I'd never try to talk her into it, at this point. Why can't you people
get it through your heads that she's a _child_, and a human being, not
some kind of laboratory animal? That's been the trouble all along.
Everybody has been so eager to _grab_, and nobody has given her a
wretched thing in return."

Aarons was smooth. Very sad and reproachful. I got a clear picture of
him--short, balding, mean little eyes in a smug, self-righteous little
face. "Michael, after all she's twenty-three years old. She's certainly
out of diapers by now."

"But she's only had two years of training aimed at teaching _her_
anything."

"Well, there's no reason that _that_ should stop, is there? Be
reasonable, Michael. We certainly agree that you've done a wonderful job
with the girl, and naturally you're sensitive about others working with
her. But when you consider that public taxes are footing the bill--"

"I'm sensitive about others exploiting her, that's all. I tell you, I
won't push her. And I wouldn't let her come up here, even if she agreed
to do it. She shouldn't be tampered with for another year or two at
least." Lambertson was angry and bitter. Now, three days later, he was
still angry.

"And you're certain that your concern is entirely--professional?"
(Whatever Aarons meant, it wasn't nice. Lambertson caught it, and oh,
my! Chart slapping down on the table, door slamming, swearing--from
mild, patient Lambertson, can you imagine? And then later, no more
anger, just disgust and defeat. That was what hit me when he came back
yesterday. He couldn't hide it, no matter how he tried.)

Well, no wonder he was tired. I remember Aarons all right. He wasn't so
interested in me, back in those days. _Wild one_, he called me. _We
haven't the time or the people to handle anything like this in a public
institution. We have to handle her the way we'd handle any other
defective. She may be a_ plus_-defective instead of a_ minus_-defective,
but she's as crippled as if she were deaf and blind._

Good old Aarons. That was years ago, when I was barely thirteen. Before
Dr. Custer got interested and started ophthalmoscoping me and testing
me, before I'd ever heard of Lambertson or the Study Center. For that
matter, before anybody had done anything but feed me and treat me like
some kind of peculiar animal or something.

Well, I'm glad it was Lambertson that went to Boston and not me, for
Aarons' sake. And if Aarons tries to come down here to work with me,
he's going to be wasting his time, because I'll lead him all around
Robin Hood's Barn and get him so confused he'll wish he'd stayed home.
But I can't help but wonder, just the same. _Am_ I a cripple like Aarons
said? Does being psi-high mean that? _I_ don't think so, but what does
Lambertson think? Sometimes when I try to read Lambertson I'm the one
that gets confused. I wish I could tell what he _really_ thinks.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wednesday night._ I asked Lambertson tonight what Dr. Custer had said.
"He wants to see you next week," he told me. "But Amy, he didn't make
any promises. He wasn't even hopeful."

"But his letter! He said the studies showed that there wasn't any
anatomical defect."

Lambertson leaned back and lit his pipe, shaking his head at me. He's
aged ten years this past week. Everybody thinks so. He's lost weight,
and he looks as if he hasn't slept at all. "Custer's afraid that it
isn't a question of anatomy, Amy."

"But what is it, then, for heaven's sake?"

"He doesn't know. He says it's not very scientific, but it may just be
that what you don't use, you lose."

"Oh, but that's silly." I chewed my lip.

"Granted."

