"Do you think you would be able to find your way, Pablo?"

"Once go one way, always know same way again."

"You are a clever fellow, Pablo, and I have a mind to try you. Now
drink some beer. I think, Pablo, you shall go home, and tell Humphrey
that I and Smoker will be where the heifer lies dead, and have it
skinned by nine o'clock tomorrow morning; so, if he comes, he will find
me there."

"Yes, I go now."

"No, not now; you must rest yourself a little more."

"Pablo not tired," replied the gipsy, getting up; "be back before
supper. As I go along, look at calf and dead cow--see if calf stay with
mother."

"Very well, then, if you wish it, you may go now," said Edward.

Pablo nodded his head and disappeared.

A few minutes afterward, Oswald made his appearance.

"Is the boy gone?"

"Yes; he is gone back to the cottage;" and Edward then stated how he
had killed the heifer, and wanted to obtain the calf.

"I've an idea that you will find that boy very useful, if he is
properly managed."

"I think so too," replied Edward; "and I am glad to perceive that he is
already attached to all of us. We treat him as ourselves."

"You are right; and now for the news that I have to tell you. The Duke
Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and Lord Capel have been tried,
condemned, and executed."

Edward sighed. "More murder! but we must expect it from those who have
murdered their king. Is that all?"

"No. King Charles the Second has been proclaimed in Scotland, and
invited to come over."

"That is indeed news," replied Edward. "Where is he now?"

"At the Hague; but it was said that he was going to Paris."

"That is all that you have heard?"

"Yes; that was what was current when Master Heatherstone, was in town.
His man, Samson, gave me the news; and he further said, 'that his
master's journey to London was to oppose the execution of the three
lords; but it was all in vain.'"

"Well," replied Edward, after a pause, "if the king does come over,
there will be some work cut out for some of us, I expect. Your news has
put me in a fever," continued Edward, taking up the biggin and drinking
a large draught of beer.

"I thought it would," replied Oswald; "but until the time comes, the
more quiet you keep the better."

"Yes, Oswald; but I can't talk any more; I must be left alone to think.
I will go to bed, as I shall be off early in the morning. Is that
fellow, Corbould, getting well?"

"Yes, sir; he is out of bed, and walks a little with a stick; but he is
still very lame, and will be for some time."

"Good-night, Oswald; if I have any thing to say, I will write and send
the boy. I do not want to be seen here any more."

"It will be best, sir. Good-night; I will put Smoker in the kennel to
the right, as he will not be friendly with the other dogs."

Edward retired to bed, but not to sleep. The Scots had proclaimed the
king, and invited him over. "He will surely come," thought Edward, "and
he will have an army round him as soon as he lands." Edward made up his
resolution to join the army, as soon as he should hear that the king
had landed; and what with considering how he should be able so to do,
and afterward building castles as to what he would do, it was long
before he fell asleep; and when he did he dreamed of battles and
victory--he was charging at the head of his troops--he was surrounded
by the dying and the dead. He was wounded, and he was somehow or other
well again, as if by magic; and then the scene was changed, and he was
rescuing Patience Heatherstone from his own lawless men, and preserving
the life of her father, which was about to be sacrificed; and at last
he awoke, and found that the daylight peeped through the windows, and
that he had slept longer than he intended to do. He arose and dressed
himself quickly, and, not waiting for breakfast, went to the kennel,
released Smoker from his durance, and set off on his return.

Before nine o'clock, he had arrived at the spot where the heifer lay
dead. He found the calf still by its side, bleating and walking round
uneasily. As he approached with the dog, it went to a farther distance,
and there remained. Edward took out his knife and commenced skinning
the heifer, and then took out the inside. The animal was quite fresh
and good, but not very fat, as may be supposed. While thus occupied,
Smoker growled and then sprung forward, bounding away in the direction
of the cottage, and Edward thought Humphrey was at hand. In a few
minutes, the pony and cart appeared between the trees, with Humphrey
and Pablo in it, and Smoker leaping up at his friend Billy.

"Good-morning, Humphrey," said Edward: "I am almost ready for you; but
the question is, how are we to take the calf? It is as wild as a deer."

"It will be a puzzler, without Smoker can run it down," said Humphrey.

"I take him, with Smoker," said Pablo.

"How will you take it?"

Pablo went to the cart, and took out a long small cord, which Humphrey
had brought with them, and made a noose at one end; he coiled the rope
in his hand, and then threw it out to its full length, by way of trial.
"This way I take him, suppose I get near enough. This way take bulls in
Spain; call him Lasso. Now come with me." Pablo had his rope again
coiled in his hand, and then went round to the other side of the calf,
which still remained lowing at about two hundred yards' distance.

"Now tell Smoker," cried Pablo.

Humphrey set Smoker upon the calf, which retreated from the dog,
presenting his head to run at it; and Pablo kept behind the animal,
while Smoker attacked it, and drove it near to him.

As soon as the calf, which was so busy with the dog that it did not
perceive Pablo, came sufficiently near to him, Pablo threw his rope,
and caught the loop round the animal's neck. The calf set off galloping
toward Humphrey, and dragging Pablo after him, for the latter was not
strong enough to hold it.

Humphrey went to his assistance, and then Edward; and the calf was
thrown down by Smoker, who seized it by the neck, and it was tied and
put on the cart in a few minutes.

"Well done, Pablo! you are a clever fellow," said Edward, "and this
calf shall be yours."

"It is a cow calf," said Humphrey, "which I am glad of. Pablo, you did
that well, and, as Edward says, the calf belongs to you."

Pablo look pleased, but said nothing.

The meat and hide were put into the cart, with some of the offal which
Alice had asked for the dogs, and they set off on their return home.

Humphrey was very anxious to go to Lymington, and was not sorry that he
had some meat to take with him: he determined to get off the next
morning, and Edward proposed that he should take Pablo with him, that
he might know the way there in case of any emergency, for they both
felt that Pablo could be trusted. Edward said he would remain at home
with his sisters, and see if he could be of any use to Alice; if not,
there would be work in the garden. Humphrey and Pablo went away after
breakfast, with Billy, and the meat and skin of the heifer in the cart.
Humphrey had also a large basket of eggs and three dozen of chickens
from Alice to be disposed of, and a list as long as the tail of a kite,
of articles which she and Edith required; fortunately there was nothing
very expensive on the list, long as it was--but women in those days
required needles, pins, buttons, tapes, thread, worsted, and a hundred
other little necessaries, as they do now. As soon as they were gone,
Edward, who was still castle-building, instead of offering his services
to Alice, brought out his father's sword and commenced cleaning it.
When he had polished it up to his satisfaction, he felt less inclined
than ever to do any thing; so after dinner he took his gun and walked
out into the forest that he might indulge in his reveries. He walked
on, quite unconscious of the direction in which he was going, and more
than once finding his hat knocked off by the branch of a tree which he
had not perceived--for the best of all possible reasons, because his
eyes were cast on the ground--when his ears were saluted with the
neighing of a horse. He looked up and perceived that he was near to a
herd of forest ponies, the first that he had seen since he had lived in
the forest.

This roused him, and he looked about him. "Where can I have been
wandering to?" thought Edward; "I never fell in with any of the forest
ponies before; I must, therefore, have walked in a direction quite
contrary to what I usually do. I do not know where I am--the scenery is
new to me. What a fool I am! It's lucky that nobody except Humphrey
digs pitfalls, or I should probably have been in one by this time; and
I've brought out my gun and left the dog at home. Well, I suppose I can
find my way back." Edward then surveyed the whole herd of ponies, which
were at no great distance from him. There was a fine horse or two among
them, which appeared to be the leaders of the herd. They allowed Edward
to approach to within two hundred yards, and then, with manes and tails
streaming in the air, they darted off with the rapidity of the wind.

"Now I'll puzzle Humphrey when I go back," thought Edward. "He says
that Billy is getting old, and that he wishes he could get another
pony. I will tell him what a plenty there are, and propose that he
should invent some way of catching one. That will be a poser for him;
yet I'm sure that he will try, for he is very ingenious. And now, which
way am I to turn to find my way home? I think it ought to be to the
north; but which is north? for there is no sun out, and now I perceive
it looks very like rain. I wonder how long I have been walking! I am
sure I don't know." Edward then hurried in a direction which he
considered might lead him homeward, and walked fast; but he once more
fell into his habit of castle-building, and was talking to himself:
"The king proclaimed in Scotland! he will come over of course: I will
join his army, and then--" Thus he went on, again absorbed in the news
which he had gained from Oswald, till on a sudden he again recollected
himself, and perceived that he had lost sight of the copse of trees on
a high hill, to which he had been directing his steps. Where was it? He
turned round and round, and at last found out that he had been walking
away from it. "I must dream no more," thought he, "or if I do indulge
in any more daydreams, I certainly shall neither sleep nor dream
to-night. It is getting dark already, and here I am lost in the forest,
and all through my own foolishness. If the stars do not shine, I shall
not know how to direct my steps; indeed, if they do, I don't know
whether I have walked south or north, and I am in a pretty pickle; not
that I care for being out in the forest on a night like this, but my
sisters and Humphrey will be alarmed at my absence. The best thing that
I can do, is to decide upon taking some straight line, and continue in
it: I must then get out the forest at last, even if I walk right across
it. That will be better than going backward and forward, or round and
round, as I shall otherwise do, just like a puppy running alter its own
tail. So now shine out, stars!" Edward waited until he could make out
Charles's Wain, which he well knew, and then the Polar Star. As soon as
he was certain of that, he resolved to travel by it due north, and he
did so, sometimes walking fast, and at others keeping up a steady trot
for a half a mile without stopping. As he was proceeding on his
travels, he observed, under some trees ahead of him, a spark of fire
emitted; he thought it was a glow-worm at first, but it was more like
the striking of a flint against steel; and as he saw it a second time,
he stopped that he might ascertain what it might be, before he advanced
farther.




CHAPTER XV.


It was now very dark, as there was no moon, and the stars were often
obscured by the clouds, which were heavy and borne along by the wind,
which was very high. The light again appeared, and this time Edward
heard the clash of the flint against the steel, and he was quite
certain that it was somebody striking a light. He advanced very
cautiously, and arrived at a large tree, behind which he remained to
reconnoiter. The people, whoever they might be, were not more than
thirty yards from him; a light spread its rays for a moment or two, and
he could make out a figure kneeling and holding his hat to protect it
from the wind; then it burned brighter, and he saw that a lantern had
been lighted, and then again, of a sudden, all was dark: so Edward
immediately satisfied himself that a dark lantern had been lighted and
then closed. Who the parties might be, he of course had no idea; but he
was resolved that he would ascertain, if he could, before he accosted
them and asked his way.

"They have no dog," thought Edward, "or it would have growled before
this; and it's lucky that I have none either." Edward then crept softly
nearer to them: the wind, which was strong, blew from where they were
to where Edward stood, so that there was less chance of their hearing
his approach.

Edward went on his hands and knees, and crawled through the fern until
he gained another tree, and within ten yards of them, and from where he
could hear what they might say. He was thus cautious, as he had been
told by Oswald that there were many disbanded soldiers who had taken up
their quarters in the forest, and had committed several depredations
upon the houses adjacent to it, always returning to the forest as a
rendezvous. Edward listened, and heard one say--

"It is not time yet! No, no: too soon by half an hour or more. The
people from Lymington, who buy him what he wants, always bring it to
him at night, that his retreat may not be discovered. They sometimes do
not leave the cottage till two hours after dark, for they do not leave
Lymington to go there till it is dark."

"Do you know who it is who supplies him with food?"

"Yes, the people at the inn in Parliament-street--I forget the sign."

"Oh, I know. Yes, the landlord is a downright Malignant in his heart!
We might squeeze him well, if we dared show ourselves in Lymington."

"Yes, but they would squeeze our necks tighter than would be agreeable,
I expect," replied the other.

"Are you sure that he has money?"

"Quite sure; for I peeped through the chinks of the window-shutters,
and I saw him pay for the things brought to him; it was from a canvas
bag, and it was gold that he took out."

"And where did he put the bag after he had paid them?"

"That I can't tell, for, as I knew that they would come out as soon as
they were paid, I was obliged to beat a retreat, lest I should be seen."

"Well, then, how is it to be managed?"

"We must first tap at the door, and try if we can get in as benighted
travelers; if that won't do--and I fear it will not--while you remain
begging for admittance at the door, and keep him occupied, I will try
the door behind, that leads into the garden; and if not the door, I
will try the window. I have examined them both well, and have been
outside when he has shut up his shutters, and I know the fastenings.
With a pane out, I could open them immediately."

"Is there any body else besides him in the cottage?"

"Yes, a lad who attends him, and goes to Lymington for him."

"No women?"

"Not one."

"But do you think we two are sufficient? Had we not better get more
help? There is Broom, and Black the gipsy, at the rendezvous. I can go
for them, and be back in time; they are stout and true."

"Stout enough, but not true. No, no, I want no sharers in this
business, and you know how ill they behaved in the last affair. I'll
swear that they only produced half the swag. I like honor between
gentlemen and soldiers; and that's why I have chosen you. I know I can
trust you, Benjamin. It's time now--what do you say? We are two to one,
for I count the boy as nothing. Shall we start?"

"I am with you. You say there's a bag of gold, and that's worth
fighting for."

"Yes, Ben, and I'll tell you: with what I've got buried, and my share
of that bag, I shall have enough, I think; and I'll start for the Low
Countries, for England's getting rather too warm for me."

"Well, I shan't go yet," replied Benjamin. "I don't like your foreign
parts; they have no good ale, and I can't understand their talk. I'd
sooner remain in jolly old England with a halter twisted ready for me,
than pass my life with such a set of chaps, who drink nothing but
scheidam, and wear twenty pair of breeches. Come, let's be off; if we
get the money, you shall go to the Low Countries, Will, and I'll start
for the North, where they don't know me; for if you go, I won't stay
here."

The two men then rose up; and the one whose name appeared to be Will
first examined if the candle in his dark lantern burned well; and then
they both set off, followed by Edward, who had heard quite enough to
satisfy him that they were bent upon a burglary, if not murder. Edward
followed them, so as to keep their forms indistinctly in sight, which
was as much as he could do at twenty yards' distance; fortunately the
wind was so high that they did not hear his footsteps, although he
often trod upon a rotten stick, which snapped as it broke in twain. As
near as Edward could guess, he had tracked them about three miles, when
they stopped, and he perceived that they were examining their pistols,
which they took from their belts. They then went on again, and entered
a small plantation of oak-trees, of about forty years' growth--very
thick and very dark, with close underwood below. They followed each
other through a narrow path, until they came to a cleared place in the
middle of the plantation, in which there stood a low cottage,
surrounded with covert on every side, with the exception of some thirty
yards of land around it. All was still, and as dark as pitch; Edward
remained behind the trees, and when the two men again stopped, he was
not six feet from them. They consulted in a low tone but the wind was
so high that he could not distinguish what they said. At last they
advanced to the cottage, and Edward, still keeping within the trees,
shifted his position, so that he should be opposite the gable end of
the cottage. He observed one man to go up to the front door, while the
other went round to the door behind, as had been agreed. Edward threw
open the pan of the lock of the gun, and reprimed it, that he might be
sure, and then waited for what was to follow. He heard the man Will at
the front door, talking and asking for shelter in a plaintive but loud
voice; and shortly afterward he perceived a light through the chinks of
the shutters--for Edward was continually altering his position to see
what was going on in the front and in the back. At one time, he thought
of leveling his gun and killing one of the men at once; but he could
not make up his mind to do that, as a burglary, although intended, had
not yet been committed; so he remained passive until the attack was
really made, when he resolved that he would come to the rescue. After
some minutes of entreaty that they would open the door, the man in
front commenced thumping and beating against it, as if he would make
them open the door by force; but this was to attract the attention of
those within, and divert it from the attempts that the other was making
to get in behind. Edward was aware of this; he now kept his eye upon
what was going on at the back. Advancing nearer--which he ventured to
do now that both the men were so occupied--he perceived that the fellow
had contrived to open the window close to the back door, and was
remaining quite close to it with a pistol in his hand, apparently not
wishing to run the risk of climbing in. Edward slipped under the eaves
of the cottage, not six feet from the man, who remained with his back
partly turned to him. Edward then, finding he had obtained this
position unperceived, crouched down with his gun ready pointed.

As Edward remained in this position, he heard a shrill voice cry out,
"They are getting in behind!" and a movement in cottage. The man near
him, who had his pistol in his hand, put his arm through the window and
fired inside. A shriek was given, and Edward fired his gun into the
body of the man, who immediately fell. Edward lost no time in reloading
his gun, during which he heard the bursting open of the front door and
the report of firearms; then all was silent for a moment, excepting the
wailing of somebody within. As soon as his gun was reloaded, Edward
walked round to the front of the cottage, where he found the man who
was called Ben, lying across the threshold of the open door. He stepped
across the body, and, looking into the room within, perceived a body
stretched on the floor, and a young lad weeping over it.

"Don't be alarmed, I am a friend," said Edward, going in to where the
body lay; and, taking the light which was at the farther end of the
chamber, he placed it on the floor, that he might examine the state of
the person, who was breathing heavily, and apparently badly wounded.
"Rise up, my lad," said Edward, "and let me see if I can be of any use."

"Ah, no!" cried the boy, throwing back his long hair from his temples,
"he bleeds to death!"

"Bring me some water, quick," said Edward, "there's a good lad, while I
see where he is hurt."

The boy ran up to fetch the water, and Edward discovered that the ball
had entered the neck above the collar-bone, and that the blood poured
out of the man's mouth, who was choking with the effusion. Although
ignorant of surgery, Edward thought that such a wound must be mortal;
but the man was not only alive but sensible, and although he could not
utter a word, he spoke with his eyes and with signs. He raised his hand
and pointed to himself first, and shook his head, as if to say that it
was all over with him; and then he turned round his head, as if looking
for the lad, who was now returning with the water. When the lad again
knelt by his side, weeping bitterly, the man pointed to him, and gave
such an imploring look that Edward immediately comprehended what he
wished: it was to ask protection for the boy. It could not be
misunderstood, and could Edward do otherwise than promise it to the
dying man? His generous nature could not refuse it, and he said, "I
understand you; you wish me to take care of your boy when you are gone.
Is it not so?"

The man signified assent.

