"Is there anything new, sir?" asked the young officer. "Have the
technicians been able to find out what's making the screens fail?"

"We're on the right track, Lieutenant," said Strong shortly. "Can't you
get any more speed out of this thing?"

[Illustration: _It would be a rough ride, but at least he was hidden_]

"Yes, sir," replied the officer. He rammed the accelerator to the floor
and the small truck blasted through the streets as though shot out of
cannon.

In a few minutes the truck screamed to a halt in front of the building
and Strong leaped toward the door, followed closely by Sergeant Morgan
and the Space Marine lieutenant.

Strong found Walters before the telemetering board waiting impatiently
for some figures Dr. Joan Dale had sent him to be analyzed and
evaluated. He spun around when Strong entered the room at a dead run.

"Steve!" he exclaimed. "What's the matter? Anything happen to the
cadets?"

"We didn't find them, sir, but we did find something else. We--" Before
Strong could finish, the calculator began pouring out its answers.

"Excuse me, Steve! These figures could tell us why the screens are
failing."

"But I know why they're failing, sir!" shouted Strong.

"You know what?" exclaimed Walters.

As all the men in the room stared at him, Strong hurriedly told the
commanding officer what he had found, concluding, "I think the room I
stumbled into was used as a repair shop. But it was gas-free and pure
oxygen was coming out of the pipe I described."

"I see," said Walters grimly. "Let me check that against these figures."
He turned to the calculator and with the assistance of Joe Howard, Kit
Barnard, and the chief electronics engineer began studying the figures.

Strong paced up and down nervously. The faces of the technicians in the
room clearly showed the strain they had been under the past few days.
And when they heard the startling news Strong had delivered, there
wasn't one who didn't feel his fingers tighten into fists at Brett and
Miles' selfishness.

Walters straightened up and glanced at the faces of the men around him.
"Well, gentlemen," he said. "I think the figures speak for themselves."

There was a murmur of agreement. Walters turned back to Strong. "Those
figures prove conclusively that what you say is true. It is impossible
for the screens to collapse except from a vital leak--exactly such a
leak as you have described."

Walters turned and began to snap orders to the men around him. "I want
every available man sent out on the double. I want every inch of that
area searched for an opening to a mine shaft or anything that leads
underground. Take half the men off the spaceport detail."

"Shall we continue evacuation operations for the miners and their
families?" asked the young Space Marine lieutenant. "There is quite a
force of men out there that could be used in the search."

"What do you think, Steve? Should we take off the guardsmen and suspend
evacuation in the hope that we can find that leak?"

"I would say yes, Commander," said Strong. "Your figures and those Dr.
Dale sent you point to a leak of this nature."

"Very well, Lieutenant," said Walters. "Order every man to the area and
begin search operations immediately. I want that leak found--and found
fast! And I want Charles Brett and Quent Miles arrested at once!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Tom and Astro bent over the lead boxes again and heaved them to their
shoulders. A quick glance showed them that Miles had not followed them
to the floor of the cavern as he had done before, but had remained on
guard on the balcony.

As they struggled to lift the boxes to their shoulders, Tom whispered
out of the side of his mouth, "I know how we can get out of here,
Astro."

"How?"

"Since Brett is staying on the ship for this trip, Miles is going to
have trouble watching both of us."

"Yeah, I know," muttered Astro. "Want me to jump him?"

"No," Tom growled. "Miles has been trailing us through the tunnel by
twenty to thirty feet each trip. When we pass that spot where the light
is, you drop your box. He'll be watching you then and that will give me
a chance to grab that booby trap you took apart, remember?"

"Yeah!"

"O.K. Now remember, when I give you the word, you drop your box on the
right-hand side of the tunnel."

"Hurry up down there!" yelled Miles from the balcony. "We haven't got
all night."

"Keep your shirt on, buster," growled Astro. "We're tired."

The two cadets balanced the heavy lead boxes on their shoulders, and,
with Tom leading the way, climbed up the stairs past Miles and started
up the tunnel in front of the black-suited spaceman.

They walked slowly, side by side, and as before, Miles stayed a good
twenty paces behind them. As they neared the light where they knew the
explosive charge would be, Tom began slowing his pace.

"Come on, get going, Corbett!" Miles yelled.

"He's tired," said Astro. "Leave him alone."

"What are you, his protector?" snarled Miles. "Get going, I said."

"O.K.," said Tom, struggling forward.

They came closer and closer to the light. Tom glanced at Astro and
winked. Astro winked back and braced himself to fake the accident.

As closely as Tom could remember, Astro had tossed the charge to one
side about ten feet beyond the light. If he knew exactly where it was,
he could fall forward on top of it and stuff it in his tunic. He tried
to recreate the scene as it happened. They passed under the light. One
step ... two steps ... three steps.... "Now, Astro," Tom whispered.

The big cadet lunged to one side, dropping the heavy box to the floor.
At the same time, Tom dropped his box and lunged forward, arms
outstretched, feeling along the floor for the precious explosives.

Miles ran up quickly, ray gun cocked and ready.

"Get up!" he shouted. "Get up or I'll freeze you both and leave you
here!"

Tom and Astro struggled to their feet. They lifted the heavy boxes to
their shoulders and started down the tunnel again.

When Astro dared a glance at Tom, he saw his unit mate grin and wink at
him. Astro winked back. Suddenly it seemed that the heavy lead box was
as light as air!




CHAPTER 17


The streets of Olympia echoed to the thunderous roar of jet trucks and
jet cars racing to sector twelve. Miners, Solar Guardsmen, and Space
Marines jammed the vehicles, their faces grim with determination as they
prepared for an all-out attempt to prevent the death of the colony.

Walters, Strong, and Kit Barnard sat behind Blake, the Space Marine
lieutenant, and Sergeant Morgan as they rocketed through the streets.
There was little conversation, each man thinking bitterly of Charles
Brett and Quent Miles. Walters had already foreseen the possibility of
trouble with emotional miners and had ordered Blake to be personally
responsible for the safety of Miles and Brett when they were arrested.

"They get a fair trial like anyone else," declared Walters. "And they
are innocent until proven guilty by a jury."

Now, as he sat beside Strong, Walters wondered if they would be able to
save the city from the ammonia gas. He had taken a calculated risk in
ordering guardsmen at the spaceport to aid in this search. If they
should fail to find the leak, and the gas death spread farther across
the city, the miners and their families would be helpless before it. The
thought of the riots that would ensue if the people tried to get aboard
the spaceships without order made the hardened commander shudder.

The jet car slowed and finally stopped. "What's the matter?" growled
Walters.

"This is as far as we can go in the car, sir," replied Blake. "The gas
is so thick I can't see where I'm driving."

"Very well. Put on your masks," Walters announced. "Keep in contact with
the spaceport control tower. They'll relay messages to me and my orders
back to you. Let's go. Spaceman's luck."

The men opened the doors of the small jet car and stepped out into the
swirling mists. Though there were more than a thousand men searching the
area, they could not rid themselves of a strange feeling of loneliness
as they each walked forward into the mists of death.

Strong and Walters inched their way down the street like blind men,
feeling for each step with hesitant feet.

"Are you sure we're heading in the right direction, Steve?" asked
Walters.

"Yes, Commander," replied Strong. "The warehouse is located about a half
mile down this street."

"Of all the blasted messes," grumbled Walters. "We've got the finest
radar system in the universe and we have to walk along here feeling our
way like blind men."

"There's no other way, I'm afraid," said Strong grimly.

"Are you still with us, Kit?" called Walters.

"Right here, sir," came Barnard's voice, immediately behind them.

The spacemen continued their slow march through the mist in silence.
Once, when Walters stumbled and nearly fell, he roared angrily.

"By the craters of Luna, when I get my hands on those two space
crawlers, there won't be enough of them left for a trial!"

"Yes, sir," said Steve. "But if anything has happened to those cadets,
you'll have to excuse ranks, sir, and wait your turn."

"Of course!" Walters exclaimed a moment later. "That's what happened to
Manning! He didn't run away. He must have gotten on to them during the
trip out here and they shut him up."

"Exactly what I was thinking, sir," said Strong, and then suddenly
stopped. "I just bumped into a wall. We're here."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tom and Astro climbed wearily through the trap door into the room above
the main shaft while Quent Miles watched them closely, keeping his
paralo-ray gun leveled. The two boys hitched the heavy lead boxes into a
more comfortable position on their shoulders and started toward the door
leading outside. But neither boy thought of his discomfort or weariness
now. With the explosive charge safely hidden under Tom's blouse, they
had a chance to fight back. It was a small chance, perhaps, but at least
a chance.

Outside, they walked slowly through the swirling methane ammonia and Tom
edged closer to his unit mate.

"Can you hear me, Astro?" he whispered through the mask amplifier. The
big cadet simply nodded, keeping his eyes forward.

"We'll have to bluff our way now," continued Tom in a low whisper. "This
stuff has to be set off with a charge of electricity."

"Where do we get it?" mumbled Astro.

"The paralo-ray gun."

"You're space happy. It won't work."

"I know that," hissed Tom. "But maybe Miles doesn't. I'll challenge
Miles, hold the stuff right in front of me, and warn him that if he
fires he'll set off the explosive and blow the four of us up."

"Oh, brother. That's a bluff to end all bluffs! Suppose he doesn't
bite?"

"Then get set to take another paralo-ray charge."

"O.K.," sighed Astro. "When do you want to try it?"

"I'll give you the word," replied Tom. "Just be ready." The cadet turned
away quickly. "Watch it," he hissed. "He's suspicious."

The two boys plodded along across the field as Miles moved up closer. He
stared at them for a long moment and then continued to walk along
directly behind them.

When they reached the ship, Miles allowed them to rest and catch their
breath before making the long climb up the ladder to the air-lock
portal. Brett suddenly appeared in the open portal above them.

"Hey, Miles," he called, "is that the last of it?"

"Yes," Miles called back. "You get in touch with our pal?"

"Uh-huh. He's going to meet us out in space."

"In space?" Miles stared up at Brett with a strange gleam in his eye.
"Why not the hide-out?"

"I don't know," Brett replied from above. "Let's not waste time talking
now. Get those other two cases up here. I want to blast off."

Miles turned to the two cadets and waved his paralo-ray gun menacingly.
"All right, you two. Get going!"

"Give us a few more minutes, Miles," said Tom. "We're so tired we can
hardly move."

"Get up, I said," snarled the black-suited spaceman.

"I can't," whined Tom. "You'll have to give me a hand."

Miles pointed his gun straight at the young cadet. "All right. That
means the big fella makes two trips and I freeze you right now."

"No, no!" cried Tom, jumping to his feet. "I can make it. Please don't
freeze me again." Astro turned away to hide his smile.

Sneering his disgust at Tom's apparent fear, Miles prodded the cadets up
the ladder. Tom went first, the heavy box digging into his shoulder.
Astro followed, cursing the fog that prevented him from seeing where
Miles stood below him so he could drop the heavy box on him.

Above them, Charles Brett watched them emerge out of the ammonia mist,
ray gun held tightly in his hand. Tom climbed into the air lock safely
and dropped the box on the edge of the platform, slumping to the deck
beside it. Astro followed seconds later, and then Miles.

"Don't stop now," barked Miles. "Put those boxes below with the rest of
them."

Tom got up slowly, leaning heavily on the outer edge of the
precariously placed box. The box suddenly tilted and then slipped out of
the air lock to disappear in the mist.

"Why, you clumsy--" Brett roared, raising his gun menacingly.

Astro stepped in front of Tom. "I'll get it," he cried. "Don't shoot!"

"Go on then," snarled Brett. "Go down with him, Miles. I'll stay here
with Corbett."

"You go down with him," sneered Miles. "I've been up and down that
ladder fifty times while you sat up here doing nothing."

"Is that so?" cried Brett angrily, turning to face the black-clad
spaceman. This gave Tom the opportunity he was waiting for. He pulled
the small charge of explosives from his tunic and held it in front of
him.

"All right, you two!" he shouted. "Drop those paralo-ray guns. This is
the booby trap you planted in the tunnel. You fire those ray guns and we
all go up together."

Brett jumped back. Miles took a half step forward and stopped. "You
haven't got the nerve," he sneered.

"Shoot and you'll find out," said Tom. "Go ahead! Shoot, if you've got
the guts. Get down the ladder, Astro," he said. "They won't fire as long
as I've got this in my hand."

Brett had begun to shake with fear but Miles brought his ray gun up
slowly. He aimed it at Astro who was starting down the ladder, his head
