
Let us pause here, reader, to assure you that this incident of the
spectacles is no fiction.  Well would it be for the South American
Republics at this day, as well as for the good name of Spain, if the
poor aborigines of South America had nothing more serious to complain of
than the arbitrary act of the dishonest governor referred to; but it is
a melancholy fact that, ever since the conquest of Peru by Pizarro, the
Spaniards have treated the Indians with brutal severity, and it is no
wonder that revenge of the fiercest nature still lingers in the breasts
of the descendants of those unfortunate savages.

Probably our reader knows that the Peruvian region of the Andes is rich
in gold and silver-mines.  These the Spanish conquerors worked by means
of Indian slave labour.  Not long after the conquest a compulsory system
of personal toil was established, whereby a certain proportion of the
natives of each district were appointed by lot to work in the mines.
Every individual who obtained a grant of a mine became entitled to a
certain number of Indians to work it, and every mine which remained
unwrought for a year and a day became the property of any one who chose
to claim and work it.  As there were many hundreds of mines registered
in Peru alone, it may be imagined what a host of Indians were
consequently condemned to a degraded state of slavery.

The labour of the mines was so dreadful that each unfortunate on whom
the lot fell considered it equivalent to his death-warrant.  And that
there was ground for this belief is proved by the fact that not more
than one in six of the Indians condemned to the mines survived the
treatment there inflicted.  Each mitayo, or conscript, received
nominally two shillings a day.  But he never actually received it.  On
his fate being fixed by lot, the poor fellow carried his wife and
children to the mines with him, and made arrangements for never again
returning home.  His food and lodging, being supplied by his employers,
(owners?) were furnished at such an extravagant rate that he always
found himself in debt at the end of his first year--if he outlived it.
In that case he was not allowed to leave until his debt was paid, which,
of course, it never was.

Usually, however, the bad air and heavy labour of the mines, coupled
with grief, told so much on men accustomed to the fresh air and free
life of the wilderness, that death closed the scene before the first
year of servitude was out.  It is said that above eight millions of
natives have perished thus in the mines of Peru.

We have shown briefly one of the many phases of tyrannical cruelty
practised by the conquerors of the land.  Here is another specimen.  At
first there were few merchants in Peru, therefore privilege was granted
to the Spanish corregidors, or governors of districts, to import goods
suitable for Indians, and barter them at a fair price.  Of course this
permission was abused, and trade became a compulsory and disgraceful
traffic.  Useless and worthless articles and damaged goods--razors, for
instance, silk stockings, velvets, etcetera--were forced on Indians who
preferred naked feet and had no beards.

The deeds of the soldiers, miners, and governors were but too readily
copied by the priests, many of whom were rapacious villains who had
chosen the crucifix as their weapon instead of the sword.  One priest,
for instance, besides his regular dues and fees, received during the
year as _presents_, which he _exacted_ at certain festivals, 200 sheep,
6000 head of poultry, 4000 guinea-pigs, and 50,000 eggs, and he would
not say mass on those festival-days until a due proportion of the
presents was delivered.  And this case of extortion is not told of one
of the priests of old.  It occurred in the second quarter of the present
century.  Another priest summoned a widow to make declaration of the
property left her by her husband, so that he might fix the scale of his
burial fees!  He made a high demand.  She implored his mercy, reminding
him of her large family.  He was inexorable, but offered to give up his
claim if she would give him her eldest son--a boy of eight--to be sold
as a slave or given away as a present.  (It seems that the senhoras of
those lands want such boys to carry their kneeling carpets.)  The civil
authorities could not be appealed to in this case.  There was no
redress, so the widow had to agree to give up her son!  Doubtless both
in camp and in church there may have been good men, but if so, they form
an almost invisible minority on the page of Peruvian history.

In short, tyranny in every form was, and for centuries has been,
practised by the white men on the savages; and it is not a matter of
wonder that the memory of these things rankles in the Indian's bosom
even at the present time, and that in recent books of travel we read of
deeds of diabolical cruelty and revenge which we, in peaceful England,
are too apt to think of as belonging exclusively to the days of old.

But let us return to our friends in the little canoe.

"To tell you the truth," said Pedro to the Indian, "I am deeply
disappointed with the result of my mission.  It is not so much that men
do not see the advantages and necessity for union, as that they are
heartless and indifferent--caring nothing, apparently, for the welfare
of the land, so long as the wants and pleasures of the present hour are
supplied."

"Has it ever been otherwise?" asked Tiger, with grave severity of
expression.

"Well, I confess that my reading of history does not warrant me to say
that it has; but my reading of the good Creator's Word entitles me to
hope for and strive after better times."

"I know not," returned the Indian, with a far-off, pensive look, "what
your histories say.  I cannot read.  There are no books in my tongue,
but my memory is strong.  The stories, true stories, of my fathers reach
very far back--to the time before the white man came to curse the
land,--and I remember no time in which men did not desire each other's
property, and slay each other for revenge.  It is man's nature, as it is
the river's nature to flow down hill."

"It is man's fallen, not his first, nature," said Pedro.  "Things were
as bad in England once.  They are not quite so bad now.  God's law has
made the difference.  However, we must take things here as we find them,
and I'm sorry to think that up to this point my mission has been a
failure.  Indeed, the last effort, as you know, nearly cost me my life."

"And what will you now do?" asked Tiger.

"I will visit a few more places in the hope that some of the people may
support us.  After that, I'll mount and away over the Pampas to Buenos
Ayres; see the colonel, and deliver Manuela to her father."

"The white-haired chief?" asked Tiger.

"Even so," replied Pedro.

During the foregoing conversation Quashy had thrust his fat nose down on
a plank and gone to sleep, while Lawrence and Manuela, having nothing
better to do, taught each other Spanish and English respectively!  And,
strange though it may appear, it is a fact that Manuela, with all her
quick-witted intelligence, was wonderfully slow at learning English.  To
Lawrence's intense astonishment and, it must be confessed, to his no
small disappointment, the Indian maiden not only made the same blunders
over and over again, and seemed to be incapable of making progress, but
even laughed at her own stupidity.  This somewhat cooled his admiration
of her character, which coolness afforded him satisfaction rather than
the reverse, as going far to prove that he was not really, (as how could
he be?) _in love_ with the brown-skinned, uneducated, half-savage girl,
but only much impressed with her amiable qualities.  Poor fellow, he was
much comforted by these thoughts, because, had it been otherwise, how
terrible would have been his fate!--either, on the one hand, to marry
her and go and dwell with her savage relations--perhaps be compelled to
paint his visage scarlet with arabesque devices in charcoal, and go on
the war-path against the white man; or, on the other hand, to introduce
his Indian bride into the _salons_ of civilisation, with the certainty
of beholding the sneer of contempt on the face of outraged society; with
the probability of innumerable violations of the rules of etiquette, and
the possibility of Manuela exhibiting the squaw's preference for the
floor to a chair, fingers to knives and forks, and--pooh! the thing was
absurd, _utterly_ out of the question!

Towards sunset they came to a part of the river where there were a good
many sandbanks, as well as extensive reaches of sand along shore.

On one of these low-lying spits they drew up the canoe, and encamped for
that night in the bushes, close enough to the edge to be able to see the
river, where a wide-spreading tree canopied them from the dews of night.

Solemn and inexpressibly sad were the views of life taken by Lawrence
that night as he stood by the river's brink in the moonlight, while his
companions were preparing the evening meal, and gave himself up to the
contemplation of things past, present, and to come,--which is very much
like saying that he thought about nothing in particular.  What he felt
quite sure of was that he was horribly depressed--dissatisfied with
himself, his companions and his surroundings, and ashamed in no small
degree of his dissatisfaction.  As well he might be; for were not his
companions particularly agreeable, and were not his surroundings
exquisitely beautiful and intensely romantic?  The moon in a cloudless
sky glittered in the broad stream, and threw its rippling silver
treasures at his very feet.  A gentle balmy air fanned his cheek, on
which mantled the hue of redundant health, and the tremendous puffs and
long-drawn sighs of the alligators, with the growl of jaguars, croak and
whistle of frogs, and the voice of the howling monkey, combined to fill
his ear with the music of thrilling romance, if not of sweetness.

"What more could I wish?" he murmured, self-reproachfully.

A tremendous slap on the face--dealt by his own hand, as a giant
mosquito found and probed some tenderer spot than usual--reminded him
that some few things, which he did not wish for, were left to mingle in
his cup of too great felicity, and reduce it, like water in overproof
whisky, to the level of human capacity.

Still dissatisfied, despite his reflections, he returned to the fire
under the spreading tree, and sat down to enjoy a splendid basin of
turtle soup,--soup prepared by Tiger the day before from the flesh of a
turtle slain by his own hand, and warmed up for the supper of that
evening.  A large tin dish or tureen full of the same was placed at his
elbow to tempt his appetite, which, to say truth, required no tempting.

Manuela, having already supped, sat with her little hands clasped in her
lap, and her lustrous eyes gazing pensively into the fire.  Perhaps she
was attempting to read her fortune in the blazing embers.  Perchance
engaged in thinking of that very common subject--nothing!  If Pedro had
smoked the same thing, it would have been better for his health and
pocket; but Pedro, thinking otherwise, fumigated his fine moustache, and
disconcerted the mosquitoes in the region of his nose.

Quashy, having just replenished the fire until the logs rose two feet or
more from the ground, turned his back on the same, warmed his hands
behind him, and gazed up through the over-arching boughs at the starry
sky with that wistfully philosophical expression which negroes are apt
to assume when their thoughts are "too deep," or too complex, "for
utterance."

Spotted Tiger continued to dally with the turtle soup, and seemed loath
to give in as he slowly, with many a pause between, raised the huge iron
spoon to his lips.

No one seemed inclined to break the silence into which they had sunk,
for all were more or less fatigued; and it seemed as if the very brutes
around sympathised with them, for there was a perceptible lull in the
whistling of the frogs, the howling monkeys appeared to have gone to
rest, and the sighing alligators to have subsided and sunk, so that the
breaking of a twig or the falling of a leaf was perceptible to the
listening ear.

Things were in this state of profound and peaceful calm when a slight
rustling was heard among the branches of the tree above them.

The instant glare of Quashy's eyes; the gaze of Manuela's; the cock of
Pedro's ear, and the sudden pause of our hero's spoon on its way to his
lips, were sights to behold!  The Indian alone seemed comparatively
indifferent to the sound, though he looked up inquiringly.

At that moment there burst forth an ear-splitting, marrow-shrivelling
blood-curdling yell, that seemed to rouse the entire universe into a
state of wild insanity.  There could be no mistaking it--the peculiar,
horrid, shrieking, only too familiar war-whoop of the painted savage!

Quashy staggered back.  He could not recover himself, for a log had
caught his heel.  To sit down on the fire he knew would be death,
therefore he bounded over it backwards and fell into Lawrence's lap,
crushing that youth's plate almost into the region where the soup had
already gone, and dashing his feet into the tureen!

Lawrence roared; Manuela shrieked; Pedro sprang up and seized his
weapons.  So did Lawrence and his man, regardless of the soup.

Tiger alone sat still, conveying the iron spoon slowly to his lips, but
with a peculiar motion of his broad shoulders which suggested that the
usually grave savage was convulsed with internal laughter.

"Ghosts and crokidiles!--what's dat?" gasped Quashy, staring up into the
tree, and ready to fire at the first visible object.

Tiger also looked up, made a peculiar sound with his mouth, and held out
his hand.

Immediately a huge bird, responding to the call, descended from the tree
and settled on his wrist.

Quashy's brief commentary explained it all.

"Purrit!"

It was indeed the Indian's faithful pet-parrot, which he had taught thus
to raise the war-cry of his tribe, and which, having bestowed its entire
affections on its master, was in the habit of taking occasional flights
after him when he went away from home.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

IN WHICH INGENUITY, COMICALITY, FEROCITY, ECCENTRICITY, FECUNDITY, AND
SOME OTHER "ITIES" IN MAN AND BEAST ARE MENTIONED.

Plain sailing, fair weather, perpetual calm and sunshine are not the lot
of any man or woman here.

The weather, that fertile source of human intercourse, is occasionally
boisterous as well as serene in the regions of Peru and Bolivia.  A day
or two after the events recounted in the last chapter our travellers
experienced a sudden change.

We have said that they had come to a part of the river where there were
occasional stretches of sand, and here they had evidence of the
improvident nature of Indians, in the number of turtle-shells found
lying on the sands with parts of the animals still adhering to them.

On one particular spot they found a space, of about seventy yards in
diameter completely covered with the upper and under shells of turtles.
These had evidently been cut asunder violently with hatchets, and
reddish-brown furrows in the sands told where streams of blood had
flowed during the massacre.

"What wanton slaughter!" exclaimed Lawrence, as he and his friends stood
looking at the scene.

"And it is not long since it was done," said Pedro, "for the flesh--at
least what's left of it--is still fresh."

"Ugh, you brutes!" exclaimed Quashy, referring to a number of urubu
vultures which stood on the shells, all more or less gorged, some still
tearing sleepily at the meat, others standing in apoplectic apathy,
quite unable to fly.

They counted upwards of three hundred dead turtles, and this carnage, it
was afterwards ascertained, had been the work of only a dozen or so of
Indians--not for food, but for the sake of the fine yellow fat covering
the intestines, which formed an article of commerce at the time between
the red men and the white.

That night after supper time the party busied themselves in making
mosquito-curtains out of a small quantity of green muslin obtained from
Spotted Tiger's father-in-law, who had received it from the
missionaries.  The supply being quite insufficient to make curtains for
them all, Quashy had set his fertile brain to work and devised a species
of net which, having never been seen in that country before, deserves
special notice.  It may serve as a hint to other mortals similarly
situated and tormented.

"You mus' know," remarked Quashy to his friends, who watched him while
he fabricated the first of these curtains, "dat my gran'fadder was a
injineer, an' some ob his geenus comed down to me.  Dat's why I's so
clebber wid my hands.  Has you got dem hoops tied, massa?"

"All right, Quashy, I'm just finishing the last one.  There--are these
the right sizes?"

"Das right, massa.  Biggest two one futt six in dameter; oder two leetle
ones, one futt.  Now, you looks here, ladies an' gen'lemen.  See, I's
made a bag ob dis muzzlin 'bout two futt six long an' 'bout two futt
wide.  Well, one end ob de bag is close up--as you see.  'Tother end am
open--as you b'hold.  Vwalla! as de Frenchman says.  Now, I puts into de
closed end one small hoop--so.  Den de two large hoops--so--'bout six
inches apart.  Den de leetle hoop--so.  Which makes my bag into what you
may call a gauze-barrel, wid de hoops inside 'stead ob outside.  Nixt, I
puts it ober my head, lets de bottom hoop rest on my shoulders, shoves
de slack ob de veil--I calls it a veil, not a curtin,--down my neck
under my poncho, so's nuffin can git inside, an' dere you are.  No
skeeters git at me now!"

"But, Quash," said Lawrence, who had watched the making of this
ingenious device, as well as lent assistance, "there are mosquitoes
inside it even now; and with such swarms as are about us, how will you
keep them out while putting the thing on."

"Don' call it a `t'ing,' massa," said Quashy, with a dignified look,
"call it a `veil.'  Dere's nuflin easier.  See here."

He rose, took off the veil, and flattened the hoops down on each other,
so as to drive out all that might be inside.  Then he stepped to leeward
of the fire, held his breath for a few seconds while in the smoke,
quickly adjusted his novel head-piece, and stood up fully armed against
the "skeeters."

"But," still objected Lawrence, "how can you lay your head on your
pillow with such a thing--beg pardon, such a veil on?"

"Nuffin easier, massa."

He illustrated his point by rolling over into one of the nearest
hammocks--which had already been hung--and laying his head down, when,
of course, the machine bulged away from his black face, and the
discomfited millions kept thrusting their probosces--and, doubtless,
making faces at him--ineffectually.

"But how if you should want to roll about in your sleep?" asked Pedro.

"_Don't_ want to roll about in your sleep!" replied the negro, curtly.

It is right to say that, in spite of the advice thus firmly given,
Quashy _did_ roll in his sleep that night, with the result that his nose
at last got close to the veil and pressed against it.  No malignant foe
ever took advantage of an enemy's weak point more promptly than did the
"skeeters" of Quashy's nocturnal trumpet.  They settled on its point
with a species of triumphant hum.  They warred with each other in their
bloodthirsty desire to seize on the delicate but limited morsel.  It was
"cut and come again"--at least it was "cut away and let others come
on"--as long as the chance lasted.  And the consequence was that Quashy
rose next morning with two noses!  His natural nose being a mere lump of
fat and the lump raised on it being much the same in form and size with
the original, we feel justified in saying that he had two noses--nearly.

Notwithstanding, it is but fair to add that the veils were afterwards
pronounced a great success.
