Hitherto he had regarded the Mexican Empire as a great and united
power, against which success with so small a force was impossible;
but now that he saw it was composed of subjugated peoples, many of
whom would gladly ally themselves with him against their
conquerors, the enterprise wore a far more hopeful aspect. He
dismissed the Indians with presents, and a promise to visit their
country, shortly.

He talked the matter over with his principal friends, who were as
reluctant as he was, himself, to abandon the enterprise and return
to Cuba, where the governor would appropriate the largest share of
the spoils they had taken. They accordingly went about among the
soldiery, urging them to persuade the general to establish a
permanent colony in the country. It was true that he had no
authority from Velasquez to do so, but the interests of the emperor
and of Spain--to say nothing of their own--were of more importance
than those of the Governor of Cuba.

This talk reached the ears of the special friends and adherents of
Velasquez; who, going to Cortez, remonstrated with him against such
proceedings. He said that nothing was farther from his desires than
to exceed his instructions, and on the following morning issued a
proclamation to the troops, ordering them to prepare for
embarkation. The sensation caused among the troops was great, and
his partisans thronged round his tent, calling upon him to
countermand his orders and form a settlement. Cortez, after due
hesitation, gave in to their wishes, nominated magistrates, and
proclaimed the territory a colony of Spain. As soon as the new
magistrates and officers came together, Cortez came before them and
tendered his resignation of his office as captain general, but was
re-nominated not only captain general, but Chief Justice of the
colony.

The partisans of Velasquez were most indignant at the whole
proceedings, and so violent were some of the leaders that Cortez
put them in irons, and sent them on board ship. Then he set to work
with the soldiers, and soon brought them round; and the prisoners
on board being also won over, the whole army, re-embarking, sailed
up the coast until they reached the port before discovered and,
landing, set out for Cempoalla.

They were delighted with the country, which was rich and fertile;
and as they neared the town, the natives poured out with lively
demonstrations of welcome, the women throwing garlands of flowers
round the necks of the soldiers. They were greatly struck with the
town, although it was but a small place in comparison with those
they were afterwards to see. Cortez lost no time in sending off a
vessel to Spain, with dispatches to the emperor; and his influence
over the soldiers was so great that they, as well as the officers,
relinquished all their shares of the treasure they had gained, in
order that a worthy present should be sent home to their monarch.

In his dispatches Cortez related all that had befallen them,
dilated on the prospect of annexing so rich a country to the
Spanish dominions, and asked for a confirmation of his acts, and
for an authorization for the magistrates of the new town, which was
called Villa Rica de Vera Cruz. The ship touched at Cuba, but
continued its voyage before Velasquez, who was furious at the news
of the important discoveries made by Cortez, could stop it.

Scarcely had the ship sailed when Cortez discovered that a
conspiracy was on foot, among the partisans of Velasquez, to seize
one of the vessels and to sail away to Cuba. The conspirators were
seized, two of them executed and others flogged; but the discovery
that there were a number of timid spirits in the camp, who might
seriously interfere with his plans, greatly annoyed Cortez, and he
took the extraordinary resolution of destroying all the ships.
Through some of his devoted friends he bribed the captains of the
vessels to fall in with his views; and they appeared before him,
and made a solemn report that the ships were worm eaten and unfit
for sea. Cortez pretended great surprise, and ordered everything
movable to be brought ashore, and the ships to be sunk.

Nine vessels were so destroyed, and but one small craft was left
afloat. When the news reached the troops at Cempoalla, they were
filled with consternation. It seemed to them that nothing but
destruction awaited them, and from murmurings they broke out into
mutiny.

Cortez however, as usual, speedily allayed the tumult. He pointed
out that his loss was the greatest, since the ships were his
property; and that the troops would in fact derive great advantage
by it, since it would swell their force by a hundred men, who must
otherwise have remained in charge of the vessels. He urged them to
place their confidence in him, and they might rely upon it that
success would attend their efforts. If there were any cowards
there, they might take the remaining ship and sail to Cuba with it,
and wait patiently there until the army returned, laden with the
spoils of the Aztecs.

The troops at once returned to their duty, and declared their
readiness to follow him, wheresoever he would. Without further
delay, Cortez, taking with him a number of natives to act as
carriers, set out on his march towards Mexico.



Chapter 12: The Fugitives.


At nightfall Roger and his guide continued their journey, but now
moved with great caution, keeping but a short distance from the
road. Several times they saw fires burning, and had to take long
detours to avoid them. Consequently the moon had set when they were
still more than ten miles from the pass. Next morning they
continued their journey, avoiding as much as possible crossing
tracts of cultivated land; and when forced to do so, lying down and
crawling between the rows of the maize or yuccas.

"They are sure to have scouts, high up on the mountainside,"
Bathalda said; "and they thence can look down upon all these
fields; and although, as we cross them we are perfectly hidden from
people standing on the same level, they can see us clearly enough
from there."

"The distance is very great to make out a man."

"The air is very clear, my lord, in these mountains; and a figure
can be seen a vast distance off. However, we can do nothing but
what we are doing, and must take our chance."

"If we are attacked," Roger said, "we must make straight up the
mountains. Steep as they may be, there are few places where active
men cannot climb, and numbers would avail nothing if we once got up
among those heights."

They were now mounting rapidly towards the pass. The country was
still thickly wooded, but Bathalda said that in the narrowest part
of the pass there were no trees, and it was here that the danger
would be greatest.

As they neared the mouth of the gorge they moved with the greatest
care, keeping their eyes in every direction. Presently Bathalda
stopped, and held up his hand. Roger listened.

"They are coming behind us," Bathalda said. "They must have made us
out in the distance, and have sent a party down the road to enter
the wood behind us, and so prevent us from retreating."

"Then we had better bear away to the left, Bathalda. They are sure
to be in force in the pass; and since they are behind us, also, our
only hope is to try and scale the hill to the left."

Bathalda, without a word, moved forward in the direction indicated.
The trees grew thinner in front, and through them they could see
rocky ground rising steeply up. They issued out and began to climb,
when the sound of a horn rose loudly in the air, and a moment
afterwards a number of men were seen, running from the right along
the edge of the trees.

"They will not shoot," Roger said. "They want to take me alive.
Never mind their arrows, it is a question of legs, at present."

The rocks were extremely steep, and in many places they had to use
their hands, as well as their feet, in making the ascent. The
Aztecs, who had on first seeing them broken into loud cries, were
now silent, and were toiling up the hillside in pursuit.

"Now," Roger said, after a very severe piece of climbing, "we must
stop them."

He strung his bow and, placing an arrow to the string, shouted to
the Aztecs that he should shoot unless they desisted from pursuit.
They paid no attention, their officer shouting to them to press on.
They were now less than a hundred yards behind.

Roger drew his bow to the fullest, and the arrow whizzed through
the air. It struck the officer in the throat, and he fell prone. A
cry of astonishment broke from the soldiers; however they did not
hesitate a moment, but pushed on with loud shouts. Roger discharged
six arrows in rapid succession, and five of them flew true to the
mark.

The Aztecs paused, the distance to which the arrows were sent, and
the accuracy of the shooting struck them with consternation; and it
was evident to them that before they could climb the steep ascent,
the greater portion of them would be shot down. Some took shelter
behind rocks, and began to discharge their arrows. Others fell back
in haste.

"Now we will be moving on again, Bathalda," Roger said. "We have
taught them a lesson of caution."

They proceeded on their way, until they reached a shoulder which
led straight up the mountain. Just as they stopped to draw breath
there was a shout, and a party of twenty men, who had evidently
climbed straight up from the pass to cut them off, rushed at them.
Roger rapidly discharged five arrows into the midst of them, and
then slipped the string from the notch, and seized the bamboo as a
quarterstaff.

At the order of their leader, the Aztecs threw down their spears
and flung themselves on him, with the intention of dragging him to
the ground; but making his quarterstaff swing round his head, he
brought the ends down upon them with tremendous force, striking
them to the ground as if they had been ninepins. Bathalda seconded
him well, by guarding him from attack behind.

Finding that, in spite of his efforts, he could not keep back his
assailants, Roger threw down the quarterstaff and seized his ax.
Four more of them fell, cleft through the head; and then four of
them sprang upon him together, but Roger's practice in Devonshire
wrestling now stood him in good service; and although in a moment
the four were hanging upon him, they could neither get him off his
legs, nor hold his arms; and he beat three of them down with heavy
blows on their faces, while Bathalda freed him from one on his
back, by a thrust with his spear.

Roger again caught up the ax, which he had let fall to have the use
of both of his fists, but the fight was over. The five Aztecs still
remaining on their feet, appalled at the, to them, supernatural
strength of their gigantic foe, fled to join their comrades, who
had now nearly reached the crest on which the combat had taken
place.

"Come on, Bathalda," Roger exclaimed. "We have not a moment to
lose. They will shoot now, seeing that they have little chance of
taking me alive."

And they accordingly started up the steep ascent, as rapidly as
their breathless condition would allow. Their pursuers paused a
moment on gaining the brow to get their wind, and then followed;
but as soon as the ground again became too steep to allow of rapid
movement, Roger turned and, betaking himself to his bow and arrows,
speedily checked the pursuit; the Aztecs being unable to stand
against these terrible weapons, whose force and accuracy seemed to
them supernatural.

The sight, too, of the heap of their comrades lying on the slope
had greatly cooled their courage. Their officers had all fallen
under Roger's arrows, together with most of their bravest comrades;
and although the rest still continued the pursuit, it was at a
distance that showed that they had no intention, whatever, of
closing again.

Paying no further heed to them, Roger and his companion now
directed their whole attention to the work of climbing. At times
they came on perpendicular precipices, and had to make long detours
to surmount them. After some hours' labor they reached the snow.
They were now near a shoulder between two lofty peaks, and after an
hour's climbing stood on its crest. The Aztecs were now mere spots,
far behind them.

"They will be an hour before they are here," Roger said. "We need
fear no more trouble with them. It was a sharp fight while it
lasted, Bathalda."

These were the first words they had spoken, beyond a momentary
consultation, now and then, as to the best mode of surmounting
difficulties.

"My lord is wonderful," the hunter said. "Never did I see such
strength and skill. It was like a mountain tiger attacked by
jackals."

"You did your share, too, Bathalda. Your spear rid me of several of
them."

"I did what I could, my lord; but that was little enough. A few men
like you would defeat an army."

"Well, Bathalda, now we will be moving on again. We will keep
straight down this slope, until we are off the snow; for they can
follow our footsteps. Beyond that we must press on until we get
into the woods again, and there we can turn right or left, as we
please, and throw them off the scent altogether. We shall then be
safe until we leave the forest, and begin to descend into the hot
country."

Another hour, and they had left the snow behind them; and after two
more hours on the rocky hillside, they again entered a forest. As
soon as they were well among the trees, they turned to the right
again, and after traveling through the wood for two or three miles
they halted, secure now against any search on the part of their
pursuers.

Just before halting they had the good luck to come across a small
bear, which Roger wounded with an arrow, and his companion
dispatched with his spear. Bathalda speedily made a fire by rubbing
two sticks together, and after skinning the bear, cut it up; and
while Roger was superintending the roasting of some pieces over the
fire, Bathalda searched in the wood, and speedily returned with
some roots, which he placed in the ashes, and which turned out
excellent eating with the bear's flesh.

As it was now far on in the afternoon, and as they had already
performed a very fatiguing day's work, they resolved to wait where
they were until the morning.

"What do you think would be our best course, now?" Roger asked,
after they had eaten their meal, and were stretched close to the
fire for warmth--for at this elevation the cold was great.

Bathalda did not reply, but sat pouring out volumes of smoke from
the pipe he had just filled. At last Roger repeated the question.

"I am ready to go where my lord wills."

"Yes, Bathalda; but that is no answer to my question. You know the
ways of your people, and I do not. We have had a sharp fight with
them today. What is likely to come of it?"

Bathalda shook his head.

"The news will, long before this, have been sent by swift runners
to every town and village on this slope of the mountains. The
garrisons of Perote, Tlatlanquitepec, Xalapa, and Naulinco will all
be in movement. Naulinco is but some eight or ten miles away down
the pass; and not only the soldiers, but every man in the town will
be ordered out. They will be posted as thick as blades of grass at
the mouth of every valley leading down from the mountains.

"You have resisted the emperor's officers, and have killed numbers
of his soldiers. They will know that the wrath of Montezuma will be
terrible, if they fail to arrest you."

"Then you think that it will almost be impossible to make our way
through them?"

Bathalda nodded his head.

"And in time, I suppose, they will search these woods?"

"Every foot of them, wide though they are, my lord."

"Then what is your advice, Bathalda?"

"It depends whether my lord's mind is altogether set upon joining
the white men of the sea, at once."

Roger, in turn, was silent for a time. The Spaniards would have
learned the wealth of the land. It was not likely they would
speedily depart; but if they did, it would only be to return again,
in far greater force than at present. Other opportunities would
occur for rejoining them, and it would be folly to throw away his
life, and that of his companion, in an attempt that the latter
evidently felt to be desperate. He had already had proof of the
vigilance of the Aztec scouts, and doubtless that vigilance would
now be redoubled.

"No, Bathalda," he replied at last; "I should be content to remain
in hiding for a time, and to risk the departure of the white men."

"Then, my lord, my advice is, that we retrace our steps across to
the other side of the mountains. Then we will head north, avoiding
the towns, and take refuge for a time in the forests, that stretch
for many leagues over the mountains. There we can build a hut and
hunt. There are turkeys and other game in abundance. From time to
time I can go down to a town and gather news, and bring back such
things as may be necessary for you. Then, when the search for you
abates, we can strike down thence to the seacoast, if the white men
are still there. At any rate, we can live by hunting as long as you
may find it necessary to remain in concealment."

"That will be by far the best plan, Bathalda. I have no objection
to a few weeks of life in the woods, and you can teach me your
craft of a hunter. What do you say: shall we start back this
evening?"

"If my lord is not too wearied, it would be well if we could get
across the crest before morning. They will have sentries at every
point whence they can command a view of the hills; and our figures
could be made out, on the snow, at a great distance away."

"I should have preferred a night's rest, Bathalda; but it would be
foolish to lose a day, and no doubt parties will be searching the
woods in the morning. We have still four hours before the sun goes
down, and that should be enough to fit us for starting again."

The hunter was pleased at Roger's decision.

"Let my lord sleep at once," he said. "I will watch. I am
accustomed to long journeys, and to pass my nights in search of
game. It is nothing to me. I used dry sticks for the fire, and but
little smoke will have made its way through the trees. Still it may
possibly be noticed, and it were best one of us should remain on
watch."

Roger felt that he should never be able to make the ascent over the
crest of the hill, unless he had some rest; and therefore, without
argument, he wrapped himself in his cotton mantle, and lay down
before the fire.

It seemed to him that he had but just closed his eyes, when his
companion touched him.

"It is time that we should be moving, my lord. The sun has just
set."

"Why, it appears to me to be night already, Bathalda."

"It has been dark here for the last hour, my lord; but on the other
side of the mountains the sun has but now gone down. See, the full
moon has just risen in the east."

"That is so, Bathalda; and we shall have her light till morning.
Well, I am ready, though I could have slept on comfortably until
sunrise. Have you heard anything?"

"I have heard the sound of horns, far down the hillside; but
nothing near us save animals, disturbed by the voices below, and
passing up towards the rocks. I have cooked some more flesh. It is
always best to make a good meal when one can. We have a rough
journey before us, and the cold will be great. Fortunately, the air
is still. Were it blowing, I should say that there was less danger
in waiting here than in crossing the mountain."

The meal was quickly eaten. Bathalda slung a large piece of bear's
flesh over his shoulder, and they started. So bright was the
moonlight that they had no more difficulty in climbing than if it
had been day, and after six hours of severe toil they again came
down upon the forest, on the other side of the mountains.

They proceeded among the trees for some little distance, till they
came to some very thick undergrowth, where Bathalda thought it
would be perfectly safe to light a fire. This he accordingly did,
as Roger said he would rather run any danger than go without a
fire.

In spite of the exertions they had made, they were chilled to the
bone. Their clothes were stiff with the frozen moisture from their
bodies, and the cotton mantles offered but small protection against
the cold. A pleasant glow stole over them, as the fire burnt up.

"I will watch now, Bathalda, and you shall sleep."

"I do not think that there is any danger, my lord. They believe us
among the woods on the other side of the mountains, and it is not
at all likely there will be any vigilant watch kept upon this side.
We can both sleep without fear."

Roger was glad to hear his companion's opinion, and in a few
minutes was fast asleep.

When he awoke it was day. Bathalda was cooking some flesh over the
embers of the fire.

"You have been asleep, I hope, Bathalda?" Roger said, as he rose to
his feet and shook himself.

"I have slept, my lord," the hunter said, although in fact it was
not until morning began to break that he had relaxed his
watchfulness. "We will be off as soon as we have eaten. It is
possible that parties may, as soon as it is daybreak, go along by
the edge of the snow line, to assure themselves that we are still
on the other side of the mountain; and if so, they will probably
come across our footsteps--therefore we had best be moving, at
once."

Two long days' marches took them deep into the woods lying north of
Tlatlanquitepec. Here they set to work to construct a rough hut of
boughs, near a mountain spring; and when this was completed, they
set to work hunting.

Turkeys abounded. These they generally obtained by shooting them at
night, as they roosted in the trees; but they sometimes hunted them
by day, Bathalda imitating their call so accurately that they came
up within easy shot of them, without the least suspicion of danger.
They killed several small bears, which were useful, not only for
their flesh, but for the warmth of their skins at night. Once or
twice they shot deer, and obtained other game in abundance.

At night they frequently heard the roar of the mountain tiger. Once
or twice, when the sounds approached too close to their hut, they
left it and took refuge in trees, as the hunter said that even
Roger's arrows would scarcely slay these fierce beasts at once; and
that, when wounded, they were terrible enemies.

Roger enjoyed the life much. The air was fresh and bracing, the
forest magnificent in its varied foliage, and the abundance of game
so great that it needed no special exertion to keep themselves well
supplied with food. Two or three times, at intervals of a week or
ten days, Bathalda went down to Tlatlanquitepec, with a load of
turkeys and other game slung on a pole over his shoulder, and
returned with maize, flour, chocolate, and pulque, and other
articles of food; and--which was of much greater importance to
Roger--news of the white strangers.

The first time he learned that they had arrived in several floating
castles, and had landed at once. The natives had received them with
kindness, and the chief of that district, Teuhtlile, had on the
following day had an interview with their chief. Presents had been
exchanged. Five days later an embassy, with many very rich gifts
from the emperor, arrived at the camp. They were the bearers of
friendly messages from Montezuma; who, however, had declined to
allow them to proceed into the country, and had requested them to
leave the coast at once. The white men had sent back a message to
Montezuma praying him to alter his determination, and showed no
signs of obeying his orders, and re-embarking on board their ships.
By the orders of Montezuma's envoys, the people had now abstained
from visiting the camp, or bringing in supplies.

Three weeks after, Bathalda returned from the town with the news
that another embassy from Montezuma had visited the white camp,
with another great store of valuable presents; but that Montezuma
positively prohibited them advancing towards the capital. Two days
later they were visited by envoys from Cempoalla, the chief town of
the Totonacs, who had been lately conquered by the Aztecs, and had
invited the white men to visit their city. They had accordingly
marched there, and were now dwelling in this town. It was said that
the Aztecs were extremely indignant at the action of the Totonacs,
and that dire vengeance would be taken upon them, for daring to act
in this manner without the permission of Montezuma.

The next news was, that the white men had marched farther north to
Chiahuitztla, that they were founding a city there, and that they
had actually seized and imprisoned a party of Aztec envoys. The
white men had visited other towns, and at Cempoalla had insulted
the gods, rolled the idols down from the tops of the temples, and
had erected altars to their own gods there.

This act had created a profound impression throughout the country;
and the greatest astonishment was felt that Montezuma did not, at
once, put his armies in motion to crush these profane and insolent
strangers. A still greater sensation had been caused by the news
that the Spaniards had destroyed all their floating castles, and
that it was therefore evident that they intended to remain,
permanently, in the land.

This news greatly surprised Roger. The reports were unanimous that
there were, at the utmost, but three or four hundred of the Whites;
and that the Spaniards should dream of matching themselves against
the whole force of Mexico, seemed almost incredible.

"How do the white men communicate with the natives?" Roger asked.

"They have with them some slaves, whom they obtained at Tabasco.
Among them was one who was a Mexican by race. They say that the
white men speak to another white man who understands the language
of Tabasco, and that he speaks to this young woman, who speaks in
Mexican what she is told. She is treated with great honor by the
white men."

