
"Is the spring coming?" he said. "What is it like? You don't see it in
rooms if you are ill."

"It is the sun shining on the rain and the rain falling on the sunshine,
and things pushing up and working under the earth," said Mary. "If the
garden was a secret and we could get into it we could watch the things
grow bigger every day, and see how many roses are alive. Don't you see?
Oh, don't you see how much nicer it would be if it was a secret?"

He dropped back on his pillow and lay there with an odd expression on
his face.

"I never had a secret," he said, "except that one about not living to
grow up. They don't know I know that, so it is a sort of secret. But I
like this kind better."

"If you won't make them take you to the garden," pleaded Mary,
"perhaps--I feel almost sure I can find out how to get in sometime. And
then--if the doctor wants you to go out in your chair, and if you can
always do what you want to do, perhaps--perhaps we might find some boy
who would push you, and we could go alone and it would always be a
secret garden."

"I should--like--that," he said very slowly, his eyes looking dreamy. "I
should like that. I should not mind fresh air in a secret garden."

Mary began to recover her breath and feel safer because the idea of
keeping the secret seemed to please him. She felt almost sure that if
she kept on talking and could make him see the garden in his mind as she
had seen it he would like it so much that he could not bear to think
that everybody might tramp into it when they chose.

"I'll tell you what I _think_ it would be like, if we could go into it,"
she said. "It has been shut up so long things have grown into a tangle
perhaps."

He lay quite still and listened while she went on talking about the
roses which _might_ have clambered from tree to tree and hung
down--about the many birds which _might_ have built their nests there
because it was so safe. And then she told him about the robin and Ben
Weatherstaff, and there was so much to tell about the robin and it was
so easy and safe to talk about it that she ceased to feel afraid. The
robin pleased him so much that he smiled until he looked almost
beautiful, and at first Mary had thought that he was even plainer than
herself, with his big eyes and heavy locks of hair.

"I did not know birds could be like that," he said. "But if you stay in
a room you never see things. What a lot of things you know. I feel as if
you had been inside that garden."

She did not know what to say, so she did not say anything. He evidently
did not expect an answer and the next moment he gave her a surprise.

"I am going to let you look at something," he said. "Do you see that
rose-colored silk curtain hanging on the wall over the mantel-piece?"

Mary had not noticed it before, but she looked up and saw it. It was a
curtain of soft silk hanging over what seemed to be some picture.

"Yes," she answered.

"There is a cord hanging from it," said Colin. "Go and pull it."

Mary got up, much mystified, and found the cord. When she pulled it the
silk curtain ran back on rings and when it ran back it uncovered a
picture. It was the picture of a girl with a laughing face. She had
bright hair tied up with a blue ribbon and her gay, lovely eyes were
exactly like Colin's unhappy ones, agate gray and looking twice as big
as they really were because of the black lashes all round them.

"She is my mother," said Colin complainingly. "I don't see why she died.
Sometimes I hate her for doing it."

"How queer!" said Mary.

"If she had lived I believe I should not have been ill always," he
grumbled. "I dare say I should have lived, too. And my father would not
have hated to look at me. I dare say I should have had a strong back.
Draw the curtain again."

Mary did as she was told and returned to her footstool.

"She is much prettier than you," she said, "but her eyes are just like
yours--at least they are the same shape and color. Why is the curtain
drawn over her?"

He moved uncomfortably.

"I made them do it," he said. "Sometimes I don't like to see her looking
at me. She smiles too much when I am ill and miserable. Besides, she is
mine and I don't want every one to see her."

There were a few moments of silence and then Mary spoke.

"What would Mrs. Medlock do if she found out that I had been here?" she
inquired.

"She would do as I told her to do," he answered. "And I should tell her
that I wanted you to come here and talk to me every day. I am glad you
came."

"So am I," said Mary. "I will come as often as I can, but"--she
hesitated--"I shall have to look every day for the garden door."

"Yes, you must," said Colin, "and you can tell me about it afterward."

He lay thinking a few minutes, as he had done before, and then he spoke
again.

"I think you shall be a secret, too," he said. "I will not tell them
until they find out. I can always send the nurse out of the room and say
that I want to be by myself. Do you know Martha?"

"Yes, I know her very well," said Mary. "She waits on me."

He nodded his head toward the outer corridor.

"She is the one who is asleep in the other room. The nurse went away
yesterday to stay all night with her sister and she always makes Martha
attend to me when she wants to go out. Martha shall tell you when to
come here."

Then Mary understood Martha's troubled look when she had asked
questions about the crying.

"Martha knew about you all the time?" she said.

"Yes; she often attends to me. The nurse likes to get away from me and
then Martha comes."

"I have been here a long time," said Mary. "Shall I go away now? Your
eyes look sleepy."

"I wish I could go to sleep before you leave me," he said rather shyly.

"Shut your eyes," said Mary, drawing her footstool closer, "and I will
do what my Ayah used to do in India. I will pat your hand and stroke it
and sing something quite low."

"I should like that perhaps," he said drowsily.

Somehow she was sorry for him and did not want him to lie awake, so she
leaned against the bed and began to stroke and pat his hand and sing a
very low little chanting song in Hindustani.

"That is nice," he said more drowsily still, and she went on chanting
and stroking, but when she looked at him again his black lashes were
lying close against his cheeks, for his eyes were shut and he was fast
asleep. So she got up softly, took her candle and crept away without
making a sound.




CHAPTER XIV

A YOUNG RAJAH


The moor was hidden in mist when the morning came and the rain had not
stopped pouring down. There could be no going out of doors. Martha was
so busy that Mary had no opportunity of talking to her, but in the
afternoon she asked her to come and sit with her in the nursery. She
came bringing the stocking she was always knitting when she was doing
nothing else.

"What's the matter with thee?" she asked as soon as they sat down. "Tha'
looks as if tha'd somethin' to say."

"I have. I have found out what the crying was," said Mary.

Martha let her knitting drop on her knee and gazed at her with startled
eyes.

"Tha' hasn't!" she exclaimed. "Never!"

"I heard it in the night," Mary went on. "And I got up and went to see
where it came from. It was Colin. I found him."

Martha's face became red with fright.

"Eh! Miss Mary!" she said half crying. "Tha' shouldn't have done
it--tha' shouldn't! Tha'll get me in trouble. I never told thee nothin'
about him--but tha'll get me in trouble. I shall lose my place and
what'll mother do!"

"You won't lose your place," said Mary. "He was glad I came. We talked
and talked and he said he was glad I came."

"Was he?" cried Martha. "Art tha' sure? Tha' doesn't know what he's like
when anything vexes him. He's a big lad to cry like a baby, but when
he's in a passion he'll fair scream just to frighten us. He knows us
daren't call our souls our own."

"He wasn't vexed," said Mary. "I asked him if I should go away and he
made me stay. He asked me questions and I sat on a big footstool and
talked to him about India and about the robin and gardens. He wouldn't
let me go. He let me see his mother's picture. Before I left him I sang
him to sleep."

Martha fairly gasped with amazement.

"I can scarcely believe thee!" she protested. "It's as if tha'd walked
straight into a lion's den. If he'd been like he is most times he'd have
throwed himself into one of his tantrums and roused th' house. He won't
let strangers look at him."

"He let me look at him. I looked at him all the time and he looked at
me. We stared!" said Mary.

"I don't know what to do!" cried agitated Martha. "If Mrs. Medlock finds
out, she'll think I broke orders and told thee and I shall be packed
back to mother."

"He is not going to tell Mrs. Medlock anything about it yet. It's to be
a sort of secret just at first," said Mary firmly. "And he says
everybody is obliged to do as he pleases."

"Aye, that's true enough--th' bad lad!" sighed Martha, wiping her
forehead with her apron.

"He says Mrs. Medlock must. And he wants me to come and talk to him
every day. And you are to tell me when he wants me."

"Me!" said Martha; "I shall lose my place--I shall for sure!"

"You can't if you are doing what he wants you to do and everybody is
ordered to obey him," Mary argued.

"Does tha' mean to say," cried Martha with wide open eyes, "that he was
nice to thee!"

"I think he almost liked me," Mary answered.

"Then tha' must have bewitched him!" decided Martha, drawing a long
breath.

"Do you mean Magic?" inquired Mary. "I've heard about Magic in India,
but I can't make it. I just went into his room and I was so surprised
to see him I stood and stared. And then he turned round and stared at
me. And he thought I was a ghost or a dream and I thought perhaps he
was. And it was so queer being there alone together in the middle of the
night and not knowing about each other. And we began to ask each other
questions. And when I asked him if I must go away he said I must not."

"Th' world's comin' to a end!" gasped Martha.

"What is the matter with him?" asked Mary.

"Nobody knows for sure and certain," said Martha. "Mr. Craven went off
his head like when he was born. Th' doctors thought he'd have to be put
in a 'sylum. It was because Mrs. Craven died like I told you. He
wouldn't set eyes on th' baby. He just raved and said it'd be another
hunchback like him and it'd better die."

"Is Colin a hunchback?" Mary asked. "He didn't look like one."

"He isn't yet," said Martha. "But he began all wrong. Mother said that
there was enough trouble and raging in th' house to set any child wrong.
They was afraid his back was weak an' they've always been takin' care of
it--keepin' him lyin' down and not lettin' him walk. Once they made him
wear a brace but he fretted so he was downright ill. Then a big doctor
came to see him an' made them take it off. He talked to th' other doctor
quite rough--in a polite way. He said there'd been too much medicine and
too much lettin' him have his own way."

"I think he's a very spoiled boy," said Mary.

"He's th' worst young nowt as ever was!" said Martha. "I won't say as he
hasn't been ill a good bit. He's had coughs an' colds that's nearly
killed him two or three times. Once he had rheumatic fever an' once he
had typhoid. Eh! Mrs. Medlock did get a fright then. He'd been out of
his head an' she was talkin' to th' nurse, thinkin' he didn't know
nothin', an' she said, 'He'll die this time sure enough, an' best thing
for him an' for everybody.' An' she looked at him an' there he was with
his big eyes open, starin' at her as sensible as she was herself. She
didn't know what'd happen but he just stared at her an' says, 'You give
me some water an' stop talkin'.'"

"Do you think he will die?" asked Mary.

"Mother says there's no reason why any child should live that gets no
fresh air an' doesn't do nothin' but lie on his back an' read
picture-books an' take medicine. He's weak and hates th' trouble o'
bein' taken out o' doors, an' he gets cold so easy he says it makes him
ill."

Mary sat and looked at the fire.

"I wonder," she said slowly, "if it would not do him good to go out into
a garden and watch things growing. It did me good."

"One of th' worst fits he ever had," said Martha, "was one time they
took him out where the roses is by the fountain. He'd been readin' in a
paper about people gettin' somethin' he called 'rose cold' an' he began
to sneeze an' said he'd got it an' then a new gardener as didn't know
th' rules passed by an' looked at him curious. He threw himself into a
passion an' he said he'd looked at him because he was going to be a
hunchback. He cried himself into a fever an' was ill all night."

"If he ever gets angry at me, I'll never go and see him again," said
Mary.

"He'll have thee if he wants thee," said Martha. "Tha' may as well know
that at th' start."

Very soon afterward a bell rang and she rolled up her knitting.

"I dare say th' nurse wants me to stay with him a bit," she said. "I
hope he's in a good temper."

She was out of the room about ten minutes and then she came back with a
puzzled expression.

"Well, tha' has bewitched him," she said. "He's up on his sofa with his
picture-books. He's told the nurse to stay away until six o'clock. I'm
to wait in the next room. Th' minute she was gone he called me to him
an' says, 'I want Mary Lennox to come and talk to me, and remember
you're not to tell any one.' You'd better go as quick as you can."

Mary was quite willing to go quickly. She did not want to see Colin as
much as she wanted to see Dickon, but she wanted to see him very much.

There was a bright fire on the hearth when she entered his room, and in
the daylight she saw it was a very beautiful room indeed. There were
rich colors in the rugs and hangings and pictures and books on the walls
which made it look glowing and comfortable even in spite of the gray sky
and falling rain. Colin looked rather like a picture himself. He was
wrapped in a velvet dressing-gown and sat against a big brocaded
