at me. Never."

Stanton chuckled, but he didn't comment.

"By observing an organism's reactions," the psychologist continued, "one
can begin to see a pattern. After long enough observation, the pattern
almost approaches certainty. If, for instance, I tell you that I put an
armful of hay into a certain animal's enclosure, and that the animal
trotted over, ate the hay, and brayed, then you will be able to tell me
with reasonable certainty whether or not the animal had long ears. Do
you see?"

"Sure. But you haven't been able to pinpoint the Nipe's activities that
easily yet, have you?" Stanton asked.

"Ah, no," said Yoritomo. "Not at all. That was merely an analogy, and we
must not make the mistake of carrying an analogy too far. The more
intelligent a creature is, the greater, in general, is its scope of
action. The Nipe is far from being so simple as a monkey or a hamster.
On the other hand--" He smiled widely, showing bright, white teeth.
"--he is not so bright as a human being."

"_What?_" Stanton looked at him skeptically. "I wouldn't say he was
exactly stupid, George. What about all those prize gadgets of his?" He
blinked. "Wipe the sweat off my forehead, will you? It's running into my
eyes."

Dr. Yoritomo wiped with the towel as he continued. "Ah, yes. He is quite
capable in that respect, my friend. Quite capable. That is because of
his great memory--at once his finest asset and his greatest curse."

He draped the towel around Stanton's head again and stepped back, his
face unsmiling. "Imagine having a near-perfect memory, Bart."

Stanton's jaw muscles tightened a little before he spoke. "I think I'd
like it," he said.

Yoritomo shrugged slightly. "Perhaps you would. But it would most
certainly not be the asset you think. Look at it very soberly, my
friend.

"The most difficult teaching job in the world is the attempt to teach an
organism something that that organism already knows. True? Yes. If a man
already knows the shape of the Earth, it will do you no good to teach
him. If he _knows_, for example, that the Earth is flat, but round like
a pancake, your contention that it is round like a ball will make no
impression upon his mind whatever. He _knows_, you see. He _knows_.

"Now. Imagine a race with a perfect memory--a memory that never fades. A
memory in which each bit of data is as bright and as fresh as the moment
it was imprinted, and as readily available as the data stored in a
robot's mind. It is, in effect, a robotic memory.

"If you put false data into the memory banks of a mathematical
computer--such as telling it that the square of two is five--you cannot
correct that error simply by telling it the true fact that the square of
two is four. No. First you must remove the erroneous data. Not so?"

"Agreed," Stanton said.

"Very good. Then let us look at the Nipe race, wherever it was spawned
in this universe. Let us look at the race a long time back--way back
when they first became _Nipe sapiens_. Back when they first developed a
true language. Each little Nipe child, as it is born or hatched or
budded--whatever it is they do--is taught as rapidly as possible all
the things it must know in order to survive. And once a little Nipelet
is taught a thing, it _knows_. That knowledge is there, and it is
permanent, and it can be brought instantly to the fore. And if it is
taught a falsehood, then it cannot be taught the truth. You see?"

Stanton thought about it. "Well, yes. But eventually there are going to
be cases where reality doesn't jibe with what he's been taught, aren't
there? And wouldn't cold reality force a change?"

"Ah. In some cases, yes. In most, no," said Yoritomo. "Look: Suppose one
of these primordial Nipes runs across a tiger--or whatever large
carnivore passes for a tiger on their home planet. This Nipe, let us
say, has never seen a tiger before, so he does not observe that this
particular tiger is old, ill, and weak. It is, as a matter of fact, on
its last legs. Our primordial Nipe hits it on the head, and it drops
dead. He drags the body home for the family to feed upon.

"'How did you kill it, Papa?'

"'Why, it was the simplest thing in the world, my child. I walked up to
it, bashed it firmly on the noggin, and it died. That is the way to kill
tigers.'"

Yoritomo smiled. "It is also a good way to kill Nipes. Eh?" He took the
towel and wiped Stanton's brow again.

"The error," he continued, "was made when Papa Nipe made the
generalization from _one_ tiger to _all_ tigers. If tigers were rare,
this erroneous bit of lore might be passed on for many generations
unchecked and spread through the Nipe community as time passed. Those
who did learn that most tigers are _not_ conquered by walking up to them
and hitting them on the noggin undoubtedly died before they could pass
this new bit of information on. Then, perhaps, one day a Nipe survived
the ordeal. His mind now contained conflicting information which must be
resolved. He _knows_ that tigers are killed in this way. He also
_knows_ that this one was not so obliging as to die. What is wrong? Ha!
He has the solution! Plainly, _this_ particular beast _was not a
tiger_!"

"How does he explain that to the others?" Stanton asked.

"What does he tell his children?" Yoritomo asked rhetorically. "Why,
first he tells them how tigers are killed. You walk up to one and bash
it on the head. But then he warns his little Nipelets that there is an
animal around that looks _just like_ a tiger, but it is _not_ a tiger.
One should not make the mistake of thinking it _is_ a tiger or one will
get oneself badly hurt. Now, since the only way to tell the true tiger
from the false is to give it a hit on the head, and since that test may
prove rather injurious, if not absolutely fatal, to the Nipe who tries
it, it follows that one is better off if one scrupulously avoids all
animals that look like tigers. You see?"

"Yeah," said Stanton. "Some snarks are boojums."

"Exactly! Thank you for that allusion," Yoritomo said with a smile. "I
must remember to use it in my report."

"It seems to me to follow," Stanton said musingly, "that there would
inevitably be some things that they'd never learn the truth about, once
they had gotten the wrong idea into their heads."

"Ah! Indeed. Absolutely true. It is precisely that which led me to
formulate my theory in the first place. How else are we to explain that
the Nipe, for all his tremendous technical knowledge, is nonetheless a
member of a society that is still in the ancient ritual-taboo stage of
development?"

"A savage?"

Yoritomo laughed softly. "As to his savagery, I think no one on Earth
would disagree. But they are not the same thing. What I do mean is that
the Nipe is undoubtedly the most superstitious and bigoted being on the
face of this planet."

There was a knock on the door of the steam room.

"Yes?" said Dr. Yoritomo.

The physical therapist stuck his head in. "Sorry to interrupt, but the
clam is done. I'll have to give him a rubdown, Doc."

"Perfectly all right," Yoritomo said. "We had almost finished. Think
over what I have said, eh, Bart?"

"Yeah, sure, George," Stanton said abstractedly. Yoritomo left, and
Stanton got up on the rubdown table and lay prone. The therapist, seeing
that his patient was in no mood for conversation, proceeded with the
massage in silence.

Stanton lay on the table, his head pillowed in his arms, while the
therapist rubbed and kneaded his muscles. The pleasant sensation formed
a background for his thoughts. For the first time, Stanton was seeing
the Nipe as an individual--as a person--as a thinking, feeling being.

_We have a great deal in common, you and I_, he thought. _Except that
you're a lot worse off than I am._

       *       *       *       *       *

_I'm actually feeling sorry for the poor guy_, Stanton thought. _Which,
I suppose, is a hell of a lot better than feeling sorry for myself. The
only real, basic difference between us freaks is that you're more of a
freak than I am. "Molly O'Grady and the Colonel's lady are sisters under
the skin."_

_Where'd that come from? Something I learned in school, no doubt--like
the snarks and the boojums._

    _He would answer to_ Hi! _or to any loud cry,
      Such as_ Fry me! _or_ Fritter my wig!

_Who was that? The snark? No. The snark had a flavor like that of
will-o'-the-wisp. And I must remember to distinguish those that have
feathers, and bite, from those that have whiskers, and scratch._

Damn _this memory of mine!_

_Or can I even call it mine when I can't even use it?_

_"For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I
know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known."_

_Another jack-in-the-box thought popping up from nowhere._

_The only way I'll ever get all of this stuff straightened out in my
mind is to get more information. And it doesn't look as though anyone is
going to give it to me on a platter, either. The Institute men seem to
be awfully chary about giving information away, even to me. George even
had to chase away old rub-and-pound (That feels good!) before he would
talk about the Nipe. Can't blame 'em for that, of course. There'd be
hell to pay for everyone around if the general public ever found out
that the Nipe has been kept as a pet for six years._

_How many people has he killed in that time? Twenty? Thirty? How much
blood does Colonel Mannheim have on his hands?_

    _Though they know not why,
      Or for what they give,
    Still, the few must die,
      That the many may live._

_I wonder whether I read all that stuff complete or just browsed through
a copy of Bartlett's_ Quotations.

_Fragments._

_We've got to get organized around here, brother. Colonel Mannheim's
puppet is going to have to cut his strings and do a Pinocchio._




_[16]_


Colonel Walther Mannheim unlocked the door of his small suite of rooms
in the Officers' Barracks. God! he was tired. It wasn't so much physical
exhaustion as mental and emotional release from the tension he had been
under for the preceding few hours. Or had it been years?

He dropped his heavy briefcase on a nearby chair, took off his cap and
dropped it on the briefcase.

He stood there for a moment, looking tiredly around. Everything was in
order, as usual. He seldom came to Government City any more. Twenty or
so visits in the last ten years, and only a dozen of them had been long
enough to force him to spend the night in his old suite at the World
Police Headquarters at the southern end of the island. He didn't like to
stay in Government City; it made him uneasy, being this close to the
Nipe's underground nest. The Nipe had too many taps into government
communication channels, too many ways of seeing and hearing what went on
here in the nerve center of civilization.

One of the most difficult parts of this whole operation had been the
careful balancing of information flow through those channels that the
Nipe had tapped. To stop using them would betray immediately to that
alien mind that his taps had been detected. The information flow must go
on as usual. There was no way to censor the information, either,
although it was known that the Nipe relied on them for planning his
raids. But since there was no way of knowing, even after years of
observation, what sort of thing the Nipe would be wanting next, there
was no way of knowing which information should be removed from the
tapped channels.

And, most certainly, removing _all_ information about every possible
material that the Nipe might want would make him even more suspicious
than simply shutting down the channels altogether. To shut them down
would only indicate that the human government had detected his taps; to
censor them heavily would indicate that a trap was being laid.

It was even impossible to censor out news about the Nipe. That, too,
would have invited suspicion. So a special corps of men had been set up,
a group whose sole job was to investigate every raid of the Nipe. Every
raid produced a flurry of activity by this special group. They rushed
out to look over the scene of the raid, prowled around, and did
everything that might be expected of an investigative body. Their
reports were sent in over the usual channels. All the actual data they
came up with was sent straight through the normal channels--but the
conclusions they reached from that data were not. Always, in spite of
everything, the messages indicated that the police were as baffled as
before.

All other information relating to the Nipe went through special channels
known to be untapped by the Nipe.

And yet, there was no way to be absolutely certain of the sum total of
the information that the Nipe received. Believing, as he did, in the
existence of Real People, he would necessarily assume that _their_
communication systems were hidden from him, and the more difficult they
were to find, the more certain he would be that they existed. And it was
impossible to know what information the Nipe picked up when he was out
on a raid, away from the spying devices that had been hidden in his
tunnels.

Mannheim walked across the small living room to the sideboard that stood
against one wall and opened a door. Fresh ice, soda, and a bottle of
Scotch were waiting for him. He took one of the ten-ounce glasses,
dropped in three of the hard-frozen cubes of ice, added a precisely
measured ounce and a half of Scotch, and filled the glass to within an
inch of the brim with soda. Holding the glass in one hand, he walked
around the little apartment, checking everything with a sort of
automatic abstractedness. The air conditioner was pouring sweet, cool,
fresh air into the room; the windows--heavy, thick slabs of paraglass
welded directly into the wall--admitted the light from the courtyard
outside, but admitted nothing else. There was no need for them to open,
because of the air conditioning. A century before, some buildings still
had fire escapes running down their outsides, but modern fireproofing
had rendered such anachronisms unnecessary.

But his mind was only partly on his surroundings. He went into the
bedroom, sat down on the edge of the bed, took a long drink from the
cold glass in his hand, and then put it on the nightstand. Absently he
began pulling off his boots. His thoughts were on the Executive Session
he had attended that afternoon.

_"How much longer, do you think, Colonel?"_

_"A few weeks, sir. Perhaps less."_

_"There was another raid in Miami, Colonel. Another man died. We could
have prevented that death, Colonel. We could have prevented a great many
deaths in the past six years."_

And what answer was there to that? The Executive Council knew that the
deaths were preventable in only one way--by killing the Nipe. And they
had long ago agreed that the knowledge in that alien mind was worth the
sacrifice. But, as he had known would happen when they made the decision
six years before, there were some of them who had, inevitably, weakened.
Not all--not even a majority--but a minority that was becoming stronger.

It had been, to a great degree, Mannheim's arguments that had convinced
them then, and now they were tending to shift the blame for their
decision to Mannheim's shoulders.

Most of the Executives were tough-minded, realistic men. They were not
going to step out now unless there were good reason for it. But if the
subtle undercutting of the vacillating minority weakened Mannheim's own
resolve, or if he failed to give solid, well-reasoned answers to their
questions, then the whole project would begin to crumble rapidly.

He had not directly answered the Executive who had pointed out that many
lives could have been saved if the Nipe had been killed six years ago.
There was no use in fighting back on such puerile terms.

_"Gentlemen, within a few weeks, we will be ready to send Stanton in
after the Nipe. If that fails, we can blast him out of his stronghold
within minutes afterwards. But if we stop now, if we allow our judgment
to be colored at this point, then all those who have died in the past
six years will have died in vain."_

He had gone on, exploring and explaining the ramifications of the plans
for the next few weeks, but he had carefully kept it on the same level.
It had been an emotional sort of speech, but it had been purposely so,
in answer to the sort of emotionalism that the weakening minority had
attempted to use on him.

Men had died, yes. But what of that? Men had died before for far less
worthwhile causes. And men, do what they will, will die eventually. In
the back of his mind, he had recalled the battle-cry of some sergeant of
the old United States Marines during an early twentieth-century war. As
he led his men over the top, he had shouted, "_Come on, you sons of
bitches! Do you wanna live forever?_"

But Mannheim hadn't mentioned it aloud to the Executive Council.

Nor had he pointed out that ten thousand times as many people had died
