across the Sun at two terrestrial stations as far as possible removed
from each other, marking the two points at which the planet, seen from
their respective stations, appears to be projected at the same moment on
the solar disk. This measure gives the width of an angle formed by two
lines, which starting from two diametrically opposite points of the
Earth, cross upon Venus, and form an identical angle upon the Sun. Venus
is thus at the apex of two equal triangles, the bases of which rest,
respectively, upon the Earth and on the Sun. The measurement of this
angle gives what is called the parallax of the Sun--that is, the angular
dimension at which the Earth would be seen at the distance of the Sun.

[Illustration: FIG. 83.--Measurement of the distance of the Sun.]

Thus, it has been found that the half-diameter of the Earth viewed from
the Sun measures 8.82". Now, we know that an object presenting an angle
of one degree is at a distance of 57 times its length.

The same object, if it subtends an angle of a minute, or the sixtieth
part of a degree, indicates by the measurement of its angle that it is
60 times more distant, _i.e._, 3,438 times.

Finally, an object that measures one second, or the sixtieth part of a
minute, is at a distance of 206,265 times its length.

Hence we find that the Earth is at a distance from the Sun of
206,265/8.82--that is, 23,386 times its half-diameter, that is,
149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles). This measurement again is as
precise and certain as that of the Moon.

I hope my readers will easily grasp this simple method of triangulation,
the result of which indicates to us with absolute certainty the distance
of the two great celestial torches to which we owe the radiant light of
day and the gentle illumination of our nights.

The distance of the Sun has, moreover, been confirmed by other means,
whose results agree perfectly with the preceding. The two principal are
based on the velocity of light. The propagation of light is not
instantaneous, and notwithstanding the extreme rapidity of its
movements, a certain time is required for its transmission from one
point to another. On the Earth, this velocity has been measured as
300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) per second. To come from Jupiter to
the Earth, it requires thirty to forty minutes, according to the
distance of the planet. Now, in examining the eclipses of Jupiter's
satellites, it has been discovered that there is a difference of 16
minutes, 34 seconds in the moment of their occurrence, according as
Jupiter is on one side or on the other of the Sun, relatively to the
Earth, at the minimum and maximum distance. If the light takes 16
minutes, 34 seconds to traverse the terrestrial orbit, it must take less
than that time, or 8 minutes, 17 seconds, to come to us from the Sun,
which is situated at the center. Knowing the velocity of light, the
distance of the Sun is easily found by multiplying 300,000 by 8 minutes,
17 seconds, or 497 seconds, which gives about 149,000,000 kilometers
(93,000,000 miles).

Another method founded upon the velocity of light again gives a
confirmatory result. A familiar example will explain it: Let us imagine
ourselves exposed to a vertical rain; the degree of inclination of our
umbrella will depend on the relation between our speed and that of the
drops of rain. The more quickly we run, the more we need to dip our
umbrella in order not to meet the drops of water. Now the same thing
occurs for light. The stars, disseminated in space, shed floods of light
upon the Heavens. If the Earth were motionless, the luminous rays would
reach us directly. But our planet is spinning, racing, with the utmost
speed, and in our astronomical observations we are forced to follow its
movements, and to incline our telescopes in the direction of its
advance. This phenomenon, known under the name of _aberration_ of light,
is the result of the combined effects of the velocity of light and of
the Earth's motion. It shows that the speed of our globe is equivalent
to 1/10000 that of light, _i.e._, = about 30 kilometers (19 miles) per
second. Our planet accordingly accomplishes her revolution round the Sun
along an orbit which she traverses at a speed of 30 kilometers (better
29-1/2) per second, or 1,770 kilometers per minute, or 106,000
kilometers per hour, or 2,592,000 kilometers per day, or 946,080,000
kilometers (586,569,600 miles) in the year. This is the length of the
elliptical path described by the Earth in her annual translation.

The length of orbit being thus discovered, one can calculate its
diameter, the half of which is exactly the distance of the Sun.

We may cite one last method, whose data, based upon attraction, are
provided by the motions of our satellite. The Moon is a little disturbed
in the regularity of her course round the Earth by the influence of the
powerful Sun. As the attraction varies inversely with the square of the
distance, the distance may be determined by analyzing the effect it has
upon the Moon.

Other means, on which we will not enlarge in this summary of the methods
employed for determinations, confirm the precisions of these
measurements with certainty. Our readers must forgive us for dwelling
at some length upon the distance of the orb of day, since this
measurement is of the highest importance; it serves as the base for the
valuation of all stellar distances, and may be considered as the meter
of the universe.

This radiant Sun to which we owe so much is therefore enthroned in space
at a distance of 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles) from here.
Its vast brazier must indeed be powerful for its influence to be exerted
upon us to such a manifest extent, it being the very condition of our
existence, and reaching out as far as Neptune, thirty times more remote
than ourselves from the solar focus.

It is on account of its great distance that the Sun appears to us no
larger than the Moon, which is only 384,000 kilometers (238,000 miles)
from here, and is itself illuminated by the brilliancy of this splendid
orb.

No terrestrial distance admits of our conceiving of this distance. Yet,
if we associate the idea of space with the idea of time, as we have
already done for the Moon, we may attempt to picture this abyss. The
train cited just now would, if started at a speed of a kilometer a
minute, arrive at the Sun after an uninterrupted course of 283 years,
and taking as long to return to the Earth the total would be 566 years.
Fourteen generations of stokers would be employed on this celestial
excursion before the bold travelers could bring back news of the
expedition to us.

Sound is transmitted through the air at a velocity of 340 meters (1,115
feet) per second. If our atmosphere reached to the Sun, the noise of an
explosion sufficiently formidable to be heard here would only reach us
at the end of 13 years, 9 months. But the more rapid carriers, such as
the telegraph, would leap across to the orb of day in 8 minutes, 17
seconds.

Our imagination is confounded before this gulf of 93,000,000 miles,
across which we see our dazzling Sun, whose burning rays fly rapidly
through space in order to reach us.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now let us see how the distances of the planets were determined.

We will leave aside the method of which we have been speaking; that now
to be employed is quite different, but equally precise in its results.

It is obvious that the revolution of a planet round the Sun will be
longer in proportion as the distance is greater, and the orbit that has
to be traveled vaster. This is simple. But the most curious thing is
that there is a geometric proportion in the relations between the
duration of the revolutions of the planets and their distances. This
proportion was discovered by Kepler, after thirty years of research,
and embodied in the following formula:

"The squares of the times of revolution of the planets round the Sun
(the periodic times) are proportional to the cubes of their mean
distances from the Sun."

This is enough to alarm the boldest reader. And yet, if we unravel this
somewhat incomprehensible phrase, we are struck with its simplicity.

What is a square? We all know this much; it is taught to children of ten
years old. But lest it has slipped your memory: a square is simply a
number multiplied by itself.

Thus: 2 x 2 = 4; 4 is the square of 2.

Four times 4 is 16; 16 is the square of 4.

And so on, indefinitely.

Now, what is a cube? It is no more difficult. It is a number multiplied
twice by itself.

For instance: 2 multiplied by 2 and again by 2 equals 8. So 8 is the
cube of 2. 3 x 3 x 3 = 27; 27 is the cube of 3, and so on.

Now let us take an example that will show the simplicity and precision
of the formula enunciated above. Let us choose a planet, no matter
which. Say, Jupiter, the giant of the worlds. He is the Lord of our
planetary group. This colossal star is five times (precisely, 5.2) as
far from us as the Sun.

Multiply this number twice by itself 5.2 x 5.2 x 5.2 = 140.

On the other hand, the revolution of Jupiter takes almost twelve years
(11.85). This number multiplied by itself also equals 140. The square of
the number 11.85 is equal to the cube of the number 5.2. This very
simple law regulates all the heavenly bodies.

Thus, to find the distance of a planet, it is sufficient to observe the
time of its revolution, then to discover the square of the given number
by multiplying it into itself. The result of the operation gives
simultaneously the cube of the number that represents the distance.

To express this distance in kilometers (or miles), it is sufficient to
multiply it by 149,000,000 (in miles 93,000,000), the key to the system
of the world.

Nothing, then, could be less complicated than the definition of these
methods. A few moments of attention reveal to us in their majestic
simplicity the immutable laws that preside over the immense harmony of
the Heavens.

       *       *       *       *       *

But we must not confine ourselves to our own solar province. We have yet
to speak of the stars that reign in infinite space far beyond our
radiant Sun.

Strange and audacious as it may appear, the human mind is able to cross
these heights, to rise on the wings of genius to these distant suns,
and to plumb the depths of the abyss that separates us from these
celestial kingdoms.

Here, we return to our first method, that of triangulation. And the
distance that separates us from the Sun must serve in calculating the
distances of the stars.

The Earth, spinning round the Sun at a distance of 149,000,000
kilometers (93,000,000 miles), describes a circumference, or rather an
ellipse, of 936,000,000 kilometers (580,320,000 miles), which it travels
over in a year. The distance of any point of the terrestrial orbit from
the diametrically opposite point which it passes six months later is
298,000,000 kilometers (184,760,000 miles), _i.e._, the diameter of this
orbit. This immense distance (in comparison with those with which we are
familiar) serves as the base of a triangle of which the apex is a star.

The difficulty in exact measurements of the distance of a star consists
in observing the little luminous point persistently for a whole year, to
see if this star is stationary, or if it describes a minute ellipse
reproducing in perspective the annual revolution of the Earth.

If it remains fixed, it is lost in such depths of space that it is
impossible to gage the distance, and our 298,000,000 kilometers have no
meaning in view of such an abyss. If, on the contrary, it is displaced,
it will in the year describe a minute ellipse, which is only the
reflection, the perspective in miniature, of the revolution of our
planet round the Sun.

The annual parallax of a star is the angle under which one would see the
radius, or half-diameter, of the terrestrial orbit from it. This radius
of 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles) is indeed, as previously
observed, the unit, the meter of celestial measures. The angle is of
course smaller in proportion as the star is more distant, and the
apparent motion of the star diminishes in the same proportion. But the
stars are all so distant that their annual displacement of perspective
is almost imperceptible, and very exact instruments are required for its
detection.

[Illustration: FIG. 84.--Small apparent ellipses described by the stars
as a result of the annual displacement of the Earth.]

The researches of the astronomers have proved that there is not one star
for which the parallax is equal to that of another. The minuteness of
this angle, and the extraordinary difficulties experienced in measuring
the distance of the stars, will be appreciated from the fact that the
value of a second is so small that the displacement of any star
corresponding with it could be covered by a spider's thread.

A second of arc corresponds to the size of an object at a distance of
206,265 times its diameter; to a millimeter seen at 206 meters'
distance; to a hair, 1/10 of a millimeter in thickness, at 20 meters'
distance (more invisible to the naked eye). And yet this value is in
excess of those actually obtained. In fact:--the apparent displacement
of the nearest star is calculated at 75/100 of a second (0.75"), _i.e._,
from this star, [alpha] of Centaur, the half-diameter of the terrestrial
orbit is reduced to this infinitesimal dimension. Now in order that the
length of any straight line seen from the front be reduced until it
appear to subtend no more than an angle of 0.75", it must be removed to
a distance 275,000 times its length. As the radius of the terrestrial
orbit is 149,000,000 kilometers (93,000,000 miles), the distance which
separates [alpha] of Centaur from our world must therefore =
41,000,000,000,000 kilometers (25,000,000,000,000 miles). And that is
the nearest star. We saw in Chapter II that it shines in the southern
hemisphere. The next, and one that can be seen in our latitudes, is 61
of Cygnus, which floats in the Heavens 68,000,000,000,000 kilometers
(42,000,000,000,000 miles) from here. This little star, of fifth
magnitude, was the first of which the distance was determined (by
Bessel, 1837-1840).

All the rest are much more remote, and the procession is extended to
infinity.

We can not conceive directly of such distances, and in order to imagine
them we must again measure space by time.

In order to cover the distance that separates us from our neighbor,
[alpha] of Centaur, _light_, the most rapid of all couriers, takes 4
years, 128 days. If we would follow it, we must not jump from start to
finish, for that would not give us the faintest idea of the distance: we
must take the trouble to think out the direct advance of the ray of
light, and associate ourselves with its progress. We must see it
traverse 300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) during the first second of
the journey; then 300,000 more in the second, which makes 600,000
kilometers; then once more 300,000 kilometers during the third, and so
on without stopping for four years and four months. If we take this
trouble we may realize the value of the figure; otherwise, as this
number surpasses all that we are in the habit of realizing, it will have
no significance for us, and will be a dead letter.

If some appalling explosion occurred in this star, and the sound in its
flight of 340 meters (1,115 feet) per second were able to cross the
void that separates us from it, the noise of this explosion would only
reach us in 3,000,000 years.

A train started at a speed of 106 kilometers (65 miles) per hour would
have to run for 46,000,000 years, in order to reach this star, our
neighbor in the celestial kingdom.

The distance of some thirty of the stars has been determined, but the
results are dubious.

The dazzling Sirius reigns 92,000,000,000,000 kilometers
(57,000,000,000,000 miles), the pale Vega at 204,000,000,000,000. Each
of these magnificent stars must be a huge sun to burn at such a distance
with such luminosity. Some are millions of times larger than the Earth.
Most of them are more voluminous than our Sun. On all sides they
scintillate at inaccessible distances, and their light strays a long
while in space before it encounters the Earth. The luminous ray that we
receive to-day from some pale star hardly perceptible to our eyes--so
enormous is its distance--may perhaps bring us the last emanation of a
sun that expired thousands of years ago.

       *       *       *       *       *

If these methods have been clear to my readers, they may also be
interested perhaps in knowing the means employed in weighing the worlds.
The process is as simple and as clear as those of which we have been
speaking.

_Weighing the stars!_ Such a pretension seems Utopian, and one asks
oneself curiously what sort of balance the astronomers must have adopted
in order to calculate the weight of Sun, Moon, planets or stars.

Here, figures replace weights. Ladies proverbially dislike figures: yet
it would be easier for some society dame to weigh the Sun at the point
of her pen, by writing down a few columns of figures with a little care,
than to weigh a 12 kilogram case of fruit, or a dress-basket of 35
kilos, by direct methods.

Weighing the Sun is an amusement like any other, and a change of
occupation.

If the Moon were not attracted by the Earth, she would glide through the
Heavens along an indefinite straight line, escaping at the tangent. But
in virtue of the attraction that governs the movements of all the
Heavenly bodies, our satellite at a distance of 60 times the terrestrial
half-diameter revolves round us in 27 days, 7 hours, 43 minutes, 11-1/2
seconds, continually leaving the straight line to approach the Earth,
and describing an almost circular orbit in space. If at any moment we
trace an arc of the lunar orbit, and if a tangent is taken to this arc,
the deviation from the straight line caused by the attraction of our
planet is found to be 1-1/3 millimeter per second.

This is the quantity by which the Moon drops toward us in each second,
during which she accomplishes 1,017 meters of her orbit.

On the other hand, no body can fall unless it be attracted, drawn by
another body of a more powerful mass.

Beings, animals, objects, adhere to the soil, and weigh upon the Earth,
because they are constantly attracted to it by an irresistible force.

Weight and universal attraction are one and the same force.

On the other hand, it can be determined that if an object is left to
itself upon the surface of the Earth, it drops 4.90 meters during the
first second of its fall.

We also know that attraction diminishes with the square of the distance,
and that if we could raise a stone to the height of the Moon, and then
abandon it to the attraction of our planet, it would in the first second
fall 4.90 meters divided by the square of 60, or 3,600--that is, of
1-1/3 millimeters, exactly the quantity by which the Moon deviates from
the straight line she would pursue if the Earth were not influencing
her.

The reasoning just stated for the Moon is equally applicable to the Sun.

The distance of the Sun is 23,386 times the radius of the Earth. In
order to know how much the intensity of terrestrial weight would be
diminished at such a distance, we should look, in the first place, for
the square of the number representing the distance--that is, 23,386
multiplied by itself, = 546,905,000. If we divide 4.90 meters, which
represents the attractive force of our planet, by this number, we get
9/1000000 of a millimeter, and we see that at the distance of the Sun,
the Earth's attraction would really be almost _nil_.

Now let us do for our planet what we did for its satellite. Let us trace
the annual orbit of the terrestrial globe round the central orb, and we
shall find that the Earth falls in each second 2.9 millimeters toward
the Sun.

This proportion gives the attractive force of the Sun in relation to
that of the Earth, and proves that the Sun is 324,000 times more
powerful than our world, for 2.9 millimeters divided by 0.000,009 equals
324,000, if worked out into the ultimate fractions neglected here for
the sake of simplicity.

A great number of stars have been weighed by the same method.

Their mass is estimated by the movement of a satellite round them, and
it is by this method that we are able to affirm that Jupiter is 310
times heavier than the Earth, Saturn 92 times, Neptune 16 times, Uranus
14 times, while Mars is much less heavy, its weight being only
two-thirds that of our own.

The planets which have no satellites have been weighed by the
perturbations which they cause in other stars, or in the imprudent
comets that sometimes tarry in their vicinity. Mercury weighs very much
less than the Earth (only 6/100) and Venus about 8/10. So the beautiful
star of the evening and morning is not so light as her name might imply,
and there is no great difference between her weight and our own.

As the Moon has no secondary body submitted to her influence, her weight
has been calculated by reckoning the amount of water she attracts at
each tide in the ocean, or by observing the effects of her attraction on
the terrestrial globe. When the Moon is before us, in the last quarter,
she makes us travel faster, whereas in the first quarter, when she is
behind, she delays us.

All the calculations agree in showing us that the orb of night is 81
times less heavy than our planet. There is nearly as much difference in
weight between the Earth and the Moon as between an orange and a grape.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not content with weighing the planets of our system, astronomers have
investigated the weight of the stars. How have they been enabled to
ascertain the quantity of matter which constitutes these distant
