
"I must do so, then, general," Vincent said quietly. "I could not return
home and remain inactive while every man in the South is fighting for
the defense of his country, so I will take my chance of being
exchanged."

"I am sorry you choose that alternative," McClellan said. "I hate to see
brave men imprisoned if only for a day; and braver men than those across
yonder stream are not to be found. My officers and men are astonished.
They seem so thin and worn as to be scarce able to lift a musket, their
clothes are fit only for a scarecrow, they are indeed pitiful objects to
look at; but the way in which they fight is wonderful. I could not have
believed had I not seen it, that men could have charged as they did
again and again across ground swept by a tremendous artillery and
musketry fire; it was wonderful! I can tell you, young sir, that even
though you beat us we are proud of you as our countrymen; and I believe
that if your General Jackson were to ride through our camp he would be
cheered as lustily and heartily by our men as he is by his own."

Some fifty or sixty other prisoners had been taken; they had been
captured in the hand-to-hand struggle that had taken place on some parts
of the field, having got separated from their corps and mixed up with
the enemy, and carried off the field with them as they retired. These
for the most part accepted the offered parole; but some fifteen, like
Vincent, preferred a Northern prison to promising to abstain from
fighting in defense of their country, and in the middle of the day they
were placed together in a tent under a guard at the rear of the camp.

The next morning came the news that Lee had fallen back. There was
exultation among the Federals, not unmingled with a strong sense of
relief; for the heavy losses inflicted in the previous fighting had
taken all the ardor of attack out of McClellan's army, and they were
glad indeed that they were not to be called upon to make another attempt
to drive the Confederates from their position. Vincent was no less
pleased at the news. He knew how thin were the ranks of the Confederate
fighting men, and how greatly they were worn and exhausted by fatigue
and want of food, and that, although they had the day before repulsed
the attacks of the masses of well-fed Northerners, such tremendous
exertions could not often be repeated, and a defeat, with the river in
their rear, approachable only by one rough and narrow road, would have
meant a total destruction of the army.

The next morning Vincent and his companions were put into the train and
sent to Alexandria. They had no reason to complain of their treatment
upon the way. They were well fed, and after their starvation diet for
the last six weeks their rations seemed to them actually luxurious. The
Federal troops in Alexandria, who were for the most part young recruits
who had just arrived from the north and west, looked with astonishment
upon these thin and ragged men, several of whom were barefooted. Was it
possible that such scarecrows as these could in every battle have driven
back the well-fed and cared-for Northern soldiers!

"Are they all like this?" one burly young soldier from a western state
asked their guard.

"That's them, sir," the sergeant in charge of the party replied. "Not
much to look at, are they? But, by gosh, you should see them fight! You
wouldn't think of their looks then."

"If that's soldiering," the young farmer said solemnly, "the sooner I am
back home again the better. But it don't seem to me altogether strange
as they should fight so hard, because I should say they must look upon
it as a comfort to be killed rather than to live like that."

A shout of laughter from the prisoners showed the young rustic that the
objects of his pity did not consider life to be altogether intolerable
even under such circumstances, and he moved away meditating on the
discomforts of war, and upon the remarks that would be made were he to
return home in so sorrowful a plight as that of these Confederate
prisoners.

"I bargained to fight," he said, "and though I don't expect I shall like
it, I sha'n't draw back when the time comes; but as to being starved
till you are nigh a skeleton, and going about barefooted and in such
rags as a tramp wouldn't look at, it ain't reasonable." And yet, had he
known it, among those fifteen prisoners more than half were possessors
of wide estates, and had been brought up from their childhood in the
midst of luxuries such as the young farmer never dreamed of.

Among many of the soldiers sympathy took a more active form, and men
pressed forward and gave packets of tobacco, cigars, and other little
presents to them, while two or three pressed rolls of dollar notes into
their hands, with words of rough kindness.

"There ain't no ill feeling in us, Rebs. You have done your work like
men and no doubt you thinks your cause is right, just as we does; but
it's all over now, and maybe our turn will come next to see the inside
of one of your prisons down south. So we are just soldiers together, and
can feel for each other."

Discipline in small matters was never strictly enforced in the American
armies, and the sergeant in charge offered no opposition to the soldiers
mingling with the prisoners as they walked along.

Two days later they were sent by railway to the great prison at Elmira,
a town in the southwest of the State of New York. When they reached the
jail the prisoners were separated, Vincent, who was the only officer,
being assigned quarters with some twenty others of the same rank. The
prisoners crowded round him as he entered, eager to hear the last news
from the front, for they heard from their guards only news of constant
victories won by the Northerners; for every defeat was transformed by
the Northern papers into a brilliant victory, and it was only when the
shattered remains of the various armies returned to Alexandria to be
re-formed that the truth gradually leaked out. Thus Antietam had been
claimed as a great Northern victory, for although McClellan's troops had
in the battle been hurled back shattered and broken across the river,
two days afterward Lee had retired.

One of the prisoners, who was also dressed in cavalry uniform, hung back
from the rest, and going to the window looked out while Vincent was
chatting with the others. Presently he turned round, and Vincent
recognized with surprise his old opponent Jackson. After a moment's
hesitation he walked across the room to him.

"Jackson," he said, "we have not been friends lately, but I don't see
why we should keep up our quarrel any longer; we got on all right at
school together; and now we are prisoners together here it would be
foolish to continue our quarrel. Perhaps we were both somewhat to blame
in that affair. I am quite willing to allow I was, for one, but I think
we might well put it all aside now."

Jackson hesitated, and then took the hand Vincent held out to him.

"That's right, young fellows," one of the other officers said. "Now that
every Southern gentleman is fighting and giving his life, if need be,
for his country, no one has a right to have private quarrels of his own.
Life is short enough as it is, certainly too short to indulge in private
animosities. A few weeks ago we were fighting side by side, and facing
death together; to-day we are prisoners; a week hence we may be
exchanged, and soon take our places in the ranks again. It's the duty of
all Southerners to stand shoulder to shoulder, and there ought to be no
such thing as ill-feeling among ourselves."

Vincent was not previously aware that Jackson had obtained a commission.
He now learned that he had been chosen by his comrades to fill a vacancy
caused by the death of an officer in a skirmish just before Pope fell
back from the Rappahannock, and that he had been made prisoner a few
days afterward in a charge against a greatly superior body of Federal
cavalry.

The great majority of the officers on both sides were at the
commencement of the war chosen by their comrades, the elections at first
taking place once a year. This, however, was found to act very badly. In
some cases the best men in the regiment were chosen; but too often men
who had the command of money, and could afford to stand treat and get in
supplies of food and spirits, were elected. The evils of the system were
found so great, indeed, that it was gradually abandoned; but in cases of
vacancies occurring in the field, and there being a necessity for at
once filling them up, the colonels of the regiments had power to make
appointments, and if the choice of the men was considered to be
satisfactory their nominee would be generally chosen.

In the case of Jackson, the colonel had hesitated in confirming the
choice of the men. He did not for a moment suspect him to be wanting in
courage; but he regarded him as one who shirked his work, and who won
the votes of the men rather by a fluent tongue and by the violence of
his expressions of hatred against the North than by any soldierly
qualities.

Some of the officers had been months in prison, and they were highly
indignant at the delays that had occurred in effecting their exchange.
The South, indeed, would have been only too glad to get rid of some of
their numerous prisoners, who were simply an expense and trouble to
them, and to get their own men back into their ranks. They could ill
spare the soldiers required to guard so large a number of prisoners, and
a supply of food was in itself a serious matter.

Thus it was that at Harper's Ferry and upon a good many other occasions
they released vast numbers of prisoners on their simple paroles not to
serve again. The North, however, were in no hurry to make exchange; and
moreover, their hands were so full with their enormous preparations that
they put aside all matters which had not the claim of urgency.


CHAPTER X. THE ESCAPE.

The discipline in the prison at Elmira was not rigorous. The prisoners
had to clean up the cells, halls, and yard, but the rest of their time
they could spend as they liked. Some of those whose friends had money
were able to live in comparative luxury, and to assist those who had no
such resources; for throughout the war there was never any great
difficulty in passing letters to and from the South. The line of
frontier was enormous, and it was only at certain points that
hostilities, were actively carried on; consequently letters and
newspapers were freely passed, and money could be sent in the same way
from one part of the country to another.

At certain hours of the day hawkers and vendors of such articles as were
in most demand by the prisoners were allowed to enter the yard and to
sell their wares to the Confederates. Spirits were not allowed to be
carried in, but tobacco and all kinds of food were permitted to pass.
Vincent had at Alexandria written a letter to his mother, and had given
it to a man who represented that he made it his business to forward
letters to an agent at Richmond, being paid for each letter the sum of a
dollar on its delivery. Vincent therefore felt confident that the
anxiety that would be felt at home when they learned that he was among
the missing at the battle of Antietam would be relieved.

He was fairly supplied with money. He had, indeed, had several hundred
dollars with him at the time he was captured; but these were entirely in
Confederate notes, for which he got but half their value in Northern
paper at Alexandria. He himself found the rations supplied in the prison
ample, and was able to aid any of his fellow-prisoners in purchasing
clothes to replace the rags they wore when captured.

One day Vincent strolled down as usual toward the gate, where, under the
eye of the guard, a row of men and women, principally negroes and
negresses, were sitting on the ground with their baskets in front of
them containing tobacco, pipes, fruit, cakes, needles and thread,
buttons, and a variety of other articles in demand, while a number of
prisoners were bargaining and joking with them. Presently his eye fell
upon a negro before whom was a great pile of watermelons. He started as
he did so, for he at once recognized the well-known face of Dan. As soon
as the negro saw that his master's eye had fallen upon him he began
loudly praising the quality of his fruit.

"Here, massa officer, here berry fine melyons, ripe and sweet; no green
trash; dis un good right through. Five cents each, sah. Berry cheap
dese."

"I expect they cost you nothing, Sambo," one of the Confederate soldiers
said as he bought a melon. "Got a neighbor's patch handy, eh?"

Dan grinned at the joke, and then selecting another from the bottom of
his pile in the basket, offered it to Vincent.

"Dis fine fruit, sah. Me sure you please with him!"

Vincent took the melon and handed Dan five cents. A momentary glance was
exchanged, and then he walked away and sat down in a quiet corner of the
yard and cut open the melon. As he expected, he found a note rolled up
in the center. A small piece of the rind had been cut out and the pulp
removed for its reception. The bit of rind had then been carefully
replaced so that the cut would not be noticed without close inspection.
It was from one of his fellow-officers, and was dated the day after his
capture. He read as follows:

"My Dear Wingfield.-We are all delighted this afternoon to hear that
instead, as we had believed, of your being knocked on the head you are a
prisoner among the Yanks. Several of us noticed you fall just as we
halted at the river, and we all thought that from the way in which you
fell you had been shot through the head or heart. However, there was no
time to inquire in that terrific storm of shot and shell. In the morning
when the burying parties went down we could find no signs of you,
although we knew almost to a foot where you had fallen.

"We could only conclude at last that you had been carried off in the
night by the Yanks, and as they would hardly take the trouble of
carrying off a dead body, it occurred to us that you might after all be
alive. So the colonel went to Lee, who at once sent a trumpeter with a
flag down to the river to inquire, and we were all mightily pleased, as
you may imagine, when he came back with the news that you were not only
a prisoner, but unwounded, having been only stunned in some way. From
the way you fell we suppose a round shot must have grazed your head; at
least that is the only way we can account for it.

"Your horse came back unhurt to the troop, and will be well cared for
until you rejoin us, which we hope will not be long. Your boy kept the
camp awake last night with his howlings, and is at present almost out of
his mind with delight. He tells me he has made up his mind to slip
across the lines and make his way as a runaway to Alexandria, where you
will, of course, be taken in the first place. He says he's got some
money of yours; but I have insisted on his taking another fifty dollars,
which you can repay me when we next meet. As he will not have to ask for
work, he may escape the usual lot of runaways, who are generally pounced
upon and set to work on the fortifications of Alexandria and Washington.

"He intends to find out what prison you are taken to, and to follow you,
with some vague idea of being able to aid you to escape. As he cannot
write, he has asked me to write this letter to you, telling you what his
idea is. He will give it to you when he finds an opportunity, and he
wishes you to give him an answer, making any suggestion that may occur
to you as to the best way of his setting about it. He says that he shall
make acquaintances among the negroes North, and will find some one who
will read your note to him and write you an answer. I have told him that
if he is caught at the game he is likely to be inside a prison a bit
longer than you are, even if worse doesn't befall him. However, he makes
light of this, and is bent upon carrying out his plans, and I can only
hope he will succeed.

"I have just heard that we shall fall back across the Rappahannock
to-morrow, and I imagine there will not be much hard fighting again
until spring, long before which I hope you will be in your place among
us again. We lost twenty-three men and two officers (Ketler and Sumner)
yesterday. Good-by, old fellow! I need not say keep up your spirits, for
that you are pretty sure to do.

"Yours truly,

"James Sinclair."

After the first start at seeing Dan, Vincent was scarcely surprised, for
he had often thought over what the boy would do, and had fancied that
while, if he supposed him dead, he would go straight back to the
Orangery, it was quite possible that, should he hear that he was a
prisoner, Dan might take it into his head to endeavor to join him. As to
his making his escape, that did not appear to be a very difficult
undertaking now that he had a friend outside. The watch kept up was not
a very vigilant one, for such numbers of prisoners were taken on both
sides that they were not regarded as of very great importance, and,
indeed, the difficulty lay rather in making across the country to the
Southern border than in escaping from prison; for with a friend outside,
with a disguise in readiness, that matter was comparatively easy. All
that was required for the adventure was a long rope, a sharp file, and a
dark night.

The chief difficulty that occurred to Vincent arose from the fact that
there were some twenty other prisoners in the same ward. He could hardly
file through the bars of the window unnoticed by them, and they would
naturally wish to share in his flight; but where one person might
succeed in evading the vigilance of the guard, it was unlikely in the
extreme that twenty would do so, and the alarm once given all would be
recaptured. He was spared the trouble of making up his mind as to his
plans, for by the time he had finished his letter the hour that the
hucksters were allowed to sell their goods was passed, and the gates
were shut and all was quiet.

After some thought he came to the conclusion that the only plan would be
to conceal himself somewhere in the prison just before the hour at which
they were locked up in their wards. The alarm would be given, for the
list of names was called over before lock-up, and a search would of
course be made. Still, if he could find a good place for concealment, it
might succeed, since the search after dark would not be so close and
minute as that which would be made next morning. The only disadvantage
would be that the sentries would be especially on the alert, as, unless
the fugitive had succeeded in some way in passing out of the gates in
disguise, he must still be within the walls, and might attempt to scale
them through the night. This certainty largely increased the danger, and
Vincent went to bed that night without finally determining what had
better be done.

The next morning while walking in the grounds he quite determined as to
the place he would choose for his concealment if he adopted the plan he
had thought of the evening before. The lower rooms upon one side of the
building were inhabited by the governor and officers of the prison, and
if he were to spring through an open window unnoticed just as it became
dusk, and hide himself in a cupboard or under a bed there he would be
safe for a time, as, however close the search might be in other parts of
the building, it would be scarcely suspected, at any rate on the first
alarm, that he had concealed himself in the officers' quarters. There
would, of course, be the chance of his being detected as he got out of
the window again at night, but this would not be a great risk. It was
the vigilance of the sentries that he most feared, and the possibility
that, as soon as the fact of his being missing was known, a cordon of
guards might be stationed outside the wall in addition to those in the
yard. The danger appeared to him to be so great that he was half
inclined to abandon the enterprise. It would certainly be weary work to
be shut up there for perhaps a year while his friends were fighting the
battles of his country; but it would be better after all to put up with
that than to run any extreme risk of being shot.

When he had arrived at this conclusion he went upstairs to his room to
write a line to Dan. The day was a fine one, and he found that the whole
of the occupants of the room had gone below. This was an unexpected bit
of good fortune, and he at once went to the window and examined the
bars. They were thick and of new iron, but had been hastily put up. The
building had originally been a large warehouse, and when it had been
converted into a prison for the Confederate prisoners the bars had been
added to the windows. Instead, therefore, of being built into solid
stone and fastened in by lead, they were merely screwed on to the wooden
framework of the windows, and by a strong turn-screw a bar could be
removed in five minutes. This altogether altered the position. He had
only to wait until the rest of the occupants of the room were asleep and
then to remove the bar and let himself down.

He at once wrote:

"I want twenty yards of strong string, and the same length of rope that
will bear my weight; also a strong turn-screw. When I have got this I
will let you know night and hour. Shall want disguise ready to put on."

He folded the note up into a small compass, and at the hour at which Dan
would be about to enter he sauntered down to the gate. In a short time
the vendors entered, and were soon busy selling their wares. Dan had, as
before, a basket of melons. Vincent made his way up to him.

"I want another melon," he said, "as good as that you me last night."

"Dey all de same, sah. First-rate melyons dose; just melt away in your
mouf like honey."

He held up one of the melons, and Vincent placed in his hands the
coppers in payment. Between two of them he had placed the little note.
Dan's hands closed quickly on the coins, and dropping them into his
pocket he addressed the next customer, while Vincent sauntered away
again. This time the melon was a whole one, and Vincent divided it with
a couple of other prisoners for the fruit was too large for one person
to consume, being quite as large as a man's head.

The next day another melon was bought, but this time Vincent did not
open it in public. Examining it closely, he perceived that it had been
cut through the middle, and no doubt contained a portion of the rope. He
hesitated as to his next step. If he took the melon up to his room he
would be sure to find some men there, and would be naturally called upon
to divide the fruit; and yet there was nowhere else he could hide it.
For a long time he sat with his back to the wall and the melon beside
him, abusing himself for his folly in not having told Dan to send the
rope in small lengths that he could hide about him. The place where he
had sat down was one of the quietest in the yard, but men were
constantly strolling up and down. He determined at last that the only
possible plan was in the first place to throw his coat over his melon,
to tuck it up underneath it, then to get hold of one end of the ball of
rope that it doubtless contained and to endeavor to wind it round his
body without being observed. It was a risky business, and he would
gladly have tossed the melon over the wall had he dared to do so; for if
he were detected, not only would he be punished with much more severe
imprisonment, but Dan might be arrested and punished most severely.

Unfortunately the weather was by no means hot, and it would look strange
to take off his coat, besides, if he did so, how could he coil the rope
round him without being observed? So that idea was abandoned. He got up
and walked to an angle in the wall, and there sat down again, concealing
the melon as well as he could between him and the wall when any one
happened to come near him. He pulled the halves apart and found, as he
had suspected, it was but a shell, the whole of the fruit having been
scooped out. But he gave an exclamation of pleasure on seeing that
instead, as he feared, of a large ball of rope being inside, the
interior was filled with neatly-made hanks, each containing several
yards of thin but strong rope, together with a hank of strong string.

Unbuttoning his coat, he thrust them in; then he took the melon rind and
broke it into very small pieces and threw them about. He then went up to
his room and thrust the hanks, unobserved, one by one among the straw
which, covered by an army blanket, constituted his bed. To-morrow, no
doubt, Dan would supply him somehow with a turn-screw. On going down to
the gate next day he found that the negro had changed his commodity, and
that this time his basket contained very large and fine cucumbers. These
were selling briskly, and Vincent saw that Dan was looking round
