and shaggy coat of hair, showed that it was no Indian nor human creature
of any sort, but _a huge bear standing upright on its hams_.

"A she-bear and her cubs!" exclaimed Francois; "but see!" he continued,
"_she_ is red, while the cubs are jet-black!"

Basil did not stop for any observation of that kind.  He had sprung to
his feet and levelled his rifle, the moment he saw what the animal was.

"For your life do not fire!" cried Lucien.  "It _may be a grizzly
bear_!"

His advice came too late.  The crack of Basil's rifle was heard; and the
bear dropping upon all fours, danced over the ground shaking her head
and snorting furiously.  The light had deceived Basil; and instead of
hitting her in the head as he had intended, his bullet glanced from her
snout, doing her but little harm.  Now, the snout of a bear is its most
precious and tender organ, and a blow upon that will rouse even the most
timid species of them to fury.  So it was with this one.  She saw whence
the shot came; and, as soon as she had given her head a few shakes, she
came in a shuffling gallop towards the boys.

Basil now saw how rashly he had acted, but there was no time for
expressing regrets.  There was not even time for them to get to their
horses.  Before they could reach these and draw the pickets, the bear
would overtake them.  Some one of them would become a victim.

"Take to the trees!" shouted Lucien; "if it be a grizzly bear, she
cannot climb."

As Lucien said this, he levelled his short rifle and fired at the
advancing animal.  The bullet seemed to strike her on the flank, as she
turned with a growl and bit the part.  This delayed her for a moment,
and allowed Lucien time to swing himself to a tree.  Basil had thrown
away his rifle, not having time to reload.  Francois, when he saw the
great monster so near, dropped his gun without firing.

All three in their haste climbed separate trees.  It was a grove of
white oaks, as we have already stated; and these trees, unlike the
pines, or magnolias, or cypress-trees, have usually great limbs growing
low down and spreading out horizontally.  These limbs are often as many
feet in length as the tree itself is in height.

It was upon these that they had climbed--Basil having taken to that one
under which they had slept, and which was much larger than the others
around.  At the foot of this tree the bear stopped.  The robes and
blankets drew her attention for the moment.  She tossed them over with
her great paws, and then left them, and walked round the trunk, looking
upward, at intervals uttering loud "sniffs," that sounded like the
"'scape" of a steam-pipe.  By this time Basil had reached the third or
fourth branch from the ground.  He might have gone much higher; but,
from what Lucien had suggested, he believed the animal to be a grizzly
bear.  Her colour, which was of a fern or fulvous brown, confirmed him
in that belief--as he knew that grizzly bears are met with of a great
variety of colours.  He had nothing to fear then, even on the lowest
branch, and he thought it was no use going higher.  So he stopped and
looked down.  He had a good view of the animal below; and to his
consternation he saw at a glance that it was _not_ a grizzly, but a
different species.  Her shape, as well as general appearance, convinced
him it was the "cinnamon" bear--a variety of the black, and one of the
best tree-climbers of the kind.  This was soon put beyond dispute, as
Basil saw the animal throw her great paws around the trunk, and commence
crawling upward!

It was a fearful moment.  Lucien and Francois both leaped back to the
ground, uttering shouts of warning and despair.  Francois picked up his
gun, and without hesitating a moment ran to the foot of the tree, and
fired both barrels into the hips of the bear.  The small shot hardly
could have penetrated her thick shaggy hide.  It only served to irritate
her afresh, causing her to growl fiercely; and she paused for some
moments, as if considering whether she would descend and punish the
"enemy in the rear," or keep on after Basil.  The rattling of the latter
among the branches above decided her, and on she crawled upward.

Basil was almost as active among the branches of a tree as a squirrel or
a monkey.  When about sixty feet from the ground, he crawled out upon a
long limb that grew horizontally.  He chose this one, because he saw
another growing above it, which he thought he might reach as soon as the
bear followed him out upon the first; and by this means get back to the
main trunk before the bear, and down to the ground again.  After getting
out upon the limb, however, he saw that he had miscalculated.  The
branch upon which he was, bending down under his weight, so widened the
distance between it and the one above, that he could not reach the
latter, even with the tips of his fingers.  He turned to go back.  To
his horror the bear was at the other end in the fork, and _preparing to
follow him along the limb_!

He could not go back without meeting the fierce brute in the teeth.
There was no branch below within his reach, and none above, and he was
fifty feet from the ground.  To leap down appeared the only alternative
to escape the clutches of the bear, and that alternative was certain
death!

The bear advanced along the limb.  Francois and Lucien screamed below,
loading their pieces as rapidly as they could; but they feared they
would be too late.

It was a terrible situation; but it was in such emergencies that the
strong mind of Basil best displayed itself; and, instead of yielding to
despair, he appeared cool and collected.  His mind was busy examining
every chance that offered.

All at once a thought struck him; and, obedient to its impulse, he
called to his brothers below,--

"A rope! a rope!  Fling me a rope!  Haste! for heaven's sake haste! a
rope, or I am lost!"

Fortunately, there lay a rope under the tree.  It was a raw-hide lasso,
used in packing Jeanette.  It lay by the spot where they had slept.

Lucien dropped his half-loaded rifle, and sprang towards it, coiling it
as he took it up.  Lucien could throw a lasso almost as well as Basil
himself; and that was equal to a Mexican "vaquero" or a "gaucho" of the
Pampas.  He ran nearly under the limb, twirled the lasso around his
head, and launched it upwards.

Basil, to gain time, had crept out upon the limb as far as it would bear
him, while his fierce pursuer followed after.  The branch, under their
united weight, bent downward like a bow.  Fortunately, it was oak, and
did not break.

Basil was astride, his face turned to the tree and towards his pursuer.
The long snout of the latter was within three feet of his head, and he
could feel her warm breath, as with open jaws she stretched forward,
snorting fiercely.

At this moment the ring-end of the lasso struck the branch directly
between them, passing a few feet over it.  Before it could slip back
again, and fall off, the young hunter had grasped it; and with the
dexterity of a packer, double-knotted it around the limb.  The next
moment, and just as the great claws of the bear were stretched forth to
clutch him, he slipped off the branch, and glided down the lasso.

The rope did not reach the ground by at least twenty feet!  It was a
short one, and part of it had been taken up in the hasty knotting.
Lucien and Francois, in consternation, had observed this from below, as
soon as it first hung down.  They had observed it, and prepared
themselves accordingly; so that, when Basil reached the end of the rope,
he saw his brothers standing below, and holding a large buffalo-skin
stretched out between them.  Into this he dropped; and the next moment
stood upon the ground unhurt.

And now came the moment of triumph.  The tough limb, that had been held
retent by Basil's weight, becoming so suddenly released, flew upward
with a jerk.

The unexpected violence of that jerk was too much for the bear.  Her
hold gave way; she was shot into the air several feet upwards, and
falling with a dull heavy sound to the earth, lay for a moment
motionless!  She was only stunned however, and would soon have struggled
up again to renew the attack; but, before she could regain her feet,
Basil had laid hold of Francois' half-loaded gun; and, hurriedly pouring
down a handful of bullets, ran forward and fired them into her head,
killing her upon the spot!

The cubs by this time had arrived upon the ground, and Marengo, who had
now partially recovered, by way of revenging himself for the castigation
he had received from their mother, attacked them with fury.  The little
creatures fought fiercely; and, together, would have been more than a
match for Marengo; but the rifles of his masters came to his assistance,
and put an end to the contest.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

JERKING A BEAR.

All three--old bear and cubs--now lay stretched along the grass dead as
may be.  A rare-looking trio they were.  The old one could not have
weighed less than five hundred pounds.  Her long, rough coat was of a
fawn, or cinnamon colour, while the cubs were of a uniform black.  This,
however, is quite a common thing; and, what is still more singular, the
cubs of the black bear are often seen of a reddish or cinnamon colour,
while the mother herself is pure black.  No doubt the cubs when
full-grown change to the colour of their own species; but even at all
ages bears of the same species are found varying in colour from
difference of climate or other circumstances.

On the continent of North America, say the naturalists, but three
species of bears are found, viz the "black," the "polar," and the
"grizzly."  This is not certain, however, for the cinnamon bear, of
which we have been speaking, is probably a species distinct from the
black.  If so, there are four kinds on that continent, and, perhaps, a
fifth; as the brown bear of the Hudson's Bay furriers, hitherto set down
as a variety of the black, is more likely the Russian or brown bear of
Europe.  It may have reached the American continent by Kamschatka, where
it is a common species.

The polar bear is found only in the snowy regions that border the Arctic
Ocean; and never ranges above one hundred miles from the sea.  The
"grizzly," for strength, courage, and ferocity, takes the first place
among the bear family--outranking even his white cousin of the north.
We shall have more to say of him by-and-bye.  The _black_ bear is our
present subject; and as all that is known of the cinnamon variety goes
to show that its habits are similar to those of the black, what is here
said of the one may be considered applicable to both.

The black bear (_Ursus Americanus_) is said to resemble the brown bear
of Europe.  I can see no resemblance.  There is enough of difference,
certainly, to constitute them separate and distinct species.  The former
has one molar tooth more than the latter; besides, the profile of the
black bear is not so much arched, or convex, as that of the brown.  In
every respect, except habits, they are unlike each other.  Their habits
are nearly similar.

The whole American continent is the range of the black bear.  He can
live, and no doubt enjoy life, in all climates.  He is equally at home
in the icy regions of Canada and the tropic swamps of Louisiana.  He is
found from the shores of the Atlantic to the Pacific.  He inhabits thick
forests, and ranges in rocky desert regions, where scarcely any timber
grows.  He prefers wooded districts, however; and in these is most
commonly met with.

Black bears were very plentiful in America previous to its colonisation
by the whites.  The demand for their skins caused them to be much hunted
since that event; and of course they are growing less numerous every
day.  The fur companies during the last hundred years have obtained
thousands upon thousands of their skins both from white and Indian
hunters.  There are still many of these animals found in wild, unsettled
parts; and even in the old and long-inhabited states they are
occasionally met with in secluded and mountainous districts.  You would
wonder that they have not been extirpated long ago--being such large
creatures, easily discovered and easily tracked; besides, it is always
an ambition with the settlers and amateur-hunters to kill them.
Moreover, but two cubs are produced at a litter, and that only happens
once a-year.  The fact is, that during winter, when the snow is on the
ground and the bear might be easily tracked and destroyed, he does not
show himself, but lies torpid in his den--which is either a cave in the
rocks or a hollow tree.  This happens only in the northern countries,
where there are snows and severe winters.  In these he disappears for
several months, hiding himself in his dark lair, and living, as the
hunters assert, by "sucking his paws."  This assertion, however, I will
not attempt to corroborate.  All I can say is, that he retires to his
lurking-place as "fat as butter," and comes out again in early spring as
"thin as a rail."

There is another curious fact about bears, that, to some extent,
explains why they are not easily exterminated.  It is this: the old
she-animals are never killed during the period of gestation--for they
are never met with at that time.  It has been said there is no hunter to
be found in all America who remembers having killed a she-bear with
young, either of the black or grizzly species.  Now this is not the case
with most other animals--such as foxes and wolves--which are often
killed with a whole litter of young, many of their species being thus
destroyed at once.

The she-bear brings forth in winter in the deep recesses of some cave,
where she has lain hid during the whole period of her gestation; and on
this account while with young, she rarely, if ever, falls a victim to
the hunters.  When the cubs are large enough to go abroad, she takes
them out, treating them with as much tenderness as a mother would her
children.  She will lay down her life for them at any time, defending
them with great courage when attacked.  It has been said that, like the
alligator-mother, she is sometimes called upon to protect them from
their savage fathers, who would devour them if they could.  This I do
not believe.

The black bears are omnivorous.  They will eat fish, flesh, fowl, and
vegetables.  They are fond of all kinds of berries and sweet fruits.
They "go crazed" after honey, climbing bee-trees and robbing the nests.
They dig for roots--such as groundnuts and prairie-turnips.  They lick
up the larva of insects greedily, turning over great logs to get at
them.  In the south they tear open the nests of turtles and alligators,
and devour the eggs; and, where there are settlements, they steal into
the fields and eat quantities of young corn and potatoes, making sad
havoc with the crops.  They will devour pigs and other animals, eating
their flesh--it might be said, alive--as they do not stop to kill them,
but eat while tearing them to pieces.  They will satisfy their hunger
with putrid carcass, or, in short, with anything that is eatable by any
other creature.

Notwithstanding the disgusting variety of his food, the flesh of the
black bear is very palatable.  It is a treat among the Indians and white
hunters--particularly the large fat paws, which are esteemed the
"tit-bits."  It is, perhaps, because these people are so fond of them,
that they are led to believe the bear himself must be so, and therefore
during his winter retirement entertains himself by sucking them.

There are many ways of capturing the bear.  He is hunted by trained
hounds.  When thus attacked he will run straight on for ten miles, if
his pursuers do not press him too close.  When overtaken, however, he
turns upon the dogs; and, should one of the latter come near enough, a
single blow of his paws will usually send it sprawling.  He runs
awkwardly on his plantigrade feet; but, although from his great length
and size he appears to move but slowly, it is not so.  He manages to
shuffle over the ground much more rapidly than one would suppose.  He
can overtake a man on foot--although a mounted hunter, with his dogs,
will easily overtake _him_.  When he finds that he cannot escape by
running, he takes to a tree; and, having clambered high up, tries to
hide himself among the leaves.  He does not often succeed in this, as
the keen noses of the hounds guide them to the right tree, where they
stand barking and howling until the hunters come up.  These finding the
bear "treed," rarely fail to bring him down with their rifles.  He will
then, if only wounded, fight fiercely both with dogs and hunters; but it
is only at such times that the black bear will contend with man; as,
when not attacked by the latter, he will never attack him.  When
wounded, however, or assailed by the hunter, he becomes a dangerous
antagonist; and men have been dreadfully mutilated and torn on such
occasions, escaping only with their lives.  Some there are who have been
nearly crushed to death by his "hug."

The black bear is often trapped and snared, in various ways--such as by
log-traps, nooses tied to bent saplings, dead-falls, and steel-traps--
and he is thus caught much more readily than either the lynx, the fox,
or the wolf.

It would be easy to fill a volume with anecdotes and adventures in which
the black bear figures as the hero.  Many stories of his peculiar habits
are related in the back settlements of America, some of which are true,
while others partake largely of exaggeration.  We have not room for
these, however; and I have given you only _facts_, such as will enable
you to form some idea of the general habits of this animal.

Most of these facts were communicated by Lucien to his brothers, while
they were engaged in preparing their breakfast; and, as all three were
very hungry, this was the first thing that occupied them after the bears
had been killed.

The breakfast consisted of part of a cub, which was cleared of the hair
by being singed, and then roasted.  They knew that bear-meat, like pork,
is spoiled by skinning; and they followed the Indian fashion of
preparing it.  They made a hearty meal, as the cub-meat proved both
tender and juicy--having a flavour something between young pork and
veal.  Of course, Marengo had his breakfast as well, coming in for
refuse bits enough to have filled a large basket.  The feet, however,
which would have fallen to his share, had it been a deer or a buffalo,
