
"That young scamp, Bouldon, and that little shrimp, Eden, ought not to
be allowed to play.  There is no guarding against their sneaking,
underhand ways," he observed.  I believe, indeed, he made use of still
more opprobrious epithets, with which I do not wish to defile my pages.
Even some of his own side laughed at his anger, but still no one thought
of rebuking him.

"Never mind, we'll beat them well the next turn," answered Rodwell, a
big, good-natured fellow, on his side.  "Now, young Bracebridge, you,
sir, look out for yourself.  We are not going to let you run over the
course in this way again."

"Oh, we are not afraid of you; we shall do our best to win again, at all
events," said Ernest, taking up the ball, and walking off with it to his
side of the ground.  "Now look out, old fellows."

"What's that the impudent young scamp says?" exclaimed Blackall.  "We'll
pay him and his sneaking set off before long, so let him look out."

Ernest heard what was said, but took no notice of the remark.  He
appeared to be entirely absorbed in considering in what direction he
should drive the ball.  He eyed the position of the various players,
both on the other side and on his own.  He called Bouldon up to him, and
whispered various directions to him.  Bouldon ran off, and immediately
several of his side changed their places.

"Ah! that boy was born to become a general," observed Monsieur Malin,
who was looking on at the game with deep interest.

The opposite side were rather astonished.  They were not accustomed to
so systematic a way of playing, still less to see directions issued by
one boy so implicitly obeyed by others.  They could not make it out.
Ernest lifted up his stick, and struck the ball.  Off it flew in a
direction away from all the best players on the opposite side, but some
of the most active of his party ran on, and hitting it before them, one
after the other, drove it right through the ranks of their opponents.
So quickly did one striker succeed the other, that none of Blackall's
boys could get a stroke.  He ran to the rescue, but this was one of the
many occasions, as he frequently found to his cost, when mere animal
strength could avail but little.  The ball was carried on, struck
rapidly past him, followed up by relays of Ernest's friends, and finally
sent by Buttar, accompanied by a loud cheer from all his side, over the
boundary.  Such a victory could not have been expected under ordinary
circumstances, had even the big boys been the conquerors, but the latter
were doubly astounded, till Rodwell sang out--

"Bravo, young Bracebridge!  You have had a lucky chance, but we'll lick
you soundly next time, so look out."

"Chance! yes, it was only chance," repeated Blackall, glad to find a
plausible excuse for his defeat.  A third round was to be played, but
the younger party were so cocky that they proposed having four rounds.
To this, of course, the others were too glad to consent, under the
belief that they could at all events make it a drawn battle; while
Ernest's friends gloried in the hopes of beating their big opponents
three to one.

Blackall having observed that Ernest placed his men according to a
certain plan, thought he would do the same.  He, therefore, with not a
small amount of pretentious formality, ordered the boys on his side to
look out in different directions, and to follow a certain course.  Some
went where they were told, but others proceeded to where they themselves
considered that they should be better placed, and instead of obeying the
orders of their leader, acted according to their own judgment, which, to
do them justice, was fully as good as that of Blackall.  Bracebridge
watched the proceedings of his opponents, and smiled as he pointed them
out to Buttar.  He very soon made his own arrangements.  Blackall
thought that he was going to act precisely as he had done in the
previous game.  He had no such intentions.  Handing the ball to Bouldon,
he told him to strike it up, while he, Buttar, Ellis, Gregson, and
several others went scattering up before him.  The big fellows looked at
him, and gathered thickly in his front.  They took no notice of Ellis,
who was away to the right.  Bouldon looked towards Bracebridge; then,
turning suddenly, struck the ball in the direction of Ellis, who
followed it up ably as it came by him, and turned it towards Buttar.
Buttar had in the meantime broken through the big fellows and though
several of them, hurrying on, tried by reiterated blows to stop it, he
carried it once more successfully up to the goal.  Blackall and some of
his party literally stamped with rage at the idea of being beaten three
times running by the younger boys, "At all events, that puppy
Bracebridge had nothing to do with the affair this time," he exclaimed,
showing the feeling which animated him.

Ernest's party cheered again and again--they could not help it.  Both
sides agreed to play out the fourth game.  Ernest managed his friends
equally well as at first, but his opponents were more alive to his
tactics.  The battle was very hotly contested; several times he got the
ball nearly to the goal, and it was again driven back.  This game had
already taken as long to play as the other three--defeat would be almost
as honourable to the younger party as victory--they kept up the game by
sheer activity and good play; not that the bigger boys played ill, but
they wanted combination and a good leader.  Blackall had now completely
lost his head and his temper.  Once or twice when Bracebridge came near
he felt very much inclined to strike him, but Ernest watched his eye,
and was very quickly out of his way.  At last, Blackall found himself
with the ball directly before him; he lifted up his stick, expecting to
strike it right ahead up to the goal.  He looked at the point before him
to which he intended to send the ball, and he looked at his stick, and
he looked at the ball, but he did not look on one side--had he done so,
he would have perceived Bracebridge springing along with his stick ready
to strike.  Strike he did too, and away flew the ball out of Blackall's
very clutches.  Blackall's rage now burst forth--twice he struck Ernest
across the shins, and though the latter managed to break the force of
the blows, he was much hurt.  Then the bully lifted up his stick and
struck Ernest on the arm more than once.  He was about to repeat the
blow on his victim's head, and the effect would have been very serious,
when he felt his own ears pulled lustily.

"Ah, you big coward--is dat de vay you play your games?  I'm ashamed dat
any boy at de school vare I teach should behave so," exclaimed the voice
of Monsieur Malin.  "If I do not take you instantly before de Doctor it
is because it is too bad to tell him of, so I will pull your ears
myself.  Bah!"

Right heartily did the good-natured French master tug away at the
bully's ears till they were red to the very roots.  He knew that he
himself was doing what in spirit was prohibited, for no master was
allowed to strike or punish a boy.  He might have argued that pulling
the ears was not striking, and that punishing meant flogging or caning.
Blackall on another occasion might have resisted, but now he felt that
he had been guilty of so cowardly an action that no one would support
him, so he submitted tamely to the infliction.

"Go, get out of de ground, you shall not play--you are not worthy of
it," continued the French master, pulling him away by the
before-spoken-of appendages of his head.

Meantime the games went on.  Ernest, though much hurt, tried to exhibit
no symptoms of his suffering.  He and his friends strove hard, but the
big fellows resolved not to lose this last game as they had done the
others, and finally by strenuous exertions drove the ball up to the
goal.  Never was a game at hockey at our school more hotly contested.  A
great deal came out of it.



CHAPTER TEN.

THE BULLY'S PUNISHMENT.

That game of hockey caused a great deal of ill-feeling among the less
generous and most ill-disposed of the big fellows towards the younger
ones who had so thoroughly beaten them.  Blackall bullied more than
ever, and several others imitated his example.  They had also already
begun to carry out their precious scheme of fagging.  Some of the little
fellows thought it very good fun at first to obey a bigger one, provided
he did not order them to do anything very difficult, or likely to bring
punishment down upon themselves.  Grown bold by impunity, the faggers
resolved to divide the boys of the classes below them among themselves
as fags by lots.  Of course it was the very worst plan that could have
been devised; indeed, tyrants generally do form very clumsy and very bad
schemes for keeping those weaker than themselves in subjection.  The
younger boys might willingly enough have served older friends who had
been kind to them and had protected them, but it was preposterous to
suppose that without force they would obey any big boy who might choose
to order them.  It was some time before this scheme became known to
Ernest Bracebridge and his friends.  As he never listened to the tales
and tittle-tattle of the school--indeed, he found that the current
stories were generally absurd exaggerations of the truth--he might have
remained some time longer ignorant, had not Bouldon come to him one
afternoon, after school, in a state of great indignation, saying that
Blackall had called him up and ordered him to go to a shop two miles
off, to buy him a tongue, some rolls, and other eatables.

"When I expostulated, he had the audacity to tell me that I should clean
his shoes if he wished it," exclaimed Tom, with a savage laugh.  "And
what do you think? that I was his fag, that I was awarded to him, and
that he intended to work me thoroughly?  I asked him by whom I was
awarded to him?  He replied, by a vote of my seniors and betters; and
that if I did not work willingly I should be compelled to serve him by
force.  I don't remember what I said at first--I know that he called me
an impudent young scamp for my pains; I concluded by telling him that I
should consult you and Buttar and other fellows, and that if you
consented to be fags, I should not have a word to say."

"You were perfectly right--I am glad you said so," observed Ernest.
"Find Buttar, and Ellis, and Gregson, and we'll talk the matter over.
We'll mention the subject to Lemon; I know full well that he will not
wish to fag any boy, yet perhaps for the sake of a quiet life he may not
be inclined to interfere with the plans of the other big fellows.
However, I do not want him to interfere; whatever we do, we should do
ourselves; fortunately, we are well prepared for the emergency.  We
number fifty fellows staunch and true.  Go round and tell them to be
prepared--that something is going to happen.  That will put them on the
alert.  When Blackall finds that you have not obeyed his orders, and
that he will have to go supperless to bed, he will probably attack you.
Tell Eden to watch you--never for a moment to lose sight of you, and
directly he sees Blackall attack you, to come up and tell me--I'll have
all our fellows ready, and we'll rush to the rescue."

"Oh, excellent," exclaimed Bouldon, rubbing his hands; "I wish that he'd
just begin trying it on.  Won't I aggravate him by what I say and do;
I'll tell him my mind more than he ever before heard it in his life."

"No, no, don't enrage him; that's not right," observed Bracebridge; but
Tom, as he went off, shook his head as if he intended to follow his own
ideas on the subject.

While Bouldon, followed at a distance by Eden, strolled about the
playground and fields as usual, hoping that Blackall would meet him,
Ernest went round to a number of boys who had combined with him to
resist any aggression which the big fellows might make upon their
rights, and told them to keep together, some in the gymnastic court, and
the rest in the fencing-room.  Meantime he and Buttar, and a few others
on whose judgment he most relied, met together and consulted as to the
best course to pursue under the present emergency.

"I've an idea," said Buttar; "let us get some ropes and bind our tyrant.
He dare not interfere with me now, but I am determined that he shall
not treat others as he treated me."

Some ropes were easily found which had been used to lash up their
play-boxes.  Ernest and Buttar were to be the leaders.  Ernest went to
the fencing-room to take command of the boys there; Buttar to the
gymnastic court.  They did not remain there idle.  One company began
twisting and turning and leaping on the poles, while Ernest got his
followers to practise with their basket-sticks and single-sticks.  Then
he proposed a drill, and they all fell in and went through their
exercises with as much precision as if Sergeant Dibble himself had been
present.  They marched and wheeled, and formed in close order and
extended order, and various other simple manoeuvres, in very good style.
While they were thus engaged, Eden rushed into the room, exclaiming,
"Blackall has caught Bouldon, and is half-killing him; he says that he
will teach him to disobey his orders.  Haste--haste, or I really believe
he will do him an injury.  I never saw a fellow in such a rage."

No one needed a second summons.  Bracebridge put himself at the head of
his companions, who kept their ranks, and, marching out in good order,
they met the party in the gymnastic court, whom Eden had likewise
summoned.

"Double quick march," cried Bracebridge; and the two bands rushed on
towards the extreme end of the grounds, where Eden told them the bully
had encountered poor Tom.  The spot towards which they were hurrying was
separated from the rest of the grounds by a thick coppice.  Several tall
trees grew about it, and it was by far the most secluded place in the
grounds.  It was a favourite resort in the summer time of some of the
more studious boys, who went there to read, and, at other seasons,
Gregson and a few other boys, who were fond of the study of natural
history, used to go there to search for specimens, as Tom Bouldon used
to say, of bird's nests, beetles, bees, and wild flowers.  Blackall,
also, and two or three of his class, occasionally retired there, but
neither to read nor to study natural history, but to smoke and to drink,
when he could procure liquor.  Bouldon ascertained that he had gone
there on this occasion, and, anxious to bring matters to a crisis, went
round that way, passing directly in front of him.

Blackall, who was sitting alone by himself, looking at the grass, saw
his shadow slowly pass along before him.  Lifting up his lack-lustre
eyes, they fell on Tom.  He immediately started up, and seized him by
the collar.  "Ah, my fine fellow, I've caught you at last, and all
alone.  I wanted to find you, and now I'll pay you off with a thrashing
which you will remember to the end of your days."

Bouldon looked up and down to see if anybody was coming to his help.  He
had missed Eden, who had, however, seen him through the trees in the
hands of Blackall, and then scampered off as fast as his legs would
carry him, his imagination somewhat supplying the particulars of the
thrashing which had not even yet begun.  Bouldon struggled hard to
release himself when he found that Blackall had got hold of his collar,
for he had no wish to become a martyr unnecessarily, as he knew from
experience that his persecutor hit very hard and cruelly whenever he had
the power.

"I'll give you a chance yet," said Blackall.  "Will you fag for me, or
will you not?"

"Most certainly not," answered Tom, firmly.  "I'll see you at Jericho,
and ten thousand leagues further, rather than lift a finger to obey one
of your commands.  There, you've got my answer."

"Then take that," exclaimed the bully, bestowing a thundering lick on
poor Tom's ear.  "How do you like the taste of that?  Will you obey me
now?"

Blackall generally played with his victims as a cat does with a mouse
before destroying it.

"Not I," answered Tom briefly, compressing his lips.

Another heavy box on the ears followed close upon this answer.

"Will you now?" again asked Blackall.

"No," bawled out Bouldon.

Several cuffs and blows now descended on his head and shoulders.  Again
Blackall asked him if he would fag.  Bouldon did not deign to answer.

"Do you hear me?  Are you deaf?" thundered out the bully.

Bouldon made not the slightest reply to this question either by word or
look.  The consequence was that the bully began striking away at him
right and left, till Tom felt that he was getting very severely
punished, and he could not help wishing that some relief was at hand.
He struggled as much as his strength would allow, and at last,
forgetting all the rules of prudence, he broke away, and instead of
endeavouring to escape, he clenched his fists and struck at the bully in
return.  The consequence was, that he was soon knocked down on the
grass.  He was not very much hurt, so when he saw Blackall about to kick
him, he sprang up in time to avoid the blow.

"Ah, you arrant coward, to think of kicking a fellow half your size when
he is on the ground!" he exclaimed, standing at a distance, however, so
that he might have time to leap out of Blackall's way.  Under any
circumstances he would not have deigned to run; that is not the fashion
of any English boys I have ever met.  On the contrary, he was anxious to
keep near Blackall, and to spin out the time till his friends could
arrive to his assistance.  He would particularly have wished them to
find him on the ground, and Blackall engaged in kicking him.  Of course
Tom's look, and attitude, and words very much increased the exasperation
of the latter, who now, springing after him, caught him again by the
collar, and began pummelling him with all his might about the ribs and
head, till his face was one mass of bumps and bruises.  Still Bouldon
would not cry out for mercy, or give in.  Whenever he had an opportunity
he broke away from his persecutor, and once more stood on the defensive,
returning, when he could, blow for blow.  He was soon, however, again
knocked down with a blow on the forehead, which almost stunned him.  He
saw the bully advancing with his foot to kick him.

"Oh, don't, don't; you'll kill me," sang out poor Tom, who really did
