glared at the Secretary of Public Opinion. "Have you any comments?"

"No, Mr. President."

"All right, then." The President unbent and said plaintively: "I don't
see why you can't all be more reasonable. I'm a very reasonable man.
I don't see why I can't have a few pleasures along with my
responsibilities. Really I don't. And I'm sensitive. I don't _like_
these scenes. Very well. That's all. The Cabinet meeting is adjourned."

They rose and left silently in the order of their seniority. The
President noticed that the panels were still down and pushed the button
that raised them again and hid the granite-faced Secret Servicemen. He
took out of his pocket a late Morrison fingering-piece and turned it
over in his hand, a smile of relaxation and bliss spreading over his
face. _Such_ amusing textural contrast! _Such_ unexpected variations on
the classic sequences!

       *       *       *       *       *

The Cabinet, less the Secretary of Defense, was holding a rump meeting
in an untapped corner of the White House gymnasium.

"God," the Secretary of State said, white-faced. "Poor old Willy!"

The professionally gruff Secretary of Public Opinion said: "We should
murder the bastard. I don't care what happens--"

The Director of the Budget said dryly: "We all know what would happen.
President Folsom XXV would take office. No; we've got to keep plugging
as before. Nothing short of the invincible can topple the Republic...."

"What about a war?" the Secretary of Commerce demanded fiercely. "We've
no proof that our program will work. What about a war?"

State said wearily: "Not while there's a balance of power, my dear man.
The Io-Callisto Question proved that. The Republic and the Soviet fell
all over themselves trying to patch things up as soon as it seemed that
there would be real shooting. Folsom XXIV and his excellency Premier
Yersinsky know at least that much."

The Secretary of the Treasury said: "What would you all think of Steiner
for Defense?"

The Director of the Budget was astonished. "Would he take it?"

Treasury cleared his throat. "As a matter of fact, I've asked him to
stop by right about now." He hurled a medicine ball into the budgetary
gut.

"Oof!" said the Director. "You bastard. Steiner would be perfect. He
runs Standards like a watch." He treacherously fired the medicine ball
at the Secretary of Raw Materials, who blandly caught it and slammed it
back.

"Here he comes," said the Secretary of Raw Materials. "Steiner! Come and
sweat some oleo off!"

Steiner ambled over, a squat man in his fifties, and said: "I don't mind
if I do. Where's Willy?"

State said: "The President unmasked him as a traitor. He's probably been
executed by now."

Steiner looked grim, and grimmer yet when the Secretary of the Treasury
said, dead-pan: "We want to propose you for Defense."

"I'm happy in Standards," Steiner said. "Safer, too. The Man's father
took an interest in science, but The Man never comes around. Things are
very quiet. Why don't you invite Winch, from the National Art
Commission? It wouldn't be much of a change for the worse for him."

"No brains," the Secretary for Raw Materials said briefly. "Heads up!"

Steiner caught the ball and slugged it back at him. "What good are
brains?" he asked quietly.

"Close the ranks, gentlemen," State said. "These long shots are too hard
on my arms."

The ranks closed and the Cabinet told Steiner what good were brains. He
ended by accepting.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Moon is all Republic. Mars is all Soviet. Titan is all Republic.
Ganymede is all Soviet. But Io and Callisto, by the Treaty of Greenwich,
are half-and-half Republic and Soviet.

Down the main street of the principal settlement on Io runs an invisible
line. On one side of the line, the principal settlement is known as New
Pittsburgh. On the other side it is known as Nizhni-Magnitogorsk.

Into a miner's home in New Pittsburgh one day an eight-year-old boy
named Grayson staggered, bleeding from the head. His eyes were swollen
almost shut.

His father lurched to his feet, knocking over a bottle. He looked
stupidly at the bottle, set it upright too late to save much of the
alcohol, and then stared fixedly at the boy. "See what you made me do,
you little bastard?" he growled, and fetched the boy a clout on his
bleeding head that sent him spinning against the wall of the hut. The
boy got up slowly and silently--there seemed to be something wrong with
his left arm--and glowered at his father.

He said nothing.
