The Project Gutenberg EBook of Comet's Burial, by Raymond Zinke Gallun

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Comet's Burial

Author: Raymond Zinke Gallun

Release Date: September 17, 2011 [EBook #37448]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMET'S BURIAL ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Dianna Adair and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










[Illustration: BRINKER BRINKER in footprints]




     _A man may be a scoundrel, a crook, a high-phased confidence man,
     and still work toward a great dream which will be worth far more
     than the momentary damage his swindles cost._




_Comet's Burial_

_by_ RAYMOND Z. GALLUN


Outside Tycho Station on the Moon, Jess Brinker showed Arne Copeland the
odd footprints made in the dust by explorers from Mars, fifty million
years ago. A man-made cover of clear plastic now kept them from being
trampled.

"Who hasn't heard about such prints?" Copeland growled laconically.
"There's no air or weather here to rub them out--even in eternity.
Thanks for showing a fresh-arrived greenhorn around..."

Copeland was nineteen, tough, willing to learn, but wary. His wide mouth
was usually sullen, his grey eyes a little narrowed in a face that
didn't have to be so grim. Back in Iowa he had a girl. Frances. But love
had to wait, for he needed the Moon the way Peary had once needed the
North Pole.

Earth needed it, too--for minerals; as an easier, jump-off point to the
planets because of its weak gravity; as a place for astronomical
observatories, unhampered by the murk of an atmosphere; as sites for
labs experimenting in forces too dangerous to be conducted on a
heavily-populated world, and for a dozen other purposes.

Young Copeland was ready for blood, sweat, and tears in his impulse to
help conquer the lunar wastes. He sized up big, swaggering Jess Brinker,
and admitted to himself that this man, who was at least ten years his
senior, could easily be a phony, stalking suckers. Yet, Copeland
reserved judgment. Like any tenderfoot anywhere, he needed an
experienced man to show him the ropes.

He already knew the Moon intimately from books: A hell of silence, some
of it beautiful: Huge ringwalls. Blazing sunlight, inky shadow. Grey
plains, black sky. Blazing stars, with the great blurry bluish globe of
Earth among them. You could yearn to be on the Moon, but you could go
bats and die there, too--or turn sour, because the place was too rough
for your guts.

Afield, you wore a spacesuit, and conversed by helmet radiophone.
Otherwise you lived in rooms and holes dug underground, and sealed up.
The scant water you dared use was roasted out of gypsum rock. The oxygen
you breathed was extracted from lunar oxides by a chemical process. Then
air-rejuvenator apparatus reseparated it from the carbon-dioxide you
exhaled, so that you could use it over and over.

Copeland had read the tales: With that kind of frugality as the price of
survival, lunar prospectors could turn selfish to the point of
queerness. Afraid somebody might follow them to their mineral claims,
they'd take more pains to leave as little spoor as possible than a fox
being tracked by dogs.

"Speaking of how footprints last around here," Copeland remarked for the
sake of conversation, "I understand you've got to be careful--stick to
high ridges, and to parts of the flat _maria_ where there's no old
volcanic ash or dust of thermal erosion."

"Guys who do that are misers and old women, kid," Brinker scoffed.
"Hell--it sure ain't because they're modest that they're so cautious!
Me--I do things right."

He lifted a foot from the dust beside the path, revealing the mark of
the specially etched steel sole of his spaceboot. A name was stamped
across the print: BRINKER.

"I'm proud of where I've been and where I'm going--like a true
explorer," the big man said. "Get some soles like mine made for
yourself, fella, and come along with me."

Copeland was intrigued. "Let me think about it a little."

             *       *       *       *       *

During the next few hours he heard quite a lot.

A big, blonde nurse--one of the two women in the sealed warrens of Tycho
