"The leg is all right," cried Dick; "I'm going to step on it," trying
to get out of the chair.

"Dicky!" cried his mother in alarm.

"Softly--softly now, young man," said Dr. Fisher. "I suppose you want
me to cure that leg of yours, and make it as good as the other one,
don't you?"

"Why, of course," replied Dick; "that's what you are a doctor for."

"Well, I won't agree to do anything of the sort," said the little
doctor coolly, "if you don't do your part. Do you know what patience
means?"

"I've been patient," exclaimed Dick, in a dudgeon, "forever and ever so
many weeks, and now papa is coming home, and I"--

And then he realized what he had done, and he turned quite pale, and
looked at his mother.

Her face gave no sign, but he sank back in his chair, feeling disgraced
for life, and ready to keep quiet forever. And he was so good while Dr.
Fisher was attending to his leg that when he was through, the little
doctor turned to him approvingly: "Well, sir, I think that I can
promise that you can go home Saturday. You've improved beyond my
expectation."

But Dick didn't "hurrah," nor even smile.

"Dicky," said Mrs. Whitney, smiling into his downcast face, "how glad
we are to hear that; just think, good Dr. Fisher says we may go next
Saturday."

"I'm glad," mumbled Dick, in a forlorn little voice, and till after the
door closed on the retreating form of the doctor, it was all that could
be gotten out of him. Then he turned and put out both arms to his
mother.

"I didn't mean--I didn't mean--I truly didn't mean--to tell--mamma," he
sobbed, as she clasped him closely.

"I know you didn't, dear," she soothed him. "It has really done no
harm; papa didn't want the home people to know, as he wants to surprise
them."

"But it was a secret," said Dick, between his tears, feeling as if he
had lost a precious treasure entrusted to him. "Oh, mamma! I really
didn't mean to let it go."

"Mamma feels quite sure of that," said Mrs. Whitney gently. "You are
right, Dicky, in feeling sorry and ashamed, because anything given to
you to keep is not your own but belongs to another; but, my boy, the
next duty is to keep back those tears--all this is hurting your leg."

Dick struggled manfully, but still the tears rolled down his cheeks. At
last he said, raising his head, "You would much better let me have my
cry out, mamma; it's half-way, and it hurts to send it back."

"Well, I don't think so," said Mrs. Whitney, with a laugh. "I've often
wanted to have a cry out, as you call it. But that's weak, Dicky, and
should be stopped, for the more one cries, the more one wants to."

"You've often wanted to have a cry out?" repeated Dick, in such
amazement that every tear just getting ready to show itself immediately
rushed back again. "Why, you haven't anything to cry for, mamma."

"Indeed I have," she declared; "often and often, I do many things that
I ought not to do"--

"Oh! never, never," cried Dick, clutching her around the neck, to the
detriment of her lace-trimmed wrapper. "My sweetest, dearingest mamma
is ever and always just right."

"Indeed, Dick," said Mrs. Whitney earnestly, "the longer I live, I find
that every day I have something to be sorry for in myself. But God, you
know, is good," she whispered softly.

Dick was silent.

"And then when papa goes," continued Mrs. Whitney, "why, then, my boy,
it is very hard not to cry."

Here was something that the boy could grasp; and he seized it with
avidity.

"And you stop crying for us," he cried; "I know now why you always put
on your prettiest gown, and play games with us the evening after papa
goes. I know now."

"Here are three letters," cried the parson, hurrying in, and tossing
them over to the boy. "And Polly Pepper has written to me, too."

Dick screamed with delight. "Two for me; one from Ben, and one from
Grandpapa!"

"And mine is from Phronsie," said Mrs. Whitney, seizing an epistle
carefully printed in blue crayon.

But although there were three letters from home, none of them carried
the news of what was going on there. None of them breathed a syllable
that Cousin Eunice Chatterton was ill with a low fever, aggravated by
nervous prostration; and that Mrs. Pepper and Polly were having a
pretty hard time of it. On the contrary, every bit of news was of the
cheeriest nature; Jasper tucked on a postscript to his father's letter,
in which he gave the latest bulletin of his school life. And Polly did
the same thing to Ben's letter. Even Phronsie went into a long detail
concerning the new developments of a wonderful kitten she had left at
home, to take her visit to Badgertown, so the two recipients never
missed the lack of information in regard to the household life, from
which they were shut out.

Only once Mrs. Whitney said thoughtfully, as she folded her letter and
slipped it back into its envelope, "They don't speak of Mrs.
Chatterton. I presume she has changed her plans, and is going to remain
longer at her nephew's."

"I hope she'll live there always," declared Dick, looking up savagely
from Ben's letter. "What an old guy she is, mamma!"

"Dick, Dick," said his mother reprovingly, "she is our guest, you know."

"Not if she is at her nephew's," said Dick triumphantly, turning back
to his letter.

Polly at this identical minute was slowly ascending the stairs, a tray
in one hand, the contents of which she was anxiously regarding on the
way.

"I do hope it is right now," she said, and presently knocked at Mrs.
Chatterton's door.

"Come in," said that lady's voice fretfully. And "Do close the door,"
before Polly and her tray were well within.

Polly shut the door gently, and approached the bedside.

"I am so faint I do not know that I can take any," said Mrs.
Chatterton. Whether it was her white cashmere dressing-robe, and her
delicate lace cap that made her face against the pillows seem wan and
white, Polly did not know. But it struck her that she looked more ill
than usual, and she said earnestly, "I am so sorry I wasn't quicker."

"There is no call for an apology from you," said Mrs. Chatterton
coldly. "Set the tray down on the table, and get a basin of water; I
need to be bathed."

Polly stood quite still, even forgetting to deposit the tray.

"Set the tray down, I told you," repeated Mrs. Chatterton sharply, "and
then get the basin of water."

"I will call Hortense," said Polly quietly, placing the tray as desired.

"Hortense has gone to the apothecary's," said Mrs. Chatterton, "and I
will not have one of the other maids; they are too insufferable."

And indeed Polly knew that it would be small use to summon one of them,
as Martha, the most obliging, had airily tossed her head when asked to
do some little service for the sick woman that very morning, declaring,
"I will never lift another finger for that Madame Chatterton."

"My neck aches, and my side, and my head," said Mrs. Chatterton
irritably; "why do you not do as I bid you?"

For one long instant, Polly hesitated; then she turned to rush from the
room, a flood of angry, bitter feelings surging through her heart, more
at the insufferable tone and manner, than at what she was bidden to do.
Only turned; and she was back by the side of the bed, and looking down
into the fretful, dictatorial old face.

"I will bathe you, Mrs. Chatterton," she said gently; "I'll bring the
water in a minute."




XI

POOR POLLY!


"You are very awkward, child," observed Mrs. Chatterton to Polly on her
knees, "and abrupt. Move the sponge more slowly; there, that is better."

Polly shifted her position from one aching knee to another, set her
lips closer together, and bent all her young energies to gentler
effects. But Mrs. Chatterton cried out irritably:

"Have you never taken care of a sick person, pray tell, or is it all
your back-country training that makes you so heavy-handed?"

"I helped mother take care of Phronsie when she had the measles, and
Ben and Joel," said Polly, "five years ago; we haven't been sick
lately."

"Humph!" ejaculated Mrs. Chatterton, not very elegantly. But what was
the use of a fine manner when there was nobody but a little
back-country maiden to see it?

"I shall have to endure it till Hortense returns," she said with a
sigh; "besides, it is my duty to give you something useful to do in
this house. You should be thankful that I allow you to bathe me."

Polly's eyes flashed, and the hand holding the sponge trembled. Nothing
but the fear of troubling Mamsie, and dear old Mr. King whose
forbearance was worn to the finest of threads, kept her at her post.

"Now get the violet water," said Mrs. Chatterton, with an air she would
never have dared employ towards Hortense; "it is the bottle in the
lower left-hand corner of the case."

Polly got up from her knees, and stiffly stumbled across the room to
the case of silver-mounted toilet articles: in her tumult bringing away
the upper right-hand corner vial.

"Stupide!" exclaimed Mrs. Chatterton among her pillows. "Go back, and
do as I bid you, girl; the lower left-hand corner bottle!"

Without a word Polly returned, and bringing the right vial set about
its use as directed, in a rapidly growing dismay at the evil feelings
surging through her, warning her it would not be safe to stay in the
room much longer.

"Do you understand," presently began Mrs. Chatterton, fastening her
cold blue eyes upon her, "what your position is in this house?
Everybody else appears to be blind and idiotic to the last degree; you
seem to have a little quickness to catch an idea."

As Polly did not answer, the question was repeated very sharply: "Do
you understand what your position is in this house?"

"Yes," said Polly, in a low voice, and dashing out the violet water
with a reckless hand, "I do."

"Take care," impatiently cried Mrs. Chatterton. Then she pushed her
pillow into a better position, and returned to the charge.

"What is it, pray, since you understand it so well?"

"I understand that I am here in this house," said Polly, quite cold and
white, "because dear Mr. King wants me to be here."

"DEAR Mr. King!" echoed Mrs. Chatterton, in shrill disdain. "Stuff and
nonsense," and she put her head back for an unpleasant cackle; it could
hardly be called a laugh. "What an idiot the man is to have the wool
pulled over his eyes in this fashion. I'll tell you, Polly"--and she
raised herself up on her elbow, the soft lace falling away from the
white, and yet shapely arm. This member had been one of her strongest
claims to beauty, and even in her rage, Mrs. Chatterton paused a second
to glance complacently at it in its new position--"you are, when all is
said about your dear Mr. King, and your absurd assumption of equality
with refined people who frequent this house, exactly the same underbred
country girl as you were in your old brown house, goodness knows
wherever that is."

"I'm glad I am," declared Polly. And she actually laughed merrily,
while she squared her sturdy shoulders. Nothing could be sweeter than
to hear it said she was worthy of the dear little old brown house, and
didn't disgrace Mamsie's bringing up.

The laugh was the last feather that overthrew Mrs. Chatterton's
restraint. She was actually furious now that she, widow of Algernon
Chatterton, who was own cousin to Jasper Horatio King, should be faced
by such presumption, and her words put aside with girlish amusement.

"And I'll tell you more," she went on, sitting quite erect now on the
bed, "your mother thinks she is doing a fine thing to get all her
family wormed in here in this style, but she'll"--

Polly Pepper, the girlish gladness gone from heart and face, waited for
no more. "OUR MOTHER!" she cried stormily, unable to utter another
word--"oh--oh!" Her breath came in quick, short gasps, the hot
indignant blood mounting to the brown waves of hair on her brow, while
she clasped her hands so tightly together, the pain at any other time
would have made her scream.

Mrs. Chatterton, aghast at the effect of her words, leaned back once
more against her pillows. "Don't try to work up a scene," she
endeavored to say carelessly. But she might as well have remonstrated
with the north wind. The little country maiden had a temper as well as
her own, and all the more for its long restraint, now on breaking
bounds, it rushed at the one who had provoked it, utterly regardless
that it was the great Mrs. Algernon Chatterton.

For two minutes, so breathlessly did Polly hurl the stinging sentences
at the figure on the bed, Cousin Eunice was obliged to let her have her
own way. Then as suddenly, the torrent ceased. Polly grew quite white.
"What have I done--oh! what have I done?" she cried, and rushed out of
the room.

"Polly--Polly!" called Jasper's voice below. She knew he wanted her to
try a new duet he had gone down town to purchase; but how could she
play with such a storm in her heart? and, worse than all else, was the
consciousness that she had spoken to one whose gray hairs should have
made her forget the provocation received, words that now plunged her
into a hot shame to recall.

She flew over the stairs--up, away from every one's sight, to a long,
dark lumber room, partially filled with trunks, and a few articles of
furniture, prized as heirlooms, but no longer admissible in the family
apartments. Polly closed the door behind her, and sank down in the
shadow of a packing box half filled with old pictures, in a distress
that would not even let her think. She covered her face with her hands,
too angry with herself to cry; too aghast at the mischief she had done,
to even remember the dreadful words Mrs. Chatterton had said to her.

"For of course, now she will complain to Mamsie, and I'm really afraid
Mr. King will find it out; and it only needs a little thing to make him
send her off. He said yesterday Dr. Valentine told him there was
nothing really the matter with her--and--dear! I don't know what will
happen."

To poor Polly, crouching there on the floor in the dim and dusty
corner, it seemed as if her wretchedness held no hope. Turn whichever
way she might, the dreadful words she had uttered rang through her
heart. They could not be unsaid; they were never to be forgotten but
must always stay and rankle there.
