
"And he didn't pay it?"

"No, sir. He said he hadn't the money, but would bring it in a few
days."

James Long listened in indignant astonishment.

"That is untrue, sir. I made no excuse, but handed Mr. Mullins the
amount in full."

"There is a very extraordinary discrepancy in your statements. You say
that he wrote out a receipt?"

"Yes, sir."

"It is a pity that you can't produce it."

"Yes," chimed in Mullins, with a sneer, "it is unlucky that you cannot
produce it."

Then came a sensation.

"I can produce it," said Long. "The receipt has been found," and he
drew out the slip of paper and passed it to Mr. Fairchild.

The face of Mullins was a study. His amazement was deep and genuine.

"It must be a forgery," he said. "Mr. Long can't possibly have a
receipt."

"You are mistaken," said Mr. Fairchild. "The receipt and the signature
are genuine, and it is written on one of our letter heads."

Mullins took the receipt and faltered:

"I don't understand it."

"Nor do I," said the broker, sternly. "Did you make any entry on the
books?"

"I--I don't remember."

"Show me the record."

Mr. Fairchild opened the book, and saw an entry made, but afterward
erased.

When the bookkeeper found the receipt on the table, a promising piece
of rascality was suggested to him. He would keep the money himself, and
conceal the record.

"Mr. Long," said the broker, "here is your receipt. It is clear that
you have paid your rent. You will have no more trouble."

Then, as the mechanic left the office, the broker, turning to the
bookkeeper, said, sternly:

"Another such transaction, Mr. Mullins, and you leave my employ."

"But, sir----" stammered Mullins.

"You may spare your words. I understand the matter. If you had not been
in my employ so long, I would discharge you at the end of this week."

Mullins went back to his desk, crushed and mortified. But his brain was
busy with the thought, "Where could James Long have obtained the
receipt?" He remembered having put it into the pocket of his overcoat,
and it had disappeared.

"I was a fool that I didn't destroy it," he reflected.




CHAPTER XV.

A PLOT AGAINST CHESTER.


The more the bookkeeper thought of it, the more he was of the opinion
that Chester must have had something to do with the events that led to
his discovery and humiliation. Otherwise, how could James Long have
recovered the receipt? He, himself, had found it and kept it in his
possession. Chester must have chanced upon the receipt and carried it
to Long.

Though well convinced of it, he wished to find out positively.
Accordingly, he took his cousin Felix into his confidence as far as was
necessary, and sent him to the room of the mechanic to find out whether
Chester had been there.

It was the middle of the forenoon when Felix knocked at the door of
James Long's humble home.

Mrs. Long, with the baby in her arms, answered the knock.

"Is this Mrs. Long?" asked Felix.

"Yes, sir."

"I am the friend of Chester Rand."

"I don't think I know Mr. Rand," said Mrs. Long, who had not heard
Chester's name.

"The boy from Mr. Fairchild's office. He called here, I believe, one
day last week."

"Oh, yes and a good friend he was to me and mine."

"In what way?" asked Felix, his face lighting with satisfaction at the
discovery he had made.

"He brought my husband the receipt he had lost. Didn't he tell you?"

"Oh, yes. I wasn't thinking of that. He asked me to inquire if he left
his gloves here?"

"I haven't found any. I should have seen them if he left them here."

"All right. I will tell him. He thought he might have left them. Good
morning, ma'am."

And Felix hurried downstairs. He was not partial to poor people or
tenement houses, and he was glad to get away.

He reached the office in time to go out to lunch with the bookkeeper.

"Well?" asked Mullins, eagerly. "Did you go to Long's?"

"Yes."

"What did you find out?"

"I found out that your office boy had been there and carried them the
receipt."

"The young--viper! So he is trying to undermine me in the office. Well,
he'll live to regret it," and the bookkeeper shook his head vigorously.

"I'd get even with him if I were you, Cousin David."

"Trust me for that! I generally pay off all debts of that kind."

"How will you do it?" asked Felix, curiously.

"I don't know yet. Probably I'll get him into some bad scrape that will
secure his discharge."

"And then you'll get me into the place?"

"I am afraid I can't. I am not on good terms with Mr. Fairchild, and my
recommendation won't do you much good, even if I do manage to get rid
of Chester."

"Then I don't see how I am going to be benefited by working for you,"
said Felix, dissatisfied.

"I'll pay you in some way. To begin with, here's a dollar. This is for
your errand of this morning."

"Thank you, Cousin David," said Felix, pocketing the bill with an air
of satisfaction. "I think I'll go to Daly's Theater to-night. Father
doesn't give me much spending money--only twenty-five cents a week, and
what's a fellow to do with such a beggarly sum as that?"

"It is more than I had at your age."

"The world has progressed since then. A boy needs more pocket money now
than he did fifteen years ago. How soon shall you try to get even with
that boy?"

"I think it will be prudent to wait a while. Mr. Fairchild may suspect
something if I move too soon. The boy has been with us less than a
week."

"He has been with you long enough to do some harm."

"That's true," said Mullins, with an ugly look.

"Does he seem to suit Mr. Fairchild?"

"Yes; he appears to be intelligent, and he attends to his duties--worse
luck!--but he's a thorn in my side, a thorn in my side! I'd give
twenty-five dollars if he was out of the office."

"Do you want me to break off acquaintance with him?"

"No; keep on good terms with him. Let him think you are his intimate
friend. It will give me a chance to plot against him--through you."




CHAPTER XVI.

PROF. HAZLITT AT HOME.


Chester did not forget his engagement to call upon Prof. Hazlitt on
Wednesday evening.

He was shown at once into the professor's study. It was a large room,
the sides lined with bookcases crowded with volumes. There seemed to be
more books than Chester had ever seen before.

In the center of the room was a study table, covered with books, open
as if in use. On one side was a desk, at which Prof. Hazlitt himself
was seated.

"Good-evening, my young friend," he said, cordially, as Chester entered
the room. "You did not forget your appointment."

"No, sir. I was not likely to forget such an engagement."

"Have you grown to feel at home in the city?"

"Not entirely, sir, but I am getting a little used to it."

"I think you mentioned that you were going into a real estate office?"

"Yes, sir. I have commenced my duties there."

"I hope you find them agreeable."

"I might, sir, but that the bookkeeper seems to have taken a dislike to
me."

"I suspect that you would like better to devote yourself to art work."

"I think I should, sir, but Mr. Conrad thinks it better that I should
only devote my leisure to drawing."

"No doubt his advice is wise, for the present, at least. Now, suppose
we come to business. I believe I told you I am writing a book on
ethnology."

"Yes, sir."

"I find a good deal of help in rare volumes which I consult at the
Astor Library. These I cannot borrow, but I have the use of anything I
find suited to my needs in the library of Columbia College. Then I
import a good many books. I shall spare no pains to make my own work
valuable and comprehensive. Of course, I shall feel at liberty to copy
and use any illustrations I find in foreign publications. It is here
that you can help me."

"Yes, sir."

"Here, for instance," and the professor opened a French book, "are some
sketches illustrating the dress and appearance of the natives of
Madagascar. Do you think you can copy them?"

"I have no doubt of it, sir," he answered.

"Sit down in that chair and try. You will find pencils and drawing
paper before you. I will mention one or two particulars in which I want
you to deviate from the original."

Chester sat down and was soon deep in his task. He felt that it was
important for him to do his best. He could understand that, though the
professor was a kind-hearted man, he would be a strict critic.

He therefore worked slowly and carefully, and it was nearly an hour
before he raised his head and said:

"I have finished."

"Show the sketch to me," said the professor.

Chester handed it to him.

He examined it with critical attention. Gradually his face lighted up
with pleasure.

"Admirably done!" he exclaimed. "You have carried out my wishes."

"Then you are satisfied, sir?"

"Entirely."

"I am very glad," said Chester, with an air of relief.

He felt now he could do all that was required of him, and, as the
contract would pay him two hundred dollars, this success to-night was
an important one.

"I won't ask you to do any more this evening, but I will give you some
work to do at home. I believe I agreed to pay you two dollars for each
sketch?"

"Yes, sir."

"Probably you are not over well provided with money, and I will pay you
as you go on. Or, rather, I will give you ten dollars as an advance for
future work."

"Thank you, sir. You are very kind."

"Only considerate. I have seen the time when a ten-dollar-bill would
have been welcome to me. Now, thanks to a wealthy relative, who left me
a fortune, I am amply provided for."

At this moment the study door opened and a bright-looking boy of about
fifteen entered.

"May I come in, uncle?" he asked, with a smile.

"Yes. Chester, this is my nephew, Arthur Burks. Arthur, this is Chester
Rand, a young artist, who is assisting me."

Arthur came forward and gave Chester his hand cordially.

"You ought to wear spectacles," he said, "like uncle Edgar. You don't
look dignified enough to be his assistant."

"That may come in time," said Chester, with a smile.

"Arthur, I am done with Chester for this evening," said the professor.
"You may carry him off and entertain him. You may bring me the other
two sketches whenever you are ready."

"Come up to my den," said Arthur. "I have the front room on the third
floor."

As they went upstairs, a prolonged, melancholy shriek rang through the
house.

Chester stopped short in dismay, and an expression of pain succeeded
the gay look on Arthur's face.
