
Nitetis looked up uneasily into his indignant face, and stammered in
blind obedience, 'I curse."

"Those who robbed my parents of their throne and lives!"

"Those who robbed my parents of their throne and their lives," she
repeated after him, and then crying, "Oh, my heart!"  sank back exhausted
on the bed.

Nebenchari bent down, and before the royal physicians could return,
kissed her forehead gently, murmuring: "She dies my confederate.  The
gods hearken to the prayers of those who die innocent.  By carrying the
sword into Egypt, I shall avenge king Hophra's wrongs as well as my own."

When Nitetis opened her eyes once more, a few hours later, Kassandane was
holding her right hand, Atossa kneeling at her feet, and Croesus standing
at the head of her bed, trying, with the failing strength of old age, to
support the gigantic frame of the king, who was so completely overpowered
by his grief, that he staggered like a drunken man.  The dying girl's
eyes lighted up as she looked round on this circle.  She was wonderfully
beautiful.  Cambyses came closer and kissed her lips; they were growing
cold in death.  It was the first kiss he had ever given her, and the
last.  Two large tears sprang to her eyes; their light was fast growing
dim; she murmured Cambyses' name softly, fell back in Atossa's arms, and
died.

We shall not give a detailed account of the next few hours: it would be
an unpleasant task to describe how, at a signal from the principal
Persian doctor, every one, except Nebenchari and Croesus, hastily left
the room; how dogs were brought in and their sagacious heads turned
towards the corpse in order to scare the demon of death;--how, directly
after Nitetis' death, Kassandane, Atossa and their entire retinue moved
into another house in order to avoid defilement;--how fire was
extinguished throughout the dwelling, that the pure element might be
removed from the polluting spirits of death;--how spells and exorcisms
were muttered, and how every person and thing, which had approached or
been brought into contact with the dead body, was subjected to numerous
purifications with water and pungent fluids.

The same evening Cambyses was seized by one of his old epileptic attacks.
Two days later he gave Nebenchari permission to embalm Nitetis' body in
the Egyptian manner, according to her last wish.  The king gave way to
the most immoderate grief; he tore the flesh of his arms, rent his
clothes and strewed ashes on his head, and on his couch.  All the
magnates of his court were obliged to follow his example.  The troops
mounted guard with rent banners and muffled drums.  The cymbals and
kettle-drums of the "Immortals" were bound round with crape.  The horses
which Nitetis had used, as well as all which were then in use by the
court, were colored blue and deprived of their tails; the entire court
appeared in mourning robes of dark brown, rent to the girdle, and the
Magi were compelled to pray three days and nights unceasingly for the
soul of the dead, which was supposed to be awaiting its sentence for
eternity at the bridge Chinvat on the third night.

Neither the king, Kassandane, nor Atossa shrank from submitting to the
necessary purifications; they repeated, as if for one of their nearest
relations, thirty prayers for the dead, while, in a house outside the
city gates Nebenchari began to embalm her body in the most costly manner,
and according to the strictest rules of his art.


     [Embalming was practised in three different ways.  The first cost a
     talent of silver (L225.); the second 20 Minae (L60.) and the third
     was very inexpensive.  Herod. II.  86-88.  Diod.  I. 9.  The brain
     was first drawn out through the nose and the skull filled with
     spices.  The intestines were then taken out, and the body filled in
     like manner with aromatic spices.  When all was finished, the corpse
     was left 70 days in a solution of soda, and then wrapped in bandages
     of byssus spread over with gum.  The microscopical examinations of
     mummy-bandages made by Dr. Ure and Prof. Czermak have proved that
     byssus is linen, not cotton.  The manner of embalming just described
     is the most expensive, and the latest chemical researches prove that
     the description given of it by the Greeks was tolerably correct.  L.
     Penicher maintains that the bodies were first somewhat dried in
     ovens, and that then resin of the cedar-tree, or asphalte, was
     poured into every opening.  According to Herodotus, female corpses
     were embalmed by women.  Herod. II. 89.  The subject is treated in
     great detail by Pettigrew, History of Egyptian Mummies.  London.
     1834.  Czermak's microscopical examinations of Egyptian mummies show
     how marvellously the smallest portions of the bodies were preserved,
     and confirm the statements of Herodotus on many points.  The
     monuments also contain much information in regard to embalming, and
     we now know the purpose of nearly all the amulets placed with the
     dead.]

For nine days Cambyses remained in a condition, which seemed little short
of insanity.  At times furious, at others dull and stupefied, he did not
even allow his relations or the high-priest to approach him.  On the
morning of the tenth day he sent for the chief of the seven judges and
commanded, that as lenient a sentence as possible should be pronounced on
Gaumata.  Nitetis, on her dying-bed, had begged him to spare the life of
this unhappy youth.

One hour later the sentence was submitted to the king for ratification.
It ran thus: "Victory to the king!  Inasmuch as Cambyses, the eye of the
world and the sun of righteousness, hath, in his great mercy, which is as
broad as the heavens and as inexhaustible as the great deep, commanded us
to punish the crime of the son of the Magi, Gaumata, with the indulgence
of a mother instead of with the severity of a judge, we, the seven judges
of the realm, have determined to grant his forfeited life.  Inasmuch,
however, as by the folly of this youth the lives of the noblest and best
in this realm have been imperilled, and it may reasonably be apprehended
that he may again abuse the marvellous likeness to Bartja, the noble son
of Cyrus, in which the gods have been pleased in their mercy to fashion
his form and face, and thereby bring prejudice upon the pure and
righteous, we have determined to disfigure him in such wise, that in the
time to come it will be a light matter to discern between this, the most
worthless subject of the realm, and him who is most worthy.  We
therefore, by the royal Will and command, pronounce sentence, that both
the ears of Gaumata be cut off, for the honor of the righteous and shame
of the impure."

Cambyses confirmed this sentence at once, and it was executed the same
day.

     [With reference to Gaumata's punishment, the same which Herodotus
     says was inflicted on the pretended Smerdis, we would observe that
     even Persians of high rank were sometimes deprived of their ears.
     In the Behistan inscription (Spiegel p. 15 and 21.) the ears, tongue
     and nose of the man highest in rank among the rebels, were cut off.
     Similar punishments are quoted by Brisson.]

Oropastes did not dare to intercede for his brother, though this
ignominious punishment mortified his ambitious mind more than even a
sentence of death could have done.  As he was afraid that his own
influence and consideration might suffer through this mutilated brother,
he ordered him to leave Babylon at once for a country-house of his own on
Mount Arakadris.

During the few days which had just passed, a shabbily-dressed and
closely-veiled woman had watched day and night at the great gate of the
palace; neither the threats of the sentries nor the coarse jests of the
palace-servants could drive her from her post.  She never allowed one of
the less important officials to pass without eagerly questioning him,
first as to the state of the Egyptian Princess, and then what had become
of Gaumata.  When his sentence was told her as a good joke by a
chattering lamp-lighter, she went off into the strangest excitement, and
astonished the poor man so much by kissing his robe, that he thought she
must be crazed, and gave her an alms.  She refused the money, but
remained at her post, subsisting on the bread which was given her by the
compassionate distributors of food.  Three days later Gaumata himself,
with his head bound up, was driven out in a closed harmamaxa.  She rushed
to the carriage and ran screaming by the side of it, until the driver
stopped his mules and asked what she wanted.  She threw back her veil and
showed the poor, suffering youth her pretty face covered with deep
blushes.  Gaumata uttered a low cry as he recognized her, collected
himself, however, in a moment, and said: "What do you want with me,
Mandane?"

The wretched girl raised her hands beseechingly to him, crying: "Oh, do
not leave me, Gaumata!  Take me with you!  I forgive you all the misery
you have brought on me and my poor mistress.  I love you so much, I will
take care of you and nurse you as if I were the lowest servant-girl."

A short struggle passed in Gaumata's mind.  He was just going to open the
carriage-door and clasp Mandane-his earliest love-in his arms, when the
sound of horses' hoofs coming nearer struck on his ear, and looking round
he saw, a carriage full of Magi, among whom were several who had been his
companions at the school for priests.  He felt ashamed and afraid of
being seen by the very youths, whom he had often treated proudly and
haughtily because he was the brother of the high-priest, threw Mandane a
purse of gold, which his brother had given him at parting, and ordered
the driver to go on as fast as possible.  The mules galloped off.
Mandane kicked the purse away, rushed after the carriage and clung to it
firmly.  One of the wheels caught her dress and dragged her down.  With
the strength of despair she sprang up, ran after the mules, overtook them
on a slight ascent which had lessened their speed, and seized the reins.
The driver used his three-lashed whip, or scourge, the creatures reared,
pulled the girl down and rushed on.  Her last cry of agony pierced the
wounds of the mutilated man like a sharp lance-thrust.

                    .....................

On the twelfth day after Nitetis' death Cambyses went out hunting, in the
hope that the danger and excitement of the sport might divert his mind.
The magnates and men of high rank at his court received him with thunders
of applause, for which he returned cordial thanks.  These few days of
grief had worked a great change in a man so unaccustomed to suffering as
Cambyses.  His face was pale, his raven-black hair and beard had grown
grey, and the consciousness of victory which usually shone in his eyes
was dimmed.  Had he not, only too painfully, experienced that there was a
stronger will than his own, and that, easily as he could destroy, it did
not he in his power to preserve the life of the meanest creature?  Before
starting, Cambyses mustered his troop of sportsmen, and calling Gobryas,
asked why Phanes was not there.

"My King did not order .  .  ."

"He is my guest and companion, once for all; call him and follow us."

Gobryas bowed, dashed back to the palace, and in half an hour reappeared
among the royal retinue with Phanes.

The Athenian was warmly welcomed by many of the group, a fact which seems
strange when we remember that courtiers are of all men the most prone to
envy, and a royal favorite always the most likely object to excite their
ill will.  But Phanes seemed a rare exception to this rule.  He had met
the Achaemenidae in so frank and winning a manner, had excited so many
hopes by the hints he had thrown out of an expected and important war,
and had aroused so much merriment by well-told jests, such as the
Persians had never heard before, that there were very few who did not
welcome his appearance gladly, and when--in company with the king--he
separated from the rest in chase of a wild ass, they openly confessed to
one another, that they had never before seen so perfect a man.  The
clever way in which he had brought the innocence of the accused to light,
the finesse which he had shown in securing the king's favor, and the ease
with which he had learnt the Persian language in so short a time, were
all subjects of admiration.  Neither was there one even of the
Achaemenidae themselves, who exceeded him in beauty of face or symmetry
of figure.  In the chase he proved himself a perfect horseman, and in a
conflict with a bear an exceptionally courageous and skilful sportsman.
On the way home, as the courtiers were extolling all the wonderful
qualities possessed by the king's favorite, old Araspes exclaimed,
"I quite agree with you that this Greek, who by the way has proved
himself a better soldier than anything else, is no common man, but I am
sure you would not praise him half as much, if he were not a foreigner
and a novelty."

Phanes happened to be only separated from the speaker by some thick
bushes, and heard these words.  When the other had finished, he went up
and said, smiling: "I understood what you said and feel obliged to you
for your kind opinion.  The last sentence, however, gave me even more
pleasure than the first, because it confirmed my own idea that the
Persians are the most generous people in the world--they praise the
virtues of other nations as much, or even more, than their own."

His hearers smiled, well pleased at this flattering remark, and Phanes
went on: "How different the Jews are now, for instance!  They fancy
themselves the exclusive favorites of the gods, and by so doing incur the
contempt of all wise men, and the hatred of the whole world.  And then
the Egyptians!  You have no idea of the perversity of that people.  Why,
if the priests could have their way entirely, (and they have a great deal
of power in their hands) not a foreigner would be left alive in Egypt,
nor a single stranger allowed to enter the country.  A true Egyptian
would rather starve, than eat out of the same dish with one of us.  There
are more strange, astonishing and wonderful things to be seen in that
country than anywhere else in the world.  And yet, to do it justice,
I must say that Egypt has been well spoken of as the richest and most
highly cultivated land under the sun.  The man who possesses that kingdom
need not envy the very gods themselves.  It would be mere child's play to
conquer that beautiful country.  Ten years there gave me a perfect
insight into the condition of things, and I know that their entire
military caste would not be sufficient to resist one such troop as your
Immortals.  Well, who knows what the future may bring!  Perhaps we may
all make a little trip together to the Nile some day.  In my opinion,
your good swords have been rather long idle."  These well-calculated
words were received with such shouts of applause, that the king turned
his horse to enquire the cause.  Phanes answered quickly that the
Achaemenidae were rejoicing in the thought that a war might possibly be
near at hand.

"What war?"  asked the king, with the first smile that had been seen on
his face for many days.

"We were only speaking in general of the possibility of such a thing,"
