Project Gutenberg's The Story of Young Abraham Lincoln, by Wayne Whipple

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of Young Abraham Lincoln

Author: Wayne Whipple

Release Date: October 8, 2007 [EBook #22925]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF YOUNG ABRAHAM LINCOLN ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration]




The Story of
Young Abraham Lincoln

By

WAYNE WHIPPLE

Author of The Story of the American Flag, The Story of the Liberty Bell,
The Story of the White House, The Story of Young George Washington, the
Story of Young Benjamin Franklin, etc.

Illustrated

PHILADELPHIA

HENRY ALTEMUS COMPANY




COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY HOWARD E. ALTEMUS

COPYRIGHT, 1918, BY HOWARD E. ALTEMUS

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                                PAGE

       INTRODUCTION                                       9

    I. ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S FOREFATHERS                     15

   II. ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S FATHER AND MOTHER               24

  III. THE BOY LINCOLN'S BEST TEACHER                    33

   IV. LEARNING TO WORK                                  40

    V. LOSING HIS MOTHER                                 52

   VI. SCHOOL DAYS NOW AND THEN.                         62

  VII. ABE AND THE NEIGHBORS                             77

 VIII. MOVING TO ILLINOIS                                94

   IX. STARTING OUT FOR HIMSELF                         102

    X. CLERKING AND WORKING                             115

   XI. POLITICS, WAR, STOREKEEPING, AND STUDYING LAW    126

  XII. BUYING AND KEEPING A STORE                       140

 XIII. THE YOUNG LEGISLATOR IN LOVE.                    147

  XIV. MOVING TO SPRINGFIELD                            162

   XV. LINCOLN & HERNDON                                184

  XVI. HIS KINDNESS OF HEART                            194

 XVII. WHAT MADE THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ABRAHAM
         LINCOLN AND HIS STEPBROTHER                    208

XVIII. HOW EMANCIPATION CAME TO PASS                    215

  XIX. THE GLORY OF GETTYSBURG                          226

   XX. "NO END OF A BOY"                                234

  XXI. LIEUTENANT TAD LINCOLN, PATRIOT                  248




INTRODUCTION

LINCOLN FROM NEW AND UNUSUAL SOURCES


The boy or girl who reads to-day may know more about the real Lincoln
than his own children knew. The greatest President's son, Robert
Lincoln, discussing a certain incident in their life in the White House,
remarked to the writer, with a smile full of meaning:

"I believe you know more about our family matters than I do!"

This is because "all the world loves a lover"--and Abraham Lincoln loved
everybody. With all his brain and brawn, his real greatness was in his
heart. He has been called "the Great-Heart of the White House," and
there is little doubt that more people have heard about him than there
are who have read of the original "Great-Heart" in "The Pilgrim's
Progress."

Indeed, it is safe to say that more millions in the modern world are
acquainted with the story of the rise of Abraham Lincoln from a poorly
built log cabin to the highest place among "the seats of the mighty,"
than are familiar with the Bible story of Joseph who arose and stood
next to the throne of the Pharaohs.

Nearly every year, especially since the Lincoln Centennial, 1909,
something new has been added to the universal knowledge of one of the
greatest, if not _the_ greatest man who ever lived his life in the
world. Not only those who "knew Lincoln," but many who only "saw him
once" or shook hands with him, have been called upon to tell what they
saw him do or heard him say. So hearty was his kindness toward everybody
that the most casual remark of his seems to be charged with deep human
affection--"the touch of Nature" which has made "the whole world kin" to
him.

He knew just how to sympathize with every one. The people felt this,
without knowing why, and recognized it in every deed or word or touch,
so that those who have once felt the grasp of his great warm hand seem
to have been drawn into the strong circuit of "Lincoln fellowship," and
were enabled, as if by "the laying on of hands," to speak of him ever
after with a deep and tender feeling.

There are many such people who did not rush into print with their
observations and experiences. Their Lincoln memories seemed too sacred
to scatter far and wide. Some of them have yielded, with real
reluctance, in relating all for publication in THE STORY OF YOUNG
ABRAHAM LINCOLN only because they wished their recollections to benefit
the rising generation.

Several of these modest folk have shed true light on important phases
and events in Lincoln's life history. For instance, there has been much
discussion concerning Lincoln's Gettysburg Address--where was it
written, and did he deliver it from notes?

Now, fifty years after that great occasion, comes a distinguished
college professor who unconsciously settles the whole dispute, whether
Lincoln held his notes in his right hand or his left--if he used them at
all!--while making his immortal "little speech." To a group of veterans
of the Grand Army of the Republic he related, casually, what he saw
while a college student at Gettysburg, after working his way through the
crowd of fifteen thousand people to the front of the platform on that
memorable day. From this point of vantage he saw and heard everything,
and there is no gainsaying the vivid memories of his first
impressions--how the President held the little pages in both hands
straight down before him, swinging his tall form to right, to left and
to the front again as he emphasized the now familiar closing words,
"_of_ the people--_by_ the people--_for_ the people--shall not perish
from the earth."

Such data have been gathered from various sources and are here given for
the first time in a connected life-story. Several corrections of stories
giving rise to popular misconceptions have been supplied by Robert,
Lincoln's only living son. One of these is the true version of "Bob's"
losing the only copy of his father's first inaugural address. Others
were furnished by two aged Illinois friends who were acquainted with
"Abe" before he became famous. One of these explained, without knowing
it, a question which has puzzled several biographers--how a young man of
Lincoln's shrewd intelligence could have been guilty of such a
misdemeanor, as captain in the Black Hawk War, as to make it necessary
for his superior officer to deprive him of his sword for a single day.

A new story is told by a dear old lady, who did not wish her name
given, about herself when she was a little girl, when a "drove of
lawyers riding the old Eighth Judicial District of Illinois," came to
drink from a famous cold spring on her father's premises. She described
the uncouth dress of a tall young man, asking her father who he was, and
he replied with a laugh, "Oh, that's Abe Lincoln."

One day in their rounds, as the lawyers came through the front gate, a
certain judge, whose name the narrator refused to divulge, knocked down
with his cane her pet doll, which was leaning against the fence. The
little girl cried over this contemptuous treatment of her "child."

Young Lawyer Lincoln, seeing it all, sprang in and quickly picked up the
fallen doll. Brushing off the dust with his great awkward hand he said,
soothingly, to the wounded little mother-heart:

"There now, little Black Eyes, don't cry. Your baby's alive. See, she
isn't hurt a bit!"

That tall young man never looked uncouth to her after that. It was this
same old lady who told the writer that Lawyer Lincoln wore a new suit of
clothes for the first time on the very day that he performed the
oft-described feat of rescuing a helpless hog from a great deep hole in
the road, and plastered his new clothes with mud to the great merriment
of his legal friends. This well-known incident occurred not far from her
father's place near Paris, Illinois.

These and many other new and corrected incidents are now collected for
THE STORY OF YOUNG ABRAHAM LINCOLN, in addition to the best of
everything suitable that was known before--as the highest patriotic
service which the writer can render to the young people of the United
States of America.

                                                       WAYNE WHIPPLE.




THE STORY OF
YOUNG ABRAHAM LINCOLN




CHAPTER I

ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S FOREFATHERS


Lincoln's grandfather, for whom he was named Abraham, was a distant
cousin to Daniel Boone. The Boones and the Lincolns had intermarried for
generations. The Lincolns were of good old English stock. When he was
President, Abraham Lincoln, who had never given much attention to the
family pedigree, said that the history of his family was well described
by a single line in Gray's "Elegy":

"The short and simple annals of the poor."

Yet Grandfather Abraham was wealthy for his day. He accompanied Boone
from Virginia to Kentucky and lost his life there. He had sacrificed
part of his property to the pioneer spirit within him, and, with the
killing of their father, his family lost the rest. They were "land
poor" in the wilderness of the "Dark-and-Bloody-Ground"--the meaning of
the Indian name, "Ken-tuc-kee."

Grandfather Lincoln had built a solid log cabin and cleared a field or
two around it, near the Falls of the Ohio, about where Louisville now
stands. But, in the Summer of 1784, the tragic day dawned upon the
Lincolns which has come to many a pioneer family in Kentucky and
elsewhere. His son Thomas told this story to his children:


HOW INDIANS KILLED "GRANDFATHER LINCOLN"

"My father--your grandfather, Abraham Lincoln--come over the mountains
from Virginia with his cousin, Dan'l Boone. He was rich for them times,
as he had property worth seventeen thousand dollars; but Mr. Boone he
told Father he could make a good deal more by trappin' and tradin' with
the Injuns for valuable pelts, or fur skins.

"You know, Dan'l Boone he had lived among the Injuns. He was a sure shot
with the rifle so's he could beat the redskins at their own game. They
took him a prisoner oncet, and instead of killin' him, they was about
ready to make him chief--he pretended all the while as how he'd like
that--when he got away from 'em. He was such a good fellow that them
Injuns admired his shrewdness, and they let him do about what he
pleased. So he thought they'd let Father alone.

"Well, your grandfather was a Quaker, you see, and believed in treatin'
them red devils well--like William Penn done, you know. He was a man for
peace and quiet, and everything was goin' smooth with the tribes of what
we called the Beargrass Country, till one day, when he and my brothers,
Mordecai--'Mord' was a big fellow for his age--and Josiah, a few years
younger--was out in the clearin' with the oxen, haulin' logs down to the
crick. I went along too, but I didn't help much--for I was only six.

"Young as I was, I remember what happened that day like it was only
yesterday. It come like a bolt out of the blue. We see Father drop like
he was shot--for he _was_ shot! Then I heard the crack of a rifle and I
saw a puff of smoke floatin' out o' the bushes.

"Injuns!" gasps Mord, and starts on the run for the house--to get his
gun. Josiah, he starts right off in the opposite direction to the
Beargrass fort--we called it a fort, but it was nothin' but a stockade.
The way we boys scattered was like a brood o' young turkeys, or
pa'tridges, strikin' for cover when the old one is shot. I knowed I'd
ought to run too, but I didn't want to leave my father layin' there on
the ground. Seemed like I'd ought to woke him up so he could run too.
Yet I didn't feel like touchin' him. I think I must 'a' knowed he was
dead.

"While I was standin' still, starin' like the oxen, not knowin' what to
do, a big Injun come out o' the brush, with a big knife in his hand. I
knowed what he was goin' to do--skelp my father! I braced up to 'im to
keep 'im away, an' he jist laffed at me. I never think what the devil
looks like without seein' that red demon with his snaky black eyes,
grinnin' at me!


TOM LINCOLN CHASED BY INDIANS

"He picked me up like I was a baby an set me on the sawlog, an' was
turnin' back to skelp Father, when--biff!--another gun-crack--and Mr.
Big Indian he drops jist like your grandfather did, only he wriggles and
squirms around, bitin' the dust--like a big snake for all the world!

"I was standin' there, kind o' dazed, watchin' another puff o' white
smoke, comin' out between two logs in the side of our house. Then I
knowed 'Mord' had shot my Injun. He had run in, got the gun down off'n
the wall, an' peekin' out through a crack, he sees that Injun takin'
hold o' me. Waitin' till the ol' demon turns away, so's not to hit me,
'Mord' he aims at a silver dangler on Mr. Injun's breast and makes him
drop in his tracks like I said. Your Uncle 'Mord' he was a sure
shot--like Cousin Dan'l Boone.

"Then I hears the most blood-curdlin' yells, and a lot o' red devils
jump out o' the bushes an' come for me brandishin' their tomahawks an'
skelpin' knives. It was like hell broke loose. They had been watchin'
an', of course, 'twas all right to kill Father, but when 'Mord' killed
one o' their bucks, that made a big difference. I had sense enough left
to run for the house with them Injuns after me. Seemed like I couldn't
run half as fast as usual, but I must 'a' made purty good time, from
what 'Mord' an' Mother said afterward.

"He said one was ahead o' the rest an' had his tomahawk raised to brain
me with it when--bing!--an' 'Mord' fetches _him_ down like he did the
