informs me that he has lately seen on an ancient mosaic at Rome a
representation of the melon; and as the Rotnans, who were such gourmands, are
silent on this fruit, he infers that the melon has been greatly ameliorated
since the classical period.

Coming to later times, Buffon (20/82. The passage is given 'Bull. Soc.
d'Acclimat.' 1858 page 11.) on comparing the flowers, fruit, and vegetables
which were then cultivated with some excellent drawings made a hundred and
fifty years previously, was struck with surprise at the great improvement
which had been effected; and remarks that these ancient flowers and vegetables
would now be rejected, not only by a florist but by a village gardener. Since
the time of Buffon the work of improvement has steadily and rapidly gone on.
Every florist who compares our present flowers with those figured in books
published not long since, is astonished at the change. A well-known amateur
(20/83. 'Journal of Horticulture' 1862 page 394.), in speaking of the
varieties of Pelargonium raised by Mr. Garth only twenty-two years before,
remarks, "What a rage they excited: surely we had attained perfection, it was
said; and now not one of the flowers of those days will be looked at. But none
the less is the debt of gratitude which we owe to those who saw what was to be
done, and did it." Mr. Paul, the well-known horticulturist, in writing of the
same flower (20/84. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1857 page 85.), says he remembers
when young being delighted with the portraits in Sweet's work; "but what are
they in point of beauty compared with the Pelargoniums of this day? Here again
nature did not advance by leaps; the improvement was gradual, and if we had
neglected those very gradual advances, we must have foregone the present grand
results." How well this practical horticulturist appreciates and illustrates
the gradual and accumulative force of selection! The Dahlia has advanced in
beauty in a like manner; the line of improvement being guided by fashion, and
by the successive modifications which the flower slowly underwent. (20/85. See
Mr. Wildman's address to the Floricult. Soc. in 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1843
page 86.) A steady and gradual change has been noticed in many other flowers:
thus an old florist (20/86. 'Journal of Horticulture' October 24, 1865 page
239.), after describing the leading varieties of the Pink which were grown in
1813 adds, "the pinks of those days would now be scarcely grown as border-
flowers." The improvement of so many flowers and the number of the varieties
which have been raised is all the more striking when we hear that the earliest
known flower-garden in Europe, namely at Padua, dates only from the year 1545.
(20/87. Prescott 'Hist. of Mexico' volume 2 page 61.)

EFFECTS OF SELECTION, AS SHOWN BY THE PARTS MOST VALUED BY MAN PRESENTING THE
GREATEST AMOUNT OF DIFFERENCE.

The power of long-continued selection, whether methodical or unconscious, or
both combined, is well shown in a general way, namely, by the comparison of
the differences between the varieties of distinct species, which are valued
for different parts, such as for the leaves, or stems, or tubers, the seed, or
fruit, or flowers. Whatever part man values most, that part will be found to
present the greatest amount of difference. With trees cultivated for their
fruit, Sageret remarks that the fruit is larger than in the parent-species,
whilst with those cultivated for the seed, as with nuts, walnuts, almonds,
chestnuts, etc., it is the seed itself which is larger; and he accounts for
this fact by the fruit in the one case, and by the seed in the other, having
been carefully attended to and selected during many ages. Gallesio has made
the same observation. Godron insists on the diversity of the tuber in the
potato, of the bulb in the onion, and of the fruit in the melon; and on the
close similarity of the other parts in these same plants. (20/88. Sagaret
'Pomologie Physiologique' 1830 page 47; Gallesio 'Teoria della Riproduzione'
1816 page 88; Godron 'De l'Espece' 1859 tome 2 pages 63, 67, 70. In my tenth
and eleventh chapters I have given details on the potato; and I can confirm
similar remarks with respect to the onion. I have also shown how far Naudin
concurs in regard to the varieties of the melon.)

In order to judge how far my own impression on this subject was correct, I
cultivated numerous varieties of the same species close to one another. The
comparison of the amount of difference between widely different organs is
necessarily vague; I will therefore give the results in only a few cases. We
have previously seen in the ninth chapter how greatly the varieties of the
cabbage differ in their foliage and stems, which are the selected parts, and
how closely they resemble one another in their flowers, capsules, and seeds.
In seven varieties of the radish, the roots differed greatly in colour and
shape, but no difference whatever could be detected in their foliage, flowers,
or seeds. Now what a contrast is presented, if we compare the flowers of the
varieties of these two plants with those of any species cultivated in our
flower-gardens for ornament; or if we compare their seeds with those of the
varieties of maize, peas, beans, etc., which are valued and cultivated for
their seeds. In the ninth chapter it was shown that the varieties of the pea
differ but little except in the tallness of the plant, moderately in the shape
of the pod, and greatly in the pea itself, and these are all selected points.
The varieties, however, of the Pois sans parchemin differ much more in their
pods, and these are eaten and valued. I cultivated twelve varieties of the
common bean; one alone, the Dwarf Fan, differed considerably in general
appearance; two differed in the colour of their flowers, one being an albino,
and the other being wholly instead of partially purple; several differed
considerably in the shape and size of the pod, but far more in the bean
itself, and this is the valued and selected part. Toker's bean, for instance,
is twice-and-a-half as long and broad as the horse-bean, and is much thinner
and of a different shape.

The varieties of the gooseberry, as formerly described, differ much in their
fruit, but hardly perceptibly in their flowers or organs of vegetation. With
the plum, the differences likewise appear to be greater in the fruit than in
the flowers or leaves. On the other hand, the seed of the strawberry, which
corresponds with the fruit of the plum, differs hardly at all; whilst every
one knows how greatly the fruit--that is, the enlarged receptacle--differs in
several varieties. In apples, pears, and peaches the flowers and leaves differ
considerably, but not, as far as I can judge, in proportion with the fruit.
The Chinese double-flowering peaches, on the other hand, show that varieties
of this tree have been formed, which differ more in flower than in fruit. If,
as is highly probable, the peach is the modified descent of the almond, a
surprising amount of change has been effected in the same species, in the
fleshy covering of the former and in the kernels of the latter.

When parts stand in close relationship to each other, such as the seed and the
fleshy covering of the fruit (whatever its homological nature may be), changes
in the one are usually accompanied by modifications in the other, though not
necessarily to the same degree. With the plum-tree, for instance, some
varieties produce plums which are nearly alike, but include stones extremely
dissimilar in shape; whilst conversely other varieties produce dissimilar
fruit with barely distinguishable stones; and generally the stones, though
they have never been subjected to selection, differ greatly in the several
varieties of the plum. In other cases organs which are not manifestly related,
through some unknown bond vary together, and are consequently liable, without
any intention on man's part, to be simultaneously acted on by selection. Thus
the varieties of the stock (Matthiola) have been selected solely for the
beauty of their flowers, but the seeds differ greatly in colour and somewhat
in size. Varieties of the lettuce have been selected solely on account of
their leaves, yet produce seeds which likewise differ in colour. Generally,
through the law of correlation, when a variety differs greatly from its
fellow-varieties in any one character, it differs to a certain extent in
several other characters. I observed this fact when I cultivated together many
varieties of the same species, for I used first to make a list of the
varieties which differed most from each other in their foliage and manner of
growth, afterwards of those that differed most in their flowers, then in their
seed-capsules, and lastly in their mature seed; and I found that the same
names generally occurred in two, three, or four of the successive lists.
Nevertheless the greatest amount of difference between the varieties was
always exhibited, as far as I could judge, by that part or organ for which the
plant was cultivated.

When we bear in mind that each plant was at first cultivated because useful to
man, and that its variation was a subsequent, often a long subsequent, event,
we cannot explain the greater amount of diversity in the valuable parts by
supposing that species endowed with an especial tendency to vary in any
particular manner were originally chosen. We must attribute the result to the
variations in these parts having been successively preserved, and thus
continually augmented; whilst other variations, excepting such as inevitably
appeared through correlation, were neglected and lost. We may therefore infer
that most plants might be made, through long-continued selection, to yield
races as different from one another in any character as they now are in those
parts for which they are valued and cultivated.

With animals we see nothing of the same kind; but a sufficient number of
species have not been domesticated for a fair comparison. Sheep are valued for
their wool, and the wool differs much more in the several races than the hair
in cattle. Neither sheep, goats, European cattle, nor pigs are valued for
their fleetness or strength; and we do not possess breeds differing in these
respects like the racehorse and dray-horse. But fleetness and strength are
valued in camels and dogs; and we have with the former the swift dromedary and
heavy camel; with the latter the greyhound and mastiff. But dogs are valued
even in a higher degree for their mental qualities and senses; and every one
knows how greatly the races differ in these respects. On the other hand, where
the dog is kept solely to serve for food, as in the Polynesian islands and
China, it is described as an extremely stupid animal. (20/89. Godron 'De
l'Espece' tome 2 page 27.) Blumenbach remarks that "many dogs, such as the
badger-dog, have a build so marked and so appropriate for particular purposes,
that I should find it very difficult to persuade myself that this astonishing
figure was an accidental consequence of degeneration." (20/90. 'The
Anthropological Treatises of Blumenbach' 1856 page 292.) Had Blumenbach
reflected on the great principle of selection, he would not have used the term
degeneration, and he would not have been astonished that dogs and other
animals should become excellently adapted for the service of man.

On the whole we may conclude that whatever part or character is most valued--
whether the leaves, stems, tubers, bulbs, flowers, fruit, or seed of plants,
or the size, strength, fleetness, hairy covering, or intellect of animals--
that character will almost invariably be found to present the greatest amount
of difference both in kind and degree. And this result may be safely
attributed to man having preserved during a long course of generations the
variations which were useful to him, and neglected the others.

I will conclude this chapter by some remarks on an important subject. With
animals such as the giraffe, of which the whole structure is admirably co-
ordinated for certain purposes, it has been supposed that all the parts must
have been simultaneously modified; and it has been argued that, on the
principle of natural selection, this is scarcely possible. But in thus
arguing, it has been tacitly assumed that the variations must have been abrupt
and great. No doubt, if the neck of a ruminant were suddenly to become greatly
elongated, the fore limbs and back would have to be simultaneously
strengthened and modified; but it cannot be denied that an animal might have
its neck, or head, or tongue, or fore-limbs elongated a very little without
any corresponding modification in other parts of the body; and animals thus
slightly modified would, during a dearth, have a slight advantage, and be
enabled to browse on higher twigs, and thus survive. A few mouthfuls more or
less every day would make all the difference between life and death. By the
repetition of the same process, and by the occasional intercrossing of the
survivors, there would be some progress, slow and fluctuating though it would
be, towards the admirably coordinated structure of the giraffe. If the short-
faced tumbler-pigeon, with its small conical beak, globular head, rounded
body, short wings, and small feet--characters which appear all in harmony--had
been a natural species, its whole structure would have been viewed as well
fitted for its life; but in this case we know that inexperienced breeders are
urged to attend to point after point, and not to attempt improving the whole
structure at the same time. Look at the greyhound, that perfect image of
grace, symmetry, and vigour; no natural species can boast of a more admirably
co-ordinated structure, with its tapering head, slim body, deep chest, tucked-
up abdomen, rat-like tail, and long muscular limbs, all adapted for extreme
fleetness, and for running down weak prey. Now, from what we see of the
variability of animals, and from what we know of the method which different
men follow in improving their stock--some chiefly attending to one point,
others to another point, others again correcting defects by crosses, and so
forth--we may feel assured that if we could see the long line of ancestors of
a first-rate greyhound up to its wild wolf-like progenitor, we should behold
an infinite number of the finest gradations, sometimes in one character and
sometimes in another, but all leading towards our present perfect type. By
small and doubtful steps such as these, nature, as we may confidently believe,
has progressed, on her grand march of improvement and development.

A similar line of reasoning is as applicable to separate organs as to the
whole organisation. A writer (20/91. Mr. J.J. Murphy in his opening address to
the Belfast Nat. Hist. Soc. as given in the 'Belfast Northern Whig' November
19, 1866. Mr. Murphy here follows the line of argument against my views
previously and more cautiously given by the Rev. C. Pritchard, Pres. Royal
Astronomical Soc., in his sermon Appendix page 33 preached before the British
Association at Nottingham 1866.) has recently maintained that "it is probably
no exaggeration to suppose that in order to improve such an organ as the eye
at all, it must be improved in ten different ways at once. And the
improbability of any complex organ being produced and brought to perfection in
any such way is an improbability of the same kind and degree as that of
producing a poem or a mathematical demonstration by throwing letters at random
on a table." If the eye were abruptly and greatly modified, no doubt many
parts would have to be simultaneously altered, in order that the organ should
remain serviceable.

But is this the case with smaller changes? There are persons who can see
distinctly only in a dull light, and this condition depends, I believe, on the
abnormal sensitiveness of the retina, and is known to be inherited. Now if a
bird, for instance, receive some great advantage from seeing well in the
twilight, all the individuals with the most sensitive retina would succeed
best and be the most likely to survive; and why should not all those which
happened to have the eye itself a little larger, or the pupil capable of
greater dilatation, be likewise preserved, whether or not these modifications
were strictly simultaneous? These individuals would subsequently intercross
and blend their respective advantages. By such slight successive changes, the
eye of a diurnal bird would be brought into the condition of that of an owl,
which has often been advanced as an excellent instance of adaptation. Short-
sight, which is often inherited, permits a person to see distinctly a minute
object at so near a distance that it would be indistinct to ordinary eyes; and
here we have a capacity which might be serviceable under certain conditions,
abruptly gained. The Fuegians on board the Beagle could certainly see distant
objects more distinctly than our sailors with all their long practice; I do
not know whether this depends upon sensitiveness or on the power of adjustment
in the focus; but this capacity for distant vision might, it is probable, be
slightly augmented by successive modifications of either kind. Amphibious
animals which are enabled to see both in the water and in the air, require and
possess, as M. Plateau has shown (20/92. On the Vision of Fishes and Amphibia,
translated in 'Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.' volume 18 1866 page 469.), eyes
constructed on the following plan: "the cornea is always flat, or at least
much flattened in the front of the crystalline and over a space equal to the
diameter of that lens, whilst the lateral portions may be much curved." The
crystalline is very nearly a sphere, and the humours have nearly the same
density as water. Now as a terrestrial animal became more and more aquatic in
its habits, very slight changes, first in the curvature of the cornea or
crystalline, and then in the density of the humours, or conversely, might
successively occur, and would be advantageous to the animal whilst under
water, without serious detriment to its power of vision in the air. It is of
course impossible to conjecture by what steps the fundamental structure of the
eye in the Vertebrata was originally acquired, for we know nothing about this
organ in the first progenitors of the class. With respect to the lowest
animals in the scale, the transitional states through which the eye at first
probably passed, can by the aid of analogy be indicated, as I have attempted
to show in my 'Origin of Species.' (20/93. Sixth edition 1872 page 144.)


CHAPTER 2.XXI.

SELECTION, continued.

NATURAL SELECTION AS AFFECTING DOMESTIC PRODUCTIONS.
CHARACTERS WHICH APPEAR OF TRIFLING VALUE OFTEN OF REAL IMPORTANCE.
CIRCUMSTANCES FAVOURABLE TO SELECTION BY MAN.
FACILITY IN PREVENTING CROSSES, AND THE NATURE OF THE CONDITIONS.
CLOSE ATTENTION AND PERSEVERANCE INDISPENSABLE.
THE PRODUCTION OF A LARGE NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS ESPECIALLY FAVOURABLE.
WHEN NO SELECTION IS APPLIED, DISTINCT RACES ARE NOT FORMED.
HIGHLY-BRED ANIMALS LIABLE TO DEGENERATION.
TENDENCY IN MAN TO CARRY THE SELECTION OF EACH CHARACTER TO AN EXTREME POINT,
LEADING TO DIVERGENCE OF CHARACTER, RARELY TO CONVERGENCE.
CHARACTERS CONTINUING TO VARY IN THE SAME DIRECTION IN WHICH THEY HAVE
ALREADY VARIED.
DIVERGENCE OF CHARACTER, WITH THE EXTINCTION OF INTERMEDIATE VARIETIES, LEADS
TO DISTINCTNESS IN OUR DOMESTIC RACES.
LIMIT TO THE POWER OF SELECTION.
LAPSE OF TIME IMPORTANT.
MANNER IN WHICH DOMESTIC RACES HAVE ORIGINATED.
SUMMARY.

NATURAL SELECTION, OR THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST, AS AFFECTING DOMESTIC
PRODUCTIONS.

We know little on this head. But as animals kept by savages have to provide
throughout the year their own food either entirely or to a large extent, it
can hardly be doubted that in different countries, varieties differing in
constitution and in various characters would succeed best, and so be naturally
selected. Hence perhaps it is that the few domesticated animals kept by
savages partake, as has been remarked by more than one writer, of the wild
appearance of their masters, and likewise resemble natural species. Even in
long-civilised countries, at least in the wilder parts, natural selection must
act on our domestic races. It is obvious that varieties having very different
habits, constitution, and structure, would succeed best on mountains and on
rich lowland pastures. For example, the improved Leicester sheep were formerly
taken to the Lammermuir Hills; but an intelligent sheep-master reported that
"our coarse lean pastures were unequal to the task of supporting such heavy-
bodied sheep; and they gradually dwindled away into less and less bulk: each
generation was inferior to the preceding one; and when the spring was severe,
seldom more than two-thirds of the lambs survived the ravages of the storms."
(21/1. Quoted by Youatt on 'Sheep' page 325. See also Youatt on 'Cattle' pages
62, 69.) So with the mountain cattle of North Wales and the Hebrides, it has
been found that they could not withstand being crossed with the larger and
more delicate lowland breeds. Two French naturalists, in describing the horses
of Circassia, remark that, subjected as they are to extreme vicissitudes of
climate, having to search for scanty pasture, and exposed to constant danger
from wolves, the strongest and most vigorous alone survive. (21/2. MM.
Lherbette and De Quatrefages in 'Bull. Soc. d'Acclimat.' tome 8 1861 page
311.)

Every one must have been struck with the surpassing grace, strength, and
vigour of the Game-cock, with its bold and confident air, its long, yet firm
neck, compact body, powerful and closely pressed wings, muscular thighs,
strong beak massive at the base, dense and sharp spurs set low on the legs for
delivering the fatal blow, and its compact, glossy, and mail-like plumage
serving as a defence. Now the English game-cock has not only been improved
during many years by man's careful selection, but in addition, as Mr.
Tegetmeier has remarked (21/3. 'The Poultry Book' 1866 page 123. Mr.
Tegetmeier, 'The Homing or Carrier Pigeon' 1871 pages 45-58.), by a kind of
natural selection, for the strongest, most active and courageous birds have
stricken down their antagonists in the cockpit, generation after generation,
and have subsequently served as the progenitors of their race. The same kind
of double selection has come into play with the carrier pigeon, for during
their training the inferior birds fail to return home and are lost, so that
even without selection by man only the superior birds propagate their race.

In Great Britain, in former times, almost every district had its own breed of
cattle and sheep; "they were indigenous to the soil, climate, and pasturage of
the locality on which they grazed: they seemed to have been formed for it and
by it." (21/4. 'Youatt on Sheep' page 312.) But in this case we are quite
unable to disentangle the effects of the direct action of the conditions of
life,--of use or habit--of natural selection--and of that kind of selection
which we have seen is occasionally and unconsciously followed by man even
during the rudest periods of history.

Let us now look to the action of natural selection on special characters.
Although nature is difficult to resist, yet man often strives against her
power, and sometimes with success. From the facts to be given, it will also be
seen that natural selection would powerfully affect many of our domestic
productions if left unprotected. This is a point of much interest, for we thus
learn that differences apparently of very slight importance would certainly
determine the survival of a form when forced to struggle for its own
existence. It may have occurred to some naturalists, as it formerly did to me,
that, though selection acting under natural conditions would determine the
structure of all important organs, yet that it could not affect characters
which are esteemed by us of little importance; but this is an error to which
we are eminently liable, from our ignorance of what characters are of real
value to each living creature.

When man attempts to make a breed with some serious defect in structure, or in
the mutual relation of the several parts, he will partly or completely fail,
or encounter much difficulty; he is in fact resisted by a form of natural
selection. We have seen that an attempt was once made in Yorkshire to breed
cattle with enormous buttocks, but the cows perished so often in bringing
forth their calves, that the attempt had to be given up. In rearing short-
faced tumblers, Mr. Eaton says (21/5. 'Treatise on the Almond Tumbler' 1851
page 33.), "I am convinced that better head and beak birds have perished in
the shell than ever were hatched; the reason being that the amazingly short-
faced bird cannot reach and break the shell with its beak, and so perishes."
Here is a more curious case, in which natural selection comes into play only
at long intervals of time: during ordinary seasons the Niata cattle can graze
as well as others, but occasionally, as from 1827 to 1830 the plains of La
Plata suffer from long-continued droughts and the pasture is burnt up; at such
times common cattle and horses perish by the thousand, but many survive by
browsing on twigs, reeds, etc.; this the Niata cattle cannot so well effect
from their upturned jaws and the shape of their lips; consequently, if not
attended to, they perish before the other cattle. In Columbia, according to
Roulin, there is a breed of nearly hairless cattle, called Pelones; these
succeed in their native hot district, but are found too tender for the
Cordillera; in this case, however, natural selection determines only the range
of the variety. It is obvious that a host of artificial races could never
survive in a state of nature;--such as Italian greyhounds,--hairless and
almost toothless Turkish dogs,--fantail pigeons, which cannot fly well against
a strong wind,--barbs and Polish fowls, with their vision impeded by their eye
wattles and great topknots,--hornless bulls and rams, which consequently
cannot cope with other males, and thus have a poor chance of leaving
offspring,--seedless plants, and many other such cases.

Colour is generally esteemed by the systematic naturalist as unimportant: let
us, therefore, see how far it indirectly affects our domestic productions, and
how far it would affect them if they were left exposed to the full force of
natural selection. In a future chapter I shall have to show that
constitutional peculiarities of the strangest kind, entailing liability to the
action of certain poisons, are correlated with the colour of the skin. I will
here give a single case, on the high authority of Professor Wyman; he informs
me that, being surprised at all the pigs in a part of Virginia being black, he
made inquiries, and ascertained that these animals feed on the roots of the
Lachnanthes tinctoria, which colours their bones pink, and, excepting in the
case of the black varieties, causes the hoofs to drop off. Hence, as one of
the squatters remarked, "we select the black members of the litter for
raising, as they alone have a good chance of living." So that here we have
artificial and natural selection working hand in hand. I may add that in the
Tarentino the inhabitants keep black sheep alone, because the Hypericum
crispum abounds there; and this plant does not injure black sheep, but kills
the white ones in about a fortnight's time. (21/6. Dr. Heusinger
'Wochenschrift fur die Hei1kunde' Berlin 1846 s. 279.)

Complexion, and liability to certain diseases, are believed to run together in
man and the lower animals. Thus white terriers suffer more than those of any
other colour from the fatal distemper. (21/7. Youatt on the 'Dog' page 232.)
In North America plum-trees are liable to a disease which Downing (21/8. 'The
Fruit-trees of America' 1845 page 270: for peaches page 466.) believes is not
caused by insects; the kinds bearing purple fruit are most affected, "and we
have never known the green or yellow fruited varieties infected until the
other sorts had first become filled with the knots." On the other hand,
peaches in North America suffer much from a disease called the "yellows,"
which seems to be peculiar to that continent, and more than nine-tenths of the
victims, "when the disease first appeared, were the yellow-fleshed peaches.
The white-fleshed kinds are much more rarely attacked; in some parts of the
country never." In Mauritius, the white sugar-canes have of late years been so
severely attacked by a disease, that many planters have been compelled to give
up growing this variety (although fresh plants were imported from China for
trial), and cultivate only red canes. (21/9. 'Proc. Royal Soc. of Arts and
Sciences of Mauritius' 1852 page 135.) Now, if these plants had been forced to
struggle with other competing plants and enemies, there cannot be a doubt that
the colour of the flesh or skin of the fruit, unimportant as these characters
are considered, would have rigorously determined their existence.

Liability to the attacks of parasites is also connected with colour. White
chickens are certainly more subject than dark-coloured chickens to the
"gapes," which is caused by a parasitic worm in the trachea. (21/10.
'Gardener's Chronicle' 1856 page 379.) On the other hand, experience has shown
that in France the caterpillars which produce white cocoons resist the deadly
fungus better than those producing yellow cocoons. (21/11. Quatrefages
'Maladies Actuelles du Ver a Soie' 1859 pages 12, 214.) Analogous facts have
been observed with plants: a new and beautiful white onion, imported from
France, though planted close to other kinds, was alone attacked by a parasitic
fungus. (21/12. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1851 page 595.) White verbenas are
especially liable to mildew. (21/13. 'Journal of Horticulture' 1862 page 476.)
Near Malaga, during an early period of the vine-disease, the green sorts
suffered most; "and red and black grapes, even when interwoven with the sick
plants, suffered not at all." In France whole groups of varieties were
comparatively free, and others, such as the Chasselas, did not afford a single
fortunate exception; but I do not know whether any correlation between colour
and liability to disease was here observed. (21/14. 'Gardener's Chronicle'
1852 pages 435, 691.) In a former chapter it was shown how curiously liable
one variety of the strawberry is to mildew.

It is certain that insects regulate in many cases the range and even the
existence of the higher animals, whilst living under their natural conditions.
Under domestication light-coloured animals suffer most: in Thuringia (21/15.
Bechstein 'Naturgesch. Deutschlands' 1801 b. 1 s. 310.) the inhabitants do not
like grey, white, or pale cattle, because they are much more troubled by
various kinds of flies than the brown, red, or black cattle. An Albino negro,
it has been remarked (21/16. Prichard 'Phys. Hist. of Mankind' 1851 volume 1
page 224.), was peculiarly sensitive to the bites of insects. In the West
Indies (21/17. G. Lewis 'Journal of Residence in West Indies' 'Home and Col.
Library' page 100.) it is said that "the only horned cattle fit for work are
those which have a good deal of black in them. The white are terribly
tormented by the insects; and they are weak and sluggish in proportion to the
white."

In Devonshire there is a prejudice against white pigs, because it is believed
that the sun blisters them when turned out (21/18. Sidney's edition of Youatt
on the 'Pig' page 24. I have given analogous facts in the case of mankind in
my 'Descent of Man' 2nd edition page 195.); and I knew a man who would not
keep white pigs in Kent, for the same reason. The scorching of flowers by the
sun seems likewise to depend much on colour; thus, dark pelargoniums suffer
most; and from various accounts it is clear that the cloth-of-gold variety
will not withstand a degree of exposure to sunshine which other varieties
enjoy. Another amateur asserts that not only all dark-coloured verbenas, but
likewise scarlets, suffer from the sun: "the paler kinds stand better, and
pale blue is perhaps the best of all." So again with the heartsease (Viola
tricolor); hot weather suits the blotched sorts, whilst it destroys the
beautiful markings of some other kinds. (21/19. 'Journal of Horticulture' 1862
pages 476, 498; 1865 page 460. With respect to the heartsease 'Gardener's
Chronicle' 1863 page 628.) During one extremely cold season in Holland all
red-flowered hyacinths were observed to be very inferior in quality. It is
believed by many agriculturists that red wheat is hardier in northern climates
than white wheat. (21/20. 'Des Jacinthes, de leur Culture' 1768 page 53: on
wheat 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1846 page 653.)

With animals, white varieties from being conspicuous are the most liable to be
attacked by beasts and birds of prey. In parts of France and Germany where
hawks abound, persons are advised not to keep white pigeons; for, as
Parmentier says, "it is certain that in a flock the white always first fall
victims to the kite." In Belgium, where so many societies have been
established for the flight of carrier-pigeons, white is the one colour which
for the same reason is disliked. (20/21. W.B. Tegetmeier 'The Field' February
25, 1865. With respect to black fowls see a quotation in Thompson 'Nat. Hist.
of Ireland' 1849 volume 1 page 22.) Prof. G. Jaeger (21/22. 'In Sachen
Darwin's contra Wigand' 1874 page 70.) whilst fishing found four pigeons which
had been killed by hawks, and all were white; on another occasion he examined
the eyrie of a hawk, and the feathers of the pigeons which had been caught
were all of a white or yellow colour. On the other hand, it is said that the
sea-eagle (Falco ossifragus, Linn.) on the west coast of Ireland picks out the
black fowls, so that "the villagers avoid as much as possible rearing birds of
that colour." M. Daudin (20/23. 'Bull. de la Soc. d'Acclimat.' tome 7 1860
page 359.), speaking of white rabbits kept in warrens in Russia, remarks that
their colour is a great disadvantage, as they are thus more exposed to attack,
and can be seen during bright nights from a distance. A gentleman in Kent, who
failed to stock his woods with a nearly white and hardy kind of rabbit,
accounted in the same manner for their early disappearance. Any one who will
watch a white cat prowling after her prey will soon perceive under what a
disadvantage she lies.

The white Tartarian cherry, "owing either to its colour being so much like
that of the leaves, or to the fruit always appearing from a distance unripe,"
is not so readily attacked by birds as other sorts. The yellow-fruited
raspberry, which generally comes nearly true by seed, "is very little molested
by birds, who evidently are not fond of it; so that nets may be dispensed with
in places where nothing else will protect the red fruit." (21/24. 'Transact.
Hort. Soc.' volume 1 2nd series 1835 page 275. For raspberries see 'Gardener's
Chronicle' 1855 page 154 and 1863 page 245.) This immunity, though a benefit
to the gardener, would be a disadvantage in a state of nature both to the
cherry and raspberry, as dissemination depends on birds. I noticed during
several winters that some trees of the yellow-berried holly, which were raised
from seed from a tree found wild by my father remained covered with fruit,
whilst not a scarlet berry could be seen on the adjoining trees of the common
kind. A friend informs me that a mountain-ash (Pyrus aucuparia) growing in his
garden bears berries which, though not differently coloured, are always
devoured by birds before those on the other trees. This variety of the
mountain-ash would thus be more freely disseminated, and the yellow-berried
variety of the holly less freely, than the common varieties of these two
trees.

Independently of colour, trifling differences are sometimes found to be of
importance to plants under cultivation, and would be of paramount importance
if they had to fight their own battle and to struggle with many competitors.
The thin-shelled peas, called pois sans parchemin, are attacked by birds
(21/25. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1843 page 806.) much more commonly than
ordinary peas. On the other hand, the purple-podded pea, which has a hard
shell, escaped the attacks of tomtits (Parus major) in my garden far better
than any other kind. The thin-shelled walnut likewise suffers greatly from the
tomtit. (21/26. Ibid 1850 page 732.) These same birds have been observed to
pass over and thus favour the filbert, destroying only the other kinds of nuts
which grew in the same orchard. (21/27. Ibid 1860 page 956.)

Certain varieties of the pear have soft bark, and these suffer severely from
wood-boring beetles; whilst other varieties are known to resist their attacks
much better. (21/28. J. De Jonghe in 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1860 page 120.) In
North America the smoothness, or absence of down on the fruit, makes a great
difference in the attacks of the weevil, "which is the uncompromising foe of
all smooth stone-fruits;" and the cultivator "has the frequent mortification
of seeing nearly all, or indeed often the whole crop, fall from the trees when
half or two-thirds grown." Hence the nectarine suffers more than the peach. A
particular variety of the Morello cherry, raised in North America, is, without
any assignable cause, more liable to be injured by this same insect than other
cherry-trees. (21/29. Downing 'Fruit-trees of North America' pages 266, 501:
in regard to the cherry page 198.) From some unknown cause, certain varieties
of the apple enjoy, as we have seen, the great advantage in various parts of
the world of not being infested by the coccus. On the other hand, a particular
case has been recorded in which aphides confined themselves to the Winter
Nelis pear and touched no other kind in an extensive orchard. (21/30.
'Gardener's Chronicle' 1849 page 755.) The existence of minute glands on the
leaves of peaches, nectarines, and apricots, would not be esteemed by
botanists as a character of the least importance for they are present or
absent in closely-related sub-varieties, descended from the same parent-tree;
yet there is good evidence (21/31. 'Journal of Horticulture' September 26,
1865 page 254; see other references given in chapter 10.) that the absence of
glands leads to mildew, which is highly injurious to these trees.

A difference either in flavour or in the amount of nutriment in certain
varieties causes them to be more eagerly attacked by various enemies than
other varieties of the same species. Bullfinches (Pyrrhula vulgaris) injure
our fruit-trees by devouring the flower-buds, and a pair of these birds have
been seen "to denude a large plum-tree in a couple of days of almost every
bud;" but certain varieties (21/32. Mr. Selby in 'Mag. of Zoology and Botany'
Edinburgh volume 2 1838 page 393.) of the apple and thorn (Crataegus
oxyacantha) are more especially liable to be attacked. A striking instance of
this was observed in Mr. Rivers's garden, in which two rows of a particular
variety of plum (21/33. The Reine Claude de Bavay 'Journal of Horticulture'
December 27, 1864 page 511.) had to be carefully protected, as they were
usually stripped of all their buds during the winter, whilst other sorts
growing near them escaped. The root (or enlarged stem) of Laing's Swedish
turnip is preferred by hares, and therefore suffers more than other varieties.
Hares and rabbits eat down common rye before St. John's-day-rye, when both
grow together. (21/34. Mr. Pusey in 'Journal of R. Agricult. Soc.' volume 6
page 179. For Swedish turnips see 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1847 page 91.) In the
south of France, when an orchard of almond-trees is formed, the nuts of the
bitter variety are sown, "in order that they may not be devoured by field-
mice" (21/35. Godron 'De l'Espece' tome 2 page 98.); so we see the use of the
bitter principle in almonds.

Other slight differences, which would be thought quite unimportant, are no
doubt sometimes of great service both to plants and animals. The Whitesmith's
gooseberry, as formerly stated, produces its leaves later than other
varieties, and, as the flowers are thus left unprotected, the fruit often
fails. In one variety of the cherry, according to Mr. Rivers (21/36.
'Gardener's Chronicle' 1866 page 732.), the petals are much curled backwards,
and in consequence of this the stigmas were observed to be killed by a severe
frost; whilst at the same time, in another variety with incurved petals, the
stigmas were not in the least injured. The straw of the Fenton wheat is
remarkably unequal in height; and a competent observer believes that this
variety is highly productive, partly because the ears from being distributed
at various heights above the ground are less crowded together. The same
observer maintains that in the upright varieties the divergent awns are
serviceable by breaking the shocks when the ears are dashed together by the
wind. (21/37. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1862 pages 820, 821.) If several
varieties of a plant are grown together, and the seed is indiscriminately
harvested, it is clear that the hardier and more productive kinds will, by a
sort of natural selection, gradually prevail over the others; this takes
place, as Colonel Le Couteur believes (21/38. 'On the Varieties of Wheat' page
59.), in our wheat-fields, for, as formerly shown, no variety is quite uniform
in character. The same thing, as I am assured by nurserymen, would take place
in our flower-gardens, if the seed of the different varieties were not
separately saved. When the eggs of the wild and tame duck are hatched
together, the young wild ducks almost invariably perish, from being of smaller
size and not getting their fair share of food. (21/39. Mr. Hewitt and others,
in 'Journal of Hort.' 1862 page 773.)

Facts in sufficient number have now been given showing that natural selection
often checks, but occasionally favours, man's power of selection. These facts
teach us, in addition, a valuable lesson, namely, that we ought to be
extremely cautious in judging what characters are of importance in a state of
nature to animals and plants, which have to struggle for existence from the
hour of their birth to that of their death,--their existence depending on
conditions, about which we are profoundly ignorant.

CIRCUMSTANCES FAVOURABLE TO SELECTION BY MAN.

The possibility of selection rests on variability, and this, as we shall see
in the following chapters, mainly depends on changed conditions of life, but
is governed by infinitely complex and unknown laws. Domestication, even when
long continued, occasionally causes but a small amount of variability, as in
the case of the goose and turkey. The slight differences, however, which
characterise each individual animal and plant would in most, probably in all,
cases suffice for the production of distinct races through careful and
prolonged selection. We see what selection, though acting on mere individual
differences, can effect when families of cattle, sheep, pigeons, etc., of the
same race, have been separately bred during a number of years by different men
without any wish on their part to modify the breed. We see the same fact in
the difference between hounds bred for hunting in different districts (21/40.
'Encyclop. of Rural Sports' page 405.), and in many other such cases.

In order that selection should produce any result, it is manifest that the
crossing of distinct races must be prevented; hence facility in pairing, as
with the pigeon, is highly favourable for the work; and difficulty in pairing,
as with cats, prevents the formation of distinct breeds. On nearly the same
principle the cattle of the small island of Jersey have been improved in their
milking qualities "with a rapidity that could not have been obtained in a
widely extended country like France." (21/41. Col. Le Couteur 'Journal Roy.
Agricult. Soc.' volume 4 page 43.) Although free crossing is a danger on the
one side which every one can see, too close interbreeding is a hidden danger
on the other side. Unfavourable conditions of life overrule the power of
selection. Our improved heavy breeds of cattle and sheep could not have been
formed on mountainous pastures; nor could dray-horses have been raised on a
barren and inhospitable land, such as the Falkland Islands, where even the
light horses of La Plata rapidly decrease in size. It seems impossible to
preserve several English breeds of sheep in France; for as soon as the lambs
are weaned their vigour decays as the heat of the summer increases (21/42.
Malingie-Nouel 'Journal R. Agricult. Soc.' volume 14 1853 pages 215, 217.): it
would be impossible to give great length of wool to sheep within the tropics;
yet selection has kept the Merino breed nearly true under diversified and
unfavourable conditions. The power of selection is so great, that breeds of
the dog, sheep, and poultry, of the largest and smallest size, long and short
beaked pigeons, and other breeds with opposite characters, have had their
characteristic qualities augmented, though treated in every way alike, being
exposed to the same climate and fed on the same food. Selection, however, is
either checked or favoured by the effects of use or habit. Our wonderfully-
improved pigs could never have been formed if they had been forced to search
for their own food; the English racehorse and greyhound could not have been
improved up to their present high standard of excellence without constant
training.

As conspicuous deviations of structure occur rarely, the improvement of each
breed is generally the result of the selection of slight individual
differences. Hence the closest attention, the sharpest powers of observation,
and indomitable perseverance, are indispensable. It is, also, highly important
that many individuals of the breed which is to be improved should be raised;
for thus there will be a better chance of the appearance of variations in the
right direction, and individuals varying in an unfavourable manner may be
freely rejected or destroyed. But that a large number of individuals should be
raised, it is necessary that the conditions of life should favour the
propagation of the species. Had the peacock been reared as easily as the fowl,
we should probably ere this have had many distinct races. We see the
importance of a large number of plants, from the fact of nursery gardeners
almost always beating amateurs in the exhibition of new varieties. In 1845 it
was estimated (21/43. Gardener's Chronicle' 1845 page 273.) that between 4000
and 5000 pelargoniums were annually raised from seed in England, yet a
decidedly improved variety is rarely obtained. At Messrs. Carter's grounds, in
Essex, where such flowers as the Lobelia, Nemophila, Mignonette, etc., are
grown by the acre for seed, "scarcely a season passes without some new kinds
being raised, or some improvement effected on old kinds." (21/44. 'Journal of
Horticulture' 1862 page 157.) At Kew, as Mr. Beaton remarks, where many
seedlings of common plants are raised, "you see new forms of Laburnums,
Spiraeas, and other shrubs." (21/45. 'Cottage Gardener' 1860 page 368.) So
with animals: Marshall (21/46. 'A Review of Reports' 1808 page 406.), in
speaking of the sheep in one part of Yorkshire, remarks, "as they belong to
poor people, and are mostly in small lots, they never can be improved." Lord
Rivers, when asked how he succeeded in always having first-rate greyhounds,
answered, "I breed many, and hang many." This, as another man remarks, "was
the secret of his success; and the same will be found in exhibiting fowls,--
successful competitors breed largely, and keep the best." (21/47. 'Gardener's
Chronicle' 1853 page 45.)

It follows from this that the capacity of breeding at an early age and at
short intervals, as with pigeons, rabbits, etc., facilitates selection; for
the result is thus soon made visible, and perseverance in the work encouraged.
It can hardly be an accident that the great majority of the culinary and
agricultural plants which have yielded numerous races are annuals or
biennials, which therefore are capable of rapid propagation, and thus of
improvement. Sea-kale, asparagus, common and Jerusalem artichokes, potatoes,
and onions, must be excepted, as they are perennials: but onions are
propagated like annuals, and of the other plants just specified, none, with
the exception of the potato, have yielded in this country more than one or two
varieties. In the Mediterranean region, where artichokes are often raised from
seed, there are several kinds, as I hear from Mr. Bentham. No doubt fruit-
trees, which cannot be propagated quickly by seed, have yielded a host of
varieties, though not permanent races; but these, judging from prehistoric
remains, have been produced at a comparatively late period.

A species may be highly variable, but distinct races will not be formed, if
from any cause selection be not applied. It would be difficult to select
slight variations in fishes from their place of habitation; and though the
carp is extremely variable and is much attended to in Germany, only one well-
marked race has been formed, as I hear from Lord A. Russell, namely the
spiegel-carpe; and this is carefully secluded from the common scaly kind. On
the other hand, a closely allied species, the gold-fish, from being reared in
small vessels, and from having been carefully attended to by the Chinese, has
yielded many races. Neither the bee, which has been semi-domesticated from an
extremely remote period, nor the cochineal insect, which was cultivated by the
aboriginal Mexicans (21/48. Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire 'Hist. Nat. Gen.'
tome 3 page 49. 'On the Cochineal Insect' page 46.), has yielded races; and it
would be impossible to match the queen-bee with any particular drone, and most
difficult to match cochineal insects. Silk-moths, on the other hand, have been
subjected to rigorous selection, and have produced a host of races. Cats,
which from their nocturnal habits cannot be selected for breeding, do not, as
formerly remarked, yield distinct races within the same country. Dogs are held
in abomination in the East, and their breeding is neglected; consequently, as
Prof. Moritz Wagner (21/49. 'Die Darwin'sche Theorie und das Migrationsgesetz
der Organismen' 1868 page 19.) remarks, one kind alone exists there. The ass
in England varies much in colour and size; but as it is an animal of little
value and bred by poor people, there has been no selection, and distinct races
have not been formed. We must not attribute the inferiority of our asses to
climate, for in India they are of even smaller size than in Europe. But when
selection is brought to bear on the ass, all is changed. Near Cordova, as I am
informed (February 1860) by Mr. W.E. Webb, C.E., they are carefully bred, as
much as 200 pounds having been paid for a stallion ass, and they have been
immensely improved. In Kentucky, asses have been imported (for breeding mules)
from Spain, Malta, and France; these "seldom averaged more than fourteen hands
high: but the Kentuckians, by great care, have raised them up to fifteen
hands, and sometimes even to sixteen. The prices paid for these splendid
animals, for such they really are, will prove how much they are in request.
One male, of great celebrity, was sold for upwards of one thousand pounds
sterling." These choice asses are sent to cattle-shows, a day being given for
their exhibition. (21/50. Capt. Marryat quoted by Blyth in 'Journ. Asiatic
Soc. of Bengal' volume 28 page 229.)

Analogous facts have been observed with plants: the nutmeg-tree in the Malay
archipelago is highly variable, but there has been no selection, and there are
no distinct races. (21/51. Mr. Oxley 'Journal of the Indian Archipelago'
volume 2 1848 page 645.) The common mignonette (Reseda odorata), from bearing
inconspicuous flowers, valued solely for their fragrance, "remains in the same
unimproved condition as when first introduced." (21/52. Mr. Abbey 'Journal of
Horticulture' December 1, 1863 page 430.) Our common forest-trees are very
variable, as may be seen in every extensive nursery-ground; but as they are
not valued like fruit-trees, and as they seed late in life, no selection has
been applied to them; consequently, as Mr. Patrick Matthews remarks (21/53.
'On Naval Timber' 1831 page 107.), they have not yielded distinct races,
leafing at different periods, growing to different sizes, and producing timber
fit for different purposes. We have gained only some fanciful and semi-
monstrous varieties, which no doubt appeared suddenly as we now see them.

Some botanists have argued that plants cannot have so strong a tendency to
vary as is generally supposed, because many species long grown in botanic
gardens, or unintentionally cultivated year after year mingled with our corn
crops, have not produced distinct races; but this is accounted for by slight
variations not having been selected and propagated. Let a plant which is now
grown in a botanic garden, or any common weed, be cultivated on a large scale,
and let a sharp-sighted gardener look out for each slight variety and sow the
seed, and then, if distinct races are not produced, the argument will be
valid.

The importance of selection is likewise shown by considering special
characters. For instance, with most breeds of fowls the form of the comb and
the colour of the plumage have been attended to, and are eminently
characteristic of each race; but in Dorkings fashion has never demanded
uniformity of comb or colour; and the utmost diversity in these respects
prevails. Rose-combs, double-combs, cup-combs, etc., and colours of all kinds,
may be seen in purely bred and closely related Dorking fowls, whilst other
points, such as the general form of body, and the presence of an additional
toe, have been attended to, and are invariably present. It has also been
ascertained that colour can be fixed in this breed, as well as in any other.
(21/54. Mr. Baily in 'The Poultry Chronicle' volume 2 1854 page 150. Also
volume 1 page 342; volume 3 page 245.)

During the formation or improvement of a breed, its members will always be
found to vary much in those characters to which especial attention is
directed, and of which each slight improvement is eagerly sought and selected.
Thus, with short-faced tumbler-pigeons, the shortness of the beak, shape of
