the proposal, but before proceeding to the combat consulted the
soothsayer Polyidus, who advised him to procure if possible the
horse Pegasus for the conflict.  For this purpose he directed him
to pass the night in the temple of Minerva.  He did so, and as he
slept Minerva came to him and gave him a golden bridle.  When he
awoke the bridle remained in his hand.  Minerva also showed him
Pegasus drinking at the well of Pirene, and at sight of the
bridle, the winged steed came willingly and suffered himself to
be taken.  Bellerophon mounting, rose with him into the air, and
soon found the Chimaera, and gained an easy victory over the
monster.

After the conquest of the Chimaera, Bellerophon was exposed to
further trials and labors by his unfriendly host, but by the aid
of Pegasus he triumphed in them all; till at length Iobates,
seeing that the hero was a special favorite of the gods, gave him
his daughter in marriage and made him his successor on the
throne.  At last Bellerophon by his pride and presumption drew
upon himself the anger of the gods; it is said he even attempted
to fly up into heaven on his winged steed; but Jupiter sent a
gadfly which stung Pegasus and made him throw his rider, who
became lame and blind in consequence.  After this Bellerophon
wandered lonely through the Aleian field, avoiding the paths of
men, and died miserably.

Milton alludes to Bellerophon in the beginning o the seventh book
of Paradise Lost:

  "Descend from Heaven, Urania, by that name
  If rightly thou art called, whose voice divine
  Following above the Olympian hill I soar,
  Above the flight of Pegasean wing,
  Up-led by thee,
  Into the Heaven of Heavens I have presumed,
  An earthly guest, and drawn empyreal air,
  (Thy tempering;) with like safety guided down
  Return me to my native element;
  Lest from this flying steed unreined, (as once
  Bellerophon, though from a lower sphere,)
  Dismounted on the Aleian field I fall,
  Erroneous there to wander, and forlorn."

Young in his Night Thoughts, speaking of the skeptic, says,

  "He whose blind thought futurity denies,
  Unconscious bears, Bellerophon, like thee
  His own indictment; he condemns himself,
  Who reads his bosom reads immortal life,
  Or nature there, imposing on her sons,
  Has written fables; man was made a lie."
  Vol. II.1,12.

Pegasus, being the horse of the Muses, has always been at the
service of the poets.  Schiller tells a pretty story of his
having been sold by a needy poet, and put to the cart and the
plough.  He was not fit for such service, and his clownish master
could make nothing of him.  But a youth stepped forth and asked
leave to try him.  As soon as he was seated on his back, the
horse, which had appeared at first vicious, and afterwards
spirit-broken, rose kingly, a spirit, a god; unfolded the
splendor of his wings and soared towards heaven.  Our own poet
Longfellow also records an adventure of this famous steed in his
Pegasus in Pound.

Shakespeare alludes to Pegasus in Henry IV, where Vernon
describes Prince Henry:

  "I saw young Harry, with his beaver on,
  His cuishes on his thighs, gallantly armed,
  Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury,
  And vaulted with such ease into his seat,
  As if an angel dropped down from the clouds,
  To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
  And witch the world with noble horsemanship."


THE CENTAURS

The Greeks loved to people their woods and hills with strange
wild people,   half man, half beast.  Such were the Satyrs   men
with goats' legs.  But nobler and better were the Centaurs,   men
to the waist, while the rest was the form of a horse.  The
ancients were too fond of a horse to consider the union of his
nature with man's as forming any very degraded compound, and
accordingly the Centaur is the only one of the fancied monsters
of antiquity to which any good traits are assigned.  The Centaurs
were admitted to the companionship of man, and at the marriage of
Pirithous with Hippodamia, they were among the guests.  At the
feast, Eurytion, one of the Centaurs, becoming intoxicated with
the wine, attempted to offer violence to the bride; the other
Centaurs followed his example, and a dreadful conflict arose in
which several of them were slain.  This is the celebrated battle
of the Lapithae and Centaurs, a favorite subject with the
sculptors and poets of antiquity.

But all the Centaurs were not like the rude guests of Pirithous.
Chiron was instructed by Apollo and Diana, and was renowned for
his skill in hunting, medicine, music, and the art of prophecy.
The most distinguished heroes of Grecian story were his pupils.
Among the rest the infant Aesculapius was intrusted to his
charge, by Apollo, his father.  When the sage returned to his
home bearing the infant, his daughter Ocyroe came forth to meet
him, and at sight of the child burst forth into a prophetic
strain (for she was a prophetess), foretelling the glory that he
was to achieve.  Aesculapius, when grown up, became a renowned
physician, and even in one instance succeeded in restoring the
dead to life.  Pluto resented this, and Jupiter, at his request,
struck the bold physician with lightning and killed him, but
after his death received him into the number of the gods.

Chiron was the wisest and justest of all the Centaurs, and at his
death Jupiter placed him among the stars as the constellation
Sagittarius.


THE PYGMIES

The Pygmies were a nation of dwarfs, so called from a Greek word
which means the cubit (a cubit was a measure of about thirteen
inches), which was said to be the height of these people.  They
lived near the sources of the Nile, or according to others, in
India.  Homer tells us that the cranes used to migrate every
winter to the Pygmies' country, and their appearance was the
signal of bloody warfare to the puny inhabitants, who had to take
up arms to defend their cornfields against the rapacious
strangers.  The Pygmies and their enemies the cranes form the
subject of several works of art.

Later writers tell of an army of Pygmies which finding Hercules
asleep made preparations to attack him, as if they were about to
attack a city.  But the hero awaking laughed at the little
warriors, wrapped some of them up in his lion's-skin, and carried
them to Eurystheus.

Milton used the Pygmies for a simile, Paradise Lost, Book I:

  "----like that Pygmaean race
  Beyond the Indian mount, or fairy elves
  Whose midnight revels by a forest side,
  Or fountain, some belated peasant sees,
  (Or dreams he sees), while overhead the moon
  Sits artibress, and nearer to the earth
  Wheels her pale course; they on their mirth and dance
  Intent, with jocund music charm his ear.
  At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds."


THE GRIFFIN, OR GRYPHON

The Griffin is a monster with the body of a lion, the head and
wings of an eagle, and back covered with feathers.  Like birds it
builds its nest, and instead of an egg lays an agate therein.  It
has long claws and talons of such a size that the people of that
country make them into drinking-cups.  India was assigned as the
native country of the Griffins.  They found gold in the mountains
and built their nests of it, for which reason their nests were
very tempting to the hunters, and they were forced to keep
vigilant guard over them.  Their instinct led them to know where
buried treasures lay, and they did their best to keep plunderers
at a distance.  The Arimaspians, among whom the Griffins
flourished, were a one-eyed people of Scythia.

Milton borrows a simile from the Griffins, Paradise Lost, Book
II.:

  "As when a Gryphon through the wilderness,
  With winged course, o'er hill and moory dale,
  Pursues the Arimaspian who by stealth
  Hath from his wakeful custody purloined
  His guarded gold."



Chapter XI

The Golden Fleece.  Medea.  The Calydonian Hunt

In very ancient times there lived in Thessaly a king and queen
named Athamas and Nephele.  They had two children, a boy and a
girl.  After a time Athamas grew indifferent to his wife, put her
away, and took another.  Nephele suspected danger to her children
from the influence of the step-mother, and took measures to send
them out of her reach.  Mercury assisted her, and gave her a ram,
with a GOLDEN FLEECE, on which she set the two children, trusting
that the ram would convey them to a place of safety.  The ram
sprung into the air with the children on his back, taking his
course to the east, till when crossing the strait that divides
Europe and Asia, the girl, whose name was Helle, fell from his
back into the sea, which from her was called the Hellespont,
now the Dardanelles.  The ram continued his career till he
reached the kingdom of Colchis, on the eastern shore of the Black
Sea, where he safely landed the boy Phyrxus, who was hospitably
received by AEetes, the king of the country.  Phryxus sacrificed
the ram to Jupiter, and gave the golden fleece to AEetes, who
placed it in a consecrated grove, under the care of a sleepless
dragon.

There was another kingdom in Thessaly near to that of Athamas,
and ruled over by a relative of his.  The king AEson, being tired
of the cares of government, surrendered his crown to his brother
Pelias, on condition that he should hold it only during the
minority of Jason, the son of AEson.  When Jason was grown up and
came to demand the crown from his uncle, Pelias pretended to be
willing to yield it, but at the same time suggested to the young
man the glorious adventure of going in quest of the golden
fleece, which it was well known was in the kingdom of Colchis,
and was, as Pelias pretended, the rightful property of their
family.  Jason was pleased with the thought, and forthwith made
preparations for the expedition.  At that time the only species
of navigation known to the Greeks consisted of small boats or
canoes hollowed out from trunks of trees, so that when Jason
employed Argus to build him a vessel capable of containing fifty
men, it was considered a gigantic undertaking.  It was
accomplished, however, and the vessel was named the Argo, from
the name of the builder.  Jason sent his invitation to all the
adventurous young men of Greece, and soon found himself at the
head of a band of bold youths, many of whom afterwards were
renowned among the heroes and demigods of Greece.  Hercules,
Theseus, Orpheus, and Nestor were among them.  They are called
the Argonauts, from the name of their vessel.

The Argo with her crew of heroes left the shores of Thessaly and
having touched at the Island of Lemnos, thence crossed to Mysia
and thence to Thrace.  Here they found the sage Phineus, and from
him received instruction as to their future course.  It seems the
entrance of the Euxine Sea was impeded by two small rocky
islands, which floated on the surface, and in their tossings and
heavings occasionally came together, crushing and grinding to
atoms any object that might be caught between them.  They were
called the Symplegades, or Clashing Islands.  Phineus instructed
the Argonauts how to pass this dangerous strait.  When they
reached the islands they let go a dove, which took her way
between the rocks, and passed in safety, only losing some
feathers of her tail.  Jason and his men seized the favorable
moment of the rebound, plied their oars with vigor, and passed
safe through, though the islands closed behind them, and actually
grazed their stern.  They now rowed along the shore till they
arrived at the eastern end of the sea, and landed at the kingdom
of Colchis.

Jason made known his message to the Colchian king, AEetes, who
consented to give up the golden fleece if Jason would yoke to the
plough two fire-breathing bulls with brazen feet, and sow the
teeth of the dragon, which Cadmus had slain, and from which it
was well known that a crop of armed men would spring up, who
would turn their weapons against their producer.  Jason accepted
the conditions, and a time was set for making the experiment.
Previously, however, he found means to plead his cause to Medea,
daughter of the king.  He promised her marriage, and as they
stood before the altar of Hecate, called the goddess to witness
his oath.  Medea yielded   and by her aid, for she was a potent
sorceress, he was furnished with a charm, by which he could
encounter safely the breath of the fire-breathing bulls and the
weapons of the armed men.

At the time appointed, the people assembled at the grove of Mars,
and the king assumed his royal seat, while the multitude covered
the hill-sides.  The brazen-footed bulls rushed in, breathing
fire from their nostrils, that burned up the herbage as they
passed.  The sound was like the roar of a furnace, and the smoke
like that of water upon quick-lime.  Jason advanced boldly to
meet them.  His friends, the chosen heroes of Greece, trembled to
behold him.  Regardless of the burning breath, he soothed their
rage with his voice, patted their necks with fearless hands, and
adroitly slipped over them the yoke, and compelled them to drag
the plough.  The Colchians were amazed; the Greeks shouted for
joy.  Jason next proceeded to sow the dragon's teeth and plough
them in.  And soon the crop of armed men sprang up, and wonderful
to relate! no sooner had they reached the surface than they began
to brandish their weapons and rush upon Jason.  The Greeks
trembled for their hero, and even she who had provided him a way
of safety and taught him how to use it, Medea herself, grew pale
with fear.  Jason for a time kept his assailants at bay with his
sword and shield, till finding their numbers overwhelming, he
resorted to the charm which Medea had taught him, seized a stone
and threw it in the midst of his foes.  They immediately turned
their arms against one another, and soon there was not one of the
dragon's brood left alive.  The Greeks embraced their hero, and
Medea, if she dared, would have embraced him too.

Then AEetes promised the next day to give them the fleece, and
the Greeks went joyfully down to the Argo with the hero Jason in
their midst.  But that night Medea came down to Jason, and bade
him make haste and follow her, for that her father proposed the
next morning to attack the Argonauts and to destroy their ship.
They went together to the grove of Mars, where the golden fleece
hung guarded by the dreadful dragon, who glared at the hero and
his conductor with his great round eyes that never slept.  But
Medea was prepared, and began her magic songs and spells, and
sprinkled over him a sleeping potion which she had prepared by
her art.  At the smell he relaxed his rage, stood for a moment
motionless, then shut those great round eyes, that had never been
known to shut before, and turned over on his side, fast asleep.
Jason seized the fleece, and with his friends and Medea
accompanying, hastened to their vessel, before AEETES, the king,
could arrest their departure, and made the best of their way back
to Thessaly, where they arrived safe, and Jason delivered the
fleece to Pelias, and dedicated the Argo to Neptune.  What became
of the fleece afterwards we do not know, but perhaps it was
found, after all, like many other golden prizes, not worth the
trouble it had cost to procure it.

This is one of those mythological tales, says a modern writer, in
which there is reason to believe that a substratum of truth
exists, though overlaid by a mass of fiction.  It probably was
the first important maritime expedition, and like the first
attempts of the kind of all nations, as we know from history, was
probably of a half-piratical character.  If rich spoils were the
result, it was enough to give rise to the idea of the golden
fleece.

Another suggestion of a learned mythologist, Bryant, is that it
is a corrupt tradition of the story of Noah and the ark.  The
name Argo seems to countenance this, and the incident of the dove
is another confirmation.

Pope, in his Ode on St. Cecelia's Day, thus celebrates the
launching of the ship Argo, and the power of the music of
Orpheus, whom he calls the Thracian:

  "So when the first bold vessel dared the seas,
  High on the stern the Thracian raised his strain,
  While Argo saw her kindred trees
  Descend from Pelion to the main.
  Transported demigods stood round,
  And men grew heroes at the sound."

In Dyer's poem of The Fleece there is an account of the ship Argo
and her crew, which gives a good picture of this primitive
maritime adventure:

  "From every region of Aegea's shore
  The brave assembled; those illustrious twins,
  Castor and Pollux; Orpheus, tuneful bard;
  Zetes and Calais, as the wind in speed;
  Strong Hercules and many a chief renowned.
  On deep Iolcos' sandy shore they thronged,
  Gleaming in armor, ardent of exploits;
  And soon, the laurel cord and the huge stone
  Uplifting to the deck, unmoored the bark;
  Whose keel of wondrous length the skilful hand
  Of Argus fashioned for the proud attempt;
  And in the extended keel a lofty mast
  Upraised, and sails full swelling; to the chiefs
  Unwonted objects.  Now first, now they learned
  Their bolder steerage over ocean wave,
  Led by the golden stars, as Chiron's art
  Had marked the sphere celestial."

Hercules left the expedition at Mysia, for Hylas, a youth beloved
by him, having gone for water, was laid hold of and kept by the
nymphs of the spring, who were fascinated by his beauty.
Hercules went in quest of the lad, and while he was absent the
Argo put to sea and left him.  Moore, in one of his songs, makes
a beautiful allusion to this incident:

  "When Hylas was sent with his urn to the fount,
  Through fields full of light and with heart full of play,
  Light rambled the boy over meadow and mount,
  And neglected his task for the flowers in the way.

  "Thus many like me, who in youth should have tasted
  The fountain that runs by Philosophy's shrine,
  Their time with the flowers on the margin have wasted,
  And left their light urns all as empty as mine."

But Hercules, as some say, went onward to Colchis by land, and
there performed many mighty deeds, and wiped away the stain of
cowardice which might have clung to him.


MEDEA AND AESON

Amid the rejoicings for the recovery of the golden Fleece, Jason
felt that one thing was wanting, the presence of AESON, his
father, who was prevented by his age and infirmities from taking
part in them.  Jason said to Medea, "My wife, I would that your
arts, whose power I have seen so mighty for my aid, could do me
one further service, and take some years from my life to add them
to my father's."  Medea replied, "Not at such a cost shall it be
done, but if my art avails me, his life shall be lengthened
without abridging yours."  The next full moon she issued forth
alone, while all creatures slept; not a breath stirred the
foliage, and all was still.  To the stars she addressed her
incantations, and to the moon; to Hecate (Hecate was a mysterious
divinity sometimes identified with Diana and sometimes with
Proserpine.  As Diana represents the moonlight splendor of night,
so Hecate represents its darkness and terrors.  She was the
goddess of sorcery and witchcraft, and was believed to wander by
night along the earth, seen only by the dogs whose barking told
her approach.), the goddess of the underworld, and to Tellus, the
goddess of the earth, by whose power plants potent for
enchantments are produced.  She invoked the gods of the woods and
caverns, of mountains and valleys, of lakes and rivers, of winds
and vapors.  While she spoke the stars shone brighter, and
presently a chariot descended through the air, drawn by flying
serpents.  She ascended it, and, borne aloft, made her way to
distant regions, where potent plants grew which she knew how to
select for her purpose.  Nine nights she employed in her search,
and during that time came not within the doors of her palace nor
under any roof, and shunned all intercourse with mortals.

She next erected two altars, the one to Hecate, the other to
Hebe, the goddess of youth, and sacrificed a black sheep, pouring
libations of milk and wine.  She implored Pluto and his stolen
bride that they would not hasten to take the old man's life.
Then she directed that AESON should be led forth, and having
thrown him into a deep sleep by a charm, had him laid on a bed of
herbs, like one dead.  Jason and all others were kept away from
the place, that no profane eyes might look upon her mysteries.
Then, with streaming hair, she thrice moved round the altars,
dipped flaming twigs in the blood, and laid them thereon to burn.
Meanwhile the caldron with its contents was got ready.  In it she
put magic herbs, with seeds and flowers of acrid juice, stones
from the distant East, and sand from the shore of all-surrounding
ocean; hoar frost, gathered by moonlight, a screech-owl's head
and wings, and the entrails of a wolf.  She added fragments of
the shells of tortoises, and the liver of stags,   animals
tenacious of life,   and the head and beak of a crow, that
outlives nine generations of men.  These, with many other things
without a name, she boiled together for her purposed work,
stirring them up with a dry olive branch; and behold, the branch
when taken out instantly became green, and before long was
covered with leaves and a plentiful growth of young olives; and
as the liquor boiled and bubbled, and sometimes ran over, the
grass, wherever the sprinklings fell, shot forth with a verdure
like that of spring.

Seeing that all was ready, Medea cut the throat of the old man
and let out all his blood, and poured into his mouth and into his
wound the juices of her caldron.  As soon as he had completely
imbibed them, his hair and beard laid by their whiteness and
assumed the blackness of youth; his paleness and emaciation were
gone; his veins were full of blood, his limbs of vigor and
robustness.  AESON is amazed at himself, and remembers that such
as he now is he was in his youthful days, forty years before.

Medea used her arts here for a good purpose, but not so in
another instance, where she made them the instruments of revenge.
Pelias, our readers will recollect, was the usurping uncle of
Jason, and had kept him out of his kingdom.  Yet he must have had
some good qualities, for his daughters loved him, and when they
saw what Medea had done for AESON, they wished her to do the same
for their father.  Medea pretended to consent, and prepared her
caldron as before.  At her request an old sheep was brought and
plunged into the caldron.  Very soon a bleating was heard in the
kettle, and, when the cover was removed, a lamb jumped forth and
ran frisking away into the meadow.  The daughters of Pelias saw
the experiment with delight, and appointed a time for their
father to undergo the same operation.  But Medea prepared her
caldron for him in a very different way.  She put in only water
and a few simple herbs.  In the night she with the sisters
entered the bed-chamber of the old king, while he and his guards
slept soundly under the influence of a spell cast upon them by
Medea.  The daughters stood by the bedside with their weapons
drawn, but hesitated to strike, till Medea chid their
irresolution.  Then, turning away their faces and giving random
blows, they smote him with their weapons.  He, starting from his
sleep, cried out, "My daughters, what are you doing?  Will you
kill your father?:" Their hearts failed them, and the weapons
fell from their hands, but Medea struck him a fatal blow, and
prevented his saying more.

Then they placed him in the caldron, and Medea hastened to depart
in her serpent-drawn chariot before they discovered her
treachery, for their vengeance would have been terrible.  She
escaped, however, but had little enjoyment of the fruits of her
crime.  Jason, for whom she had done so much, wishing to marry
Creusa, princess of Corinth, put away Medea.  She, enraged at his
ingratitude, called on the gods for vengeance, sent a poisoned
robe as a gift to the bride, and then killing her own children,
and setting fire to the palace, mounted her serpent-drawn chariot
and fled to Athens, where she married King AEgeus, the father of
Theseus; and we shall meet her again when we come to the
adventures of that hero.

The incantations of Medea will remind the reader of those of the
witches in Macbeth.  The following lines are those which seem
most strikingly to recall the ancient model:

  "Round about the caldron go;
  In the poisoned entrails throw.
  *    *    *    *    *    *
  Fillet of a fenny snake
  In the caldron boil and bake;
  Eye of newt and toe of frog,
  Wool of bat and tongue of dog.
  Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting,
  Lizard's leg and howlet's wing:
  *    *    *    *    *    *
  Maw of ravening salt-sea shark,
  Root of hemlock digged in the dark."
  Macbeth, Act IV., Scene 1

And again:

  Macbeth.  What is't you do?
  Witches.  A deed without a name.

There is another story of Medea almost too revolting for record
even of a sorceress, a class of persons to whom both ancient and
modern poets have been accustomed to attribute every degree of
atrocity.  In her flight from Colchis she had taken her young
brother Absyrtus with her.  Finding the pursuing vessels of
AEETES gaining upon the Argonauts, she caused the lad to be
killed and his limbs to be strewn over the sea.  AEETES on
reaching the place found these sorrowful traces of his murdered
son; but while he tarried to collect the scattered fragments and
bestow upon them an honorable interment, the Argonauts escaped.

In the poems of Campbell will be found a translation of one of
the choruses of the tragedy of Medea, where the poet Euripides
has taken advantage of the occasion to pay a glowing tribute to
Athens, his native city.  It begins thus:

  "Oh, haggard queen!  To Athens dost thou guide
  Thy glowing chariot, steeped in kindred gore;
  Or seek to hide thy damned parricide
  Where Peace and Justice dwell for evermore?"


THE CALYDONIAN HUNT.  MELEAGER AND ATALANTA

The search for the Golden Fleece was undertaken by Jason, aided
by heroes from all Greece, or Hellas as it was then called.  It
was the first of their common undertakings which made the Greeks
feel that they were in truth one nation, though split up into
many small kingdoms.  Another of their great gatherings was for
the Calydonian Hunt, and another, the greatest and most famous of
all, for the Trojan War.

The hero of the quest for the golden Fleece was Jason.  With the
other heroes of the Greeks, he was present at the Calydonian
Hunt.  But the chief hero was Meleager, the son of OEneus, king
of Calydon, and Althea, his queen.

Althea, when her son was born, beheld the three Destinies, who,
as they spun their fatal thread, foretold that the life of the
child should last no longer than a brand then burning upon the
hearth.  Althea seized and quenched the brand, and carefully
preserved it for years, while Meleager grew to boyhood, youth,
and manhood.  It chanced, then, that OEneus, as he offered
sacrifices to the gods, omitted to pay due honors to Diana, and
she, indignant at the neglect, sent a wild boar of enormous size
to lay waste the files of Calydon.  Its eyes shone with blood and
fire, its bristles stood like threatening spears, its tusks were
like those of Indian elephants.  The growing corn was trampled,
the vines and olive trees laid waste, the flocks and herds were
driven in wild confusion by the slaughtering foe.  All common aid
seemed vain; but Meleager called on the heroes of Greece to join
in a bold hunt for the ravenous monster.  Theseus and his friend
Pirithous, Jason, Peleus afterwards the father of Achilles,
Telamon the father of Ajax, Nestor, then a youth, but who in his
age bore arms with Achilles and Ajax in the Trojan war,   these
and many more joined in the enterprise.  With them came Atalanta,
the daughter of Iasius, king of Arcadia.  A buckle of polished
gold confined her vest, an ivory quiver hung on her left
shoulder, and her left hand bore the bow.  Her face blent
feminine beauty with the best graces of martial youth.  Meleager
saw and loved.
