intense gravity.

"Now, then, the question is," said Mrs Gaff, sitting down and again
seizing Tottie's head for stroking purposes, while she put the question
with deep solemnity--"the question is, how long will that last?"

Haco was a good deal puzzled.  He bit his thumb nail, and knit his
shaggy brows for some time, and then said--

"Well, you know, that depends on how much you spend at a time.  If you
go for to spend a thousand pounds a day, now, it'll just last ten days.
If you spend a thousand pounds a year, it'll last ten years.  If you
spend a thousand pounds in ten years, it'll last a hundred years--d'ye
see?  It all depends on the spendin'.  But, then, Mrs Gaff," said the
skipper remonstratively, "you mustn't go for to live on the principal,
you know."

"What's the principal?" demanded Mrs Gaff.

"Why, the whole sum; the money _itself_, you know."

"D'ye suppose that I'm a born fool, Mr Barepoles, that I should try to
live on the money itself?  I never heerd on anybody bilin' up money in a
kettle an' suppin' goold soup, and I'm not a-goin' for to try."

With infinite difficulty, and much futile effort at illustration, did
Haco explain to Mrs Gaff the difference between principal and interest;
telling her to live on the latter, and never on any account to touch the
former, unless she wished to "end her days in a work'us."

"I wonder what it's like," said Mrs Gaff.

"What what's like?" inquired the skipper.

"Ten thousand pounds."

"Well, that depends too, you know, on what it's made of--whether copper,
silver, goold, or paper."

"What! is it ever made o' paper?"

In attempting to explain this point, Haco became unintelligible even to
himself, and Mrs Gaff became wildly confused.

"Well, well," said the latter, "never mind; but try to tell me how much
I'll have a year."

"That depends too--"

"Everything seems to depend," cried Mrs Gaff somewhat testily.

"Of course it does," said Haco, "everything _does_ depend on somethin'
else, and everything will go on dependin' to the end of time: it depends
on how you invest it, and what interest ye git for it."

"Oh, dearie me!" sighed Mrs Gaff, beginning for the first time to
realise in a small degree the anxieties and troubles inseparable from
wealth; "can't ye tell me what it's _likely_ to be about?"

"Couldn't say," observed Haco, drawing out his pipe as if he were about
to appeal to it for information; "it's too deep for me."

"Well, but," pursued Mrs Gaff, becoming confidential, "tell me now,
d'ye think it would be enough to let me make some grand improvements on
the cottage against Stephen and Billy's return?"

"Why, that depends on what the improvements is to be," returned Haco
with a profound look.

"Ay, just so.  Well, here are some on 'em.  First of all, I wants to get
a noo grate an' a brass tea-kettle.  There's nothing like a cheery fire
of a cold night, and my Stephen liked a cheery fire--an' so did Billy
for the matter o' that; but the trouble I had wi' that there grate is
past belief.  Now, a noo grate's indispens'ble."

"Well?" said Haco, puffing his smoke up the chimney, and regarding the
woman earnestly.

"Well; then I want to get a noo clock.  That one in the corner is a
perfit fright.  A noo table, too, for the leg o' that one has bin mended
so often that it won't never stand another splice.  Then a noo tea-pot
an' a fender and fire-irons would be a comfort.  But my great wish is to
get a big mahogany four-post bed with curtains.  Stephen says he never
did sleep in a four-poster, and often wondered what it would be like--no
more did I, so I would like to take him by surprise, you see.  Then I
want to git--"

"Well?" said Haco, when she paused.

"I'm awful keen to git a carpit, but I doubt I'm thinkin' o' too many
things.  D'ye think the first year's--what d'ye call it?"

"Interest," said Haco.

"Ay, interest--would pay for all that?"

"Yes, an' more," said the skipper confidently.

"If I only knew how much it is to be," said Mrs Gaff thoughtfully.

At that moment the door opened, and Kenneth Stuart entered, followed by
his friend Gildart Bingley.  After inquiring as to her welfare Kenneth
said:

"I've come to pay you the monthly sum which is allowed you by the
Shipwrecked Mariners' Society.  Mr Bingley asked me to call as he could
not do so; but from all accounts I believe you won't need it.  May I
congratulate you on your good fortune, Mrs Gaff."

Kenneth took out his purse as he spoke to pay the sum due to her.

Mrs Gaff seemed to be struck with a sudden thought.  She thanked
Kenneth for his congratulations, and then said:

"As to my not needin' the money you've brought me, young man, I take
leave to say that I _do_ need it; so you'll obleege me by handin' it
over."

Kenneth obeyed in surprise not unmingled with disappointment in finding
such a grasping spirit in one whom he had hitherto thought well of.  He
paid the money, however, in silence, and was about to take his leave
when Mrs Gaff stopped him.

"This sum has bin paid to me riglarly for the last three months."

"I believe it has," said Kenneth.

"And," continued Mrs Gaff, "it's been the means o' keepin' me and my
Tottie from starvation."

"I'm glad to hear it," returned Kenneth, who began to wonder what was to
follow; but he was left to wonder, for Mrs Gaff abruptly asked him and
Gildart to be seated, as she was anxious to find out a fact or two in
regard to principal and interest.

Gildart could scarce avoid laughing as he glanced at his companion.

"Now," began Mrs Gaff, seating herself opposite Kenneth, with a hand on
each knee, "I wants to know what a principal of ten thousand pounds
comes to in the way of interest in a twel'month."

"Well, Mrs Gaff," said Kenneth, "that depends--"

"Dear me!" cried Mrs Gaff petulantly, "every mortial thing that has to
do with money seeps to _depend_.  Could ye not tell me somethin' about
it, now, that doesn't depend?"

"Not easily," replied Kenneth with a laugh; "but I was going to say that
if you get it invested at five per cent, that would give you an income
of five hundred pounds a year."

"How much?" inquired Mrs Gaff in a high key, while her eyes widened
with astonishment.

Kenneth repeated the sum.

"Young man, you're jokin'."

"Indeed I am not," said Kenneth earnestly, with an appealing glance at
Gildart.

"True--as Johnson's Dictionary," said the middy.  Mrs Gaff spent a few
moments in silent and solemn reflection.

"The Independent clergyman," she said in a low meditative tone, "has
only two hundred a year--so I'm told; an' the doctor at the west end has
got four hundred, and he keeps a fine house an' servants; an' Sam Balls,
the rich hosier, has got six hundred--so they say; and Mrs Gaff, the
poor critter, has only got five hundred!  That'll do," she continued,
with a sudden burst of animation, "shake out the reefs in yer tops'ls,
lass, slack off yer sheets, ease the helm, an' make the most on it while
the fair wind lasts."

Having thus spoken, Mrs Gaff hastily folded up in a napkin the sum just
given her, and put it, along with the bank-book, into the tea-caddy,
which she locked and deposited safely in the corner cupboard.
Immediately after, her visitors, much surprised at her eccentric
conduct, rose and took their leave.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

MRS. GAFF BECOMES A WOMAN OF BUSINESS, AND FINDS IT AWFULLY HARD WORK.

Soon after the conversation narrated in the last chapter, the clerks in
the bank of Wreckumoft were not a little interested by the entrance of a
portly woman of comely appearance and large proportions.  She was
dressed in a gaudy cotton gown and an enormously large bonnet, which
fluttered a good deal, owing as much to its own magnitude and
instability as to the quantity of pink ribbons and bows wherewith it was
adorned.

The woman led by the hand a very pretty little girl, whose dress was
much the same in pattern, though smaller in proportion.  Both woman and
child looked about them with that air of uncertainty peculiar to females
of the lower order when placed in circumstances in which they know not
exactly how to act.

Taking pity upon them, a clerk left his perch, and going forward, asked
the woman what she wanted.

To this she replied promptly, that she wanted money.

She was much flushed and very warm, and appeared to have come some
distance on foot, as well as to be in a state of considerable agitation,
which, however, she determinedly subdued by the force of a strong will.

"If you go to yonder rail and present your cheque," replied the clerk
kindly, "you'll get the money."

"Present what, young man?"

"Your cheque," replied the clerk.

"What's that?"

"Have you not a cheque-book--or a slip of paper to--"

"Oh! ay, a _book_.  Of course I've got a book, young man."

Saying this, Mrs Gaff, (for it was she), produced from a huge bag the
bank-book that had erstwhile reposed in the mysterious tea-caddy.

"Have you no other book than this?"

"No, young man," replied Mrs Gaff, feeling, but not exhibiting, slight
alarm.

The clerk, after glancing at the book, and with some curiosity at its
owner, then explained that a cheque-book was desirable, although not
absolutely necessary, and went and got one, and showed her the use of
it,--how the sum to be drawn should be entered with the date, etcetera,
on the margin in figures, and then the cheque itself drawn out in words,
"_not in figures_," and signed; after which he advised Mrs Gaff to draw
out a cheque on the spot for what she wanted.

"But, young man," said Mrs Gaff, who had listened to it all with an
expression of imbecility on her good-looking face, "I never wrote a
stroke in my life 'xcept once, when I tried to show my Billy how to do
it, and only made a big blot on his copy, for which I gave him a slap on
the face, poor ill-used boy."

"Well, then, tell me how much you want, and I will write it out for
you," said the clerk, sitting down at a table and taking up a pen.

Mrs Gaff pondered for a few seconds, then she drew Tottie aside and
carried on an earnest and animated conversation with her in hoarse
whispers, accompanied by much nodding and quivering of both bonnets,
leading to the conclusion that what the one propounded the other
heartily agreed to.

Returning to the table, Mrs Gaff said that she wanted a hundred pounds.

"How much?" demanded the clerk in surprise.

"A hundred pound, young man," repeated Mrs Gaff, somewhat sternly, for
she had made up her mind to go through with it come what might; "if ye
have as much in the shop just now--if not I'll take the half, and call
back for the other half to-morry--though it be raither a longish walk
fro' Cove and back for a woman o' my size."

The clerk smiled, wrote out the cheque, and bade her sign it with a
cross.  She did so, not only with a cross, but with two large and
irregular blots.  The clerk then pointed to a partition about five feet
six in height, where she was to present it.  Going to the partition she
looked about for a door by which to enter, but found none.  Looking back
to the clerk for information, she perceived that he was gone.
Pickpockets and thieves instantly occurred to her, but, on searching for
the bank-book and finding that it was safe, she felt relieved.  Just as
she was beginning to wonder whether she was not being made game of, she
heard a voice above her, and, looking up, observed a man's head
stretched over the top of the partition and looking down at her.

"Now, then, good woman, what do you want?" said the head.

"I wants a hundred pound," said Mrs Gaff, presenting her cheque in a
somewhat defiant manner, for she began to feel badgered.

The head put over a hand, took the cheque, and then both disappeared.

Mrs Gaff stood for some time waiting anxiously for the result, and as
no result followed, she began again to think of thieves and pickpockets,
and even meditated as to the propriety of setting up a sudden cry of
thieves, murder, and fire, in order to make sure of the clerk being
arrested before he should get quite clear of the building, when she
became aware of a fluttering of some sort just above her.  Looking up
she observed her cheque quivering on the top of the partition.
Wondering what this could mean, she gazed at it with an expression of
solemn interest.

Twice the cheque fluttered, with increasing violence each time, as
though it were impatient, and then the head re-appeared suddenly.

"Why don't you take your cheque?" it demanded with some asperity.

"Because I don't want it, young man; I wants my money," retorted Mrs
Gaff, whose ire was beginning to rise.

The head smiled, dropped the cheque on the floor, and, pointing with its
nose to a gentleman who stood behind a long counter in a sort of stall
surrounded with brass rails, told her to present it to the teller, and
she'd get the money.  Having said which the head disappeared; but it
might have been noted by a self-possessed observer, that as soon as Mrs
Gaff had picked up the cheque, (bursting two buttons off her gown in the
act), the head re-appeared, grinning in company with several other
heads, all of which grinned and watched the further movements of Mrs
Gaff with interest.

There were four gentlemen standing behind the long counter in brazen
stalls.  Three of these Mrs Gaff passed on her way to the one to whom
she had been directed by the head's nose.

"Now, sir," said Mrs Gaff, (she could not say "young man" this time,
for the teller was an elderly gentleman), "I hope ye'll pay me the money
without any more worrittin' of me.  I'm sure ye might ha' done it at
once without shovin' about a poor ignorant woman like me."

Having appealed to the teller's feelings in this last observation, Mrs
Gaff's own feelings were slightly affected, and she whimpered a little.
Tottie, being violently sympathetic, at once began to weep silently.

"How would you like to have it, my good woman?" asked the teller kindly.

"Eh?" exclaimed Mrs Gaff.

"Would you like to have it in notes or gold?" said the teller.

"In goold, of course, sir."

Tottie here glanced upwards through her tears.  Observing that her
mother had ceased to whimper, and was gazing in undisguised admiration
at the proceedings of the teller, she turned her eyes in his direction,
and forgot to cry any more.

The teller was shovelling golden sovereigns into a pair of scales with a
brass shovel as coolly as if he were a grocer's boy scooping out raw
sugar.  Having weighed the glittering pile, he threw them carelessly out
of the scale into the brass shovel, and shot them at Mrs Gaff, who
suddenly thrust her ample bosom against the counter, under the
impression that the coins were about to be scattered on the floor.  She
was mistaken.  They were checked in their career by a ledge, and lay
before her unbelieving eyes in a glittering mass.

Suddenly she looked at the teller with an expression of severe reproof.

"You've forgot to count 'em, sir."

"You'll find them all right," replied the teller, with a laugh.

Thereupon Mrs Gaff, in an extremely unbelieving state of mind, began to
count the gold pieces one by one into a little cotton bag which had been
prepared by her for this very purpose, and which Tottie held open with
both hands.  In ten minutes, after much care and many sighs, she counted
