practised at all in the preceding year, having been introduced by
Shuffles and Monroe, who had visited a prop saloon in the city where
they resided, during their late furlough. Each of them had brought a set
of props on board, with which they intended to amuse themselves during
the voyage. As yet, the practice was confined to a few of "our
fellows;" but the crew in the steerage were certainly in very great
danger of being carried away by the passion for gaming, for it was
spreading rapidly.

The prop-shaking was carried on in the mess rooms, while the students
were off duty. Shuffles had played with half a dozen boys the night
before; Sanborn and Lynch had been engaged in the game since the first
watch was set, and another party had been employed in the same manner in
another room. All of the boys were supplied with money in considerable
sums, generally in sovereigns and half sovereigns, for use when they
reached Europe. It was changing hands now, though no one had as yet been
particularly lucky.

"Have a game, Shuffles?" said Lynch, when Sanborn declared that he had
no money left but gold.

"No," replied Shuffles, "I shall not play any more."

"Why not?"

"I haven't time; and I don't want to become too fond of it."

"Haven't time!" exclaimed Lynch.

"No; I've got a big job on my hands."

"What's that?"

"Making a chain."

"Making a what?"

"Making a chain."

"A watch chain?"

"I think it will be a watch chain; but I'll tell you about it when we
are alone. Do you understand?"

"No, I don't."

"Keep still then."

Shuffles turned in, and the others followed his example. He did not
sleep, if they did, for his soul was full of rage and malice. He was
studying up the means of revenge; and he had matured a project, so
foolhardy that it was ridiculous, and his mind was fully occupied with
it.

At twelve o'clock he was called to take his place with the first part of
the port watch on deck. Belonging to each quarter watch, there were five
petty officers, four of whom were to call the portion of the crew who
were to relieve those on duty. Shuffles was called by one of these.

The wind was freshening when he went on deck, and the ship was going
rapidly through the water. At the last heaving of the log she was making
eleven knots, with her studding sails still set. Mr. Fluxion came on
deck at eight bells.

Wilton, Sanborn, and Adler were in the watch with Shuffles, and the
malcontent lost not a moment in pushing forward the scheme he had
matured. Fortunately or unfortunately, he was placed on the lookout with
Wilton, and the solitude of the top-gallant forecastle afforded them a
good opportunity for the conference.




CHAPTER XI.

THE GAMBLERS IN NO. 8.


"It's coming on to blow," said Wilton, as the lookouts took their
stations on the top-gallant forecastle.

"I don't think it will blow much; it is only freshening a little,"
replied Shuffles.

"Now, what about the mutiny?" demanded Wilton, impatiently, after he had
become more accustomed to the dash of the sea under the bows of the
ship.

"Don't call it by that name," replied Shuffles, earnestly. "Never use
that word again."

"That's what you mean--isn't it? You might as well call things by their
right names."

"It's an ugly word, and if any one should happen to hear it, their
attention would be attracted at once. We musn't get in the habit of
using it."

"I don't know what you are going to do yet," added Wilton.

"It's a big job; but I mean to put it through, even if I am sure of
failure."

"What's the use of doing that? Do you want to get the fellows into a
scrape for nothing?"

"There will be no failure, Wilton; you may depend upon that. There will
be a row on board within a day or two, and, if I mistake not, nearly
all the fellows will be so mad that they will want to join us."

"What row?"

"Do you know the reason why I wouldn't shake props this evening?"

"I'm sure I don't."

"Lowington has found out what is going on in the rooms."

"He hasn't, though!"

"Yes, he has."

"How do you know?"

"What odds does it make how I know?" answered Shuffles, impatiently, for
Wilton was much too inquisitive to suit his purposes. "I talked with the
chaplain half an hour to-night. When he went to my berth after the wine,
I rather think he heard the rattle of the props. At any rate the whole
thing will be broken up to-morrow or next day."

"I don't see how that will make a row. Not more than a dozen fellows
have played any; and they won't think of making a row about that."

"You see!" added Shuffles, confidently.

"Ugh!" exclaimed Wilton, as a cloud of spray dashed over the bow, and
drenched the lookout; but they wore their pea-jackets, and such an
occurrence was to be expected at sea.

"Stand by to take in studding sails!" shouted Paul Kendall, who was the
officer of the deck; and the order was repeated by his subordinates in
the waist and on the forecastle.

"We must go," said Wilton; and they descended from their position.

The wind had continued to freshen, until the ship labored somewhat under
her heavy press of canvas. It was the policy of the principal to go as
easily and comfortably as possible, and he had directed Mr. Fluxion, if
the wind continued to increase, to have the sail reduced, though neither
the safety of the ship nor of the spars absolutely required such a step.
The quarter watch on deck was sufficient to perform this labor.

"Lay aloft, foretopmen!" said the second lieutenant; and those of the
watch who had their stations in the fore rigging sprang up the shrouds.
"Stand by the halyard of the top-gallant studding sails! Man the tacks
and sheets!"

"All ready, sir," reported the second midshipman, who was in the
foretop, superintending the operation.

"Lower on the halyards! Ease off the tacks, and haul on the sheet!"

The two top-gallant studding-sails were thus brought into the top, where
they were made up. The fore-topmast and the lower studding sails were
taken in by a similar routine, and the Young America then moved along
less furiously through the water.

"Now about the chain," said Wilton, when the lookouts had returned
to their stations.

"Let me see; where did I leave off?" replied Shuffles.

"You said there was to be a row; which I don't believe."

"I may be mistaken about that; if I am, the job will be all the more
difficult. Lowington has got us out to sea now, and, in my opinion, he
means to shake us up. He is a tyrant at heart, and he will carry it
with a high hand. I hate the man!" added Shuffles, with savage
earnestness.

"You may, but the fellows don't generally."

"They will as soon as he begins to put the twisters on them. You won't
hear him say, 'If you please, young gentlemen,' now that we are in blue
water. You know how savage he was with me."

"Well, but you were disobedient. You told him, up and down, you wouldn't
do what he ordered you to do."

"No matter for that. You had a chance to see the spirit of the man. He
was a perfect demon. He put me in irons!" exclaimed Shuffles, still
groaning under this indignity. "I have been insulted and outraged, and I
will teach him that Bob Shuffles is not to be treated in that manner! I
will be revenged upon him, if it costs me my life."

"The fellows won't go into any such desperate game as that," replied
Wilton, cautiously.

"But there will be fun in the thing," added the malcontent, softening
his tone. "We shall have the ship all to ourselves. We needn't trouble
ourselves anything about Latin and Greek, and trigonometry and algebra.
We shall go in for a good time generally."

"It is all moonshine; it can't be done. What's the use of talking about
such a thing?" said Wilton.

"It can be done, and it shall be," replied Shuffles, stamping his foot
on the deck.

"How?"

"I am not quite ready to tell you yet."

"Very well; I don't want to know anything more about it," answered the
timid conspirator, who was almost disgusted at the foolhardiness of the
plan.

"I can get along without you," added Shuffles, with assumed
indifference.

"I would rather have you do so."

"All right; but you will want to come in when we have got along a little
farther."

"Perhaps I shall; if I do, I suppose the door will be open to me."

"It may be open; but perhaps you can't walk into the cabin then."

"Why not?"

"Do you suppose the fellows who do the burden of the work are going to
be shut out of the cabin? If you join at the eleventh hour, you will
have to be what you are now--a foremast hand."

"What can I be if I join now?"

"Second or third officer."

"Who will be first."

"I can't mention his name yet. He belongs in the cabin now."

"You don't mean so!" said Wilton, astonished to learn that his bold
companion expected to find friends among the present officers of the
ship.

"I know what I'm about," replied Shuffles, confidently.

With this information Wilton thought more favorably of the mad
enterprise. If it was to be a winning game, he wished to have a part in
it; if a losing one, he desired to avoid it. There was something in the
decided manner of the chief conspirator which made an impression upon
this doubting mind.


"I don't want to go in till I know more about it," said he, after
walking two or three times across the top-gallant forecastle.

"You can't know anything more about it until you have been toggled,"
replied Shuffles.

"Toggled?" repeated the sceptic, curiously.

"This thing is to be well managed, Wilton. We shall not use any hard
words, that outsiders can understand; and if any of them happen to hear
anything that don't concern them, they will not know what it means. Will
you join, or not?"

"I will," replied Wilton, desperately.

The strange words which Shuffles used, and the confidence he manifested
in the success of his project, carried the hesitating lookout man. He
was fascinated by the "clap-trap" which the leader of "our fellows" had
adopted to help along his scheme, for it promised to afford no little
excitement during the voyage.

"Now you talk like a man, Wilton," replied Shuffles. "You shall be a
member of the league at once."

"What's the league?"

"The Chain League."

"Upon my word, Shuffles, you have been reading yellow-covered novels to
some purpose."

"I didn't get this idea from a novel. I invented it myself."

"The Chain League!" repeated Wilton, who was pleased with the title of
the conspirators.

"It will be called simply 'The Chain.' I am the first member, and you
are the second; or you will be when you have been toggled."

"Toggled again!" laughed Wilton. "What do you mean?"

"Initiated."

"Go ahead, then."

"Repeat after me."

"Go on," replied Wilton, deeply interested in the proceeding, even while
he was amused at its formality.

"_I am a link of the chain_."

"I am a link of the chain," repeated Wilton.

"_I will obey my superior officers_."

"I will obey my superior officers."

"_And I will reveal none of its secrets_."

"And I will reveal none of its secrets."

"_This I promise_----"

"This I promise----"

"_On penalty of falling overboard accidentally_."

"On penalty of what?" demanded Wilton, both puzzled and terrified by the
mysterious words.

"Repeat the words after me. On penalty," said Shuffles, sternly.

"I know what the words are, but I'll be hanged if I will repeat them.
'Falling overboard accidentally!' What does that mean?"

"It means that, if you betray the secrets of The Chain, you might fall
overboard accidentally, some day."

"That is, you would push me over when no one was looking," added Wilton,
involuntarily retreating from the conspirator, whom, for the moment, he
regarded as a very dangerous companion.

"That's what the words mean," replied Shuffles, coolly.

"Have I been toggled?" demanded Wilton.

"No; you didn't repeat all the words."

"Then you needn't toggle me any more. I've got enough of this thing."

"All right; just as you say. But I can tell you this, my dear fellow? if
you should whisper the first word of what has passed between us
to-night, you might fall overboard," continued Shuffles, sharply, as he
laid his hand on his companion's shoulder.

Wilton grasped the sheet of the fore-topmast staysail which was the
nearest rope to him, and held on as though he was then in imminent
danger of "falling overboard accidentally."

"I won't say a word," protested he, vehemently; for he did not know but
that Shuffles was wicked enough to push him into the sea.

"Wilton, you are a fool!" added the disappointed conspirator, with deep
disgust. "Why didn't you say what I told you?"

"I don't want to be bound in any such way as that," replied the
terrified student.

"Don't you see it is only a form?"

"No, I don't; or if it is, I don't want anything to do with such forms.
You won't get any fellows to be toggled in that way."

"Yes, I shall? I shall get plenty of them. They are not babies, like
