
"Where are you off to, Maskull?"

"That's a matter of no importance, for wherever I go it must be a change
for the better. You walking whirlpools of crime!"

"Wait a minute. I only want to say this. Blodsombre is just starting,
and you had better stay here till the afternoon. We can quickly put that
body out of sight, and, as you seem to detest me so much, the place is
big enough--we needn't talk, or even see each other."

"I don't wish to breathe the same air."

"Singular man!" She was sitting erect and motionless, like a beautiful
statue. "And what of your wonderful interview with Surtur, and all the
undone things which you set out to do?"

"You aren't the one I shall speak to about that. But"--he eyed her
meditatively--"while I'm still here you can tell me this. What's the
meaning of the expression on that corpse's face?"

"Is that another crime, Maskull? All dead people look like that. Ought
they not to?"

"I once heard it called 'Crystalman's face.'"

"Why not? We are all daughters and sons of Crystalman. It is doubtless
the family resemblance."

"It has also been told me that Surtur and Crystalman are one and the
same."

"You have wise and truthful acquaintances."

"Then how could it have been Surtur whom I saw?" said Maskull, more to
himself than to her. "That apparition was something quite different."

She dropped her mocking manner and, sliding imperceptibly toward him,
gently pulled his arm.

"You see--we have to talk. Sit down beside me, and ask me your
questions. I'm not excessively smart, but I'll try to be of assistance."

Maskull permitted himself to be dragged down with soft violence. She
bent toward him, as if confidentially, and contrived that her sweet,
cool, feminine breath should fan his cheek.

"Aren't you here to alter the evil to the good, Maskull? Then what does
it matter who sent you?"

"What can you possibly know of good and evil?"

"Are you only instructing the initiated?"

"Who am I, to instruct anybody? However, you're quite right. I wish to
do what I can--not because I am qualified, but because I am here."

Oceaxe's voice dropped to a whisper. "You're a giant, both in body and
soul. What you want to do, you can do."

"Is that your honest opinion, or are you flattering me for your own
ends?"

She sighed. "Don't you see how difficult you are making the
conversation? Let's talk about your work, not about ourselves."

Maskull suddenly noticed a strange blue light glowing in the northern
sky. It was from Alppain, but Alppain itself was behind the hills. While
he was observing it, a peculiar wave of self-denial, of a disquieting
nature, passed through him. He looked at Oceaxe, and it struck him for
the first time that he was being unnecessarily brutal to her. He had
forgotten that she was a woman, and defenceless.

"Won't you stay?" she asked all of a sudden, quite openly and frankly.

"Yes, I think I'll stay," he replied slowly. "And another thing,
Oceaxe--if I've misjudged your character, pray forgive me. I'm a hasty,
passionate man."

"There are enough easygoing men. Hard knocks are a good medicine for
vicious hearts. And you didn't misjudge my character, as far as you
went--only, every woman has more than one character. Don't you know
that?"

During the pause that followed, a snapping of twigs was heard, and both
looked around, startled. They saw a woman stepping slowly across the
neck that separated them from the mainland.

"Tydomin," muttered Oceaxe, in a vexed, frightened voice. She
immediately moved away from Maskull and stood up.

The newcomer was of middle height, very slight and graceful. She was no
longer quite young. Her face wore the composure of a woman who knows
her way about the world. It was intensely pale, and under its quiescence
there just was a glimpse of something strange and dangerous. It
was curiously alluring, though not exactly beautiful. Her hair was
clustering and boyish, reaching only to the neck. It was of a strange
indigo colour. She was quaintly attired in a tunic and breeches, pieced
together from the square, blue-green plates of some reptile. Her small,
ivory-white breasts were exposed. Her sorb was black and sad--rather
contemplative.

Without once glancing up at Oceaxe and Maskull, she quietly glided
straight toward Crimtyphon's corpse. When she arrived within a few feet
of it, she stopped and looked down, with arms folded.

Oceaxe drew Maskull a little away, and whispered, "It's Crimtyphon's
other wife, who lives under Disscourn. She's a most dangerous woman.
Be careful what you say. If she asks you to do anything, refuse it
outright."

"The poor soul looks harmless enough."

"Yes, she does--but the poor soul is quite capable of swallowing up Krag
himself.... Now, play the man."

The murmur of their voices seemed to attract Tydomin's notice, for she
now slowly turned her eyes toward them.

"Who killed him?" she demanded.

Her voice was so soft, low, and refined, that Maskull hardly was able
to catch the words. The sounds, however, lingered in his ears, and
curiously enough seemed to grow stronger, instead of fainter.

Oceaxe whispered, "Don't say a word, leave it all to me." Then she swung
her body around to face Tydomin squarely, and said aloud, "I killed
him."

Tydomin's words by this time were ringing in Maskull's head like an
actual physical sound. There was no question of being able to ignore
them; he had to make an open confession of his act, whatever the
consequences might be. Quietly taking Oceaxe by the shoulder and putting
her behind him, he said in a low, but perfectly distinct voice, "It was
I that killed Crimtyphon."

Oceaxe looked both haughty and frightened. "Maskull says that so as to
shield me, as he thinks. I require no shield, Maskull. I killed him,
Tydomin."

"I believe you, Oceaxe. You did murder him. Not with your own strength,
for you brought this man along for the purpose."

Maskull took a couple of steps toward Tydomin. "It's of little
consequence who killed him, for he's better dead than alive, in my
opinion. Still, I did it. Oceaxe had no hand in the affair."

Tydomin appeared not to hear him--she looked beyond him at Oceaxe
musingly. "When you murdered him, didn't it occur to you that I would
come here, to find out?"

"I never once thought of you," replied Oceaxe, with an angry laugh. "Do
you really imagine that I carry your image with me wherever I go?"

"If someone were to murder your lover here, what would you do?"

"Lying hypocrite!" Oceaxe spat out. "You never were in love with
Crimtyphon. You always hated me, and now you think it an excellent
opportunity to make it good... now that Crimtyphon's gone.... For we
both know he would have made a footstool of you, if I had asked him. He
worshiped me, but he laughed at you. He thought you ugly."

Tydomin flashed a quick, gentle smile at Maskull. "Is it necessary for
you to listen to all this?"

Without question, and feeling it the right thing to do, he walked away
out of earshot.

Tydomin approached Oceaxe. "Perhaps because my beauty fades and I'm no
longer young, I needed him all the more."

Oceaxe gave a kind of snarl. "Well, he's dead, and that's the end of it.
What are you going to do now, Tydomin?"

The other woman smiled faintly and rather pathetically. "There's
nothing left to do, except mourn the dead. You won't grudge me that last
office?"

"Do you want to stay here?" demanded Oceaxe suspiciously.

"Yes, Oceaxe dear, I wish to be alone."

"Then what is to become of us?"

"I thought that you and your lover--what is his name?"

"Maskull."

"I thought that perhaps you two would go to Disscourn, and spend
Blodsombre at my home."

Oceaxe called out aloud to Maskull, "Will you come with me now to
Disscourn?"

"If you wish," returned Maskull.

"Go first, Oceaxe. I must question your friend about Crimtyphon's death.
I won't keep him."

"Why don't you question me, rather?" demanded Oceaxe, looking up
sharply.

Tydomin gave the shadow of a smile. "We know each other too well."

"Play no tricks!" said Oceaxe, and she turned to go.

"Surely you must be dreaming," said Tydomin. "That's the way--unless you
want to walk over the cliffside."

The path Oceaxe had chosen led across the isthmus. The direction which
Tydomin proposed for her was over the edge of the precipice, into empty
space.

"Shaping! I must be mad," cried Oceaxe, with a laugh. And she obediently
followed the other's finger.

She walked straight on toward the edge of the abyss, twenty paces
away. Maskull pulled his beard around, and wondered what she was doing.
Tydomin remained standing with outstretched finger, watching her.
Without hesitation, without slackening her step once, Oceaxe strolled
on--and when she had reached the extreme end of the land she still took
one more step.

Maskull saw her limbs wrench as she stumbled over the edge. Her body
disappeared, and as it did so an awful shriek sounded.

Disillusionment had come to her an instant too late. He tore himself
out of his stupor, rushed to the edge of the cliff, threw himself on the
ground recklessly, and looked over.... Oceaxe had vanished.

He continued staring wildly down for several minutes, and then began to
sob. Tydomin came up to him, and he got to his feet.

The blood kept rushing to his face and leaving it again. It was some
time before he could speak at all. Then he brought out the words with
difficulty. "You shall pay for this, Tydomin. But first I want to hear
why you did it."

"Hadn't I cause?" she asked, standing with downcast eyes.

"Was it pure fiendishness?"

"It was for Crimtyphon's sake."

"She had nothing to do with that death. I told you so."

"You are loyal to her, and I'm loyal to him."

"Loyal? You've made a terrible blunder. She wasn't my mistress. I killed
Crimtyphon for quite another reason. She had absolutely no part in it."

"Wasn't she your lover?" asked Tydomin slowly.

"You've made a terrible mistake," repeated Maskull. "I killed him
because he was a wild beast. She was as innocent of his death as you
are."

Tydomin's face took on a hard look. "So you are guilty of two deaths."

There was a dreadful silence.

"Why couldn't you believe me?" asked Maskull, who was pale and sweating
painfully.

"Who gave you the right to kill him?" demanded Tydomin sternly.

He said nothing, and perhaps did not hear her question.

She sighed two or three times and began to stir restlessly. "Since you
murdered him, you must help me bury him."

"What's to be done? This is a most fearful crime."

"You art a most fearful man. Why did you come here, to do all this? What
are we to you?"

"Unfortunately you are right."

Another pause ensued.

"It's no use standing here," said Tydomin. "Nothing can be done. You
must come with me."

"Come with you? Where to?"

"To Disscourn. There's a burning lake on the far side of it. He always
wished to be cast there after death. We can do that after Blodsombre--in
the meantime we must take him home."

"You're a callous, heartless woman. Why should he be buried when that
poor girl must remain unburied?"

"You know that's out of the question," replied Tydomin quietly.

Maskull's eyes roamed about agitatedly, apparently seeing nothing.

"We must do something," she continued. "I shall go. You can't wish to
stay here alone?"

"No, I couldn't stay here--and why should I want to? You want me to
carry the corpse?"

"He can't carry himself, and you murdered him. Perhaps it will ease your
mind to carry it."

"Ease my mind?" said Maskull, rather stupidly.

"There's only one relief for remorse, and that's voluntary pain."

"And have you no remorse?" he asked, fixing her with a heavy eye.

"These crimes are yours, Maskull," she said in a low but incisive voice.

They walked over to Crimtyphon's body, and Maskull hoisted it on to his
shoulders. It weighed heavier than he had thought. Tydomin did not offer
to assist him to adjust the ghastly burden.

She crossed the isthmus, followed by Maskull. Their path lay through
sunshine and shadow. Branchspell was blazing in a cloudless sky, the
heat was insufferable--streams of sweat coursed down his face, and the
corpse seemed to grow heavier and heavier. Tydomin always walked in
front of him. His eyes were fastened in an unseeing stare on her white,
womanish calves; he looked neither to right nor left. His features grew
sullen. At the end of ten minutes he suddenly allowed his burden to slip
off his shoulders on to the ground, where it lay sprawled every which
way. He called out to Tydomin.

She quickly looked around.

"Come here. It has just occurred to me"--he laughed--"why should I be
carrying this corpse--and why should I be following you at all? What
surprises me is, why this has never struck me before."

She at once came back to him. "I suppose you're tired, Maskull. Let us
sit down. Perhaps you have come a long way this morning?"

"Oh, it's not tiredness, but a sudden gleam of sense. Do you know of
any reason why I should be acting as your porter?" He laughed again, but
nevertheless sat down on the ground beside her.

Tydomin neither looked at him nor answered. Her head was half bent, so
as to face the northern sky, where the Alppain light was still glowing.
Maskull followed her gaze, and also watched the glow for a moment or two
in silence.

"Why don't you speak?" he asked at last.

"What does that light suggest to you, Maskull?"

"I'm not speaking of that light."

"Doesn't it suggest anything at all?"

"Perhaps it doesn't. What does it matter?"

"Not sacrifice?"

Maskull grew sullen again. "Sacrifice of what? What do you mean?"

"Hasn't it entered your head yet," said Tydomin, looking straight in
front of her, and speaking in her delicate, hard manner, "that this
adventure of yours will scarcely come to an end until you have made some
sort of sacrifice?"

He returned no answer, and she said nothing more. In a few minutes' time
Maskull got up of his own accord, and irreverently, and almost angrily,
threw Crimtyphon's corpse over his shoulder again.

"How far do we have to go?" he asked in a surly tone.

"An hour's walk."

"Lead on."

"Still, this isn't the sacrifice I mean," said Tydomin quietly, as she
went on in front.

Almost immediately they reached more difficult ground. They had to pass
from peak to peak, as from island to island. In some cases they were
able to stride or jump across, but in others they had to make use of
rude bridges of fallen timber. It appeared to be a frequented path.
Underneath were the black, impenetrable abysses--on the surface were the
glaring sunshine, the gay, painted rocks, the chaotic tangle of strange
plants. There were countless reptiles and insects. The latter were
thicker built than those of Earth--consequently still more disgusting,
and some of them were of enormous size. One monstrous insect, as large
as a horse, stood right in the centre of their path without budging. It
was armour-plated, had jaws like scimitars, and underneath its body was
a forest of legs. Tydomin gave one malignant look at it, and sent it
crashing into the gulf.

"What have I to offer, except my life?" Maskull suddenly broke out. "And
what good is that? It won't bring that poor girl back into the world."

"Sacrifice is not for utility. It's a penalty which we pay."

"I know that."

"The point is whether you can go on enjoying life, after what has
happened."

She waited for Maskull to come even with her.

"Perhaps you imagine I'm not man enough--you imagine that because I
allowed poor Oceaxe to die for me--"

"She did die for you," said Tydomin, in a quiet, emphatic voice.

"That would be a second blunder of yours," returned Maskull, just as
firmly. "I was not in love with Oceaxe, and I'm not in love with life."

"Your life is not required."

"Then I don't understand what you want, or what you are speaking about."

"It's not for me to ask a sacrifice from you, Maskull. That would be
compliance on your part, but not sacrifice. You must wait until you feel
there's nothing else for you to do."

