ears: What year? What year?

It was in the year 1930 that the great thing began in my life. There was
then a very great man who performed operations on his fellows to compose
their vitals--we called such men surgeons. John Granden wore the title
"Sir" before his name, in indication of nobility by birth according to
the prevailing standards in England. But surgery was only a hobby of Sir
John's, if I must be precise, for, while he had achieved an enormous
reputation as a surgeon, he always felt that his real work lay in the
experimental end of his profession. He was, in a way, a dreamer, but a
dreamer who could make his dreams come true.

I was a very close friend of Sir John's. In fact, we shared the same
apartments in London. I have never forgotten that day when he first
mentioned to me his momentous discovery. I had just come in from a long
sleigh-ride in the country with Alice, and I was seated drowsily in the
window-seat, writing idly in my mind a description of the wind and the
snow and the grey twilight of the evening. It is strange, is it not,
that my tale should begin and end with the snow and the twilight.

Sir John opened suddenly a door at one end of the room and came hurrying
across to another door. He looked at me, grinning rather like a
triumphant maniac.

"It's coming!" he cried, without pausing, "I've almost got it!" I smiled
at him: he looked very ludicrous at that moment.

"What have you got?" I asked.

"Good Lord, man, the Secret--the Secret!" And then he was gone again,
the door closing upon his victorious cry, "The Secret!"

I was, of course, amused. But I was also very much interested. I knew
Sir John well enough to realize that, however amazing his appearance
might be, there would be nothing absurd about his "Secret"--whatever it
was. But it was useless to speculate. I could only hope for
enlightenment at dinner. So I immersed myself in one of the surgeon's
volumes from his fine Library of Imagination, and waited.

I think the book was one of Mr. H. G. Wells', probably "The Sleeper
Awakes," or some other of his brilliant fantasies and predictions, for I
was in a mood conducive to belief in almost anything when, later, we sat
down together across the table. I only wish I could give some idea of
the atmosphere that permeated our apartments, the reality it lent to
whatever was vast and amazing and strange. You could then, whoever you
are, understand a little the ease with which I accepted Sir John's new
discovery.

He began to explain it to me at once, as though he could keep it to
himself no longer.

"Did you think I had gone mad, Dennell?" he asked. "I quite wonder that
I haven't. Why, I have been studying for many years--for most of my
life--on this problem. And, suddenly, I have solved it! Or, rather, I am
afraid I have solved another one much greater."

"Tell me about it, but for God's sake don't be technical."

"Right," he said. Then he paused. "Dennell, it's _magnificent_! It will
change everything that is in the world." His eyes held mine suddenly
with the fatality of a hypnotist's. "Dennell, it is the Secret of
Eternal Life," he said.

"Good Lord, Sir John!" I cried, half inclined to laugh.

"I mean it," he said. "You know I have spent most of my life studying
the processes of birth, trying to find out precisely what went on in the
whole history of conception."

"You have found out?"

"No, that is just what amuses me. I have discovered something else
without knowing yet what causes either process.

"I don't want to be technical, and I know very little of what actually
takes place myself. But I can try to give you some idea of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

It is thousands, perhaps millions of years since Sir John explained to
me. What little I understood at the time I may have forgotten, yet I try
to reproduce what I can of his theory.

"In my study of the processes of birth," he began, "I discovered the
rudiments of an action which takes place in the bodies of both men and
women. There are certain properties in the foods we eat that remain in
the body for the reproduction of life, two distinct Essences, so to
speak, of which one is retained by the woman, another by the man. It is
the union of these two properties that, of course, creates the child.

"Now, I made a slight mistake one day in experimenting with a
guinea-pig, and I re-arranged certain organs which I need not describe
so that I thought I had completely messed up the poor creature's
abdomen. It lived, however, and I laid it aside. It was some years later
that I happened to notice it again. It had not given birth to any young,
but I was amazed to note that it had apparently grown no older: it
seemed precisely in the same state of growth in which I had left it.

"From that I built up. I re-examined the guinea-pig, and observed it
carefully. I need not detail my studies. But in the end I found that my
'mistake' had in reality been a momentous discovery. I found that I had
only to close certain organs, to re-arrange certain ducts, and to open
certain dormant organs, and, _mirabile dictu_, the whole process of
reproduction was changed.

"You have heard, of course, that our bodies are continually changing,
hour by hour, minute by minute, so that every few years we have been
