joins Peloponnesus to the continent. From its situation between two
seas, Horace says,

     _Bimarisve Corinthi moenia._

The city was taken and burnt to the ground by Mummius the Roman
general, A.U.C. 608. It was afterwards restored to its ancient
splendour, and made a Roman colony. It retains the name of _Corinth_.

CORMA, a river in Asia; mentioned by Tacitus only.

CORSICA, an island in the part of the Mediterranean called the Sea of
Liguria, in length from north to south about a hundred and fifty
miles, and about fifty where broadest. To the south it is separated
from Sardinia by a narrow channel.

COS, or COOS, one of the islands called the Cyclades, in the AEgean
sea, famous for being the birth-place of Apelles; now _Stan Co_.

COSA, a promontory of Etruria; now _Mont Argentaro_, in Tuscany.

CREMERA, a river of Tuscany, falling into the Tiber a little to the
north of Rome, rendered famous by the slaughter of the Fabii.

CREMONA, a city of Italy, built A.U.C. 536, and afterwards, in the
year 822, rased to the ground by the army of Vespasian, in the war
with Vitellius. It was soon rebuilt by the citizens, with the
exhortations of Vespasian. It is now a flourishing city in the duchy
of Milan, and retains the name of Cremona.

CUMAE, a town of Campania, near Cape Misenum, famous for the cave of
the Cumaean Sibyl.

CUSUS, a river in Hungary, that falls into the Danube.

CYCLADES, a cluster of islands in the AEgean sea, so called from
_Cyclus_, the orb in which they lie. Their names and number are not
ascertained. Strabo reckons sixteen.

CYME, a maritime town of AEolia in Asia.

CYPRUS, a noble island opposite to the coast of Syria, formerly sacred
to Venus, whence she was called the Cyprian goddess.

CYRENE (now called _Curin_), the capital of Cyrenaica, a district of
Africa, now the _Desert of Barca_. It stood about eleven miles from
the sea, and had an excellent harbour.

CYTHERA, an island situated on the coast of Peloponnesus formerly
sacred to Venus, and thence her name of _Cytherea_. The island is now
called _Cerigo_.

CYTHNUS, one of the islands called the Cyclades, in the AEgean Sea.

CYZICUS, a city of Mysia, in the Hither Asia, rendered famous by the
long siege of Mithridates, which at last was raised by Lucullus.


D.

DACIA, a country extending between the Danube and the Carpathian
mountains to the mouth of the Danube, and to the Euxine, comprising a
part of Upper Hungary, Transylvania, and Moldavia. The inhabitants to
the west, towards Germany, were called _Daci_; those to the east
towards the Euxine were called _Getae_. The whole country was reduced
by Trajan to a Roman province.

DAHAE, a people of Scythia, to the south of the Caspian, with the
Massagetae on the east. Virgil calls them _indomitique Dahae_.

DALMATIA, an extensive country bordering on Macedonia and Maesia, and
having the Adriatic to the south.

DANDARIDAE, a people bordering on the Euxine. Brotier says that some
vestiges of the nation, and its name, still exist at a place called
_Dandars_.

DANUBE, the largest river in Europe. It rises in Suabia, and after
visiting Bavaria, Austria, Hungary, and taking thence a prodigious
circuit, falls at last into the Black or Euxine sea. See Manners of
the Germans, s. 1. note g.

DELOS, the central island of the Cyclades, famous in mythology for the
birth of Apollo and Diana.

DELPHI, a famous inland town of Phocis in Greece, with a temple and
oracle of Apollo, situate near the foot of Mount Parnassus.

DENTHELIATE LANDS, a portion of the Peloponnesus that lay between
Laconia and Messenia; often disputed by those states.

DERMONA, a river of Gallia Transpadana; it runs into the Ollius (now
_Oglio_), and through that channel into the Po.

DIVODURUM, a town in Gallia Belgica, situate on the Moselle, on the
spot where _Metz_ now stands.

DONUSA, or DONYSA, an island in the AEgean sea, not far from _Naxos_.
Virgil has, _Bacchatamque jugis Naxon, viridemque Donysam_.

DYRRACHIUM, a town on the coast of Illyricum. Its port answered to
that of Brundusium, affording a convenient passage to Italy.


E.

ECBATANA, the capital of Media; now _Hamedan_.

EDESSA, a town of Mesopotamia; now _Orrhoa_, or _Orfa_.

ELEPHANTINE, an island in the Nile, not far from Syene; at which last
place stood the most advanced Roman garrison, _Notitia Imperii_.

ELEUSIS, a district of Attica near the sea-coast, sacred to Ceres,
where the Eleusinian mysteries were performed; now in ruins.

ELYMAEI, a people bordering on the gulf of Persia.

EMERITA, a city of Spain; now _Merida_ in the province of
_Estramadoura_.

EPHESUS, an ancient and celebrated city of Ionia, in Asia Minor; now
_Efeso_. It was the birth-place of Heraclitus, the weeping
philosopher.

EPIDAPHNE, a town in Syria, not far from Antioch.

EPOREDIA, a town at the foot of the Alps, afterwards a Roman colony;
now _Jurea_, or _Jura_, a city of Piedmont.

ERINDE, a river of Asia, mentioned by Tacitus only.

ERITHRAE, a maritime town of Ionia, in Asia Minor.

ETRURIA, a district of Italy, extending from the boundary of Liguria
to the Tiber; now _Tuscany_.

EUBOEA, an island near the coast of _Attica_; now _Negropont_.

EUPHRATES, a river of Asia, universally allowed to take its rise in
Armenia Major. It divides into two branches, one running through
Babylon, and the other through Seleucia. It bounds Mesopotamia on the
west.

EUXINE, or PONTUS EUXINUS; now the Black Sea.


F.

FERENTINUM, a town of Latium, in Italy; now _Ferentino_, in the
Campania of Rome.

FERENTUM, a town of Etruria; now _Ferenti_.

FERONIA, a town in Etruria.

FIDENAE, a small town in the territory of the Sabines, about six miles
to the north of Rome. The place where the ruins of Fidenae are seen, is
now called _Castello Giubileo_.

FLAMMINIAN WAY, made by Flamminius A.U.C. 533, from Rome to
_Ariminum_, a town of Umbria, or Romana, at the mouth of the river
Ariminus, on the gulf of Venice. It is now called _Rimini_.

FLEVUS, a branch of the Rhine, that emptied itself into the lakes
which have been long since absorbed by the _Zuyderzee_. A castle,
called _Flevum Castellum_, was built there by Drusus, the father of
Germanicus.

FORMIAE, a maritime town of Italy, to the south-east of _Cajeta_. The
ruins of the place are still visible.

FOROJULIUM. See FORUM JULIUM.

FORUM ALLIENI, now _Ferrare_, on the Po.

FORUM JULIUM, a Roman colony in Gaul, founded by Julius Caesar, and
completed by Augustus, with a harbour at the mouth of the river
_Argens_, capable of receiving a large fleet. The ruins of two moles
at the entrance of the harbour are still to be seen. See Life of
Agricola, s. 4. note a. The place is now called _Frejus_.

FRISII, the ancient inhabitants of _Friesland_. See Manners of the
Germans.

FUNDANI MONTES, now _Fondi_, a city of Naples, on the confines of the
Pope's dominions.


G.

GABII, a town of Latium, between Rome and Preneste. A particular
manner of tucking up the gown, adopted by the Roman consuls when they
declared war or attended a sacrifice, was called _Cinctus Gabinus_.
The place now extinct.

GAETULI, a people of Africa, bordering on Mauritania.

GALATIA, or GALLOGRAECIA, a country of Asia Minor, lying between
_Cappadocia, Pontus_, and _Pophlagonia_; now called _Chiangare_.

GALILAEA, the northern part of Canaan, or Palestine, bounded on the
north by _Phoenicia_, on the south by _Samaria_, on the east by the
_Jordan_, and on the west by the _Mediterranean_.

GALLIA, the country of ancient Gaul, now _France_. It was divided by
the Romans into _Gallia Cisalpina_, viz. Gaul on the Italian side of
the Alps, with the _Rubicon_ for its boundary to the south. It was
also called _Gallia Togata_, from the use made by the inhabitants of
the Roman _Toga_. It was likewise called _Gallia Transpadana_, or
_Cispadana_, with respect to Rome. The second great division of Gaul
was _Gallia Transalpina_, or _Ulterior_, being, with respect to Rome,
on the other side of the Alps. It was also called _Gallia Comata_,
from the people wearing their hair long, which the Romans wore short.
The southern part was GALLIA NARBONENSIS, _Narbon Gaul_, called
likewise _Braccata_, from the use of _braccae_, or breeches, which were
no part of the Roman dress; now _Languedoc_, _Dauphiny_, and
_Provence_. For the other divisions of Gaul on this side of the Alps,
into the _Gallia Belgica, Celtica, Aquitanica_, further subdivided by
Augustus, see the Manners of the Germans, s. 1. note a.

GARAMANTES, a people in the interior part of Africa, extending over a
vast tract of country at present little known.

GARIZIM, a mountain of Samaria, famous for a temple built on it by
permission of Alexander the Great.

GELDUBA, not far from Novesium (now _Nuys_, in the electorate of
Cologne) on the west side of the Rhine.

GEMONIAE, a place at Rome, into which were thrown the bodies of
malefactors.

GERMANIA, Ancient Germany, bounded on the east by the Vistula (the
_Weissel_), on the north by the Ocean, on the west by the Rhine, and
on the south by the Danube. A great part of Gaul, along the west side
of the Rhine, was also called Germany by Augustus Caesar, _Germania
Cisrhenana_, and by him distinguished into _Upper_ and _Lower
Germany_.

GOTHONES, a people of ancient Germany, who inhabited part of Poland,
and bordered on the Vistula.

GRAIAN ALPS, Graiae Alpes, supposed to be so called from the Greeks who
settled there. See ALPS.

GRINNES, a town of the Batavi, on the right side of the Vahalis (now
the _Waal_), in the territory of Utrecht.

GUGERNI, a people originally from Germany, inhabiting part of the
duchy of Cleves and Gueldre, between the Rhine and the Meuse.

GYARUS, one of the islands called the _Cyclades_, rendered famous by
being allotted for the banishment of Roman citizens. Juvenal says,
_Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris, et carcere dignum, si vis esse
aliquis._


H.

HAEMUS, MOUNT, a ridge of mountains running from Illyricum towards the
Euxine sea; now _Mont Argentaro_.

HAEMONADENSIANS, a people bordering on Cilicia.

HALICARNASSUS, the capital of Caria, in Asia Minor, famous for being
the birth-place of Herodotus and Dionysius, commonly called _Dionysius
Halicarnassensis_.

HELVETII, a people in the neighbourhood of the Allobroges, situate on
the south-west side of the Rhine, and separated from Gaul by the
Rhodanus and Lacus Lemanus.

HENIOCHIANS, a people dwelling near the Euxine Sea.

HERCULANEUM, a town of Campania, near Mount Vesuvius, swallowed up by
an earthquake. Several antiquities have been lately dug out of the
ruins.

HERCYNIAN FOREST: in the time of Julius Caesar, the breadth could not
be traversed in less than nine days; and after travelling lengthways
for sixty days, no man reached the extremity. Caesar, De Bell. Gal.
lib. vi. s. 29.

HERMUNDURI, a people of Germany, in part of what is now called Upper
Saxony, bounded on the north by the river _Sala_, on the east by the
_Elbe_, and on the south by the _Danube_.

HIERO-CAESAREA, a city in Lydia, famous for a temple to the Persian
Diana, supposed to have been built by Cyrus.

HISPALIS, a town of Boetica in the Farther Spain; now _Seville_ in
_Andalusia_.

HISPANIA, Spain, otherwise called _Iberia_, from the river _Iberus_.
It has the sea on every side except that next to _Gaul_, from which it
is separated by the _Pyrenees_. During the time of the republic, the
whole country was divided into two provinces, _Ulterior_ and
_Citerior_, the _Farther_ and _Hither_ Spain. Augustus divided the
Farther Spain into two provinces; _Boetica_, and _Lusitania_. The
Hither Spain he called _Tarraconensis_, and then Spain was formed into
three provinces; _Boetica_, under the management of the senate; and the
other two reserved for officers appointed by the prince.

HOSTILIA, a village on the Po: now _Ostiglia_, in the neighbourhood of
Cremona.

HYPAEPA, a small city in _Lydia_, now rased to the ground.

HYRCANIA, a country of the Farther Asia, to the east of the Caspian
Sea, with Media on the west, and Parthia on the south; famous for its
tigers. There was a city of the same name in Lydia.


I.

IBERIA, an inland country of Asia, bounded by Mount Caucasus on the
north, by Albania on the cast, by Colchis and part of Pontus on the
west, and by Armenia on the south. Spain was also called Iberia, from
the river Iberus; now the _Ebro_.

IBERUS, a noble river of the Hither Spain; now the _Ebro_.

ICENI, a people of Britain; now _Essex, Suffolk_, and _Norfolk_.

ILIUM, another name for ancient Troy. A new city, nearer to the sea,
was built after the famous siege of Troy, and made a Roman colony.
But, as was said of the old city, _Etiam periere ruinae_.

ILLYRICUM, the country between Pannonia to the north, and the Adriatic
to the south. It is now comprised by _Dalmatia_ and _Sclavonia_, under
the respective dominion of the Venetians and the Turks.

INSUBRIA, a country of Gallia Cisalpina; now the _Milanese_.

INTEMELIUM. See ALBIUM INTEMELIUM.

INTERAMNA, an ancient town of the Volsci in Latium, not far from the
river Liris. It is now in ruins.

IONIAN SEA, the sea that washes the western coast of Greece, opposite
to the gulf of Venice.

ISICHI, a people bordering on the Euxine, towards the east.

ISTRIA, an island in the gulf of Venice, still retaining its ancient
name. There was also a town of the same name near the mouth of the
Ister, on the Euxine Sea.

ITURAEA, a _Transjordan_ district of Palestine, now _Bacar_.


J.

JAPHA, a strong place, both by nature and art, in the Lower Galilee,
not far from _Jotapata_; now _Saphet_.

JAZYGES, a people of Sarmatia Europaea, situate on this side of the
Palus Maeotis, near the territory of Maroboduus, the German king.

JUGANTES, said by Camden to be the same as the _Brigantes_, but
Brotier thinks it probable that they were a distinct, people.


L.

LACUS LEMANUS, now the _Lake of Geneva_.

LANGOBARDI, a people of Germany, between the _Elbe_ and the _Oder_, in
part of what is now called _Brandenburg_.

LANUVIUM, a town of Latium, about sixteen miles from Rome; now _Civita
Lavinia_.

LAODICEA, a town of Phrygia, called, to distinguish it from other
cities of the same name, _Laodicea ad Lycum_. Spon, in his account of
his travels, says it is rased to the ground, except four theatres
built, with marble, finely polished, and in as good condition as if
they were modern structures; now called _Ladik_.

LAODICEA AD MARE, a considerable town on the coast of Syria, well
built, with a commodious harbour.

LATIUM, the country of the Latini, so called from king Latinus;
contained at first within narrow bounds, but greatly enlarged under
the Alban kings and the Roman consuls, by the accession of the AEqui,
Volsci, Hernici, &c.

LECHAEUM, the west port of Corinth, which the people used for their
Italian trade, as they did _Cenchrae_ for their eastern or Asiatic.

LEPTIS, there were in Africa two ancient cities of the name, _Leptis
magna_, and _Leptis parva_. The first (now called _Lebeda_) was in the
territory of Tripoli; the second, a town on the Mediterranean, not far
from Carthage.

LESBOS, an island in the Egean Sea, near the coast of Asia; the
birth-place of Sappho: now called _Metelin_.

LEUCI, a people of Gallia Belgica, to the north of the Lingones,
between the Moselle and the Meuse.

LIBYA, the name given by the Greeks to all Africa; but, properly
speaking, it was an interior part of Africa.

LIGERIS; now the _Loire_.

LIGURIA, a country of Italy, divided into the maritime, _Ligus Ora_;
