The Project Gutenberg eBook, Stories of Later American History, by Wilbur
F. Gordy


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Stories of Later American History


Author: Wilbur F. Gordy



Release Date: June 19, 2006  [eBook #18618]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES OF LATER AMERICAN
HISTORY***


E-text prepared by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 18618-h.htm or 18618-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/8/6/1/18618/18618-h/18618-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/8/6/1/18618/18618-h.zip)


Transcriber's note

      There are a few phonetic descriptions:
      ' is a stress mark,
      [=e] is an e-with-macron
      and [=a] is an a-with-macron.





STORIES OF LATER AMERICAN HISTORY

by

WILBUR F. GORDY

Formerly Superintendent of Schools, Springfield, Mass.; Author of "A
History of the United States for Schools," "Elementary History of the
United States," "American Leaders and Heroes," "American Beginnings in
Europe," "Stories of American Explorers," "Colonial Days," and "Stories
of Early American History"

With Maps and Illustrations







[Illustration: Pioneers on the Overland Route, Westward.]




Charles Scribner's Sons
New York      Chicago         Boston
Copyright, 1915, by Charles Scribner's Sons





PREFACE


This book, like "Stories of Early American History," follows somewhat
closely the course of study prepared by the Committee of Eight, the
present volume covering the topics outlined for Grade V, while the earlier
one includes the material suggested for Grade IV.

It was the plan of that committee to take up in these grades, largely in a
biographical way, a great part of the essential facts of American history;
and with this plan the author, who was a member of that committee, was in
hearty accord. This method, it is believed, serves a double purpose. In
the first place, it is the best possible way of laying the foundation for
the later and more detailed study of United States history in the higher
grammar grades by those pupils who are to continue in school; and in the
second, it gives to that large number of pupils who will leave school
before the end of the sixth grade--which is at least half of all the boys
and girls in the schools of the country--some acquaintance with the
leading men and prominent events of American history.

It is without doubt a great mistake to allow half of the pupils to go out
from our public schools with almost no knowledge of the moral and material
forces which have made this nation what it is to-day. It is an injustice
to the young people themselves; it is also an injury to their country, the
vigor of whose life will depend much upon their intelligent and patriotic
support.

With this conviction, it has been the author's desire to make the story of
the events concrete, dramatic, and lifelike by centring them about
leaders, heroes, and other representative men, in such a way as to appeal
to the imagination and to influence the ideals of the child. In so doing,
he has made no attempt to write organized history--tracing out its
intricate relations of cause and effect. At the same time, however, he has
aimed to select his facts and events so carefully that the spirit of our
national life and institutions, as well as many of the typical events of
American history, may be presented.

It is confidently hoped that the fine illustrations and the attractive
typographical features of the book will help to bring vividly before the
mind of the child the events narrated in the text.

Another aid in making the stories vivid will, it is intended, be found in
"Some Things to Think About." These and many similar questions, which the
teacher can easily frame to fit the needs of her class, will help the
pupil to make real the life of days gone by as well as to connect it with
the present time and with his own life.

In conclusion, I wish to acknowledge my deep obligations to Mr. Forrest
Morgan, of the Watkinson Library, Hartford, and to Miss Elizabeth P. Peck,
of the Hartford Public High School, both of whom have read the manuscript
and have made many valuable criticisms and suggestions.

                                                     WILBUR F. GORDY.

HARTFORD, CONN.,
April 15, 1915.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

     I. PATRICK HENRY
    II. SAMUEL ADAMS
   III. THE WAR BEGINS NEAR BOSTON
    IV. GEORGE WASHINGTON IN THE REVOLUTION
     V. NATHANAEL GREENE AND OTHER HEROES IN THE SOUTH
    VI. JOHN PAUL JONES
   VII. DANIEL BOONE
  VIII. JAMES ROBERTSON
    IX. JOHN SEVIER
     X. GEORGE ROGERS CLARK
    XI. THE NEW REPUBLIC
   XII. INCREASING THE SIZE OF THE NEW REPUBLIC
  XIII. INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS
   XIV. THE REPUBLIC GROWS LARGER
    XV. THREE GREAT STATESMEN
   XVI. THE CIVIL WAR
  XVII. FOUR GREAT INDUSTRIES
        INDEX




ILLUSTRATIONS


  Pioneers on the Overland Route, Westward
  George III
  Patrick Henry
  Patrick Henry Delivering His Speech in the Virginia House of
          Burgesses
  William Pitt
  St. John's Church, Richmond
  Samuel Adams
  Patriots in New York Destroying Stamps Intended for Use in
          Connecticut
  Faneuil Hall, Boston
  Old South Church, Boston
  The "Boston Tea Party"
  Carpenters' Hall, Philadelphia
  John Hancock
  John Hancock's Home, Boston
  A Minuteman
  Old North Church
  Paul Revere's Ride
  Monument on Lexington Common Marking the Line of the Minutemen
  Concord Bridge
  President Langdon, the President of Harvard College, Praying for the
          Bunker Hill Entrenching Party on Cambridge Common Just
          Before Their Departure
  Prescott at Bunker Hill
  Bunker Hill Monument
  George Washington
  Washington, Henry, and Pendleton on the Way to Congress at
          Philadelphia
  The Washington Elm at Cambridge, under which Washington took Command
          of the Army
  Sir William Howe
  Thomas Jefferson Looking Over the Rough Draught of the Declaration
          of Independence
  The Retreat from Long Island
  Nathan Hale
  British and Hessian Soldiers
  Powder-Horn, Bullet-Flask, and Buckshot-Pouch Used in the Revolution
  General Burgoyne Surrendering to General Gates
  Marquis de Lafayette
  Lafayette Offering His Services to Franklin
  Winter at Valley Forge
  Nathanael Greene
  The Meeting of Greene and Gates upon Greene's Assuming Command
  Daniel Morgan
  Francis Marion
  Marion Surprising a British Wagon-Train
  John Paul Jones
  Battle Between the Ranger and the Drake
  The Fight Between the Bon Homme Richard and the Serapis
  Daniel Boone
  Boone's Escape from the Indians
  Boonesborough
  Boone Throwing Tobacco into the Eyes of the Indians Who Had Come to
          Capture Him
  James Robertson
  Living-Room of the Early Settler
  Grinding Indian Corn
  A Kentucky Pioneer's Cabin
  John Sevier
  A Barbecue of 1780
  Battle of King's Mountain
  George Rogers Clark
  Clark on the Way to Kaskaskia
  Clark's Surprise at Kaskaskia
  Wampum Peace Belt
  Clark's Advance on Vincennes
  George Washington
  Washington's Home, Mount Vernon
  Tribute Rendered to Washington at Trenton
  Washington Taking the Oath of Office as First President, at Federal
          Hall, New York City
  Washington's Inaugural Chair
  Eli Whitney
  Whitney's Cotton-Gin
  A Colonial Planter
  A Slave Settlement
  Thomas Jefferson
  "Monticello," the Home of Jefferson
  A Rice-Field in Louisiana
  A Flatboat on the Ohio River
  House in New Orleans Where Louis Philippe Stopped in 1798
  A Public Building in New Orleans Built in 1794
  Meriwether Lewis
  William Clark
  Buffalo Hunted by Indians
  The Lewis and Clark Expedition Working Its Way Westward
  Andrew Jackson
  "The Hermitage," the Home of Andrew Jackson
  Fighting the Seminole Indians, under Jackson
  Robert Fulton
  Fulton's First Experiment with Paddle-Wheels
  The "Clermont" in Duplicate at the Hudson-Fulton Celebration, 1909
  The Opening of the Erie Canal in 1825
  The Ceremony Called "The Marriage of the Waters"
  Erie Canal on the Right and Aqueduct over the Mohawk River, New York
  "Tom Thumb," Peter Cooper's Locomotive Working Model, First Used
          near Baltimore in 1830
  Railroad Poster of 1843
  Comparison of "DeWitt Clinton" Locomotive and Train, the First Train
          Operated in New York, with a Modern Locomotive of the New
          York Central R.R.
  S.F.B. Morse
  The First Telegraph Instrument
  Modern Telegraph Office
  The Operation of the Modern Railroad is Dependent upon the Telegraph
  Sam Houston
  Flag of the Republic of Texas
  David Crockett
  The Fight at the Alamo
  John C. Fremont
  Fremont's Expedition Crossing the Rocky Mountains
  Kit Carson
  Sutter's Mill
  Placer-Mining in the Days of the California Gold Rush
  John C. Calhoun
  Calhoun's Office and Library
  Henry Clay
  The Birthplace of Henry Clay, near Richmond
  The Schoolhouse in "the Slashes"
  Daniel Webster
  The Home of Daniel Webster, Marshfield, Mass.
  Henry Clay Addressing the United States Senate in 1850
  Abraham Lincoln
  Lincoln's Birthplace
  Lincoln Studying by Firelight
  Lincoln Splitting Rails
  Lincoln as a Boatman
  Lincoln Visiting Wounded Soldiers
  Robert E. Lee
  Lee's Home at Arlington, Virginia
  Jefferson Davis
  Thomas J. Jackson
  A Confederate Flag
  J.E.B. Stuart
  Confederate Soldiers
  Union Soldiers
  Ulysses S. Grant
  Grant's Birthplace, Point Pleasant, Ohio
  General and Mrs. Grant with Their Son at City Point, Virginia
  William Tecumseh Sherman
  Sherman's March to the Sea
  Philip H. Sheridan
  Sheridan Rallying His Troops
  The McLean House Where Lee Surrendered
  General Lee on His Horse, Traveller
  Cotton-Field in Blossom
  A Wheat-Field
  Grain-Elevators at Buffalo
  Cattle on the Western Plains
  Iron Smelters
  Iron Ore Ready for Shipment




MAPS


  Boston and Vicinity
  The War in the Middle States
  The War in the South
  Early Settlements in Kentucky and Tennessee
  George Rogers Clark in the Northwest
  The United States in 1803, after the Louisiana Purchase (Colored)
  Jackson's Campaign
  Scene of Houston's Campaign
  Fremont's Western Explorations
  Map of the United States Showing First and Second Secession
    Areas (Colored)
  Route of Sherman's March to the Sea
  The Country Around Washington and Richmond




STORIES OF LATER AMERICAN HISTORY




CHAPTER I

PATRICK HENRY


The Last French War had cost England so much that at its close she was
heavily in debt.

"As England must now send to America a standing army of at least ten
thousand men to protect the colonies against the Indians and other
enemies," the King, George III, reasoned, "it is only fair that the
colonists should pay a part of the cost of supporting it."

The English Parliament, being largely made up of the King's friends, was
quite ready to carry out his wishes, and passed a law taxing the
colonists. This law was called the Stamp Act. It provided that
stamps--very much like our postage-stamps, but costing all the way from
one cent to fifty dollars each--should be put upon all the newspapers and
almanacs used by the colonies, and upon all such legal papers as wills,
deeds, and the notes which men give promising to pay back borrowed money.
