hour in which Joris left Hyde Manor, Peter Van Ariens received a letter
that made him very anxious. He left his office and went to see his son.
"Rem," he said, "there is now an opportunity for thee. Here has come a
letter from Boston, and some one must go there; and that too in a great
hurry. The house of Blume and Otis is likely to fail, and in it we have
some great interests. A lawyer we must have to look after them; go
thyself, and it shall be well for both of us."

"I am ready to go--that is, I can be ready in one or two days."

"There are not one or two days to spare. Gerard will take care of thy
work here. To-day is the best time of all."

"I cannot go with a happy mind to-day. I will tell you, father. I think
now my case with Cornelia will bear putting to the question. As you
know, it has been step with step between Joris Hyde and myself in that
affair, and if I go away now without securing the ground I have gained,
what can hinder Hyde from taking advantage over me? He too must go
soon, but he will try and secure his position before he leaves. To do
the same thing is my only way. I wish, then, the time to give myself
this security."

"That is fair. A man is not a man till he has won a wife. Cornelia
Moran is much to my mind. Tell her my home is thine, and she will be a
mistress dearly loved and honoured. And if a thing is to be done, there
is no time like the hour that has not struck. Go and see her now. She
was in the garden gathering asters when I left home this morning."

"I will write to her. I will tell her what is in my heart--though she
knows it well--and ask her for her love and her hand. If she is kind to
my offer she will tell me to come and see her to-night, then I can go
to Boston with a free heart and look after your money and your
business."

"If things be this way, thou art reasonable. A good wife must not be
lost for the peril of some gold sovereigns. At once write to the maid;
such letters are best done at the first thought, some prudences or some
fears may come with the second thoughts."

"I have no fear but Joris Hyde. That Englishman I hate. His calm
confidence, his smiling insolent air is intolerable."

"It is the English way. But Cornelia is American--as thou art."

"She thinks much of that, but yet--"

"Be not afraid. The brave either find, or make, a way to success. What
is in a girl's heart no man can tell, if she be cold and shy that
should not cause thee to doubt. When water is ice, who would suspect
what great heat is stored away in it? Write thy letter at once. Put thy
heart into thy pen. Not always prudent is this way, but once in a man's
life it is wisdom."

"My pen is too small for my heart."

"My opinion is that thou hast wavered too long. It is a great
foolishness to let the cherry knock against the lips too often or too
long. A pretty pastime, perhaps, to will, and not will, to dare, and
not dare; but at last the knock comes that drops the cherry--it may be
into some other mouth."

"I fear no one but that rascal, Joris Hyde."

"A rascal he is not, because the same woman he loves as thyself. Such
words weaken any cause. No wrong have I seen or known of Lieutenant
Hyde."

"I will call him a rascal, and I will give him no other title, though
his father leave him an earl."

"Now, then, I shall go. I like not ill words. Write thy letter, but put
out of thy mind all bad thoughts first. A love letter from a bitter
heart is not lucky. And of all thy wit thou wilt have great need if to
a woman thou write."

"Oh, they are intolerable, aching joys! A man who dares to love a
woman, or dares to believe in her, dares to be mad."

"Come, come! No evil must thou speak of good women, I swear that I was
never out of it yet, when I judged men as they judged women. The art of
loving a woman is the art of trusting her--yes, though the heavens
fall. Now, then, haste with thy letter. Thou may have 'Yes' to it ere
thou sleep to-night."

"And I may have 'No.'"

"To be sure, if thou think 'no.' But, even so, if thou lose the wedding
ring, the hand is still left; another ring may be found."

"'No,' would be a deathblow to me."

"It will not. While a man has meat and drink love will not starve him;
with world's business and world's pleasure an unkind love he makes
shift to forget. Bring to me word of thy good fortune this night, and
in the morning there is the Boston business. Longer it can hardly wait."

But the letter to Cornelia which Hyde found to slip off his pen like
dancing was a much more difficult matter to Rem. He wrote and
destroyed, and wrote again and destroyed, and this so often that he
finally resolved to go to Maiden Lane for his inspiration. "I may see
Cornelia in the garden, or at the window, and when I see what I desire,
surely I shall have the wit to ask for it."

So he thought, and with the thought he locked his desk and went towards
his home in Maiden Lane. He met George Hyde sauntering up the street
looking unhappy and restless, and he suspected at once that he had been
walking past Doctor Moran's house in the hope of seeing Cornelia and
had been disappointed. The thought delighted him. He was willing to
bear disappointment himself, if by doing so some of Hyde's smiling
confidence was changed to that unhappy uneasiness which he detected in
his rival's face and manner. The young men bowed to each other but did
not speak. In some occult way they divined a more positive antagonism
than they had ever before been conscious of.

"I cannot go out of the house," thought Rem, "without meeting that fop.
He is in at one door, and out at another; this way, that way, up
street, and down street--the devil take the fellow!"

"What a mere sullen creature that Rem Van Ariens is!" thought Hyde,
"and with all the good temper in the world I affirm it. I wonder what
he is on the street for at this hour! Shall I watch him? No, that would
be vile work. I will let him alone; he may as well play the ill-natured
fool on the street as in the house--better, indeed, for some one may
have a title to tell him so. But I may assure myself of one thing, when
I met him he was building castles in the future, for he was looking
straight before him; and if he had been thinking of the past, he would
have been looking down. I should not wonder if it was Cornelia that
filled his dreams. Faith, we have blockheads of all ages; but on that
road he will never overtake his thought"--then with a movement of
impatience he added,

"Why should I let him into my mind?--for he is the least welcome of all
intruders.--Good gracious! how long the minutes are! It is plain to me
that Cornelia is not at home, and my letter may not even have touched
her hands yet. How shall I endure another hour?--perhaps many hours.
Where can she have gone? Not unlikely to Madame Jacobus. Why did I not
think of this before? For who can help me to bear suspense better than
madame? I will go to her at once."

He hastened his steps and soon arrived at the well-known residence of
his friend. He was amazed as soon as the door was opened to find
preparations of the most evident kind for some change. The corded trunk
in the hall, the displaced furniture, all things he saw were full of
the sad hurry of parting. "What is the matter?" he asked in a voice of
fear.

"I am going away for a time, Joris, my good friend," answered madame,
coming out of a shrouded and darkened parlour as she spoke. She had on
her cloak and bonnet, and before Joris could ask her another question a
coach drove to the door. "I think it is a piece of good fortune," she
continued, "to see you before I go."

"But where are you going?"

"To Charleston."

"But why?"

"I am going because my sister Sabrina is sick--dying; and there is no
one so near to her as I am."

"I knew not you had a sister."

"She is the sister of my husband. So, then, she is twice my sister.
When Jacobus comes home he will thank me for going to his dear Sabrina.
But what brings you here so early? Yesterday I asked for you, and I was
told that you were waiting on your good mother."

"My mother felt sure there was a letter from father, and I came at once
to get it for her."

"Was there one?"

"There was none."

"It will come in good time. Now, I must go. I have not one moment to
lose. Good-bye, dear Joris!"

"For how long, my friend?"

"I know not. Sabrina is incurably ill. I shall stay with her till she
departs." She said these words as they went down the steps together,
and with eyes full of tears he placed her carefully in the coach and
then turned sorrowfully to his own rooms. He could not speak of his own
affairs at such a moment, and he realized that there was nothing for
him to do but wait as patiently as possible for Cornelia's answer.

In the meantime Rem was writing his proposal. He was not assisted in
the effort by any sight of his mistress. It was evident Cornelia was
not in her home, and he looked in vain for any shadow of the sweet face
that he was certain would have made his words come easily. Finally,
after many trials, he desisted with the following, though it was the
least affective of any form he had written:

To MISS MORAN,

Honoured and Beloved Friend:

Twenty times this day I have tried to write a letter worthy to come
into your hands and worthy to tell you how beyond all words I love you,
But what can I say more than that I love you? This you know. It has
been no secret to you since ever you were a little girl. Many years I
have sought your love,--pardon me if now I ask you to tell me I have
not sought in vain. To-morrow I must leave New York, and I may be away
for some time. Pray, then, give me some hope to-night to take with me.
Say but one word to make me the proudest and happiest lover in the
world. Give me the permission to come and show to your father that I am
able to maintain you in every comfort that is your right; and all my
life long I will prove to you the devotion that attests my undying
affection and gratitude. I am sick with longing for the promise of your
love. May I presume to hope so great a blessing? O dearest Cornelia, I
am, as you know well, your humble servant,             REMBRANDT VAN
ARIENS.

When he had finished this letter, he folded and sealed it, and walked
to the window with it in his hand. Then he saw Cornelia returning home
from some shopping or social errand, and hastily calling a servant,
ordered him to deliver the letter at once to Miss Moran. And as
Cornelia lingered a little among the aster beds, the man put it into
her own hands. She bowed and smiled as she accepted it, but Rem,
watching with his heart in his eyes, could see that it awakened no
special interest. She kept it unopened as she wandered among the purple
and pink, and gold and white flowers, until Mrs. Moran came to the door
to hurry her movements; then she followed her mother hastily into the
house, "Do you know how late it is, Cornelia? Dinner is nearly ready.
There is a letter on your dressing table that came by Lieutenant Hyde's
servant two or three hours ago."

"And Tobias has just brought me a letter from Rem--at least the
direction is in Rem's handwriting."

"Some farewell dance I suppose, before our dancers go to gay
Philadelphia."

"I dare say it is." She made the supposition as she went up the stairs,
and did not for a moment anticipate any more important information. As
she entered her room an imposing looking letter met her eyes--a letter
written upon the finest paper, squarely folded, and closed with a large
seal of scarlet wax carrying the Hyde arms. Poor Rem's message lost
instantly whatever interest it possessed; she let it fall from her
hand, and lifting Hyde's, opened it with that marvellous womanly
impetuosity which love teaches. Then all the sweet intimate ardour and
passionate disquietude of her lover took possession of her. In a moment
she felt all that he felt; all the ecstasy and tumult of a great
affection not sure. For this letter was the "little more" in Hyde's
love, and, oh, how much it was!

She pondered it until she was called to dinner. There was then no time
to read Rem's letter, but she broke the seal and glanced at its tenor,
and an expression of pity and annoyance came into her eyes. Hastily she
locked both letters away in a drawer of her desk, and as she did so,
smilingly said to herself, "I wonder if papers are sensitive! Shut
close together in one little drawer will they like it? I hope they will
lie peaceably and not quarrel."

Doctor Moran was not at home, nor was he expected until sundown, so
mother and daughter enjoyed together the confidence which Hyde's letter
induced. Mrs. Moran thought the young man was right, and promised, to a
certain extent, to favour his proposal. "However, Cornelia," she added,
"unless your father is perfectly agreeable and satisfied, I would not
advise you to make any engagement. Clandestine engagements come to
grief in some way or other, and if your marriage with Joris Hyde is
prearranged by THOSE who know what is best for your good, then, my
dear, it is as sure to take place as the sun is sure to rise to-morrow.
It is only waiting for the appointed hour, and you may as well wait in
a happy home as in one you make wretched by the fret and complaining
which a secret in any life is certain to produce."

Now, it is not often that a girl has to answer in one hour two such
epistles as those received by Cornelia. Yet perhaps such an event
occurs more frequently than is suspected, for Love--like other
things--has its critical moment; and when that moment arrives it finds
a voice as surely as the flower ready to bloom opens its petals. And if
there be two lovers equally sincere, both are likely to feel at the
same moment the same impetus to revelation. Besides which, Fate of any
kind seeks the unusual and the unexpected; it desires to startle, and
to force events by surprises.

The answering of these letters was naturally Cornelia's first afternoon
thought. It troubled her to remember that Joris had already been
waiting some hours for a reply, for she had no hesitation as to what
that reply should be. To write to Joris was a delightful thing, an
unusual pleasure, and she sat down, smiling, to pen the lines which she
thought would bring her much happiness, but which were doomed to bring
her a great sorrow.

MY JORIS! My dear Friend:

'Tis scarce an hour since I received your letter, but I have read it
over four times. And whatever you desire, that also is my desire; and I
am deceived as much as you, if you think I do not love you as much as I
am loved by you. You know my heart, and from you I shall never hide it;
and I think if I were asleep, I should tell you how much I love you;
for, indeed, I often dream that I do so. Come, then, this very night as
soon as you think convenient. If my father is in a suitable temper it
will be well to speak plainly to him, and I am sure that my mother will
say in our favour all that is wise.

Our love, with no recognition but our own, has been so strangely sweet
that I could be content never to alter that condition; and yet I fear
no bond, and am ready to put it all to the trial. For if our love is
not such as will uphold an engagement, it will sink of itself; and if
it is true as we believe it to be, then it may last eternally. What
more is to say I will keep for your ear, for you are enough in my heart
to know all my thoughts, and to know better than I can tell you how
dearly, how constantly, how entirely I love you.

Yours forever, CORNELIA.
