The Project Gutenberg EBook of Heart, by Henry Slesar

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Heart

Author: Henry Slesar

Release Date: January 7, 2010 [EBook #30885]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEART ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Amazing Stories January 1957. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


                                HEART


                           By HENRY SLESAR


     _Monk had three questions he lived by: Where can I find it?
      How much will it cost? When can you deliver? But now they
      said that what he needed wasn't for sale. "Want to bet?" He
      snorted._

       *       *       *       *       *




_Systole_ ... _diastole_ ... the Cardiophone listened, hummed, and
recorded; tracing a path of perilous peaks and precipices on the white
paper.

"Relax!" Dr. Rostov pleaded. "Please relax, Mr. Monk!"

The eyes of Fletcher Monk replied. Rostov knew their language well
enough to read the glaring messages they transmitted. Indignation ...
"_Don't use that commanding tone with me, Doctor!_" Protest ... "_I am
relaxed; completely relaxed!_" Warning.... "_Get me out of this
electric chair, Rostov!_"

The physician sighed and clicked the apparatus off. Swiftly, but with
knowing fingers, he disengaged his patient from the wire and rubber
encumbrances of the reclining seat. Fletcher Monk sat up and rubbed
his forearms, watching every movement the doctor made as he prepared
to study the results of his examination.

"You're fussing, Rostov," he said coldly. "My shirt."

"In a moment."

"_Now,_" said Monk impatiently.

The physician shook his head sadly. He handed Monk his shirt and
waited until the big man had buttoned it half way down. Then he
returned to the Cardiophone for a more critical study. A fine analysis
was hardly necessary; the alarming story had been told with the first
measurements of the heart machine.

[Illustration: Money buys anything, I tell you--anything!]

"Cut it out," said Monk brusquely. "You've got that death's-head
look again, Rostov. If you want to say something, say it."

"You were tight as a drum," said the doctor. "That's going to
influence my findings, you know. If you hadn't refused the narcotic--"

Fletcher Monk barked: "I won't be drugged!"

"It would have relaxed you--"

"I was as relaxed as I ever am," the other man said candidly, and
Rostov recognized the truth of his analysis. Monk lived in a world of
taut muscles and nerves stretched out just below the breaking point.
Tenseness was his trademark; there was no more elasticity in Monk's
body than there was in the hard cash he accumulated so readily.

"Well?" the patient jeered. "What's the verdict, you damned sawbones?
Going to throw away my cigars? Going to send me on a long sea voyage?"

Rostov frowned.

"Don't look so smug!" Monk exploded. "I know you think there's
something wrong with me. You can't wait to bury me!"

"You're sick, Mr. Monk," said the doctor. "You're very sick."

Monk glowered. "You're wrong," he said icily. "You've made a lousy
diagnosis."

"What was that feeling you described?" asked Rostov. "Remember what
