force.

"It was done by the bear," said Nick, "and he hit Bowser a hard blow; I
shouldn't wonder if it kills him."

Sam stooped over the dog and tried to soothe him by patting and speaking
kind words.

"He is badly hurt, but I hope he isn't going to die. Poor fellow! we
have been unjust to him; he's a good deal braver dog than we gave him
credit for."

They were still patting and soothing the wounded hound, when the report
of Herbert's rifle was heard again. Sam and Nick started up and stared
in the direction whence the sound came.

"He has got the bear--"

Just then the voice of Herbert was heard ringing through the forest
arches:

"Quick! quick! help! help! the bear has got me! Hurry up, boys, or I'm a
goner!"

The lads dashed forward, excited and fearful they would be too late.

The voice of the imperiled hunter rang out again.

"Quick! quick! the bear has got me sure! Hurry boys, hurry, for pity's
sake!"

The next instant Sam and Nick came upon an extraordinary scene.




CHAPTER XXX.

A FRIEND IN NEED.


Herbert Watrous had been set upon by a huge bear, and, throwing aside
his Creedmoor, had run with might and main for a large stump, behind
which he took refuge. Had he climbed a sapling, he would have been safe,
but he was too flustered to think of that.

Dodging behind this shelter he squatted down, hoping that his enemy did
not notice where he had gone; but, when he heard the brute lumbering
after him, he hastily shifted his quarters to the other side of the
stump. While doing so, he emitted the ringing cries for help which
brought his friends in such haste to his rescue.

The situation would have been laughable but for its element of peril.
Darting to the side of the stump opposite to that of the bear, Herbert
would drop his head, and then instantly pop up again, like a
jack-in-the-box, to see what the brute was doing. The latter, it may be
said, kept things moving.

When Herbert lowered his head and yelled, his voice had a muffled sound,
as though it came from a distance, but when he shot up in sight, his
cries were clear and distinct.

The beast, although heavy and awkward of movement, managed to move
around the stump and to reverse his course with such facility that there
can be little doubt that he would have caught the lad, had not his
friends been so prompt to rush to his help.

Sam and Nick felt no disposition to laugh; indeed, they were so
impressed by the danger that, without exercising the care they would
have done any other time, and which they meant to show when talking of
the matter a few minutes before, they raised their guns together and
fired.

Although the aim was not as deliberate as it should have been, yet both
bullets struck the bear, though neither inflicted a mortal wound.

The brute stopped short in his circular pursuit, looked confusedly
about him for a second or two, and then made straight for the lads who
had fired upon him, just as the buck did in the case of Nick Ribsam.

"Scatter and climb a tree!" called out Nick, who saw they had no chance
to reload.

Now was the time for Herbert to recover, and reload his gun and to take
another shot at the brute, so as to draw him off from his hot pursuit of
the others; but the panic-stricken youth could not realize that the
danger was removed, and that his terrible foe was bestowing his
attention elsewhere. He continued calling for help in a louder voice
than before, believing that every minute would be his last.

Sam Harper whirled about to make for a sapling, but caught his foot in
an obstruction and fell violently to the ground. Nick was so alarmed
that he stopped to help him up.

"I'm all right," said Sam, "look out for yourself!"

But Nick could not desert him, until assured he was not mangled by the
fall, and by that time the bear was too close for them to escape by
climbing a tree.

It looked as if it would go ill with one at least (for no gun in the
party was loaded, and the brute was almost upon them), when most
providentially, but unexpectedly, the report of another rifle broke upon
their ear, and the bullet reached the heart of the monstrous beast, who
reared himself on his haunches and used his paws as though trying to
draw out the splinters which he imagined were thrust into his body.

Then he swerved to one side, sagged heavily to the ground, and then it
was plain that all was over.

"Are any of you hurt?"

It was the voice of the plucky Mrs. Fowler, who hurried forward with
anxious face, the smoking rifle in her hands.

Herbert was still peering from behind the stump and shouting himself
hoarse, with no thought of what had taken place within the last few
minutes. By and by, however, after he had been called to, he
comprehended the facts and came forth, when a general explanation
followed.

Although Herbert would not admit it, there was no doubt that of the two
shots which he fired at the bear only one touched him, and that only to
a sufficient extent to graze his body and to draw his attention to the
young hunter.

Herbert then dropped his gun and made for the stump, which was not a
secure refuge.

This took place so near the cabin-home of Mrs. Fowler that she heard the
cries for help, and, taking down her rifle, hurried to the spot,
arriving just in time to save the other lads from serious danger, if not
from death.

The boys overwhelmed the brave woman with thanks, and though she
modestly disclaimed her right to the bear--expressing her belief that
the two shots they had fired were fatal--they would not listen to it,
but they turned to, skinned the animal, and presented the hide to her,
regretting that they had not several others, that her husband might
collect twenty dollars apiece from Mr. Bailey, his employer.

"This isn't the only bear in the woods," said she, thanking them for
their kindness; "and some of you will see another before long. But this
will do for to-day."

They thought so, too; and, swinging their hats in the air, bade her
good-by and started homeward.

Sam Harper proposed that they should go out of their path to examine the
carcass of the deer, so as to learn whether the shot of Herbert took
effect; but that young gentleman was frank enough to admit, after his
experience, that it was impossible he had come anywhere near hitting the
buck. Accordingly, they continued homeward, Herbert going back to the
city a few days afterward to find out, if he could, why his gun so often
failed to hit the object he aimed at.




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE "DARK DAY" OF SEPTEMBER, 1881.


The summer during which Nicholas Ribsam attained the age of twelve years
was viewed with dismal forebodings by many people, for the reason that a
celebrated weather prophet had foretold that it would be unusually
rainy, cold, and wet.

As a consequence, it proved to be the driest known in years. Days,
weeks, and even months passed without a drop of rain falling from the
brassy sky, and the fine powdery dust permeated everywhere. The weather
prophet lost caste, but he persisted in announcing rain, knowing that he
had only to stick to it long enough to hit it in the course of time.

As the autumn approached and the drought continued over a vast extent of
territory, the forest fires raged in different parts of the country. All
day and night immense volumes of smoke and vapor hung over the land, and
the appearance of the sun was so peculiar as to cause alarm on the part
of those who were superstitious.

There came a "dark day," like that of the 19th of May, 1780, which
overspread New England, and was most marked in Massachusetts. The
Connecticut Legislature was in session, and the belief was so universal
that the last awful day had come that the motion was made to adjourn.
Then, as the graphic Quaker poet says:

    All eyes were turned to Abraham Davenport.
    He rose, slow cleaving with his steady voice
    The intolerable hush. "This well may be
    The Day of Judgment which the world awaits;
    But be it so or not, I only know
    My present duty, and my Lord's command
    To occupy till He come. So at the post
    Where He has set me in His providence,
    I choose, for one, to meet Him face to face--
    No faithless servant frightened from my task,
    But ready when the Lord of the harvest calls;
    And, therefore, with all reverence, I would say,
    Let God do His work, we will see to ours.
    Bring in the candles." And they brought them in.

Tuesday, September 7, 1881, was a day very similar to the memorable one
of a century ago. A strange, greenish-yellow pall overspread the
heavens, and so darkened the light of the sun that lamps and gas were
lighted, schools and factories closed, and multitudes of the ignorant
and superstitious believed that the Day of Judgment had come.

Everything looked changed and unnatural. The faces of people on the
streets were ghastly, the gas jets in the stores, instead of showing
yellow, were as white and clear as the electric lights, and thousands of
the sect known as Second Adventists gathered in their places of worship
and confidently awaited the appearing of the Lord.

The "dark day" was more wonderful in the country. The leaves and
withering foliage assumed a most singular tint of green, changing, like
that of the grass, to a brownish hue; fowls went to roost, and the
animal creation must have been greatly mystified by a phenomenon such as
they had never witnessed before.

A curious feature of this luminous haze was that it cast no shadow. It
was as light under the trees as away from them, the whole unnatural
appearance of things most likely being due to the immense forest fires
which were raging in many parts of the country.

It was during the summer, I repeat, in which Nick Ribsam reached the age
of twelve years, that so many forest fires raged, and it was in the
autumn of the same year that he saw the famous dark day, so similar to
that of September, 1881; in fact, it could not have resembled it more
closely, for I may as well state it was that very day to which I refer.

"Nick," said his father, on that September morning, addressing his boy
in Dutch, "I promised to pay James Bradley one hundred dollars to-day
before three o'clock."

"Yes, sir," responded the boy, who knew that the debt would be paid on
time.

"He was to come here to our house to get it, but he sent me word last
night that he would be much obliged if I would send it to him at
Martin's store in Dunbarton, as he is obliged to be there all day. I
like to accommodate any one, and I will therefore send you to take it to
him."

"Yes, sir; I am ready to go whenever you want me to do so."

Dunbarton, as has been stated, was a village nine miles away, and the
principal grocery store in the place was kept by Jacob Martin. It was
there that Nick was to take the one hundred dollars which was to be
handed to James Bradley, to whom his father owed it.

It was like a holiday for Nick to take such a drive, and he was glad
when his father made known his wishes.

"Harness up the mare to the fall-top and drive over; you ought to be
back early in the afternoon."

"I will, if nothing happens to prevent."

Just then rosy-faced Nellie came out to feed the chickens. As the fowls
flocked toward her, some perching on her shoulders, head, and wherever
they could find a resting-place, she scattered the golden grains of corn
with a deft and lavish hand.

Her father looked at the cheeks as red as apples and the eyes glowing
with health, and, dropping into English, said with a sigh and shake of
the head:

"I dinks dot Nellie looks some bale."

He meant to say pale, and Nick laughed.

"I don't think she is very sick; she ate more breakfast than I did this
morning."

"Dot ish so, but I dinks dot I leafes her go mit you to Dunbarton, if
she can shpare her moder."

Mr. Ribsam meant all right, and when his wishes were made known to
Nellie she was delighted; her mother was glad to give her the privilege
of an excursion, for she was an industrious little girl, and,
furthermore, there were some purchases to be made both for the mother
and daughter, which Nellie could attend to better than could any boy, no
matter how intelligent.

The famous "dark day" of 1881 prevailed principally in New England and
the State of New York; but it was noticed further south, especially in
some of the wooded portions of Pennsylvania, though in the larger part
of the commonwealth it attracted no great attention.

It was between seven and eight o'clock when the four-wheeled carriage
with the single seat, and which vehicle is known as a "fall top" in
some sections of the country, was driven from the humble home of the
Ribsams, with the brother and sister seated in it.

As they approached the scene of Nellie's adventure with the bear, they
naturally talked about it, while Nick again related his own thrilling
experience, when the animal was shot by Mrs. Fowler, just in the nick of
time.

Shark Creek had suffered so much from the long continued drought that it
was no more than one fourth its usual volume; but the pond below was not
much diminished in size, as it did not flow off except when at a certain
height.

The brother and sister did not speak of the peculiar appearance of the
atmosphere until nearly to the bridge. There had been a great deal of
smoke floating over the country for several days, but there was nothing
to cause any fear on the part of those who lived near the large
stretches of timber.

As the darkness increased, however, Nick said:

"It must be caused by the thick smoke; but I don't think it will last,
and when we reach Dunbarton that will be the end of it."

"It won't make any difference," said Nellie, "unless it gets so dark we
can't see the way."

"No fear of that."

But when at last they emerged from the woods, and shortly after entered
the village, the impressive gloom was deeper than ever. The villagers
were awed by the unnatural appearance of nature, and were standing in
groups looking at the sky and talking in undertones.

Many were frightened, and not a few hurried to their homes, terrified
with the belief that the last awful day, when the heavens shall be
burned up as a scroll and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, was
at hand.

Ah, had it been the final Judgment Day, how many of us would have had
our houses in order for the coming of the angel of the Lord?

Nick Ribsam sprang out of the carriage, helped Nellie to alight, and
went into the store of Mr. Martin, where James Bradley was found
awaiting him. The money was handed over, a receipt taken, the horse
fed, during which Nellie attended to the errand on which she was sent,
and, an hour later, the mare was given water, and brother and sister
started homeward, little dreaming of what awaited them.




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE BURNING FOREST.


"It is growing darker all the time."

"So it seems; I never saw anything like it."

"Maybe it is really night, Nick, and we have lost our reckoning. Isn't
there any way by which the world might swing out of its--what do you
call it?"

"Orbit, I suppose, you mean; there may be such a way, but from what I
have studied, when it does do that there will be more of a disturbance
than simple darkness like this."

These words were exchanged between brother and sister after they had
penetrated the woods a considerable distance on their return home. It
had become like night around them, except that, as has been shown, the
gloom was of that peculiar lurid nature which can hardly be described,
and can never be forgotten by those who saw it.

Even Nick Ribsam was impressed. It could not have been otherwise, for
any one would have been lacking in natural sensibility had he failed to
be awed by the singular sight. It can scarcely be said that the lad was
frightened, although there came over him a yearning feeling that he
might hurry home so the family could all be together, if the awful
calamity--whatever it might be--should descend.

It was different with the sister Nellie; her nature was more
impressible, and it was only by a strong effort that she kept her
self-control so long. As she peeped furtively out from the carriage, she
looked at the woods, penetrated by the strange haze, which perhaps took
on a more striking appearance in an autumnal forest like that, than
anywhere else.

"Nick, I believe it's the Last Day that has come."

The lad turned toward his sister, who was sitting far back in her seat,
