scurfy-pubescent.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds 1/8-1/4 inch long, bluntish to pointed,
conspicuously clustered at ends of branches. Leaves simple, alternate,
of two forms so distinct as to suggest different species, _a_ (Plate
XLV, 8) varying towards _b_ (Plate XLV, 6), and _b_ often scarcely
distinguishable from the leaf of the scarlet oak; in both forms outline
obovate to oval, lobes usually 7, densely woolly when opening, more or
less pubescent or scurfy till midsummer or later, dark shining green
above, lighter beneath, becoming brown or dull red in autumn.

Form _a_, sinuses shallow, lobes broad, rounded, mucronate.

Form _b_, sinuses deep, extending halfway to the midrib or farther,
oblong or triangular, bristle-tipped.

=Inflorescence.=--Early in May. Appearing when the leaves are half
grown; sterile catkins 2-5 inches long, with slender, pubescent threads;
calyx usually 3-4-lobed; lobes ovate, acute to rounded, hairy-pubescent;
stamens 3-7, commonly 4-5; anthers yellow: pistillate flowers reddish,
pubescent, at first nearly sessile; stigmas 3, red, divergent,
reflexed.

=Fruit.=--Maturing the second year; nearly sessile or on short
footstalks: cup top-shaped to hemispherical; scales less firm than in
_Q. coccinea_, tips papery and transversely rugulose, obtuse or rounded,
or some of them acutish, often lacerate-edged, loose towards the thick
and open edge of the cup: acorn small: kernel yellow within and bitter.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in
well-drained soils, but prefers a rich, moist loam; of vigorous and
rapid growth when young, but as it soon begins to show dead branches and
becomes unsightly, it is not a desirable tree to plant, and is rarely
offered by nurserymen. Propagated from seed.

=Note.=--Apparently runs into _Q. coccinea_, from which it may be
distinguished by its rougher and darker trunk, the yellow color and
bitter taste of the inner bark, its somewhat larger and more pointed
buds, the greater pubescence of its inflorescence, young shoots and
leaves, the longer continuance of scurf or pubescence upon the leaves,
the yellow or dull red shades of the autumn foliage, and by the yellow
color and bitter taste of the nut.

[Illustration: PLATE XLV.--Quercus velutina.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower, 4-lobed calyx.
  4. Sterile flower, 3-lobed calyx.
  5. Fertile flower.
  6. Fruiting branch.
  7. Fruit.
  8. Variant leaf.


=Quercus palustris, Du Roi.=

PIN OAK. SWAMP OAK. WATER OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=--Low grounds, borders of forests, wet woods, river
banks, islets in swamps.

     Ontario.

Northern New England,--no station reported; Massachusetts,--Amherst
(Stone, _Bull. Torrey Club_, IX, 57; J. E. Humphrey, _Amherst Trees_);
Springfield, south to Connecticut, rare; Rhode Island,--southern
portions, bordering the great Kingston swamp, and on the margin of the
Pawcatuck river (L. W. Russell); Connecticut,--common along the sound,
frequent northward, extending along the valley of the Connecticut river
to the Massachusetts line.

     South to the valley of the lower Potomac in Virginia; west to
     Minnesota, east Kansas, Missouri, Arkansas, and Indian territory.

=Habit.=--A medium-sized tree, 40-50 feet high, with trunk diameter of
1-2 feet, occasionally reaching a height of 60-70 feet (L. W. Russell),
but attaining its maximum of 100 feet in height and upward in the basins
of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers; trunk rather slender, often fringed
with short, drooping branchlets, lower tier of branches short and mostly
descending, the upper long, slender, and often beset with short, lateral
shoots, which give rise to the common name; head graceful, open, rounded
and symmetrical when young, in old age becoming more or less irregular;
foliage delicate; bright shining green in autumn, often turning to a
brilliant scarlet.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk dark, furrowed and broken in old trees, in young
trees grayish-brown, smoothish; branchlets shining, light brown.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds short, conical, acute. Leaves simple,
alternate, 3-5 inches long, bright green, smooth and shining above,
duller beneath, with tufted hairs in the angles of the veins; outline
broadly obovate to ovate; lobes divergent, triangular, toothed or
entire, bristle-pointed; sinuses broad, rounded; leafstalk slender;
stipules linear, soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--May. Appearing when the leaves are half grown; sterile
catkins 2-4 inches long; segments of calyx mostly 4 or 5, obtuse or
rounded, somewhat lacerate; stamens mostly 4 or 5, anthers yellow,
glabrous: pistillate flowers with broadly ovate scales; stigmas stout,
red, reflexed.

=Fruit.=--Abundant, maturing the second season, short-stemmed: cup
saucer-shaped, with firm, appressed scales, shallow: acorns ovoid to
globose, about 1/2 inch long, often striate, breadth sometimes equal to
entire length of fruit.

=Horticultural Value.=--Probably hardy throughout New England; grows in
wet soils, but prefers a rich, moist loam; of rapid and uniform
growth, readily and safely transplanted, and but little disfigured by
insects; obtainable in leading nurseries. Propagated from the seed.

[Illustration: PLATE XLVI.--Quercus palustris.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower, side view.
  4. Fertile flower, side view.
  5. Fruiting branch.


=Quercus ilicifolia, Wang.=

_Quercus nana, Sarg. Quercus pumila, Sudw._

SCRUB OAK. BEAR OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=--In poor soils; sandy plains, gravelly or rocky
hills.

Maine,--frequent in eastern and southern sections and upon Mount Desert
island; New Hampshire,--as far north as Conway, more common near the
lower Connecticut; Vermont,--in the eastern and southern sections as far
north as Bellows Falls; Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and
Connecticut,--too abundant, forming in favorable situations dense
thickets, sometimes covering several acres.

     South to Ohio and the mountain regions of North Carolina and
     Kentucky; west to the Alleghany mountains.

=Habit.=--Shrub or small tree, usually 3-8 feet high, but frequently
reaching a height of 15-25 feet; trunk short, sometimes in peaty swamps
10-13 inches in diameter near the ground, branches much contorted,
throwing out numerous branchlets of similar habit, forming a stiff,
flattish head; beautiful for a brief week in spring by the delicate
greens and reds of the opening leaves and reds and yellows of the
numerous catkins. Sometimes associated with _Q. prinoides_.

=Bark.=--Old trunks dark gray, with small, closely appressed scales;
small trunks and branches grayish-brown, not furrowed or scaly; younger
branches marked with pale yellow, raised dots; season's shoots
yellowish-green, with a tawny, scurfy pubescence.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds 1/8-1/4 inch long, ovoid or conical,
covered with imbricated, brownish, minutely ciliate scales. Leaves
simple, alternate, 3-4 inches long and 2-3 inches broad; when unfolding
reddish above and woolly on both sides, when mature yellowish-green and
somewhat glossy above, smooth except on the midrib, rusty-white, and
pubescent beneath; very variable in outline and in the number (3-7) and
shape of lobes, sometimes entire, oftenest obovate with 5 bristle-tipped
angular lobes, the two lower much smaller; base unequal, wedge-shaped,
tip obtuse or rounded; leafstalk short; stipules linear, soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--Early in May. Appearing when the leaves are half
grown; sterile catkins 2-4 inches long; calyx pubescent, lobes oftenest
2-3, rounded; stamens 3-5; anthers red or yellow: pistillate flowers
numerous; calyx lobes ovate, pointed, reddish, pubescent; stigmas 3,
reddish, recurved, spreading.

=Fruit.=--Abundant, maturing in the autumn of the second year, clustered
along the branchlets on stout, short stems: cup top-shaped or
hemispherical: acorn about 1/2 inch long, varying greatly in shape,
mostly ovoid or spherical, brown, often striped lengthwise.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in New England; grows well in dry,
gravelly, ledgy, or sandy soil, where few other trees thrive; useful in
such situations where a low growth is required; but as it is not
procurable in quantity from nurseries, it must be grown from the seed.
The leaves are at times stripped off by caterpillars, but otherwise it
is not seriously affected by insects or fungous diseases.

[Illustration: PLATE XLVII.--Quercus ilicifolia.]

  1. Flowering branch.
  2. Sterile flower, side view.
  3. Fertile flowers, side view.
  4. Fruiting branch.
  5. Variant leaves.




ULMACEAE. ELM FAMILY.


=Ulmus Americana, L.=

ELM. AMERICAN ELM. WHITE ELM.

=Habitat and Range.=--Low, moist ground; thrives especially on rich
intervales.

     From Cape Breton to Saskatchewan, as far north as 54 deg. 30'.

Maine,--common, most abundant in central and southern portions; New
Hampshire,--common from the southern base of the White mountains to the
sea; in the remaining New England states very common, attaining its
highest development in the rich alluvium of the Connecticut river
valley.

     South to Florida; west to Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, and Texas.

=Habit.=--In the fullness of its vigor the American elm is the most
stately and graceful of the New England trees, 50-110 feet high and 1-8
feet in diameter above the swell of the roots; characterized by an
erect, more or less feathered or naked trunk, which loses itself
completely in the branches, by arching limbs, drooping branchlets set at
a wide angle, and by a spreading head widest near the top. Modifications
of these elements give rise to various well-marked forms which have
received popular names.

1. In the vase-shaped tree, which is usually regarded as the type, the
trunk separates into several large branches which rise, slowly
diverging, 40-50 feet, and then sweep outward in wide arches, the
smaller branches and spray becoming pendent.

2. In the umbrella form the trunk remains entire nearly to the top of
the tree, when the branches spread out abruptly, forming a broad,
shallow arch, fringed at the circumference with long, drooping
branchlets.

3. The slender trunk of the plume elm rises, usually undivided, a
considerable height, begins to curve midway, and is capped with a
one-sided tuft of branches and delicate, elongated branchlets.

4. The drooping elm differs from the type in the height of the arch and
greater droop of the branches, which sometimes sweep the ground.

5. In the oak form the limbs are more or less tortuous and less arching,
forming a wide-spreading, rounded head.

In all forms short, irregular, pendent branchlets are occasional along
the trunks. The trees most noticeably feathered are usually of medium
size, and have few large branches, the superfluous vitality manifesting
itself in a copious fringe, which sometimes invests and obliterates the
great pillars which support the masses of foliage. Conspicuous at all
seasons of the year,--in spring when its brown buds are swollen to
bursting, or when the myriads of flowers, insignificant singly, give in
the sunlight an atmosphere of purplish-brown; when clothed with light,
airy masses of deep green in summer or pale yellow in autumn, or in
winter when the great trunk and mighty sweep of the arching branches
distinguish it from all other trees. The roots lie near the surface and
run a great distance.

=Bark.=--Dark gray, irregularly and broadly striate, rather firmly
ridged, in very old trees sometimes partially detached in plates;
branches ash-gray, smooth; branchlets reddish-brown; season's shoots
often pubescent, light brown in late fall.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds ovate, brown, flattened, obtuse to
acute, smooth. Leaves simple, alternate, 2-5 inches long, 2-3 inches
wide, dark green and roughish above, lighter and downy at first beneath;
outline ovate or oval to obovate-oblong, sharply and usually doubly
serrate; apex abruptly pointed; base half acute, half rounded, produced
on one side, often slightly heart-shaped or obtuse; veins straight and
prominent; leafstalk stout, short; stipules small, soon falling. Leaves
drop in early autumn.

=Inflorescence.=--April. In loose lateral clusters along the preceding
season's shoots; flowers brown or purplish, mostly perfect, with
occasional sterile and fertile on the same tree; stems slender; calyx
7-9-lobed, hairy or smooth; stamens 7-9, filaments slender, anthers
exserted, brownish-red; ovary flat, green, ciliate; styles 2.

=Fruit.=--Ripening in May, before the leaves are fully grown, a samara,
1/2 inch in diameter, oval or ovate, smooth on both sides, hairy on
the edge, the notch in the margin closed or partially closed by the two
incurved points.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in any soil,
but prefers a deep, rich loam; the ideal street tree with its high,
overarching branches and moderate shade; grows rapidly, throws out few
low branches, bears pruning well; now so seriously affected by numerous
insect enemies that it is not planted as freely as heretofore;
objectionable on the borders of gardens or mowing land, as the roots run
along near the surface for a great distance. Very largely grown in
nurseries, usually from seed, sometimes from small collected plants.
Though so extremely variable in outline, there are no important
horticultural forms in cultivation.

[Illustration: PLATE XLVIII.--Ulmus Americana.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Flower, side view.
  4. Fruiting branch.
  5. Mature leaf.


=Ulmus fulva, Michx.=

_Ulmus pubescens, Walt._

SLIPPERY ELM. RED ELM.

=Habitat and Range.=--Rich, low grounds, low, rocky woods and hillsides.

     Valley of the St. Lawrence, apparently not abundant.

Maine,--District of Maine (Michaux, _Sylva of North America_, ed. 1853,
III, 53), rare; Waterborough (York county, Chamberlain, 1898); New
Hampshire,--valley of the Connecticut, usually disappearing within ten
miles of the river; ranges as far north as the mouth of the Passumpsic;
Vermont,--frequent; Massachusetts,--rare in the eastern sections,
