
"Well, you see, it's rather too far for a cleek, and too short for a
driver.  Sometimes I try it with a brassey, but on the whole I think the
cleek is best.  If you over-drive you get into awful trouble, as you
will see."  So the course was gone over and explained, and Tom's eye was
quick to see the possibilities, and note the dangers, nor did she
hesitate sometimes to differ from Harold's tactics.

"Well," said he, in conclusion, "what do you think of 'em?  Rather
sporting, aren't they?"

"Humph--yes!" said Tom.  "That fifth hole is a little tricky, but I
think they ought to be done in--er--What's your record?"

"M-well, it varies--of course.  I'm no pro., but I can get round in
forty, with luck."

"Forty!  Humph!"  Tom wheeled round on her heel, and gazed from right to
left with calculating eyes.  Her lips moved noiselessly, then she nodded
her head, and cried confidently:

"I'll take you!  I'll play you to-morrow for the better man!"

"Done!" agreed Harold at once, but he straightened his shoulders as he
spoke with a gesture which meant that he had no intention, if he knew
it, of being beaten by a school-girl, and his sister looked forward to
the contest with very mingled feelings.  If Tom lost, it would be a
distinct blow; yet if Tom won, how Harold would dislike her!  How
hopeless it would be to look for any friendship between them after that!
She was glad that the game would have to be deferred for a day at
least, for an evening spent in Tom's company must surely instal her in
public favour.  When, however, she went to her friend's room to convey
her downstairs to dinner, Rhoda's confidence was shaken, and she nearly
exclaimed aloud in dismay at the apparition which she beheld.

Tom in full evening dress was a vision which had been denied to Hurst
Manor, but on the present occasion she had evidently determined to pay
every honour to her hosts, and bony arms and neck emerged festively from
a shot-silk gown, which Rhoda felt convinced must have been a possession
of the long-deceased mother.

"What do you think of _that_?"  Tom cried proudly, rustling round to
confront the new-comer, arms akimbo, and eyes twinkling with
complacency.  "There's a natty get-up!  Quite a fashion plate, ain't I?
The very latest from Par-ee.  You didn't expect to see anything like
that, did you?"

"I didn't!" cried Rhoda, truthfully enough; but Tom suspected no satire
in her words, and taking up the hand-glass, began twisting and turning
before the mirror so as to get a view of her hair, which was no longer
plaited into a pigtail, but screwed into a knot the size of a walnut,
planted accurately in the middle of her head.

"I say, what do you think of my coiffure?"

Rhoda looked, and burst into a shriek of laughter.  "Oh, Tom! that's it!
I noticed there was something different, but couldn't think what it
was.  Oh, no, no, Tom, you can't leave it like that!  You must make it
bigger, and wear it either high or low.  It's too ridiculous--that
little button just in the very wrong place.  Sit down for one moment,
and I'll arrange it for you!"

But Tom beat her off resolutely with the hair-brush.

"I won't!  It's my own hair, and I like it this way.  It's _distingue_--
not like every other woman you meet.  Now that I've left school and am
grown-up, I must study _les convenances_, and it's fatal to be
commonplace.  I may be prejudiced, but it seems to me that in this get-
up I'm a striking figure!"

The beaming good-humour of her smile, the utter absence of anything
approaching envy or discontent, struck home to Rhoda's heart, and
silenced further protestations.  She put her arm round Tom's waist, gave
her an affectionate grip, wishing, for perhaps the first time in her
life, that she herself had put on an older frock, so that the contrast
between herself and her guest should be less marked in the eyes of the
household.

Alas! socially speaking, Tom was not a success.  Mrs Chester was
plainly alarmed by her eccentricities; Mr Chester did not know whether
to take her in fun or in earnest; and Harold's languor grew more and
more pronounced.  The very servants stared with astonishment at the
peculiar guest, and when dinner was over Rhoda, in despair, took Tom up
to her own den to avoid the ordeal of an evening in the drawing-room.

Once alone, with closed doors and no critical grown-ups to listen to
their conversation, the hours sped away with lightning speed, while Tom
told of her own plans, sympathised with Rhoda's ambition, and let fall
words of wisdom, none the less valuable for being uttered in the most
casual fashion.  Every now and again the remembrance of her recent
disappointment would send a stabbing pain through Rhoda's heart, but, as
she had said, it was impossible to remain in low spirits in Tom's
company, and if no one else enjoyed that young lady's society it was
precious beyond words to her girl companion.

The game of golf was played as arranged, but though Harold came off
victor it was too close a contest to be agreeable to his vanity, or to
increase his liking for his opponent, while Mr Chester confided to his
wife that he could not understand Rhoda's infatuation for such a
remarkably unattractive companion.

"If it had been that sweet little Miss Everett, now, she might have
stayed for a year, and been welcome, but I confess I shall be glad when
this girl takes her departure.  She makes me quite nervous, sitting
blinking at me with those little eyes.  I have a sort of feeling that
she is laughing to herself when she seems most serious."

"Oh, she could never laugh at you, dear.  She couldn't be so audacious!"
declared Mrs Chester fondly; "but I can't bring myself to like her, and
where her cleverness lies is a mystery to me.  I never met a more
ignorant girl.  She can neither sew nor knit nor crochet, and the
remarks she made in the market yesterday would have disgraced a child of
ten.  I pity the man who gets _her_ for his wife!"

But, as we have seen, Thomasina had other ideas than matrimony for her
own future.  As she drove to the station by Rhoda's side she fell into
an unusual fit of silence, and emerging from it said slowly:

"I'm glad I've seen your home, Fuzzy.  It's very beautiful, and very
happy.  You are all so fond of one another, and so nice and kind, that
it's a regular ideal family.  I think you are a lucky girl.  I like all
your people very much, though they don't like me!"

Rhoda exclaimed sharply, but Tom's smile was without a shadow of offence
as she insisted--

"My dear, I know it!  Don't perjure yourself for the sake of politeness.
I'm sorry, but--I'm accustomed to it.  Strangers _don't_ like me, and
it's not a mite of use trying to ingratiate myself.  I did all I knew
when I came here.  I wore my best clothes, I tried to behave prettily,
and you see, dead failure, as usual!  You needn't look doleful, for no
doubt it's all for the best.  If I were beauteous and fascinating I
might be distracted from my work, whereas now I shall devote myself to
it with every scrap of my strength.  Girls love me, and I love them, so
I'll give up my life for their service.  We have all our vocation, and
it would be a happier world if everyone were as well satisfied as I am.
`In work, in work, in work always, let my young days be spent.'  Bother
it!  Here's the station already, and I haven't said half I wanted to!"

"Nor I to you.  It's horrid to say good-bye, and think of school without
you, but you'll write to me, won't you, Tom?  You will promise to write
regularly?"

"Indeed, I won't!  Fifty odd girls implored me to write to them, and
it's too big an order.  No, my dear Fuzz, I shall have no time to tell
you how busy I am.  Here we part, and we must leave it to fate or good
fortune when we meet again.  Bless you, my infant!  Perk up, and be a
credit to me."

"But--but--how am I to know, how am I to hear what happens to you?  I
_can't_ say good-bye and let you fade away completely, as if we had
never met.  It's horrible.  You _must_ let me know!"

"Look in the newspapers.  You will see my doings recorded in the Public
Press," replied Tom, as she skipped into the carriage.  Rhoda looked on
blankly, her heart sinking with a conviction that Tom did not care; that
it was nothing for her to say good-bye and part without a prospect of
reunion.  She was too proud to protest, but, waving her hand, turned
abruptly away and walked out of the station.  The train lingered,
however, and the temptation to take one more peep became too strong to
be resisted, so she ran along the path for twenty or thirty yards, and
peered cautiously through a gate from which a sight of the carriage in
which her friend sat could be commanded.  Tom had leant back in her
seat, and flung her hat on one side; her little eyes were red with
tears, and she was mopping them assiduously with a ball-like pocket
handkerchief!



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

SCHOOL AGAIN.

School again, and no Tom!  The house-parlour with no manly figure to
lean with its back against the mantelpiece, and jingle chains in its
pocket; the dining-hall with no one to make faces at the critical moment
when a girl was swallowing her soup, or to nudge her elbow as she lifted
a cup to her lips; the cubicle with no magenta dressing-jacket whisking
to and fro--it was ghastly!  The girls could not reconcile themselves to
their loss, and the first fortnight of the term was one of unalloyed
depression.  No one dared to joke, for if she did her companions
instantly accused her of "apeing Tom" and snubbed her for the feebleness
of the attempt; no one dared to be cheerful, lest she should be charged
with fickleness, and want of heart.  And Irene, the beautiful, reigned
in Tom's stead!  It would have been a difficult post for any girl to
have succeeded Thomasina Bolderston, but, curious though it may appear,
Irene's flaxen locks and regular features were for the time being so
many offences in the eyes of her companions.  They were accustomed to
Tom; Tom had been the Head Girl of their heart, and they resented the
"finicking" ways of her successor as an insult to the dear departed.

Irene strove by a gentle mildness of demeanour to soften the prejudice
against her, and the girls but abused her the more.

"Catch Tom saying `_It didn't matter_'!  Imagine Tom pretending she
didn't hear!  A nice Head Girl _she_ is!  We might as well have Hilary
Jervis!"  Irene assumed a pretence of firmness; the girls rolled their
eyes at each other and tittered audibly.  The idea of Irene Grey
ordering others about!  Plainly, it was time, and time only, which could
give any authority to Tom Bolderston's supplanter!

How keenly Rhoda felt her friend's absence no one guessed but herself.
Tom's attitude towards the result of the late examinations would have
given the keynote to that of her companions, and have shielded the poor,
smarting victim from much which she now had to endure.  The girls were
unaffectedly sorry for her, but pity is an offering which a proud spirit
finds it hard to accept.  It seemed strange to realise that girls cast
in such graceful moulds as Dorothy and Irene should be so deficient in
tact as to gush over the humiliation of another, and check the
rhapsodies of successful candidates by such significant coughings and
frownings as must have been obvious to the dullest faculties.  Oh, for
Tom's downright acceptance of a situation--her calm taking-for-granted
that the sufferer was neither selfish nor cowardly enough to grudge
success to others!  Rhoda felt, as we have all felt in our time, that
she had never thoroughly appreciated her friend until she had departed,
and she was one of the most enthusiastic members of the committee
organised to arrange about the tablet to be composed in Tom's honour.

Of course, Tom must have a place on the Record Wall!  Blues, Reds,
Greens, and Yellows were unanimously decided on the point; contributions
poured in, and on Sunday afternoon the Blues sat in consultation over
the wording of the inscription.

"The simpler the better.  Tom hated gush!" was the general opinion; but
it was astonishing how difficult it was to hit on something simple yet
telling.  A high-flown rhapsody seemed far easier to accomplish, and at
last, in despair, each girl was directed to compose an inscription and
to read it aloud for general approval.  None were universally approved,
but Rhoda's received the largest number of votes, as being simple yet
comprehensive:--

"This tablet is erected to the memory of Thomasina Bolderston, the most
popular `Head Girl' whom Hurst Manor has ever known.  Her companions
affectionately record the kindly justice of her rule, and the unfailing
cheerfulness which was a stimulus to them in work and play."

"Yes--it's the best, decidedly the best, but I should like it to have
been better still!" said Kathleen thoughtfully.  "It is so difficult to
describe Tom in three or four lines."

"And it leaves so much unsaid!  I should like to describe her a little
bit so that future pupils might know what she was like.  If they read
that, they would imagine her just like anyone else," objected Bertha,
frowning.  "I suppose it wouldn't do to say something about her--
er--`_engaging ugliness_!' or some expression like that?"

Howls of indignation greeted this audacious proposition, and Bertha was
alternately snubbed, reproached, and abused, until she grew sulky and
retired from the discussion.  Rhoda herself came to the rescue, and with
the critical spirit of the true artist acknowledged the defect in her
own work.

"Bertha is right!  What I have written gives no idea of Tom herself.
It's a pity, but I don't see how it can be helped.  What words could
describe Tom to anyone who had not seen her?  Now, here's another idea!
Why not make a rule that every girl who has had her name inscribed on
the Record Wall must present a framed portrait to the school?  All the
frames would be alike, and they would be hung in rows in the Great Hall,
so that future generations of pupils might be able to see what the girls
were like, and feel more friendly towards them!"

"Rhoda!  What a h-eavenly idea!" cried Irene rapturously.  "How s-imply
lovely!  Why in the world have we never thought of that before?"

"I never heard of anything so splendid!" cried the girls in chorus,
while Rhoda sat beaming with gratified smiles.  Well, if her own name
would never be printed in that roll of honour, at least she had composed
the inscription of one of the most important tablets, and had suggested
a new idea which bade fair to be as much appreciated as the Wall itself!
Already the girls were debating eagerly together as to its
inauguration, and deciding that the different "Heads" should be deputed
to write to those old members of each house who had been honoured with
tablets, to ask for portraits taken as nearly as possible about the date
of leaving school.  Irene, of course, would communicate with Tom to
inform her of the step about to be taken by her companions, and to
direct her to be photographed at the first possible moment.

"And--er--you might just drop a hint about her attire!" said Rhoda,
anxiously, as a remembrance of the dress and coiffure of Erley Chase
rose before her.  Nothing more likely than that Tom would elect to do
honour to her companions by putting on her very best clothes for their
benefit, and imagine the horror of the Blues at seeing their old Head
decked out in such fashion!  "We should like best to see her as she used
to look here."

"She must wear the old blue dress, and stand with her back to the
fireplace, with her hands in her pockets," cried Kathleen firmly.  "We
don't want to see Tom lying in a hammock against a background of palms,
or smirking over a fan--not much!  It's the genuine article we want, and
no make-up.  What will she say, I wonder, when she hears she is going to
have a tablet?  Will she be pleased or vexed?"

"She must be pleased--who could help it?--but she will pretend she is
not.  Mark my words, she'll write back and say it's a piece of
ridiculous nonsense."

So prophesied Irene; but the result proved that she was wrong, for Tom,
as usual, refused to be anticipated.  Instead of protesting that she had
done nothing worthy of such an honour, and beseeching her companions not
to make themselves ridiculous, she dismissed the subject in a couple of
lines, in which she declared the proposed scheme to be "most laudable,"
and calmly volunteered to contribute half-a-crown!

The Blues agreed among themselves that such behaviour came perilously
near "callousness," but Rhoda recalled that last peep through the bars
of the station gate, and could not join in the decision.  She believed
that Tom would be profoundly touched by the honour, so touched and so
proud that she dared not trust herself to approach the subject from a
serious view.  And she was right, for if imagination could have carried
her old companions to the study where Tom was then domiciled, they would
have seen her chalking an immense red cross on her calendar against the
date when Irene's letter had arrived, and mentally recording it as the
proudest day of her life.

No mention was made of the photograph, but in due time it arrived, so
life-like and speaking in its well-known attitude, that the more
sentimental of the girls shed tears of joy at beholding it.  Closely
following it came other contributions to the gallery, which the new-
comers examined with keenest interest, feeling more able to understand
the enthusiasm of their seniors, now that the well-known names were
attached to definite personalities.

About this time, too, arrived a full report of the examination, and, as
had been expected, Rhoda was found to have failed in arithmetic.  In
other subjects she had done well, gaining the longed-for distinction in
German and French, so that if only-- Oh! that little "If!"  How much it
meant!  That terrible mountainous "If," which made all the difference
between failure and success!  _If_ it had been a dark morning and she
had slept on!  _If_ she had given way to temptation, and dozed off in
the middle of her work!  _If_ she had listened to Evie's words of
warning!--If but one of those possible Ifs had been accomplished, she
would have been among the happy crowd to-day, and not standing miserably
apart, the only girl in the house who had failed to pass.  The wild
grief of the first few days swept back like a wave and threatened to
overwhelm her, but she clung to the remembrance of Tom's words, and told
herself passionately that she would _not_ "whine"!  She would not pose
as a martyr!  Even on that great occasion when the certificates were
presented in Great Hall, and the school burst into ecstatic repetitions
of "See the Conquering Hero Comes!" as each fresh girl walked up to the
platform, even through that dread ordeal did Rhoda retain her self-
possession, attempting--poor child--to add a trembling note to the
chorus.

She never knew, nor guessed, that the girls honoured her more in that
moment than if she had won a dozen distinctions.  She did not see the
kindly glances bent upon her by the teachers, for they were careful to
turn aside when she looked in their direction; and if she had seen, she
would never have believed it was admiration, and not pity, which those
looks expressed.  In her estimation the occasion was one of pure,
unalloyed humiliation, and when she reached the shelter of her cubicle
she seized the hand-glass and examined her ruddy head anxiously beneath
the electric globe.

"It isn't true!" she exclaimed.  "The ghost stories tell lies.  I don't
believe now that anyone's head ever turned white in a night.  I can't
see a single grey hair."



CHAPTER TWENTY.

AN ACCIDENT.

After a storm comes a calm.  Compared with the struggle and anxiety of
