him to become skipper o' your ship without delay.  You see, sir, havin'
said that to myself, I've took my own advice, so if you'll take command
of me, sir, you may steer me where you please, for I'm ready to be your
sarvant for love, seein' that you han't got no money."

"Most obliging of you," said Frank, laughing, "and by this offer I
understand that you wish to become my companion."

"Of coorse, in a country o' this kind," replied Graddy, "it's
difficult,--I might a'most say unpossible,--to be a man's sarvant
without bein' his companion likewise."

"But here is a great difficulty at the outset, Joe.  I have not yet made
up my mind what course to pursue."

"Just so, sir," said the ex-seaman, with a look of satisfaction, "I
know'd you wouldn't be doin' that in a hurry, so I've comed to have a
talk with 'e about it."

"Very good, sit down," said Frank, "and let us consider it.  In the
first place, I regret to say that I have not been taught any trade, so
that I cannot become a blacksmith or a carpenter or anything of that
sort.  A clerk's duties I can undertake, but it seems to me that clerks
are not much wanted here just now.  Porterage is heavy work and rather
slow.  I may be reduced to that if nothing better turns up, but it has
occurred to me that I might try painting with success.  What would you
say to that, Joe?"

The man looked at Frank in surprise.  "Well," said he, "people don't
look as if they wanted to paint their houses here, an' most of 'em's got
no houses."

"Why, man, I don't mean house-painting.  It is portrait and landscape
painting that I refer to," said Frank, laughing.

Joe shook his head gravely.  "Never do, Mr Frank--"

"Stop! if you and I are to be companions in trouble, you must not call
me _Mister_ Frank, you must drop the mister."

"Then I won't go with 'e, sir, that's all about it," said Joe firmly.

"Very well, please yourself," said Frank, with a laugh; "but if painting
is so hopeless, what would you advise?"

"The diggin's," answered Joe.

"I thought so," said Frank, shaking his head.

"Most men out of work rush to the diggings.  Indeed, many men are fools
enough to leave their work to go there, but I confess that I don't like
the notion.  It has always appeared to me such a pitiful thing to see
men, who are fit for better things, go grubbing in the mud for gold."

"But what are men to do, Mr Frank, w'en they can't git no other work?"

"Of course it is better to dig than to idle or starve, or be a burden on
one's friends; nevertheless, I don't like the notion of it.  I suppose,
however, that I must try it just now, for it is quite certain that we
cannot exist here without gold.  By the way, Joe, have you got any
more?"

"Not a rap, sir."

"H'm, then I doubt whether I have enough to buy tools, not to speak of
provisions."

"I've bin' thinkin' about that, sir," said Joe, "and it seems to me that
our only chance lie in settin' up a grog and provision store!"

"A grog and provision store!"

"Yes, sir, the fact is that I had laid in a stock of pipes and baccy,
tea and brandy, for winter's use this year.  Now as things have turned
out, I shan't want these just at this minute, so we can sell 'em off to
the diggers at a large profit.  We might make a good thing of it, sir,
for you've no notion wot prices they'll give for things on the road to
the diggin's--"

Frank here interrupted his friend with a hearty laugh, and at the same
time declared that he would have nothing to do with the grog and
provision store; that he would rather take to porterage than engage in
any such enterprise.

"Well, then, sir, we won't say no more about that, but wot coorse would
ye advise the ship's head to be laid?"

Frank was silent for a few minutes as he sat with downcast eyes,
absorbed in meditation.  Then he looked up suddenly, and said, "Joe,
I'll give you a definite answer to that question to-morrow morning.
To-night I will think over it and make arrangements.  Meanwhile, let it
suffice that I have made up my mind to go to the diggings, and if you
remain in the same mind to-morrow, come here all ready for a start."

The ruddy countenance of the sturdy ex-porter beamed with gratification
as he rose and took his leave of Frank, who heard him, as he walked
away, making sundry allusions in nautical phraseology to having his
anchor tripped at last, and the sails shook out, all ready for a start
with the first o' the flood-tide in the morning!



CHAPTER THREE.

A VISIT TO THE DIGGINGS RESOLVED ON.  TERRIBLE COMMENCEMENT OF THE
JOURNEY.

When next morning arrived, Joe Graddy, true to his word, appeared with
the first--if not of the "flood-tide," at least of the morning sun, and
Frank told him that, on the previous evening, he had made arrangements
to go to the diggings in company with a party that was to start the
following day; that he had already made purchases of the few things
which they would require on the journey, and that the only thing
remaining to be done was to pack up.

"Now, Joe, you must go at once to the principal guide and make
arrangements with him as to that brandy and tea on which you expect to
found your future fortunes.  I told him to expect a visit from you early
in the day."

"Wotiver you do, do it at once," said Joe, putting on his straw hat with
an energetic slap.  "That's one of my mottos.  I'll go an' carry it into
practice."

The following day saw Frank and his man set forth with a party of about
thirty men, all of whom were clad in blue or red flannel shirts, straw
hats, big boots, and other rough garments; with rifles on their
shoulders, and bowie-knives and pistols in their belts.  These were men
of various nations; Californians, Chinamen, Malays, Americans, Scotch,
and English, and many of them looked not only rough but savage.  In
truth, they were as diverse in their characters as in their appearance,
some of them being men who had evidently moved in good society, while
others were as evidently of the lowest--probably the convict--class.
They had all, however, been thrown together by the force of a common
interest.  All were bound for the gold-mines, and it was necessary that
they should travel in company for mutual protection and assistance.

There were two guides, who had charge of ten pack-mules loaded with
provisions for the storekeepers at some remote diggings.  These guides
were stern, powerful, bronzed fellows, who had to make their way among
rough men in difficult circumstances, and they seemed to be quite
prepared to do so, being fearless, resolute, and armed to the teeth.

Joe Graddy had obtained permission, on promise of payment, to place his
little fortune on the backs of the mules, so that he and Frank had
nothing to carry save their weapons and blankets, besides a tin cup each
at their girdles, and a water-bag.

"Come, I like this sort of thing," said one of the party, an Englishman,
when the order was given to start.  "If it is all like this it will be
uncommonly jolly."

"I guess it ain't all like this, stranger," said one of the Americans
with a good-humoured grin.

One of the guides laughed, and the other ejaculated "humph!" as they set
forward.

There was indeed some ground for the remark of the Englishman, for the
country through which they passed was most beautiful, and the weather
delicious.  Their track lay over an undulating region of park-like land
covered with short grass; clumps of bushes were scattered here and there
about the plain, and high above these towered some magnificent specimens
of the oak, sycamore, and Californian cypress, while in the extreme
distance rose the ranges of the "golden" mountains--the Sierra Nevada--
in the midst of which lay the treasures of which they were in search.

All the members of the party were on foot, and, being fresh, full of
hope, and eager to reach their destination.  They chatted gaily as they
marched over the prairie.

On the way the good-humoured American seemed to take a fancy to Frank,
with whom he had a great deal of animated conversation.  After asking
our hero every possible question in regard to himself and intentions, he
told him that he was Yankee,--a piece of superfluous information, by the
way;--that his name was Jeffson, that he was a store-keeper at one of
the farthest off diggings, that the chief part of the loading of one of
the mules belonged to him, and that he was driving a considerable
business in gold-dust without the trouble of digging for it.

Towards evening they came to a very small hole in the plain, which was
dignified with the name of a well.  Here they stopped to replenish their
water-casks.

"Take as much as you can carry, men," said the principal guide, "we've a
long march to the next well, over sandy ground, and sometimes there
ain't much water in it."

They all followed this advice with the exception of one man, a coarse
savage-looking fellow, with a huge black beard and matted locks, who
called himself Bradling, though there was ground for doubting whether
that was the name by which he had been at first known in the world.
This man pulled out an enormous brandy-flask, and with a scoffing laugh
said:--

"This is the water for me, mister guide, pure and unmixed, there's
nothin' like it."

He nodded as he spoke, and put the flask to his lips, while the guide,
who made no rejoinder, eyed him with a grave, stern expression of
countenance.

That night they all encamped under the shade of a small clump of trees,
kindled several large fires, and, heartily glad to be relieved of their
back-burdens, sat down to enjoy supper.  After it was over pipes were
smoked and stories told, until it was time to retire to rest.  Then each
man lay down under his blanket, the sky being his canopy, and the
howling of the wolves his lullaby.

It seemed to each sleeper, when awakened next morning, that he had only
just closed his eyes, so sound had been his repose, and there was a
great deal of violent yawning, stretching, grumbling, and winking before
the whole party was finally aroused and ready to set forth.  However,
they got under way at last, and early in the forenoon came to the edge
of a sandy plain, which appeared to be interminable, with scarcely a
blade of grass on it.  Here they halted for a few minutes.

"How wide is the plain, guide?" inquired Frank.

"Forty miles," replied the man, "and there's not a drop of water to be
had till the end of the first twenty.  We'll get there about sundown,
and replenish our kegs, if it's not all gone dry.  Let me warn you,
however, to use the water you have sparingly."

"Do we encamp at the end o' the first twenty?" asked Jeffson.

"Yes, you'll find it a long enough day's march."

No one made any reply, but by their looks they appeared to think nothing
of a twenty-mile walk.  They found, however, that such a distance,
traversed over loose sand ankle-deep, and under a burning sun, was not
what any of them had been accustomed to.

On entering the plain they observed that the heat had opened cracks and
fissures in the earth, which omitted a fiery heat.  At intervals
pyramids of sand arose, which were borne with great velocity through the
air, sometimes appearing in the shape of columns sixty feet high, which
moved majestically over the plain.  Ere long some of these clouds of
sand enveloped them, and they were accompanied by hot winds, which
seemed to shrivel up, not only the skin, but the very vitals of the
travellers.  The pores of their skin closed, producing feverish heat in
the blood and terrible thirst, while their eyes became inflamed by the
dazzling glare of the sun on the white sand.

Of course most of the party applied pretty frequently to their
water-kegs and bottles.  Even Bradling gave up his brandy, and was
content to refresh himself with the little of the pure element which
chanced to remain in his formerly despised, but now cherished,
water-bottle.  The guides carried skins of water for themselves and the
mules, but these they opened very seldom, knowing full well the torments
that would ensue if they should run short before getting across the
scorching desert.

Thus they went on hour after hour, becoming more and more oppressed at
every step.  The improvident among them drank up the precious water too
fast, and towards evening began to sigh for relief, and to regard with
longing eyes the supplies of their more self-denying companions.  They
consoled themselves, however, to some extent, with thoughts of the deep
draughts they hoped to obtain at night.

Our hero and Joe were among those who reserved their supplies.

As night approached the thirst of the travellers increased to a terrible
extent, insomuch that they appeared to forget their fatigue, and hurried
forward at a smart pace, in the eager hope of coming to the promised
water-hole.  Great, therefore, was their dismay when the guides told
them that it was impossible to reach the place that night, that the
mules were too much knocked up, but that they would get to it early on
the following day.

They said little, however, seeming to be too much depressed to express
their disappointment in words, but their haggard looks were fearfully
eloquent.  Some of those who had wasted their supplies earnestly
implored their more prudent comrades to give them a little, a "very
little," of the precious element, and two or three were generous enough
to give away a few drops of the little that still remained to them.

The place where they had halted was without a scrap of vegetation, and
as there was no wood wherewith to kindle a fire, they were compelled to
encamp without one.  To most of the travellers, however, this was a
matter of little importance, because they were too much exhausted to
eat.  Those who had water drank a mouthful sparingly, and then lay down
to sleep.  Those who had none also lay down in gloomy silence.  They did
not even indulge in the usual solace of a pipe, for fear of adding to
the burning thirst with which they were consumed.

At day-break they were aroused by the guides, and rose with alacrity,
feeling a little refreshed, and being anxious to push on to the
water-hole, but when the sun rose and sent its dazzling rays over the
dreary waste, giving promise of another dreadful day, their spirits sank
again.  Seeing this the principal guide encouraged them by saying that
the water-hole was not more than three miles distant.

Onward they pushed with renewed energy and hope.  At last they reached
the place, and found that the hole was dry!

With consternation depicted on their haggard countenances the men looked
at the guide.

"Dig, men, dig," he said, with a troubled look on his bronzed face,
"there may be a little below the surface."

They did dig with shovels, spades, knives, sticks, hands, anything, and
they dug as never men did for gold.  All the gold in California would
they have given at that time for a cupful of cold water, but all the
gold in the world could not have purchased one drop from the parched
sand.  Never was despair more awfully pictured on men's faces as they
gazed at one another after finding that their efforts were unavailing.
Their case was truly pitiable, and they turned to the guide as if they
expected commiseration; but the case had become too desperate for him to
think of others.  In a stern, hard voice he cried--

"Onwards, men! onwards!  The nearest stream is forty miles off.  None of
those who have water can spare a drop, and death lies in delay.  Every
man for himself now.  Onward, men, for your lives!"

Saying this he applied the whip to the poor mules, which, with glazed
eyes and hanging ears, snorted with agony, and dropped down frequently
as they went along, but a sharp thrust of the goad forced them to rise
again and stumble forward.

"God help the poor wretches," murmured Joe Graddy to Frank as they
