They looked all about them. They could see no signs of a spring
anywhere, and both were parched with thirst after their terrific climb.

"We must find water, Haidia," said Tommy. "Why, what's the matter?"

Haidia was pointing upward at the starry heaven, and shivering with
fear. "Eyes!" she cried. "Big beetles waiting for us up there!"

"No, no, Haidia," Dodd explained. "Those are stars. They are
worlds--places where people live."

"Will you take me up there?" asked Haidia.

"No, this is our world," said Dodd. "And by and by the sun will rise,
that's a big ball of fire up there. He watches over the world and gives
us light and warmth. Don't be afraid. I'll take care of you."

"Haidia is not afraid with Jimmydodd to take care of her," replied the
girl with dignity. "Haidia smells water--over there." She pointed across
one side of the crater.

"There we'd better hurry," said Tommy, "because I can't hold out much
longer."

       *       *       *       *       *

The three scrambled over the soft sand, which sucked in their feet to
the ankle at every step. It was with the greatest difficulty that they
succeeded in reaching the crater's summit, low though it was. Then Dodd
uttered a cry, and pointed. In front of them extended a long pool of
water, with a scrubby growth around the edges.

The ground was firmer here, and they hurried toward it. Tommy was the
first to reach it. He lay down on his face and drank eagerly. He had
taken in a quart before he discovered that the water was saline.

At the same time Dodd uttered an exclamation of disgust. Haidia, too,
after sipping a little of the fluid, had stood up, chattering excitedly
in her own language.

But she was not chattering about the water. She was pointing toward the
scrub. "Men there!" she cried. "Men like you and Tommy, Jimmydodd."

Tommy and Dodd looked at each other, the water already forgotten in
their excitement at Haidia's information, which neither of them doubted.

Brave as she was, the girl now hung back behind Dodd, letting the two
men take precedence of her. The water, saline as it was, had partly
quenched their thirst. They felt their strength reviving.

And it was growing light. In the east the sky was already flecked with
yellow pink. They felt a thrill of intense excitement at the prospect of
meeting others of their kind.

"Where do you think we are?" asked Tommy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dodd stopped to look at a shrub that was growing near the edge of the
pool. "I don't think, I know, Tommy," he answered. "This is wattle."

"Yes?"

"We're somewhere in the interior regions of the Australian
continent--and that's not going to help us much."

"Over there--over there," panted Haidia. "Hold me, Jimmydodd. I can't
see. Ah, this terrible light!"

She screwed her eyelids tightly together to shut out the pale light of
dawn. The men had already discovered that the third membrane had been
burned away.

"We must get her out of here," whispered Dodd to Tommy. "Somewhere where
it's dark, before the sun rises. Let's go back to the entrance of the
crater."

But Haidia, her arm extended, persisted, "Over there! Over there!"

Suddenly a spear came whirling out of a growth of wattle beside the
pool. It whizzed past Tommy's face and dropped into the sand behind.
Between the trunks of the wattles they could see the forms of a party of
blackfellows, watching them intently.

Tommy held up his arms and moved forward with a show of confidence that
he was far from feeling. After what he had escaped in the underworld he
was in no mood to be massacred now.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the blacks were evidently not hostile. It was probable that the
spear had not been aimed to kill. At the sight of the two white men, and
the white woman, they came forward doubtfully, then more fearlessly,
shouting in their language. In another minute Tommy and Dodd were the
center of a group of wondering savages.

Especially Haidia. Three or four gins, or black women, had crept out of
the scrub, and were already examining her with guttural cries, and
fingering the hair garment that she wore.

"Water!" said Tommy, pointing to his throat, and then to the pool, with
a frown of disgust.

The blackfellows grinned, and led the three a short distance to a place
where a large hollow had been scooped in the sandy floor of the desert.
It was full of water, perfectly sweet to the taste. The three drank
gratefully.

Suddenly the edge of the sun appeared above the horizon, gilding the
sand with gold. The sunlight fell upon the three, and Haidia uttered a
terrible cry of distress. She dropped upon the sand, her hands pressed
to her eyes convulsively. Tommy and Dodd dragged her into the thickest
part of the scrub, where she lay moaning.

They contrived bandages from the remnants of their clothing, and these,
damped with cold water, and bound over the girl's eyes, alleviated her
suffering somewhat. Meanwhile the blackfellows had prepared a meal of
roast opossum. After their long diet of shrimps, it tasted like ambrosia
to the two men.

       *       *       *       *       *

Much to their surprise, Haidia seemed to enjoy it too. The three
squatted in the scrub among the friendly blacks, discussing their
situation.

"These fellows will save us," said Dodd. "It may be that we're quite
near the coast, but, any way, they'll stick to us, even if only out of
curiosity. They'll take us somewhere. But as soon as we get Haidia to
safety we'll have to go back along our trail. We mustn't lose our
direction. Suppose I was laughed at when I get back, called a liar! I
tell you, we've got to have something to show, to prove my statements,
before I can persuade anybody to fit out an expedition into Submundia.
Even those three beetle-shells that we dropped in the crater won't be
conclusive evidence for the type of mind that sits in the chairs of
science to-day. And, speaking of that, we must get those blacks to carry
those shells for us. I tell you, nobody will believe--"

"What's that?" cried Tommy sharply, as a rasping sound rose above the
cries of the frightened blacks.

But there was no need to ask. Out of the crater two enormous beetles
were winging their way toward them, two beetles larger than any that
they had seen.

Fully seven feet in length, they were circling about each other,
apparently engaged in a vicious battle.

The fearful beaks stabbed at the flesh beneath the shells, and they
alternately stabbed and drew back, all the while approaching the party,
which watched them, petrified with terror.

It was evident that the monsters had no conception of the presence of
humans. Blinded by the sun, only one thing could have induced them to
leave the dark depths of Submundia. That was the mating instinct. The
beetles were evidently rival leaders of some swarm, engaged in a duel to
the death.

Round and round they went in a dizzy maze, stabbing and thrusting, jaws
closing on flesh, until they dropped, close-locked in battle, not more
than twenty feet from the little party of blacks and whites, both
squirming in the agonies of death.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I don't think that necessarily means that the swarm is on our trail,"
said Tommy, a little later, as the three stood beside the shells that
they had discarded. "Those two were strays, lost from the swarm and
maddened by the mating instinct. Still, it might be as well to wear
these things for a while, in case they do follow us."

"You're right," answered Dodd, as he placed one of the shells around
Haidia. "We've got to get this little lady to civilization, and we've
got to protect our lives in order to give this great new knowledge to
the world. If we are attacked, you must sacrifice your life for me,
Tommy, so that I can carry back the news."

"Righto!" answered Tommy with alacrity. "You bet I will, Jim."

The glaring sun of mid-afternoon was shining down upon the desert, but
Haidia was no longer in pain. It was evident that she was fast becoming
accustomed to the sunlight, though she still kept her eyes screwed up
tightly, and had to be helped along by Dodd and Jimmy. In high good
humor the three reached the encampment, to find that the blacks were
feasting on the dead beetles, while the two eldest members of the party
had proudly donned the shells.

It was near sunset before they finally started. Dodd and Tommy had
managed to make it clear to them that they wished to reach civilization,
but how near this was there was, of course, no means of determining.
They noted, however, that the party started in a southerly direction.

"I should say," said Dodd, "that we are in South Australia, probably
three or four hundred miles from the coast. We've got a long journey
before us, but these blackfellows will know how to procure food for us."

       *       *       *       *       *

They certainly knew how to get water, for, just as it began to grow
dark, when the three were already tormented by thirst, they stopped at
what seemed a mere hollow among the stones and boulders that strewed the
face of the desert, and scooped away the sand, leaving a hole which
quickly filled with clear, cold water of excellent taste.

After which they made signs that they were to camp there for the night.
The moon was riding high in the sky. As it grew dark, Haidia opened her
eyes, saw the luminary, and uttered an exclamation, this time not of
fear, but of wonder.

"Moon," said Dodd. "That's all right, girl. She watches over the night,
as the sun does over the day."

"Haidia likes the moon better than the sun," said the girl wistfully.
"But the moon not strong enough to keep away the beetles."

"If I was you, I'd forget about the beetles, Haidia," said Dodd. "They
won't come out of that hole in the ground. You'll never see them again."

And, as he spoke, they heard a familiar rasping sound far in the
distance.

"How the wind blows," said Tommy, desperately resolved not to believe
his ears. "I think a storm's coming up."

But Haidia, with a scream of fear, was clinging to Dodd, and the blacks
were on their feet, spears and boomerangs in their hands, looking
northward.

Out of that north a little black cloud was gathering. A cloud that
spread gradually, as a thunder-cloud, until it covered a good part of
the sky. And still more of the sky, and still more. All the while that
faint, distant rasping was audible, but it did not increase in volume.
It was as if the beetles had halted until the full number of the swarm
had come up out of the crater.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then the cloud, which by now covered half the sky, began to take
geometric form. It grew square, the ragged edges seemed to trim
themselves away, streaks of light shot through it at right angles, as if
it was marshaling itself into companies.

The doomed men and the girl stood perfectly still, staring at that
phenomenon. They knew that only a miracle could save them. They did not
even speak, but Haidia clung more tightly to Dodd's arm.

Then suddenly the cloud spread upward and covered the face of the moon.

"Well, this is good-by, Tommy," said Dodd, gripping his friend's hand.
"God, I wish I had a revolver, or a knife!" He looked at Haidia.

Suddenly the rasping became a whining shriek. A score of enormous
beetles, the advance guards of the army, zoomed out of the darkness into
a ray of straggling moonlight. Shrieking, the blacks, who had watched
the approaching swarm perfectly immobile, threw away the two shells and
bolted.

"Good Lord," Dodd shouted, "did you see the color of their shells,
Tommy?" Even in that moment the scientific observer came uppermost in
him. "Those red edges? They must be young ones, Tommy. It's the new
brood! No wonder Bram stayed behind! He was waiting for them to hatch!
The new brood! We're doomed--doomed! All my work wasted!"

The blackfellows did not get very far. A hundred yards from the place
where they started to run they dropped, their bodies hidden beneath the
clustering monsters, their screams cut short as those frightful beaks
sought their throats, and those jaws crunched through flesh and bone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Circling around Dodd, Tommy, and Haidia, as if puzzled by their
appearance, the beetles kept up a continuous, furious droning that
sounded like the roar of Niagara mixed with the shrieking of a thousand
sirens. The moon was completely hidden, and only a dim, nebulous light
showed the repulsive monsters as they flew within a few feet of the
heads of the fugitives. The stench was overpowering.

But suddenly a ray of white light shot through the darkness, and, with a
changed note, just perceptible to the ears of the two men, but doubtless
of the greatest significance to the beetles, the swarm fled apart to
right and left, leaving a clear lane, through which appeared--Bram,
reclining on his shell-couch above his eight trained beetle steeds!

Hovering overhead, the eight huge monsters dropped lightly to the ground
beside the three. Bram sat up, a vicious grin upon his twisted face. In
his hand he held a large electric bulb, its sides sheathed in a roughly
carved wooden frame; the wire was attached to a battery behind him.

"Well met, my friends!" he shouted exultantly. "I owe you more thanks
than I can express for having so providentially left the electrical
equipment of your plane undamaged after you crashed at the entrance to
Submundia. I had a hunch about it--and the hunch worked!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He grinned more malevolently as he looked from one man to the other.

"You've run your race," he said. "But I'm going to have a little fun
with you before you die. I'm going to use you as an object lesson.
You'll find it out in a little while."

"Go ahead, go ahead, Bram," Dodd grinned back at him. "Just a few
million years ago, and you were a speck of protoplasm--in that
pre-pleistocene age--swimming among the invertebrate crustaceans that
characterized that epoch."

"Invertebrates and monotremes, Dodd," said Bram, almost wistfully. "The
mammals were already existent on the earth, as you know--" Suddenly he
broke off, as he realized that Dodd was spoofing him. A yell of
execration broke from his lips. He uttered a high whistle, and instantly
the whiplike lashes of a hundred beetles whizzed through the darkness
and remained poised over Dodd's head.

"Not even the marsupial lion, Bram," grinned Dodd, undismayed. "Go
ahead, go ahead, but I'll not die with a lie upon my lips!"


CHAPTER IX

_The Trail of Death_

"There's sure some sort of hoodoo on these Antarctic expeditions,
Wilson," said the city editor of _The Daily Record_ to the star rewrite
man. He glanced through the hastily typed report that had come through
on the wireless set erected on the thirty-sixth story of the Record
Building. "Tommy Travers gone, eh? And James Dodd, too! There'll be woe
and wailing along the Great White Way to-night when this news gets out.
They say that half the chorus girls in town considered themselves
engaged to Tommy. Nice fellow, too! Always did like him!"

"Queer, that curtain of fog that seems to lie on the actual site of the
south pole," he continued, glancing over the report again. "So Storm
thinks that Tommy crashed in it, and that it's a million to one against
their ever finding his remains. What's this about beetles? Shells of
enormous prehistoric beetles found by Tommy and Dodd! That'll make good
copy, Wilson. Let's play that up. Hand it to Jones, and tell him to
scare up a catching headline or two."

       *       *       *       *       *

He beckoned to the boy who was hurrying toward his desk, a flimsy in his
hand, glanced through it, and tossed it toward Wilson.

"What do they think this is, April Fool's Day?" he asked. "I'm surprised
that the International Press should fall for such stuff as that!"

"Why, to-morrow is the first of April!" exclaimed Wilson, tossing back
the cable dispatch with a contemptuous laugh.

"Well, it won't do the I. P. much good to play those tricks on their
subscribers," said the city editor testily. "I'm surprised, to say the
least. I guess their Adelaide correspondent has gone off his head or
something. Using poor Travers's name, too! Of course that fellow didn't
know he was dead, but still...."

That was how _The Daily Record_ missed being the first to give out
certain information that was to stagger the world. The dispatch, which
had evidently outrun an earlier one, was as follows:

    ADELAIDE, South Australia, March 31.--Further telegraphic
    communications arriving almost continuously from Settler's
    Station, signed by Thomas Travers, member of Travers Antarctic
    Expedition, who claims to have penetrated earth's interior at
    south pole and to have come out near Victoria Desert. Travers
    states that swarm of prehistoric beetles, estimated at two
    trillion, and as large as men, with shells impenetrable by rifle
    bullets, now besieging Settler's Station, where he and Dodd and
    Haidia, woman of subterranean race whom they brought away, are
    shut up in telegraph office. Bram, former member of Greystoke
    Expedition, said to be in charge of swarm, with intention of
    obliterating human race. Every living thing at Settler's Station
    destroyed, and swarm moving south.

It was a small-town paper a hundred miles from New York that took a
chance on publishing this report from the International Press, in spite
of frantic efforts on the parts of the head office to recall it after it
had been transmitted. This paper published the account as an April
Fool's Day joke, though later it took to itself the credit for having
believed it. But by the time April Fool's Day dawned all the world knew
that the account was, if anything, an under-estimate of the fearful
things that were happening "down under."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was known now that the swarm of monsters had originated in the Great
Victoria Desert, one of the worst stretches of desolation in the world,
situated in the south-east corner of Western Australia. Their numbers
were incalculable. Wimbush, the aviator, who was attempting to cross the
continent from east to west, reported afterward that he had flown for
four days, skirting the edge of the swarm, and that the whole of that
time they were moving in the same direction, a thick cloud that left a
trail of dense darkness on earth beneath them, like the path of an
eclipse. Wimbush escaped them only because he had a ceiling of twenty
thousand feet, to which apparently the beetles could not soar.

And this swarm was only about one-fourth of the whole number of the
monsters. This was the swarm that was moving westward, and subsequently
totally destroyed all living things in Kalgoorlie, Coolgardie, Perth,
and all the coastal cities of Western Australia.

Ships were found drifting in the Indian Ocean, totally destitute of
crews and passengers; not even their skeletons were found, and it was
estimated that the voracious monsters had carried them away bodily,
devoured them in the air, and dropped the remains into the water.

All the world knows now how the sea elephant herd on Kerguelen Island
was totally destroyed, and of the giant shells that were found lying
everywhere on the deserted beaches, in positions that showed the
monsters had in the end devoured one another.

Mauritius was the most westerly point reached by a fraction of the
swarm. A little over twenty thousand of the beetles reached that lovely
island, by count of the shells afterward, and all the world knows now of
the desperate and successful fight that the inhabitants waged against
them. Men and women, boys and girls, blacks and whites, finding that the
devils were invulnerable against rifle fire, sallied forth boldly with
knives and choppers, and laid down a life for a life.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the second day after their appearance, the main swarm, a trillion and
a half strong, reached the line of the transcontinental railway, and
moved eastward into South Australia, traveling, it was estimated, at the
rate of two hundred miles an hour. By the next morning they were in
Adelaide, a city of nearly a quarter of a million people. By nightfall
every living thing in Adelaide and the suburbs had been eaten, except
for a few who succeeded in hiding in walled-up cellars, or in the
surrounding marshes.

That night the swarm was on the borders of New South Wales and Victoria,
