not been calculated to make me specially generous in his case."

She did not reply, and after a moment's pause he said, "Well, as
Lady Greendale seems to be busy, I will be going."

"You will come to the ball tomorrow evening, won't you?" she asked.

"I suppose I shall have to," he said. "If I win, though mind I feel
sure that I shan't, it will seem odd if I don't come. If I lose, it
will look as if I sulked."

"You must come," she said, "and you must have a dance with me. You
have not been keeping your word, Major Mallett. You said that you
would always be the same to me, and you are not. You have never
once asked me to dance with you, and you are changed altogether."

"I try to be--I try hard, Bertha; but just at present it is beyond
me. I cannot stand by and see you going--" and he stopped abruptly.

"Well, never mind, Bertha. It will all come right in time, but at
any rate I cannot stand it at present. Goodbye."

And without giving her time to reply, he hastily left the room.

Bertha stood silent for a minute or two, then quietly followed him
out of the room.

The next day Ryde was astir early. It was the Queen's Cup day.
Eight yachts were entered: three schooners--the Rhodope, the
Isobel, and the Mayflower; four cutters--the Pearl, the Chrysalis,
the Alacrity, and the Phantom; and the Osprey, which was the only
yawl. It was half-past eight, and all were under way under mainsail
and jib.

The Solent was alive with yachts. They were pouring out from
Southampton water, they were coming up from Cowes, and some were
making their way across from Portsmouth. The day was a fine one for
sailing.

"Have you got the same extra hands as last time?" Frank asked the
skipper.

"All the same, sir. They all know their work well, and of course if
there is anything to be done aloft, our own men go up. I don't
think any of them will beat us in smartness."

As the time approached for the start, the racers began to gather in
the neighbourhood of the starting line; and as the five-minutes gun
fired, the topsail went up, and they began to sail backwards and
forwards near it.

As the Phantom crossed under the lee of the Osprey, the three
ladies waved their handkerchiefs to Frank, who took off his cap.

"May the best yacht win," Bertha called out, as the vessels flew
quickly apart.

"We could not want a better day, George," Frank said. "We can carry
everything comfortably, and there is not enough wind to kick up
much of a sea. As far as we are concerned, I would rather that the
wind had been either north or south, so that we could have laid our
course all round; as it is, we shall have the wind almost dead aft
till we are round the Nab, then we shall be close-hauled, with
perhaps an occasional tack along the back of the island, then free
again back. There is no doubt that the cutters have a pull
close-hauled. I fancy with this wind the schooners will be out of
it; though if it had been a reach the whole way, they would have
had a good chance.

"Four minutes are gone."

He was holding his watch in his hand, and after a short pause
called out, "Five seconds gone."

The Osprey had a good position at present; though, with the wind
aft, this was of comparatively little consequence. She was nearly
in a line with the mark boat nearest to the shore, and some hundred
and fifty yards from it.

"Haul in the main sheet," Hawkins said quietly, and the men
stationed there hauled on the rope until he said, "That will do, we
must not go too fast."

He went on, turning to Frank (who had just called out, "Twenty
seconds gone"):

"I think that we shall about do."

The latter nodded.

"A bit more, lads," the skipper said ten seconds later. "That will
do."

"Fifteen seconds more," Frank said presently.

"Slack away the sheet, slack it away handsomely. Up foresail, that
is it," shouted the skipper.

As the boom ran out, and the foresail went up, the Osprey glided on
with accelerated speed, and the end of the bowsprit was but a few
yards from the starting line when the gun fired.

"Bravo, good start," Frank said, as he looked round for the first
time.

The eight yachts were all within a length of each other, and a
cheer broke from the boats around as they sped on their way. For a
time there was but little difference between them, and then the
cutters began to show a little in front. Their long booms gave them
an advantage over the schooners and the yawl when before the wind;
the spinnaker was not then invented, and the wind was not
sufficiently dead aft to enable the schooners to carry their
mainsail and foresails, wing and wing; or for the yawl's mizzen to
help her.

As they passed Sea View the cutters were a length ahead, the
Phantom having a slight advantage over her sisters. They gained no
further, for the schooners fell into their wake as soon as they
were able to do so, thus robbing them of some of their wind. The
Osprey, having the inside station, kept straight on, and came up
with the cutters as they were abreast of the end of the island. All
were travelling very fast through the water.

"We shall be first round the Nab, sir," Hawkins said in delight.
"The schooners are smothering the cutters, but they are not hurting
us."

"Give her plenty of room when we get there," Frank said.

The skipper nodded. "I won't risk a foul, sir, you may be sure."

The three ladies on board the Phantom were seated on footstools
under the weather bulwark--although as yet the yachts were
travelling on an almost even keel. Miss Haverley and Lady Olive
uttered exclamations of satisfaction as the Phantom slowly drew
ahead of the others, and were loud in their disgust as they saw the
effect of the schooner's sail behind them on their own speed.

"I don't call it fair," the former said; "if a vessel cannot sail
well herself, that she should be allowed to damage the chances of
others. Do you, Bertha?"

"I don't know. I suppose it is equally fair for all, and that we
should do the same if a boat had got ahead of us. Still, it is very
tiresome, but it is just as bad for the other cutters."

"Look at the Osprey," Lady Olive said soon afterwards. "She is
coming up fast; you see, she has nothing behind her. I do believe
that she is going to pass us."

"It won't make much difference," Carthew, who was standing close to
her, said confidently. "The race won't really begin until we are
round the Nab, and after that we shan't hamper each other. I am
quite content with the way that we are going."

The Osprey rounded the lightship two lengths ahead, the Phantom
came next, three lengths before the Chrysalis, and the others
followed in quick succession. The sheets were hauled in, and the
yachts were able to lie close-hauled for Ventnor. The three leading
boats maintained their respective places, but drew out from each
other, and when they passed Ventnor the Osprey was some five
lengths ahead of the Phantom.

"Don't be downcast, ladies," Carthew said, gaily. "We have a long
way to go yet, and once round the point we shall have to turn till
we pass the Needles."

The sea was now getting a good deal rougher. The wind was against
tide, and the yachts began to throw the spray over the bows. Bertha
was struck with the confidence with which Carthew had spoken, and
watched him closely.

"We shall get it a good deal worse off St. Catherine's Head," he
went on. "There is a race there even in the calmest weather, and I
should advise you to get your wraps ready, for the spray will be
flying all over her when we get into it."

They were now working tack and tack, but the Osprey was still
improving her position, and as they neared St. Catherine's Head she
was a good quarter of a mile to the good. Still Carthew maintained
his good temper, but Bertha could see that it was with an effort.
He seemed to pay but little attention to the sailing of the
Phantom, but kept his eyes intently fixed upon the Osprey.

"I should not be surprised at some of us carrying away a spar
before long," he said. "The wind is freshening, and we shall have
to shift topsails and jibs, I fancy."

They were now lying far over, and the water was two or three planks
up the lee deck. Each time the cutter went about, the ladies
carried their footstools up to windward, when the vessel was for a
moment on an even keel. When there they were obliged to sit with
one hand over the rail, to prevent themselves from sliding down to
leeward as the vessel heeled.

"There goes the Chrysalis's topmast," the skipper exclaimed
suddenly. "That does for her chance. I think I had better get the
jib header ready for hoisting, Mr. Carthew; the spar is bending
like a whip."

"Yes, I think you had better get it up at once, captain. It is no
use running any risk."

As the Phantom's big topsail came down, the Osprey's was seen to
flutter and then to descend.

"He has only been waiting for us," the captain said.

Carthew made no reply. He was still intently watching the craft
ahead.

"It is just as well for him," the captain went on. "He will be in
the race directly."

Bertha was still watching Carthew's face. Cheerful as his tones
were, there was an expression of anxiety in it. Three minutes
later, he gave an exclamation as of relief, and a shout rose from
the men forward.

Following the direction of his eyes, she saw the bowsprit of the
Osprey swing to leeward, and a moment later her topmast fall over
her side.

"What did I tell you?" Carthew said, exultingly. "A race is never
lost till it is won."

"Oh! I am sorry," Bertha said. "I do think it is hard to lose a
race by an accident."

"Every yacht has to abide by its own accidents, Miss Greendale; and
carrying away a spar is one of the accidents one counts on. If it
were not for that risk, yachts would always carry on too long. It
is a matter of judgment and of attention to gear. The loss of a
spar is in nine times out of ten the result either of rashness or
of inattention.

"However, I am sorry myself; that is to say, I would prefer winning
the cup by arriving first at the flag boat. However, I am certainly
not disposed to grumble at Fortune just at present."

"I should think not, Mr. Carthew," Lady Olive said. "I am sure I
congratulate you very heartily. Of course, I have seen scores of
races, and whenever there is any wind someone is always sure to
lose a spar, and sometimes two or three will do so. I don't think
you need fear any of the boats behind."

"No, yet I don't feel quite safe. I have no fear of any of the
cutters, but once round the Needles, it will be a broad reach, and
you will see that the schooners will come up fast, and I have to
allow them a good bit of time. However, I think we are pretty
safe."



Chapter 9.

The Phantom presently came along close to the Osprey, and Carthew
shouted:

"Is there anything that I can do for you?"

"No, thank you," Frank replied.

Then Bertha called out:

"I am so sorry."

Frank waved his hand in reply. The men were all busy trying to get
the wreckage alongside. The cross-trees had been carried away by
the fall of the topmast, and her deck forward was littered with
gear. The difficulty was greatly increased by the heavy sea in the
race.

"As soon as you have got everything on board, Hawkins, we will put
a couple of reefs in the mainsail. She will go well enough under
that and the foresail. If the mizzen is too much for her, we can
take it off."

It was nearly half an hour before all was clear, and the last of
the yachts in the race had passed them before the leeward sheet of
the foresail was hauled aft, and the Phantom resumed her course. As
soon as she did so, the captain came aft with part of the copper
bar of the bobstay.

"There has been foul play, sir," he said. "I thought there must
have been, for I could not imagine that this bar would have broken
unless there had been a flaw in the metal or it had been tampered
with. I unshackled it myself, for I thought it was better that the
men should not see it until I had told you about it."

"Quite right, Hawkins. Yes, there is no doubt that there has been
foul play. The bar has been sawn three-quarters of the way through
with a fine saw, and, of course, it went as soon as she began to
dip her bowsprit well into it in the race. You see, whoever has
done it has poured some acid into it, and darkened the copper,
partly perhaps to prevent the colour of the freshly-cut metal from
being noticed, and partly to give it the appearance, after it was
broken, of being an old cut."

"It cannot have been that, sir, for we were out in quite as rough a
sea as this last week, and the bowsprit would have gone then if
this cut had been there. Besides, we should have been sure to have
noticed it when we went round her to polish up her sides."

"I don't know about that, Hawkins. You see, the cut is from below,
and it is only two or three inches above the waterline. It might
very well have been there without being noticed. Still, I agree
with you, it could not have been there last week, or it must have
gone when she put her nose into it then. In point of fact, I have
no doubt that it was done last night or the night before. It could
easily have been managed. Of course, everyone was below, both here
and in the yachts lying round us, and a man might very well have
come out in a small boat between one and two o'clock in the
morning, and done this without being noticed."

"He might have done that, sir, but we should have heard the grating
down in the forecastle."

"I don't know, Hawkins. A fine steel saw, such as burglars use,
will work its way through an iron bar almost noiselessly, and I
should say that it would go through copper almost as easily as it
would through hard wood. It is as well to say nothing to the crew
about it, but I think it my duty to lay the matter before the club
committee, and they can do as they like about it. Mind, I don't say
for a moment that it was done by anyone on board the Phantom. It
may have been someone on shore who had laid a bet of a few pounds
against us, and wanted to make sure of winning his money. Besides,
the Phantom might very well have hoped to have beaten us fairly,
for she was just as much fancied as we were. Take it below, and lay
it in my cabin, and when we get in unshackle the other bit of the
bar, and put it with this."

It was impossible, however, when the bowsprit and bobstay were
brought on board, that the crew should have failed to notice the
break in the bar, and the news that there had been foul play had at
once been passed round. Seeing the angry faces of the men, and the
animated talk forward, Frank told the captain to call all hands
aft.

"Look here, my men," he said. "I see that you are all aware of what
has taken place. It is most disgraceful and unfortunate, and I need
hardly say that I am as much vexed as yourselves at losing the Cup,
which, but for that, we must have carried off. However, it is one
of those cases in which there is nothing to be done, and we should
only make things worse by making a fuss about it. We have no ground
whatever for believing that it was the work of one of the Phantom's
crew, and it is far more likely that it was the work of some
longshore loafer who had laid more than he could afford against us.
It has partly been our own fault, but we shall know better in
future, and your captain will take good care that there shall be an
anchor watch set for two or three nights before we sail another
race.

"What I have called you up for is to beg of you not to make this an
occasion for disputes or quarrels ashore. Hitherto I have been
proud of the good behaviour of my crew, and I should be sorry
indeed to hear that there was any row ashore between you and the
Phantom's men. They at least have nothing to boast of. They have
won the Cup, but we have won the honour. We have shown ourselves
the better yacht, and should have beaten them by something like a
mile, if it had not been for this accident. Therefore it is my
express wish and order that you do not show your natural
disappointment on shore. You can give the real reason of our
defeat, but do not say a word of blame to anyone, for we know not
who was the author of the blackguardly act.

"Of course, the matter cannot be kept altogether a secret, for it
will be my duty to lay it before the committee. I shall make no
protest. If they choose to institute an inquiry they must do so,
but I shall take no steps in the matter, and it is unlikely in the
extreme that we shall ever know who did it. I shall pay you all
winning money, for that you did not win was no fault of yours. One
thing I will wager, though I am not a betting man, and that is,
that the next time we meet the Phantom we shall beat her, by as
much as we should have done today, but for this accident."

The appearance of the Osprey as she sailed into the anchorage,
without topmast or bowsprit, excited great attention; and many of
the yachtsmen came on board to inquire how the disaster had
happened. To save going through the story a score of times, Frank
had the broken pieces of the bobstay bar brought up and laid on the
deck near the tiller, and in reply to inquiries simply pointed to
them, saying:

"I think that tells the tale for itself."

All were full of indignation at the dastardly outrage.

"What are you going to do, Major?"

"I am not going to do anything, except take it ashore and hand it
to the Sailing Committee. That it has been cut is certain. As to
who cut it, there is no shadow of evidence."

"If I were in Carthew's place," one of them said, "I should decline
to take the Cup under such circumstances, and would offer to sail
the race over again with you as soon as you had repaired damages."

"I should decline the offer if he made it," he said, quietly. "It
is probable that we shall meet in a race again some day, and then
we can fight it out, but for the present it is done with. He has
won the Queen's Cup, and I must put up with my accidents."

The effect produced by the facts reported to the committee, and
their examination of the broken bar, was very great. Such a thing
had not been known before in the annals of yachting, and the
committee ordered a poster to be instantly printed and stuck up
offering a reward of 100 pounds for proof that would lead to the
conviction of the author of the outrage.

Frank returned on board at once, and sent off a boat, towing behind
it the broken bowsprit and topmast to Cowes, with instructions to
Messieurs White to have two fresh spars got ready, by the following
afternoon if possible.
