"Confess that it was you, and I will kill you quickly," Daoud whispered.
"I have shown you paradise, and I can show you hell. If you do not give
yourself up now, and I find out later that it was you, I will inflict
torments of mind and body on you beyond your imagining."

"David, stop, you will kill him!" Sophia screamed. She gripped Daoud's
arm, digging her nails into his muscle.

Gradually Daoud released his hold on the corded throat. With his eyes
alone, employing the Hashishiyya "look that imprisons," he held Sordello
fast. The bravo's eyes were bloodshot and red-rimmed.

He was glad Sophia had stopped him. She must have realized that he would
regret it if he killed Sordello in a fit of rage. If Sordello had not
betrayed them, his false reports to Simon de Gobignon would still be
useful. And in any case his sudden disappearance immediately after the
attack on the Monaldeschi palace would draw de Gobignon's attention.

"If it is not you, then there is another among us who told Simon de
Gobignon about my plans. If you want to save your life, you will find
out who it is."

"I promise you, Messere." Sordello's voice was a hoarse croak. "Whoever
the escremento is, I will deliver his life into your hands."

Sordello stood up, then turned to Sophia and bowed.

"Madonna," Sordello gasped. "My eternal gratitude--"

"Just get out," Sophia snapped.

Was there a suggestion of a leer in Sordello's lumpy face as he stared
at Sophia? But pain spread from the wound in Daoud's leg in great
ripples through him, and he lay back and concentrated on the Sufi
exercise that detached him from his body.

The heavy oak door closed behind Sordello. They were all three silent
for a moment. Then Lorenzo jerked the door open and looked out into the
corridor. He nodded, indicating Sordello had truly gone.

"It might have been wiser to strangle him," said Lorenzo. "He has all
our lives in his hands."

Daoud held up his hand. "What he said was true. He could have delivered
us to our enemies before the attack. I believe he is still in my power."

       *       *       *       *       *

When alone with Sophia, Daoud lay back on his cushions. She stood
looking down at him, and he wondered if that was pity he saw in her
face.

"You are in such pain," she said.

He shook his head. "It is nothing."

"I do not mean the pain of the body."

She understood, then, what he was feeling. He smiled at her and shut his
eyes.

She sat in silence on the edge of the bed while he lay there, brooding.
Again he escaped into drowsiness. His mind drifted back to the sands of
Egypt. He dreamed again of riding as a Mameluke.

When he woke, a short time had passed, and Sophia was still sitting
there, gazing down at him.

Hints of a new plan began to come together in his mind. As fever purged
him of poison, it had brought him dreams of battle. Not of intrigues
with the priests and bishops around the pope. Not of ambushes in narrow
streets. Rather, open war.

That was the meaning of those dreams. Perhaps God Himself had sent them.
He was called upon to wage jihad against the enemies of Islam as a
Mameluke, on horseback, at the head of an army.

He held out his arm to Sophia. "Help me up. You and Lorenzo and I must
meet with Ugolini."

       *       *       *       *       *

Later that morning, a heavy spring rain hammered on the windows of
Ugolini's cabinet. The storm had so darkened the room that the
cardinal's servants had lit extra candles. Daoud, Lorenzo, and Sophia
sat in a semicircle across from Ugolini's worktable.

The painted glass eyes of Ugolini's stuffed owl glared disapprovingly
down from the bookshelves at Daoud, who had a sense that the cardinal
felt as the owl looked. The skull on the table seemed to be laughing at
him.

He understood now what he had to do, but would the others, especially
Ugolini, go along with it? Over Ugolini's frantic protests he had
insisted on inciting the Filippeschi to attack the Palazzo Monaldeschi.
That attack having failed of its purpose, would the three of them still
accept Daoud's authority? Ugolini, surely, would think that events had
proved him right about the futility of the attack on the Monaldeschi.
How could he be won over to the idea of a wider war? _Make war utterly
on the idolaters_--that, he had decided, was the meaning of his dream.

"Manfred's supporters, the Ghibellini, must take the pope captive," he
said. "I know that you would prefer peace to war, but now that I have
tried to kill the Tartars and failed, we do not have that choice." It
was best, he thought, to admit his failure openly before Ugolini threw
it in his face.

The cardinal's eyes were almost as wide and as stark as the owl's. "You
would plunge the whole of Italy into war?"

"No," said Daoud, "but that is what is going to happen. The one thing
that has kept the French out of Italy is the pope's refusal to give the
Christian kings, especially the king of France, permission to ally
themselves with the Tartars. But now that Urban is ill, he may give King
Louis what he wants. When the pope allows the alliance, Louis will give
his brother Charles permission to attack Manfred. It is not I who will
plunge Italy into war. I am proposing only that we act before the French
do."

Ugolini shook his head. "What do you mean, take the pope captive?"

"The Papal States are surrounded by cities ruled by Manfred's Ghibellino
supporters. The nearest is Siena. With gold and with timely warnings
about the danger from the French, we can persuade Siena to move against
the pope." He held up his fist. "And then we can make sure that the next
pope elected is favorable to Manfred. And through him, well disposed
toward peace with Islam."

It was the same sort of plan, Daoud thought, as inciting the Filippeschi
against the Monaldeschi. But Lorenzo had already visited Siena and made
sure that the Ghibellini of Siena, with Daoud's help, could raise a far
greater army than the pope could muster in Orvieto. This time he would
succeed.

"Impossible!" Ugolini cried. "No king can control the Papacy. The
Hohenstaufen have been trying to rule over the popes for centuries, and
for centuries they have failed."

"Perhaps it takes a stranger to see that where the Hohenstaufen failed,
the French are about to succeed," said Daoud. "France is now the
strongest kingdom in Europe. If Manfred does not get control of the pope
and the cardinals, the next pope will be under the protection of the
French, and will have to do whatever they want."

"Urban is a sick man," said Ugolini. "There is not a cardinal who would
risk a wager that he will live to see the year 1265. He will not call
for the French to save him when he knows the angels are coming to get
him."

"No, there I must disagree with Your Eminence," said Lorenzo, lounging
in a large chair facing Ugolini's table. "Urban is a Frenchman, and he
will work to bring the French into Italy until the moment the angels
knock at his door."

Sophia, who had been sitting quietly in an armless straight-back chair
with her hands folded in her lap, said, "The pope will blame the
Ghibellini for the attack on the Monaldeschi. He will want help, and he
will ask it from the French even if it means Christians joining the
Tartars in a crusade the pope does not really want."

"Very shrewd," said Daoud with a smile in her direction. "Except that
the pope had decided before the attack on the Monaldeschi to approve the
alliance with the Tartars. As we know from his persuading Fra Tomasso to
switch sides. It was because the pope had clearly turned against us that
I planned to kill the Tartars."

Daoud was tired of sitting. Despite the pain in his leg, he used his
stick to push himself to his feet and stepped out of the window recess.
He limped over to Ugolini's table.

"We must send Lorenzo to Siena with enough of our precious stones to
raise an army big enough to overwhelm the papal soldiery and the Orvieto
militia. It may take time to persuade the Sienese to act. It will take
more time to muster an army and march on Orvieto. We must begin as
quickly as we can. With the pope in Ghibellino hands, with the
Ghibellini in a position to sway the outcome of the next papal election,
we may yet keep the French out of Italy."

And that, he thought, would keep crusaders and Tartars out of the Dar
al-Islam.

Ugolini's shrug spoke more of despair than of acquiescence. "Certainly
the French will come if we do nothing. You are right about that. Do as
you will. It is a miracle we have survived this long."

Strange, Daoud thought. Ugolini saw their mere survival as miraculous.
To Daoud, failure so far to put a final stop to the alliance of
Christians and Tartars made him wonder whether God disapproved of him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once he accepted the fact that he had to go, Lorenzo had hoped the rain
would continue. Under its cover his leaving the city was less likely to
be noticed or impeded. But by mid-afternoon, the hour of None, when he
was packed and mounted, a spare horse trotting behind him, a bright,
hot sun had come out, and the puddles in the narrow streets were turning
to steam.

At the Porta Maggiore he stopped when he saw two clerks seated at tables
on either side of the gateway, one questioning each person entering the
town, the other examining those leaving. A dozen of the podesta's men in
yellow and blue stood by to keep people in line. Each clerk consulted
what appeared to be a list on a scroll and on another scroll wrote down
the names of those he questioned.

Only two days ago Sophia had told d'Ucello that David of Trebizond and
his man Giancarlo were in Perugia. Now, Lorenzo thought, those damned
clerks were probably watching for their return. They could have been set
at the gate the morning after the attack on the Monaldeschi palace.

He smiled ironically as he remembered how, last summer, he had sat as
these clerks did now, at the gateway to Lucera waiting to catch a
certain Saracen newly arrived from Egypt.

Now, thought Lorenzo, if he tried to leave Orvieto he would not only be
stopped and possibly arrested, he would be as good as telling the
podesta that he and David had never been out of the town at all.

Lorenzo clenched his fists. He felt like a tuna caught in a net.

_And if I stand here much longer staring they'll notice me and haul me
in._

He quickly turned his horses away from the gate and headed back to
Ugolini's mansion.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the beginning of the third Nocturn, Lorenzo, David, and a servant of
Ugolini's named Riccardo, whom they had chosen for his size and
strength, emerged from an alley near the north side of the city wall.

David wore a hood pulled low over his face. He limped and walked with a
stick. Lorenzo had advised against his being out in the street at all,
but David had answered that the watch did not know he was in Orvieto and
would not be looking for him.

Lorenzo was amazed at how rapidly David had gotten better. He had never
seen a man walking only two days after taking a bad arrow wound in the
leg. The Muslims who taught David the art of healing must be even better
than Jewish physicians.

As they walked, Lorenzo made David recite the names of half a dozen
prominent Perugian merchants who were supporters of King Manfred. If the
podesta were to question David about his whereabouts the night of the
Filippeschi uprising, these men would bear witness that David and
Lorenzo had been in Perugia.

"If d'Ucello does question you, how will you explain that you are back
in Orvieto without having been seen entering through the gate?" Lorenzo
asked him.

"I will tell him--with the greatest reluctance--that the line was very
long when I arrived and that I was in haste to enter, so I bribed the
men on duty to let me by. The more time passes before he discovers my
presence in Orvieto, the more believable that will be."

"If he suspects you of anything, he will arrest you no matter how good a
story you tell him," Lorenzo said.

David stopped walking and rested his hand on Lorenzo's shoulder. "That
is why you must go tonight, my friend. And come back quickly with an
army from Siena."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lorenzo had a pack over his shoulder and wore a long traveling cloak.
Riccardo carried a coil of rope. Ahead of them was a small stone shed
built against the wall, beside one of the round guard towers.

Lorenzo was not particularly frightened by the ordeal ahead. He had done
enough climbing in his younger days. But he was repelled by the thought
that through the large opening in the floor of the little house the
people of this quarter dumped, not only their garbage, but also the
contents of their chamber pots.

They went quietly to the door of the shed. There was a guard in the
tower above them, though he would have no reason to watch the garbage
chute.

Riccardo put a meaty hand on the rough-hewn door. It gave without a
struggle. Not even locked, thought Lorenzo. He supposed the podesta, may
his ballocks wrinkle up like prunes, had not thought that anyone would
choose this ignominious way to escape from the city.

"Sophia told me to tell you she would miss you," David said.

"Kiss her for me," said Lorenzo.

_Wonder if David has bedded Sophia yet._

Riccardo filled the little room so that Lorenzo felt himself being
crowded to the edge of the chute.

"Hey! Riccardo! Push me down _after_ you have the rope around me."

"Sorry, Messere." The burly man tied the rope tightly around Lorenzo's
waist, just above the belt that held the jewels, and they both pulled
hard on the knot to test it. Tying the knots in the dark, they had to be
doubly careful. Then Riccardo tied the other end of the rope around his
own waist and donned heavy oxhide gloves.

It was a warm April night, and Lorenzo smelled a horrid odor of garbage
and excrement coming up from the pit. It was not actually a pit, but a
crevice in the face of the cliff on which Orvieto was built. Lorenzo had
hoped the day's heavy rain would have washed the cliffside clean. But
the people of Orvieto had been dumping offal here for centuries.

"Your final instructions?" he said to David.

"Ugolini's servant Guglielmo seems to have gotten safely out of the city
with your horses and baggage," said David. "He must not have been on any
list. He will meet you at the shrine of Saint Sebastian on the road to
Siena. From there you know what you have to do."

David grasped him by the shoulders and then patted his back. They had
become good friends, Lorenzo realized. Look how David was trusting him
to ride with a fortune in gems to Siena, meet the right parties, bargain
with them, deliver the gems to them and come back to Orvieto with a
Ghibellino army. That was much to expect of a man. Yet David seemed not
to doubt that Lorenzo would do it.

Lorenzo felt warm when he thought how much David meant to him. He had
come on this mission as King Manfred's man, but he was going to Siena
just as much for David as for Manfred. Bringing the Sienese into the
struggle might keep the French away, though, and that would help Manfred
as much as it would the Muslims.

"Lower away, then," Lorenzo said to Riccardo.

David stepped back. Riccardo and Lorenzo both took hold of the rope.
Lorenzo stepped over the edge of the chute. His legs dangled, and he
tried not to think about how much empty space was between him and the
rocks at the base of Orvieto's mountain. The rope cut painfully into his
waist and back. He gripped it tightly with his gloved hands and wrapped
his legs around it to take some of the strain off the loop around his
waist.

Grunting, Riccardo slowly lowered Lorenzo through the chute. David was
standing beside Ugolini's man and had laid a protective hand on the
rope. The hole in the floor was just wide enough for Lorenzo's shoulders
to pass through. Then he was hanging free below the city wall, his back
to the cliff, staring out at a starry black sky and the silhouettes of
distant hillsides. He felt dizzy and shut his eyes.

"Turn me," he whispered hoarsely up at the opening above him.

After a moment he felt his body rotating, and again he had to fight
dizziness. He was facing in toward the smelly crevice, and he drew up
his legs and planted his feet firmly on its walls. With the help of the
rope he could walk down the cliffside. Riccardo let out the rope a
little more, and Lorenzo's boot sole scraped loudly against the
crumbling tufa surface, releasing a shower of pebbles.

"Who's down there?" a distant voice shouted, and Lorenzo felt as if
someone had dumped a bucket of cold water over him. That was the guard
in the tower high above. He wondered if the guard could see him down
here. He tried to grip the sides of the crevice with his feet and pull
himself closer to the cliff face.

"I am taking a piss, buon'amico!" Riccardo called up to the guard. "Do
you mind?"

"That place is not for pissing," the guard called back.

"Would you rather I sprinkled your tower?"

There was no answer this time, and Riccardo began whistling loudly to
cover any further noises Lorenzo might make. Lorenzo hoped the guard
would not come down to investigate. What if he did, and Riccardo felt he
must let go of the rope?

Riccardo must have had the same thought, because he began paying out the
rope more rapidly, and Lorenzo's feet flew over the crackling rock. He
was like a man running furiously backward. It would be comical, he
thought, were he not in danger of breaking his neck.

This was a time when he wished he had clung to a religion of some sort
rather than abandoning the faith of his fathers and replacing it with
nothing. It would be so comforting to pray to an all-powerful being who
might be kind enough to protect him. Just _hoping_ not to get hurt
seemed stupid and futile.

He felt the cliff wall beginning to slant outward a bit under his feet.
The whistling from the shed had stopped. He looked up and saw that he
was halfway down the side of the cliff. The backs of his legs ached from
the strain of supporting his weight, and his shoulders and arms hurt
too. He began to worry, not so much about whether he would fall as what
he might land in when he reached the bottom.

And the smell of rot and filth all around him might choke him before he
ever got down. He saw directly below him a pit of blackness surrounded
by trees that were only a little less dark. The muck might be over his
head; he might just sink into it.

As he reached the level of the trees he drew his knees up and then
straightened them hard, giving himself a push away from the cliff. He
was still being lowered, so that when he swung back to the cliff he was
much farther down. This time his boots hit a coating of soft stuff on
the rock, and the smell was unbearable.

_I'd rather break my neck than smother in shit._

He kicked again with his legs, and when he hit the end of the outward
swing, the rope feeling as if it would cut him in two, he grabbed for a
tree branch, barely visible in the darkness. It hit him in the stomach
and knocked all the wind out of him, but he clung to it desperately.

Bent double over the tree limb, he looked down and saw shadows that
might be forest floor as far below him as his own height. Then again, he
might be seeing the tops of other trees. He drew his dagger and cut the
rope around his middle but held it with one hand. He took deep, relieved
breaths when the constraint was gone. He gave three sharp jerks on the
rope, the signal that he was down. After a moment all tension left the
rope, and he felt it falling in the darkness. Another moment and he
heard rustlings, thumps, and splashes as the rope landed at the bottom
of the crevice. Tomorrow's dumping, he thought, would quite conceal it.

He wondered briefly if David and Riccardo had safely left the dumping
shed and were on their way back to Ugolini's. He looked down again into
the darkness, realizing that if he jumped from here he might fall far
enough to kill himself. Having swung away from the pile of offal, he was
now more worried about breaking his neck. He pulled himself up,
straddling the tree and facing in toward the trunk. He slid down to the
trunk, then tried to feel about with his foot for another branch.

His feet met nothing. He swung over the side of the branch, feeling the
trunk with one hand and the space below him with his feet. Still
nothing. Now he was dangling from the limb, holding on with two aching
hands. If he had not worn gloves, he would have no skin left on his
palms.

_Well, here goes one hopeful atheist._ He let go.

He fell a short distance, feetfirst, into a pool of water. It came up
over his low boots, soaking his hose. There was no smell; apparently it
was a pure forest pool, probably a puddle enlarged by the recent rain.
Sighing, he sloshed out of it. Small creatures hopped and scurried away
from him.

_It could have been much, much worse._

Glad to feel his feet on the ground, he hoped the rest of his journey to
Siena would be less exciting than the beginning.




XLVI


Friar Mathieu sat in a cushion-lined armchair in the cloistered garden
of the Hospital of Santa Clara, the white wisps of his beard ruffling
like feathers in the morning breeze. The dappled shade of a pear tree
protected him from the June sun.

A young Franciscan, his tonsured head a gleaming pink spot surrounded by
a wreath of close-cropped black hair, stood at a tall desk beside Friar
Mathieu, writing on a piece of parchment.

"All things lead to good if one looks at them aright," Friar Mathieu
said with a chuckle. "That murderer in black gave me the time I needed
to do something needful--get the story of my journey among the Tartars
written before it is lost in my failing memory. A good thing I did not
land on my head."

Despite the pain he felt at Friar Mathieu's injuries, Simon had to smile
at the old Franciscan's little joke. And indeed, he might look small and
fragile huddled in his chair, but he was showing energy and zest for
life. He was pulling through.

"And behold," Friar Mathieu went on, lifting his bandaged right arm, "I
myself am exempted from writing. Friar Giuseppe must do the work while I
sit here and explore my memory. And when I grow tired of even that
little bit of work, Friar Giuseppe reads to me from the newly arrived
manuscript on mathematics, called _De Computo Naturali_, by our gifted
brother Friar Bacon of Oxford. I could almost be grateful to that
Assassin."

Simon stood awkwardly, looking unhappily down at him, till Friar Mathieu
motioned him to sit on the ground beside him. To make room for himself,
Simon moved a pair of crutches out of the way. It was worrisome that so
soon--only a few weeks after the fall that had almost killed him--Friar
Mathieu had started hobbling about on crutches and had begun dictating,
sitting painfully upright, to Friar Giuseppe. Even though one leg was
certainly broken and there were probably a dozen other cracks in his
arms and ribs, Friar Mathieu insisted that he was more likely to die if
he remained in bed than if he was up and moving about.

"You are looking well today, Father." He had to admit it, even though
the old priest was not taking proper care of himself.

"I am lucky this happened to me in the spring," said Friar Mathieu. "The
sun and air help me mend. But I fear you will not see my complete
recovery, since you will have to leave Orvieto shortly."

"Leave? Why, Father? Has something gone wrong?" His first thought, as
always, was for the safety of the Tartars. Ever since that terrible
night in April, he dreaded leaving them out of his sight.

Instead of answering, Friar Mathieu asked Friar Giuseppe for privacy.
The young priest bowed deeply and touched the old man's hand reverently
before gathering up his writing materials and turning to go.

"You have not heard, then? A courier brought the news to the pope's
palace last night. All through the north, the Ghibellini are on the
move. Siena, it seems, has been quietly raising an army to send against
Orvieto. And the Ghibellino party has taken power in Pisa and Lucca. It
appears the Ghibellini have decided to seize all of Italy before the
French come in and take it."

_But we are French_, thought Simon, _and we have no ambitions in Italy_.

_Uncle Charles does._

In this quiet garden it was hard to believe that an army could be
preparing to march against Orvieto. Or even that the attack on the
Palazzo Monaldeschi had happened in the same city. Simon watched a friar
in his brown robe serenely weeding. The rows of plants were already tall
and thick--peas, haricots, lettuce, cabbage, carrots. At Gobignon this
time of year the seedlings would not be half as high.

"Will the Sienese besiege Orvieto?" he asked.

_Another battle? And another attempt on the Tartars?_

"Pope Urban will not wait to see what they do," said Friar Mathieu. "He
feels threatened from both north and south, and intends to move away
from here as soon as possible. There is a rumor that Manfred of Sicily
himself may invade the Papal States this summer."

Simon sprang to his feet and threw his arms wide in astonishment. "And
what about the Tartars?"

"They will certainly go where His Holiness goes."

"God's blood!" Simon struck his forehead with his hand. "Forgive me,
Father. But if the pope has not enough troops to keep him safe in
Orvieto, surely he is in even more danger on the road. And if the
Tartars are with him, we could lose everything."

Friar Mathieu shook his head, absently rubbing his bound right arm with
his left hand. "We can gain everything. His Holiness needs help
desperately. Now he can be persuaded to give King Louis permission to
join with the Tartars." The old Franciscan's eyes fixed on Simon's. "You
must go to the pope."

Simon felt the palms of his hands grow cold. "The pope will not listen
to me, Father."

Friar Mathieu chuckled. "Is he more likely to listen to that fool--God
forgive me--de Verceuil?"

"Yes," said Simon after a moment's thought. "De Verceuil is a cardinal.
And is it not his task to treat with the pope? Mine is to guard the
ambassadors."

"Are you not close to King Louis, Simon? Almost a foster son?"

Simon hesitated. "That is putting it a bit strongly. But he knows me
well."

Friar Mathieu gestured with his left hand. "Then you are the person to
carry His Holiness's appeal for help to King Louis."

The suggestion dismayed Simon. It meant he would have to leave the
Tartars for months. And just when they would be much more vulnerable to
attack, following the pope from one city to another.

"No, Father," he said. "I cannot leave the Tartars."

Friar Mathieu shook his head patiently. "Do you not see, Simon? If the
pope does decide to approve an alliance with the Tartars, John and
Philip's work is done."

Standing on the gravel walk of the Franciscan cloister garden, Simon
felt as if the earth were shaking under him. He could not picture
himself speaking to the pope as one statesman to another. Persuade the
pope suddenly to take a stand, when he had vacillated for nearly a year?
And yet, he told himself, he was the Count de Gobignon, and the lands he
held were larger than some kingdoms.

But that only reminded him that he held the title through a lie.

       *       *       *       *       *

The courtyard before the papal palace was crowded with covered wagons
and open carts, horses and donkeys, men carrying crates and bales. Here
and there, mailed papal archers in gold and white surcoats strode,
crossbows on their shoulders, alert for pilfering. Simon asked a series
of servants for the pope's majordomo and was directed to that official,
clad in a glittering embroidered tunic, who stood at the center of the
papal library overseeing the packing of books and scrolls. Simon
summoned up all his confidence and presented himself to the man.

"The Count de Gobignon of France?" the horse-faced majordomo repeated.
"I will try to find His Holiness for you, Your Signory."

They found Pope Urban in a tiny chamber on the second floor of the
palace, writing furiously at a desk that faced a window opposite the
door. He was wearing a white cassock with a white linen hood drawn up
over his head. On his desk Simon saw a jar of ink, a sheaf of quills,
and a stack of parchment sheets. A wrought-iron stand held a black
earthenware pitcher over a candle flame.

"Holy Father--" the majordomo began, addressing the pope's back. Simon
watched with fascination the rapid movements of Pope Urban's right arm
as his quill raced over the parchment, leaping after each line to the
ink jar and back again.

"Maledizione!" the pope exclaimed. "Not now, Ludovico. God's pity, let
me get at least one letter done without you interrupting me. The
Archangel Michael run you through if you speak another word to me."

Simon was momentarily shocked, but then recalled that the pope was a
shoemaker's son. Once a bourgeois, always a bourgeois, he thought, even
if one becomes God's vicar on earth. But, by God's robe, the man could
write fast. In a moment he had filled a sheet of parchment with the
short, unadorned black strokes of a chancery hand. Simon estimated it
would take him the better part of a morning to write that much. Of
course Pope Urban, being a churchman all his life, had a good deal more
practice at writing.

Urban folded the parchment and poured melted red wax from the black
pitcher to seal it. He took the large gold ring from his finger and
stamped it into the wax. Without looking around, he handed the letter to
his majordomo.

"To Duke Alberto Baglione at Perugia by our best horses," said Pope
Urban. "Have Pietro Pettorini carry it; he is our fastest man."

