
By her great divan the dead man had fallen, and so near to it he lay that
one arm was hidden by the draperies; and at this moment this she
saw--before having seemed to see nothing but the death in his face.  A
thought came to her like a flame lit on a sudden, and springing high the
instant the match struck the fuel it leaped from.  It was a thought so
daring and so strange that even she gasped once, being appalled, and her
hands, stealing to her brow, clutched at the hair that grew there,
feeling it seem to rise and stand erect.

"Is it madness to so dare?" she said hoarsely, and for an instant,
shuddering, hid her eyes, but then uncovered and showed them burning.
"Nay! not as I will dare it," she said, "for it will make me steel.  You
fell well," she said to the stone-faced thing, "and as you lie there,
seem to tell me what to do, in your own despite.  You would not have so
helped me had you known.  Now 'tis 'twixt Fate and I--a human thing--who
is but a hunted woman."

She put her strong hand forth and thrust him--he was already
stiffening--backward from the shoulder, there being no shrinking on her
face as she felt his flesh yield beneath her touch, for she had passed
the barrier lying between that which is mere life and that which is
pitiless hell, and could feel naught that was human.  A poor wild beast
at bay, pressed on all sides by dogs, by huntsmen, by resistless weapons,
by Nature's pitiless self--glaring with bloodshot eyes, panting, with
fangs bared in the savagery of its unfriended agony--might feel thus.
'Tis but a hunted beast; but 'tis alone, and faces so the terror and
anguish of death.

The thing gazing with its set sneer, and moving but stiffly, she put
forth another hand upon its side and thrust it farther backward until it
lay stretched beneath the great broad seat, its glazed and open eyes
seeming to stare upward blankly at the low roof of its strange prison;
she thrust it farther backward still, and letting the draperies fall,
steadily and with care so rearranged them that all was safe and hid from
sight.

"Until to-night," she said, "you will lie well there.  And then--and
then--"

She picked up the long silken lock of hair which lay like a serpent at
her feet, and threw it into the fire, watching it burn, as all hair
burns, with slow hissing, and she watched it till 'twas gone.

Then she stood with her hands pressed upon her eyeballs and her brow, her
thoughts moving in great leaps.  Although it reeled, the brain which had
worked for her ever, worked clear and strong, setting before her what was
impending, arguing her case, showing her where dangers would arise, how
she must provide against them, what she must defend and set at defiance.
The power of will with which she had been endowed at birth, and which had
but grown stronger by its exercise, was indeed to be compared to some
great engine whose lever 'tis not nature should be placed in human hands;
but on that lever her hand rested now, and to herself she vowed she would
control it, since only thus might she be saved.  The torture she had
undergone for months, the warring of the evil past with the noble
present, of that which was sweet and passionately loving woman with that
which was all but devil, had strung her to a pitch so intense and high
that on the falling of this unnatural and unforeseen blow she was left
scarce a human thing.  Looking back, she saw herself a creature doomed
from birth; and here in one moment seemed to stand a force ranged in mad
battle with the fate which had doomed her.

"'Twas ordained that the blow should fall so," she said, "and those who
did it laugh--laugh at me."

'Twas but a moment, and her sharp breathing became even and regular as
though at her command; her face composed itself, and she turned to the
bell and rang it as with imperious haste.

When the lacquey entered, she was standing holding papers in her hand as
if she had but just been consulting them.

"Follow Sir John Oxon," she commanded.  "Tell him I have forgot an
important thing and beg him to return at once.  Lose no time.  He has but
just left me and can scarce be out of sight."

The fellow saw there was no time to lose.  They all feared that imperial
eye of hers and fled to obey its glances.  Bowing, he turned, and
hastened to do her bidding, fearing to admit that he had not seen the
guest leave, because to do so would be to confess that he had been absent
from his post, which was indeed the truth.

She knew he would come back shortly, and thus he did, entering somewhat
breathed by his haste.

"My lady," he said, "I went quickly to the street, and indeed to the
corner of it, but Sir John was not within sight."

"Fool, you were not swift enough!" she said angrily.  "Wait, you must go
to his lodgings with a note.  The matter is of importance."

She went to a table--'twas close to the divan, so close that if she had
thrust forth her foot she could have touched what lay beneath it--and
wrote hastily a few lines.  They were to request that which was
stiffening within three feet of her to return to her as quickly as
possible that she might make inquiries of an important nature which she
had forgotten at his departure.

"Take this to Sir John's lodgings," she said.  "Let there be no loitering
by the way.  Deliver into his own hands, and bring back at once his
answer."

Then she was left alone again, and being so left, paced the room slowly,
her gaze upon the floor.

"That was well done," she said.  "When he returns and has not found him,
I will be angered, and send him again to wait."

She stayed her pacing, and passed her hand across her face.

"'Tis like a nightmare," she said--"as if one dreamed, and choked, and
panted, and would scream aloud, but could not.  I cannot!  I must not!
Would that I might shriek, and dash myself upon the floor, and beat my
head upon it until I lay--as _he_ does."

She stood a moment, breathing fast, her eyes widening, that part of her
which was weak woman for the moment putting her in parlous danger,
realising the which she pressed her sides with hands that were of steel.

"Wait! wait!" she said to herself.  "This is going mad.  This is
loosening hold, and being beaten by that One who hates me and laughs to
see what I have come to."

Naught but that unnatural engine of will could have held her within
bounds and restrained the mounting female weakness that beset her; but
this engine being stronger than all else, it beat her womanish and
swooning terrors down.

"Through this one day I must live," she said, "and plan, and guard each
moment that doth pass.  My face must tell no tale, my voice must hint
none.  He will be still--God knows he will be still enough."

Upon the divan itself there had been lying a little dog; 'twas a King
Charles' spaniel, a delicate pampered thing, which attached itself to
her, and was not easily driven away.  Once during the last hour the
fierce, ill-hushed voices had disturbed it, and it had given vent to a
fretted bark, but being a luxurious little beast, it had soon curled up
among its cushions and gone to sleep again.  But as its mistress walked
about muttering low words and ofttimes breathing sharp breaths, it became
disturbed again.  Perhaps through some instinct of which naught is known
by human creatures, it felt the strange presence of a thing which roused
it.  It stirred, at first drowsily, and lifted its head and sniffed; then
it stretched its limbs, and having done so, stood up, turning on its
mistress a troubled eye, and this she saw and stopped to meet it.  'Twas
a strange look she bestowed upon it, a startled and fearful one; her
thought drew the blood up to her cheek, but backward again it flowed when
the little beast lifted its nose and gave a low but woeful howl.  Twice
it did this, and then jumped down, and standing before the edge of the
couch, stood there sniffing.

There was no mistake, some instinct of which it knew not the meaning had
set it on, and it would not be thrust back.  In all beasts this strange
thing has been remarked--that they know that which ends them all, and so
revolt against it that they cannot be at rest so long as it is near them,
but must roar, or whinny, or howl until 'tis out of the reach of their
scent.  And so 'twas plain this little beast knew and was afraid and
restless.  He would not let it be, but roved about, sniffing and whining,
and not daring to thrust his head beneath the falling draperies, but
growing more and yet more excited and terrified, until at last he
stopped, raised head in air, and gave vent to a longer, louder, and more
dolorous howl, and albeit to one with so strange and noticeable a sound
that her heart turned over in her breast as she stooped and caught him in
her grasp, and shuddered as she stood upright, holding him to her side,
her hand over his mouth.  But he would not be hushed, and struggled to
get down as if indeed he would go mad unless he might get to the thing
and rave at it.

"If I send thee from the room thou wilt come back, poor Frisk," she said.
"There will be no keeping thee away, and I have never ordered thee away
before.  Why couldst thou not keep still?  Nay, 'twas not dog nature."

That it was not so was plain by his struggles and the yelps but poorly
stifled by her grasp.

She put her hand about his little neck, turning, in sooth, very pale.

"Thou too, poor little beast," she said.  "Thou too, who art so small a
thing and never harmed me."

When the lacquey came back he wore an air more timorous than before.

"Your ladyship," he faltered, "Sir John had not yet reached his lodgings.
His servant knew not when he might expect him."

"In an hour go again and wait," she commanded.  "He must return ere long
if he has not left town."

And having said this, pointed to a little silken heap which lay
outstretched limp upon the floor.  "'Tis poor Frisk, who has had some
strange spasm, and fell, striking his head.  He hath been ailing for
days, and howled loudly but an hour ago.  Take him away, poor beast."




CHAPTER XVII--Wherein his Grace of Osmonde's courier arrives from France


The stronghold of her security lay in the fact that her household so
stood in awe of her, and that this room, which was one of the richest and
most beautiful, though not the largest, in the mansion, all her servitors
had learned to regard as a sort of sacred place in which none dared to
set foot unless invited or commanded to enter.  Within its four walls she
read and wrote in the morning hours, no servant entering unless summoned
by her; and the apartment seeming, as it were, a citadel, none approached
without previous parley.  In the afternoon the doors were thrown open,
and she entertained there such visitors as came with less formality than
statelier assemblages demanded.  When she went out of it this morning to
go to her chamber that her habit might be changed and her toilette made,
she glanced about her with a steady countenance.

"Until the babblers flock in to chatter of the modes and playhouses," she
said, "all will be as quiet as the grave.  Then I must stand near, and
plan well, and be in such beauty and spirit that they will see naught but
me."

In the afternoon 'twas the fashion for those who had naught more serious
in their hands than the killing of time to pay visits to each other's
houses, and drinking dishes of tea, to dispose of their neighbours'
characters, discuss the playhouses, the latest fashions in furbelows or
commodes, and make love either lightly or with serious intent.  One may
be sure that at my Lady Dunstanwolde's many dishes of Bohea were drunk,
and many ogling glances and much witticism exchanged.  There was in these
days even a greater following about her than ever.  A triumphant beauty
on the verge of becoming a great duchess is not like to be neglected by
her acquaintance, and thus her ladyship held assemblies both gay and
brilliantly varied, which were the delight of the fashionable triflers of
the day.

This afternoon they flocked in greater numbers than usual.  The episode
of the breaking of Devil, the unexpected return of his Grace of Osmonde,
the preparations for the union, had given an extra stimulant to that
interest in her ladyship which was ever great enough to need none.
Thereunto was added the piquancy of the stories of the noticeable
demeanour of Sir John Oxon, of what had seemed to be so plain a rebellion
against his fate, and also of my lady's open and cold displeasure at the
manner of his bearing himself as a disappointed man who presumed to show
anger against that to which he should gallantly have been resigned, as
one who is conquered by the chance of war.  Those who had beheld the two
ride homeward together in the morning, were full of curiousness, and one
and another, mentioning the matter, exchanged glances, speaking plainly
of desire to know more of what had passed, and of hope that chance might
throw the two together again in public, where more of interest might be
gathered.  It seemed indeed not unlikely that Sir John might appear among
the tea-bibbers, and perchance 'twas for this lively reason that my
lady's room was this afternoon more than usually full of gay spirits and
gossip-loving ones.

They found, however, only her ladyship's self and her sister, Mistress
Anne, who, of truth, did not often join her tea-parties, finding them so
given up to fashionable chatter and worldly witticisms that she felt
herself somewhat out of place.  The world knew Mistress Anne but as a
dull, plain gentlewoman, whom her more brilliant and fortunate sister
gave gracious protection to, and none missed her when she was absent, or
observed her greatly when she appeared upon the scene.  To-day she was
perchance more observed than usual, because her pallor was so great a
contrast to her ladyship's splendour of beauty and colour.  The contrast
between them was ever a great one; but this afternoon Mistress Anne's
always pale countenance seemed almost livid, there were rings of pain or
illness round her eyes, and her features looked drawn and pinched.  My
Lady Dunstanwolde, clad in a great rich petticoat of crimson flowered
satin, with wondrous yellow Mechlin for her ruffles, and with her
glorious hair dressed like a tower, looked taller, more goddess-like and
full of splendid fire than ever she had been before beheld, or so her
visitors said to her and to each other; though, to tell the truth, this
was no new story, she being one of those women having the curious power
of inspiring the beholder with the feeling each time he encountered them
that he had never before seen them in such beauty and bloom.

When she had come down the staircase from her chamber, Anne, who had been
standing at the foot, had indeed started somewhat at the sight of her
rich dress and brilliant hues.

"Why do you jump as if I were a ghost, Anne?" she asked.  "Do I look like
one?  My looking-glass did not tell me so."

"No," said Anne; "you--are so--so crimson and splendid--and I--"

Her ladyship came swiftly down the stairs to her.

"You are not crimson and splendid," she said.  "'Tis you who are a ghost.
What is it?"

Anne let her soft, dull eyes rest upon her for a moment helplessly, and
when she replied her voice sounded weak.

"I think--I am ill, sister," she said.  "I seem to tremble and feel
faint."

"Go then to bed and see the physician.  You must be cared for," said her
ladyship.  "In sooth, you look ill indeed."

"Nay," said Anne; "I beg you, sister, this afternoon let me be with you;
it will sustain me.  You are so strong--let me--"

She put out her hand as if to touch her, but it dropped at her side as
though its strength was gone.

"But there will be many babbling people," said her sister, with a curious
look.  "You do not like company, and these days my rooms are full.  'Twill
irk and tire you."

"I care not for the people--I would be with you," Anne said, in strange
imploring.  "I have a sick fancy that I am afraid to sit alone in my
chamber.  'Tis but weakness.  Let me this afternoon be with you."

"Go then and change your robe," said Clorinda, "and put some red upon
your cheeks.  You may come if you will.  You are a strange creature,
Anne."

And thus saying, she passed into her apartment.  As there are blows and
pain which end in insensibility or delirium, so there are catastrophes
and perils which are so great as to produce something near akin to these.
As she had stood before her mirror in her chamber watching her
reflection, while her woman attired her in her crimson flowered satin and
builded up her stately head-dress, this other woman had felt that the
hour when she could have shrieked and raved and betrayed herself had
passed by, and left a deadness like a calm behind, as though horror had
stunned all pain and yet left her senses clear.  She forgot not the thing
which lay staring upward blankly at the under part of the couch which hid
it--the look of its fixed eyes, its outspread locks, and the purple
indentation on the temple she saw as clearly as she had seen them in that
first mad moment when she had stood staring downward at the thing itself;
but the coursing of her blood was stilled, the gallop of her pulses, and
that wild hysteric leaping of her heart into her throat, choking her and
forcing her to gasp and pant in that way which in women must ever end in
shrieks and cries and sobbing beatings of the air.  But for the feminine
softness to which her nature had given way for the first time, since the
power of love had mastered her, there was no thing of earth could have
happened to her which would have brought this rolling ball to her throat,
this tremor to her body--since the hour of her birth she had never been
attacked by such a female folly, as she would indeed have regarded it
once; but now 'twas different--for a while she had been a woman--a woman
who had flung herself upon the bosom of him who was her soul's lord, and
resting there, her old rigid strength had been relaxed.

But 'twas not this woman who had known tender yielding who returned to
take her place in the Panelled Parlour, knowing of the companion who
waited near her unseen--for it was as her companion she thought of him,
as she had thought of him when he followed her in the Mall, forced
himself into her box at the play, or stood by her shoulder at assemblies;
he had placed himself by her side again, and would stay there until she
could rid herself of him.

"After to-night he will be gone, if I act well my part," she said, "and
then may I live a freed woman."

'Twas always upon the divan she took her place when she received her
visitors, who were accustomed to finding her enthroned there.  This
afternoon when she came into the room she paused for a space, and stood
beside it, the parlour being yet empty.  She felt her face grow a little
cold, as if it paled, and her under-lip drew itself tight across her
teeth.

"In a graveyard," she said, "I have sat upon the stone ledge of a tomb,
and beneath there was--worse than this, could I but have seen it.  This
is no more."

When the Sir Humphreys and Lord Charleses, Lady Bettys and Mistress
Lovelys were announced in flocks, fluttering and chattering, she rose
from her old place to meet them, and was brilliant graciousness itself.
She hearkened to their gossipings, and though 'twas not her way to join
in them, she was this day witty in such way as robbed them of the dulness
in which sometimes gossip ends.  It was a varied company which gathered
about her; but to each she gave his or her moment, and in that moment
said that which they would afterwards remember.  With those of the Court
she talked royalty, the humours of her Majesty, the severities of her
Grace of Marlborough; with statesmen she spoke with such intellect and
discretion that they went away pondering on the good fortune which had
befallen one man when it seemed that it was of such proportions as might
have satisfied a dozen, for it seemed not fair to them that his Grace of
Osmonde, having already rank, wealth, and fame, should have added to them
a gift of such magnificence as this beauteous woman would bring; with
beaux and wits she made dazzling jests; and to the beauties who desired
their flatteries she gave praise so adroit that they were stimulated to
plume their feathers afresh and cease to fear the rivalry of her
loveliness.

And yet while she so bore herself, never once did she cease to feel the
presence of that which, lying near, seemed to her racked soul as one who
lay and listened with staring eyes which mocked; for there was a thought
which would not leave her, which was, that it could hear, that it could
see through the glazing on its blue orbs, and that knowing itself bound
by the moveless irons of death and dumbness it impotently raged and
cursed that it could not burst them and shriek out its vengeance, rolling
forth among her worshippers at their feet and hers.

"But he _can_ not," she said, within her clenched teeth, again and
again--"_that_ he cannot."

Once as she said this to herself she caught Anne's eyes fixed helplessly
upon her, it seeming to be as the poor woman had said, that her weakness
caused her to desire to abide near her sister's strength and draw support
from it; for she had remained at my lady's side closely since she had
descended to the room, and now seemed to implore some protection for
which she was too timid to openly make request.

"You are too weak to stay, Anne," her ladyship said.  "'Twould be better
that you should retire."

"I am weak," the poor thing answered, in low tones--"but not too weak to
stay.  I am always weak.  Would that I were of your strength and courage.
Let me sit down--sister--here."  She touched the divan's cushions with a
shaking hand, gazing upward wearily--perchance remembering that this
place seemed ever a sort of throne none other than the hostess queen
herself presumed to encroach upon.

"You are too meek, poor sister," quoth Clorinda.  "'Tis not a chair of
coronation or the woolsack of a judge.  Sit! sit!--and let me call for
wine!"

She spoke to a lacquey and bade him bring the drink, for even as she sank
into her place Anne's cheeks grew whiter.

When 'twas brought, her ladyship poured it forth and gave it to her
sister with her own hand, obliging her to drink enough to bring her
colour back.  Having seen to this, she addressed the servant who had
obeyed her order.

"Hath Jenfry returned from Sir John Oxon?" she demanded, in that clear,
ringing voice of hers, whose music ever arrested those surrounding her,
whether they were concerned in her speech or no; but now all felt
sufficient interest to prick up ears and hearken to what was said.

"No, my lady," the lacquey answered.  "He said that you had bidden him to
wait."

"But not all day, poor fool," she said, setting down Anne's empty glass
upon the salver.  "Did he think I bade him stand about the door all
night?  Bring me his message when he comes."

"'Tis ever thus with these dull serving folk," she said to those nearest
her.  "One cannot pay for wit with wages and livery.  They can but obey
the literal word.  Sir John, leaving me in haste this morning, I forgot a
question I would have asked, and sent a lacquey to recall him."

Anne sat upright.

"Sister--I pray you--another glass of wine."

My lady gave it to her at once, and she drained it eagerly.

"Was he overtaken?" said a curious matron, who wished not to see the
subject closed.

"No," quoth her ladyship, with a light laugh--"though he must have been
in haste, for the man was sent after him in but a moment's time.  'Twas
