quoth he, and stared at Cicely. Her cheeks were flushed, and her panting
red lips were fallen apart so that her little white teeth showed
through. Her long, dark lashes cast shadow circles under her eyes. Her
curly hair in elfin locks tossed all about her face, and through it was
tied a crimson ribbon, mocking the quick color of the blood which came
and went beneath her delicate skin. "My faith!" cried Tommy Webster,
"her face be as fair as a K in a copy-book! Hey, bullies, what? let's
make her queen!"

"A queen?" "What queen?" "Where is a queen?" "I granny! Tom Webster hath
catched a queen!" "Where is she, Tom?" "Up with her, mate, and let a
fellow see."

"Hands off, there!" snarled the bandy-legged man.

"Up with her, Tom!" cried out the strapping fellow at his back. "A queen
it is; and a right good smacking toll all round--I have not bussed a
maid this day! Up with her, Tom!"

"Stand back, ye rogues, and let us pass!"

But alas and alack for the bandy-legged man! He could not ruffle and
swagger it off as Gaston Carew had done of old; a London apprentice was
harder nuts than his cowardly heart could crack.

"Stand back, ye rogues!" he cried again.

"Rogues? Rogues? Who calls us rogues? Hi, Martin Allston, crack me his
crown!"

"Good masters," faltered Gregory, seeing that bluster would not serve,
"I meant ye no offense. I pr'ythee, do not keep a father and his
children from their dying mother's bed!"

"Nay--is that so?" asked Webster, sobering instantly "Here, lads, give
way--their mother be a-dying."

The crowd fell back. "Ah, sirs," whined Goole, scarce hiding the joy in
his face, "she'll thank ye with her dying breath. Get on, thou knave!"
he muttered fiercely in Nick's ear.

But Nick stood fast, and caught Tom Webster by the arm. "The fellow
lieth in his throat," said he. "My mother is in Stratford town; and
Cicely's mother is dead."

"Thou whelp!" cried the bandy-legged man, and aimed a sudden blow at
Nick, "I'll teach thee to hold thy tongue."

"Oh, no, ye won't," quoth Thomas Webster, interposing his long oak
staff, and thrusting the fellow away so hard that he thumped against the
wall; "there is no school on holidays! Thou'lt teach nobody here to hold
his tongue but thine own self--and start at that straightway. Dost take
me?--say? Now, Jacky Sprat, what's all the coil about? Hath this sweet
fellow kidnapped thee?"

"Nay, sir, not me, but Cicely; and do na leave him take her, sir, for he
treats her very ill!"

"The little rascal lies," sneered Goole, though his lips were the color
of lead; "I am her legal guardian!"

"What! How? Thou wast her father but a moment since!"

"Nay, nay," Goole stammered, turning a sickly hue; "her father's nearest
friend, I said,--he gave her in my charge."

"My father's friend!" cried Cicely. "Thou? Thou? His common groom! Why,
he would not give my finger in thy charge."

"He is the wiser daddy, then!" laughed Jemmy Armstrong, "for the fellow
hath a T for Tyburn writ upon his face."

The eyes of the bandy-legged man began to shift from side to side; but
still he put a bold front on. "Stand off," said he, and tried to thrust
Tom Webster back. "Thou'lt pay the piper dear for this! The knave is a
lying vagabond. He hath stolen this pack of goods."

"Why, fie for shame!" cried Cicely, and stamped her little foot. "Nick
doth not steal, and thou knowest it, Gregory Goole! It is thou who hast
stolen my pretty clothes, and the wine from my father's house!"

"Good, sweetheart!" quoth Tom Webster, eying the bandy-legged man with a
curious snap in his honest eyes. "So the rascal hath stolen other things
than thee? I thought that yellow bow of his was tied tremendous high!
Why, mates, the dog is a branded rogue--that ribbon is tied through the
hole in his ear!"

Gregory Goole made a dash through the throng where the press was least.

Thump! went Tommy Webster's club, and a little puff of dust went up from
Gregory's purple cloak. But he was off so sharply, and dodged with such
amazing skill, that most of the blows aimed at his head hummed through
the empty air, or thwacked some stout apprentice in the ribs as they all
went whooping after him. He was out of the press and away like a deer
down a covert lane between two shops ere one could say, "Jack, Robin's
son," and left the stout apprentices at every flying leap. So presently
they all gave over the chase, and came back with the bag he had dropped
as he ran; and were so well pleased with themselves for what they had
done that they gave three cheers for all the Cloth-workers and Saddlers
in London, and then three more for Cicely and Nick. They would no doubt
have gone right on and given three for the bag likewise, being strongly
in the humor of it; but "Hi, Tom Webster!" shouted one who could hardly
speak for cherries and cheese and puffing, "what's gone with the queen
we're to have so fast, and the toll that we're to take?"

Tom Webster pulled at his yellow beard, for he saw that Cicely was no
common child, and of gentler birth than they. "I do not think she'll
bide the toll," said he, in half apology.

"What! is there anything to pay?" she asked with a rueful quaver in her
voice. "Oh, Nick, there is to pay!"

"We have no money, sirs," said Nick; "I be very sorry."

"If my father were here," said Cicely, "he would give thee a handful of
silver; but I have not a penny to my name." She looked up into Tom
Webster's face. "But, sir," said she, and laid her hand upon his arm,
"if ye care, I will kiss thee upon the cheek."

"Why, marry come up! My faith!" quoth he, and suddenly blushed--to his
own surprise the most of all--"why, what? Who'd want a sweeter penny
for his pains?" But "Here--nay, nay!" the others cried; "ye've left us
out. Fair play, fair play!"

All Cicely could see was a forest of legs that filled the lane from wall
to wall, and six great fellows towering over her. "Why, sirs," cried
she, confusedly, while her face grew rosy red, "ye all shall kiss my
hand--if--if--"

"If what?" they roared.

"If ye will but wipe your faces clean."

At the shout of laughter they sent up the constable of the cloth-men's
ward awoke from a sudden dream of war and bloody insurrection, and came
down Cheapside bawling, "Peace, in the name of the Queen!" But when he
found it was only the apprentices of Mincing Lane out Maying, he stole
away around a shop, and made as if it were some other fellow.

They took the humor of it like a jolly lot of bears, and all came
crowding round about, wiping their mouths on what came first, with a
lick and a promise,--kerchief, doublet, as it chanced,--laughing, and
shouldering each to be first. "Up with the little maid there, Tom!" they
roared lustily.

Cicely gave him both her hands, and--"Upsydaisy!"--she was on the top of
the corner post, where she stood with one hand on his brawny shoulder to
steady herself, like a flower growing by a wall, bowing gravely all
about, and holding out her hand to be kissed with as graceful an air as
a princess born, and withal a sweet, quaint dignity that abashed the
wildest there.

Some one or two came blustering as if her hand were not enough; but
Jemmy Armstrong rapped them so sharply over the pate, with "Soft, ye
loons, her hand!" that they dabbed at her little finger-tips, and were
out of his reach in a jiffy, rubbing their polls with a sheepish grin;
for Jemmy Armstrong's love-pats would have cracked a hazelnut.

Some came again a second time. One came even a third. But Cicely knew
him by his steeple-hat, and tucked her hand behind her, saying, "Fie,
sir, thou art greedy!" Whereupon the others laughed and punched him in
the ribs with their clubs, until he bellowed, "Quits! We'll all be late
to the archery if we be not trotting on."

Nick's face fell at the merry shout of "Finsbury, Finsbury, ho!" "I dare
na try to take her home alone," said he; "that rogue may lie in wait
for us."

"Oh, Nick, he is not coming back?" cried Cicely; and with that she threw
her arms around Tom Webster's neck. "Oh, take us with thee, sir--don't
leave us all alone!"

Webster pulled his yellow beard. "Nay, lass, it would not do," said he;
"we'll be mad larks by evening. But there, sweetheart, don't weep no
more! That rogue shall not catch thee again, I promise that."

"Why, Tom," quoth Armstrong, "what's the coil? We'll leave them at the
Boar's Head Inn with sixpence each until their friends can come for
them. Hey, mates, up Great East Cheap!" And off they marched to the
Boar's Head Inn.




CHAPTER XXXV


A SUDDEN RESOLVE

Nick and Cicely were sitting on a bench in the sun beside the tap-room
door, munching a savory mutton-pie which Tommy Webster had bought for
them. Beside them over the window-sill the tapster twirled his spigot
cheerfully, and in the door the carrier was bidding the
serving-maids good-by.

Around the inn-yard stood a row of heavy, canvas-covered wains and
lumbering two-wheeled carts, each surmounted by a well-armed guard, and
drawn by six strong horses with harness stout as cannon-leathers. The
hostlers stood at the horses' heads, chewing at wisps of barley-straw as
though their other fare was scant, which, from their sleek rotundity,
was difficult to believe. The stable-boy, with a pot of slush, and a
head of hair like a last year's haycock, was hastily greasing a
forgotten wheel; while, out of the room where the servants ate, the
drivers came stumbling down the steps with a mighty smell of onions and
brawn. The weekly train from London into the north was ready to be off.

A portly, well-clad countryman, with a shrewd but good-humored
countenance, and a wife beside him round and rosy of face as he, came
bustling out of the private door. "How far yet, Master John?" he asked
as he buckled on his cloak. "Forty-two miles to Oxford, sir," replied
the carrier. "We must be off if we're to lie at Uxbridge overnight; for
there hath been rain beyond, sir, and the roads be werry deep."

Nick stared at the man for Oxford. Forty-two miles to Oxford! And Oxford
lay to the south of Stratford fifty miles and two. Ninety-four miles
from Stratford town! Ninety-four miles from home!

"When will my father come for us, Nick?" asked Cicely, turning her hand
in the sun to see the red along the edges of her fingers.

"Indeed, I can na tell," said Nick; "Master Will Shakspere is coming
anon, and I shall go with him."

"And leave me by myself?"

"Nay; thou shalt go, too. Thou'lt love to see his garden and the
rose-trees--it is like a very country place. He is a merry gentleman,
and, oh, so kind! He is going to take me home."

"But my father will take us home when he comes."

"To Stratford town, I mean."

"Away from daddy and me? Why, Nick!"

"But my mother is in Stratford town."

Cicely was silent. "Then I think I would go, too," she said quite
softly, looking down as if there were a picture on the ground. "When
one's mother is gone there is a hurting-place that nought doth ever
come into any more--excepting daddy, and--and thee. We shall miss thee,
Nick, at supper-times. Thou'lt come back soon?"

"I am na coming back."

"Not coming back?" She laid the mutton-pie down on the bench.

"No--I am na coming back"

"Never?"

"Never."

She looked at him as if she had not altogether understood.

Nick turned away. A strange uneasiness had come upon him, as if some one
were staring at him fixedly. But no one was. There was a Dutchman in the
gate who had not been there just before. "He must have sprung up out of
the ground," thought Nick, "or else he is a very sudden Dutchman!" He
had on breeches like two great meal-sacks, and a Flemish sea-cloth
jacket full of wrinkles, as if it had been lying in a chest. His back
was turned, and Nick could not help smiling, for the fellow's shanks
came out of his breeches' bottoms like the legs of a letter A. He looked
like a pudding on two skewers.

Cicely slowly took up the mutton-pie once more, but did not eat. "Is na
the pasty good?" asked Nick.

"Not now," said she.

Nick turned away again.

The Dutchman was not in the gate. He had crossed the inn-yard suddenly,
and was sitting close within the shadow of the wall, though the sunny
side was pleasanter by far. His wig was hanging down about his face,
and he was talking with the tapster's knave, a hungry-looking fellow
clad in rusty black as if some one were dead, although it was a holiday
and he had neither kith nor kin. The knave was biting his under lip and
staring straight at Nick.

"And will I never see thee more?" asked Cicely.

"Oh, yes," said Nick; "oh, yes."

But he did not know whether she ever would or no.

"Gee-wup, Dobbin! Yoicks, Ned! Tschk--tschk!" The leading cart rolled
slowly through the gate. A second followed it. The drivers made a
cracking with their whips, and all the guests came out to see them off.
But the Dutchman, as the rest came out, arose, and with the tapster's
knave went in at a narrow entrance beyond the tap-room steps.

"And when will Master Shakspere come for thee?" asked Cicely once more,
the cold pie lying in her lap.

"I do na know. How can I tell? Do na bother me so!" cried Nick, and dug
his heels into the cracks between the paving-stones; for after all that
had come to pass the starting of the baggage-train had made him sick
for home.

Cicely looked up at him; she thought she had not heard aright. He was
staring after the last cart as it rolled through the inn-yard gate; his
throat was working, and his eyes were full of tears.

"Why, Nick!" said she, "art crying?"

"Nay," said he, "but very near," and dashed his hand across his face.
"Everything doth happen so all-at-once--and I am na big enough, Cicely.
Oh, Cicely, I would I were a mighty king--I'd make it all up
different somehow!"

"Perhaps thou wilt be some day, Nick," she answered quietly. "Thou'ldst
make a very lovely king. I could be queen; and daddy should be Lord
Admiral, and own the finest play-house in the town."

But Nick was staring at the tap-room door. A voice somewhere had
startled him. The guests were gone, and none was left but the tapster's
knave leaning against the inner wall.

"Thy mother should come to live with us, and thy father, and all thy
kin," said Cicely, dreamily smiling; "and the people would love us,
there would be no more war, and we should be happy forevermore."

But Nick was listening,--not to her,--and his face was a little pale. He
felt a strange, uneasy sense of some one staring at his back. He whirled
about--looked in at the tap-room window. For an instant a peering face
was there; then it was gone--there was only the Dutchman's frowzy wig
and striped woolen cap. But the voice he had heard and the face he had
seen were the voice and the face of Gregory Goole.

"I should love to see thy mother, Nick," said Cicely.

He got up steadily, though his heart was jolting his very ribs. "Thou
shalt right speedily!" said he.

The carts were standing in a line. The carrier came down the steps with
his stirrup-cup in hand. Nick's heart gave a sudden, wild, resolute
leap, and he touched the carrier on the arm. "What will ye charge to
carry two as far as Stratford town?" he asked. His mouth was dry as a
dusty road, for the Dutchman had risen from his seat and was coming
toward the door.

"I do na haul past Oxford," said the man.

"To Oxford, then--how much? Be quick!" Nick thrust his hand into his
breast where he carried the burgesses' chain.

"Eightpence the day, for three days out--two shilling 'tis, and find
yourself; it is an honest fare."

The tapster's knave came down the steps; the Dutchman stood within the
shadow of the door.

"Wilt carry us for this?" Nick cried, and thrust the chain into the
fellow's hands.

He gasped and almost let it fall. "Beshrew my heart! Gadzooks!" said he,
"art thou a prince in hiding, boy? 'T would buy me, horses, wains, and
all. Why, man alive, 'tis but a nip o' this!"

"Good, then," said Nick, "'tis done--we'll go. Come, Cicely, we're
going home!"

Staring, the carrier followed him, weighing the chain in his hairy hand.
"Who art thou, boy?" he cried again. "This matter hath a queer look."

"'Twas honestly come by, sir," cried Nick, no longer able to conceal a
quiver in his voice, "and my name is Nicholas Attwood; I come from
Stratford town."

"Stratford-on-Avon? Why, art kin to Tanner Simon Attwood there, Attwood
of Old Town?"

"He is my father, sir. Oh, leave us go with thee--take the whole
chain!"

Slap went the carrier's cap in the dirt! "Leave thee go wi' me?
Gadzooks!" he cried, "my name be John Saddler--why, what? my daddy
liveth in Chapel lane, behind Will Underhill's. I stole thy father's
apples fifteen years. What! go wi' me? Get on the wain, thou little
fool--get on all the wains I own, and a plague upon thine eightpence,
lad! Why, here; Hal telled me thou wert dead, or lost, or some such
fairy tale! Up on the sheepskin, both o' ye!"

The Dutchman came from the tap-room door and spoke to the tapster's
knave; but the words which he spoke to that tapster's knave were
anything but Dutch.




CHAPTER XXXVI


WAYFARING HOME

At Kensington watering-place, five miles from London town, Nick held the
pail for the horses of the Oxford man. "Hello, my buck!" quoth he, and
stared at Nick; "where under the sun didst pop from all at once?" and,
looking up, spied Cicely upon the carrier's wain. "What, John!" he
shouted, "thou saidst there were no more!"

"No more there weren't, sir," said John, "but there be now"; and out
with the whole story.

"Well, I ha' farmed for fifty year," cried honest Roger Clout, "yet
never have I seen the mate to yonder little maid, nor heard the like o'
such a tale! Wife, wife!" he cried, in a voice as round and full of
hearty cheer as one who calls his own cattle home across his own fat
fields. "Come hither, Moll--here's company for thee. For sure, John,
they'll ride wi' Moll and I; 'tis godsend--angels on a baggage-cart!
Moll ha' lost her only one, and the little maid will warm the cockles o'
her heart, say nought about mine own. La, now, she is na feared o' me;
God bless thee, child! Look at her, Moll--as sweet as honey and the
cream o' the brindle cow."

So they rode with kindly Roger Clout and his good wife by Hanwell,
Hillingdon Hill, and Uxbridge, where they rested at the inn near old St.
Margaret's, Cicely with Mistress Clout, and Nick with her good man. And
in the morning there was nothing to pay, for Roger Clout had footed all
the score.

Then on again, through Beaconsfield and High Wycombe, into and over the
Chiltern Hills in Buckinghamshire. In parts the land was passing fair,
with sheep in flocks upon the hills, and cattle knee-deep in the grass;
but otherwhere the way was wild, with bogs and moss in all the deeps,
and dense beech forests on the heights; and more than once the guards
made ready their match-locks warily. But stout John Saddler's train was
no soft cakes for thieves, and they came up through Bucks scot-free.

At times it drizzled fitfully, and the road was rough and bad; but the
third day was a fair, sweet day, and most exceeding bright and fresh.
The shepherds whistled on the hills, and the milkmaids sang in the
winding lanes among the white-thorn hedges, the smell of which was
everywhere. The singing, the merry voices calling, the comfortable
lowing of the kine, the bleating of the sheep, the clinking of the
bridle-chains, and the heavy ruttle of the carts filled the air with
life and cheer. The wind was blowing both warm and cool; and, oh, the
blithe breeze of the English springtime! Nick went up the green hills,
and down the white dells like a leaf in the wind, now ahead and now
behind the winding train, or off into the woods and over the fields for
a posy-bunch for Cicely, calling and laughing back at her, and filling
her lap with flowers and ferns until the cart was all one great,
sweet-smelling bower.

As for Cicely, Nick was there, so she was very well content. She had
never gone a-visiting in all her life before; and she would see Nick's
