What a yell went up!

"Hoke is knocked out!"

"Did you ever see such a blow?"

Wild with rage, the bully was assisted to his feet by several friends.

The blood flowed from his chin and from a cut lip.

"I'll show you yet!" he hissed, and again went at Mont.

But our hero was cool and collected, while the bully was excited.

The bully got in one little body blow, but that was all, while our hero
fairly played all over his face.

"Better give it up, Hoke!"

"You are outclassed against Mont Folsom!"

"Let me be!" howled the bully.

With every blow that our hero delivered Ummer's anger increased.

His reputation, he felt, was at stake.

If he was beaten that would be the end of him, so far as bossing the
boys was concerned.

At last Mont hit him a stinging blow on the ear that caused him to roll
over and over.




CHAPTER IV.

ON THE ROAD.


The bully was knocked out completely, and had to acknowledge Mont the
victor of the encounter.

This he did with very bad grace, and a minute later sneaked off with his
toady.

"I'll get even for that," he growled. "He'll be sorry he ever tackled
me."

"You'll have to watch Hoke Ummer," said Link, some time later, when the
crowd had dispersed. "He is a treacherous fellow."

"I'll have my eyes open," returned our hero.

Yet little did he dream of the dastardly way in which the bully would
try to get even.

It did not take Mont long to settle down at Nautical Hall. The fight had
made him many friends, and established him as a sort of leader among a
certain set.

On the following Saturday Link proposed that he, Barry Powell, and Mont
take a stroll down to the village.

The others were willing, and soon the party was on the way.

"I'll get some stuff for a midnight feast while I am at it," said Mont.

Soon the school was left behind, and they came out on the village
highway.

"Hark!" cried Barry suddenly.

"What is it?" demanded Mont.

Barry was listening intently to a dull, heavy tramping sound, which was
wafted faintly toward them on the breeze.

"Do you hear that?" he asked excitedly.

Link and Mont listened, and could distinctly hear a low thud, thud, thud
in the distance.

"What does it mean?" Link asked.

"It means that a pair of ponies, or horses, have run away, and are
coming along at a tearing gallop."

As if in corroboration of Barry's words, at that moment a light phaeton,
drawn by two high-spirited ponies, which were pounding along at the top
of their speed, burst round the bend of the road.

The vehicle was rocking from side to side, and every moment threatened
to hurl it into one of the deep ditches which lined the road.

As the boys gazed at the approaching carriage Mont's heart seemed to
stand still.

"Fellows!" he cried, "there is someone in the phaeton--a lady, I
believe."

"So there is!" gasped Link, in tones of horror. "What shall we do?"

"We must stop them."

With his face whiter than usual, and his lips tightly compressed, our
hero ran down the road.

"He is courting death," said his chum, beneath his breath, "but we may
be of some use."

And both started after their companion.

Mont was running at the top of his speed, for he saw that the occupant
of the carriage was only a young girl, and utterly helpless, and that
every second's delay endangered her life.

On and on he went, until he was within a score of yards of the maddened
steeds.

Then he planted himself firmly in the middle of the road and prepared
for a spring.

Fiercely the ponies dashed onward.

Nearer and nearer they came, until it seemed they must inevitably
trample him beneath their iron-shod hoofs.

But our hero never wavered.

Motionless he crouched there until the end of the pole almost touched
his cheek.

Then he leaped up and caught both the bridles in his strong, nervous
grip.

The ponies, with loud whinnies of rage, tossed up their heads and lifted
him from his feet, but he clung tenaciously to them.

They dragged him along the ground for a few yards, and then their speed
began to slacken.

Link now came up, and the vicious little brutes were brought to a
standstill.

Then Mont, thoroughly exhausted, sank in a heap upon the ground.

As soon as the carriage was stopped in its wild career, a fair and
beautiful girl sprang out.

"Oh, is he very much hurt?" she cried, as she raised her clasped hands
in despair.

Our hero staggered to his feet, and as he gazed on the fairy-like form
and sweet, delicate face his cheeks flushed and his heart beat quickly.

"I am not hurt at all," he said stoutly, although his arms and legs and
every portion of his body ached as though he had been upon the rack.

"How can I thank you?" she exclaimed. "If it had not been for you, I
shudder to think what might have happened. You saved my life."

At this praise our hero blushed more than ever.

"I require no thanks," he said. "I am rewarded enough by knowing I have
been of some service to you, but I think you are scarcely strong enough
to be trusted with such high-spirited animals."

"My father would never have thought of such a thing," she replied. "He
alighted at a cottage to visit one of his old friends, and while he was
inside the ponies bolted. But here he comes, and I know he will be
better able to thank you than I am."

She pointed to the figure of a tall, elderly gentleman, of upright
carriage and aristocratic bearing, who was coming up the road at a rapid
pace.

"It's Judge Moore," whispered Link; "he owns a fine place a couple of
miles from here."

In another moment our hero found himself being presented to the judge,
who overwhelmed him with praise.

"You must come and dine with us, you and your friends," said the judge;
"there will only be myself and my daughter Alice. Nay, you must make no
excuses. I shall call upon Captain Hooper and tell him all about it, and
if ever you require a friend do not forget to come to me."

Mont would have respectfully declined the invitation, but a glance from
Alice Moore prevented him from doing so.

He therefore thanked the judge for his kindness, and then the boys took
their leave.

Our hero simply raised his cap, but Alice put out her hand.

"You will be certain to come?" she asked in a low tone.

"Certain," he replied.

The news of Mont's heroism spread through Nautical Hall, and he speedily
found himself a decided hero.




CHAPTER V.

HOKE UMMER'S TREACHERY.


Our hero succeeded on the following Monday in getting a quantity of
cake, pie, and other stuff from town and hiding them in an unoccupied
bedroom.

He was also promised a dozen bottles of root beer and soda water, but
these he was unable to smuggle into the school, owing to the
watchfulness of Captain Hooper and his assistants.

Accordingly, he hid the stuff in the bushes near the lake, and decided
to go after it late at night.

He unfolded his plan to Link, Barry, and Carl Barnaby, and this plan was
overheard by Hoke Ummer.

Next to the empty bedroom was a window overlooking the side playground.
From this window Mont decided to reach the ground by aid of a long rope.

This was the only way to get out, as after nine o'clock all the doors
and windows below were locked in such a fashion they could not be
opened.

That evening our hero, with a light heart, repaired to the empty
bedroom.

Opening the boxful of stuff, he spread out upon a tablecloth of
newspapers a prettily decorated ham, a couple of cold roast chickens, a
fine apple pie, a quantity of mince pies, and a varied assortment of
choice fruits and cake.

All these arranged to his satisfaction, he looked at his watch, and then
sat down and waited.

It was just half-past eight, and in another half-hour servants and
masters would all have retired for the night.

After what appeared to the watcher to be an age the great school clock
tolled solemnly out the hour of nine.

Then Mont drew out a thick rope from beneath the bed and left the room.

Soon he was at the window.

Throwing up the lower sash, our hero fastened one end of the rope
securely and threw the other out.

"Just the right length," he said, and then he swung himself over the
window sill. "I'll soon have the rest of the stuff up."

The door of one of the spare bedrooms was opened, and Ummer stepped into
the corridor.

As the light of the moon fell upon his face it looked strangely white
and ghastly.

His lips were tightly compressed and his eyes had in them a horrible
glare as he stepped stealthily but quickly to the window.

Arrived there, he crouched low down that he might not be seen by any
person outside.

Then, with deft fingers, he untied the knot by which the rope was
secured.

There was heard a loud, wild cry, followed by a dull, heavy thud.

Then all was still.

The bully crept away along the corridor and down the stairs, his heart
beating as though it would burst its bounds.

A little before twelve o'clock that night several dark figures might
have been seen stealing cautiously along the corridors.

All these figures made their way to one common spot.

This was the bedroom Mont had mentioned.

Arrived there, they found everything prepared for the feast, but no
host.

"What a strange thing for Mont to do," said Carl Barnaby; "to invite us
all here and not be present."

"It isn't very gentlemanly of him," submitted Barry.

"You talk like a fool," said Link. "Something must have happened to
him."

"I saw him at supper, and he was all right then."

"Perhaps some of the tramps have waylaid him on the road," suggested
another boy, who had been sitting very white and very quiet, in one
corner of the room.

Everyone turned to the speaker.

"Mine cracious, dot's so," put in Sam Schump. "Besser we go an' see?"

Without delay a search was begun.

A rope was procured, and Link was the first person out of the window.

"Hullo!"

"What's up?" asked those above.

"Bring a light. Mont has fallen and hurt himself."

A light was quickly procured, and one after another the boys came down
the rope.

Our hero lay at the foot of a large lilac bush.

It was this bush which had saved his life.

When the rope gave way, had he fallen on the ground he would most likely
have been killed.

Link brought some water, and he was soon revived.

In the meantime, from another window, overhead, Hoke Ummer watched
proceedings.

When he saw Mont get up his hateful face plainly showed his chagrin.

"How was it you didn't fasten the rope tightly?" asked Link.

"I thought I did," returned our hero. "In fact, I am certain I did," he
added.

"But it gave way and let you down."

Our hero shook his head. He couldn't understand it at all.

In a few minutes he was able to go with his friends and show them where
the root-beer and soda-water bottles were hidden.

Loaded down with the stuff, the crowd returned to the Hall, and the
feast began.

Nearly all of the boys of Mont's age had been invited in a general way,
and a lively time was had for fully an hour.

Hoke Ummer could not stand it to see his rival triumph over him, and so
slipped down to the room occupied by Moses Sparks, one of the under
teachers.

"Mont Folsom and his crowd are having a feast in one of the upper
rooms," he said.

At once Moses Sparks prepared to investigate.

The feast was at its height when a footstep was heard.

"Scatter!" whispered Carl Barnaby, who caught the sounds first, and all
of the boys hurried from the bedroom by side doors and managed to get to
their own rooms.

When Moses Sparks came up they seemed to be sleeping like so many lambs.

"Ummer has been fooling me," muttered the under teacher. "Or else he was
mistaken." And he went off and left the boys to finish the feast in
peace.




CHAPTER VI.

OUT ON THE BAY.


In a general way Mont suspected Hoke Ummer, not of the dastardly trick
he had played, but of playing the sneak and telling Moses Sparks.

"I'll get square," he said to Link and Carl.

Out in the fields he had picked up a dead snake, and he now resolved to
make use of it in a truly original manner. As soon as it was time to
retire that night Mont slipped upstairs and into the dormitory occupied
by Hoke Ummer, Goul, and their chums.

He had the dead snake with him, and put the reptile in the bully's bed.

Five minutes later he was in his own room awaiting developments.

They were not long in coming.

A murmur of voices ended in a wild shriek of terror.

"A snake!" yelled Hoke. "It's in my bed! Save me! I'm a dead boy!"

His cry aroused everyone, and soon Nautical Hall was in a commotion.

"What's the matter with Hoke?"

"He's got 'em bad!"

"A snake!" roared the bully. "Take it away."

He ran out into the corridor, and soon a crowd began to collect.

In the meantime Mont slipped into the room and threw the dead reptile
out of the window.

Captain Hooper tried to get at the bottom of the affair, but failed.

"You must have been dreaming, Ummer," he said at last, and sent all of
the boys off to bed.

During the following week Nautical Hall was closed up, and the schoolboy
cadets marched to the head of the bay.

Here they went into camp for a month, part of the time being spent on
the bay and the ocean beyond in learning how to sail both large and
small boats.

The sailing of the boats particularly interested Mont and Carl Barnaby.
Link did not care very much for the water, for when the sea was rough he
was inclined to grow seasick.

One day Mont and Carl obtained permission to hire a sloop at the town,
and go out for an all-day cruise over the bay and back.

They took with them a young fellow from Nautical Hall named John
Stumpton, a handy lad who generally went by the name of Stump. Since
Mont had arrived at the Hall, Stump had taken to him greatly, and would
do almost anything that Mont asked of him. Stump was also a great friend
to Carl.

They sailed out of sight of the camp, and gradually crept up to a large
excursion boat which was just leaving one of the docks of the town.

The steamboat was overcrowded, every deck being full of humanity bent on
having a good time.

Some musicians were playing on the forward deck, and they drew quite
close to hear what was going on.

Suddenly a cry of horror arose.

A young girl had been standing close to the rail on a camp chair at the
bow of the boat.

It was Alice Moore.

As the steamboat swung around the girl lost her balance.

She tried to save herself, and, failing, pitched headlong into the
water.

Our hero saw her go under the waves.

"She'll be struck by the paddle wheel," he yelled, and then, splash! he
was overboard himself.

Bravely he struck out to save the maiden.

The order was given to back the steamboat.

The wheels churned up the water into a white foam, but still the
momentum carried the large craft on.

In the meantime our hero came up and struck out valiantly for the girl,
who was now going down for a second time.

"Save her! Save her!" shrieked Judge Moore, who was with his daughter.

Half a dozen life-preservers were thrown overboard, but none came to
where the girl could reach them.

The judge wanted to join his daughter in the water.

Strong hands held him back.

"The young fellow will save her, judge."

"He's a true hero!"

Life-lines were thrown over, but even these did no good.

The steamboat swung around, but the run of the water washed the girl
closer and closer to the paddle wheel.

She now came up a second time.

Should she sink again all would be over.

Mont was swimming with all the strength and skill at his command.

At last he was within a yard of the struggling girl.

The maiden threw up her hands and went under. As quick as a flash our
hero dove down.

A second passed. Then up came our hero with the girl clinging to his
shoulder.

But now the current was apparently too strong for both of them.

"Help us--quick!"

Carl and Stump heard the cry, and immediately put about in their sloop.

Mont was swimming along on his side.

The girl was too weak to support herself, and he was holding her up well
out of the water.

It took the sloop but a moment to run up alongside of the pair.

Carl reached over and caught hold of the girl and placed her on deck.

In the meantime our hero caught hold of a rope thrown by the old boatman
and pulled himself up.

A cheer arose from those on the excursion boat.

