Captain Nemo, the engine, increasing its propelling power, made the
screw turn more rapidly.

Just then the lieutenant drew the Captain's attention again.  The
latter stopped walking and directed his glass towards the place
indicated.  He looked long.  I felt very much puzzled, and descended to
the drawing-room, and took out an excellent telescope that I generally
used.  Then, leaning on the cage of the watch-light that jutted out
from the front of the platform, set myself to look over all the line of
the sky and sea.

But my eye was no sooner applied to the glass than it was quickly
snatched out of my hands.

I turned round.  Captain Nemo was before me, but I did not know him.
His face was transfigured.  His eyes flashed sullenly; his teeth were
set; his stiff body, clenched fists, and head shrunk between his
shoulders, betrayed the violent agitation that pervaded his whole
frame.  He did not move.  My glass, fallen from his hands, had rolled
at his feet.

Had I unwittingly provoked this fit of anger?  Did this
incomprehensible person imagine that I had discovered some forbidden
secret?  No; I was not the object of this hatred, for he was not
looking at me; his eye was steadily fixed upon the impenetrable point
of the horizon.  At last Captain Nemo recovered himself.  His agitation
subsided.  He addressed some words in a foreign language to his
lieutenant, then turned to me.  "M. Aronnax," he said, in rather an
imperious tone, "I require you to keep one of the conditions that bind
you to me."

"What is it, Captain?"

"You must be confined, with your companions, until I think fit to
release you."

"You are the master," I replied, looking steadily at him.  "But may I
ask you one question?"

"None, sir."

There was no resisting this imperious command, it would have been
useless.  I went down to the cabin occupied by Ned Land and Conseil,
and told them the Captain's determination.  You may judge how this
communication was received by the Canadian.

But there was not time for altercation.  Four of the crew waited at the
door, and conducted us to that cell where we had passed our first night
on board the Nautilus.

Ned Land would have remonstrated, but the door was shut upon him.

"Will master tell me what this means?" asked Conseil.

I told my companions what had passed.  They were as much astonished as
I, and equally at a loss how to account for it.

Meanwhile, I was absorbed in my own reflections, and could think of
nothing but the strange fear depicted in the Captain's countenance.  I
was utterly at a loss to account for it, when my cogitations were
disturbed by these words from Ned Land:

"Hallo! breakfast is ready."

And indeed the table was laid.  Evidently Captain Nemo had given this
order at the same time that he had hastened the speed of the Nautilus.

"Will master permit me to make a recommendation?" asked Conseil.

"Yes, my boy."

"Well, it is that master breakfasts.  It is prudent, for we do not know
what may happen."

"You are right, Conseil."

"Unfortunately," said Ned Land, "they have only given us the ship's
fare."

"Friend Ned," asked Conseil, "what would you have said if the breakfast
had been entirely forgotten?"

This argument cut short the harpooner's recriminations.

We sat down to table.  The meal was eaten in silence.

Just then the luminous globe that lighted the cell went out, and left
us in total darkness.  Ned Land was soon asleep, and what astonished me
was that Conseil went off into a heavy slumber.  I was thinking what
could have caused his irresistible drowsiness, when I felt my brain
becoming stupefied.  In spite of my efforts to keep my eyes open, they
would close.  A painful suspicion seized me.  Evidently soporific
substances had been mixed with the food we had just taken.
Imprisonment was not enough to conceal Captain Nemo's projects from us,
sleep was more necessary.  I then heard the panels shut.  The
undulations of the sea, which caused a slight rolling motion, ceased.
Had the Nautilus quitted the surface of the ocean?  Had it gone back to
the motionless bed of water?  I tried to resist sleep.  It was
impossible.  My breathing grew weak.  I felt a mortal cold freeze my
stiffened and half-paralysed limbs.  My eye lids, like leaden caps,
fell over my eyes.  I could not raise them; a morbid sleep, full of
hallucinations, bereft me of my being.  Then the visions disappeared,
and left me in complete insensibility.



CHAPTER XXIII

THE CORAL KINGDOM

The next day I woke with my head singularly clear.  To my great
surprise, I was in my own room.  My companions, no doubt, had been
reinstated in their cabin, without having perceived it any more than I.
Of what had passed during the night they were as ignorant as I was, and
to penetrate this mystery I only reckoned upon the chances of the
future.

I then thought of quitting my room.  Was I free again or a prisoner?
Quite free.  I opened the door, went to the half-deck, went up the
central stairs.  The panels, shut the evening before, were open.  I
went on to the platform.

Ned Land and Conseil waited there for me.  I questioned them; they knew
nothing.  Lost in a heavy sleep in which they had been totally
unconscious, they had been astonished at finding themselves in their
cabin.

As for the Nautilus, it seemed quiet and mysterious as ever.  It
floated on the surface of the waves at a moderate pace.  Nothing seemed
changed on board.

The second lieutenant then came on to the platform, and gave the usual
order below.

As for Captain Nemo, he did not appear.

Of the people on board, I only saw the impassive steward, who served me
with his usual dumb regularity.

About two o'clock, I was in the drawing-room, busied in arranging my
notes, when the Captain opened the door and appeared.  I bowed.  He
made a slight inclination in return, without speaking.  I resumed my
work, hoping that he would perhaps give me some explanation of the
events of the preceding night.  He made none.  I looked at him.  He
seemed fatigued; his heavy eyes had not been refreshed by sleep; his
face looked very sorrowful.  He walked to and fro, sat down and got up
again, took a chance book, put it down, consulted his instruments
without taking his habitual notes, and seemed restless and uneasy.  At
last, he came up to me, and said:

"Are you a doctor, M. Aronnax?"

I so little expected such a question that I stared some time at him
without answering.

"Are you a doctor?" he repeated.  "Several of your colleagues have
studied medicine."

"Well," said I, "I am a doctor and resident surgeon to the hospital.  I
practised several years before entering the museum."

"Very well, sir."

My answer had evidently satisfied the Captain.  But, not knowing what
he would say next, I waited for other questions, reserving my answers
according to circumstances.

"M. Aronnax, will you consent to prescribe for one of my men?" he asked.

"Is he ill?"

"Yes."

"I am ready to follow you."

"Come, then."

I own my heart beat, I do not know why.  I saw certain connection
between the illness of one of the crew and the events of the day
before; and this mystery interested me at least as much as the sick man.

Captain Nemo conducted me to the poop of the Nautilus, and took me into
a cabin situated near the sailors' quarters.

There, on a bed, lay a man about forty years of age, with a resolute
expression of countenance, a true type of an Anglo-Saxon.

I leant over him.  He was not only ill, he was wounded.  His head,
swathed in bandages covered with blood, lay on a pillow.  I undid the
bandages, and the wounded man looked at me with his large eyes and gave
no sign of pain as I did it.  It was a horrible wound.  The skull,
shattered by some deadly weapon, left the brain exposed, which was much
injured.  Clots of blood had formed in the bruised and broken mass, in
colour like the dregs of wine.

There was both contusion and suffusion of the brain.  His breathing was
slow, and some spasmodic movements of the muscles agitated his face.  I
felt his pulse.  It was intermittent.  The extremities of the body were
growing cold already, and I saw death must inevitably ensue.  After
dressing the unfortunate man's wounds, I readjusted the bandages on his
head, and turned to Captain Nemo.

"What caused this wound?"  I asked.

"What does it signify?" he replied, evasively.  "A shock has broken one
of the levers of the engine, which struck myself.  But your opinion as
to his state?"

I hesitated before giving it.

"You may speak," said the Captain.  "This man does not understand
French."

I gave a last look at the wounded man.

"He will be dead in two hours."

"Can nothing save him?"

"Nothing."

Captain Nemo's hand contracted, and some tears glistened in his eyes,
which I thought incapable of shedding any.

For some moments I still watched the dying man, whose life ebbed
slowly.  His pallor increased under the electric light that was shed
over his death-bed. I looked at his intelligent forehead, furrowed with
premature wrinkles, produced probably by misfortune and sorrow.  I
tried to learn the secret of his life from the last words that escaped
his lips.

"You can go now, M. Aronnax," said the Captain.

I left him in the dying man's cabin, and returned to my room much
affected by this scene.  During the whole day, I was haunted by
uncomfortable suspicions, and at night I slept badly, and between my
broken dreams I fancied I heard distant sighs like the notes of a
funeral psalm.  Were they the prayers of the dead, murmured in that
language that I could not understand?

The next morning I went on to the bridge.  Captain Nemo was there
before me.  As soon as he perceived me he came to me.

"Professor, will it be convenient to you to make a submarine excursion
to-day?"

"With my companions?"  I asked.

"If they like."

"We obey your orders, Captain."

"Will you be so good then as to put on your cork jackets?"

It was not a question of dead or dying.  I rejoined Ned Land and
Conseil, and told them of Captain Nemo's proposition.  Conseil hastened
to accept it, and this time the Canadian seemed quite willing to follow
our example.

It was eight o'clock in the morning.  At half-past eight we were
equipped for this new excursion, and provided with two contrivances for
light and breathing.  The double door was open; and, accompanied by
Captain Nemo, who was followed by a dozen of the crew, we set foot, at
a depth of about thirty feet, on the solid bottom on which the Nautilus
rested.

A slight declivity ended in an uneven bottom, at fifteen fathoms depth.
This bottom differed entirely from the one I had visited on my first
excursion under the waters of the Pacific Ocean.  Here, there was no
fine sand, no submarine prairies, no sea-forest. I immediately
recognised that marvellous region in which, on that day, the Captain
did the honours to us.  It was the coral kingdom.

The light produced a thousand charming varieties, playing in the midst
of the branches that were so vividly coloured.  I seemed to see the
membraneous and cylindrical tubes tremble beneath the undulation of the
waters.  I was tempted to gather their fresh petals, ornamented with
delicate tentacles, some just blown, the others budding, while a small
fish, swimming swiftly, touched them slightly, like flights of birds.
But if my hand approached these living flowers, these animated,
sensitive plants, the whole colony took alarm.  The white petals
re-entered their red cases, the flowers faded as I looked, and the bush
changed into a block of stony knobs.

Chance had thrown me just by the most precious specimens of the
zoophyte.  This coral was more valuable than that found in the
Mediterranean, on the coasts of France, Italy and Barbary.  Its tints
justified the poetical names of "Flower of Blood," and "Froth of
Blood," that trade has given to its most beautiful productions.  Coral
is sold for L20 per ounce; and in this place the watery beds would make
the fortunes of a company of coral-divers. This precious matter, often
confused with other polypi, formed then the inextricable plots called
"macciota," and on which I noticed several beautiful specimens of pink
coral.

But soon the bushes contract, and the arborisations increase. Real
petrified thickets, long joints of fantastic architecture, were
disclosed before us. Captain Nemo placed himself under a dark gallery,
where by a slight declivity we reached a depth of a hundred yards. The
light from our lamps produced sometimes magical effects, following the
rough outlines of the natural arches and pendants disposed like
lustres, that were tipped with points of fire.

At last, after walking two hours, we had attained a depth of about
three hundred yards, that is to say, the extreme limit on which coral
begins to form.  But there was no isolated bush, nor modest brushwood,
at the bottom of lofty trees.  It was an immense forest of large
mineral vegetations, enormous petrified trees, united by garlands of
elegant sea-bindweed, all adorned with clouds and reflections.  We
passed freely under their high branches, lost in the shade of the waves.

Captain Nemo had stopped.  I and my companions halted, and, turning
round, I saw his men were forming a semi-circle round their chief.
Watching attentively, I observed that four of them carried on their
shoulders an object of an oblong shape.

We occupied, in this place, the centre of a vast glade surrounded by
the lofty foliage of the submarine forest.  Our lamps threw over this
place a sort of clear twilight that singularly elongated the shadows on
the ground.  At the end of the glade the darkness increased, and was
only relieved by little sparks reflected by the points of coral.

Ned Land and Conseil were near me.  We watched, and I thought I was
going to witness a strange scene.  On observing the ground, I saw that
it was raised in certain places by slight excrescences encrusted with
limy deposits, and disposed with a regularity that betrayed the hand of
man.

In the midst of the glade, on a pedestal of rocks roughly piled up,
stood a cross of coral that extended its long arms that one might have
thought were made of petrified blood.  Upon a sign from Captain Nemo
one of the men advanced; and at some feet from the cross he began to
dig a hole with a pickaxe that he took from his belt.  I understood
all!  This glade was a cemetery, this hole a tomb, this oblong object
the body of the man who had died in the night!  The Captain and his men
had come to bury their companion in this general resting-place, at the
bottom of this inaccessible ocean!

The grave was being dug slowly; the fish fled on all sides while their
retreat was being thus disturbed; I heard the strokes of the pickaxe,
which sparkled when it hit upon some flint lost at the bottom of the
waters.  The hole was soon large and deep enough to receive the body.
Then the bearers approached; the body, enveloped in a tissue of white
linen, was lowered into the damp grave.  Captain Nemo, with his arms
crossed on his breast, and all the friends of him who had loved them,
knelt in prayer.

The grave was then filled in with the rubbish taken from the ground,
which formed a slight mound.  When this was done, Captain Nemo and his
men rose; then, approaching the grave, they knelt again, and all
extended their hands in sign of a last adieu.  Then the funeral
procession returned to the Nautilus, passing under the arches of the
forest, in the midst of thickets, along the coral bushes, and still on
the ascent.  At last the light of the ship appeared, and its luminous
track guided us to the Nautilus.  At one o'clock we had returned.

As soon as I had changed my clothes I went up on to the platform, and,
a prey to conflicting emotions, I sat down near the binnacle.  Captain
Nemo joined me.  I rose and said to him:

"So, as I said he would, this man died in the night?"

"Yes, M. Aronnax."

"And he rests now, near his companions, in the coral cemetery?"

"Yes, forgotten by all else, but not by us.  We dug the grave, and the
polypi undertake to seal our dead for eternity." And, burying his face
quickly in his hands, he tried in vain to suppress a sob.  Then he
added:  "Our peaceful cemetery is there, some hundred feet below the
surface of the waves."

"Your dead sleep quietly, at least, Captain, out of the reach of
sharks."

"Yes, sir, of sharks and men," gravely replied the Captain.



PART TWO



CHAPTER I

THE INDIAN OCEAN

We now come to the second part of our journey under the sea.  The first
ended with the moving scene in the coral cemetery which left such a
deep impression on my mind.  Thus, in the midst of this great sea,
Captain Nemo's life was passing, even to his grave, which he had
prepared in one of its deepest abysses.  There, not one of the ocean's
monsters could trouble the last sleep of the crew of the Nautilus, of
those friends riveted to each other in death as in life.  "Nor any man,
either," had added the Captain.  Still the same fierce, implacable
defiance towards human society!

I could no longer content myself with the theory which satisfied
Conseil.

That worthy fellow persisted in seeing in the Commander of the Nautilus
one of those unknown _savants_ who return mankind contempt for
indifference.  For him, he was a misunderstood genius who, tired of
earth's deceptions, had taken refuge in this inaccessible medium, where
he might follow his instincts freely.  To my mind, this explains but
one side of Captain Nemo's character.  Indeed, the mystery of that last
night during which we had been chained in prison, the sleep, and the
precaution so violently taken by the Captain of snatching from my eyes
the glass I had raised to sweep the horizon, the mortal wound of the
man, due to an unaccountable shock of the Nautilus, all put me on a new
track.  No; Captain Nemo was not satisfied with shunning man.  His
formidable apparatus not only suited his instinct of freedom, but
perhaps also the design of some terrible retaliation.

At this moment nothing is clear to me; I catch but a glimpse of light
amidst all the darkness, and I must confine myself to writing as events
shall dictate.

