for the work that he had to do, and set himself resolutely to accomplish
it.

What a contrast, my dear children, between this bold, rough, active man,
and the gentle Lady Arbella, who was fading away, like a pale English
flower, in the shadow of the forest! And now the great chair was often
empty, because Lady Arbella grew too weak to arise from bed.

Meantime, her husband had pitched upon a spot for their new home. He
returned from Boston to Salem, travelling through the woods on foot, and
leaning on his pilgrim's staff. His heart yearned within him; for he was
eager to tell his wife of the new home which he had chosen. But when he
beheld her pale and hollow cheek, and found how her strength was wasted,
he must have known that her appointed home was in a better land. Happy for
him then,--happy both for him and her,--if they remembered that there was a
path to heaven, as well from this heathen wilderness as from the Christian
land whence they had come. And so, in one short month from her arrival,
the gentle Lady Arbella faded away and died. They dug a grave for her in
the new soil, where the roots of the pine trees impeded their spades; and
when her bones had rested there nearly two hundred years, and a city had
sprung up around them, a church of stone was built upon the spot.



Charley, almost at the commencement of the foregoing narrative, had
galloped away with a prodigious clatter, upon Grandfather's stick, and was
not yet returned. So large a boy should have been ashamed to ride upon a
stick. But Laurence and Clara had listened attentively, and were affected
by this true story of the gentle lady, who had come so far to die so soon.
Grandfather had supposed that little Alice was asleep, but, towards the
close of the story, happening to look down upon her, he saw that her blue
eyes were wide open, and fixed earnestly upon his face. The tears had
gathered in them, like dew upon a delicate flower; but when Grandfather
ceased to speak, the sunshine of her smile broke forth again.

"O, the lady must have been so glad to get to heaven!" exclaimed little
Alice.

"Grandfather, what became of Mr. Johnson?" asked Clara.

"His heart appears to have been quite broken," answered Grandfather; "for
he died at Boston within a month after the death of his wife. He was
buried in the very same tract of ground, where he had intended to build a
dwelling for Lady Arbella and himself. Where their house would have stood
there was his grave.

"I never heard any thing so melancholy!" said Clara.

"The people loved and respected Mr. Johnson so much," continued
Grandfather, "that it was the last request of many of them, when they
died, that they might be buried as near as possible to this good man's
grave. And so the field became the first burial-ground in Boston. When you
pass through Tremont street, along by King's Chapel, you see a
burial-ground, containing many old grave-stones and monuments. That was
Mr. Johnson's field."

"How sad is the thought," observed Clara, "that one of the first things
which the settlers had to do, when they came to the new world, was to set
apart a burial-ground!"

"Perhaps," said Laurence, "if they had found no need of burial-grounds
here, they would have been glad, after a few years, to go back to
England."

Grandfather looked at Laurence, to discover whether he knew how profound
and true a thing he had said.




Chapter III


Not long after Grandfather had told the story of his great chair, there
chanced to be a rainy day. Our friend Charley, after disturbing the
household with beat of drum and riotous shouts, races up and down the
staircase, overturning of chairs, and much other uproar, began to feel the
quiet and confinement within doors intolerable. But as the rain came down
in a flood, the little fellow was hopelessly a prisoner, and now stood
with sullen aspect at a window, wondering whether the sun itself were not
extinguished by so much moisture in the sky.

Charley had already exhausted the less eager activity of the other
children; and they had betaken themselves to occupations that did not
admit of his companionship. Laurence sat in a recess near the book-case,
reading, not for the first time, the Midsummer Night's Dream. Clara was
making a rosary of beads for a little figure of a Sister of Charity, who
was to attend the Bunker Hill Fair, and lend her aid in erecting the
Monument. Little Alice sat on Grandfather's foot-stool, with a
picture-book in her hand; and, for every picture, the child was telling
Grandfather a story. She did not read from the book, (for little Alice had
not much skill in reading,) but told the story out of her own heart and
mind.

Charley was too big a boy, of course, to care any thing about little
Alice's stories, although Grandfather appeared to listen with a good deal
of interest. Often, in a young child's ideas and fancies, there is
something which it requires the thought of a lifetime to comprehend. But
Charley was of opinion, that if a story must be told, it had better be
told by Grandfather, than little Alice.

"Grandfather, I want to hear more about your chair," said he.

Now Grandfather remembered that Charley had galloped away upon a stick, in
the midst of the narrative of poor Lady Arbella, and I know not whether he
would have thought it worth while to tell another story, merely to gratify
such an inattentive auditor as Charley. But Laurence laid down his book
and seconded the request. Clara drew her chair nearer to Grandfather, and
little Alice immediately closed her picture-book, and looked up into his
face. Grandfather had not the heart to disappoint them.

He mentioned several persons who had a share in the settlement of our
country, and who would be well worthy of remembrance, if we could find
room to tell about them all. Among the rest, Grandfather spoke of the
famous Hugh Peters, a minister of the gospel, who did much good to the
inhabitants of Salem. Mr. Peters afterwards went back to England, and was
chaplain to Oliver Cromwell; but Grandfather did not tell the children
what became of this upright and zealous man, at last. In fact, his
auditors were growing impatient to hear more about the history of the
chair.

"After the death of Mr. Johnson," said he, "Grandfather's chair came into
the possession of Roger Williams. He was a clergyman, who arrived at
Salem, and settled there in 1631. Doubtless the good man has spent many a
studious hour in this old chair, either penning a sermon, or reading some
abstruse book of theology, till midnight came upon him unawares. At that
period, as there were few lamps or candles to be had, people used to read
or work by the light of pitchpine torches. These supplied the place of the
"midnight oil," to the learned men of New England."

Grandfather went on to talk about Roger Williams, and told the children
several particulars, which we have not room to repeat. One incident,
however, which was connected with his life, must be related, because it
will give the reader an idea of the opinions and feelings of the first
settlers of New England. It was as follows:



THE RED CROSS


While Roger Williams sat in Grandfather's chair, at his humble residence
in Salem, John Endicott would often come to visit him. As the clergy had
great influence in temporal concerns, the minister and magistrate would
talk over the occurrences of the day, and consult how the people might be
governed according to scriptural laws.

One thing especially troubled them both. In the old national banner of
England, under which her soldiers have fought for hundreds of years, there
is a Red Cross, which has been there ever since the days when England was
in subjection to the Pope. The Cross, though a holy symbol, was abhorred
by the Puritans, because they considered it a relic of Popish idolatry.
Now, whenever the train-band of Salem was mustered, the soldiers, with
Endicott at their head, had no other flag to march under than this same
old papistical banner of England, with the Red Cross in the midst of it.
The banner of the Red Cross, likewise, was flying on the walls of the fort
of Salem; and a similar one was displayed in Boston harbor, from the
fortress on Castle Island.

"I profess, brother Williams," Captain Endicott would say, after they had
been talking of this matter, "it distresses a Christian man's heart, to
see this idolatrous Cross flying over our heads. A stranger beholding it,
would think that we had undergone all our hardships and dangers, by sea
and in the wilderness, only to get new dominions for the Pope of Rome."

"Truly, good Mr. Endicott," Roger Williams would answer, "you speak as an
honest man and Protestant Christian should. For mine own part, were it my
business to draw a sword, I should reckon it sinful to fight under such a
banner. Neither can I, in my pulpit, ask the blessing of Heaven upon it."

Such, probably, was the way in which Roger Williams and John Endicott used
to talk about the banner of the Red Cross. Endicott, who was a prompt and
resolute man, soon determined that Massachusetts, if she could not have a
banner of her own, should at least be delivered from that of the Pope of
Rome.

Not long afterwards there was a military muster at Salem. Every
able-bodied man, in the town and neighborhood, was there. All were well
armed, with steel caps upon their heads, plates of iron upon their breasts
and at their backs, and gorgets of steel around their necks. When the sun
shone upon these ranks of iron-clad men, they flashed and blazed with a
splendor that bedazzled the wild Indians, who had come out of the woods to
gaze at them. The soldiers had long pikes, swords, and muskets, which were
fired with matches, and were almost as heavy as a small cannon.

These men had mostly a stern and rigid aspect. To judge by their looks,
you might have supposed that there was as much iron in their hearts, as
there was upon their heads and breasts. They were all devoted Puritans,
and of the same temper as those with whom Oliver Cromwell afterwards
overthrew the throne of England. They hated all the relics of Popish
superstition as much as Endicott himself; and yet, over their heads, was
displayed the banner of the Red Cross.

Endicott was the captain of the company. While the soldiers were expecting
his orders to begin their exercise, they saw him take the banner in one
hand, holding his drawn sword in the other. Probably he addressed them in
a speech, and explained how horrible a thing it was, that men, who had
fled from Popish idolatry into the wilderness, should be compelled to
fight under its symbols here. Perhaps he concluded his address somewhat in
the following style.

"And now, fellow soldiers, you see this old banner of England. Some of
you, I doubt not, may think it treason for a man to lay violent hands upon
it. But whether or no it be treason to man, I have good assurance in my
conscience that it is no treason to God. Wherefore I have resolved that we
will rather be God's soldiers, than soldiers of the Pope of Rome; and in
that mind I now cut the Papal Cross out of this banner."

And so he did. And thus, in a province belonging to the crown of England,
a captain was found bold enough to deface the King's banner with his
sword.

When Winthrop, and the other wise men of Massachusetts, heard of it, they
were disquieted, being afraid that Endicott's act would bring great
trouble upon himself and them. An account of the matter was carried to
King Charles; but he was then so much engrossed by dissensions with his
people, that he had no leisure to punish the offender. In other times, it
might have cost Endicott his life, and Massachusetts her charter.



"I should like to know, Grandfather," said Laurence, when the story was
ended, "whether, when Endicott cut the Red Cross out of the banner, he
meant to imply that Massachusetts was independent of England?"

"A sense of the independence of his adopted country, must have been in
that bold man's heart," answered Grandfather; "but I doubt whether he had
given the matter much consideration, except in its religious bearing.
However, it was a very remarkable affair, and a very strong expression of
Puritan character."

Grandfather proceeded to speak further of Roger Williams, and of other
persons who sat in the great chair, as will be seen in the following
chapter.




Chapter IV


"Roger Williams," said Grandfather, "did not keep possession of the chair
a great while. His opinions of civil and religious matters differed, in
many respects, from those of the rulers and clergymen of Massachusetts.
Now the wise men of those days believed, that the country could not be
safe, unless all the inhabitants thought and felt alike."

"Does any body believe so in our days Grandfather?" asked Laurence.

"Possibly there are some who believe it," said Grandfather; "but they have
not so much power to act upon their belief, as the magistrates and
ministers had, in the days of Roger Williams. They had the power to
deprive this good man of his home, and to send him out from the midst of
them, in search of a new place of rest. He was banished in 1634, and went
first to Plymouth colony; but as the people there held the same opinions
as those of Massachusetts, he was not suffered to remain among them.
However, the wilderness was wide enough; so Roger Williams took his staff
and travelled into the forest, and made treaties with the Indians, and
began a plantation which he called Providence."

"I have been to Providence on the railroad," said Charley. "It is but a
two hours' ride."

"Yes, Charley," replied Grandfather; "but when Roger Williams travelled
thither, over hills and valleys, and through the tangled woods, and across
swamps and streams, it was a journey of several days. Well; his little
plantation is now grown to be a populous city; and the inhabitants have a
great veneration for Roger Williams. His name is familiar in the mouths of
all because they see it on their bank bills. How it would have perplexed
this good clergyman, if he had been told that he should give his name to
the ROGER WILLIAMS BANK!"

"When he was driven from Massachusetts," said Laurence, "and began his
journey into the woods, he must have felt as if he were burying himself
forever from the sight and knowledge of men. Yet the whole country has now
heard of him, and will remember him forever."

"Yes," answered Grandfather, "it often happens, that the outcasts of one
generation are those, who are reverenced as the wisest and best of men by
the next. The securest fame is that which comes after a man's death. But
let us return to our story. When Roger Williams was banished, he appears
to have given the chair to Mrs. Anne Hutchinson. At all events it was in
her possession in 1637. She was a very sharp-witted and well-instructed
lady, and was so conscious of her own wisdom and abilities, that she
thought it a pity that the world should not have the benefit of them. She
therefore used to hold lectures in Boston, once or twice a week, at which
most of the women attended. Mrs. Hutchinson presided at these meetings,
sitting, with great state and dignity, in Grandfather's chair."

"Grandfather, was it positively this very chair?" demanded Clara, laying
her hand upon its carved elbow.

"Why not, my dear Clara?" said Grandfather. "Well; Mrs. Hutchinson's
lectures soon caused a great disturbance; for the ministers of Boston did
not think it safe and proper, that a woman should publicly instruct the
people in religious doctrines. Moreover, she made the matter worse, by
declaring that the Rev. Mr. Cotton was the only sincerely pious and holy
clergyman in New England. Now the clergy of those days had quite as much
share in the government of the country, though indirectly, as the
magistrates themselves; so you may imagine what a host of powerful enemies
were raised up against Mrs. Hutchinson. A synod was convened; that is to
say, an assemblage of all the ministers in Massachusetts. They declared
that there were eighty-two erroneous opinions on religious subjects,
diffused among the people, and that Mrs. Hutchinson's opinions were of the
number."

"If they had eighty-two wrong opinions," observed Charley, "I don't see
how they could have any right ones."

"Mrs. Hutchinson had many zealous friends and converts," continued
Grandfather. "She was favored by young Henry Vane, who had come over from
England a year or two before, and had since been chosen governor of the
colony, at the age of twenty-four. But Winthrop, and most of the other
leading men, as well as the ministers, felt an abhorrence of her
doctrines. Thus two opposite parties were formed; and so fierce were the
dissensions, that it was feared the consequence would be civil war and
bloodshed. But Winthrop and the ministers being the most powerful, they
disarmed and imprisoned Mrs. Hutchinson's adherents. She, like Roger
Williams, was banished."

"Dear Grandfather, did they drive the poor woman into the woods?"
exclaimed little Alice, who contrived to feel a human interest even in
these discords of polemic divinity.

"They did, my darling," replied Grandfather; "and the end of her life was
so sad, you must not hear it. At her departure, it appears from the best
authorities, that she gave the great chair to her friend, Henry Vane. He
was a young man of wonderful talents and great learning, who had imbibed
the religious opinions of the Puritans, and left England with the
intention of spending his life in Massachusetts. The people chose him
governor; but the controversy about Mrs. Hutchinson, and other troubles,
caused him to leave the country in 1637. You may read the subsequent
events of his life in the History of England."

"Yes, Grandfather," cried Laurence; "and we may read them better in Mr.
Upham's biography of Vane. And what a beautiful death he died, long
afterwards! beautiful, though it was on a scaffold."

"Many of the most beautiful deaths have been there," said Grandfather.
"The enemies of a great and good man can in no other way make him so
glorious, as by giving him the crown of martyrdom."

In order that the children might fully understand the all-important
history of the chair, Grandfather now thought fit to speak of the progress
that was made in settling several colonies. The settlement of Plymouth, in
1620, has already been mentioned. In 1635, Mr. Hooker and Mr. Stone, two
ministers, went on foot from Massachusetts to Connecticut, through the
pathless woods, taking their whole congregation along with them. They
founded the town of Hartford. In 1638, Mr. Davenport, a very celebrated
minister, went, with other people, and began a plantation at New Haven. In
the same year, some persons who had been persecuted in Massachusetts, went
to the Isle of Rhodes, since called Rhode Island, and settled there. About
this time, also, many settlers had gone to Maine, and were living without
any regular government. There were likewise settlers near Piscataqua
River, in the region which is now called New Hampshire.

Thus, at various points along the coast of New England, there were
communities of Englishmen. Though these communities were independent of
one another, yet they had a common dependence upon England; and, at so
vast a distance from their native home, the inhabitants must all have felt
like brethren. They were fitted to become one united people, at a future
period. Perhaps their feelings of brotherhood were the stronger, because
different nations had formed settlements to the north and to the south. In
Canada and Nova Scotia were colonies of French. On the banks of the Hudson
River was a colony of Dutch, who had taken possession of that region many
years before, and called it New Netherlands.

Grandfather, for aught I know, might have gone on to speak of Maryland and
Virginia; for the good old gentleman really seemed to suppose, that the
whole surface of the United States was not too broad a foundation to place
the four legs of his chair upon. But, happening to glance at Charley, he
perceived that this naughty boy was growing impatient, and meditating
another ride upon a stick. So here, for the present, Grandfather suspended
the history of his chair.




Chapter V


The Children had now learned to look upon the chair with an interest,
which was almost the same as if it were a conscious being, and could
remember the many famous people whom it had held within its arms.

Even Charley, lawless as he was, seemed to feel that this venerable chair
must not be clambered upon nor overturned, although he had no scruple in
taking such liberties with every other chair in the house. Clara treated
it with still greater reverence, often taking occasion to smooth its
cushion, and to brush the dust from the carved flowers and grotesque
figures of its oaken back and arms. Laurence would sometimes sit a whole
hour, especially at twilight, gazing at the chair, and, by the spell of
his imaginations, summoning up its ancient occupants to appear in it
again.

Little Alice evidently employed herself in a similar way; for once, when
Grandfather had gone abroad, the child was heard talking with the gentle
Lady Arbella, as if she were still sitting in the chair. So sweet a child
as little Alice may fitly talk with angels, such as the Lady Arbella had
long since become.

Grandfather was soon importuned for more stories about the chair. He had
no difficulty in relating them; for it really seemed as if every person,
noted in our early history, had, on some occasion or other, found repose
within its comfortable arms. If Grandfather took pride in any thing, it
was in being the possessor of such an honorable and historic elbow chair.

"I know not precisely who next got possession of the chair, after Governor
Vane went back to England," said Grandfather. "But there is reason to
believe that President Dunster sat in it, when he held the first
commencement at Harvard College. You have often heard, children, how
careful our forefathers were, to give their young people a good education.
They had scarcely cut down trees enough to make room for their own
dwellings, before they began to think of establishing a college. Their
principal object was, to rear up pious and learned ministers; and hence
old writers call Harvard College a school of the prophets."

"Is the college a school of the prophets now?" asked Charley.

"It is a long while since I took my degree, Charley. You must ask some of
the recent graduates," answered Grandfather. "As I was telling you,
President Dunster sat in Grandfather's chair in 1642, when he conferred
the degree of bachelor of arts on nine young men. They were the first in
America, who had received that honor. And now, my dear auditors, I must
confess that there are contradictory statements and some uncertainty about
the adventures of the chair, for a period of almost ten years. Some say
that it was occupied by your own ancestor, William Hawthorne, first
Speaker of the House of Representatives. I have nearly satisfied myself,
however, that, during most of this questionable period, it was literally
the Chair of State. It gives me much pleasure to imagine, that several
successive governors of Massachusetts sat in it at the council board."

"But, Grandfather," interposed Charley, who was a matter-of-fact little
person, "what reason have you to imagine so?"

"Pray do imagine it, Grandfather," said Laurence.

"With Charley's permission, I will," replied Grandfather, smiling. "Let us
consider it settled, therefore, that Winthrop, Bellingham, Dudley, and
Endicott, each of them, when chosen governor, took his seat in our great
chair on election day. In this chair, likewise, did those excellent
governors preside, while holding consultations with the chief counsellors
of the province, who were styled Assistants. The governor sat in this
chair, too, whenever messages were brought to him from the chamber of
Representatives."
