laid out three suits of mail, helmets, and arms.

"Now," said Ealhstan, as he saw our eyes go, as a man's eyes will,
straight to these things, "if you thanes are not too proud to accept
such as I can give, let me arm you, and tell you where you shall bear
these arms."

And that was what we longed for, for as yet we had no post in the levy,
and we told him as much.

"That is well," he answered. "See, Wislac, here is bright steel armour
and helm and shield for you. Sword also, if you need it, for maybe you
will scarce part from your own tried weapon?"

But Wislac smiled at that, and took hold of his sword hilt, loosening
the strings which bound it to the sheath. There were but eight inches of
blade left, and these were sorely notched.

"Aha!" quoth the bishop, "now know I why Wislac thought well to stop
fighting the other day," which pleased the Mercian well enough.

"Then, Wulfhere," went on Ealhstan, "here is this black armour and helm
and shield for you, and sword or axe as you will."

And Wulfhere thanked him, taking the axe, as his own sword was good.

"Now, Heregar, my son, this is yours," said the bishop, looking kindly
at me.

And as I looked I thought I had never seen more beautiful arms. No
better were they than the other two suits, for all three were of good
Sussex ring mail as to the byrnies, [x] while the boar-crested helms
were of hammered steel.

But mine was silver white, with gold collar and gold circles round the
arms. Gold, too, was the boar-crest of the helm, and gold the circle
round the head, and to me it seemed as I looked that this was too good.
And Ealhstan knew my thoughts and answered them.

"Black for the man of dark counsel, bright steel for the warrior, and
silver-bright armour for the man who brings back hope when all seems lost."

"That is good," said Wislac. "Now read us the meaning of the gold
thereon also," for he seemed to see that the bishop had some meaning in
that, whereat the bishop smiled.

"Gold for trust," he said, "and for the man who shall be honoured."

"That is well also," said Wulfhere, and Wislac nodded gravely.

"Now," said the bishop, "I will put Heregar out of my council for a
minute, so that he may not speak nor hear. Tell me, Thanes both, if it
will be well to give Heregar the place whereto men shall rally in need?"

"Aye, surely," they said. "We know he can fill that place."

"Then shall he bear my standard," said the bishop, "and none will
gainsay it," and so he turned to me.

"Now, Heregar, may you hear this decision. Standard bearer to me shall
you be, and I know you will bear it well and bravely. And these two,
your friends and mine, shall stand to right and left of you, and six
stout carles may you choose from the levy to stand before and behind
you. And whom you choose I will arm alike, that all may know them."

Now knew I not what to say or do, but I knelt before the bishop and
kissed his hand, and so he laid it on my head and blessed me, bidding me
speak no words of thanks, but only deserve them from him.

Now there was a little silence after this, and Wislac, being ever ready,
broke it for us,

"Much do I marvel," he said, "that these suits of armour should be so
exactly fitting to each of us. Surely there is some magic in it."

"Only the magic of a wearied man's sleep, and of a good weapon smith,"
said the bishop, laughing. "One measured your mail, byrnie and helm
both, as you slept. We have lay brethren apt for every craft."

And that reminded me of Brother Guthlac, and a thought came to me.

"Father," I said, "six men have you bidden me choose, and I know none of
the Dorset men. Yet there are six lay brethren here who have been
warriors, of whom brother Guthlac is one, and if they may march against
heathen men, I pray you let me have them."

Now that the Bishop seemed to find pleasant, as though he knew something
of those lovers of war songs, and answered that he wot not if Tatwine
would let them go. But, in any case, he would choose men for me of the
best, and that we all thought well, knowing in what spirit he would put
those men whom he should choose.

So he bade us go, taking our arms with us, and we, thanking him, went
out. But I found my collier, and showed him the arms I had been wearing,
saying they should be his, and then took him, rejoicing, into the town.
There I bought him, after some search, a plain, good sword and target,
which he bore to his lodgings to scour and gaze at for the rest of the day.



CHAPTER XIII. A MESSAGE FROM THE DEAD.


How shall I tell what it was like when the bishop, standing aloft at the
head of the abbey steps with all the monks round him, gave into my
hands, as I knelt, his standard to bear at the head of his men?

Very early in the morning it was, and all the roofs were golden in
bright sunlight, and the men, drawn up in a hollow square fronting the
abbey, were silent and attentive as mass was sung in the great church,
so that the sound of the chanting came out to them through the open
doors. And when the sacring [xi] bell rang, as though a
wave went along the ranks, all knelt, and there was a clash and ring of
steel, and then silence for a space, very wonderful.

Then came out, when mass was said, bishop, and thanes, and monks, and
there gave me the banner, Wulfhere and Wislac kneeling on either side of
me, and behind us those six stout housecarles whom the bishop had chosen
and armed for me. So the banner was given and blessed, and I rose up,
grasping the golden-hafted cross from which it hung, and lifted it that
all might see.

Then was a great shout from all the men, and swords were drawn and
brandished on every side, and, without need of command, all the Dorset
host swore to follow it even to the death. And that was good to hear.

But as for me, my thoughts were more than I may write, but it seems to
me that they were as those of Saint George when he rode out to slay the
dragon in the old days, so great were they.

After that a little wait, and then the horses; and the bishop mounted a
great bay charger, managing him as a master. And to me was brought my
white horse by the collier, looking a grim fighting man enough in his
arms, and to Wulfhere and Wislac black and gray steeds given by Ealhstan
himself.

Now the bishop rode, followed by us, to the centre of the levy, and
again a great shout rose up even mightier than that first, and when it
ended he spoke to the men as he was wont to speak but even yet more
freely, and then put himself at their head, and so began the march to
Brent. And all the town was out to see us go, never doubting of our
victory, nor thinking of how few might return of all that long line of
sturdy and valiant fighting men.

When we were clear of the town at last, and went, the men singing as
they marched, down the ancient green lanes that had seen our
forefathers' levies and the Roman legions alike, I had time to look
around me at my own following, being conscious in some way that, mixed
up as it were with the war song, there had been the sound of the droning
of a chant as by monks close by me. And I could see no monks near. The
thanes were riding round and after the bishop, who came next me as I led
the way with the standard, and Ealhstan indeed had on his robes; but
there was a stiffness about him, and a glint of steel also, when a
breeze shifted the loose fold of his garments, that seemed to say that
his was not all peaceful gear.

Just behind me, as I rode with Wulfhere and Wislac to right and left,
came my six men, big powerful housecarles, all in black armour and
carrying red and black shields, and with a red cross on their helms'
fronts. And the squarest of these six, he who seemed to be their leader,
looked up at me, when I turned again, with a grin that I seemed to know.
So I took closer notice of him, and lo! it was Guthlac, the reader of
Beowulf, and the other five were his brethren. Small wonder that I had
not recognized the holy men in their war gear, so little looked they
like the peaceful brethren who had walked in the abbey cloisters.

With them was my collier, keeping step and holding himself with the best
of them, and I thought that they would be seven hardy Danes who should
overmatch my standard guard. So I was well content with the bishop's
choice for me.

Now of that march to Brent, and the meeting there with the Somerset
levy, there is no need to tell. But by the time we marched from thence
against the Danes, there were five hundred men of Dorset, and near nine
hundred of Somerset. Of the Danes some judged that there would be eight
hundred or more, but if that was so, they were tried men, and our
numbers were none too great. Moreover, we must separate, so as to drive
them down to their ships, for they were spread over the country, burning
and destroying on every side.

We lay but one night on Brent, while the leaders held counsel, and even
as we sat gathered, we could see plainly the fires the Danes had lit, of
burning hamlet and homestead, far and wide across the marshes of Parret.
And the end of that council was that Eanulf should take his Somerset men
up Parret valley, and so drive down the Danes, while Ealhstan should
fall on them by Bridgwater as they came down, and so scatter them.

Therefore would the Somerset levy march very early, before light; while
we should wait till the next night, unless word should come beforehand.

So we went to sleep. And as I slept in my place, with the standard
flapping above me, and my comrades on either side and behind, it seemed
to me that one came and waked me. And when I sat up and looked, thinking
it was a messenger from the bishop, I saw that it was Matelgar.

Now this time I had no fear of him, and I waited for him to speak, just
as though he had been before me in the flesh, for there seemed naught
uncanny about the matter to me. And yet even at the moment that seemed
strange, though it was so.

But for a while he looked not at me, but out over the low lands towards
Parret mouth and Stert, shading his eyes with his hand as though it were
broad noonday. And then he turned back to me and spoke.

"Heregar; I promised to stand by you again when the time came. Now I bid
you go to Combwich hill, there to wait what betides. So, if you will do
the bidding of the dead who has wronged you, but would now make amends,
shall you thank me for this hereafter--aye, and not you only."

Then out over Parret he gazed again and faded from beside me, so that I
could ask him nothing. Then knew I that I was awake, and that this had
been no dream; for a great fear came on me for a little, knowing what I
had seen to be not of this world. Yet all around me my comrades slept,
and only round the rim of the trenched hill went the wakeful sentries,
too far for speech--for we leaders were in the centre of the camp.

But presently I began to think less of the vision, and more of the
words. And at first they seemed vain, for Combwich hill was over near to
Stert; nor did I see how I could reach the place without cutting through
the Danes (who would doubtless leave a strong guard with the ships, and
were also in and about Bridgwater), seeing that the river must be crossed.

Then as I turned over the matter, not doubting but that a message so
given was sooth, and by no means lightly to be disregarded, I seemed to
wake to a resolve concerning the meaning of the whole thing. What if I
could win there under cover of darkness, and so fall on the Danish host
as Eanulf drove them back and the bishop and Osric chased them to the
ships?

That seemed possible, if only I could cross Parret with men enough, and
unseen. I would ask Wulfhere and Wislac, when morning came, and so, if
they could help, lay the matter before the bishop himself. So thinking I
fell asleep again, peacefully enough, nor dreamt I aught.

With morning light that vision and the bidding to Combwich, and what I
had thought thereon, seemed yet stronger. Very early the Somerset men
went with Eanulf, and we of the bishop's levy only remained on Brent
after the morning meal.

Then as we three stood on the edge of the hill, and looked out where
Matelgar had looked, I told my two friends of his coming and of his words.

"Three things there are," said Wislac, "that hinder this ghost's
business; namely, want of wings, uncertainty of darkness, and ignorance
of the time when the Danes shall come."

"There are also three things that make for it, brother," said Wulfhere.
"Namely: that men can swim, that there is no moon, and that the Danes
are careless in their watch of the waste they leave behind them."

"Think you that the hill will be unguarded?" asked I, glad that Wulfhere
did not put away the plan at once.

"Why should they guard it? There are Danes at the ships--though few, I
expect, for we have been well beaten. And more in plenty from Parret to
Quantocks, and no Saxon left between the two forces."

"Why not burn the ships then?" asked Wislac.

"Doubtless that could we, once over Parret," answered Wulfhere, "but
what then? Away go the Danes through Somerset, burning and plundering
even to Cornwall, and there bide till ships come, and then can be gone
in safety. That is not what we need. We have to trap them and beat them
here."

"So then, Wulfhere," I said, "think you that the plan is good?"

"Aye," he answered, "good enough; but not easy. Moreover, I doubt if the
bishop would let his standard bearer part from him."

That was likely enough to stop all the plan; but yet I would lay it
before Ealhstan, for it seemed to us that such a message might by no
means go untold at least.

So we sought him, and asked for speech with him; and at that he laughed,
saying that surely his council had the best right to that. Osric was
with him, and the bishop told him how that we three had been his first
advisers in this matter.

Then we sat down and I told Ealhstan all, asking nothing.

When I had ended, Osric looked at me, and said that the plan was
venturesome; but no doubt possible to be carried out, and if so, by none
better than myself, who knew every inch of that country. Then, thinking
over it, as it were, he added that the woods beyond Matelgar's hall
would shelter any force that must needs seek cover, so that, even were
Combwich hill unsafe, there was yet a refuge whence attack could again
be made.

Then Ealhstan, who had listened quietly, said that such messages were
rare, but all the less to be despised. Therefore would he think thereof
more fully.

"What," he asked, "is the main difficulty?"

I said that the crossing of Parret was like to be hard in any case; but
at night and unobserved yet more so. But that, could we reach the
farther bank, I could find places where we might lie in wait for a day,
if need were, with many men.

Thereupon the bishop took that great book of Caesar's wars, and looked
into it. But he seemed long in finding aught to meet that case, while we
talked of one thing or another concerning it among ourselves.

At last he shut the book and said, very gravely: "I would that I could
swim."

"I also, Father," said Wislac, "and why I cannot, save for sheer
cowardice, I know not, having been brought up on Thames side, and never
daring to go out of depth."

At that we were fain to laugh, so dismally did the broad-shouldered
Mercian blame himself. But the bishop said that if I went, needs must
that he came also. But he did not dissuade me in any way.

"Wulfhere the Counsellor," he said then, "have you no plan?"

"To cross the river?" answered the veteran. "Aye, many, if they may be
managed. Rafts for those who cannot swim, surely."

Now I bethought me of the many boats that ever lay in the creek under
Combwich, and wondered if any were yet whole. For if they were, surely
one might swim over and bring one back. And that I said.

Then of a sudden, the bishop rose up, and seemed to have come to a
decision, saying:

"See here, thanes; ever as we march to Bridgwater, we draw nearer
Parret. Now by this evening, we shall be close over against this place
Combwich, so that one may go thither and spy what there is to be done,
and come back in good time and tell us if crossing may be made by raft
or boat. Let this rest till then. But if it may be so, then I, and
Heregar and his following, and two hundred men will surely cross, and
wait for what may betide. For I think this plan is good."

So he would say no more of it then. And presently all his men were
mustered, and we marched from Brent slowly along the way to Bridgwater.



CHAPTER XIV. ELGAH THE FISHER.


Now men have said that this plan of mine needed no ghost to set it
forth, but is such that would enter the mind of any good leader. That
might be so had there been one there who knew the country as I knew it,
but there was not. And I was no general as was Eanulf. However that
might be, I tell what happened to me in the matter, and sure am I that
but for Matelgar's bidding I had never thought of this place or plan.

But once Ealhstan had heard thereof, the thought of it seemed ever
better to him. And when we were fairly marching along the level towards
Bridgwater he called me, and began to talk of that business of spying
out the crossing place.

Now I too had been thinking of that same, and asked him to let me go at
once, taking one man with me. Then would I rejoin him as best I might,
and close to the place where I might fix on means of getting over.

Now there seemed little danger in the matter, for our spies had reported
no Danes on this side of Parret, for they kept the water between us and
them, doubtless knowing that Osric had gone to Brent at first, and
thinking it likely that another levy might be made. So the bishop, not
very willingly, as it seemed to me, let me go, as there was none else
who could go direct to the point as I could without loss of time, even
as Osric told him.

Then I gave the standard into Wulfhere's hand, and must seek one to go
with me. First I thought of Wislac, but he was a stranger, and then my
eyes lit on my collier, and I knew that I need go no further. So I
called him, and taking him aside--while the men streamed past us,
looking at my silver arms and speaking thereof to one another--told
him what we had to do.

Whereat his eyes sparkled, and he said that it was good hearing.

"But, master," he went on, "take off those bright arms of yours and let
us go as marshmen. Then will be no suspicion if the Danes see us from
