

"Now, Professor Lambert, tell us what you have done with the body of
your assistant Miss Madge Crawford. Her car is outside your door, has
stood there since early yesterday morning. There are no footprints
leading away from the house and you can't expect us to believe that an
airplane picked her off the roof. It will make it a lot easier if you
tell us where she is. Her parents are greatly worried about her. When
they telephoned, you refused to talk to them, would not allow them to
speak to Miss Crawford. They are alarmed as to her fate. While you are
not the sort of man who would injure a young woman, still, things look
bad for you. You had better explain fully."

John Lambert, a man of about thirty-six, tall, spare, with black hair
which was slightly tinged with gray at the temples in spite of his
youth, turned large eyes which were filled with agony upon his
questioners.

Lambert was already internationally famous for his unique and
astounding experiments in the realm of sound and rhythm. He had been
endowed by one of the great electrical companies to do original work,
and his laboratory, in which he lived, was situated in a large tract
of isolated woodland some forty miles from New York City. It was
necessary for the success of his work that as few disturbing noises as
possible be made in the neighborhood. Many of his experiments with
sound and etheric waves required absolute quiet and freedom from
interrupting noises. The delicate nature of some of the machines he
used would not tolerate so much as the footsteps of a man within a
hundred yards, and a passing car would have disrupted them entirely.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lambert was terribly nervous; he trembled under the gaze of the stern
detective, come with several colleagues from a neighboring town at the
call of Madge Crawford's frightened family. The girl, whose picture
stood on a working table nearby, looked at them from the photograph as
a beautiful young woman of twenty-five, light of hair, with large eyes
and a lovely face.

Detective Phillips pointed dramatically to the likeness of the missing
girl. "Can you," he said, "look at her there, and deny you loved her?
And if she did not love you in return, then we have a motive for what
you have done--jealousy. Come, tell us what you have done with her.
Our men will find her, anyway; they are searching the cellar for her
now. You can't hope to keep her, alive, and if she is dead--"

Lambert uttered a cry of despair, and put his face in his long
fingers. "She--she--don't say she's dead!"

"Then you did love her!" exclaimed Phillips triumphantly, and
exchanged glances with his companions.

"Of course I love her. And she returned my love. We were secretly
engaged, and were to be married when we had finished these extremely
important experiments. It is infamous though, to accuse me of having
killed her; if I have done so, then it was no fault of mine."

"Then you did kill her?"

"No, no. I cannot believe she is really gone."

"Why did you evade her parents' inquiries?"

"Because ... I have been trying to bring her ... to re-materialize
her."

"You mean to bring her back to life?"

"Yes."

"Couldn't a doctor do that better than you, if she is hidden somewhere
about here?" asked Phillips gravely.

"No, no. You do not understand. She cannot be seen, she has
dematerialized. Oh, go away. I'm the only man, save, possibly, my
friend Doctor Morgan, who can help her now. And Morgan--I've thought
of calling him, but I've been working every instant to get the right
combination. Go away, for God's sake!"

"We can't go away until we have found out Miss Crawford's fate," said
Phillips patiently.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another sleuth entered the immense laboratory. He made his way through
the myriad strange machines, a weird collection of xylophones, gongs,
stone slabs cut in peculiar patterns to produce odd rhythmic sounds,
electrical apparatus of all sorts. Near Phillips was a plate some feet
square, of heavy metal, raised from the floor on poles of a different
substance. About the ceiling were studs thickly set of the same sort
of metal as was the big plate.

One of the sleuths tapped his forehead, pointing to Lambert as the
latter nervously lighted a cigarette.

The newcomer reported to Phillips. He held in his hand two or three
sheets of paper on which something was written.

"The only other person here is a deaf mute," said the sleuth to
Phillips, his superior. "I've got his story. He writes that he takes
care of things, cooks their meals and so on. And he writes further
that he thinks the woman and this guy Lambert were in love with each
other. He has no idea where she has gone to. Here, you read it."

Phillips took the sheets and continued: "'Yesterday morning about ten
o'clock I was passing the door of the laboratory on my way to make up
Professor Lambert's bed. Suddenly I noticed a queer, shimmering,
greenish-blue light streaming down from the walls and ceiling of the
laboratory. I was right outside the place and though I cannot hear
anything, I was knocked down and I twisted and wriggled around like a
snake. It felt like something with a thousand little paws but with
great strength was pushing me every way. When there was a lull, and
the light had stopped for a few moments, I staggered to my feet and
ran madly for my own quarters, scared out of my head. As I went by the
kitchen, I saw Miss Crawford at the sink there, filling some vases and
arranging flowers as she usually did every morning.

"'If she called to me, I did not hear her or notice her lips moving. I
believe she came to the door.

"'I was going to quit, when I recovered myself, angry at what had
occurred; but then, I began to feel ashamed for being such a baby, for
Professor Lambert has been very good to me. About fifteen minutes
after I went to my room, I was able to return to the kitchen. Miss
Crawford was not there, though the flowers and vases were. Then, as I
started to work, still a little alarmed, Professor Lambert came
rushing into the kitchen, an expression of terror on his face. His
mouth was open, and I think he was calling. He then ran out, back to
the laboratory, and I have not seen Miss Madge since. Professor
Lambert has been almost continuously in the work-room since then,
and--I kept away from it, because I was afraid.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

Two more members of Phillips' squad broke into the laboratory and came
toward the chief. They had been working at physical labor, for they
were still perspiring and one regarded his hands with a rueful
expression.

"Any luck?" asked Phillips eagerly.

"No, boss. We been all over the place, and we dug every spot we could
get to earth in the cellar. Most of it's three-inch concrete, without
a sign of a break."

"Did you look in the furnace?"

"We looked there the first thing. She ain't there."

There were several closets in the laboratory, and Phillips opened all
of them and inspected them. As he moved near the big plate, Lambert
uttered a cry of warning. "Don't disturb that, don't touch anything
near it!"

"All right, all right," said Phillips testily.

The skeptical sleuths had classified Lambert as a "nut," and were
practically sure he had done away with Madge Crawford because she
would not marry him.

Still, they needed better evidence than their mere beliefs. There was
no corpus delicti, for instance.

"Gentlemen," said Lambert at last, controlling his emotions with a
great effort. "I will admit to you that I am in trepidation and a
state of mental torture as to Miss Crawford's fate. You are delaying
matters, keeping me from my work."

"He thinks about work when the girl he claims he loves has
disappeared," said Doherty, in a loud whisper to Phillips. Doherty was
one of the sleuths who had been digging in the cellar, and the hard
work had made his temper short.

"You must help us find Miss Crawford before we can let you alone,"
said Phillips. "Can't you understand that you are under grave
suspicion of having injured her, hidden her away? This is a serious
matter, Professor Lambert. Your experiments can wait."

"This one cannot," shouted Lambert, shaking his fists. "You are
fools!"

"Steady now," said Doherty.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Perhaps you had better come with us to the district attorney's
office," went on Phillips. "There you may come to your senses and
realize the futility of trying to cover up your crime--if you have
committed one. If you have not, why do you not tell us where Miss
Crawford is?"

"Because I do not know myself," replied Lambert. "But you can't take
me away from here. I beg of you, gentlemen, allow me a little more
time. I must have it."

Phillips shook his head. "Not unless you tell us logically what has
occurred," he said.

"Then I must, though I do not think you will comprehend or even
believe me. Briefly, it is this: yesterday morning I was working on
the final series of experiments with a new type of harmonic overtones
plus a new type of sinusoidal current which I had arranged with a
series of selenium cells. When I finally threw the switch--remember, I
was many weeks preparing the apparatus, and had just put the final
touches on early that morning--there was a sound such as never had
been heard before by human ears, an indescribable sound, terrifying
and mysterious. Also, there was a fierce, devouring verditer blue
light, and this came from the plates and studs you see, but so great
was its strength that it got out of control and leaped about the room
like a live thing. For some moments, while it increased in intensity
as I raised the power of the current by means of the switch I held in
my hand, I watched and listened in fascination. My instruments had
ceased to record, though they are the most delicate ever invented and
can handle almost anything which man can even surmise."

       *       *       *       *       *

The perspiration was pouring from Lambert's face, as he recounted his
story. The detectives listened, comprehending but a little of the
meaning of the scientist's words.

"What has this to do with Miss Crawford?" asked Doherty impatiently.

Phillips held up his hand to silence the other sleuth. "Let him
finish," he ordered. "Go on, professor."

"The sensations which I was undergoing became unendurable," went on
Lambert, in a low, hoarse voice. "I was forced to cry out in pain and
confusion.

"Miss Crawford evidently heard my call, for a few moments later, just
as the terrific unknown force reached its apex, she dashed into the
laboratory, and stepped across the plate you see there.

"I was powerless. Though I shut off the current by a superhuman
effort, she--she was gone!"

Lambert put his face in his hands, a sob shook his broad shoulders.

"Gone?" repeated Phillips. "What do you mean, gone?"

"She disappeared, before my very eyes," said the professor shakily.
"Torn into nothingness by the fierce force of the current or sound.
Since then, I have been trying to reproduce the conditions of the
experiment, for I wish to bring her back. If I cannot do so, then I
want to join her, wherever she has gone. I love her, I know now that I
cannot possibly live without her. Will you please leave me alone, now,
so that I can continue?"

Doherty laughed derisively. "What a story," he jeered.

"Keep quiet, Doherty," ordered Phillips. "Now, Professor Lambert, your
explanation of Miss Crawford's disappearance does not sound logical to
us, but still we are willing to give you every chance to bring her
back, if what you say is true. We cannot leave you entirely alone,
because you might try to escape or you might carry out your threat of
suicide. Therefore, I am going to sit over there in the corner,
quietly, where I can watch you but will not interfere with your work.
We will give you until midnight to prove your story. Then you must go
with us to the district attorney. Do you agree to that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lambert nodded, eagerly. "I agree. Let me work in peace, and if I do
not succeed then you may take me anywhere you wish. If you can," he
added, in an undertone.

Doherty and the others, at Phillips' orders, filed from the
laboratory. "One thing more, professor," said Phillips, when they were
alone and the professor was preparing to work. "How do you explain the
fact, if your story is true, that Miss Crawford was killed and made to
disappear, while you yourself, close by, were uninjured?"

"Do you see these garments?" asked Lambert, indicating some black
clothes which lay on a bench nearby. "They insulated me from the
current and partially protected me from the sound. Though the force
was very great, great enough to penetrate my insulation, it was
handicapped in my case because of the garments."

"I see. Well, you may go on."

Phillips moved in the chair he had taken, from time to time. He could
hear the noises of his men, still searching the premises for Madge
Crawford, and Professor Lambert heard them, too.

"Will you tell your men to be quiet?" he cried at last.

There were dark circles under Lambert's eyes. He was working in a
state of feverish anxiety. When the girl he loved had dematerialized
from under his very eyes, panic had seized him; he had ripped away
wires to break the current and lost the thread of his experiment, so
that he could not reproduce it exactly without much labor.

The scientist put on the black robes, and Phillips wished he too had
some protective armor, even though he did believe that Lambert had
told them a parcel of lies. The deaf mute's story was not too
reassuring. Phillips warned his companions to be more quiet, and he
himself sat quite still.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lambert knew that the sleuths thought he was stark mad. He was aware
of the fact that he had but a few hours in which to save the girl who
had come at his cry to help him, who had loved him and whom he loved,
only to be torn into some place unknown by the forces which were
released in his experiment. And he knew he would rather die with her
than live without her.

He labored feverishly, though he tried to keep his brain calm in order
to win. His notes helped him up to a certain point, but when he had
made the final touches he had not had time to bring the data up to the
moment, being eager to test out his apparatus. It was while testing
that the awful event had occurred and he had seen Madge Crawford
disappear before his very eyes.

Her eyes, large and frightened, burned in his mind.

The deaf mute, Felix, a small, spare man of about fifty, sent the
professor some food and coffee through one of the sleuths. Lambert
swallowed the coffee, but waved away the rest, impatiently. Phillips,
watching his suspect constantly, was served a light supper at the end
of the afternoon.

There seemed to be a million wires to be touched, tested, and various
strange apparatus. Several times, later on in the evening. Lambert
threw the big switch with an air of expectancy, but little happened.
Then Lambert would go to work again, testing, testing--adjusting this
and that till Phillips swore under his breath.

"Only an hour more, professor," said Phillips, who was bored to death
and cramped from trying to obey the professor's orders to keep still.
A circle of cigarette-ends surrounded the sleuth.

"Only an hour," agreed Lambert. "Will you please be quiet, my man?
This is a matter of my fiancee's life or death."

Phillips was somewhat disgruntled, for he felt he had done Lambert
quite a favor in allowing him to remain in the laboratory for so long,
to prove his story.

"I wish Doctor Morgan were here; I ought to have sent for him, I
suppose," said Lambert, a few minutes later. "Will you allow me to get
him? I cannot seem to perfect this last stage."

"No time, now," declared Phillips. "I said till midnight."

It was obvious to Lambert that the detective had become certain during
the course of the evening that the scientist was mad. The ceaseless
fiddling and the lack of results or even spectacular sights had
convinced Phillips that he had to do with a crank.

"I think I have it now," said Lambert coolly.

"What?" asked Phillips.

"The original combination. I had forgotten one detail in the
excitement, and this threw me off. Now I believe I will succeed--in
one way or another. I warn you, be careful. I am about to release
forces which may get out of my control."

"Well, now, don't get reckless," begged Phillips nervously. The array
