
When we go to some sunny cranberry bog to look for these sundews,
nothing could be more innocent looking than the tiny plant, its
nodding raceme of buds, usually with only a solitary little
blossom (that opens only in the sunshine) at the top of the
curve, its leaves glistening with what looks like dew, though the
midsummer sun may be high in the heavens. A little fly or gnat,
attracted by the bright jewels, alights on a leaf only to find
that the clear drops, more sticky than honey, instantly glue his
feet, that the pretty reddish hairs about him act like tentacles,
reaching inward, to imprison him within their slowly closing
embrace. Here is one of the horrors of the Inquisition operating
in this land of liberty before our very eyes! Excited by the
struggles of the victim, the sensitive hairs close only the
faster, working on the same principle that a vine's tendrils do
when they come in contact with a trellis. More of the sticky
fluid pours upon the hapless fly, plastering over his legs and
wings and the pores on his body through which he draws his
breath. Slowly, surely, the leaf rolls inward, making a temporary
stomach; the cruel hairs bind, the glue suffocates and holds him
fast. Death alone releases him. And now the leafs orgy begins:
moistening the fly with a fresh peptic fluid, which helps in the
assimilation, the plant proceeds to digest its food. Curiously
enough, chemical analysis proves that this sundew secretes a
complex fluid corresponding almost exactly to the gastric juice
in the stomach of animals.

Darwin, who fed these leaves with various articles, found that
they could dissolve matter out of pollen, seeds, grass, etc.; yet
without a human caterer, how could a leaf turn vegetarian? When a
bit of any undesirable substance, such as chalk or wood, was
placed on the hairs and excited them, they might embrace it
temporarily; but as soon as the mistake was discovered, it would
be dropped! He also poisoned the plants by administering acids,
and gave them fatal attacks of indigestion by overfeeding them
with bits of raw beef!

Other common sundews, the SPATULATE-LEAVED SUNDEW (D. intermedia)
and the THREAD-LEAVED SUNDEW (D. filiformis) whose purplish-pink
flowers are reared above wet sand along the coast, possess
contrivances similar to the round-leaved plant's to pursue their
gruesome business. Why should these vegetables turn carnivorous?
Doubtless because the soil in which they grow can supply little
or no nitrogen. Very small roots testify to the small use they
serve. The water sucked up through them from the bog aids in the
manufacture of the fluid so freely exuded by the bristly glands,
but nitrogen must be obtained by other means, even at the
sacrifice of insect victims.


EARLY SAXIFRAGE
  (Saxifraga Virginiensis)  Saxifrage family

Flowers - White, small, numerous, perfect, spreading into a loose
panicle. Calyx 5-lobed; 5 petals; 10 stamens; 1 pistil with 2
styles. Scape: 4 to 12 in. high, naked, sticky-hairy. Leaves:
Clustered at the base, rather thick, obovate, toothed, and
narrowed into spatulate-margined petioles. Fruit: Widely spread,
purplish-brown pods.
Preferred Habitat - Rocky woodlands, hillsides.
Flowering Season - March-May
Distribution - New Brunswick to Georgia, and westward a thousand
miles or more.

Rooted in clefts of rock that, therefore, appears to be broken by
this vigorous plant, the saxifrage shows rosettes of fresh green
leaves in earliest spring, and soon whitens with its blossoms the
most forbidding niches. (Saxum = a rock; frango = 1 break.) At
first a small ball of green buds nestles in the leafy tuffet,
then pushes upward on a bare scape, opening its tiny, white,
five-pointed star flowers as it ascends, until, having reached
the allotted height, it scatters them in spreading clusters that
last a fortnight. Again we see that, however insignificantly
small nectar-bearing flowers may be, they are somehow protected
from crawling pilferers; in this case by the commonly employed
sticky hairs in which ants' feet become ensnared. As the anthers
mature before the stigmas are ready to receive pollen, certainly
the flowers cannot afford to send empty away the benefactors on
whom the perpetuation of their race depends; and must prevent it
even with the most heroic measures.


FALSE MITERWORT; COOLWORT; FOAM-FLOWER; NANCY-OVER-THE-GROUND
  (Tiarella cordifolia)  Saxifrage family.

Flowers - White, small, feathery, borne in a close raceme at the
top of a scape 6 to 12 in. high. Calyx white, 9-lobed; 5 clawed
petals; 10 stamens, long-exserted; 1 pistil with 2 styles.
Leaves: Long-petioled from the rootstock or runners, rounded or
broadly heart-shaped, 3 to 7-lobed, toothed, often downy along
veins beneath.
Preferred Habitat - Rich, moist woods, especially along
mountains.
Flowering Season - April-May.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Georgia, and westward scarcely to
the Mississippi.

Fuzzy, bright white foam-flowers are most conspicuous in the
forest when seen against their unevenly colored leaves that
carpet the ground. A relative, the TRUE MITERWORT or BISHOP'S CAP
(Mittella diphylla), with similar foliage, except that two
opposite leaves may be found almost seated near the middle of its
hairy stem, has its flowers rather distantly scattered on the
raceme, and their fine petals deeply cut like fringe. Both
species may be found in bloom at the same time, offering an
opportunity for comparison to the confused novice. Now, tiarella,
meaning a little tiara, and mitella, a little miter, refer, of
course, to the odd forms of their seed-cases; but all of us are
not gifted with the imaginative eyes of Linnaeus, who named the
plants. Xenophon's assertion that the royal tiara or turban of
the Persians was encircled with a crown helps us no more to see
what Linnaeus saw in the one case than the fact that the papal
miter is encircled by three crowns helps in the other. And as for
the lofty, two-peaked cap worn by bishops in the Roman Church, a
dozen plants, with equal propriety, might be said to wear it.

CAROLINA GRASS OF PARNASSUS
  (Parnassia Caroliniana)  Saxifrage family

Flowers - Creamy white, delicately veined with greenish,
solitary, 1 in. broad or over, at the end of a scape 8 in. to 2
ft. high, 1 ovate leaf clasping it. Calyx deeply 5-lobed; corolla
of 5 spreading, parallel veined petals; 5 fertile stamens
alternating with them, and 3 stout imperfect stamens clustered at
base of each petal; 1 very short pistil with 4 stigmas. Leaves:
>From the root, on long petioles, broadly oval or rounded,
heart-shaped at base, rather thick.
Preferred Habitat - Wet ground, low meadows, swamps.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - New Brunswick to Virginia, west to Iowa.

What's in a name? Certainly our common grass of Parnassus, which
is no grass at all, never starred the meadows round about the
home of the Muses, nor sought the steaming savannas of the
Carolinas. The European counterpart (P. palustris), fabled to
have sprung up on Mount Parnassus, is at home here only in the
Canadian border States and northward.

At first analysis one is puzzled by the clusters of filaments at
the base of each petal. Of what use are they? We have seen in the
case of the beard-tongue and the turtle-head that even imperfect
stamens sometimes serve useful ends, or they would doubtless have
been abolished. A fly or bee mistaking, as he well may, the
abortive anthers for beads of nectar on this flower, alights on
one of the white petals, a convenient, spreading landing place;
but finding his mistake, and guided by the greenish lines, the
pathfinders to the true nectaries situated on the other side of
the curious fringy structures, he must, because of their
troublesome presence, climb over them into the center of the
flower to suck its sweets from the point where he will dust
himself with pollen in young blossoms. Of course he will carry
some of their vitalizing powder to the late maturing stigmas of
older ones. Without the fringe of imperfect stamens, that serves
as a harmless trellis easily climbed over, the visitor might
stand on the petals and sip nectar without rendering any
assistance in cross-fertilizing his entertainers.


NINEBARK
  (Opulaster opulifolius; Spiraea opulifolia of Gray)  Rose
family

Flowers - White or pink, small, in numerous rounded terminal
clusters to 2 in. broad. Calyx 5-lobed; 5 rounded petals inserted
in its throat; 20 to 40 stamens; several pistils. Stem: Shrubby,
3 to 10 ft. high, with long, recurved branches, the loose bark
peeling off annually in thin strips. Leaves: Simple, heart-shaped
or rounded, 3-lobed, toothed. Fruit: 3 to 5 smooth, shining,
reddish, inflated, pointed pods.
Preferred Habitat - Rocky banks, riversides.
Flowering Season - June.
Distribution - Canada to Georgia, west to Kansas.

Whether the nurserymen agree with Dr. Gray or not when he says
these balls of white flowers possess "no beauty," the fact
remains that numbers of the shrubs are sold for ornament,
especially a golden-leaved variety. But the charm certainly lies
in their fruit. (Opulus = a wild cranberry tree.) When this is
plentifully set at the ends of long branches that curve backward,
and the bladder-like pods have taken on a rich purplish or
reddish hue, the shrub is undeniably decorative. Even the old
flowers, after they have had their pollen carried away by the
small bees and flies, show a reddish tint on the ovaries which
deepens as the fruit forms; and Ludwig states that this is not
only to increase the conspicuousness of the shrubs, but to entice
unbidden guests away from the younger flowers. Who will tell us
why the old bark should loosen every year and the thin layers
separate into not nine, but dozens of ragged strips?


MEADOW-SWEET; QUAKER LADY; QUEEN-OF-THE-MEADOW
  (Spiraea salicifolia)  Rose family

Flowers - Small, white or flesh pink, clustered in dense
pyramidal terminal panicles. Calyx 5 cleft; carolla of 5 rounded
petals; stamens numerous; pistils 5 to 8. Stem: 2 to 4 ft. high,
simple or bushy, smooth, usually reddish. Leaves: Alternate, oval
or oblong, saw-edged.
Preferred Habitat - Low meadows, swamps, fence-rows, ditches.
Flowering Season - June-August.
Distribution - Newfoundland to Georgia, west to Rocky Mountains.
Europe and Asia.

Fleecy white plumes of meadow-sweet, the "spires of closely
clustered bloom" sung by Dora Read Goodale, are surely not
frequently found near dusty "waysides scorched with barren heat,"
even in her Berkshires; their preference is for moister soil,
often in the same habitat with a first cousin, the pink
steeple-bush. But plants, like humans, are capricious creatures.
If the meadow-sweet always elected to grow in damp ground whose
rising mists would clog the pores of its leaves, doubtless they
would be protected with a woolly absorbent, as its cousins are.

Inasmuch as perfume serves as an attraction to the more highly
specialized, aesthetic insects, not required by the spiraeas, our
meadow-sweet has none, in spite of its misleading name. Small
bees (especially Andrenidae), flies (Syrphidae), and beetles,
among other visitors, come in great numbers, seeking the
accessible pollen, and, in this case, nectar also, secreted in a
conspicuous orange-colored disk. When a floret first opens, or
even before, the already mature stigmas overtop the incurved,
undeveloped stamens, so that any visitor dusted from other
clusters cross-fertilizes it; but as the stigmas remain fresh
even after the stamens have risen and shed their abundant pollen,
it follows that in long-continued stormy weather, when few
insects are flying, the flowers fertilize themselves.
Self-fertilization with insect help must often occur in the
flower's second stage. The fragrant yellowish-white ENGLISH
MEADOW-SWEET (S. ulmaria), often cultivated in old-fashioned
gardens here, has escaped locally.

In long, slender, forking spikes the GOAT'S-BEARD (Aruncus
Aruncus - Spiraea aruncus of Gray) lifts its graceful panicles of
minute whitish flowers in May and June from three to seven feet
above the rich soil of its woodland home. The petioled, pinnate
leaves are compounded of several leaflets like those on its
relative the rose-bush. From New York southward and westward to
Missouri, also on the Pacific Coast to Alaska, is its range on
this Continent. Very many more beetles than any other visitors
transfer pollen from the staminate flowers on one plant to the
pistillate ones on another; other plants produce only perfect
flowers - the reason different panicles vary so much in
appearance.

Another herbaceous perennial once counted a spiraea is the common
INDIAN PHYSIC or BOWMAN'S-ROOT (Porteranthus trifoliatus -
Gillensia trifoliata of Gray) found blooming in the rich woods
during June and July from western New York southward and
westward. Two to four feet high, it displays its very loose,
pretty clusters of white or pale pink flowers, comparatively few
in the whole panicle, each blossom measuring about a half inch
across and borne on a slender pedicel. A tubular, 5-toothed calyx
has the long slender petals inserted within. Owing to the depth
and narrowness of the tube, the small, long-tongued bees cannot
reach the nectar without dusting their heads with pollen from the
anthers inserted in a ring around the entrance or leaving some on
the stigmas of other blossoms. Later, the five carpels make as
many hairy, awl-tipped little pods within the reddish cup. The
leaves may be compounded of three oblong or ovate, saw-edged
leaflets, or merely three-lobed, and with small stipules at their
base.


WILD RED RASPBERRY
  (Rubus strigosus)  Rose family

Flowers - White, about 1/2 in. across, on slender, bristly
pedicels, in a loose cluster. Calyx deeply 5-parted, persistent
in fruit; 5 erect, short-lived petals, about the length of the
sepals; stamens numerous; carpels numerous, inserted on a convex
spongy receptacle, and ripening into drupelets. Stem: 3 to 6 ft.
high, shrubby, densely covered with bristles; older, woody stems
with rigid, hooked prickles. Leaves: Compounded of 3 to 5 ovate,
pointed, and irregularly saw-edged leaflets, downy beneath, on
bristly petioles. Fruit: A light red, watery, tender,
high-flavored, edible berry; ripe July-September.
Preferred Habitat - Dry soil, rocky hillsides, fence-rows,
hedges.
Flowering Season - May-July.
Distribution - Labrador to North Carolina, also in Rocky Mountain
region.

Who but the bees and such small visitors care about the raspberry
blossoms? Notwithstanding the nectar secreted in a fleshy ring
for their benefit, comparatively few insects enter the flowers,
whose small, erect petals imply no hospitable welcome.
Occasionally a visitor laden with pollen from another plant
alights in the center of a blossom, and leaves some on the
stigmas in bending his head down between them and the stamens to
reach the refreshment; but inasmuch as the erect petals allow no
room for the stamens to spread out and away from the stigmas, it
follows that self-fertilization very commonly occurs.

Of course, men and children, bears and birds, are vastly more
interested in the delicious berries; men for the reason that
several excellent market varieties, some white or pale red, the
Cuthbert and Hansall berries among others, owe their origin to
this hardy native. Many superior sorts derived from its European
counterpart (R. Idaeus) cannot well endure our rigorous northern
climate. As in the case of most berry-bearing species, the
raspberry depends upon the birds to drop its undigested seeds
over the country, that new colonies may arise under freer
conditions. Indeed, one of the best places for the budding
ornithologist to take opera-glasses and notebook is to a
raspberry patch early in the morning.

The BLACK RASPBERRY, BLACK CAP or SCOTCH CAP or THIMBLE-BERRY (R.
occidentalis), common in such situations as the red raspberry
chooses, but especially in burned-over districts from Virginia
northward and westward, has very long, smooth, cane-like stems,
often bending low until they root again at the tips. These are
only sparingly armed with small, hooked prickles, no bristles.
The flowers, which are similar to the preceding, but clustered
more compactly, are sparingly visited by insects; nevertheless
when self-fertilized, as they usually are, abundant
purplish-black berries, hollow like a thimble where they drop
from the spongy receptacle, ripen in July. Numerous garden
hybrids have been derived from this prolific species also. Indeed
its offspring are the easiest raspberries to grow, since they
form new plants at the tips of the branches, yet do not weaken
themselves with suckers, and so, even without care, yield immense
crops. One need not stir many feet around a good raspberry patch
to enjoy a Transcendental feast.


HIGH BUSH BLACKBERRY; BRAMBLE
 (Rubus villosus)  Rose family

Flowers - White, 1 in. or less across, in terminal raceme-like
clusters. Calyx deeply 5-parted, persistent; 5 large petals;
stamens and carpels numerous, the latter inserted on a pulpy
receptacle. Stem: 3 to 10 ft. high, woody, furrowed, curved,
armed with stout, recurved prickles. Leaves: Compounded of 3 to 5
ovate, saw-edged leaflets, the end one stalked, all hairy
beneath. Fruit: Firmly attached to the receptacle; nearly black,
oblong juicy berries 1 in. long or less, hanging in clusters.
Ripe, July-August.
Preferred Habitat - Dry soil, thickets, fence-rows, old fields,
waysides. Low altitudes.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - New England to Florida, and far westward.

     "There was a man of our town,
      And he was wondrous wise,
      He jumped into a bramble bush" -

If we must have poetical associations for every flower, Mother
Goose furnishes several.

But for the practical mind this plant's chief interest lies in
the fact that from its wild varieties the famous Lawton and
Kittatinny blackberries have been derived. The late Peter
Henderson used to tell how the former came to be introduced. A
certain Mr. Secor found an unusually fine blackberry growing wild
in a hedge at New Rochelle, New York, and removed it to his
garden, where it increased apace. But not even for a gift could
he induce a neighbor to relieve him of the superfluous bushes, so
little esteemed were blackberries in his day. However, a shrewd
lawyer named Lawton at length took hold of it, exhibited the
fruit, advertised it cleverly, and succeeded in pocketing a snug
little fortune from the sale of the prolific plants. Another fine
variety of the common wild blackberry, which was discovered by a
clergyman at the edge of the woods on the Kittatinny Mountains in
New Jersey, has produced fruit under skilled cultivation that
still remains the best of its class. When clusters of blossoms
and fruit in various stages of green, red, and black hang on the
same bush, few ornaments in Nature's garden are more decorative.

Because bramble flowers show greater executive ability than the
raspberries do, they flaunt much larger petals, and spread them
out flat to attract insect workers as well as to make room for
the stamens to spread away from the stigmas - an arrangement
which gives freer access to the nectar secreted in a fleshy ring
at the base. Heavy bumblebees, which require a firm support,
naturally alight in the center, just as they do in the wild
roses, and deposit on the early maturing stigmas some imported
pollen. They may therefore be regarded as the truest benefactors,
and it will be noticed that for their special benefit the nectar
is rather deeply concealed, where short-tongued insects cannot
rob them of it. Small bees, which come only to gather pollen from
first the outer and then the inner rows of stamens, and a long
list of other light-weight visitors, too often alight on the
petals to effect cross-fertilization regularly, but they usually
self-fertilize the blossoms. Competition between these flowers
and the next is fierce, for their seasons overlap.

The DEWBERRY or LOW RUNNING BLACKBERRY (R. Canadensis), that
trails its woody stem by the dusty roadside, in dry fields, and
on sterile, rocky hillsides, calls forth maledictions from the
bare-footed farmer's boy, except during June and July, when its
prickles are freely forgiven it in consideration of the
delicious, black, seedy berries it bears. He is the last one in
the world to confuse this vine with the SWAMP BLACKBERRY (R.
hispidus), a smaller flowered runner, slender and weakly prickly
as to its stem, and insignificant and sour as to its fruit. Its
greatest charm is when we come upon it in some low meadow in
winter, when its still persistent, shining, large leaves, that
have taken on rich autumnal reds, glow among the dry, dead weeds
and grasses.


CREEPING DALIBARDA
  (Dalibarda repens)  Rose family

Flowers - White, solitary, or 2 at end of a scape 2 to 5 in.
high. Calyx deeply, unevenly 5 or 6 parted, the larger divisions
toothed; 5 petals falling early; numerous stamens; 5 to 10
carpels forming as many dry drupelets within the persistent
calyx. Stem: Creeping, slender, no prickles. Leaves: Long
petioled, in tufts from the runner, almost round, heart-shaped at
base, crenate-edged, both sides hairy.
Preferred habitat - Woods and wooded hillsides.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Pennsylvania, and westward to the
Mississippi.

This delicate blossom, which one might mistake for a white violet
among a low tuft of violet-like leaves, shows its rose kinship by
its rule of five and its numerous stamens. Like the violet again,
however, it bears curious little economical flowers near the
ground - flowers which never open, and so save pollen. These,
requiring no insects to fertilize them, waste no energy in
putting forth petals to advertise for visitors. Nevertheless, to
save the species from degeneracy from close inbreeding, this
little plant needs must display a few showy blossoms to insure
cross-fertilized seed; for the offspring of such defeats the
offspring of self-fertilized plants in the struggle for
existence.


VIRGINIA STRAWBERRY
  (Fragaria Virginiana)  Rose family

Flowers - White, loosely clustered at summit of an erect hairy
scape usually shorter than the leaves. Calyx persistent in fruit,
deeply 5-cleft, with 5 bracts between the divisions; 5 petals;
stamens and pistils numerous, the latter inserted on a
cushion-like receptacle becoming fleshy in fruit. Staminate and
pistillate flowers, from separate roots. Stem: Running, and
forming new plants. Leaves: Tufted from the root, on hairy
petioles 2 to 6 in. tall, compounded of 3 broadly oval, saw-edged
leaflets. Fruit. An ovoid, glistening red berry, the minute
achenes imbedded in pits on its surface. Ripe, June-July. (Latin,
fragum = fragrant fruit, the strawberry.)
Preferred Habitat - Dry fields, banks, roadsides, woodlands.
Flowering Season - April-June.
Distribution - New Brunswick to the Gulf of Mexico, and westward
to Dakota.

"Doubtless God could have made a better berry, but doubtless God
never did." Whether one is kneeling in the fields, gathering the
sun-kissed, fragrant, luscious, wet scarlet berries nodding among
the grass, or eating the huge cultivated fruit smothered with
sugar and cream, one fervently quotes Dr. Boteler with dear old
lzaak Walton. Shakespeare says : "My lord of Ely, when I was last
in Holborn, I saw good strawberries in your garden there." Is not
this the first reference to the strawberry under cultivation?
Since the time of Henry V, what multitudes of garden varieties
past the reckoning have been evolved from the smooth, conic
EUROPEAN WOOD STRAWBERRY (F. vesca) now naturalized in our
Eastern and Middle States, as well as from our own precious
pitted native! Some authorities claim the berry received its name
from the straw laid between garden rows to keep the fruit clean,
but in earliest Anglo-Saxon it was called streowberie, and later
straberry, from the peculiarity of its straying suckers lying as
if strewn on the ground; and so, after making due allowance for
the erratic, go-as-you-please spelling of early writers, it would
seem that there might be two theories as to the origin of the
name.

Since the different sexes of these flowers frequently occur on
separate plants, good reason have they to woo insect messengers
with a showy corolla, a ring of nectar, and abundant pollen to be
transferred while they are feasted. Lucky is the gardener who
succeeds in keeping birds from pecking their share of the berries
which, of course, were primarily intended for them. In English
gardens one is almost certain to find a thrush or two imprisoned
under the nets so futilely spread over strawberry beds, just as
their American cousin, the robin, is caught here in June.

A young botanist may be interested to note the difference in the
formation of the raspberry or blackberry and the strawberry: in
the former it is the carpels (ovaries) that swell around the
spongy receptacle into numerous little fruits (drupelets) united
into one berry, whereas it is the cushion-like receptacle itself
in the strawberry blossom that swells and reddens into fruit,
carrying with it the tiny yellow pistils to the surface.

The NORTHERN WILD STRAWBERRY (F. Canadensis), with clusters of
elongated, oblong little berries delightful to three senses,
comes over the Canadian border no farther south than the
Catskills. Nearly all strawberry plants show the useless but
charming eccentricity of bursting into bloom again in autumn, the
little white-petaled blossoms coming like unexpected flurries of
snow.

No one will confuse our common, fruiting species with the small,
yellow-flowered DRY or BARREN STRAWBERRY (Waldsteinia
fragarioides), more nearly related to the cinquefoils. Tufts of
its pretty trefoliate leaves, sent up from a creeping rootstock,
carpet the woods and hillsides from New England and along the
Alleghanies to Georgia, and westward a thousand miles or more.
Flowers in May and June.


WHITE AVENS
  (Geum Canadense; G. album of Gray)  Rose family

Flowers - White or pale greenish yellow, about 1/2 in. across,
loosely scattered in small clusters on slender peduncles. Calyx
persistent, 5-cleft, with little bracts between the reflexed
divisions; 5 petals, equaling or shorter than the sepals; stamens
and carpels numerous, the latter collected on a short,
bristly-hairy receptacle; styles smooth below, hairy above,
jointed. Stem: 2 1/2 ft. high or less, slender, branching above.
Leaves: Seated on stem or short petioled, of 3 to 5 divisions, or
lobed, toothed small stipules; also irregularly divided large
root-leaves on long petioles, 3-foliate, usually the terminal
leaflet large, broadly ovate side leaflets much smaller, all more
or less lobed and toothed. Fruit: A ball of achenes, each ending
in an elongated, hooked style.
Preferred Habitat - Woodland borders, shady thickets and
roadsides.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Georgia, west to the Mississippi or
beyond.

Small bees and flies attracted to sheltered, shady places by
these loosely scattered flowers at the ends of zig-zagged stems,
pay for the nectar they sip from the disk where the stamens are
inserted, by carrying some of the pollen lunch on their heads
from the older to the younger flowers, which mature stigmas
first. But saucy bumblebees, undutiful pilferers from the purple
avens, rarely visit blossoms so inconspicuous. Insects failing
these, they are well adapted to pollenize themselves. Most of us
are all too familiar with the seeds, clinging by barbed styles to
any garment passing their way, in the hope that their stolen ride
will eventually land them in good colonizing ground. Whoever
spends an hour patiently picking off the various seed tramps from
his clothes after a walk through the woods and fields in autumn,
realizes that the by hook or by crook method of scattering
offspring is one of Nature's favorites. Simpler plants than those
with hooked achenia produce enormous numbers of spores so light
and tiny that the wind and rain distribute them wholesale.


RED CHOKE-BERRY; DOGBERRY TREE
  (Aronia arbutifolia; Pyrus arbutifolia of Gray)  Apple family

Flowers - White or magenta tinged, 1/2 in. across or less, in
terminal, compound cymes, finally overtopped by young sterile
shoots. Calyx 5-lobed, hairy; 5 concave, spreading petals;
stamens numerous; 3 to 5 styles united at base; ovary woolly.
Stem: Shrubby, branching, usually low, rarely 12 ft. high.
Leaves: Alternate, petioled, oval to oblong, finely cut-edged,
smooth above, matted with woolly hairs underneath. Fruit: Small,
round or top-shaped, bright red berries.
Preferred Habitat - Swamps, low ground, wet thickets.
Flowering Season - March-May.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Gulf of Mexico, westward to the
Mississippi.

Another common species often found in the same haunts, the BLACK
CHOKE-BERRY (A. nigra), with similar flowers, the berries very
dark purple, was formerly confounded with the red choke-berry.
But because it sometimes elects to live in dry ground its leaves
require no woolly mat on the underside to absorb vapors arising
from wet retreats. No wonder that the insipid little berries.
related to apples, pears, and other luscious fruits, should share
with a cousin, the mountain ash, or rowan, the reproachful name
of dogberry.


JUNEBERRY; SERVICEBERRY; MAY-CHERRY
  (Amelanchier Canadensis)  Apple family

Flowers - Pure white, over 1 in. across, on long, slender
pedicels, in spreading or drooping racemes, with silky, reddish
bracts, early falling, among them. Calyx persistent, 5-parted; 5
long, narrow, tapering petals, 3 or 4 times the length of calyx;
numerous stamens inserted on calyx throat; 2 to 5 styles, hairy
at base. Stem: A large shrub or tree, usually much less than 25
ft. high, rarely twice that height, wood very hard and heavy.
Leaves: Alternate, oval, tapering at tip, finely saw-edged,
smooth (like the pear tree's), often hairy when young. Fruit.
Round, crimson, sweet, edible, seedy berries, ripe in June and
July.
Preferred Habitat - Woodland borders, pasture thickets, dry soil.
Flowering Season - March-May.
Distribution - Newfoundland to the Gulf of Mexico, westward over
a thousand miles.

Silvery-white chandeliers, hanging from the edges of the woods,
light Flora's path in earliest spring, before the trees and
shrubbery about them have begun to put forth foliage, much less
flowers. Little plants that hug the earth for protection while
rude winds rush through the forest and across the hillsides, are
already starring her way with fragile, dainty blossoms; but what
other shrub, except the serviceberry's twin sister the shadbush,
or perhaps the spicebush, has the temerity to burst into bloom
while March gusts howl through the naked forests? Little female
bees of the Andrena tribe, already at work collecting pollen and
nectar for generations yet unborn, buzz their gratitude about the
beautiful feathery clusters that lean away from the crowded
thicket with a wild, irregular grace. Nesting birds have abundant
cause for gratitude also, for the attractive, sweet berries, that
ripen providentially early; but, of course, the bees which
transfer pollen from flower to flower, and the birds which drop
the seeds far and wide, are not the receivers of wholly
disinterested favors.


The SHADBUSH or SWAMP SUGAR-PEAR (A. Botryapium), because it was
formerly accounted a mere variety (oblongifolia) of the preceding
species, still shares with it its popular names; but swamps,
river banks, brook sides, and moist thickets are its habitat.
Consequently both its inflorescence and pale green, glossy
foliage are covered with a sort of whitish cotton, absorbent when
young, to prevent the pores from clogging with vapors arising
from its damp retreats. Late in the season, when streams narrow
or dry up altogether, and the air becomes drier, as the sun rises
higher in the heavens, the foliage is usually quite smooth. It
will be noticed that, lovely as the shadbush is, its smaller
flowers have shorter pedicels than the serviceberry's;
consequently its feathery sprays, which are flung outward to the
sunshine in April and May, lack something of the grace for which
its sister stands preeminent. Under cultivation both species
assume conventional form, and lose the wild irregularities of
growth that charm us in Nature's garden. Indians believed, what
is an obvious fact, that when this bush whitens the swampy river
banks, shad are swimming up the stream from the sea to spawn.
Then, too, the nighthawk, returning from its winter visit south,
booms forth its curious whirring, vibrating, jarring sound as it
drops through the air at unseen heights, a dismal, weird noise
which the red man thought proceeded from the shad spirits come to
warn the schools of fish of their impending fate.


COMMON HAWTHORN: WHITE THORN; SCARLET-FRUITED THORN; RED HAW;
MAYFLOWERS
  (Cratoegus coccinea)  Apple family

Flowers - White, rarely pinkish, usually less than 1 in. across,
numerous, in terminal corymbs. Calyx 5-lobed; 5 spreading petals
inserted in its throat numerous stamens; styles 3 to 5. Stem: A
shrub or small tree, rarely attaining 30 ft. in height (Kratos =
strength, in reference to hardness and toughness of the wood);
branches spreading, and beset with stout spines (thorns) nearly 2
