The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Coral Island, by R. M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Coral Island
       A Tale of the Pacific Ocean

Author: R. M. Ballantyne

Posting Date: June 1, 2012 [EBook #7124]
Release Date: December, 2004
First Posted: March 12, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CORAL ISLAND ***




Produced by Michelle Shephard, Tiffany Vergon, Juliet
Sutherland, Charles Franks, Charles Aldarondo and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










THE CORAL ISLAND

_A Tale Of The Pacific Ocean_



BY

R. M. BALLANTYNE




PREFACE


I was a boy when I went through the wonderful adventures herein set
down. With the memory of my boyish feelings strong upon me, I present
my book specially to boys, in the earnest hope that they may derive
valuable information, much pleasure, great profit, and unbounded
amusement from its pages.

One word more. If there is any boy or man who loves to be melancholy
and morose, and who cannot enter with kindly sympathy into the regions
of fun, let me seriously advise him to shut my book and put it away. It
is not meant for him.

                                       RALPH ROVER.




CONTENTS

CHAP.

     I. MY EARLY LIFE AND CHARACTER
    II. THE DEPARTURE--A DREADFUL STORM
   III. THE CORAL ISLAND
    IV. OUR ISLAND DESCRIBED--CURIOUS DISCOVERIES
     V. ENCHANTING EXCURSIONS AMONG THE CORAL GROVES
    VI. AN EXCURSION INTO THE INTERIOR
   VII. HORRIBLE ENCOUNTER WITH A SHARK
  VIII. THE BEAUTIES OF THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA TEMPT PETERKIN TO DIVE
    IX. PREPARE FOR A JOURNEY ROUND THE ISLAND
     X. MAKE DISCOVERY OF MANY EXCELLENT ROOTS AND FRUITS
    XI. EFFECTS OF OVER-EATING, AND REFLECTIONS THEREON
   XII. SOMETHING WRONG WITH THE TANK
  XIII. NOTABLE DISCOVERY AT THE SPOUTING CLIFFS
   XIV. STRANGE PECULIARITY OF THE TIDES
    XV. BOAT-BUILDING EXTRAORDINARY
   XVI. THE BOAT LAUNCHED--WE VISIT THE CORAL REEF
  XVII. A MONSTER WAVE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
 XVIII. AN AWFUL STORM AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
  XVIX. AN UNEXPECTED VISIT AND AN APPALLING BATTLE
    XX. INTERCOURSE WITH THE SAVAGES--CANNIBALISM PREVENTED
   XXI. A SAIL!--AN UNEXPECTED SALUTE
  XXII. I FALL INTO THE HANDS OF PIRATES
 XXIII. A STRANGE SAIL, AND A STRANGE CREW
  XXIV. UNPLEASANT PROSPECTS
   XXV. THE SANDAL-WOOD PARTY
  XXVI. MISCHIEF BREWING--MY BLOOD IS MADE TO RUN COLD
 XXVII. REFLECTIONS--THE WOUNDED MAN
XXVIII. ALONE ON THE DEEP--NECESSITY THE MOTHER OF INVENTION
  XXIX. THE EFFECT OF A CANNON-SHOT
   XXX. THE VOYAGE
  XXXI. A STRANGE AND BLOODY BATTLE
 XXXII. AN UNEXPECTED DISCOVERY
XXXIII. THE FLIGHT--THE PURSUIT
 XXXIV. IMPRISONMENT--SINKING HOPES
  XXXV. CONCLUSION




THE CORAL ISLAND




Chapter I

The beginning--My early life and character--I thirst for adventure in
foreign lands, and go to sea.


Roving has always been, and still is, my ruling passion, the joy of my
heart, the very sunshine of my existence. In childhood, in boyhood, and
in man's estate, I have been a rover; not a mere rambler among the
woody glens and upon the hilltops of my own native land, but an
enthusiastic rover throughout the length and breadth of the wide, wide
world.

It was a wild, black night of howling storm, the night on which I was
born on the foaming bosom of the broad Atlantic Ocean. My father was a
sea-captain; my grandfather was a sea-captain; my great-grandfather had
been a marine. Nobody could tell positively what occupation _his_
father had followed; but my dear mother used to assert that he had been
a midshipman, whose grandfather, on the mother's side, had been an
admiral in the Royal Navy. At any rate, we knew that, as far back as
our family could be traced, it had been intimately connected with the
great watery waste. Indeed, this was the case on both sides of the
house; for my mother always went to sea with my father on his long
voyages, and so spent the greater part of her life upon the water.

Thus it was, I suppose, that I came to inherit a roving disposition.
Soon after I was born, my father, being old, retired from a seafaring
life, purchased a small cottage in a fishing village on the west coast
of England, and settled down to spend the evening of his life on the
shores of that sea which had for so many years been his home. It was
not long after this that I began to show the roving spirit that dwelt
within me. For some time past my infant legs had been gaining strength,
so that I came to be dissatisfied with rubbing the skin off my chubby
knees by walking on them, and made many attempts to stand up and walk
like a man, all of which attempts, however, resulted in my sitting down
violently and in sudden surprise. One day I took advantage of my dear
mother's absence to make another effort; and, to my joy, I actually
succeeded in reaching the doorstep, over which I tumbled into a pool of
muddy water that lay before my father's cottage door. Ah, how vividly I
remember the horror of my poor mother when she found me sweltering in
the mud amongst a group of cackling ducks, and the tenderness with
which she stripped off my dripping clothes and washed my dirty little
body! From this time forth my rambles became more frequent, and, as I
grew older, more distant, until at last I had wandered far and near on
the shore and in the woods around our humble dwelling, and did not rest
content until my father bound me apprentice to a coasting vessel, and
let me go to sea.

For some years I was happy in visiting the seaports, and in coasting
along the shores of my native land. My Christian name was Ralph, and my
comrades added to this the name of Rover, in consequence of the passion
which I always evinced for travelling. Rover was not my real name, but
as I never received any other, I came at last to answer to it as
naturally as to my proper name; and as it is not a bad one, I see no
good reason why I should not introduce myself to the reader as Ralph
Rover. My shipmates were kind, good-natured fellows, and they and I got
on very well together. They did, indeed, very frequently make game of
and banter me, but not unkindly; and I overheard them sometimes saying
that Ralph Rover was a "queer, old-fashioned fellow." This, I must
confess, surprised me much, and I pondered the saying long, but could
come at no satisfactory conclusion as to that wherein my
old-fashionedness lay. It is true I was a quiet lad, and seldom spoke
except when spoken to. Moreover, I never could understand the jokes of
my companions, even when they were explained to me: which dulness in
apprehension occasioned me much grief. However, I tried to make up for
it by smiling and looking pleased when I observed that they were
laughing at some witticism which I had failed to detect. I was also
very fond of inquiring into the nature of things and their causes, and
often fell into fits of abstraction while thus engaged in my mind. But
in all this I saw nothing that did not seem to be exceedingly natural,
and could by no means understand why my comrades should call me "an
old-fashioned fellow."

Now, while engaged in the coasting trade, I fell in with many seamen
who had travelled to almost every quarter of the globe; and I freely
confess that my heart glowed ardently within me as they recounted their
wild adventures in foreign lands--the dreadful storms they had
weathered, the appalling dangers they had escaped, the wonderful
creatures they had seen both on the land and in the sea, and the
interesting lands and strange people they had visited. But of all the
places of which they told me, none captivated and charmed my
imagination so much as the Coral Islands of the Southern Seas. They
told me of thousands of beautiful, fertile islands that had been formed
by a small creature called the coral insect, where summer reigned
nearly all the year round; where the trees were laden with a constant
harvest of luxuriant fruit; where the climate was almost perpetually
delightful; yet where, strange to say, men were wild, bloodthirsty
savages, excepting in those favoured isles to which the Gospel of our
Saviour had been conveyed. These exciting accounts had so great an
effect upon my mind that, when I reached the age of fifteen, I resolved
to make a voyage to the South Seas.

I had no little difficulty at first in prevailing on my dear parents to
let me go; but when I urged on my father that he would never have
become a great captain had he remained in the coasting trade, he saw
the truth of what I said, and gave his consent. My dear mother, seeing
that my father had made up his mind, no longer offered opposition to my
wishes. "But oh, Ralph," she said, on the day I bade her adieu, "come
back soon to us, my dear boy, for we are getting old now, Ralph, and
may not have many years to live."

I will not take up my readers' time with a minute account of all that
occurred before I took my final leave of my dear parents. Suffice it to
say that my father placed me under the charge of an old messmate of his
own, a merchant captain, who was on the point of sailing to the South
Seas in his own ship, the _Arrow_. My mother gave me her blessing and a
small Bible; and her last request was that I would never forget to read
a chapter every day, and say my prayers; which I promised, with tears
in my eyes, that I would certainly do.

Soon afterwards, I went on board the _Arrow_, which was a fine large
ship, and set sail for the islands of the Pacific Ocean.




Chapter II

The departure--The sea--My companions--Some account of the wonderful
sights we saw on the great deep--A dreadful storm and a frightful wreck.


It was a bright, beautiful, warm day when our ship spread her canvas to
the breeze, and sailed for the regions of the south. Oh, how my heart
bounded with delight as I listened to the merry chorus of the sailors,
while they hauled at the ropes and got in the anchor! The captain
shouted; the men ran to obey; the noble ship bent over to the breeze,
and the shore gradually faded from my view, while I stood looking on
with a kind of feeling that the whole was a delightful dream.

The first thing that struck me as being different from anything I had
yet seen during my short career on the sea, was the hoisting of the
anchor on deck and lashing it firmly down with ropes, as if we had now
bid adieu to the land for ever, and would require its services no more.

"There, lass," cried a broad-shouldered jack-tar, giving the fluke of
the anchor a hearty slap with his hand after the housing was
completed--"there, lass, take a good nap now, for we shan't ask you to
kiss the mud again for many a long day to come!"

And so it was. That anchor did not "kiss the mud" for many long days
afterwards; and when at last it did, it was for the last time!

There were a number of boys in the ship, but two of them were my
special favourites. Jack Martin was a tall, strapping, broad-shouldered
youth of eighteen, with a handsome, good-humoured, firm face. He had
had a good education, was clever and hearty and lion-like in his
actions, but mild and quiet in disposition. Jack was a general
favourite, and had a peculiar fondness for me. My other companion was
Peterkin Gay. He was little, quick, funny, decidedly mischievous, and
about fourteen years old. But Peterkin's mischief was almost always
harmless, else he could not have been so much beloved as he was.

"Hallo, youngster!" cried Jack Martin, giving me a slap on the shoulder
the day I joined the ship, "come below, and I'll show you your berth.
You and I are to be messmates, and I think we shall be good friends,
for I like the look o' you."


Jack was right. He and I, and Peterkin afterwards, became the best and
staunchest friends that ever tossed together on the stormy waves.

I shall say little about the first part of our voyage. We had the usual
amount of rough weather and calm; also we saw many strange fish rolling
in the sea, and I was greatly delighted one day by seeing a shoal of
flying-fish dart out of the water and skim through the air about a foot
above the surface. They were pursued by dolphins, which feed on them,
and one flying-fish in its terror flew over the ship, struck on the
rigging, and fell upon the deck. Its wings were just fins elongated,
and we found that they could never fly far at a time, and never mounted
into the air like birds, but skimmed along the surface of the sea. Jack
and I had it for dinner, and found it remarkably good.

When we approached Cape Horn, at the southern extremity of America, the
weather became very cold and stormy, and the sailors began to tell
stories about the furious gales and the dangers of that terrible Cape.

"Cape Horn," said one, "is the most horrible headland I ever doubled.
I've sailed round it twice already, and both times the ship was a'most
blow'd out o' the water."

"I've been round it once," said another, "an' that time the sails were
split, and the ropes frozen in the blocks, so that they wouldn't work,
and we wos all but lost."

"An' I've been round it five times," cried a third, "an' every time wos
wuss than another, the gales wos so tree-mendous!"

"And I've been round it no times at all," cried Peterkin, with an
impudent wink in his eye, "an' _that_ time I wos blow'd inside out!"

Nevertheless, we passed the dreaded Cape without much rough weather,
and, in the course of a few weeks afterwards, were sailing gently
before a warm, tropical breeze over the Pacific Ocean. Thus we
proceeded on our voyage, sometimes bounding merrily before a fair
breeze, at other times floating calmly on the glassy wave and fishing
for the curious inhabitants of the deep--all of which, although the
sailors thought little of them, were strange, and interesting, and very
wonderful to me.

At last we came among the Coral Islands of the Pacific, and I shall
never forget the delight with which I gazed--when we chanced to pass
one--at the pure, white, dazzling shores, and the verdant palm trees,
which looked bright and beautiful in the sunshine. And often did we
three long to be landed on one, imagining that we should certainly find
perfect happiness there! Our wish was granted sooner than we expected.

One night, soon after we entered the tropics, an awful storm burst upon
our ship. The first squall of wind carried away two of our masts, and
left only the foremast standing. Even this, however, was more than
enough, for we did not dare to hoist a rag of sail on it. For five days
the tempest raged in all its fury. Everything was swept off the decks
except one small boat. The steersman was lashed to the wheel, lest he
should be washed away, and we all gave ourselves up for lost. The
captain said that he had no idea where we were, as we had been blown
far out of our course; and we feared much that we might get among the
dangerous coral reefs which are so numerous in the Pacific. At daybreak
on the sixth morning of the gale we saw land ahead. It was an island
encircled by a reef of coral on which the waves broke in fury. There
was calm water within this reef, but we could see only one narrow
opening into it. For this opening we steered, but ere we reached it a
tremendous wave broke on our stern, tore the rudder completely off, and
left us at the mercy of the winds and waves.

