going on, and most of the troops engaged with the enemy. It was not
unlikely that, if such a plan had been formed, the prisoner would
know of it; and that he might very well believe what my man said,
that some men had been sent into the town, with that or some
similar intention."

"True enough. The idea was a capital one, Mr. Brooke; and we shall
be ready for them, whichever night they come.

"Will you please go across to the guard tent, and tell the sergeant
to send a corporal across to the man on sentry, with orders to take
the prisoner to the jail, and hand him over to the officer in
command there? When you have done that, will you ride out to the
pagoda and inform your colonel what you have discovered? It will be
a relief to him, and to the men for, as the date of the attack has
been uncertain, he has been obliged to largely increase his
patrols, and to keep a portion of his force, all night, under arms.
He will be able to decrease the number, and let the men have as
much sleep as they can, for the next two nights.

"The clouds are banking up, and I am very much afraid that the rain
is going to set in again. They say that we shall have another two
months of it."

After seeing the prisoner marched away, Stanley rode to the pagoda
and, saying that he had come with a message from the general, was
at once shown into the colonel's quarters.

"Any news, Mr. Brooke?"

"Yes, Colonel; the general has requested me to inform you, at once,
of the news that I have obtained from a prisoner; namely that,
either on the night of the 30th or 31st, your position will be
attacked, by the men who are called the Invulnerables."

"We will give them a chance of proving whether their title is
justified," the colonel said, cheerfully. "That is very good news.
The men are getting thoroughly worn out with the extra night duty
caused by this uncertainty. You think that there is no doubt that
the news is correct?"

"None whatever, sir. I could do nothing with the prisoner; but my
Burman pretended to have a mission here, to kick up a row in the
town when the attack began; and the man, believing his story, at
once told him that the attack will be made on the pagoda, by the
Invulnerables, on the early morning of the fourth day from this--or
on the next night--the astrologers having declared that the time
would be propitious, and also because they were very anxious to
have the pagoda in their hands, in order that the princes might
celebrate the great annual festival that is held, it seems, two
days after."

The colonel laughed.

"I am afraid that they will have to put it off for another year.
The general gave no special orders, I suppose?"

"No, sir; he had only just received the news, and ordered me to
ride over at once to you, as he was sure that you would be glad to
know that it would not be necessary to keep so many men on night
duty, for the next two days."

"Thank you, Mr. Brooke. Will you kindly tell the general that I am
very pleased at the news? No doubt he will be up here, himself,
this afternoon or tomorrow."

Stanley rode back fast, and was just in time to escape a tremendous
downpour of rain, which began a few minutes after he returned. He
went in at once to the general's, but was told that he was engaged
with the quartermaster and adjutant generals. He therefore went
into the anteroom where Tollemache, his fellow aide-de-camp, was
standing at the window, looking out at the rain.

"This is a beastly climate," he grumbled. "It is awful to think
that we are likely to get another two months of it; and shall then
have to wait at least another, before the country is dry enough to
make a move. You were lucky in getting in, just now, before it
began."

"I was indeed," Stanley agreed, "for I had ridden off without my
cloak, and should have been drenched, had it begun two minutes
earlier."

"I saw you gallop past, and wondered what you were in such a hurry
about. Was it like this when you were out in the woods?"

"Not in the least. There is very little rain near Ava; though the
country is a good deal flooded, where it is flat, from the rivers
being swollen by the rains in the hills. We had lovely weather, all
the time."

"I should like to see a little lovely weather here. The last week
has been almost worse than the rain--the steamy heat is like being
in a vapour bath. If it were not that I am on duty, I should like
to strip, and go out and enjoy a shower bath for half an hour."

Stanley laughed.

"It really would be pleasant," he said. "I don't think that I
gained much by hurrying back, for the gallop has thrown me into
such a perspiration that I might almost as well be drenched by the
rain, except that my clothes won't suffer so much."

"Ah, it is all very well for you," the other grumbled. "Of course,
after once having wandered about in the forest, painted up like a
nigger, you feel cheerful under almost any circumstances; but for
us who have been cooped up, doing nothing, in this beastly place,
it is impossible to look at things cheerfully."

"Have you heard that the enemy are going to attack, on Tuesday or
Wednesday night?"

"No!" the other exclaimed, with a sudden animation. "The general
only came in a quarter of an hour ago and, as he had the two
bigwigs with him, of course I did not speak to him. Is it certain?
How did you hear it?"

"It is quite certain--that is, unless the Burmese change their
mind, which is not likely. The princes want to celebrate the great
annual festival at the pagoda, on Friday; and so the Invulnerables
are going, as they think, to capture it either on Tuesday or
Wednesday night. I have just been up there to tell the colonel.

"As to your other question--how did I learn it--I got it, or rather
my Burman did, from that prisoner we were questioning this morning.
He would not say anything then; but my man got round him and,
believing that he was a spy, or something of that kind, the
prisoner told him all about it."

"Are they only going to attack at the pagoda?"

"That I cannot say; that is the only point that the man mentioned.
I should say that it would only be there."

"Why should it only be there?"

"Because I should imagine that even the Burmese must be beginning
to doubt whether they could defeat our whole force and, as they
particularly wish to occupy the pagoda on Friday, they would hardly
risk an attack on other points, which might end in disaster while,
what with the propitious nature of the day, and the fact that the
Invulnerables have undertaken to capture the pagoda, no doubt they
look upon that as certain."

"I suppose that you are right, Brooke. Well, I do hope that the
general will let us go up to see the fun."

"What, even if it is raining?"

"Of course," the other said, indignantly. "What does one care for
rain, when there is something to do? Why, I believe that, if it was
coming down in a sheet, and the men had to wade through the swamps
waist deep, they would all march in the highest spirits, if there
was the chance of a fight with the Burmans at the end of the day.

"However, I am afraid that there is no chance of our getting off,
unless the chief goes, himself. There may be attacks in other
places. As you say, it is not likely; but it is possible.
Therefore, of course, we should have to be at hand, to carry
orders. Of course, if he takes his post at the pagoda it will be
all right; though the betting is that we shall have to gallop off,
just at the most interesting moment."

Presently the two officers left the general. The latter's bell
rang, and Stanley went in.

"You saw the colonel, Mr. Brooke?"

"Yes, sir; and he begged me to say that he was extremely glad to
get the news, and much obliged to you for sending it so promptly."

"There is no occasion for you and Mr. Tollemache to stay here any
longer, now; but at five o'clock I shall ride out to the pagoda. At
any rate, should I want you before then, I shall know where to send
for you."

This was the general order, for in the afternoon there was, when
things were quiet, a hush for two or three hours. The work of the
aides-de-camp was, indeed, generally very light for, as there were
no movements of troops, no useless parades, and very few military
orders to be carried, they had a great deal of time on their hands;
and usually took it by turns to be on duty for the day, the one off
duty being free to pay visits to acquaintances in the various
camps, or on board ship. During the rainy season, however, very few
officers or men went beyond shelter, unless obliged to do so and,
from two till four or five, no small proportion passed the time in
sleep.

Stanley had intended to pay a visit to the Larne; as Captain
Marryat, who had dined at the staff mess on the previous evening,
had invited him to go on board, whenever it might be convenient to
him. The Larne had performed good service, in the operations
against the stockades; and her boats had been particularly active
and successful. Her captain was one of the most popular, as well as
one of the most energetic officers in the service; and was to
become as popular, with future generations, as the brightest of all
writers of sea stories.

However, the day was not favourable for an excursion on the water.
Stanley therefore went back to his room where, divesting himself of
his jacket, he sat down at the open window, and read up a batch of
the last newspapers, from England, that had been lent him by
Colonel Adair.

At five o'clock Meinik came in, to say that his horse was at the
general's door. Stanley hastily put on his jacket and cloak, and
sallied out. The general came down in a few minutes, followed by
Tollemache and, mounting, they rode to the pagoda.

Here Sir Archibald had a talk with the colonel of the 89th, and the
officer commanding the battery of the Madras Artillery. Both were
of opinion that their force was amply sufficient to resist any
attack. The only approach to it from the forest was a long road
between two swamps which, a short distance away, had become lakes
since the wet weather set in.

"Had they taken us by surprise," the colonel said, "some of them
might have got across, before we were quite ready for them, and
might have given us some trouble but, as we shall be prepared, I
don't think that any of them will reach the foot of this hill and,
if they did, none of them would reach this terrace. If an attack
were made from the other side, it would of course be a good deal
more serious, as the ground is firm and they could attack all along
the foot of the hill; but as they cannot get there, until they have
defeated the rest of the army, I consider that, even without the
assistance of the guns, we could hold the hill with musket and
bayonet against any force that they are likely to bring against
us."

"Very well, then; I shall not reinforce you, Colonel. Of course, we
shall keep a considerable number of troops under arms, in case they
should attack all along the line, at the same time that they make
their principal effort here.

"I rather hope that the rain will keep on, until this affair is
over."

The colonel looked surprised.

"I am much more afraid," the general went on, "of fire in the town,
than I am of an attack without. The number of natives there is
constantly increasing. No doubt the greater number of those who
come in are natives of the place, who have managed, since we
cleared out their war galleys from some of the creeks and channels,
to escape from the authorities and to make their way in, either on
foot or in fishermen's boats; but some of them may be sent in as
spies, or to do us harm. I have been having a long talk over it
with Colonel Adair, this afternoon, and he quite agrees with me
that we must reckon on the probability of an attempt to fire the
town. It would be a terrible blow to us if they succeeded, for the
loss of our stores would completely cripple us. They would
naturally choose the occasion of an attack upon our lines for the
attempt for, in the first place, most of the troops will be under
arms and drawn up outside the town; and in the second place the
sight of the place on fire would cause much confusion, would
inspirit our assailants, and necessitate a considerable force being
withdrawn from the field, to fight the fire.

"If the rains continue we need feel no uneasiness, whatever, for
there would be no getting anything to burn; whereas in dry weather,
a man with a torch might light the thatch as fast as he could run
along, and a whole street would be in a blaze in two or three
minutes and, if a wind happened to be blowing, it might make a
sweep of the whole place, in spite of all our efforts."

"I see that, sir. I own that I had never given it a thought,
before."

"I shall come up here, Colonel, unless we obtain sure news, before
the time arrives, that the attack is going to be a general one;
indeed, it is in any case the best place to post myself, for I can
see over the whole country, and send orders to any point where the
enemy may be making progress, or where our men can advance with
advantage. The line of fire flashes will be as good a guide, at
night, as the smoke by day."

"I will get a cot rigged up for you, General, as we don't know
which night it is to be."

"Thank you. Yes, I may just as well turn in, all standing, as the
sailors say, and get a few hours' sleep; for in this climate one
cannot keep at it, night and day, as we had to do in Spain."

The two aides-de-camp were kept in suspense as to what the
general's intentions were, and it was not until the morning of
Tuesday that he said to them:

"I am going up to the pagoda this evening, Mr. Tollemache; and you
had better, therefore, put some provisions and a bottle of brandy
into your holsters."

At nine in the evening they rode off. The rain had ceased; the moon
was shining through the clouds.

"It will be down by twelve o'clock," Tollemache said. "I should
think, most likely, they will wait for that. They will think that
we shall not be able to take aim at them, in the darkness; and that
they will manage to get to the foot of the hill, without loss."

When they reached the platform in front of the pagoda, their syces
took their horses. Meinik had begged Stanley to let him take his
groom's place on this occasion and, laying aside the dress he
ordinarily wore, assumed the light attire of an Indian syce, and
had run behind the horses with the others. He had a strong desire
to see the fighting, but his principal motive in asking to be
allowed to accompany Stanley was that, although greatly impressed
with what he had seen of the drill and discipline of the white and
native regiments, he could not shake off his faith in the
Invulnerables; and had a conviction that the pagoda would be
captured, and therefore wished to be at hand, to bring up Stanley's
horse at the critical moment, and to aid him to escape from the
assailants.

Fires were burning, as usual, at several points on the terrace. Two
companies were under arms, and were standing well back from the
edge of the platform, so as to be out of sight of those in the
forest. The rest of the men were sitting round the fires. Their
muskets were piled in lines hard by.

When he alighted, the general proceeded to the battery.

"Have you everything in readiness, Major?" he asked the officer in
command.

"Yes, sir. The guns are all loaded with grape and, as it will be
very dark when the moon has set, I have pegged a white tape along,
just under each gun; so that they can be trained upon the causeway,
however dark it may be."

"That is a very good idea," the general said. "There is nothing
more difficult than laying guns accurately in the dark."

The colonel now arrived, a soldier having brought the news to him,
as soon as the general reached the platform.

"I see that you are well prepared to give them a hot reception,
Colonel."

"I hope so, sir. I have a strong patrol out beyond the causeway. My
orders are that they are to resist strongly, for a minute or two,
so as to give us time to have the whole of our force in readiness
here. Then they are to retreat at the double to the foot of the
hill; and then to open fire again, so that we may know that they
are out of the way, and that we can begin when we like. We have
been making some port fires this afternoon, and I have a dozen men
halfway down the hill and, directly the outposts are safely across,
they are to light the port fires, which will enable us to take aim.
These white tapes will be guide enough for the artillery; but my
men would make very poor shooting, if they could not make out the
muzzles of their guns. Anyhow, I don't think that it is likely that
the enemy will get across the causeway, however numerous they may
be."

"I don't think they will, Colonel. Certainly, so far, they have
shown themselves contemptible in attack; and have never made a
successful stand, even for a minute, when we once entered their
stockades, though they defend them pluckily enough until we have
once got a footing inside.

"Still, these fellows ought to fight well tonight for, if they are
beaten, it will be a death blow to their reputation among their
countrymen. Besides, many of them do believe in the power they
claim and, as we have found before now, in India, fanatics are
always formidable."

After taking a look round with the colonel, the general accompanied
him to his quarters; while the two aides-de-camp remained on the
terrace, chatting with the officers; and then, after a time, went
with some of them to the mess tent, where they sat smoking and
talking until midnight, when all went out.

The troops were formed up under arms, and all listened impatiently
for something that would show that the long-delayed assault would
take place that night. At half-past twelve there was the sound of a
shot, which sent an electrical thrill through the troops. It was
followed almost immediately by others. The troops were at once
marched forward to the edge of the platform. A babel of wild shouts
went up at the sound of the first shots, followed by a burst of
firing.

The two aides-de-camp had taken their places close to the general,
who was standing in the gap between the infantry and the guns; and
was looking intently, through his night glasses, at the forest.

"They are in a dense mass," he said. "I cannot see whether they are
in any regular order, but they are certainly packed a great deal
closer than I have ever before seen them. Those in front have got
lanterns. They are coming along fast."

As yet the enemy were half a mile away, but the lanterns and the
flash of their guns showed their exact position, while the fire of
the outposts was kept up steadily. As the latter fell back along
the causeway, the interval between the two forces decreased; and
then the fire of the outposts ceased as, in accordance with their
orders, they broke into the double.
