The Project Gutenberg EBook of Footprints on the Sea-Shore (From "Twice
Told Tales"), by Nathaniel Hawthorne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Footprints on the Sea-Shore (From "Twice Told Tales")

Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne

Posting Date: December 2, 2010 [EBook #9218]
Release Date: November, 2005
First Posted: August 23, 2003
Last Updated: February 5, 2007

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOOTPRINTS ON THE SEA-SHORE ***




Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines.









                        TWICE TOLD TALES

                   FOOTPRINTS ON THE SEA-SHORE

                     By Nathaniel Hawthorne



It must be a spirit much unlike my own, which  can keep itself in
health and vigor without sometimes stealing from the sultry sunshine
of the world, to plunge into the cool bath of solitude. At  intervals,
and not infrequent ones, the forest and the ocean summon me--one with
the roar of its waves, the other with the murmur of its boughs--forth
from the  haunts of men.  But I must wander many a mile, ere I could
stand beneath the shadow of even one primeval tree, much less be lost
among the multitude of hoary trunks, and hidden from earth and sky by
the mystery  of darksome foliage.  Nothing is within my daily reach
more like a forest than the acre or two of woodland near some suburban
farm-house. When, therefore, the yearning for seclusion becomes a
necessity within me, I am  drawn to the sea-shore, which extends its
line of rude rocks and seldom-trodden sands, for leagues around our
bay.  Setting forth at my last ramble, on a September  morning, I
bound myself with a hermit's vow, to interchange no thoughts with man
or woman, to share no social pleasure, but to derive all that day's
enjoyment from shore, and sea, and sky,--from my soul's communion with
these, and from fantasies, and recollections, or anticipated
realities.  Surely here is enough to feed a human spirit for a single
day.  Farewell, then, busy world!  Till your evening lights shall
shine along the street,--till they gleam upon my sea-flushed face, as
I tread homeward,--free me from your ties, and let me be a peaceful
outlaw.

Highways and cross-paths are hastily traversed, and, clambering down a
crag, I find myself at the extremity of a long beach.  How gladly does
the spirit leap forth, and suddenly enlarge its sense of being to the
full extent of the broad, blue, sunny deep!  A greeting and a homage
to the Sea!  I descend over its margin, and dip my hand into the wave
that meets me, and bathe my brow.  That far-resounding roar is Ocean's
