After that Hargreaves was ready for it and could lengthen, twist, and
spin into yarn eleven threads of it."

"I hope the ungrateful workmen did not get after him as they did after
John Kay," Mary murmured.

"They did! At least, although they did not drive him out of England
they drove him out of Lancashire. So he went to Nottingham; and after
arming himself with his patent he and a Mr. James built a spinning mill
there, one of the first to be built in England."

"That must have made his fortune and repaid him for all his hard
labor," remarked Mrs. McGregor, as she held up a violet cloud of
spangled tulle and examined it critically.

"The book said he didn't make much money," Carl announced. "He wasn't
as poor as John Kay and did not die in want; but he certainly never
became rich."

"I suppose now that they had spinning factories England was satisfied,"
said Mary.

"Satisfied?" repeated Carl with scorn. "Satisfied because there was one
little measly spinning factory? You bet your life people weren't
satisfied! To be sure some of the hardest of the inventing was done.
But don't for a minute imagine you are through with Richard Arkwright.
He was still on the job."

"You told us about him before."

"Trying to get a patent on spinning by rollers? Yes, I did. Well, he
was still alive and of course when everybody was talking about spinning
he couldn't help hearing the gossip even if he did happen to be a
barber. In fact while he traveled round buying and selling hair for
wigs he must have met no end of people and talked with them, so I guess
he heard more of the news of the day than did lots of other men.
Barbers always seem to be sociable chaps. He was quite a mechanic, too,
in his way; machinery had always interested him."

"In spite of his making wigs and toupees for ladies and gentlemen?"
laughed Mrs. McGregor mischievously.

"Sure, Ma! He had been born in Lancashire just as Hargreaves had and so
he probably was particularly interested in Hargreaves. When anybody
from your own part of the world does anything smart you always are all
ears about it, you know. So Arkwright found out all he could by
gossiping about Hargreaves's spinning jenny, and no one was quicker to
see what such an invention would mean to England than he. The idea was
almost like a magnet to him. He hunted up Mr. Highs, who had
experimented a lot with spinning machinery, and talked with him; he
also met John Kay, who at one time had helped Highs. And because he was
such an intelligent listener and seemed to understand machinery so well
these men babbled to him about their hobby. Having heard all they had
to say Arkwright went off by himself and set quietly to work to try out
on a small scale certain notions of his own. These notions had to do
with spinning cotton by drawing rollers, and they worked perfectly.
That was enough for him. He announced his success, got his patent, was
knighted by the crown, and became rich. How's that for a yarn? Isn't it
like the story of Puss-In-Boots?"

"It is certainly magical," declared Mrs. McGregor, who had dropped her
work in her absorption. "I am glad, too, to know there was one inventor
who prospered."

"I am afraid he was the only one--at least of those interested in
spinning," replied Carl gravely.

"All the others both before and after him lost out so far as money
went."

"Who did come after Arkwright?" queried Mary.

"Crompton--Samuel Crompton," was the prompt reply. "He was a little boy
when Arkwright was tooting round the country trading hair and wigs. The
two men may even have happened to see one another somewhere. That
wouldn't be impossible, you know. Anyway, during the time that
Arkwright was fighting the right to his roller patent; going into
partnership with rich men who could finance his schemes; and building
his chain of mills at Nottingham, Cromford, and Matlock, Crompton was
growing up. As some of these mills were worked by horse power and some
by water power, the name of 'water frame' clung to Arkwright's
invention. Crompton, like everybody else who lived at the time, saw the
rivalry between Hargreaves's jenny and Arkwright's water frame. It was
of course silly that there should have been rivalry, for the two
machines did quite different sorts of work. Arkwright's water frame was
better for making the warp and long threads of cloth; and Hargreaves's
jenny turned out better weft, or the kind of thread that went from side
to side. It was only a matter of the sort of thread you needed,
understand."

"Then they certainly needn't have been jealous of one another,"
commented Mrs. McGregor.

"Fortunately in time they found that out and realized that each loom
had its advantages; to-day both are used--one for one purpose, one for
another. But no matter how many enemies Arkwright had everybody,
whether they liked him or not, was compelled to admit that he gave the
spinning industry a tremendous boost and did more toward starting our
present factory idea than did any one else. Not only was he a tireless
worker, but he was quick as a flash to see what was needed. Maybe he
wasn't any too scrupulous whose property he took; but at least he took
the things he seized more for the public good than his own, I really
believe. For instance, there was Lewis Paul's carding engine; he
introduced that into Lancashire and added to it a stripping comb, or
doffer, that made it about fifty per cent. better than it ever had been
before. That is what he did to everything he touched. He swooped down
on any machine he saw and then proceeded to improve it. It didn't
matter to him who it belonged to. Of course you can't do that, even if
you are an inventor," grinned Carl. "Naturally it got Arkwright in
wrong and he was given some pretty hard names. Still he did a lot of
good for all that. And, anyway, whatever he was, I take my hat off to
him because he began to study writing, spelling, and arithmetic when he
was fifty years old. That gets me!"

"Poor soul! He probably had no chance for an education when he was
younger," remarked Mrs. McGregor.

"No, he hadn't. But picture it! Jove! If I had gone that long without
books, and had been able to invent all sorts of things into the
bargain, darned if I wouldn't have stuck it out," Carl said.

"But you told us Arkwright became rich and was knighted," replied Mrs.
McGregor. "No doubt this resulted in his meeting educated people,
gentlemen and ladies, in whose company he felt ashamed, uncomfortable,
and at a disadvantage."

"I'd feel that way, wouldn't you?" nodded Mary. "I do feel so even when
I am with Uncle Frederick, and my teacher, and--and you, Mother."

"Don't include me, dear," protested her mother sadly. "Alas, I know
little enough. But it does help you to understand how that poor,
hard-working Richard Arkwright suffered. Often, I'll wager, he was
angry at himself for his lack of education even though it was not his
fault. I don't wonder, snubbed as he probably was at times, that he
determined he would learn something."

"His hard-earned education did not do him much good, Mother, for he
died when he was sixty," said Carl.

"Well, at least he lived long enough to see his success," Mary put in
brightly.

"He was luckier than Crompton," replied her brother.

"Oh, tell us about Crompton. Do you remember anything about him?" Mary
inquired.

"Crompton was one of the most important of the spinning inventors,"
continued Carl. "But he did not set out to be an inventor any more than
Arkwright did. To be sure he wasn't a barber or anything as ordinary as
that. He was a musician, a person of quite another sort, you see. His
family were better bred and started him out with a good education--the
very thing Arkwright lacked. Crompton might easily have mixed with the
class Arkwright wanted to mix with but he wasn't as good a mixer.
Instead of gossiping with everybody he met, as Arkwright had done,
Crompton kept by himself and lived quietly at home with his mother."

"A sensible lad!" Mrs. McGregor whispered.

"Maybe," grinned her son. "Still, it made people call Crompton
unsociable. I guess, though, most geniuses are that. They always seem
to be so in books; and Crompton certainly was a genius. He hadn't an
ounce of brain for business but he had no end of ideas; and it was
those that got him on in life. For you see, although the Cromptons were
what Ma would call 'gentle people', they were not rich. They were
comfortably off, though, and if the father had not died when the
children were small they might have been very well off indeed. As it
was, Mrs. Crompton had to help out the finances by carding, spinning,
and weaving cloth at home when her other work was done. Ever so many
other women did it, so it was considered an all right thing to do.
Since Kay's flying shuttle had made it possible to spin more stuff the
weavers, as I told you, were scouring the country for all the warp and
weft they could lay hands on, so everybody who could spin thread was
sure of a market. The prices offered, and the difficulties the weavers
were having to get material enough, were common talk at every English
cottage fireside. So of course it wasn't strange that Mrs. Crompton,
along with the rest of her neighbors, heard this gossip and also heard
about Hargreaves's spinning jenny. Now Samuel helped his mother to spin
evenings when he wasn't playing at the village theater and she decided
it would be nice to get one of these spinning jennies for him to use.
So she did, and it wasn't long before he could not only use it, but
could turn out weft enough for cloth to clothe the whole Crompton
family."

"Then I don't see but the Cromptons were nicely taken care of," Mary
announced.

"That wasn't the point, smartie!" her brother objected. "Of course they
were well enough off themselves, but the village of Bolton where they
lived was strong on its muslins and quilt materials and what the people
wanted was to be able to spin fine muslins such as were imported into
England from India and China. If such goods could be made by uneducated
Orientals why should not people as clever and ingenious as the English
make them?"

"Why, indeed?"

"They couldn't do it; I don't know why," answered Carl. "They just
could not contrive to draw fine enough thread. Of course Samuel
Crompton had always seen the Bolton goods since he was a little boy and
so knew as well as did everybody else in the town what a wonderful
thing it would be if finer thread could be made. So after his mother
got her spinning jenny for him he began to fuss round with it simply to
find out whether he could make it any better or not. He experimented
five years and at the end of that time he had made a 'muslin wheel'
that was something like Arkwright's water frame and something like
Hargreaves's jenny and yet wasn't like either of those things.
Therefore, as a joke, it was called a 'mule.'"

"Oh, I'm awfully glad he made it!" ejaculated the sympathetic Mary.
"Five years was such a long time to work. Wasn't it splendid of him!"

"Other people, I'm sorry to say, were not of your opinion," Carl
replied. "As I said before, the spinners and weavers were a crazy,
jealous lot. You remember how they treated Kay and Hargreaves? Well,
they hadn't improved any and were still just as mad at spinning
inventions and spinning inventors as they were before. Everything that
did away with hand labor was, they argued, an enemy and was going to
put them out of business."

"But how could they expect they were going to stop the progress of the
world?" asked Mrs. McGregor.

"They didn't think it was progress; they were just that stupid,"
returned Carl. "And I guess even if they had thought so it would have
been the same. They were determined to use nothing that reduced the
number of hand workers. So they set themselves to take out their
vengeance on all spinning machinery, and in order to put an end to it
mobs of workers went about smashing to atoms every spinning jenny they
could find that had more than twenty spindles."

"How nasty!" breathed Mary.

"How stupid!" rejoined her mother.

"Now, of course, Samuel Crompton wasn't going to have his new 'muslin
wheel' smashed to bits so he did not tell anybody what he had invented.
He simply took the thing to pieces and hid the parts round his
workroom. Some of them he put in the ceiling, some he tucked away under
the floor."

"Bully for him!" Mary cried. "It was a regular kid trick."

"I know it," agreed Carl. "He wasn't really a kid, though, because he
was twenty-seven years old at the time and was married and his wife had
just come to live at the big Crompton homestead. Well, after a little
while, things settled down and then Samuel Crompton dragged out the
parts of his hidden muslin wheel, put them together, and he and the
lady he had married went to work making the finest and strongest yarn
they could. Such fine thread had never before been made in all England
and you better believe when it began to appear it created a stir.
Everybody in Bolton went round trying to find out where it came from
and after the tidings spread about that the Cromptons were the people
who were producing the mysterious yarn, the town swelled with pride.
How was the thread made? That was the next question!"

"And the Cromptons didn't tell, of course."

"That's where you're wrong, Mary Ann! I wish they hadn't; but they
did."

"That was a pity," interrupted Mrs. McGregor.

"You'd have thought they would have been wise enough not to, wouldn't
you?" Carl observed. "But I told you Samuel Crompton had no great head
for business. He was trusting and decent, just the way Eli Whitney was.
He had no idea people would steal his invention. So when the mill
owners and factory folks came surging to his house, he not only let
them see the loom but even allowed some of them to try it when they
wrote out a promise or pledged their word that they would pay him for
the privilege."

Mrs. McGregor shook her head.

"I'm afraid," said she, "that was all he ever heard of the money."

"Of course it was, Ma! Evidently you know more about human nature than
poor Crompton did. He was utterly amazed when they wouldn't pay up. And
when there were others mean enough to hide in the room over his
workshop, bore holes in the floor, and spy down at the magic machine,
all was lost."

"He held no patent, then?"

"He hadn't one thing to protect him. The sharks just came down on him,
grabbed his idea, and walked away with it unmolested," answered Carl.

"Oh, that was pitiful--pitiful!" exclaimed Mrs. McGregor, laying aside
her work.

"It was a darn shame!" echoed her son.

"And the Cromptons never got any money at all?" asked Mary.

"Not then, anyhow."

"Well, at least Mr. Crompton had the joy of doing what he set out to
do--nobody could take that satisfaction away from him," mused Mrs.
McGregor.

"Yes, but would that have consoled you for finding that people were so
low-down?" answered Carl with scorn. "I'll bet that one fact
disappointed him more than the loss of the money. It would me."

"Greed, I regret to say, sonny, is at the bottom of most of the evils
of the world," retorted his mother sadly. "What finally became of the
Cromptons?"

"Oh, the whole thing got on Crompton's nerves and he moved to another
town where he buried himself," Carl answered. "After a while, though,
he came back to Bolton because he needed money and opened a little
factory there. It ran along for almost ten years, doing business on a
small scale. Imagine it! Then in 1800 some Manchester manufacturers
(who had probably got rich on his invention and whose consciences
troubled them most likely) collected a purse for him that his mill
might be enlarged. By this time as a result of various improvements
Crompton's idea had expanded until one of his looms had as many as
three hundred and sixty spindles, and another had two hundred and
twenty."

"And years before the spinners had destroyed those that boasted more
than twenty," commented Mary thoughtfully.

"I know it! Ironic, wasn't it? Poor old Crompton! He just didn't seem
to have any luck," asserted Carl.

"It wasn't want of luck, my dear, so much as want of wisdom--the wit to
grasp opportunity when it came," contradicted his mother.

"You mean 'there is a tide in the affairs of men', Ma, and all that?"
Carl grinned. "Who says I don't know Shakespeare when I meet him?
Anyhow, I guess Bill was right; he certainly was in this case. Even the
money the English government later collected and presented to Crompton
got dribbled away and lost in various unfortunate enterprises. Crompton
got poorer and poorer, and if it hadn't been that friends took care of
him he might almost have starved."

"And did his star never rise again?" inquired Mrs. McGregor.

"Never! He just died in poverty and left other people to grow rich on
what he had done."

"That is the world, I am afraid," was Mrs. McGregor's observation.
"Still he had given humanity a hand up and done a great service to his
generation. That knowledge was better than all the fortunes he could
have possessed."

"But he might so easily have had both, Ma," returned the practical
Carl. "I call the help to humanity slim comfort when you've been
cheated out of what should have been yours. I shouldn't even have been
grateful had I been Crompton for the fine monument they set up to his
memory long after he was dead. What they ought to have done was to
treat him square while he was alive to enjoy it."

"See that as you go through life you do not forget your own philosophy,
my son," cautioned his mother.




CHAPTER XV

TIDINGS


The following week brought a letter from Uncle Frederick and very
important the McGregors felt when they took it, adorned with its
English stamp, from the mail box in the hall. Mulberry Court did not
receive so many letters that the arrival of one was a routine affair.
No, indeed! When a real letter came to any of its residents the fact
was remarked upon by the recipient with a casualness calculated to veil
the pride he or she experienced.

Mrs. O'Dowd, for example, in passing through the hall would call
carelessly to one of her neighbors:

"I've just had a letter from my sister Jane in Fall River. Plague the
girl! What can she be writing to me about?"

Nevertheless, in spite of this ungracious observation Mrs. O'Dowd was
much pleased to be seen with the letter and overhear her friends
whispering among themselves:

"Julie O'Dowd had a letter from Jane to-day. It was in a blue envelope
and looked like quite a thick one. What do you suppose the girl had to
say? Most likely Julie will tell us by and by."

And sure enough! The prediction was a true prophecy, for before the day
was out Julie had made an errand to every flat in the house and before
leaving had read to each family extracts from the letter, interspersing
the paragraphs with a running line of comment concerning Jane and her
history since babyhood. By evening the letter had become blurred and
dingy with much handling and Julie could recite it from beginning to
end.

Yet for all the interest evoked by Julie's letters and the other rare
epistles that found their way into Mulberry Court these missives came
after all only from American cities which lay within a radius of a
hundred miles of Baileyville. They had not traveled far, any more than
had the persons to whom they were addressed. They were not letters
written on thin foreign paper and bearing unfamiliar postmarks and the
fascinating stamps of other nations. Only the McGregors could boast
such splendor as that.

Realizing this, Mrs. McGregor would have been short of human if she had
