Project Gutenberg's Popular Lectures on Zoonomia, by Thomas Garnett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Popular Lectures on Zoonomia
       Or The Laws of Animal Life, in Health and Disease

Author: Thomas Garnett

Release Date: January 8, 2009 [EBook #27748]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POPULAR LECTURES ON ZOONOMIA ***




Produced by R. L. Garnett





POPULAR LECTURES
ON
ZOONOMIA,
OR
THE LAWS OF ANIMAL LIFE,
IN
HEALTH AND DISEASE.

BY THOMAS GARNETT, M.D.

MEMBER OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, LONDON; OF THE ROYAL
IRISH ACADEMY; OF THE ROYAL MEDICAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH; HONORARY
MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF AGRICULTURE; FELLOW OF THE LINNEAN SOCIETY;
MEMBER OF THE MEDICAL SOCIETY, LONDON; AND OF THE LITERARY AND
PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY OF MANCHESTER: &c. &c.
FORMERLY PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY AND CHEMISTRY IN THE
ROYAL INSTITUTION OF GREAT BRITAIN.

LONDON:
FROM THE PRESS OF THE ROYAL INSTITUTION OF GREAT BRITAIN:
W. SAVAGE, PRINTER.
PUBLISHED FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE AUTHOR'S CHILDREN BY HIS EXECUTORS.
TO BE HAD OF MR. NICHOLSON, SOHO SQUARE, MR. PRICE,
WESTMINSTER LIBRARY, JERMYN STREET,
AND OF ALL THE BOOKSELLERS.
1804.

[FRONTISPIECE PORTRAIT]

THOMAS GARNETT. M.D.

L. R. Smith, del.
Lenney, sculpt.

Published Jan. 1, 1805, by the Executors, for the benefit of his
orphan children.

ENTERED AT STATIONERS HALL.

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, AND HONOURABLE,
THE MANAGERS OF THE ROYAL INSTITUTION OF GREAT
BRITAIN,
THESE LECTURES,
COMPOSED BY A MAN, WHO, IN HIS LIFE TIME, WAS
HONOURED BY THEIR SELECTION,
AS THEIR FIRST LECTURER;
AND WHOSE INFANT FAMILY HAVE SINCE EXPERIENCED
THEIR BENEVOLENCE AND PROTECTION,
ARE, WITH PERMISSION, DEDICATED,
BY THE TRUSTEES OF THE SUBSCRIPTION,
IN FAVOUR OF THOSE ORPHANS.
CONTENTS.

THE AUTHOR'S LIFE.

His early amusements. His apprenticeship to Mr. Dawson. His studies
at Edinburgh. In London. His establishment at Bradford. At
Knaresborough. At Harrowgate. His marriage. His lectures at
Liverpool. At Manchester. At Warrington. At Lancaster. At Glasgow.
His tour in the Highlands. The death of his wife. His engagement in
the Royal Institution. His resignation. His establishment in
Marlborough Street. His appointment as physician to the Mary-le-bonne
Dispensary. His death.

LECTURE I, INTRODUCTION.

Difficulties and advantages of a popular course of lectures. General
view of the human frame. Bones. Muscles. Joints. Powers of the
muscles. Brain and Nerves. Senses. Hypothesis of sensation.
Galvanism. Distribution of the subjects of the course.

LECTURE II, ON RESPIRATION.

Air. Trachea. Thorax. Animal heat. Its uniformity. Chemical
properties of the air. Combustion. Effects of cold.

LECTURE III, ON THE CIRCULATION OF THE BLOOD.

Respiration partially voluntary. Heart. Circulation. Pulsation.
Hepatic vessels. Action of the arteries. Causes propelling the blood.
Varieties of the pulse. Changes of the blood. Harvey's merits.

LECTURE IV, ON DIGESTION AND NUTRITION.

Necessity of food. Structure of the viscera. Bile. Food of man.
Gastric juice. Absorption. Assimilation. Lymphatics. Diseases
affecting digestion. Advantages of temperance and exercise.

LECTURE V, OF THE SENSES IN GENERAL.

Sensation. Attention. Internal senses. Habit. Touch. Skin. Pain.

LECTURE VI, ON TASTE AND SMELL.

Tongue. Kinds of taste. Diseases of taste. Smell. Mucous membrane.
Odours. Smell in animals. Diseases of smell.

LECTURE VII, ON SOUND AND HEARING.

Production of sound. Medium. Ear. Hearing. Pendulums. Chords. Wind
instruments. Tones. Velocity of sound. Music. Echo. Deafness.

LECTURE VIII, ON VISION.

The eye. Figure. Light. Vision. Accommodation to different distances.
Seat of vision. Erect vision. Single vision. Squinting.

LECTURE IX, ON THE LAWS OF ANIMAL LIFE.

Action of external objects. Excitability. Its laws. Action of light.
Of Heat. Of food. Sound. Odours.

LECTURE X, ON THE LAWS OF ANIMAL LIFE.

General laws. Sleep. Degrees of excitability. Health. Comparison with
a furnace. Oxidation. Electricity. Hydrogen. Theory of muscular
contraction.

LECTURE XI, OF THE NATURE AND CAUSES OF DISEASES.

Brown's theory. Sthenic and asthenic diseases. Debility. Sthenic
depression of spirits. Scale of excitability. Fallacy of symptoms
Effects of cold. Alcohol. Sthenic diseases.

LECTURE XII, ON INFLAMMATION AND ASTHENIC DISEASES.

Nature of inflammation. Distention of the arteries. Cure of
ophthalmias. Asthenic diseases. Cold. Intemperance. Mental exertions.
Classes of diseases. Cure. Oxidation.

LECTURE XIII, ON THE GOUT.

Effects of the gout. Gout not hereditary. Symptoms. Causes.
Affections of the stomach. Cure. Use of electricity. Diet.

LECTURE XIV, ON NERVOUS COMPLAINTS.

Predisposition. Classes. Sthenic kinds. Case of the author. Bad
effects of wine. Asthenic kinds. Passions. Direct debility.
Treatment. Torpor. Remedies. Exercise and temperance. Conclusion.

AN ACCOUNT
OF
THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.

DR. GARNETT was born at Casterton, near Kirkby Lonsdale,
Westmoreland, on the 21st of April, 1766. During the first fifteen
years of his life, he remained with his parents, and was instructed
by them in the precepts of the established church of England, from
which he drew that scheme of virtue, by which every action of his
future life was to be governed. The only school education he received
during these early years, was at Barbon, a small village near his
native place, to which his father had removed the year after he was
born. The school was of so little consequence, that its master
changed not less than three times during the space of seven or eight
years, and the whole instruction he received, was comprehended in the
rudiments of the English grammar, a small portion of Latin, and a
little French, together with the general principles of arithmetic.
His bodily constitution was from the beginning weak and susceptible;
he was unequal to joining in the boisterous amusements of his
companions, while from the liveliness of his disposition he could not
remain a moment idle. To these circumstances we are, perhaps, to
attribute the uncommon progress he made in every branch of knowledge
to which he afterwards applied himself.

Whilst a schoolboy, the susceptibility of his mind, and a diffidence
of character connected with it, caused him to associate very little
with his schoolfellows: he dreaded the displeasure of his preceptor,
as the greatest misfortune which could befal him The moment he
arrived at home, he set about preparing his lesson for the next day;
and as soon as this was accomplished, he amused himself by contriving
small pieces of mechanism, which he exhibited with conscious
satisfaction to his friends. His temper was warm and enthusiastic;
whatever came within the narrow circle of his early knowledge he
would attempt to imitate. He saw no difficulties before hand, nor was
he discouraged when he met with them. At the early age of eleven
years, he had somewhere seen a dial and a quadrant, and was able to
imitate these instruments, nay, with the assistance of the latter,
and the small knowledge of arithmetic and trigonometry, which he had
then obtained, he formally marched out with his younger brother, and
rudely attempted to measure the height of a mountain behind his
father's house. When he was nearly fifteen years of age, he was, at
his earnest desire, put apprentice to the celebrated mathematician,
Mr. Dawson, of Sedbergh, who was at that time a surgeon and
apothecary. This situation was peculiarly advantageous to him, on
account of the great mathematical knowledge of his master, by whom he
was instructed in the different branches of this science; and,
notwithstanding his constant employment in necessary business, his
ardent pursuit of professional information, and his extreme youth, in
the course of four years, he became well acquainted with mechanics,
hydrostatics, optics, and astronomy. He afterwards applied himself
with energy to the study of chemistry, and other subjects, with which
it was thought expedient that he should be acquainted, previously to
attending the medical lectures in the University of Edinburgh.
Strongly impressed with a sense of the value of time, he was
indefatigable in the pursuit of knowledge: by a concurrence of
fortunate circumstances, his talents had become so flexible, that he
succeeded almost equally well in every subject to which he applied
himself; but of chemistry he was particularly fond, and from this
time it became his favourite study.

During the four years of his apprenticeship, his conduct was in every
respect highly commendable; he was assiduous, he was virtuous. His
pursuit after general knowledge was restrained to one object only at
a time; he had advanced far in the abstruse sciences; his inclination
for study was increased: when in the year 1785, he went to Edinburgh
with a degree of scientific knowledge, seldom attained by young men
beginning the study of medicine. He became a member of the Medical
and Physical Societies, where he soon made himself conspicuous, and
of the latter of which, he was afterwards president.

Well acquainted with the first principles of natural philosophy, he
had considerable advantages over his contemporaries; and his
superiority was soon acknowledged. He was not, however, on this
account inclined to remit his industry; he attended the lectures of
the ablest professors of the day, and more particularly those of Dr.
Black, with the most scrupulous punctuality, and endeavoured to
elucidate his subject by every collateral information he could
obtain. He avoided almost all society; and it is said, he never
allowed himself, at this time, more than four hours sleep out of the
twenty four. The famous Dr. Brown was then delivering lectures on his
new theory of medicine. Dr. Garnett, fired with the enthusiasm of
this noted teacher, and struck with the conformity of his theory to
the general laws of nature, became one of the most zealous advocates
of his doctrine; and from this period, he took, during the remainder
of his life, every opportunity of supporting it.

During two summers he returned to Mr. Dawson at Sedbergh, passing the
intervening winters in Edinburgh: about this time he wrote the essay,
which, in the year 1797, he published under the title of a Lecture on
Health, which very neatly and perspicuously explains the fundamental
parts of the Brunonian theory of medicine: in September 1788, he
published his inaugural dissertation de Visu, and obtained the degree
of M.D. Very soon afterwards he went to London, to pursue his
professional studies, which he continued to do with the greatest
perseverance: he attended with unceasing diligence the lectures of
the most eminent lecturers, and he sought practical knowledge in the
chief hospitals of the metropolis with the most ardent zeal; so that
whilst he gained information to himself, he set an impressive example
to his contemporary medical students, who in the delusive pursuits of
a great city, are too apt to neglect the objects their parents had in
view in sending them to the capital. Having finished his studies in
London, Dr. Garnett, in 1789, returned to his parents. At the time he
left London, he had lost none of his ardour; still he continued
indefatigable and observant. He had been flattered and respected by
his fellow students, and praised by his seniors; and his previous
success animated him with the strongest expectation of future
advancement. At this time, it is supposed, he wrote the justly
admired Treatise on Optics, which is in the Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Soon after his establishment as a physician, at Bradford, in
Yorkshire, which took place in the year 1790, he began to give
private lectures on philosophy and chemistry. He wrote his treatise
on the Horley Green Spa; and in a short time, gained a deserved
character of ingenuity and skill as a chemist, a physician, and a
benevolent member of society. Bradford did not afford scope for his
practice as a physician, equal to the sanguine expectations he had
formed; and he was induced to change his situation.

In the year 1791, therefore, he removed to Knaresborough, intending
to reside at that place during the winter, and at Harrowgate during
the summer. This plan he put in execution till the year 1794; his
reputation rapidly increased, and his future prospects appeared
cheering and bright. He continued to apply himself very closely to
chemistry, which was now decidedly his most pleasant and interesting
study. He endeavoured to apply his various knowledge to practical
purposes, and in many instances was peculiarly successful. No sooner
had he arrived at Knaresborough, than anxious to investigate every
thing in the neighbourhood, which could at all affect the health of
the inhabitants, he began to analyse the Crescent Water at
Harrowgate; which he did, with all the accuracy a subject so
difficult could admit of; and in 1791, he published his treatise upon
it. The same spirit led him, in 1792, to analyse the other mineral
waters at the same place of fashionable and general resort, the
detail of which he published in the same year. These publications
became generally read, and gained him a very extensive reputation.
The late Dr. Withering, whose knowledge on these subjects could not
be disputed, before he had seen his general analysis of the
Harrowgate Waters, said, that "excepting only the few examples given
us by Bergman, the analysis of the Crescent Waters was one of the
neatest and most satisfactory accounts he had ever read of any
mineral water." But his exertions were not confined to professional
and scientific pursuits; laudably desirous of advancing knowledge
amongst every branch of the community, he formed the plan of a
subscription library, which has, since 1791, been of great
convenience and utility to the inhabitants of Knaresborough. Far from
joining in the opinion which has so much prevailed in modern times,
that it was sufficient to aim at general utility, he lost no
opportunity of doing good to every member of society. He greatly
promoted and encouraged the making of the pleasure grounds and
building on the rock, called Fort Montague; and he instructed and
assisted the poor man, who is called the Governor, to institute a
bank, and to print and issue small bills of the value of a few
halfpence, in imitation of the notes of the country bankers, but
drawn and signed with a reference of humour to the fort, the flag,
the hill, and the cannon. These notes, the nobility and gentry, who
during the Harrowgate season crowd to visit this remarkable place,
take in exchange for their silver, and by these means the governor,
who is a man of gentle and inoffensive manners, has been enabled,
with the assistance of his loom, to support himself and a numerous
family, and to ameliorate their condition, by giving education to his
children.

No station in life escaped his benevolent attentions. In order to
benefit John Metcalf, who is perhaps more generally known by the name
of Blind Jack of Knaresborough, he assisted him to publish an account
of the very singular and remarkable occurrences of his life, during a
long series of years, under the heavy affliction of total blindness;
by the sale of which, this venerable old man derived a considerable
contribution towards his subsistence.

Whilst at Harrowgate, Dr. Garnett obtained the patronage and
protection of the Earl of Rosslyn, then Lord Loughborough, who in the
year 1794 built a house for him, which for the future Dr. Garnett
meant should be his only residence; it was not long however before he
discovered that his situation at Harrowgate was but ill calculated to
forward his liberal and extended views. At this place he had small
opportunities of attaching himself to his favourite sciences; in the
winter months he was without literary society, and it was not for his
ardent spirit to remain inactive. About this time also, he formed the
idea of going to America, where he thought he might live both
honourably and profitably as a teacher of chemistry and natural
philosophy. All these circumstances were floating in his mind, when
in the year 1794, about the end of July, at the instance of a medical
friend, who resided in London, he received as boarders into his
house, which was kept by his sister, Miss Catharine Grace Cleveland,
daughter of the late Mr. Cleveland, of Salisbury Square, Fleet
Street, who was recommended to the use of the Harrowgate waters,
together with her friend Miss Worboys. To all who were acquainted
with the prepossessing exterior of Dr. Garnett, the liveliness of his
conversation, the urbanity of his manners, and his general desire of
communicating knowledge to whomever he saw desirous of gaining
information, it will be no surprise, that a mutual attachment grew up
between him and his inmate, Miss Cleveland, a young lady possessing,
in all respects, a mind similar to his own, and who must have felt a
natural gratification in the zeal with which the company of the
person, on whom she had placed her affections, was sought by all
ranks resorting to this fashionable watering place, where every one
thought himself most fortunate who sat nearest to him at the table,
and where he enlivened the circle around him with his conversation,
which was not only instructive, but playfully gay, and entertaining,
ever striving to amuse, and always successful in his attempts. The
