Mr Bright.  "Meanwhile we shall visit the hospital I need scarcely
explain to you that the hospital is the place to which wounded letters
and packages are taken to be healed.  Here it is."

The party now stood beside a table, at which several clerks--we might
almost say surgeons--were at work, busy with sealing-wax and string.

The patients were a wondrous lot, and told eloquently of human
carelessness.  Here were found letters containing articles that no
envelope of mere paper could be expected to hold--such as bunches of
heavy keys, articles of jewellery, etcetera, which had already more than
half escaped from their covers.  There were also frail cardboard boxes,
so squeezed and burst that their contents were protruding, and parcels
containing worsted and articles of wearing apparel, which had been so
carelessly put up as to have come undone in the mail-bags.  All these
things were being re-tied, re-folded, patched up here and there with
sealing-wax, or put into new covers, by the postal surgeons, and done
with as much care, too, as though the damage had been caused by the
Post-Office rather than by carelessness in the public.

But among these invalided articles were a few whose condition
accidentally revealed attempts to contravene the postal laws.  One
letter which had burst completely open revealed a pill-box inside, with
"Dinner Pills" on the outside.  On examination, the pills turned out to
be two sixpences wrapped up in a scrap of paper, on which was
written--"Thought you had no money to get a stamp with, so sent you
some."  It is contrary to regulations to send coin by post without
registering the letter.  The unfortunate receiver would have to pay
eightpence, as a registration fee, for this shilling!

While the party was looking at the hospital work another case was
discovered.  A book-packet came open and revealed a letter inside.  But
still further, the letter was found to contain sixpence in silver, sent
to defray postage when the book should be returned.  Here was a double
sin!  No letter, or writing of the nature of a letter, is allowed to go
by book post, and coin may not be sent unregistered.  In this case the
book would be forwarded at letter-rate, and the 8 pence registration fee
would be charged for the coin--the whole amounting to 6 shillings, 6
pence.

"If the public would only attend," observed Mr Bright, in commenting on
these facts, "to the regulations laid down for their guidance by the
Post-Office--as detailed in our Directories and Postal Guides--such
errors would seldom occur, for I believe that things of this sort are
the result of ignorance rather than dishonesty."

"Now, ma'am," he continued, "we come to the blind officers."

There were several of those gentlemen, whose title, we presume, was
satirically expressive of the extraordinary sharpness of their eyes and
intellects.  They were seated at a table, engaged in examining addresses
so illegible, so crabbed, so incomplete, and so ineffably ridiculous,
that no man of ordinary mental capacity could make head or tail of them.
All the principal London and Provincial Directories, Guides, and
Gazetteers were ranged in front of the blind officers, to assist them in
their arduous labours, and by the aid of these, and their own extensive
knowledge of men and places, they managed to dispose of letters for
which a stranger would think it impossible to find owners.

"What would you make of that address, now?" said Mr Bright, presenting
a letter to Miss Lillycrop for inspection.

"It looks like Cop--Cup--no--it begins with a C at all events.--What
think you of it, May?" said the puzzled lady.

"It seems to me something like Captain Troller of Rittler Bunch," said
May, laughing.  "It is quite illegible."

"Not _quite_," said one of the blind officers, with a smile.  "It is--
Comptroller of the Returned Letter Branch.  Some one making inquiries,
no doubt, after a lost letter addressed as badly as this one."

Having looked at a few more of the letters that were then passing under
examination, Mr Bright showed them a book in which were copied
facsimiles of addresses which had passed through the post.  Some of
these were pictorial--embracing quaint devices and caricatures, most of
them in ink, and some in colours, all of which had been traced by a
gentleman in the office with great skill.  One that struck May as being
very original was the representation of an artist painting the portrait
of the Queen.  Her Majesty was depicted as sitting for her portrait, and
the canvas on the easel before which the artist stood was made the exact
size of the postage-stamp.

While the ladies were examining this book of literary curiosities, Mr
Bright took occasion to comment with pardonable pride on the working of
the Post-Office.

"You see, ma'am," he said, "we do our best for the public--though many
of 'em have no idea of it.  We don't send letters to the Returned Letter
Branch till we've tried, as you see, to get the correct addresses, and
until two separate letter-carriers have attempted to deliver them.
After leaving the letter-carriers' hands, the address of every
undelivered letter, and the indorsement it bears, are carefully examined
by a superior officer, who is held responsible for discovering any wrong
treatment it may have undergone, and for having recourse to any further
available means of finding the owner.  It is considered better that the
sender of a letter should know as soon as possible of its non-delivery,
than that it should travel about with little prospect of its owner being
found.  We therefore send it to the Returned Branch without further
delay, where it is carefully examined by a superior officer, to see that
it has actually been presented as addressed, and that the reasons
assigned for its non-delivery are sufficient.  In doubtful cases the
Directories and other books of reference in the branch are consulted,
and should it be found that there has been any oversight or neglect, the
letter is immediately re-issued.  After all has been done that can be to
deliver such letters, they are opened, and returned the same day to the
senders.  If valuables are enclosed, the address and contents are
recorded in case of inquiry.  When senders fail to give their addresses,
sometimes these are discovered by bills of exchange, cheques, or
money-orders, which happen to be enclosed.  When addresses of senders
can be discovered by information on the outside of covers, the letters
are returned without passing through the Returned Letter Branch, and are
not opened.  When all efforts have failed, and the letters do not
contain property, they are not preserved."

"Do many letters come into the Returned Letter Offices in this way?"
asked Miss Lillycrop.

"Ay; over the whole kingdom, including the letters sent direct to the
senders last year, there were above four millions eight hundred
thousand, and of these we managed to return nine-tenths to the writers,
or re-issued them to corrected addresses."

"Oh, indeed!" said Miss Lillycrop, utterly bewildered.

"A large proportion of the letters passing through this office," said
Mr Bright, "consists of circulars.  An account of these was once taken,
and the number was found to be nearly twenty millions a year, and of
these circulars it was ascertained that--"

"Stop! pray, sir, stop!" exclaimed Miss Lillycrop, pressing her hand to
her forehead; "I am lost in admiration of your amazing memory, but I--I
have no head for figures.  Indeed, what I have already heard and seen in
this place has produced such confusion in my poor brain that I cannot
perceive any difference whatever between millions, billions, and
trillions!"

"Well, come, we will continue our round," said Mr Bright, laughing.

Now, while all this was going on in the hall, there was a restive
creature inside of a box which did not relish its confinement.  This was
Mr Fred Blurt's snake.

That sagacious animal discovered that there was a knot in the side of
his pine-wood box.  Now, knots are sometimes loose.  Whether the snake
found this out, and wrought at the knot intentionally, or forced it out
accidentally during its struggles, we cannot tell, but certain it is
that it got it out somehow, made its escape, and glided away into the
darkest corner it could find.

Meanwhile its box was treated after the manner of parcels, and put
safely into one of the mail-bags.

As the mass of letters began to diminish in bulk the snake began to feel
uncomfortably exposed.  At the same time Miss Lillycrop, with that
wicked delight in evil prophecy which is peculiar to mankind, began to
feel comfortably exultant.

"You see I was right!" she said to her guide, glancing at the clock,
which now indicated ten minutes to eight; "the confusion is almost as
great as ever."

"We shall see," replied Mr Bright, quietly, as he led the way back to
the gallery.

From this point it could be seen, even by unpractised eyes, that,
although the confusion of letters all over the place was still
considerable, there were huge gaps on the sorting-tables everywhere,
while the facing-tables were of course empty.  There was a push and
energy also which had not prevailed at first.  Men seemed as though they
really were in considerable haste.  Letters were being bundled up and
tied with string and thrust into bags, and the bags sealed with a degree
of celerity that transfixed Miss Lillycrop and silenced her.  A few
minutes more and the tables were cleared.  Another minute, and the bags
were being carried out.  Thirty red vans outside gaped to receive them.
Eight o'clock struck, whips cracked, wheels rattled, the eight o'clock
mail was gone, and there was not a single letter left in the great
sorting-room of St. Martin's-le-Grand!

"I was right, you see," said Mr Bright.

"You were right," responded Miss Lillycrop.

They descended and crossed the now unencumbered floor.  The snake took
it into its mottled head at that moment to do the same.  Miss Lillycrop
saw it, shrieked, sprang to get out of its way, fell, and sprained her
ankle!

There was a rush of sorters, letter-carriers, boy-sorters, and
messengers; the snake was captured, and Miss Lillycrop was tenderly
borne from the General Post-Office in a state of mental amazement and
physical collapse.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

FORMATION OF THE PEGAWAY LITERARY ASSOCIATION AND OTHER MATTERS.

Close to the residence of Solomon Flint there was a small outhouse or
shed, which formed part of the letter-carrier's domain, but was too
small to be sub-let as a dwelling, and too inconveniently situated in a
back court to be used as an apartment.  It was therefore devoted to the
reception of lumber.  But Solomon, not being a rich man, did not possess
much lumber.  The shed was therefore comparatively empty.

When Philip Maylands came to reside with Solomon, he was allowed to use
this shed as a workroom.

Phil was by nature a universal genius--a Jack-of-all-trades--and formed
an exception to that rule about being master of none, which is asserted,
though not proved, by the proverb, for he became master of more than one
trade in the course of his career.  Solomon owned a few tools, so that
carpentry was naturally his first attempt, and he very soon became
proficient in that.  Then, having discovered an old clock among the
lumber of the shed, he took to examining and cleaning its interior of an
evening after his work at the Post-Office was done.  As his mechanical
powers developed, his genius for invention expanded, and soon he left
the beaten tracks of knowledge and wandered into the less trodden
regions of fancy.

In all this Phil had an admirer and sympathiser in his sister May; but
May's engagements, both in and out of the sphere of her telegraphic
labours, were numerous, so that the boy would have had to pursue his
labours in solitude if it had not been for his friend Peter Pax, whose
admiration for him knew no bounds, and who, if he could, would have
followed Phil like his shadow.  As often as the little fellow could
manage to do so, he visited his friend in the shed, which they named
Pegaway Hall.  There he sometimes assisted Phil, but more frequently
held him in conversation, and commented in a free and easy way on his
work,--for his admiration of Phil was not sufficient to restrain his
innate insolence.

One evening Phil Maylands was seated at his table, busy with the works
of an old watch.  Little Pax sat on the table swinging his legs.  He had
brought a pipe with him, and would have smoked, but Phil sternly forbade
it.

"It's bad enough for men to fumigate their mouths," he said, with a
smile on his lip and a frown in his eye, "but when I see a thing like
you trying to make yourself look manly by smoking, I can't help thinking
of a monkey putting on the boots and helmet of a Guardsman.  The boots
and helmet look grand, no doubt, but that makes the monkey seem all the
more ridiculous.  Your pipe suggests manhood, Pax, but you look much
more like a monkey than a man when it's in your mouth."

"How severe you are to-night, Phil!" returned Pax, putting the pipe,
however, in his pocket; "where did you graduate, now--at Cambridge or
Oxford?  Because w'en my eldest boy is big enough I'd like to send 'im
w'ere he'd acquire sitch an amazin' flow of eloquence."

Phil continued to rub the works of the watch, but made no reply.

"I say, Phil," observed the little fellow, after a thoughtful pause.

"Well?"

"Don't it strike you, sometimes, that this is a queer sort of world?"

"Yes, I've often thought that, and it has struck me, too, that you are
one of the queerest fish in it."

"Come, Phil, don't be cheeky.  I'm in a sedate frame of mind to-night,
an' want to have a talk in a philosophical sort o' way of things in
general."

"Well, Pax, go ahead.  I happen to have been reading a good deal about
things in general of late, so perhaps between us we may grind something
out of a talk."

"Just so; them's my ideas precisely.  There's nothin'," said Pax,
thrusting both hands deeper into his trousers pockets, and swinging his
legs more vigorously--"nothin' like a free an' easy chat for developin'
the mental powers.  But I say, what a fellow you are for goin' ahead!
Seems to me that you're always either workin' at queer contrivances or
readin'."

"You forget, Pax, that I sometimes carry telegraphic messages."

"Ha! true, then you and I are bound together by the cords of a common
dooty--p'r'aps I should say an uncommon dooty, all things considered."

"Among other things," returned Phil, "I have found out by reading that
there are two kinds of men in the world, the men who push and strive and
strike out new ideas, and the men who jog along easy, on the
let-be-for-let-be principle, and who grow very much like cabbages."

"You're right there, Phil--an' yet cabbages ain't bad vegetables in
their way," remarked Pax, with a contemplative cast of his eyes to the
ceiling.

"Well," continued Phil gravely, "I shouldn't like to be a cabbage."

"W'ich means," said the other, "that you'd rather be one o' the fellows
who push an' strive an strike out noo ideas."

Phil admitted that such were his thoughts and aspirations.

"Now, Pax," he said, laying down the tool with which he had been
working, and looking earnestly into his little friend's face, "something
has been simmering in my mind for a considerable time past."

"You'd better let it out then, Phil, for fear it should bu'st you,"
suggested Pax.

"Come, now, stop chaffing for a little and listen, because I want your
help," said Phil.

There was something in Phil's look and manner when he was in earnest
which effectually quelled the levity of his little admirer.  The appeal
to him for aid, also, had a sedative effect.  As Phil went on, Pax
became quite as serious as himself.  This power of Pax to suddenly
discard levity, and become interested, was indeed one of the qualities
which rendered him powerfully attractive to his friend.

"The fact is," continued Phil, "I have set my heart on forming a
literary association among the telegraph-boys."

"A what?"

"A literary association.  That is, an association of those boys among us
who want to read, and study: and discuss, and become knowing and wise."

The daring aspirations suggested by this proposition were too much for
little Pax.  He remained silent--open mouthed and eyed--while Phil went
on quietly to expound his plans.

"There is a capital library, as you know, at the Post-Office, which is
free to all of us, though many of us make little use of it--more's the
pity,--so that we don't require a library of our own, though we may come
to that, too, some day, who knows?  Sure it wouldn't be the first time
that great things had come out of small beginnings, if all I have read
be true.  But it's not only books we would be after.  What we want, Pax,
is to be organised--made a body of.  When we've got that done we shall
soon put soul into the body,--what with debates, an' readings, an'
lectures, an' maybe a soiree now and then, with music and speeches, to
say nothing of tea an' cakes."

As Phil Maylands warmed with his subject his friend became excited.  He
ceased to chaff and raise objections, and finally began to see the
matter through Phil's rose-coloured glasses.

"Capital," he exclaimed heartily.  "It'll do, Phil.  It'll work--like
everything else you put your hand to.  But"--here his chubby little
visage elongated--"how about funds?  Nothin' in this world gets along
without funds; an' then we've no place to meet in."

"We must content ourselves with funds of humour to begin with," returned
Phil, resuming his work on the watch.  "As for a meeting-room, wouldn't
this do?  Pegaway Hall is not a bad place, and quite enough room in it
when the lumber's cleared out o' the way.  Then, as to members, we would
only admit those who showed a strong desire to join us."

"Just so--who showed literary tastes, like you an' me," suggested Pax.

"Exactly so," said Phil, "for, you see, I don't want to have our society
flourished about in the eyes of people as a public Post-Office affair.
We must make it private and very select."
