The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astronomy for Amateurs, by Camille Flammarion

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Astronomy for Amateurs

Author: Camille Flammarion

Translator: Frances A. Welby

Release Date: April 30, 2008 [EBook #25267]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRONOMY FOR AMATEURS ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration: Paul Renaud.

CONTEMPLATION]




  ASTRONOMY FOR
  AMATEURS


  BY
  CAMILLE FLAMMARION
  AUTHOR OF POPULAR ASTRONOMY


  _AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION BY_
  FRANCES A. WELBY


  _ILLUSTRATED_

  [Illustration]


  NEW YORK AND LONDON
  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
  1910




COPYRIGHT, 1904, BY

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY


_Published October, 1904_




TO

MADAME C.R. CAVARE

  ORIGINAL MEMBER OF THE ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY OF FRANCE
  CHATEAU DE MAUPERTHUIS


MADAME: I have dedicated none of my works, save Stella--offered to the
liberal-minded, the free and generous friend of progress, and patron of
the sciences, James Gordon Bennett, editor of the New York Herald. In
this volume, Madame, I make another exception, and ask your permission
to offer it to the first woman who consented to be enrolled in the list
of members of the Astronomical Society of France, as foundress of this
splendid work, from the very beginning of our vast association (1887);
and who also desired to take part in the permanent organization of the
Observatory at Juvisy, a task of private enterprise, emancipated from
administrative routine. An Astronomy for Women[1] can not be better
placed than upon the table of a lady whose erudition is equal to her
virtues, and who has consecrated her long career to the pursuit and
service of the Beautiful, the Good, and the True.

                         CAMILLE FLAMMARION.

  OBSERVATORY OF JUVISY, _November, 1903_.




  CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                            PAGE

        INTRODUCTION                                    1

     I. THE CONTEMPLATION OF THE HEAVENS               10

    II. THE CONSTELLATIONS                             28

   III. THE STARS, SUNS OF THE INFINITE. A JOURNEY
            THROUGH SPACE                              56

    IV. OUR STAR THE SUN                               88

     V. THE PLANETS. A. MERCURY, VENUS, THE
            EARTH, MARS                               113

    VI. THE PLANETS. B. JUPITER, SATURN, URANUS,
            NEPTUNE                                   146

   VII. THE COMETS                                    172

  VIII. THE EARTH                                     205

    IX. THE MOON                                      232

     X. THE ECLIPSES                                  259

    XI. ON METHODS. HOW CELESTIAL DISTANCES
           ARE DETERMINED, AND HOW THE SUN IS
           WEIGHED                                    287

   XII. LIFE, UNIVERSAL AND ETERNAL                   317

        INDEX                                         341




   LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


   Contemplation                                 _Frontispiece_
                  From a painting by Paul Renaud

   FIG.                                                         PAGE

   1. The great Book of the Heavens is open to all eyes           15

   2. The earth in space. June solstice, midday                   20

   3. The Great Bear (or Dipper) and the Pole Star                34

   4. To find the Pole Star                                       35

   5. To find Cassiopeia                                          37

   6. To find Pegasus and Andromeda                               37

   7. Perseus, the Pleiades, Capella                              38

   8. To find Arcturus, the Herdsman, and the Northern Crown      40

   9. The Swan, Vega, the Eagle                                   41

  10. The Constellations of the Zodiac: summer and autumn;
        Capricorn, Archer, Scorpion, Balance, Virgin, Lion        46

  11. The Constellations of the Zodiac: winter and spring;
        Crab, Twins, Bull, Ram, Fishes, Water-Carrier             47

  12. Orion and his celestial companions                          48

  13. Winter Constellations                                       51

  14. Spring Constellations                                       52

  15. Summer Constellations                                       53

  16. Autumn Constellations                                       54

  17. The double star Mizar                                       69

  18. Triple star [xi] in Cancer                                  72

  19. Quadruple star [epsilon] of the Lyre                        73

  20. Sextuple star [theta] in the Nebula of Orion                74

  21. The Star-Cluster in Hercules                                79

  22. The Star-Cluster in the Centaur                             80

  23. The Nebula in Andromeda                                     81

  24. Nebula in the Greyhounds                                    82

  25. The Pleiades                                                83

  26. Occultation of the Pleiades by the Moon                     85

  27. Stellar dial of the double star [gamma] of the Virgin       86

  28. Comparative sizes of the Sun and Earth                      93

  29. Direct photograph of the Sun                                96

  30. Telescopic aspect of a Sun-Spot                             97

  31. Rose-colored solar flames 228,000 kilometers (141,500
        miles) in height, _i.e._, 18 times the diameter of the
        Earth                                                    103

  32. Orbits of the four Planets nearest to the Sun              115

  33. Orbits of the four Planets farthest from the Sun           116

  34. Mercury near quadrature                                    117

  35. The Earth viewed from Mercury                              119

  36. The Evening Star                                           123

  37. Successive phases of Venus                                 124

  38. Venus at greatest brilliancy                               126

  39. The Earth viewed from Venus                                130

  40. Diminution of the polar snows of Mars during the
        summer                                                   136

  41. Telescopic aspect of the planet Mars (Feb., 1901)          137

  42. Telescopic aspect of the planet Mars (Feb., 1901)          138

  43. Chart of Mars                                              140

  44. The Earth viewed from Mars                                 144

  45. Telescopic aspect of Jupiter                               150

  46. Jupiter and his four principal satellites                  155

  47. Saturn                                                     159

  48. Varying perspective of Saturn's Rings, as seen from
        the Earth                                                161

  49. The Great Comet of 1858                                    174

  50. What our Ancestors saw in a Comet                          177

                         After Ambroise Pare (1858)

  51. Prodigies seen in the Heavens by our Forefathers           178

  52. The orbit of a Periodic Comet                              182

  53. The tails of Comets are opposed to the Sun                 185

  54. A Meteor                                                   191

  55. Shooting Stars of November 12, 1799                        196

                        From a contemporary drawing

  56. Fire-Ball seen from the Observatory at Juvisy, August
      10, 1899                                                   199

  57. Explosion of a Fire-Ball above Madrid, February 10,
      1896                                                       200

  58. Raphael's Fire-Ball (_The Madonna of Foligno_)             202

  59. A Uranolith                                                203

  60. Motion of the Earth round the Sun                          222

  61. Inclination of the Earth                                   224

  62. The divisions of the globe. Longitudes and latitudes       226

  63. To find the long and short months                          230

  64. The Full Moon slowly rises                                 234

  65. The Moon viewed with the unaided eye                       236

  66. The Man's head in the Moon                                 237

  67. Woman's head in the Moon                                   238

  68. The kiss in the Moon                                       239

  69. Photograph of the Moon                                     240

  70. The Moon's Phases                                          241

  71. Map of the Moon                                            247

  72. The Lunar Apennines                                        251

  73. Flammarion's Lunar Ring                                    253

  74. Lunar landscape with the Earth in the sky                  254

  75. Battle between the Medes and Lydians arrested by an
        Eclipse of the Sun                                       266

  76. Eclipse of the Moon at Laos (February 27, 1877)            269

  77. The path of the Eclipse of May 28, 1900                    273

  78. Total eclipse of the Sun, May 28, 1900, as observed
        from Elche (Spain)                                       281

  79. The Eclipse of May 28, 1900, as photographed by
        King Alfonso XIII, at Madrid                             285

  80. Measurement of Angles                                      289

  81. Division of the Circumference into 360 degrees             291

  82. Measurement of the distance of the Moon                    292

  83. Measurement of the distance of the Sun                     297

  84. Small apparent ellipses described by the stars as a
        result of the annual displacement of the Earth           306




INTRODUCTION


The Science of Astronomy is sublime and beautiful. Noble, elevating,
consoling, divine, it gives us wings, and bears us through Infinitude.
In these ethereal regions all is pure, luminous, and splendid. Dreams of
the Ideal, even of the Inaccessible, weave their subtle spells upon us.
The imagination soars aloft, and aspires to the sources of Eternal
Beauty.

What greater delight can be conceived, on a fine spring evening, at the
hour when the crescent moon is shining in the West amid the last glimmer
of twilight, than the contemplation of that grand and silent spectacle
of the stars stepping forth in sequence in the vast Heavens? All sounds
of life die out upon the earth, the last notes of the sleepy birds have
sunk away, the Angelus of the church hard by has rung the close of day.
But if life is arrested around us, we may seek it in the Heavens. These
incandescing orbs are so many points of interrogation suspended above
our heads in the inaccessible depths of space.... Gradually they
multiply. There is Venus, the white star of the shepherd. There Mars,
the little celestial world so near our own. There the giant Jupiter.
The seven stars of the Great Bear seem to point out the pole, while they
slowly revolve around it.... What is this nebulous light that blanches
the darkness of the heavens, and traverses the constellations like a
celestial path? It is the Galaxy, the Milky Way, composed of millions on
millions of suns!... The darkness is profound, the abyss immense....
See! Yonder a shooting star glides silently across the sky, and
disappears!...

Who can remain insensible to this magic spectacle of the starry Heavens?
Where is the mind that is not attracted to these enigmas? The
intelligence of the amateur, the feminine, no less than the more
material and prosaic masculine mind, is well adapted to the
consideration of astronomical problems. Women, indeed, are naturally
predisposed to these contemplative studies. And the part they are called
to play in the education of our children is so vast, and so important,
that the elements of Astronomy might well be taught by the young mother
herself to the budding minds that are curious about every issue--whose
first impressions are so keen and so enduring.

Throughout the ages women have occupied themselves successfully with
Astronomy, not merely in its contemplative and descriptive, but also in
its mathematical aspects. Of such, the most illustrious was the
beautiful and learned Hypatia of Alexandria, born in the year 375 of our
era, public lecturer on geometry, algebra, and astronomy, and author of
three works of great importance. Then, in that age of ignorance and
fanaticism, she fell a victim to human stupidity and malice, was dragged
from her chariot while crossing the Cathedral Square, in March, 415,
stripped of her garments, stoned to death, and burned as a dishonored
witch!

Among the women inspired with a passion for the Heavens may be cited St.
Catherine of Alexandria, admired for her learning, her beauty and her
virtue. She was martyred in the reign of Maximinus Daza, about the year
312, and has given her name to one of the lunar rings.

Another celebrated female mathematician was Madame Hortense Lepaute,
born in 1723, who collaborated with Clairaut in the immense calculations
by which he predicted the return of Halley's Comet. "Madame Lepaute,"
wrote Lalande, "gave us such immense assistance that, without her, we
should never have ventured to undertake this enormous labor, in which it
was necessary to calculate for every degree, and for a hundred and fifty
years, the distances and forces of the planets acting by their
attraction on the comet. During more than six months, we calculated from
morning to night, sometimes even at table, and as the result of this
forced labor I contracted an illness that has changed my constitution
for life; but it was important to publish the result before the arrival
of the comet."

This extract will suffice for the appreciation of the scientific ardor
of Madame Lepaute. We are indebted to her for some considerable works.
Her husband was clock-maker to the King. "To her intellectual talents,"
says one of her biographers, "were joined all the qualities of the
heart. She was charming to a degree, with an elegant figure, a dainty
foot, and such a beautiful hand that Voiriot, the King's painter, who
had made a portrait of her, asked permission to copy it, in order to
preserve a model of the best in Nature." And then we are told that
