and closed his eyes--all but a little. Shif'less Sol shoved himself into
the corner, and blotted out his figure against the wall.

The door opened and Braxton Wyatt stepped in. What decree of fate had
caused him to be spying about that night, and what had caused him to find
the door of Paul's prison hut unfastened? He stood a few moments, trying
to accustom his eyes to the dark, and he plainly heard the regular
breathing of Paul on the bed of skins. Presently he saw the dim, recumbent
figure also. But he was still suspicious, and he took a step nearer. Then
a big form, projected somewhere from the dark, hurled itself upon him, and
he was thrown headlong to the earthen floor. Strong fingers compressed his
throat, and he gasped for breath.

"Here, Paul," said Sol, "tear off a piece o' that skin an' stuff it into
his mouth."

Paul, who had leaped to his feet, obeyed at once.

"An' cut off some stout strips o' the same with this knife o' mine," said
Shif'less Sol.

Paul again obeyed at once, and in three minutes Braxton Wyatt lay bound
and gagged on the earthen floor. Shif'less Sol Hyde and Paul Cotter stood
over him, and looked down at him, and even in the dark they saw the terror
of all things in his eyes.

"The Lord has been good to us to-night, Paul," said Shif'less Sol, with a
certain solemnity, "an' He wuz best o' all when He sent this hound here
a-spyin'."

"You know what he is?" said Paul.

"Ef I don't know, I've guessed."

Then the two stood silent for a little space, still gazing down at Braxton
Wyatt, bound and gagged. Paul had never before seen such stark dread in
the eyes of any one, and he shuddered. Despite himself, he felt a certain
amount of pity.

"He would have lured a boat-load of our people into the hands of the
savages," he said.

"I'll put this knife in his foul heart, Paul," said Shif'less Sol.

The bound figure quivered in its bonds, and the eyes became wild and
appealing.

"No, not that," replied Paul; "I couldn't bear to see anyone helpless put
to death."

"It was just the thought uv a moment," said Shif'less Sol. "We've got a
better use fur him. It's the one that the Lord sent him here fur. Now,
Paul, help me strip off his huntin' shirt."

They took off Braxton Wyatt's hunting shirt, leggins, and cap, and Paul
put them on, his own taking their place on the form of the gagged youth.

"Now, Paul," said Shif'less Sol, "you're Braxton Wyatt--for a little
while, at least, you've got to stand it--an' he's you. Help me roll him up
thar on your bed o' skins, an' he kin sleep in calm an' peace until they
bring him his breakfast in the mornin'."

They put Wyatt on the couch, and his eyes glared fiercely at them. He
struggled to speak, but they did not care to hear him. Sol took the
weapons from his belt and gave them to Paul.

"Good-night, Braxton," said Shif'less Sol pleasantly. "Fine dreams to you.
We're glad you came. You happened in jest in time."

Wyatt quivered convulsively on his bed of skins. Paul was filled with
repugnance, but he would not exult. His nature would not permit him.
Shif'less Sol opened the door, and the two stepped out into the open air
and a dark night. No one was about, and the shiftless one deliberately
fastened the doors on the outside in the usual manner. Then he and Paul
strolled away through the village.

"Remember that you are Braxton Wyatt," whispered Shif'less Sol. "Walk ez
near like him ez you kin. You've seen him often enough to know."

The two sauntered lazily forward. An old squaw, crouched by a low and
smoking fire, gave one glance at them, but no more. She went on dreaming
of the days when she was young, and when the braves fought for her. A
mangy cur barked once, and then lay down again at the foot of a deer-skin
lodge. A warrior, smoking a pipe in his own doorway, looked up, but saw
nothing unusual, and then looked down again.

The coolness of Shif'less Sol was something wonderful to see. He merely
loafed along, as if he had no object in the world but to pass away the
time, and there was nothing in the course he chose to indicate that he
meant to reach the forest. Now and then he spoke apparently casual words
to Paul, and the boy, in the faint light, wearing Braxton Wyatt's clothes,
might easily pass for Braxton Wyatt himself, even to the keen eyes of the
Shawnees.

Presently they reached the northern end of the village, the one nearest to
the forest, and it was here that Shif'less Sol intended to make the
escape. Paul kept close to him, and he noticed with joy that all the time
the light, already faint, was growing fainter. The friendly forest seemed
to curve very near. Paul's heart throbbed with painful violence.

Shif'less Sol passed the last wigwam, and he took a step into the open
space that divided them from the forest. Paul stepped with him, but a
gaunt and weazened figure rose up in their path. It was that of the old
squaw who wished a new son, and she stared for a few moments at the
clothes of Braxton Wyatt, and the figure within them. Then she knew, and
she uttered a shrill cry that was at once a lament and a warning. At the
same time she flung her arms around Paul in a gesture that was intended
alike for affection and detention.

"Run, Paul, run!" exclaimed Shif'less Sol.

Paul attempted to throw off the old woman, but she clung to him like a
wild cat, showing marvelous strength and tenacity for one so little and
weazened and old. Shif'less Sol saw the difficulty and, seizing her in his
powerful grasp, tore her loose.

"Don't hurt her, Sol!" cried Paul.

Shif'less Sol understood, and he cast her from them, but not with
violence. Then the two ran with utmost speed and desperate need toward the
forest, because the village behind them was up and alive. Lights flared,
dogs barked, men shouted, and before the friendly trees were reached
rifles began to crack.

"Jumpin' Jehoshaphat!" cried Shif'less Sol, as a bullet whistled past his
ear. "Ef that don't put life into a tired man, I don't know what will."

He ran with amazing swiftness, and Paul, light-footed, kept beside him.
But the alert Shawnee warriors, ever quick to answer an alarm, were
already in fleet pursuit, and only the darkness kept their bullets from
striking true. Paul looked back once--even in the moment of haste and
danger he could not help it--and he saw three warriors in advance of the
others, coming so fast that they must overtake them. He and Sol might beat
them off, but one cannot fight well and at the same time escape from a
multitude. His heart sank. He would be recaptured, and with him the
gallant Shif'less Sol.

Flashes of fire suddenly appeared in the forest toward which they ran, and
death cries came from the two warriors who pursued. Shif'less Sol uttered
an exultant gasp.

"The boys!" he said. "They're thar in the woods, a-helpin'."

Daunted by the sudden covering fire, the pursuing mob fell back for a few
moments, and the two fugitives plunged into the deep and friendly shadows
of the woods. Three figures, all carrying smoking rifles, rose up to meet
them. The figures were those of Henry Ware, Tom Ross, and Jim Hart. Henry
reached out his hand and gave Paul's a strong and joyous grasp.

"Well, Sol has brought you!" he said.

"But Sol's not goin' to stop runnin' yet for a long time, tired ez he is,"
gasped the shiftless one.

"Good advice," said Henry, laughing low, and without another word the five
ran swiftly and steadily northward through the deep woods. Henry had on
his shoulder an extra rifle, which he had brought for Paul, so confident
was he that Sol would save him; but he said nothing about it for the
present, preferring to carry the added weight himself. They heard behind
them two or three times the long-drawn, terrible cry with which Paul was
so familiar, but it did not now send any quiver through him. He was with
the ever-gallant comrades who had come for him, and he was ready to defy
any danger.

Henry Ware, after a while, stopped very suddenly, and the others stopped
with him.

"I think we'd better turn here," he said, unconsciously assuming his
natural position of leader. "It's not worth while to run ourselves to
death. What we've got to do is to hide."

"Them's blessed words!" gasped Shif'less Sol. "I wuz never so tired in all
my born days. Seems to me I've been chased by Shawnees all over this here
continent of North Ameriky!"

Paul laughed low, from pure pleasure--pleasure at his escape and pleasure
in the courage, loyalty, and skill of his comrades.

"You may be tired, Sol," he said, "but there was never a braver man than
you."

"It ain't bravery," protested the shiftless one. "I get into these things
afore I know it, an' then I've got to kick like a mule to get out o' 'em."

But Paul merely laughed low again.

Henry turned from the north to the west, and led now at a pace that was
little more than a walk. Paul and Sol drew deep breaths, as they felt the
heavenly air flowing back into their lungs and the spring returning to
their muscles. They went in Indian file, five dusky figures in the shadow,
a faint moonlight touching them but wanly, and all silent. Thus they
marched until past midnight, and they heard nothing behind them. Then
their leader stopped, and the others, without a word, stopped with him.

"I think we've shaken 'em off," said Henry, "and we'd better rest and
sleep. Then we can make up our plans."

"Good enough," said Shif'less Sol. "An' ef any man wakes me up afore next
week, I'll hev his scalp."

He sank down at once in his buckskins on a particularly soft piece of
turf, and in an incredibly brief space of time he was sound asleep. Jim
Hart, doubling up his long, thin figure like a jackknife, imitated him,
and Paul was not long in following them to slumberland. Only Henry and
Ross remained awake and watchful, and by and by the moonlight came out and
silvered their keen and anxious faces.




CHAPTER X

THE ISLAND IN THE LAKE


When Paul awoke the others were munching the usual breakfast of dried
venison, and Henry handed him a piece, which he ate voraciously. Henry was
sitting on the ground, with his back against a fallen log, and he regarded
Paul contemplatively.

"Paul," he said, in the dryest possible tones, "I don't see how you could
have been so hard-hearted."

Paul looked at him, startled. "Why, what do you mean?"

"To tear yourself away, as you did, from a loving father and mother. Why,
Sol, here, tells me that you actually threw your mother from you."

"Truth, Gospel truth," put in Shif'less Sol. "I never seen sech a cruel,
keerless person. He gives her jest one fling into the south, an' then he
bolts off into the north, like an arrow out o' the bow. I follows him
lickety-split to bring him back, but he runs so fast I can't ketch him."

Paul smiled.

"I've one father and mother already," he said, "and so I have no use for
two. Rather than cause embarrassment, I came away as quickly as I could."

"You did come fast," said Henry dryly.

"It was mighty fine of all of you to come after me," said Paul earnestly,
"and to risk your lives to save me from the Shawnees. But I knew you'd do
it."

"Uv course," said Tom Ross simply. "The rest uv our party would hev come,
too, but they were needed back thar in Kentucky. Besides, we could spare
'em, ez it took cunnin' an' not numbers to do what we had to do."

"What's our next step?" asked Paul, who was in the highest of spirits--his
imagination, with its usual vivid rebound, now painted everything in
glowing colors.

"We are going northward," said Henry.

"Northward?"

"Yes, it's necessary. There's some great movement on foot among the
tribes. It's not the Shawnees alone, but the Miamis and Wyandots and
others as well, though the Shawnees are leaders. War belts are passing
between all the tribes, and we think they are joining together to destroy
all the white settlements in Kentucky."

"An' some renegades are helpin' 'em," said Tom Ross. "They may hev better
luck than they did when they attacked Wareville."

"Yes, an' there's Braxton Wyatt," said Shif'less Sol sorrowfully, "He's
cunnin' an' revengeful, an' he'll do us a power o' harm. Paul, you ought
to a-let me put a knife in atween his ribs when I had the chance. I might
a-saved some good lives an' a power o' sufferin'."

Paul did not reply, but he was not sorry that he had interfered. He could
not see a bound youth killed.

"I think we'd better be goin' now," said Tom Ross. "We've got to keep to
the north, to throw the Shawnees off the track, an' then we'll come back
an' spy on 'em."

"An' me with only ten hours o' rest got to git up an' start to runnin'
ag'in," said Shif'less Sol plaintively.

"Wa'al, no, you needn't run," said Tom Ross, grinning. "You can jest walk
for about forty hours without stoppin'!"

Shif'less Sol heaved a deep sigh, but made ready. Jim Hart undoubled
himself, cracked his joints, and said deliberately:

"Ef I wuz ez lazy ez Shif'less Sol Hyde, I'd a-stayed back thar in the
East, whar a feller might jest sleep hisself to death, an' no Injuns to
torment him."

"Ef I wuz es mean an' onchristian ez Jim Hart, I'd go an' join Braxton
Wyatt an' become a renegade myself," rejoined Shif'less Sol.

Paul smiled. He enjoyed the little spats of Sol and Jim, but he knew that
the two were as true as steel, and the best of friends to each other.
Moreover, he was about to take up again the mission which Fate seemed so
constantly to interrupt. The scene of action had been shifted to the great
northern woods, and it now seemed to Paul that perhaps Fortune had been
kind in bringing him there. If a league of the tribes were being attempted
for a new attack upon the settlements, the powder for Marlowe might well
rest, for the present, in its hiding-place in the woods, while his
comrades and he undertook more important action elsewhere.

Before they started, Henry and Ross took stock of their ammunition, of
which they had a plentiful supply, replenished more than once from their
enemies, and also gave an abundance to Paul. The extra rifle given to him,
