thought she must be a foreigner. Her way of speaking, her whole
appearance had something unusual about it. Perhaps some one had taken
pity on her, and had lent her clothes because she was so good. So she
thanked Elsli and accepted her offer. Without hesitation Elsli set to
work, and it was easy to see that it was not for the first time. In a
trice she had freed Lenchen from her shell, and dressed her in a little
jacket that hung on the wall. Then she took the stiff frock upon her arm
and went with the children into the kitchen. She drew water in a wooden
bucket, and put the two pairs of little feet to soak, after removing the
dirty shoes and socks. When they were clean and dried, she sent the
children back into the other room, while she washed out the dress. They
went very obediently, but Lucas called back to her to hurry and come to
them as soon as the washing was done. The other boys now came into the
kitchen, desirous to scrape acquaintance with this novel visitor.

When Tolf saw how much at home the stranger seemed to be in her work, he
said:--

"Get our supper ready too, won't you? If you don't, we shall have to
wait till father comes home; and he doesn't know how to cook very well,
either."

"Yes," chimed in Heini; "and once he fell asleep when he was cooking, he
was so tired; and the potatoes were all burned up."

"Yes, and then father has to go fishing after supper," continued Tolf;
"every day, no matter how tired he is, he takes the boat and goes to
catch fish to sell."

"And we've got to learn to fish too," interrupted Heini; "father says
the oars are too heavy for us now, but by and by we shall be strong
enough, and we must all work as hard as we can, or else we shall have
nothing to eat, and our house will be taken away from us."

These words roused many old memories in Elsli; how well she knew how it
all was. It seemed to her as if she were at home with her father again,
and saw his tired face, and heard him say:--

"If we can only manage so that we shall not have to give up our house!"

When Elsli had finished the washing, she went to the mother's bedside,
and asked if she were willing that she should get the supper ready, and
if she would tell her what to do. The eyes of the sick woman glowed with
pleasure.

"Oh!" she cried, "how kind you are! will you really do that for us?" and
she seized Elsli's hand, and grasped it heartily. Then she told her what
she wished to have done. It was simple enough; Elsli had done the same
at home a hundred times. The boys ran into the kitchen with her.

"I know of something new for you to do," she said, presently. "How old
are you?"

"I am seven," "I am eight," they answered both at once; and Elsli
said:--

"Well, you are old enough. When I was eight I had to cook the potatoes
all by myself. Now I will show you how to do it, if you like, and then
when your father comes home tired, you can say, 'Sit down, dear father,
and eat your supper; it is all ready.'"

The boys were very much pleased with this proposition, and all eagerness
to begin. Elsli showed them how to make the fire with small bits of dry
wood at first, and to put the larger sticks on afterwards. Then the
potatoes must be washed very clean, and put into the pot, and a very
little water poured upon them. The boys worked away merrily, and
meanwhile Elsli fetched the sour milk. The boys watched the pot
unceasingly, but when the potatoes began to burst apart, first one and
then another, they were frightened and called aloud for Elsli. She
speedily reassured them, explaining that the bursting only meant that
they were good potatoes and that they were done. Then she threw away the
water that remained in the pot, and poured the potatoes out into a big
round dish. She carried the plates into the other room, and made the
table ready against the father's arrival.

The old grandfather, who had watched the proceedings from his corner,
called Elsli to him.

"You are good, and very handy too," he said; "can you come again
to-morrow?"

Elsli promised to come.

"Look, I am lame," he went on, "and ever since my daughter has been
sick, I have not been able to get out into the sun, because there is no
one for me to lean on; the children are too little. Will you help me
to-morrow to get out-of-doors?"

She promised that too. But now it was time for her to go; she must not
be away when the supper-bell rang. The mother thanked her again and
again, and the children begged her to stay longer. As she went out of
the house she saw a man just taking from his shoulder a shovel, which he
placed against the house. Elsli recognized him at once as the weary
laborer whom she had seen before, and who had reminded her of her
father. And as he stood there now, with his two boys affectionately
clinging to his sides, and looked sadly yet kindly at her, he seemed
still more to resemble her father, and she could not keep the tears from
her eyes. She could scarcely refrain from sobbing, so clearly did she
see the anxiety and trouble that were in his heart, the same that
weighed down her own father at home. She held her hand to him, he
pressed it kindly, and she was gone.

When the father entered the cottage, the children all began talking at
once, so that he could not understand a word they said. He went to the
bedside, and asked his wife for an explanation. She told him just what
had happened, and of her wonder that a child so well dressed and with
such an air of refinement should have been able to do that kind of work
for poor people like themselves, and she didn't know where she could
have come from; but the father said simply, "Our Heavenly Father has
taken pity on our misery, and has sent a kind angel to help us." And he
thought of the tears of pity that he had seen in Elsli's eyes.

Elsli ran as fast as she could along the path to the linden tree and up
into the garden. The supper-bell rang just as she reached the house, and
the different members of the household gathered together from their
different occupations. No one asked any questions of Elsli. She meant,
as soon as she could find a good opportunity, to ask Aunt Clarissa's
leave to continue her visits to the fisherman's family. She did not
doubt that she should be allowed to help them; they were so much in
need of help.

When she left the cottage, she had asked the woman if she should not
send a doctor to her; but the answer was that the best medicine would be
her own return. The poor mother had been constantly prevented from
getting well by trying to work before she was strong enough, and yet
there was so much to be done that it was hard for her to keep her bed.
If she could lie still for one week only, she would be well again.

So Elsli had decided that she could not help going again, and she was
glad to go. It was a real pleasure to her to feel that she could be of
use, that some one really needed her.

The next afternoon Elsli did not wait a moment on the seat by the river.
As soon as the children had scattered to their different amusements she
started down to the lindens, and she did not stop till she reached the
little house among the willows. All four children were standing in the
door-way awaiting her. They cried out with joy when they espied her, and
ran to meet her, and when she took little Lenchen up in her arms, the
child almost choked her in her close embrace. The boys too were so glad
to see her, and pressed so near her side, that she began to feel as if
she were surrounded by a tenderness and love such as she had never
before received; the poor, lonely little girl!

The mother's welcome was warm, and the grandfather raised both arms in
the air and cried out:--

"God be praised! I had begun to think that there was no chance for
to-day!"

He asked her to help him go directly out into the sun; for it was
pleasant and warm outside, but within he sat chilly all day long. It
was no easy task, for the old man was heavy, and leaned upon her so that
she could scarcely stand under his weight, but at last they struggled
out to where the sun shone pleasantly on the water, and gilded the
trunks of the old willows with his beams. Here the old man sat down, and
asked Elsli to sit by him. She did so, and he went on talking.

"Yes," he said, "that is the same old Rhine! How I have always loved it!
But it will soon be all over with me; I shall not be long here to see
it; I must go, and where? But it's foolish to talk this way to you; you
are too young to understand. Your life is just beginning. Are you not
happy, and glad to think that you can stay here by this beautiful water
for a long, long time to come?"

"I don't think of that when I look at the river," said Elsli. "I think
of the beautiful stream that flows through Paradise, and of the
happiness of those who live there."

"What do you say! How can you know anything about that?" said the old
man, looking at Elsli in amazement.

"I know what is said about it in a beautiful song; I have known it a
long time. One of my friends taught it to me, and she has gone there
already. Shall I repeat it to you?"

The old man nodded assent, and Elsli was glad to repeat the song again
to some one who must be interested to hear it, since he was so soon
going there himself, he said. She began directly, and, as the old man
listened with great attention, she kept on to the end. He shook his head
several times during the recitation, and, when it was finished, he
said:--

"That will not be for me."

Elsli was very much startled. "But why not, why not?" she asked,
anxiously. "It is certainly for every one; we must all die some time,
and then how happy we shall be, when we go there."

He shook his head again.

"Not for me; it is only for the good." He said no more for some minutes,
and Elsli sat in silence. At last he spoke again.

"I could tell you something, but I don't think you would understand me.
If a man doesn't get along well in life, and he thinks that God can help
him but does not, he says to himself that there's no use in praying, and
he must help himself as he can; and so he grows reckless and does things
that are wrong and that he shouldn't do; then when he comes to die, and
he has not thought for a long time anything about God and Heaven, then
the door of Paradise does not open to him, and he cannot go in to that
happy life. But why do I talk to you of this? You cannot understand."

But Elsli did understand partly, for she remembered hearing her
step-mother once say it was easy enough for those to pray who had all
they wanted, for they could see that God helped them; but he had never
helped her. And Elsli could hear again the sorrowful tones of her
father's voice as he answered:--

"If we think that, it will be worse and worse for us; that is not the
right way to think."

These thoughts made Elsli very sad; but presently she roused herself and
said she would go into the house and see if she could do something for
the sick woman; she would come back by and by, and help him into the
house again. The old man would not let her go, however; he drew her down
again upon the fallen tree on which he was sitting.

"No, no; stay here," he said. "Let us talk a little more; you are wise
for your age. Don't you know some other song? I should like to hear
another."

Yes; Elsli knew many others; but she could not tell which it would be
best to repeat now. After thinking awhile, she suddenly looked up
brightly and said, "I remember one now that perhaps you will like. Shall
I say it?" and as her companion nodded assent, she went on:--

    "The night draws on--sped is my day;
      I know my end is near.
     I raise my trembling hands to pray;
      The grave's dark road I fear.

    "O God! thou art my only light!
       Be thou my guiding star!
     Hide all my trespasses from sight;
      Thy mercies endless are.

    "Look down upon me, Lord! I bow,
       Repenting of my sin,
     Oh! ope the gates of heaven now,
      And bid me enter in."

The old man was silent. In a few moments Elsli arose, and the
grandfather rose also, to go back with her into the house. While with
slow and painful steps they regained the door, he said, thoughtfully:--

"Yes; I heard that long ago when I went to church. Then, it is still
true! If I could only find my way there! Will you come to-morrow, my
child, and say those verses again?"

Elsli promised heartily. She was glad that she had thought of the right
words to help the poor old man. She set to work at once in the house,
and did not rest till she had put to rights everything that could make
the mother uneasy, and had made the sick woman and the children orderly
and comfortable. The boys were eager to have her come into the kitchen,
to see how well they remembered their yesterday's lesson. Everything
went right; and as she was leaving the house she again met the father
coming in, and again received from him the friendly yet depressed
greeting which reminded her of her own father. And when the four
children seized and held her, declaring that she should not leave them,
a rare smile lighted up his weary face for a moment, and he stretched
out his hand to her with such a tender look of love as she had never in
her life received from any one but her father.

And this was the story of one day after another for many succeeding
days. Elsli was living in quite another world from that in which the
other children were amusing themselves at Rosemount. A new life had come
to her, and she looked so happy always and so changed that Fred one day
called out:--

"What makes you so happy, Elsli? You look as if you had just caught two
gold beetles!"

Elsli had found a place in the world, and no longer felt herself
useless and superfluous. She knew that early every morning the four
children began to count the hours till she should come. The sick mother
longed for her to appear and with her skilful hands bring neatness and
comfort into her room. The grandfather depended on her help to take his
daily airing, and, more than that, he loved the songs and hymns and
gentle talk, with which Elsli brightened an hour of his lonely day. And
every day Elsli could see more clearly how the father grew happier in
his home-coming, now that he found the house-work done and a peaceful
evening of rest before him.

Only one thing troubled her. She had not found a chance to talk with
Aunt Clarissa, and these daily visits were still a secret. And what if
Mrs. Stanhope should disapprove them! This thought gave her great
anxiety. She knew that there was nothing wrong about them, but she was
not sure that they would be allowed. For all that, she could not give
them up. She had made many attempts to tell Aunt Clarissa, but there was
a great deal going on in the house, and every time she spoke she was
told that she must wait till another time. One day she determined to
make another effort to get a few minutes' attention from Aunt Clarissa
in the evening, and then she would tell her the whole story. After
supper she went to her and asked whether she might tell her something
before they went out on the terrace with the others. Aunt Clarissa asked
how long it would take, for Mrs. Stanhope wished them all to go out
together in a few minutes. Elsli answered that it would take some time
to tell it all, but that it was very important.

"Then, dear," said Aunt Clarissa, "we shall have to wait till some
other time; but I will call you to come to me in my room as soon as I
can find a quiet time. There is no hurry, I'm sure."

So it was put off again.




CHAPTER V.

GREAT PREPARATIONS.


The day had come for the expedition to Cologne. It was a perfect day.
The sky was blue and the sun shone bright. The children had a delightful
trip, and the zooelogical garden was beyond all expectation interesting.
Nevertheless, when they went to bed that night, each was a little
dissatisfied on looking back over the day. Each thought:--

"It was splendid! but what a shame!"

Yet each was thinking of a different disappointment.

When they went on board the steamboat in the morning, Mrs. Stanhope
said:--

"Now, all come and sit here quietly with me; there are so many
passengers to-day that it will not do for you to be running about."

This prevented Oscar from carrying out his plan of going through the
crowd, to find as many fellow-countrymen as he could, whom he could
invite to his great Festival.

Emma had cherished a hope that by some unexpected arrangement it would
turn out that the boat would stop for a little while in sight of the
