any planet can be located, at any time of the year, and at any point in
its course about the heavens. But it may turn out that the place
occupied by the planet is too near the sun to render it easily, or at
all, visible. Such a case can be recognized, either from a general
knowledge of the location of the constellations at various seasons, or
with the aid of the Nautical Almanac, where at the beginning of each set
of monthly tables in the calendar the sun's right ascension and
declination will be found. In locating the sun, if you find that its
right ascension differs by less than an hour, one way or the other, from
that of the planet sought, it is useless to look for the latter. If the
planet is situated west of the sun--to the right on the chart--then it
is to be looked for in the east before sunrise. But if it is east of the
sun--to the left on the chart--then you must seek it in the west after
sunset.

For instance, I look for the planet Mercury on October 12, 1901. I find
its R.A. to be 14 h. 40 m. and its Dec. 18 deg. 36 min. Looking at the
sun's place for October 12th, I find it to be R.A. 13 h. 8 m. and Dec.
7 deg. 14 min. Placing them both on Chart No. 4, I discover that Mercury
is well to the east, or left hand of the sun, and will consequently be
visible in the western sky after sundown.

Additional guidance will be found by noting the following facts about
the charts:

The meridian (the north and south line) runs through the middle of Chart
No. 1 between 11 and 12 o'clock P.M. on November 1st, between 9 and 10
o'clock P.M. on December 1st, and between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on
January 1st.

The meridian runs through the middle of Chart No. 2 between 11 and 12
o'clock P.M. on January 1st, between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on February
1st, and between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on March 1st.

The meridian runs through the middle of Chart No. 3 between 11 and 12
o'clock P.M. on March 1st, between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on April 1st,
and between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on May 1st.

The meridian runs through the middle of Chart No. 4 between 11 and 12
o'clock P.M. on May 1st, between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on June 1st, and
between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on July 1st.

The meridian runs through the middle of Chart No. 5 between 11 and 12
o'clock P.M. on July 1st, between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on August 1st,
and between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on September 1st.

The meridian runs through the middle of Chart No. 6 between 11 and 12
o'clock P.M. on September 1st, between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on October
1st, and between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on November 1st.

Note well, also, these particulars about the charts: Chart No. 1
includes the first four hours of right ascension, from 0 h. to 4 h.
inclusive; Chart No. 2 includes 4 h. to 8 h.; Chart No. 3, 8 h. to 12
h.; Chart No. 4, 12 h. to 16 h.; Chart No. 5, 16 h. to 20 h.; and Chart
No. 6, 20 h. to 24 h., which completes the circuit. In the first three
charts the line of 0 deg., or the equator, is found near the bottom, and in
the last three near the top. This is a matter of convenience in
arrangement, based upon the fact that the ecliptic, which, and not the
equator, marks the center of the zodiac, indicates the position of the
tracks of the planets among the stars; and the ecliptic, being inclined
23 deg. to the plane of the equator, lies half to the north and half to the
south of the latter.

Those who, after all, may not care to consult the ephemeris in order to
find the planets, may be able to locate them, simply from a knowledge of
their situation among the constellations. Some ordinary almanacs tell in
what constellations the principal planets are to be found at various
times of the year. Having once found them in this way, it is
comparatively easy to keep track of them thereafter through a general
knowledge of their movements. Jupiter, for instance, requiring a period
of nearly twelve years to make a single journey around the sun, moves
about 30 deg. eastward among the stars every year. The zodiacal
constellations are roughly about 30 deg. in length, and as Jupiter was in
Sagittarius in 1901, he will be in Capricornus in 1902. Saturn,
requiring nearly thirty years for a revolution around the sun, moves
only between 12 deg. and 13 deg. eastward every year, and, being in
conjunction with Jupiter in Sagittarius in 1901, does not get beyond the
border of that constellation in 1902.

Jupiter having been in opposition to the sun June 30, 1901, will be
similarly placed early in August, 1902, the time from one opposition of
Jupiter to the next being 399 days.

Saturn passes from one opposition to the next in 378 days, so that
having been in that position July 5, 1901, it reaches it again about
July 18, 1902.

Mars requires about 687 days to complete a revolution, and comes into
conjunction with the earth, or opposition to the sun--the best position
for observation--on the average once every 780 days. Mars was in
opposition near the end of February, 1901, and some of its future
oppositions will be in March, 1903; May, 1905; July, 1907; and
September, 1909. The oppositions of 1907 and 1909 will be unusually
favorable ones, for they will occur when the planet is comparatively
near the earth. When a planet is in opposition to the sun it is on the
meridian, the north and south line, at midnight.

Mercury and Venus being nearer the sun than the earth is, can never be
seen very far from the place of the sun itself. Venus recedes much
farther from the solar orb than Mercury does, but both are visible only
in the sunset or the sunrise sky. All almanacs tell at what times these
planets play their respective roles as morning or as evening stars. In
the case of Mercury about 116 days on the average elapse between its
reappearances; in the case of Venus, about 584 days. The latter, for
instance, having become an evening star at the end of April, 1901, will
become an evening star again in December, 1902.

With the aid of the Nautical Almanac and the charts the amateur will
find no difficulty, after a little practise, in keeping track of any of
the planets.

In the back part of the Nautical Almanac will be found two pages headed
"Phenomena: Planetary Configurations." With the aid of these the student
can determine the position of the planets with respect to the sun and
the moon, and with respect to one another. The meaning of the various
symbols used in the tables will be found explained on a page facing the
calendar at the beginning of the book. From these tables, among other
things, the times of greatest elongation from the sun of the planets
Mercury and Venus can be found.

It may be added that only bright stars, and stars easily seen, are
included in the charts, and there will be no danger of mistaking any of
these stars for a planet, if the observer first carefully learns to
recognize their configurations. Neither Mars, Jupiter, nor Saturn ever
appears as faint as any of the stars, except those of the first
magnitude, included in the charts. Uranus and Neptune being invisible to
the naked eye--Uranus can occasionally be just glimpsed by a keen
eye--are too faint to be found without the aid of more effective
appliances.




INDEX


Agassiz, Alexander, on deep-sea animals, 63.

Asteroids, the, 16, 129.
  brightness of, 130.
  imaginary adventures on, 146.
  life on, 144.
  number of, known, 129.
  orbits of, 132.
  origin of, 138, 143.
  size of, 129.

Aristarchus, lunar crater, 226.

Atmosphere, importance of, 20.


Bailey, Solon I., on oppositions of Eros, 134.

Barnard, E.E., discovers fifth satellite of Jupiter, 181.
  measures asteroids, 129.
  on Saturn's rings, 205.

Belopolski, on rotation of Venus, 79.


Ceres, an asteroid, 129, 130.

Clefts in the moon, 226.

Copernicus, lunar crater, 223, 242.


Darwin, George H., on Jupiter and Saturn, 206.
  on origin of moon, 235.
  theory of tidal friction, 32.

Davy, Sir Humphry, on Saturn, 190.

Dawes sees canals on Mars, 93.

Deimos, satellite of Mars, 125.

Denning, W.F., description of Jupiter, 175.

De Vico on rotation of Venus, 76.

Dewar, James, discovers free hydrogen in air, 232.

De Witt discovers Eros, 133.

Dick, Thomas, on Saturn, 201.

Douglass, A.E., sees Mars's canals, 92.
  sees clouds in Mars, 119.

Doppler's principle, 79, 200.


Earth and moon's orbit, 217.
  birth of moon from, 236.
  change of distance from sun, 27.
  less advanced than Mars, 89.
  older than Venus, 58.
  seen from Mercury, 41.
  seen from Venus, 69-71, 75.
  seen from moon, 214.

Earth, similarity to Venus, 46.
  supposed signals to and from Mars, 110.

Elger, T.G., on cracks in moon, 227.
  on Tycho's rays, 246.

Ephemeris, how to use, 260, 264.

Eros, an asteroid, 131-134, 136, 137.


Flammarion, C., observes Venus's atmosphere, 56.
  on plurality of worlds, 8.

Forbes, Prof. George, on ultra-Neptunian planet, 210.


Galileo on lunar world, 215.

Gravity, as affecting life on planets, 20, 46.


Hall, Asaph, discovers Mars's moons, 90.

Herodotus, lunar crater, 227.

Herschel, Sir John, on Saturn, 185.

Holden, E.S., on photograph of lunar crater, 242.

Huggins on Mercury's atmosphere, 21.


Inhabitants of foreign planets, 1, 4, 5.

Interplanetary communication, 1, 3, 72, 110, 112.


Juno, an asteroid, 129.

Jupiter, cloudy aspect of, 165.
  density of, 162.
  distance of, 161.
  equatorial belts on, 165.
  future of, 180.
  gravity on, 162.
  great red spot on, 169.
  markings outside the belts, 168.
  and the nebular theory, 178.
  once a companion star, 179.
  polar compression of, 161.
  possibly yet incandescent, 177.
  question of a denser core, 176.
  resemblance of, to sun, 174.
  rotation of, 161, 173.
  satellites of, 166, 181.
  seen from satellites, 182.
  size of, 160.
  solar light and heat on, 182.
  south belt of, 172.
  surface conditions of, 163.
  theories about the red spot, 170.
  trade-winds and the belts of, 167.
  various rates of rotation of, 173.
  visibility of rotation of, 166.


Keeler, J.E., on Saturn's rings, 200.

Kepler, lunar crater, 223.

Kinetic theory of gases, 116.

Kirkwood, Daniel, on asteroids, 131.


Lagrange on Olbers's theory, 139.

Lick Observatory and Mars's canals, 92.

Life, a planetary phenomenon, 10.
  in sea depths, 62.
  on planets, 62, 63.
  prime requisites of, 64.
  resisting extreme cold, 123.
  universality of, 9.

Loewy and Puiseux, on lunar atmosphere, 248.
  on lunar "seas," 234.

Lowell, Percival, description of Mars, 108.
  on markings of Venus, 60.
  on Mercury's rotation, 33.
  on rotation of Venus, 77.
  sees Mars's canals, 92.
  theory of Martian canals, 101.

Lucian, on appearance of earth from moon, 213.

Lyman, C.S., observes Venus's atmosphere, 55.


