The Project Gutenberg EBook of Walter and the Wireless, by Sara Ware Bassett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Walter and the Wireless

Author: Sara Ware Bassett

Illustrator: William F. Stecher

Release Date: December 4, 2007 [EBook #23728]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WALTER AND THE WIRELESS ***




Produced by Sigal Alon, David T. Jones, La Monte H.P.
Yarroll and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







WALTER AND THE WIRELESS

By Sara Ware Bassett

_The Invention Series_


PAUL AND THE PRINTING PRESS
STEVE AND THE STEAM ENGINE
TED AND THE TELEPHONE
WALTER AND THE WIRELESS


[Illustration: "K Y W Chicago, Illinois. Stand by fifteen minutes
for----." FRONTISPIECE. _See page_ 208.]





The Invention Series

WALTER AND
THE WIRELESS

BY
SARA WARE BASSETT

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY
WILLIAM F. STECHER

BOSTON
LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY
1923


_Copyright, 1923_,
BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.

_All rights reserved_

Published March, 1923

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA



To
PAUL MARBLE
AND HIS COLLIE BOBS,
THIS BOOK IS AFFECTIONATELY
DEDICATED





CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                PAGE

    I HIS HIGHNESS                                        1

   II THE NEW JOB                                        17

  III WHAT WORRIED MRS. KING                             36

   IV WALTER MAKES HIS BOW TO HIS EMPLOYER               50

    V THE CONQUEST OF ACHILLES                           64

   VI HIS HIGHNESS IN A NEW ROLE                         75

  VII THE PURSUIT OF LOLA                                92

 VIII A BLUNDER AND WHAT CAME OF IT                     104

   IX MORE CLUES                                        116

    X BOB                                               127

   XI THE DECISION                                      138

  XII LESSONS                                           147

 XIII INFORMATION FROM A NEW SOURCE                     162

  XIV BOB AS PEDAGOGUE                                  169

   XV TIDINGS                                           183

  XVI MIRACLES                                          197

 XVII THE LAWS OF THE AIR                               210

XVIII THE NET TIGHTENS                                  228

  XIX WALTER STEPS INTO THE BREACH                      238

   XX THE RETURN OF THE WANDERERS                       248




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"K Y W CHICAGO, ILLINOIS. STAND BY FIFTEEN MINUTES
  FOR----"                                       _Frontispiece_

                                                          PAGE

THE TWO BOYS WOULD DISCUSS BOATS, FISHING AND
  KINDRED INTERESTS                                         76

"YOU WILL GET ALL THE WIRELESS COMING TO YOU,
  THAT'S ALL. TAKE IT FROM ME"                             154

CLEARLY AND EVENLY THE MESSAGE TICKED ITSELF OFF.
  THEN THERE WAS SILENCE                                   240




WALTER AND THE WIRELESS

CHAPTER I

HIS HIGHNESS


His Highness came by the nickname honestly enough and yet those who
heard it for the first time had difficulty in repressing a smile at
the incongruity of the title. In fact perhaps no term could have been
found that would have been less appropriate. For Walter King possessed
neither dignity of rank nor of stature. On the contrary he was a
short, snub-nosed boy of fifteen, the epitome of good humor and
democracy.

His hair was red and towsled, his face spangled with great golden
freckles which sea winds and sunshine had multiplied until there was
scarce room for another on his beaming countenance. Hands and arms
were freckled too, for when one lives in a bathing suit six months of
the year and is either in the water or on it most of the time the skin
fails to retain its pristine whiteness of hue. But His Highness did
not care a fig for that. He was far too busy baiting eel and lobster
traps, mending fish nets, untangling lines, and painting boats to give
a thought to his personal beauty.

Indeed his mother often bewailed the fact that he was not more
interested in his appearance and there were times when it seemed as if
she were right. Certainly when her son ambled home at dusk with every
rebellious hair standing upended upon his head and a string of
flounders dripping salt from the tips of their slimy tails she was
justified to a degree in wishing he had more regard for the niceties
of life.

"Look at the mess you're making!" she would pipe indignantly. "I've
just mopped this floor, Walter."

"You have? Now isn't that the dickens! Well, no matter, Ma; I'll swab
the place down again when I've finished cleaning these fish. They're
beauties, aren't they? A batch of them fried won't go bad for supper
to-night. I'm hungry as a bear. Shouldn't think I'd eaten anything in
ten years. Say, Ma, what do you s'pose? Dave Corbett was out in the
_Nancy_ three hours and never got a bite. What do you think of that?
The wind died down, his engine got stalled, and he and Hosey Talbot
had to row home from the Bell Reef Shoals. Haw, haw! Maybe I didn't
roar when I saw them come pulling in against the tide, mad as two
man-eating sharks. Fit to harpoon the first person they met, they
were. I sung out and asked them were they practicing for the Harvard
and Yale boat race and Dave was that peeved he shied an oarlock after
me. Haw, haw, haw!"

"You ought not to provoke Dave, Walter."

"Provoke him? But he was provoked already, Ma. There's no harm
putting an extra stick on the fire when it's burning, anyhow. Besides,
Dave is never in earnest when he bawls me out. He just likes to hear
himself scold."

"He has a terrible temper."

"Oh, I know half the town is scart to death of him. But he always will
take a jolly from me. We understand each other, Dave and I. Say, Ma,
these rubber boots leak. Did you know that? Yes, siree! They leak like
sieves. I might as well be without 'em."

Mrs. King sighed.

"I don't see," murmured she, "how you manage to go through everything
you have so quickly, Walter. Nothing you wear lasts you more than a
week."

"Oh, I say, make it a month. Do, now!"

He saw his mother smile faintly.

"Well, a month then."

"You couldn't stretch it to two?"

"Not possibly. Four weeks seems to be your limit."

The sharpness of her tone, however, had weakened.

"Four weeks, eh? I did think I'd had these rubber boots longer than
that. It is amazing how attached you can get to things even in a
little while."

Holding aloft the knife with which he was preparing to behead the
unlucky flounders, His Highness gazed reflectively down at his feet.

"It's awful that I have to keep having so many things, isn't it? I
hate to be costing you money all the time. Now if you'd only let me
ship for the Grand Banks when the _Katie B._ goes out----"

"Walter! What is the use of digging up that old bone again? I never
shall let you ship for the Grand Banks or any other Banks so long as I
live. We've had this out hundreds of times before. You know you and
Bob are all I've got in the world. Do you suppose I want you lost in a
fog and never heard from again?"

"Oh, Great Scott, Ma! They don't lose fishing boats now as they used
to. They carry wireless, and the fleet keeps in touch every minute."

"The dories have no wireless aboard them," observed Mrs. King grimly.

"I suppose not, no, probably they don't," His Highness admitted
reluctantly.

"Anyway, wireless or no wireless, you are not going on a fishing
cruise to the Grand Banks."

"I hear you, Ma," grinned the boy.

"There is plenty of work right here on the land if you're looking for
it. Why must you always be wanting to go to sea to earn money?"

"Faith, Mother, I don't know," laughed Walter. "I expect it's because
I see chores to do when I'm afloat that I can't see ashore. It is the
way I was born."

"A poor way."

"Maybe it is. At any rate I can't help it."

"I'm afraid you do not try to help it very hard."

The lad shrugged his shoulders.

"There's that chance you have to hire out at the Crowninshields' for
the summer."

"Those snobs."

"Beggars cannot be choosers. Besides, they may not be snobs at all.
What makes you think they are?"

"Oh, I don't mind the lugs they put on," protested Walter, evading the
issue. "I suppose all New York swells do that. It's what they want me
for that gets my goat." Again the knife he held was tragically
upraised. "How would you like to be nursemaid to six or eight
brainless little pups no bigger than rats? Not but what I like dogs.
I'd like nothing better than to own a fine dog of some spirit. But
those imitations! Why, before a week was out, I'd have their necks
wrung."

"Mr. Crowninshield promised to pay you well."

"What's money if all the kids in town are going to josh you?"

"Money is a good deal when you need it." His mother shook her head
gravely. "Have you ever considered how badly we are in want of money,
Walter?"

"What do you mean, Ma?" The boy wheeled about, startled.

"I haven't said anything about it, dear, because I could not bear to
have you boys bothered," was the quiet answer. "But lately things have
not been going well and I have been pretty much worried. The money
your Uncle Henry invested for us isn't paying any dividends; there
seems to be something the matter with the company's affairs. As for
your Uncle Mark Miller, I've heard nothing from him in months. His
ship was to put in at Shanghai for cargo and I ought to have had a
letter by now; but none has come and I am afraid something must be the
trouble. He is a good brother and never fails to send me money. I can
ill afford to be without help now when the mortgage is coming due and
I have so many bills to meet. It takes a deal of money to live
nowadays. You boys do not realize that."

"Why, I had no idea you were fussed, Mother, and I'm sure Bob hadn't
either," declared Walter soberly.

"Then I have done better than I thought I had," returned his mother,
with the shadow of a smile. "I wanted to keep it secret if I could."

"But you shouldn't have tried to keep it a secret, Mater dear," Walter
replied. "I'm sure we'd rather know--at least I would."

"But what use is it?"

"Use? Why, all the use in the world, Ma. I shall go ahead and take Mr.
Crowninshield's job for one thing."

"But you said----"

"Shucks! I was only fooling about the dogs, Mother. I shan't really
mind exercising and taking care of them at all. Of course, I won't
deny I'd rather they were Great Danes or police dogs; I'd even prefer
Airedales or Cockers. Still I suppose these little mopsey Pekingese
must have some brains or the Lord would not have made them. No doubt I
shall get used to them in time."

"It is only for the summer vacation anyway, you know," ventured his
mother. "The Crowninshields go back to New York in October."

"I certainly ought to be able to bear up a few months," laughed
Walter, with a ludicrously wry twist of his mouth. "I hate to think
you've been bothered and have been keeping it all to yourself."

"Misery does like company," Mrs. King returned with an unsteady laugh.
"I believe I feel better already for having told you. But you must not
worry, dear. We shall pull through all right, I guess. How I came to
speak of it I don't know. It was only that it seemed such a pity to
toss the Crowninshield offer aside without even considering it. Nobody
knows where it might end. The village people say Mr. Crowninshield is
a very generous man, especially if he takes a fancy to anybody."

"But he may not take a fancy to me."

"He must have done so already to be asking you to help with the dogs."

"Nonsense, Ma! Did you think Mr. Crowninshield picked me out himself?
Why, he's never laid eyes on me. That great privilege is still in
store for him. No, he simply told Jerry Thomas, the caretaker, to find
somebody for the job before the family arrived. He doesn't care a darn
who it is so long as he has a person who can be trusted with his
priceless pups. Why, I heard the other day that a dealer from New York
had offered five thousand dollars for the smallest one."

"Walter!"

"Straight goods!"

"Five thousand dollars for a dog!" gasped Mrs. King.

Her son chuckled at her incredulity.

"Sure!"

"But it's a fortune," murmured she. "I had no idea there was a dog on
earth worth that much."

"All of them are not."

"But five thousand dollars!" she repeated. "Why, Walter, I wouldn't
have you responsible for a creature like that for anything in the
world. You might as well attempt to be custodian of a lot of gold
bonds. I shouldn't have a happy moment or sleep a wink thinking of it.
Suppose some of the little wretches were to run away and get lost? Or
suppose they were to be stolen? Or they might get sick and die on your
hands."

"That is why they want a responsible person to keep an eye on them."

His Highness squared his shoulders and threw out his chest.

"But you are not a responsible person," burst out Mrs. King with
unflattering candor.

"Mother!"

"Well--are you?" she insisted.

The boy's figure shriveled.

"No," he confessed frankly, "I'm afraid I'm not."

