town during the time of the great war. The garrison was a large one,
the channel cruisers often anchored under the guns of the castle, and
from the top of the hills upon a clear day for months a keen lookout
was kept for the appearance from the port of Boulogne of the
expedition Napoleon had gathered there for the invasion of England.

The white sails of the English cruisers as they sailed up or down the
channel were clearly visible, and occasionally a privateer could be
seen making its way westward with a prize it had picked up off Texel.
Military and naval matters were the sole topics of conversation, and
by the time he was fifteen Ralph had fully determined to follow in his
grandfather's footsteps and to become a soldier. Having passed almost
all her life among military men Mrs. Conway had offered no objections
to his wishes, and as several of her father's old friends had promised
to use their influence on his behalf, there was little doubt that he
would be enabled to procure a commission as soon as he reached the
regulation age.

It was not often that the postman called at Mrs. Conway's with
letters; for postage was expensive, and the people in those days only
wrote when they had something particular to say. Mrs. Conway had just
made breakfast when Ralph came in with a letter in his hand.

"Here is a letter for you, mother; but please don't open it until you
have given me my breakfast. I am very late now, and shall barely have
time to get through with it and be there before the gates close."

"Your porridge is quite ready for you, Ralph; so if you are late it
will be your own fault not mine. The eggs will be in before you have
eaten it. However, I won't open the letter until you have gone,
because you will only waste time by asking questions about it."

Ralph began his bread and milk, and Mrs. Conway, stretching out her
hand, took the letter he had laid beside his plate, and turning it
over glanced at the direction to ascertain from which of her few
correspondents it came. For a moment she looked puzzled, then, with a
little start, she laid it down by the side of her plate. She had
recognized the handwriting once so familiar to her.

"What is it, mother? You look quite startled. Who is it from?"

"It is from no one you know, Ralph. I think it is from a person I have
not heard from for some years. At any rate it will keep until you are
off to school."

"It's nothing unpleasant, I hope, mother. Your color has quite gone,
and you look downright pale."

"What should be the matter, you silly boy?" Mrs. Conway said, with an
attempt to smile. "What could there be unpleasant in a letter from a
person I have not heard from for years? There, go on with your
breakfast. I expect you will hear some news when you get down into the
town, for the guns in the castle have been firing, and I suppose there
is news of a victory. They said yesterday that a great battle was
expected to be fought against Napoleon somewhere near Leipzig."

"Yes; I heard the guns, mother, and I expect there has been a victory.
I hope not."

"Why do you hope not, Ralph?"

"Why, of course, mother, I don't want the French to be beaten--not
regularly beaten, till I am old enough to have a share in it. Just
fancy what a nuisance it would be if peace was made just as I get my
commission."

"There will be plenty of time for you, Ralph," his mother said
smiling. "Peace has been patched up once or twice, but it never lasts
long; and after fighting for the last twenty years it is hardly
probable that the world is going to grow peaceful all at once. But
there, it is time for you to be off; it only wants ten minutes to nine
and you will have to run fast all the way to be in time."

When Mrs. Conway was alone she took up the letter, and turned it over
several times before opening it.

What could Herbert Penfold have written about after all these years?
Mrs. Conway was but thirty-six years old now, and was still a pretty
woman, and a sudden thought sent a flush of color to her face.
"Never!" she said decidedly. "After the way in which he treated me he
cannot suppose that now--" and then she stopped. "I know I did love
him once, dearly, and it nearly broke my heart; but that was years and
years ago. Well, let us see what he says for himself," and she broke
open the letter. She glanced through it quickly, and then read it
again more carefully. She was very pale now, and her lips trembled as
she laid down the letter.

"So," she said to herself in a low tone, "it is to him after all I owe
all this," and she looked round her pretty room; "and I never once
really suspected it. I am glad now," she went on after a pause, "that
I did not; for, of course, it would have been impossible to have taken
it, and how different the last twelve years of my life would have
been. Poor Herbert! And so he really suffered too, and he has thought
of me all this time."

For fully half an hour she sat without moving, her thoughts busy with
the past, then she again took up the letter and reread it several
times. Its contents were as follows:

    "Dear Mrs. Conway: You will be doubtless surprised at seeing my
    handwriting, and your first impulse will naturally be to put this
    letter into the fire. I am not writing to ask you to forgive my
    conduct in the old days. I am but too well aware how completely I
    have forfeited all right to your esteem or consideration. Believe
    me that I have suffered for my fault, and that my life has been a
    ruined one. I attempt to make no excuses. I am conscious that
    while others were to blame I was most of all, and that it is to my
    own weakness of will and lack of energy that the breach between us
    was due. However, all this is of the past and can now interest you
    but little. You have had your own sorrows and trials, at which,
    believe me, I sincerely grieved. And now to my object in writing
    to you. Although still comparatively a young man, I have not many
    years to live. When last in London I consulted two of the first
    physicians, and they agreed that, as I had already suspected, I
    was suffering from heart disease, or rather, perhaps, from an
    enfeebled state of my heart, which may at any moment cease to do
    its work.

    "Naturally then, I have turned my thoughts as to whom I should
    leave my property. My sisters are amply provided for. I have no
    other near relatives, and therefore consider myself free to leave
    it as I choose. I have long fixed my thoughts upon the daughter of
    a dear friend, the rector of Bilston; she is now thirteen years
    old, and half my property is left her. I have left the other half
    to your son. The whole subject to an annuity to yourself; which
    you will not, I trust, refuse to accept. I have never thought of
    any woman but you, and I hope that you will not allow your just
    resentment against me to deprive me of the poor satisfaction of
    making what atonement lies in my power for the cruel wrong I
    formerly did you.

    "Were I strong and in health I can well imagine that you would
    indignantly refuse to receive any benefits from my hands, but
    knowing your kindness of heart, I feel sure that you will not
    sadden the last days of a doomed man by the knowledge that even
    after his death his hopes of insuring the comfort of the one woman
    on earth he cared for are to be disappointed.

    "I should like to know your son. Would it be too much to ask you
    to spare him for a while from time to time so long as I live? I
    have a double motive, I say frankly, in thus asking him to come
    here. I wish him and my little pet, Mabel Withers, to come to like
    each other. I wish to divide my property between them, and yet I
    should be glad if the whole estate could remain intact.

    "I should not be so foolish as to make a proviso that two persons
    who are as yet so young, and who may not in any way be suitable to
    each other, should marry, but nothing would please me so much as
    that they should take a fancy to each other; and thrown together
    as they would be here, for Mabel is constantly at the house, it is
    just possible that one of those boy and girl affections, which do
    sometimes, although perhaps rarely, culminate in marriage, might
    spring up between them. Whether that may be so in the present case
    I must leave to fate, but I should at any rate like to pave the
    way for such an arrangement by bringing the young people together.
    I need not say that it will be best that neither of them should
    have the slightest idea of what is in my mind, for this would be
    almost certain to defeat my object.

    "If the proposal is agreeable to you, I hope that you will let
    Ralph come to me at the beginning of his holidays; which must, I
    fancy, be now near at hand. I think it will be as well that he
    should not know of my intention as to the disposal of my property,
    for it is better he should think that he will have to work for his
    living; but at the same time there would be no harm in his knowing
    that it is probable I shall help him on in life. This will make
    him bear better what would otherwise be a dull visit. But I leave
    this matter entirely in your hands. You know the boy and I do not,
    and you can therefore better judge what will be best for him to
    know. And now, dear Mary, if you will pardon my once again calling
    you so,

    "I remain,

    "Your affectionate friend,

    "HERBERT PENFOLD."

It was characteristic of Mrs. Conway that at the first reading of this
letter she thought rather of the writer than of the bright prospects
which his offer opened to her son. She thought rather of Herbert
Penfold, her first love, now ill, if not dying, of the days of their
engagement and its rupture, than of the fact that her son was to
inherit half the Penfold estates. She had been sorely hurt at the
time; and even after all these years it was a pleasure to her to know
that the quarrel was not as she had often thought at the time, a mere
pretext for breaking off the engagement, but that Herbert had really
loved her, had cared for her all these years, and had been the
mysterious friend whose kindness had so lightened her cares.

"I did not throw away my love after all," she said to herself, as with
her eyes full of tears she stood at the window and looked out towards
the sea. "He cared for me enough to be faithful all this time and to
think of me constantly, while I had almost forgotten the past. I ought
to have known all the time that he was acting under the influence of
others--those sisters of his, of course. I was always certain they
hated me--hated the thought of my becoming mistress of Penfold Hall. I
knew the influence they had over him. Herbert had no will of his
own--it was the only fault I ever saw in him--and they could twist him
round their little fingers. And now he is going to make Ralph his
heir, or at least his heir with the girl he speaks of. It is a grand
thing for Ralph; for the estates were worth, he told papa, eight
thousand a year, and if Herbert's little romance comes off Ralph will
have all."

Then she thought over the years he had been befriending her, and
wondered what she should do about that. Finally, being a sensible
woman, she decided to do nothing. Had she known it before, or learned
the truth by other means, she would have refused absolutely to touch
Herbert Penfold's money; but it would be indeed a poor return for his
kindness were she now, when he was ill and feeble, and was about to
bestow still further benefits upon her, to refuse to permit him any
longer to aid her. She wished, as she read the letter over again, that
he had expressed some desire to see her. She should have liked to have
thanked him in person, to have told him how grateful she felt for his
care and kindness, to have taken his hand again if but for a minute.

But he had expressed no wish for a meeting, had never all these years
made an effort to see her. She could read in the wording of the letter
that he had been principally deterred from making any attempt to see
her by the feeling that he had entirely forfeited her regard, and had
offended her beyond chance of forgiveness. And had she been asked the
day before she would doubtless have replied that she had no wish
whatever ever again to meet Herbert Penfold; whereas now she felt
almost aggrieved that he should express no wish to meet her, should
have stayed away so long without making one effort to bring about
reconciliation.

"Of all faults that a man can have," she said pettishly, "I do not
think there's one so detestable as that of self-distrust. Why could he
not have said ten years ago, 'I behaved badly, Mary; I treated you
abominably; but forgive me and forget. I was not wholly to blame,
except that I allowed others to come between us?' If he had come and
said that, we could at least have been good friends. I have no
patience with men who cannot stand up for themselves. Now, how much
shall I tell Ralph?" and she again read the letter through.

"Ralph," she said when he came in to dinner, "you remember that letter
I had this morning?"

"Yes, I know, mother; the one that made you turn so white. You said it
was from an old friend, though why a letter from an old friend should
upset any one I can't make out. What was it about, mother?"

"Well, my boy, it contains a pleasant piece of news. Mr. Penfold, that
is the name of the writer, was a friend of my family. He knew me long
ago when we were young people, and at one time it seemed likely that
we should be married. However, as you know, that never took place.
However, it seems, as he says by his letter, that he has never
altogether forgotten me, and he intends to help you on in life if you
turn out as he would like to see you. He wishes you to go down to stay
with him when your holidays begin."

"That sounds nice," Ralph said; "and if he has got any boys about my
own age it will be pleasant."

"He has no children, Ralph. He is what you may call an old bachelor,
and lives with his sisters--or, rather, they live with him."

"That does not sound very cheerful, mother. An old gentleman with two
old ladies alone in the house can't make much fun."

"He is not an old gentleman, Ralph," Mrs. Conway said almost angrily.
"I told you we were young people together. Still it may not be very
lively for you, but you must put up with that. He evidently means to
be very kind to you, and it will be of great advantage to you going
down to stay with him."

"But what are you going to do with yourself, mother, all alone here? I
think he might have asked you as well as me."

"I shall do very well, Ralph. I have plenty of friends here."

"Where does Mr. Penfold live, mother?"

"Down in Dorsetshire. It is a very nice place, and only about a mile
from the sea. But, as I say, I do not expect you will find it lively;
but that you mustn't mind. It will be a very good thing for you, and
will be well worth your while putting up with a little dullness for a
time. Mr. Penfold is one of the kindest of men, but I do not think you
will like his sisters much. Certainly you will not unless they are a
good deal changed from what they were as I remember them. Still you
must try to get on with them as well as you can, and I dare say you
will find some pleasant companions in the neighborhood. I am sure you
will do your best when I tell you that I am most anxious for many
reasons that Mr. Penfold should like you."

"Of course I will do my best, mother, though I must say that the
lookout is not, according to your description, a very cheerful one,
and I would a deal rather stop at home with you."

"We can't always do exactly as we like, Ralph; though that is a lesson
you have as yet to learn. What day did you say your holidays began?"

"Next Monday week, mother. But I do hope I may have two or three days'
sailing with Joe Knight the fisherman before I go."

"Mr. Penfold says he will be glad to see you as soon as your holidays
begin, Ralph; still I suppose a day or two will make no difference, so
we will settle that you shall go on Friday. As you go down to school
this afternoon you had better tell Rogerson the tailor to come up this
evening to measure you for a suit of clothes. You must look decent
when you go down; and you know except your Sunday suit, you have got
nothing fit to wear in such a house as that."

"I am afraid it's going to be a horrible nuisance altogether," Ralph
said ruefully. "However, I suppose it's got to be done as you say so,
mother; though it's hard breaking in on my holidays like that. He
might just as well have asked me in school-time. One could have put up
with it ever so much better if it took one out of old Harper's
clutches for a bit. How long am I to stay there?"

"I expect the greater part of your holidays, Ralph. I think he wants
to get to know all about you."

Ralph groaned loudly. "He may intend very kindly," he said; "but I
wish he would keep his good intentions to himself."

"You think so now," Mrs. Conway said with a smile. "You won't think so
when you are in the army, but will find a little extra allowance or a
tip now and then very welcome."

"I dare say I shall, mother," Ralph said, brightening. "Anyhow, if the
old gentleman--that is to say, the gentleman--takes it into his head
to make me an allowance, it will take me off your hands, and I shall
not be always feeling that I am an awful expense to you. All right,
mother. I think I can promise that I will be on my best behavior, and
will try hard to get on even with his sisters. I wish he had asked
Phil Landrey to go down with me. Two fellows can get on anywhere."

"I should have very little hope of your making a good impression if
you went there with your friend Phil," Mrs. Conway said, smiling. "I
can believe in your good conduct while you are alone, but I should
have no hopes whatever of you if you and he were together."

"But how am I to go, mother? It seems such a tremendous way from here
down into Dorsetshire."

"I have not thought anything about it yet, Ralph; but probably Mr.
Penfold will give some instructions as to your journey when he hears
from me that you are coming."




CHAPTER II.

A COUNTRY VISIT.


When Ralph had gone off to school again Mrs. Conway sat down to answer
the letter--by no means an easy task--and she sat with the paper
before her for a long time before she began. At last, with an air of
desperation, she dipped her pen into the ink and began:

    "MY DEAR HERBERT PENFOLD: It is difficult to answer such a letter
    as yours--to say all one feels without saying too much; to express
    the gratitude with which one is full, but of which one feels that
    you do not desire the expression. First, a word as to the past.
    Now that it is irreparable, why should I not speak freely? We were
    the victims of a mistake! You were misled respecting me. I
    foolishly resented the line you took, failed to make sufficient
    allowances for your surroundings, and even doubted a love that
    seemed to me to be so easily shaken. Thus my pride was, perhaps,
    as much responsible for what happened as your too easy credence of
    tales to my disadvantage. At any rate, believe me that I have
    cherished no such feelings as those with which you credit me
    toward you. Now that I know the truth, I can only regret that your
    life has been, as you say, spoiled, by what can but be called a
    fatal misunderstanding.

    "Next, I must thank you, although you make no allusion to it in
    your letter, for your kindness during past years. Of these,
    believe me, I never suspected that you were the author; and I need
    hardly say how deeply I have been touched at finding that the hand
    to which I and my boy owe so much is that of Herbert Penfold. Of
    this I will say no more. I leave you to picture my feelings and my
    gratitude. Also, most warmly I thank you for your intentions
    regarding my boy. He will be ready to come to you on Friday week.
    I suppose his best way will be to go by coach to London and then
    down to you, or he could take passage perhaps in a coaster. He is
    very fond of the sea.

    "We had settled that he should enter the army; but of course I
    consider that nothing will be decided on this or any other point
    as to his future until I know your wishes on the matter. Lastly,
    dear Herbert, believe me that the news that you have given me
    concerning your state of health has caused me deep sorrow, and I
    earnestly hope and trust that the doctors may be mistaken in your
    case, that you may have a long life before you, and that life may
    be happier in the future than it has been in the past.

    "I remain,

    "Your grateful and affectionate

    "MARY CONWAY."

A fortnight later Ralph Conway took his place on the outside of the
coach for London. As to the visit to this unknown friend of his
mother, he anticipated no pleasure from it whatever; but at the same
time the journey itself was delightful to him. He had never during his
remembrance been further away from Dover than Canterbury; and the trip
before him was in those days a more important one than a journey half
over Europe would be at the present time. In his pocket he carried a
piece of paper, on which his mother had carefully written down the
instructions contained in the letter she had received in answer to her
own from Herbert Penfold. Sewn up in the lining of his waistcoat were
five guineas, so that in case the coach was stopped by highwaymen, or
any other misfortune happened, he would still be provided with funds
for continuing his journey.

Under the seat was a small basket filled with sandwiches, and his head
ought to have been equally well filled with the advice his mother had
given him as to his behavior at Penfold Hall. As his place had been
booked some days before, he had the advantage of an outside seat. Next
to him was a fat woman, who was going up to town, as she speedily
informed her fellow-passengers, to meet her husband, who was captain
of a whaler.

"I see in the _Gazette_ of to-day," she said, "as his ship was
signaled off Deal yesterday, and with this ere wind he will be up at
the docks to-morrow; so off I goes. He's been away nigh eighteen
months; and I know what men is. Why, bless you, if I wasn't there to
meet him when he steps ashore, as likely as not he would meet with
friends and go on the spree, and I shouldn't hear of him for a week;
and a nice hole that would make in his earnings. Young man, you are
scrouging me dreadful! Can't you get a little further along."

