The Project Gutenberg eBook, Anchorite, by Randall Garrett, Illustrated by
 Schelling


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Anchorite


Author: Randall Garrett

Release Date: November 20, 2007  [eBook #23561]
[Date last updated: January 16, 2009]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANCHORITE***


E-text prepared by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 23561-h.htm or 23561-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/5/6/23561/23561-h/23561-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/5/6/23561/23561-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      This etext was produced from _Analog Science Fact Science Fiction_,
      November, 1962. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
      that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.





ANCHORITE

by

JOHNATHAN BLAKE MACKENZIE

Illustrated by Schelling







     There are two basic kinds of fools--the ones who know they are
     fools, and the kind that, because they do not know that, are
     utterly deadly menaces!



The mountain was spinning.

Not dizzily, not even rapidly, but very perceptibly, the great mass of
jagged rock was turning on its axis.

Captain St. Simon scowled at it. "By damn, Jules," he said, "if you can
see 'em spinning, it's too damn fast!" He expected no answer, and got
none.

He tapped the drive pedal gently with his right foot, his gaze shifting
alternately from the instrument board to the looming hulk of stone
before him. As the little spacecraft moved in closer, he tapped the
reverse pedal with his left foot. He was now ten meters from the surface
of the asteroid. It was moving, all right. "Well, Jules," he said in his
most commanding voice, "we'll see just how fast she's moving. Prepare to
fire Torpedo Number One!"

"Yassuh, boss! Yassuh, Cap'n Sain' Simon, suh! All ready on the firin'
line!"

He touched a button with his right thumb. The ship quivered almost
imperceptibly as a jet of liquid leaped from the gun mounted in the nose
of the ship. At the same time, he hit the reverse pedal and backed the
ship away from the asteroid's surface. No point getting any more gunk on
the hull than necessary.

The jet of liquid struck the surface of the rotating mountain and
splashed, leaving a big splotch of silvery glitter. Even in the vacuum
of space, the silicone-based solvents of the paint vehicle took time to
boil off.

"How's that for pinpoint accuracy, Jules?"

"Veddy good, M'lud. Top hole, if I may say so, m'lud."

"You may." He jockeyed the little spacecraft around until he was
reasonably stationary with respect to the great hunk of whirling rock
and had the silver-white blotch centered on the crosshairs of the peeper
in front of him. Then he punched the button that started the timer and
waited for the silver spot to come round again.

The asteroid was roughly spherical--which was unusual, but not
remarkable. The radar gave him the distance from the surface of the
asteroid, and he measured the diameter and punched it through the
calculator. "Observe," he said in a dry, didactic voice. "The diameter
is on the order of five times ten to the fourteenth micromicrons." He
kept punching at the calculator. "If we assume a mean density of two
point six six times ten to the minus thirty-sixth metric tons per cubic
micromicron, we attain a mean mass of some one point seven four times
ten to the eleventh kilograms." More punching, while he kept his eye on
the meteorite, waiting for the spot to show up again. "And that, my dear
Jules, gives us a surface gravity of approximately two times ten to the
minus sixth standard gees."

"_Jawohl, Herr Oberstleutnant._"

"Und zo, mine dear Chules, ve haff at least der grave zuspicion dot der
zurface gravity iss less dan der zentrifugal force at der eqvator!
_Nein? Ja!_ Zo."

"_Jawohl, Herr Konzertmeister._"

Then there was a long, silent wait, while the asteroid went its
leisurely way around its own axis.

"There it comes," said Captain St. Simon. He kept his eyes on the
crosshair of the peeper, one hand over the timer button. When the silver
splotch drifted by the crosshair, he punched the stop button and looked
at the indicator.

"Sixteen minutes, forty seconds. How handy." He punched at the
calculator again. "Ah! You see, Jules! Just as we suspected! Negative
gees at the surface, on the equator, comes to ten to the minus third
standard gees--almost exactly one centimeter per second squared. So?"

"Ah, so, honorabu copton! Is somesing rike five hundred times as great
as gravitationar attraction, is not so?"

"Sukiyaki, my dear chap, sometimes your brilliance amazes me."

Well, at least it meant that there would be no loose rubble on the
surface. It would have been tossed off long ago by the centrifugal
force, flying off on a tangent to become more of the tiny rubble of the
belt. Perhaps "flying" wasn't exactly the right word, though, when
applied to a velocity of less than one centimeter per second. _Drifting_
off, then.

"What do you think, Jules?" said St. Simon.

"Waal, Ah reckon we can do it, cap'n. Ef'n we go to the one o' them thar
poles ... well, let's see--" He leaned over and punched more figures
into the calculator. "Ain't that purty! 'Cordin' ter this, thar's a spot
at each pole, 'bout a meter in diameter, whar the gee-pull is _greater_
than the centry-foogle force!"

Captain St. Simon looked at the figures on the calculator. The forces,
in any case, were negligibly small. On Earth, where the surface gravity
was ninety-eight per cent of a Standard Gee, St. Simon weighed close to
two hundred pounds. Discounting the spin, he would weigh about four
ten-thousandths of a pound on the asteroid he was inspecting. The spin
at the equator would try to push him off with a force of about two
tenths of a pound.

But a man who didn't take those forces into account could get himself
killed in the Belt.

"Very well, Jules," he said, "we'll inspect the poles."

"Do you think they vill velcome us in Kraukau, _Herr Erzbischof_?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The area around the North Pole--defined as that pole from which the body
appears to be spinning counterclockwise--looked more suitable for
operations than the South Pole. Theoretically, St. Simon could have
stopped the spin, but that would have required an energy expenditure of
some twenty-three thousand kilowatt-hours in the first place, and it
would have required an anchor to be set somewhere on the equator. Since
his purpose in landing on the asteroid was to set just such an anchor,
stopping the spin would be a waste of time and energy.

Captain St. Simon positioned his little spacecraft a couple of meters
above the North Pole. It would take better than six minutes to fall that
far, so he had plenty of time. "Perhaps a boarding party, Mr. Christian!
On the double!"

"Aye, sir! On the double it is, sir!"

St. Simon pushed himself over to the locker, took out his vacuum suit,
and climbed into it. After checking it thoroughly, he said: "Prepare to
evacuate main control room, Mr. Christian!"

"Aye, aye, Sir! All prepared and ready. I hope."

Captain St. Simon looked around to make sure he hadn't left a bottle of
coffee sitting somewhere. He'd done that once, and the stuff had boiled
out all over everywhere when he pulled the air out of the little room.
Nope, no coffee. No obstacles to turning on the pump. He thumbed the
button, and the pumps started to whine. The whine built up to a
crescendo, then began to die away until finally it could only be felt
through the walls or floor. The air was gone.

Then he checked the manometer to make sure that most of the air had
actually been pumped back into the reserve tanks. Satisfied, he touched
the button that would open the door. There was a faint jar as the
remaining wisps of air shot out into the vacuum of space.

St. Simon sat back down at the controls and carefully repositioned the
ship. It was now less than a meter from the surface. He pushed himself
over to the open door and looked out.

He clipped one end of his safety cable to the steel eye-bolt at the edge
of the door. "Fasten on carefully, Jules," he said. "We don't want to
lose anything."

"Like what, _mon capitain_?"

"Like this spaceship, _mon petit tete de mouton_."

"Ah, but no, my old and raw; we could not afford to lose the so-dear
_Nancy Bell_, could we?"

The other end of the long cable was connected to the belt of the suit.
Then St. Simon launched himself out the open door toward the surface of
the planetoid. The ship began to drift--very slowly, but not so slowly
as it had been falling--off in the other direction.

He had picked the spot he was aiming for. There was a jagged hunk of
rock sticking out that looked as though it would make a good handhold.
Right nearby, there was a fairly smooth spot that would do to brake his
"fall". He struck it with his palm and took up the slight shock with his
elbow while his other hand grasped the outcropping.

He had not pushed himself very hard. There is not much weathering on the
surface of an asteroid. Micro-meteorites soften the contours of the rock
a little over the millions of millennia, but not much, since the debris
in the Belt all has roughly the same velocity. Collisions do occur, but
they aren't the violent smashes that make the brilliant meteor displays
of Earth. (And there is still a standing argument among the men of the
Belt as to whether that sort of action can be called "weathering".) Most
of the collisions tend to cause fracturing of the surface, which results
in jagged edges. A man in a vacuum suit does not push himself against a
surface like that with any great velocity.

       *       *       *       *       *

St. Simon knew to a nicety that he could propel himself against a bed of
