The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fly By Night, by Arthur Dekker Savage

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Fly By Night

Author: Arthur Dekker Savage

Illustrator: Ed Emsh

Release Date: June 7, 2010 [EBook #32734]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLY BY NIGHT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             FLY by NIGHT

                        By Arthur Dekker Savage

                         Illustrated by Ed Emsh

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science
Fiction May 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _A young man and a young woman alone on the first
over-the-moon ship. The world cheered them as the most romantic
adventurers in all history. Do-gooders decried them as immoral stunters.
Gaunt, serious militarists pronounced them part of the most crucial
experiment ever undertaken...._]


The general introduced them in the ship's shadow, a trim lieutenant, a
clean-cut major. "You probably already think of each other as Carol and
Ken. At any rate, there are no two people in the world who have heard as
much about each other without previously meeting."

She offered her hand and he took it, held it for a long moment while
their eyes locked. "Hello, Carol," he said warmly. "I'd have known you
from your pictures." And he realized as never before what a poor
substitute were the hoarded scraps of paper.

"Hello--Ken." A smile made her face radiant. "I've sort of studied your
pictures too."

Ken turned his eyes to the crowd--a roaring, cheering multitude
surrounding the poised rocket ship here on the California desert in this
zero hour. To certain harried physicists and engineers, it was a moment
promising paramount achievement. To romanticists of 1966, watching their
video screens avidly, it was fulfillment of their most sensual dreams: a
beautiful girl being given wholly and unreservedly to a handsome young
man; the flight around the moon was merely an added fillip. To a few
gaunt military psychologists it was the end of a long nightmare of
protests by women's clubs, demonstrations by national female societies
and actual attempts at murder by fanatical blue-noses; and a mere
beginning of the most crucial experiment ever undertaken--which _had_ to
be a success.

[Illustration]


Suddenly Ken was angry at the knowing looks from the throng's nearest
ranks. While the general continued his prepared speech into the mike,
focus of the hollow, hungry eyes of the video cameras, Ken pulled Carol
to his side and held her with an arm about her waist, glaring when the
crowd murmured and the cameras swung their way again. He had not
questioned the actions of the military, of the world, before. But now--a
public spectacle--

During the years of rigorous, specialized training almost from childhood
they had kept him away from Carol, teasing him--it was the only word
that now occurred to his mind--with the dangled promise of her presence
on the flight. They had let him see her pictures--intimate, almost-nude
photos harvested by the gossip columnists, snaps of her glory in bathing
attire as she lounged by a swimming pool.

Swimming. Since he had been selected as a boy, every free afternoon he
had been made to swim, swim, swim--developing the long, smooth muscles
they wanted him to have. It had been, he knew, the same with Carol.

Had they taunted her with his pictures too? Had she responded by wanting
