laboriously isolated polonium and radium; back to the French scientist
H. A. Becquerel, who first discovered something he called a "spontaneous
emission of penetrating rays from certain salts of uranium"; to the
German physicist W. K. Roentgen and his discovery of x rays in 1895; and
back still further.

During this passage of scientific history, the very idea of "element"
has undergone several great changes.

The early Greeks suggested earth, air, fire, and water as being the
essential material from which all others were made. Aristotle considered
these as being combinations of four properties: hot, cold, dry, and
moist (see Fig. 1).

[Illustration: Fig. 1. The elements as proposed by the early Greeks.]

Later, a fifth "essence," ether, the building material of the heavenly
bodies was added.

Paracelsus (1493-1541) introduced the three alchemical symbols salt,
sulfur, and mercury. Sulfur was the principle of combustability, salt
the fixed part left after burning (calcination), and mercury the
essential part of all metals. For example, gold and silver were
supposedly different combinations of sulfur and mercury.

Robert Boyle in his "Sceptical Chymist" (1661) first defined the word
element in the sense which it retained until the discovery of
radioactivity (1896), namely, a form of matter that could not be split
into simpler forms.

The first discovery of a true element in historical time was that of
phosphorus by Dr. Brand of Hamburg, in 1669. Brand kept his process
secret, but, as in modern times, knowledge of the element's existence
was sufficient to let others, like Kunkel and Boyle in England, succeed
independently in isolating it shortly afterward.

As in our atomic age, a delicate balance was made between the
"light-giving" (desirable) and "heat-giving" (feared) powers of a
discovery. An early experimenter was at first "delighted with the white,
waxy substance that glowed so charmingly in the dark of his laboratory,"
but later wrote, "I am not making it any more for much harm may come of
it."

Robert Boyle wrote in 1680 of phosphorus, "It shone so briskly and lookt
so oddly that the sight was extreamly pleasing, having in it a mixture
of strangeness, beauty and frightfulness."

These words describe almost exactly the impressions of eye witnesses of
the first atom bomb test at Alamagordo, New Mexico, July 16, 1945.

For the next two and three-quarters centuries the chemists had much fun
and some fame discovering new elements. Frequently there was a long
interval between discovery and recognition. Thus Scheele made chlorine
in 1774 by the action of "black manganese" (manganese dioxide) on
concentrated muriatic acid (hydrochloric acid), but it was not
recognized as an element till the work of Davy in 1810.

Occasionally the development of a new technique would lead to the "easy"
discovery of a whole group of new elements. Thus Davy, starting in 1807,
applied the method of electrolysis, using a development of Volta's pile
as a source of current; in a short time he discovered aluminum, barium,
boron, calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium, and strontium.

The invention of the spectroscope by Bunsen and Kirchhoff in 1859
provided a new tool which could establish the purity of substances
already known and lead to the discovery of others. Thus, helium was
discovered in the sun's spectrum by Jansen and isolated from uranite by
Ramsay in 1895.

The discovery of radioactivity by Becquerel in 1896 (touched off by
Roentgen's discovery of x rays the year before) gave an even more
sensitive method of detecting the presence or absence of certain kinds
of matter. It is well known that Pierre and Marie Curie used this
new-found radioactivity to identify the new elements polonium and
radium. Compounds of these new elements were obtained by patient
fractional recrystallization of their salts.

The "explanation" of radioactivity led to the discovery of isotopes by
Rutherford and Soddy in 1914, and with this discovery a revision of our
idea of elements became necessary. Since Boyle, it had been assumed that
all atoms of the individual elements were identical and unlike any
others, and could not be changed into anything simpler. Now it became
evident that the atoms of radioactive elements were constantly changing
into other elements, thereby releasing very large amounts of energy, and
that many different forms of the same element (lead was the first
studied) were possible. We now think of an element as a form of matter
in which all atoms have the same nuclear charge.

The human mind has always sought order and simplification of the
external world; in chemistry the fruitful classifications were
Dobereiner's Triads (1829), Newland's law of octaves (1865), and
Mendeleev's periodic law (1869). The chart expressing this periodic law
seemed to indicate the maximum extent of the elements and gave good
hints "where to look for" and "the probable properties of" the remaining
ones (see Fig. 2).

By 1925, all but four of the slots in the 92-place file had been filled.
The vacancies were at 43, 61, 85, and 87.

[Illustration: Fig. 2. Periodic chart of the elements (1963)]

