building a space fleet to conquer the world. We weren't. They were. And
it looks very much as if they may have beaten us."

The lieutenant got out the dreary mass of papers, intended to call for
every conscious or unconscious observation Joe might have made in space.
It was the equivalent of the interviews extracted from fliers after a
bombing raid, and it was necessary, but Joe was very tired.

Wearily, he said, "Start your questions. I'll try to answer them."

They arrived in Bootstrap some forty-six hours after the crashing of
their ship. Joe, at least, had slept nearly thirty of those hours. So
while he was still wobbly on his feet and would be for days to come,
his disposition was vastly improved.

There was nobody waiting on the airfield by the town of Bootstrap, but
as they landed a black car came smoothly out and stopped close by the
transport. Joe got down and climbed into it. Sally Holt was inside. She
took both his hands and cried, and he was horribly embarrassed when the
Chief came blundering into the car after him. But the Chief growled, "If
he didn't kiss you, Sally, I'm going to kick his pants for him."

"He--he did," said Sally, gulping. "And I'm glad you're back, Chief. And
Haney. And Mike."

Mike grinned as he climbed in the back too. Haney crowded in after him.
They filled the rear of the car entirely. It started off swiftly across
the field, swerving to the roadway that led to the highway out of
Bootstrap to the Shed. It sped out that long white concrete ribbon, and
the desert was abruptly all around them. Far ahead, the great round
half-dome of the Shed looked like a cherry-pit on the horizon.

"It's good to be back!" said the Chief warmly. "I feel like I weigh a
ton, but it's good to be back! Mike's the only one who was happier out
yonder. He figures he belongs there. I got a story to tell you,
Sally----"

"Chief!" said Mike fiercely. "Shut up!"

"Won't," said the Chief amiably. "Sally, this guy Mike----"

Mike went pale. "You're too big to kill," he said bitterly, "but I'll
try it!"

The Chief grunted at him. "Quit being modest. Sally----"

Mike flung himself at the Chief, literally snarling. His small fist hit
the Chief's face--and Mike was small but he was not puny. The "crack" of
the impact was loud in the car. Haney grabbed. There was a moment's
frenzied struggling. Then Mike was helplessly wrapped in Haney's arms,
incoherent with fury and shame.

"Crazy fool!" grunted the Chief, feeling his jaw. "What's the matter
with you? Don't you feel good?"

He was angry, but he was more concerned. Mike was white and raging.

"You tell that," he panted shrilly, "and so help me----"

"What's got into you?" demanded Haney anxiously. "I'd be bragging, I
would, if I'd got a brainstorm like you did! That guy Sanford woulda
wiped us all out----"

The Chief said angrily, between unease and puzzlement:

"I never knew you to go off your nut like this before! What's got into
you, anyway?"

Mike gulped suddenly. Haney still held him firmly, but both Haney and
the Chief were looking at him with worried eyes. And Mike said
desperately: "You were going to tell Sally----"

The Chief snorted.

"Huh! You fool little runt! No! I was going to tell her about you
opening up that airlock when Sanford locked us out! Sure I kidded you
about what you're talking about! Sure! I'm going to do it again! But
that's amongst us! I don't tell that outside!"

Haney made an inarticulate exclamation. He understood, and he was
relieved. But he looked disgusted. He released Mike abruptly, rumbling
to himself. He stared out the window. And Mike stood upright, an absurd
small figure. His face worked a little.

"Okay," said Mike, with a little difficulty. "I was dumb. Only, Chief,
you owe me a sock on the jaw when you feel like it. I'll take it."

He swallowed. Sally was watching wide-eyed.

"Sally," said Mike bitterly, "I'm a bigger fool than I look. I thought
the Chief was going to tell you what happened when I landed. I--I
floated down in a village over there in India, and those crazy savages'd
never seen a parachute, and they began to yell and make gestures, and
first thing I knew they had a sort of litter and were piling me in it,
and throwing flowers all over me, and there was a procession----"

Sally listened blankly. Mike told the tale of his shame with the very
quintessence of bitter resentment. When he got to his installation in a
red-painted mud temple, and the reverent and forcible removal of his
clothes so he could be greased with butter, Sally's lips began to
twitch. At the picture of Mike in a red loincloth, squirming furiously
while brown-skinned admirers zestfully sang his praises, howling his
rage while they celebrated some sort of pious festival in honor of his
arrival, Sally broke down and laughed helplessly.

Mike stared at her, aghast. He felt that he'd hated the Chief when he
thought the Chief was going to tell the tale on him as a joke. He'd told
it on himself as a penance, in the place of the blow he'd given the
Chief and which the Chief wouldn't return. To Mike it was still tragedy.
It was still an outrage to his dignity. But Sally was laughing. She
rocked back and forth next to Joe, helpless with mirth.

"Oh, Mike!" she gasped. "It's beautiful! They must have been saying such
lovely, respectful things, while you were calling them names and wanting
to kill them! They'd have been bragging to each other about how you
were--visiting them because they'd been such good people, and--this was
the reward of well-spent lives, and you--you----"

She leaned against Joe and shook. The car went on. The Chief chuckled.
Haney grinned. Joe watched Mike as this new aspect of his disgrace got
into his consciousness. It hadn't occurred to Mike, before, that anybody
but himself had been ridiculous. It hadn't occurred to him, until he
lost his temper, that Haney and the Chief would ride him mercilessly
among themselves, but would not dream of letting anybody outside the
gang do so.

Presently Mike managed to grin a little. It was a twisty grin, and not
altogether mirthful.

"Yeah," he said wrily. "I see it. They were crazy too. I should've had
more sense than to get mad." Then his grin grew a trifle twistier. "I
didn't tell you that the thing that made me maddest was when they wanted
to put earrings on me. I grabbed a club then and--uh--persuaded them I
didn't like the idea."

Sally chortled. The picture of the small, truculent Mike in frenzied
revolt with a club against the idea of being decked with jewelry....
Mike turned to the two big men and shoved at them imperiously.

"Move over!" he growled. "If you two big lummoxes had dropped in on
those crazy goofs instead of me, they'd've thought you were elephants
and set you to work hauling logs!"

He squirmed to a seat between them. He still looked ashamed, but it was
shame of a different sort. Now he looked as if he wished he hadn't
mistrusted his friends for even a moment. And he included Sally.

"Anyhow," he said suddenly in a different tone, "maybe it did do some
good for me to get all worked up! I got kind of frantic. I figured
somebody'd made a fool of me, and I was going to put something over on
you."

"Mike!" said Sally reproachfully.

"Not like you think, Sally," said Mike, grinning a little. "I made up my
mind to beat these lummoxes at their own game. I asked Joe about my
brainstorm in the plane. He didn't know what I was driving at, but he
said what I hoped was so. So I'm telling you--and," he added fiercely,
"if it's any good everybody gets credit for it, because all of us
four--even two big apes who try kidding--are responsible for it!"

He glared at them. Joe asked. "What is it, Mike?"

"I think," said Mike, "I think I've got a trick to make space ships
quicker than anybody ever dreamed of. Joe says you can make a weld with
powder metallurgy. And I think we can use that trick to make one-piece
ships--lighter and stronger and tighter--and fast enough to make your
head swim! And you guys are in on it!"

The black car braked by the entrance to the Security offices outside the
Shed. It looked completely deserted. There was only a skeleton force
here since the Platform had been launched three months before. There was
almost nobody to be seen, but Mike pressed his lips pugnaciously
together as they got out of the car and went inside.

The four of them, with Sally, went along the empty corridors to the
major's office. He was waiting for them. He shook hands all around. But
it was not possible for Major Holt to give an impression of cordiality.

"I'm very glad to see all of you back," he said curtly. "It didn't look
like you'd make it. Joe, you will be able to reach your father by
long-distance telephone as soon as you finish here. I--ah--thought it
would not be indiscreet to tell him you had landed safely, though I did
ask him to keep the fact to himself."

"Thank you, sir," said Joe.

"You answered most of the questions you needed to answer on the plane,"
added the major, grimly, "and now you may want to ask some. You know
there is no ship for you. You know that the enemies of the Platform
copied our rocket fuel. You know they've made rockets with it. You've
met them! And Intelligence says they're building a fleet of space
ships--not for space exploration, but simply to smash the Platform and
get set for an ultimatum to the United States to backwater or be
bombarded from space."

Mike said crisply: "How long before they can do it?"

Major Holt turned uncordial eyes upon him. "It's anybody's guess. Why?"

"We've been working something out," said Mike, firmly but in part
untruthfully. He stood sturdily before the major's desk, which he barely
topped. "The four of us have been working it out. Joe says they've done
powder metallurgy welds, back at his father's plant. Joe and Haney and
the Chief and me, we've been working out an idea."

Major Holt waited. His hands moved nervously on his desk. Joe looked at
Mike. Haney and the Chief regarded him warily. The Chief cocked his head
on one side.

"It'll take a minute to get it across," said Mike. "You have to think of
concrete first. When you want to make a cubic yard of concrete, you take
a cubic yard of gravel. Then you add some sand--just enough to fill in
the cracks between the gravel. Then you put in some cement. It goes in
the cracks between the grains of sand. A little bit of cement makes a
lot of concrete. See?"

Major Holt frowned. But he knew these four. "I see, but I don't
understand."

"You can weld metals together with powder-metallurgy powder at less than
red heat. You can take steel filings for sand and steel turnings for
gravel and powdered steel for cement--"

Joe jolted erect. He looked startledly at Haney and the Chief. And
Haney's mouth was dropping open. A great, dreamy light seemed to be
bursting upon him. The Chief regarded Mike with very bright eyes. And
Mike sturdily, forcefully, coldly, made a sort of speech in his small
and brittle voice.

Things could be made of solid steel, he said sharply, without rolling or
milling or die-casting the metal, and without riveting or arc-welding
the parts together. The trick was powder metallurgy. Very finely
powdered metal, packed tightly and heated to a relatively low
temperature--"sintered" is the word--becomes a solid mass. Even alloys
can be made by mixing powdered metals. The process had been used only
for small objects, but--there was the analogy to concrete. A very little
powder could weld much metal, in the form of turnings and smaller bits.
And the result would be solid steel!

Then Mike grew impassioned. There was a wooden mockup of a space ship in
the Shed, he said. It was an absolutely accurate replica, in wood, of
the ships that had been destroyed. But one could take castings of it,
and use them for molds, and fill them with powder and filings and
turnings, and heat them not even red-hot and there would be steel hulls
in one piece. Solid steel hulls! Needing no riveting nor anything
else--and one could do it fast! While the first hull was fitting out a
second could be molded----

The Chief roared: "You fool little runt!" he bellowed. "Tryin' to give
us credit for that! You got more sense than any of us! You worked that
out in your own head----"

Haney rubbed his hands together. He said softly, "I like that! I do like
that!"

Major Holt turned his eyes to Joe. "What's your opinion?"

"I think it's the sort of thing, sir, that a professional engineer would
say was a good idea but not practical. He'd mean it would be a lot of
trouble to get working. But I'd like to ask my father. They have done
powder welding at the plant back home, sir."

Major Holt nodded. "Call your father. If it looks promising, I'll pull
what wires I can."

Joe went out, with the others. Mike was sweating. All unconsciously, he
twisted his hands one within the other. He had had many humiliations
because he was small, but lately he had humiliated himself by not
believing in his friends. Now he needed desperately to do something that
would reflect credit on them as well as himself.

Joe made the phone call. As he closed the door of the booth, he heard
the Chief kidding Mike blandly.

"Hey, Einstein," said the Chief. "How about putting that brain of yours
to work on a faster-than-light drive?"

But then he began to struggle with the long distance operator. It took
minutes to get the plant, and then it took time to get to the point,
because his father insisted on asking anxiously how he was and if he was
hurt in any way. Personal stuff. But Joe finally managed to explain that
this call dealt with the desperate need to do something about a space
fleet.

His father said grimly, "Yes. The situation doesn't look too good right
now, Joe."

"Try this on for size, sir," said Joe. He outlined Mike's scheme. His
father interrupted only to ask crisp questions about the mockup of the
tender, already in existence though made of wood. Then he said, "Go on,
son!"

Joe finished. He heard his father speaking to someone away from the
phone. Questions and answers, and then orders. His father spoke to him
direct.

"It looks promising, Joe," said his father. "Right here at the plant
we've got the gang that can do it if anybody can. I'm getting a plane
and coming out there, fast! Get Major Holt to clear things for me. This
is no time for red tape! If he has trouble, I'll pull some wires
myself!"

"Then I can tell Mike it's good stuff?"

"It's not good stuff," said his father. "There are about forty-seven
things wrong with it at first glance, but I know how to take care of one
or two, and we'll lick the rest. You tell your friend Mike I want to
shake him by the hand. I hope to do it tonight!"

He hung up, and Joe went out of the phone booth. Mike looked at him
with yearning eyes. Joe lied a little, because Mike rated it.

"My father's on the way here to help make it work," he told Mike. Then
he added untruthfully: "He said he thought he knew all the big men in
his line, and where've you been that he hasn't heard of you?"

He turned away as the Chief whooped with glee. He hurried back to Major
Holt as the Chief and Haney began zestfully to manhandle Mike in
celebration of his genius.

The major held up his hand as Joe entered. He was using the desk phone.
Joe waited. When he hung up, Joe reported. The major seemed unsurprised.

"Yes, I had Washington on the wire," he said detachedly. "I talked to a
personal friend who's a three-star general. There will be action started
at the Pentagon. When you came in I was arranging with the largest
producers of powder-metallurgy products in the country to send their
best men here by plane. They will start at once. Now I have to get in
touch with some other people."

Joe gaped at him. The major moved impatiently, waiting for Joe to leave.
Joe gulped. "Excuse me, sir, but--my father didn't say it was certain.
He just thinks it can be made to work. He's not sure."

"I didn't even wait for that, something has to turn up to take care of
this situation!" said the Major with asperity. "It has to! This
particular scheme may not work, but if it doesn't, something will come
out of the work on it! You should look at a twenty-five cent piece
occasionally, Joe!"

