
Immediately he began to shout to attract our attention, but in the awful
uproar we could not hear him. Getting together all the ropes that he
could lay his hands on, he steered the ship to a point directly over us,
and then dropped down within a few yards of the boiling flood.

Now as he hung over our heads, and saw the water up to our very necks
and still swiftly rising, he shouted again:

"Catch hold, for God's sake!"

The three men who were with him in the ship seconded his cries.

But by the time we had fairly grasped the ropes, so rapidly was the
flood rising, we were already afloat. With the assistance of Tom and his
men we were rapidly drawn up, and immediately Tom reversed the electric
polarity, and the ship began to rise.

At that same instant, with a crash that shivered the air, the immense
metallic power house gave way and was swept tumbling, like a hill torn
loose from its base, over the very spot where a moment before we had
stood. One second's hesitation on the part of Tom, and the electrical
ship would have been battered into a shapeless wad of metal by the
careening mass.

When we had attained a considerable height, so that we could see a great
distance on either side, the spectacle became even more fearful than it
was when we were close to the surface.

On all sides banks and dykes were going down; trees were being uprooted;
buildings were tumbling, and the ocean was achieving that victory over
the land which had long been its due, but which the ingenuity of the
inhabitants of Mars had postponed for ages.

Far away we could see the front of the advancing wave crested with foam
that sparkled in the electric lights, and as it swept on it changed the
entire aspect of the planet--in front of it all life, behind it all
death.

Eastward our view extended across the Syrtis Major toward the land of
Libya and the region of Isidis. On that side also the dykes were giving
way under the tremendous pressure, and the floods were rushing toward
the sunrise, which had just began to streak the eastern sky.

The continents that were being overwhelmed on the western side of the
Syrtis were Meroc, Aeria, Arabia, Edom and Eden.

The water beneath us continually deepened. The current from the melting
snows around the southern pole was at its strongest, and one could
hardly have believed that any obstruction put in its path would have
been able to arrest it and turn it into these two all-swallowing
deluges, sweeping east and west. But, as we now perceived, the level of
the land over a large part of its surface was hundreds of feet below the
ocean, so that the latter, when once the barriers were broken, rushed
into depressions that yawned to receive it.

The point where we had dealt our blow was far removed from the great
capitol of Mars, around the Lake of the Sun, and we knew that we should
have to wait for the floods to reach that point before the desired
effect could be produced. By the nearest way, the water had at least
5,000 miles to travel. We estimated that its speed where we hung above
it was as much as a hundred miles an hour. Even if that speed were
maintained, more than two days and nights would be required for the
floods to reach the Lake of the Sun.

But as the water rushed on it would break the banks of all the canals
intersecting the country, and these, being also elevated above the
surface, would add the impetus of their escaping waters to hasten the
advance of the flood. We calculated, therefore, that about two days
would suffice to place the planet at our mercy.

Half way from the Syrtis Major to the Lake of the Sun another great
connecting link between the Southern and Northern ocean basins, called
on our maps of Mars the Indus, existed, and through this channel we knew
that another great current must be setting from the south toward the
north. The flood that we had started would reach and break the banks of
the Indus within one day.

The flood traveling in the other direction, toward the east, would have
considerably further to go before reaching the neighborhood of the Lake
of the Sun. It, too, would involve hundreds of great canals as it
advanced and would come plunging upon the Lake of the Sun and its
surrounding forts and cities, probably about half a day later than the
arrival of the deluge that traveled toward the west.

Now that we had let the awful destroyer loose we almost shrank from the
thought of the consequences which we had produced. How many millions
would perish as the result of our deed we could not even guess. Many of
the victims, so far as we knew, might be entirely innocent of enmity
toward us, or of the evil which had been done to our native planet. But
this was a case in which the good--if they existed--must suffer with the
bad on account of the wicked deeds of the latter.

I have already remarked that the continents of Mars were higher on their
northern and southern borders where they faced the great oceans. These
natural barriers bore to the main mass of land somewhat the relation of
the edge of a shallow dish to its bottom. Their rise on the land side
was too gradual to give them the appearance of hills, but on the side
toward the sea they broke down in steep banks and cliffs several hundred
feet in height. We guessed that it would be in the direction of these
elevations that the inhabitants would flee, and those who had timely
warning might thus be able to escape in case the flood did not--as it
seemed possible it might in its first mad rush--overtop the highest
elevations on Mars.

As day broke and the sun slowly rose upon the dreadful scene beneath us,
we began to catch sight of some of the fleeing inhabitants. We had
shifted the position of the fleet toward the south, and were now
suspended above the southeastern corner of Aeria. Here a high bank of
reddish rock confronted the sea, whose waters ran lashing and roaring
along the bluffs to supply the rapid drought produced by the emptying of
Syrtis Major. Along the shore there was a narrow line of land, hundreds
of miles in length, but less than a quarter of a mile broad, which still
rose slightly above the surface of the water, and this land of refuge
was absolutely packed with the monstrous inhabitants of the planet who
had fled hither on the first warning that the water was coming.

In some places it was so crowded that the later comers could not find
standing ground on dry land, but were continually slipping back and
falling into the water. It was an awful sight to look at them. It
reminded me of pictures I had seen of the deluge in the days of Noah,
when the waters had risen to the mountain tops, and men, women and
children were fighting for a foothold upon the last dry spots the earth
contained.

We were all moved by a desire to help our enemies, for we were
overwhelmed with feelings of pity and remorse, but to aid them was now
utterly beyond our power. The mighty floods were out, and the end was in
the hands of God.

Fortunately, we had little time for these thoughts, because no sooner
had the day begun to dawn around us than the airships of the Martians
appeared. Evidently the people in them were dazed by the disaster and
uncertain what to do. It is doubtful whether at first they comprehended
the fact that we were the agents who had produced the cataclysm.

But as the morning advanced the airships came flocking in greater and
greater numbers from every direction, many swooping down close to the
flood in order to rescue those who were drowning. Hundreds gathered
along the slip of land which was crowded as I have described, with
refugees, while other hundreds rapidly assembled about us, evidently
preparing for an attack.

We had learned in our previous contests with the airships of the
Martians that our electrical ships had a great advantage over them, not
merely in rapidity and facility of movement, but in the fact that our
disintegrators could sweep in every direction, while it was only with
much difficulty that the Martian airships could discharge their
electrical strokes at an enemy poised directly above their heads.

Accordingly, orders were instantly flashed to all the squadrons to rise
vertically to an elevation so great that the rarity of the atmosphere
would prevent the airships from attaining the same level.

This maneuver was executed so quickly that the Martians were unable to
deal us a blow before we were poised above them in such a position that
they could not easily reach us. Still they did not mean to give up the
conflict.

Presently we saw one of the largest of their ships maneuvering in a very
peculiar manner, the purpose of which we did not at first comprehend.
Its forward portion commenced slowly to rise, until it pointed upward
like the nose of a fish approaching the surface of the water. The moment
it was in this position, an electrical bolt was darted from its prow,
and one of our ships received a shock which, although it did not prove
fatal to the vessel itself, killed two or three men aboard it,
disarranged its apparatus, and rendered it for the time being useless.

"Ah, that's their trick, is it?" said Mr. Edison. "We must look out for
that. Whenever you see one of the airships beginning to stick its nose
up after that fashion blaze away at it."

An order to this effect was transmitted throughout the squadron. At the
same time several of the most powerful disintegrators were directed upon
the ship which had executed the stratagem and, reduced to a wreck, it
dropped, whirling like a broken kite until it fell into the flood
beneath.

Still the Martian ships came flocking in ever greater numbers from all
directions. They made desperate attempts to attain the level at which we
hung above them. This was impossible, but many, getting an impetus by a
swift run in the denser portion of the atmosphere beneath, succeeded in
rising so high that they could discharge their electric artillery with
considerable effect. Others, with more or less success, repeated the
maneuver of the ship which had first attacked us, and thus the battle
gradually became more general and more fierce, until, in the course of
an hour or two, our squadron found itself engaged with probably a
thousand airships, which blazed with incessant lightning strokes, and
were able, all too frequently, to do us serious damage.

But on our part the battle was waged with a cool determination and a
consciousness of insuperable advantage which boded ill for the enemy.
Only three or four of our sixty electrical ships were seriously damaged,
while the work of the disintegrators upon the crowded fleet that floated
beneath us was terrible to look upon.

Our strokes fell thick and fast on all sides. It was like firing into a
flock of birds that could not get away. Notwithstanding all their
efforts they were practically at our mercy. Shattered into
unrecognizable fragments, hundreds of the airships continually dropped
from their great height to be swallowed up in the boiling waters.

Yet they were game to the last. They made every effort to get at us, and
in their frenzy they seemed to discharge their bolts without much regard
to whether friends or foes were injured. Our eyes were nearly blinded by
the ceaseless glare beneath us, and the uproar was indescribable.

At length, after this fearful contest had lasted for at least three
hours, it became evident that the strength of the enemy was rapidly
weakening. Nearly the whole of their immense fleet of airships had been
destroyed, or so far damaged that they were barely able to float. Just
so long, however, as they showed signs of resistance we continued to
pour our merciless fire upon them, and the signal to cease was not given
until the airships, which had escaped serious damage began to flee in
every direction.

"Thank God, the thing is over," said Mr. Edison. "We have got the
victory at last, but how we shall make use of it is something that at
present I do not see."

"But will they not renew the attack?" asked someone.

"I do not think they can," was the reply. "We have destroyed the very
flower of their fleet."

"And better than that," said Colonel Smith, "we have destroyed their
clan; we have made them afraid. Their discipline is gone."

But this was only the beginning of our victory. The floods below were
achieving a still greater triumph, and now that we had conquered the
airships we dropped within a few hundred feet of the surface of the
water and then turned our faces westward in order to follow the advance
of the deluge and see whether, as we hoped, it would overwhelm our
enemies in the very center of their power.

In a little while we had overtaken the first wave, which was still
devouring everything. We saw it bursting the banks of the canal,
sweeping away forests of gigantic trees, and swallowing cities and
villages, leaving nothing but a broad expanse of swirling and eddying
waters, which, in consequence of the prevailing red hue of the
vegetation and the soil, looked, as shuddering we gazed down upon it,
like an ocean of blood flecked with foam and steaming with the escaping
life of the planet from whose veins it gushed.

As we skirted the southern borders of the continent the same dreadful
scenes which we had beheld on the coast of Aeria presented themselves.
Crowds of refugees thronged the high borders of the land and struggled
with one another for a foothold against the continually rising flood.

We saw, too, flitting in every direction, but rapidly fleeing before our
approach, many airships, evidently crowded with Martians, but not armed
either for offense or defense. These, of course, we did not disturb, for
merciless as our proceedings seemed even to ourselves, we had no
intention of making war upon the innocent, or upon those who had no
means to resist. What we had done it had seemed to us necessary to do,
but henceforth we were resolved to take no more lives if it could be
avoided.

Thus, during the remainder of that day, all of the following night and
all of the next day, we continued upon the heels of the advancing flood.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN

_THE WOMAN FROM CERES_


The second night we could perceive ahead of us the electric lights
covering the land of Thaumasia, in the midst of which lay the Lake of
the Sun. The flood would be upon it by daybreak, and, assuming that the
demoralization produced by the news of the coming of the waters, which
we were aware had hours before been flashed to the capitol of Mars,
would prevent the Martians from effectively manning their forts, we
thought it safe to hasten on with the flagship, and one or two others,
in advance of the waters, and to hover over the Lake of the Sun, in the
darkness, in order that we might watch the deluge perform its awful work
in the morning.

Thaumasia, as we have before remarked, was a broad, oval-shaped land,
about 1,800 miles across, having the Lake of the Sun exactly in its
center. From this lake, which was four or five hundred miles in
diameter, and circular in outline, many canals radiated, as straight as
the spokes of a wheel, in every direction, and connected it with the
surrounding seas.

Like all the other Martian continents, Thaumasia lay below the level of
the sea, except toward the south, where it fronted the ocean.

Completely surrounding the lake was a great ring of cities constituting
the capitol of Mars. Here the genius of the Martians had displayed
itself to the full. The surrounding country was irrigated until it
fairly bloomed with gigantic vegetation and flowers; the canals were
carefully regulated with locks so that the supply of water was under
complete control; the display of magnificent metallic buildings of all
kinds and sizes produced a most dazzling effect, and the protection
against enemies afforded by the innumerable fortifications surrounding
the ringed city, and guarding the neighboring lands, seemed complete.

Suspended at a height of perhaps two miles from the surface, near the
southern edge of the lake, we waited for the oncoming flood. With the
dawn of day we began to perceive more clearly the effects which the news
of the drowning of the planet had produced. It was evident that many of
the inhabitants of the cities had already fled. Airships on which the
fugitives hung as thick as swarms of bees were seen, elevated but a
short distance above the ground, and making their way rapidly toward the
south.

The Martians knew that their only hope of escape lay in reaching the
high southern border of the land before the floods were upon them. But
they must have known also that that narrow beach would not suffice to
contain one in ten of those who sought refuge there. The density of the
population around the Lake of the Sun seemed to us incredible. Again our
hearts sank within us at the sight of the fearful destruction of life
for which we were responsible. Yet we comforted ourselves with the
reflection that it was unavoidable. As Colonel Smith put it:

"You couldn't trust these coyotes. The only thing to do was to drown
them out. I am sorry for them, but I guess there will be as many left as
will be good for us, anyhow."

We had not long to wait for the flood. As the dawn began to streak the
east, we saw its awful crest moving out of the darkness, bursting across
the canals and plowing its way into the direction of the crowded shores
of the Lake of the Sun. The supply of water behind that great wave
seemed inexhaustible. Five thousand miles it had traveled, and yet its
power was as great as when it started from the Syrtis Major.

We caught sight of the oncoming water before it was visible to the
Martians beneath us. But while it was yet many miles away, the roar of
it reached them, and then arose a chorus of terrified cries, the effect
of which, coming to our ears out of the half gloom of the morning, was
most uncanny and horrible. Thousands upon thousands of the Martians
still remained here to become victims of the deluge. Some, perhaps, had
doubted the truth of the reports that the banks were down and the floods
were out; others, for one reason or another had been unable to get away;
others, like the inhabitants of Pompeii, had lingered too long, or had
returned after beginning their flight to secure abandoned treasures, and
now it was too late to get away.

With a roar that shook the planet the white wall rushed upon the great
city beneath our feet, and in an instant it had been engulfed. On went
the flood, swallowing up the Lake of the Sun itself, and in a little
while, as far as our eyes could range, the land of Thaumasia had been
turned into a raging sea.

We now turned our ships toward the southern border of the land,
following the direction of the airships carrying the fugitives, a few of
which were still navigating the atmosphere a mile beneath us. In their
excitement and terror the Martians paid little attention to us,
although, as the morning brightened, they must have been aware of our
presence over their heads. But, apparently, they no longer thought of
resistance; their only object was escape from the immediate and
appalling danger.

When we had progressed to a point about half way from the Lake of the
Sun to the border of the sea, having dropped down within a few hundred
feet of the surface, there suddenly appeared, in the midst of the raging
waters, a sight so remarkable that at first I rubbed my eyes in
astonishment, not crediting their report of what they beheld.

Standing on the apex of a sandy elevation, which still rose a few feet
above the gathering flood, was a figure of a woman, as perfect in form
and in classic beauty of feature as the Venus of Milo--a magnified human
being not less than forty feet in height!

But for her swaying and the wild motions of her arms, we should have
mistaken her for a marble statue.

Aina, who happened to be looking, instantly exclaimed:

"It is the woman from Ceres. She was taken prisoner by the Martians
during their last invasion of that world, and since then has been a
slave in the palace of the emperor."

Apparently her great stature had enabled her to escape, while her
masters had been drowned. She had fled like the others, toward the
south, but being finally surrounded by the rising waters, had taken
refuge on the hillock of sand, where we saw her. This was fast giving
way under the assault of the waves, and even while we watched the water
rose to her knees.

"Drop lower," was the order of the electrical steersman of the flagship,
and as quickly as possible we approached the place where the towering
figure stood.

She had realized the hopelessness of her situation, and quickly ceased
those appalling and despairing gestures, which had at first served to
convince us that it was indeed a living being on whom we were looking.

There she stood, with a light, white garment thrown about her, erect,
half-defiant, half yielding to her fear, more graceful than any Greek
statue, her arms outstretched, yet motionless, and her eyes upcast, as
if praying to her God to protect her. Her hair, which shone like gold in
the increasing light of day, streamed over her shoulders, and her great
eyes were astare between terror and supplication. So wildly beautiful a
sight not one of us had ever beheld.

For a moment sympathy was absorbed in admiration. Then:

"Save her! Save her!" was the cry that arose throughout the ship.

Ropes were instantly thrown out, and one or two men prepared to let
themselves down in order better to aid her.

But when we were almost within reach, and so close that we could see the
very expression of her eyes, which appeared to take no note of us, but
to be fixed, with a far away look upon something beyond human ken,
suddenly the undermined bank on which she stood gave way, the blood red
flood swirled in from right to left, and then:

    "The waters closed above her face
    With many a ring."

"If but for that woman's sake, I am sorry we drowned the planet,"
exclaimed Sydney Phillips. But a moment afterward I saw that he
regretted what he had said, for Aina's eyes were fixed upon him.
Perhaps, however, she did not understand his remark, and perhaps if she
did it gave her no offence.

