Mrs. Moseley, seizing the letter, and turning it over, exclaimed
excitedly:

"Why, sakes alive, John, it ain't a foreign letter at all; it have the
Norwich post-mark on it. I do hope as there ain't no bad news of
mother."

"Well, open it and see, wife," answered the practical husband. The wife
did so.

Alas! her fears were confirmed. A very old mother down in the country
was pronounced dying, and Mrs. Moseley must start without an hour's
delay if she would see her alive.

Then ensued bustle and confusion. John Moseley was heard to mutter that
it came at a queer ill-conwenient time, Mr. Danvers being away, and a
deal more than or'nary put in his wife's hands. However, there was no
help for it. The dying won't wait for other people's convenience.
Cecile helped Mrs. Moseley to pack her small carpet-bag. Crying
bitterly, the loving-hearted woman bade both children a tender good-by.
If her mother really died, she would only remain for the funeral. At
the farthest she would be back at the end of a week. In the meantime,
Cecile was to take care of Moseley for her. By the twelve o'clock train
she was off to Norforkshire. She little guessed that those bright and
sweet faces which had made her home so homelike for the last two months
were not to greet her on her return. Maurice cried bitterly at losing
Mammie Moseley. Cecile went to school with a strangely heavy heart. Her
only consolation was in the hope that her good friend would quickly
return. But that hope was dashed to the ground the very next morning.
For Mrs. Moseley, writing to her husband, informed him that her old
mother had rallied; that the doctor thought she might live for a week
or so longer, but that she had found her in so neglected and sad a
condition that she had not the heart to leave her again. Moseley must
get someone to take up her church work for her, for she could not leave
her mother while she lived.

It was on the very afternoon of this day that Cecile, walking slowly
home with Maurice from school, and regretting very vehemently to her
little brother the great loss they both had in the absence of dear,
dear Mammie Moseley, was startled by a loud and frightened exclamation
from her little brother.

"Oh, Cecile! Oh, look, look!"

Maurice pointed with an eager finger to a woman who, neatly dressed
from head to foot in black, was walking in front of them.

"'Tis--'tis Aunt Lydia Purcell--'tis wicked Aunt Lydia Purcell," said
Maurice.

Cecile felt her very heart standing still; her breath seemed to leave
her--her face felt cold. Before she could stir a step or utter an
exclamation the figure in black turned quickly and faced the children.
No doubt who she was. No doubt whose cold gray eyes were fixed on them.
Cecile and Maurice, huddling close together, gazed silently. Aunt Lydia
came on. She looked at the little pair, but when she came up to them,
passed on without a word or sign of apparent recognition.

"Oh! come home, Cecile, come home," said Maurice.

They were now in the street where the Moseleys lived, and as they
turned in at the door, Cecile looked round. Lydia Purcell was standing
at the corner and watching them.




CHAPTER X.

STARTING ON THE GREAT JOURNEY.


Cecile and Maurice ran quickly upstairs, pulled the rope with a will,
and got into the Moseleys' attic.

"We are safe now," said the little boy, who had not seen Lydia watching
them from the street corner.

Cecile, panting after her rapid run, and with her hand pressed to her
heart, stood quiet for a moment, then she darted into their snug little
attic bedroom, shut the door, and fell on her knees.

"Lord Jesus," she said aloud, "wicked Aunt Lydia Purcell has seen us,
and we must go away at once. Don't forget to guide me and Maurice and
Toby."

She said this little prayer in a trembling voice. She felt there was
not a moment to lose; any instant Aunt Lydia might arrive. She flung
the bedclothes off the bed, and thrusting her hand into a hole in the
mattress, pulled out the Russia-leather purse. Joined to its former
contents was now six shillings and sixpence in silver. This money was
the change over from Maurice's half sovereign.

Cecile felt that it was a very little sum to take them to France, but
there was no help for it. She and Maurice and Toby must manage on this
sum to walk to Dover. She knew enough of geography now to be sure that
Dover was the right place to go to.

She slipped the change from the half sovereign into a sixpenny purse
which Moseley had given her on Christmas Day. The precious
Russia-leather purse was restored to its old hiding place in the bosom
of her frock. Then, giving a mournful glance round the little chamber
which she was about to quit, she returned to Maurice.

"Don't take off your hat, Maurice, darling; we have got to go."

"To go!" said Maurice, opening his brown eyes wide. "Are we to leave
our nice night's lodging? Is that what you mean? No, Cecile," said the
little boy, seating himself firmly on the floor. "I don't intend to go.
Mammie Moseley said I was to be here when she came back, and I mean to
be here."

"But, oh! Maurice, Maurice, I must go south, Will you let me go alone?
Can you live without me, Maurice, darling?"

"No, Cecile, you shall not go. You shall stay here too. We need neither
of us go south. It's much, much nicer here."

Cecile considered a moment. This opposition from Maurice puzzled her.
She had counted on many obstacles, but this came from an unlooked-for
quarter.

Moments were precious. Each instant she expected to hear the step she
dreaded on the attic stairs. Without Maurice, however, she could not
stir. Resolving to fight for her purse of gold, with even life itself
if necessary, she sat down by her little brother on the floor.

"Maurice," she said--as she spoke, she felt herself growing quite old
and grave--"Maurice, you know that ever since our stepmother died, I
have told you that me and you must go on a long, long journey. We must
go south. You don't like to go. Nor I don't like it neither,
Maurice--but that don't matter. In the book Mrs. Moseley gave me all
about Jesus, it says that people, and even little children, have to do
lots of things they don't like. But if they are brave, and do the hard
things, Jesus the good Guide, is _so_ pleased with them. Maurice, if
you come with me to-day, you will be a real, brave French boy. You know
how proud you are of being a French boy."

"Yes," answered Maurice, pouting his pretty rosy lips a little, "I
don't want to be an English boy. I want to be French, same as father.
But it won't make me English to stay in our snug night's lodging, where
everything is nice and warm, and we have plenty to eat. Why should we
go south to-day, Cecile? Does Jesus want us to go just now?"

"I will tell you," said Cecile; "I will trust you, Maurice. Maurice,
when our stepmother was dying, she gave me something very
precious--something very, very precious. Maurice, if I tell you what it
was, will you promise never, never, never to tell anybody else? Will
you look me in the face, and promise me that, true and faithful,
Maurice?"

"True and faithful," answered Maurice, "true and faithful, Cecile.
Cecile, what did our stepmother give you to hide?"

"Oh, Maurice! I dare not tell you all. It is a purse--a purse full,
full of money, and I have to take this money to somebody away in
France. Maurice, you saw Aunt Lydia Purcell just now in the street, and
she saw me and you. Once she took that money away from me, and Jane
Parsons brought it back again. And now she saw us, and she saw where we
live. She looked at us as we came in at this door, and any moment she
may come here. Oh, Maurice! if she comes here, and if she steals my
purse of gold, I _shall die_."

Here Cecile's fortitude gave way. Still seated on the floor, she
covered her face with her hands, and burst into tears.

Her tears, however, did what her words could not do. Maurice's tender
baby heart held out no longer. He stood up and said valiantly:

"Cecile, Cecile, we'll leave our night's lodging. We'll go away. Only
who's to tell Mammie Moseley and Mr. Moseley?"

"I'll write," said Cecile; "I can hold my pen pretty well now. I'll
write a little note."

She went to the table where she knew some seldom-used note paper was
kept, selected a gay pink sheet, and dipping her pen in the ink, and
after a great deal of difficulty, and some blots, which, indeed, were
made larger by tear-drops, accomplished a few forlorn little words.
This was the little note, ill-spelt and ill-written, which greeted
Moseley on his return home that evening:

"Dear Mammie Moseley and Mr. Moseley: The little children you gave so
many nights' lodgings to have gone away. We have gone south, but there
is no use looking for us, for Cecile must do what she promised. Mammie
Moseley, if Cecile can't do what she promised she will die. The little
children would not have gone now when mammie was away, but a great,
great danger came, and we had not a moment to stay. Some day, Mammie
Moseley and Mr. Moseley, me and Maurice will come back and then look
for a great surprise. Now, good-by. Your most grateful little children,

"CECILE--MAURICE.

"Toby has to come with us, please, and he is most obliged for all
kindness."

This little note made Moseley dash his hand hastily more than once
before his eyes, then catching up his hat he rushed off to the nearest
police-station, but though all steps were immediately taken, the
children were not found. Mrs. Moseley came home and cried nearly as
sorely for them as she did for her dead mother.

"John," she said, "I'll never pick up no more strays--never, never.
I'll never be good to no more strays. You mark my words, John Moseley."

In answer to this, big John Moseley smiled and patted his wife's cheek.
It is needless to add that he knew her better than to believe even her
own words on that subject.






THIRD PART.

THE GREAT JOURNEY.



  "I know not the way I am going',
  But well do I know my Guide."




CHAPTER I.

ON THE SAND HILL.


There is an old saying which tells us that there is a special
Providence over the very young and the very old. This old-world saying
was specially proved in the cases of Maurice and Cecile. How two
creatures so young, so inexperienced, should ever find themselves in a
foreign land, must have remained a mystery to those who did not hold
this faith.

Cecile was eight, Maurice six years old; the dog, of no age in
particular, but with a vast amount of canine wisdom, was with them. He
had walked with them all the way from London to Dover. He had slept
curled up close to them in two or three barns, where they had passed
nights free of expense. He had jumped up behind them into loaded carts
or wagons when they were fortunate enough to get a lift, and when they
reached Dover he had wandered with them through the streets, and had
found himself by their sides on the quay, and in some way also on board
the boat which was to convey them to France. And now they were in
France, two miles outside Calais, on a wild, flat, and desolate plain.
But neither this fact nor the weather, for it was a raw and bitter
winter's day, made any difference, at least at first, to Cecile. All
lesser feelings, all minor discomforts, were swallowed up in the joyful
knowledge that they were in France, in the land where Lovedy was sure
to be, in their beloved father's country. They were in France, their
own _belle_ France! Little she knew or recked, poor child! how far was
this present desolate France from her babyhood's sunny home. Having
conquered the grand difficulty of getting there, she saw no other
difficulties in her path just now.

"Oh, Maurice! we are safe in our own country," she said, in a tone of
ecstasy, to the little boy.

Maurice, however,--cold, tired, still seasick from his passage across
the Channel,--saw nothing delightful in this fact.

"I'm very hungry, Cecile," he said, "and I'm very cold. How soon shall
we find breakfast and a night's lodging?"

"Maurice, dear, it is quite early in the day; we don't want to think of
a night's lodging for many hours yet."

"But we passed through a town, a great big town," objected Maurice;
"why did you not look for a night's lodging there, Cecile?"

"'Twasn't in my 'greement, Maurice, darling. I promised, promised
faithful when I went on this search, that we'd stay in little villages
and small tiny inns, and every place looked big in that town. But we'll
soon find a place, Maurice, and then you shall have breakfast. Toby
will take us to a village very soon."

All Toby's temporary degeneration of character had vanished since his
walk to Dover. He was as alert as ever in his care of Maurice, as
anxiously solicitous for Cecile's benefit, and had also developed a
remarkable and valuable faculty for finding small towns and
out-of-the-way villages, where Cecile's slender store of money could be
spent to the best advantage.

On board the small boat which had brought the children across the
Channel, Cecile's piquant and yet pathetic face had won the captain's
good favor. He had not only given all three their passage for nothing,
but had got the little girl to confide sufficiently in him to find out
that she carried money with her. He asked her if it was French or
English money, and on her taking out her precious Russia-leather purse
from its hiding-place, and producing with trembling hands an English
sovereign, he had changed it into small and useful French money, and
had tried to make the child comprehend the difference between the two.
When they got to Calais he managed to land the children without the
necessity of a passport, of which, of course, Cecile knew nothing. What
more he might have done was never revealed, for Cecile, Maurice, and
Toby were quickly lost sight of in the bustle on the quay.

The little trio walked off--Cecile, at least, feeling very
triumphant--and never paused, until obliged to do so, owing to
Maurice's weariness.

"We will find a village at once now, Maurice," said his little sister.
She called Toby, whistled to him, gave him to understand what they
wanted, and the dog, with a short bark and glance of intelligence, ran
on in front. He sniffed the air, he smelt the ground. Presently he
seemed to know all about it, for he set off soberly in a direct line;
and after half an hour's walking, brought the children to a little
hamlet, of about a dozen poor-looking houses. In front of a tiny inn he
drew up and sat down on his haunches, tired, but well pleased.

The door of the little wayside inn stood open. Cecile and Maurice
entered at once. A woman in a tall peasant's cap and white apron came
forward and demanded in French what she could serve the little dears
with. Cecile, looking helpless, asked in English for bread and milk. Of
course the woman could not understand a word. She held up her hands and
proclaimed the stupendous fact that the children were undoubtedly
English to her neighbors, then burst into a fresh volley of French.

And here first broke upon poor little Cecile the stupendous fact that
they were in a land where they could not speak a word of the language.
She stood helpless, tears filling her sweet blue eyes. A group gathered
