The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Revolutions of Time, by Jonathan Dunn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Revolutions of Time

Author: Jonathan Dunn

Posting Date: February 14, 2015 [EBook #8735]
Release Date: August, 2005
First Posted: August 6, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REVOLUTIONS OF TIME ***




Produced by Jonathan Dunn









THE
REVOLUTIONS
OF
TIME

By Jonathan Dunn


Note to the reader: The manuscript for this book was found in a
weather-beaten stone box on an island in the Pacific Ocean. Its contents
were written in an ancient form of Latin, which was translated and
edited by Jonathan Dunn.


Dedicated to Bernibus,
amicus certus in re incerta cernitur.


Table of Contents:
Chapter 1: Past and Present
Chapter 2: Predestined Deja Vu
Chapter 3: Zards and Canitaurs
Chapter 4: Onan, Lord of the Past
Chapter 5: The Treeway
Chapter 6: The Fiery Lake
Chapter 7: Down to Nunami
Chapter 8: The Temple of Time
Chapter 9: Mutually Assured Deception
Chapter 10: Devolution
Chapter 11: The Land Across the Sea
Chapter 12: The White Eagle
Chapter 13: The Big Bang
Chapter 14: Past and Future


...The very men who claimed mental superiority because they were free
from superstitions and divine disillusionment were themselves victims of
their own sophism, and while they thought themselves crowned with
enlightenment, it was naught but the Phrygian caps of their prejudices
toward the material state.

--Jehu, the Kinsman Redeemer

The physical manifestation of the spiritual force is not the spiritual
force at all, only a bland deception. If you only focus on what you can
see directly, than you chase after only the representation and not the
object desired. If a bird is flying through the sky at noontime, casting
a shadow on the ground below him, and a man comes along, and in the hope
of catching the bird chases after its shadow, it is evident that he will
never catch it, for when he does reach it, he will find that there is
nothing there at all, only the shadow of what it was he desired. So it
is with the spiritual!

--Onan, Lord of the Past





Chapter 1: Past and Present



My name is Jehu. Most probably it sounds foreign and unfamiliar to you,
devoid of the qualities of affection and personality which give
character to a name. It is a harsh name, cold and inhuman, like
something out of the night, an unwelcome intruder into the warmth of
familiarity. It inspires no blissful memories, nor does it kindle fond
feelings in the bosom of the hearer, instead the heart is hardened to it
like the feathers of a duck to water, repulsing it, leaving it to run
off into the ditches and by-ways of the long forgotten past, to trickle
dejectedly into those stagnant ponds where so many words of wisdom are
imprisoned: out of sight, out of mind, out of heart, out of history. Yet
while history is forgotten and misconstrued, it is repeated, for what is
life without water, which nourishes and sustains it, and what is life
without wisdom, which protects and cultivates it?

Jehu is my name, though it no longer brings the quickened pulse and keen
anticipation of happiness to the hearts of any, not even my own. For
what deference can be given to a name, though not in itself a thing of
dishonor, which represents the failure to derail the evitable fate which
wrecks the race of man again and again. Not that I myself embody such a
failure, nor even that I gave birth to the dreaded fate's latest
momentum, but as is seen time and again throughout history, one name is
brought to represent the tide of change, for better or worse, the doer
of deeds which were done not by him, but by a mass of independent doers,
yet it is written in the annals of history as the deeds of but one man.

While I had little to do, consciously, with the doom of the earth, I
will always be fingered as the villain, as the ambitious Napoleon or the
barbaric Atilla, the arrogant Augustus or the fearful Cyrus. Someone has
to bear the burden of shame on the pages of history for the people of
his time, and in that sense, maybe I truly can be called their kinsman
redeemer. Perhaps it is my fate to bear witness to the wrongs of a
people, of which even you are not wholly innocent.

And yet can an individual be blamed for the faults of a society, can
personal responsibility be extended to the members of an unknown
multitude? How the enjoined conscience of one longs to say no, but in
good faith it cannot be said, for in this case the mask of ignorance
cannot supersede the face of guilt. Indeed, ignorance in this case only
adds to the shame of the guilty, this being a crime not of misdeeds but
of negligence, twisted together with the vices of humanity into a thick
and sturdy cord, a rope that cannot be pulled apart and individually
examined, yet must be taken as a whole. Insularly, the strand of
ignorance could be easily snapped, remedied by but a little education,
yet when woven together by one's own hands with prides and prejudices,
it forms an unbreakable rope, which is placed about our neck to hang us:
through means of our own doing is our fate foretold. If but one or two
of the strands were omitted, the result would be a feeble rope, easily
broken, and we would live. But by our own vices is our mortality made
manifest, by our own wrongs are we wronged.

By now you may be beginning to feel the impulses of indignation arising
in your breast, for who am I, the admittedly despicable Jehu, to group
you as my fellow convicts, my co-conspirators, in a sense? And you are
right, for I am not your judge and neither do I wish to be.

Having said that, I now request of you to put down the book and
discontinue reading.

"Surely," you say to yourself, "He is mentally deranged, for what author
in his right mind would encourage his readers to disperse, what writer
does not thrive on the digestion of his words by an eager audience?"

Here I must make a revelation to you: if my manuscript has indeed been
found, then I have long since been dead; and I assure you that in
whatever form my existence takes in the present, I have little desire
for your intrigue or goodwill. Do you think Melville is consoled in
death of his miserable life by the vainglorious praises of the living?
Or do you think that Poe is comforted by such avid attentions in his
present abode? In truth, Melville's only rivalry is now within, and
Poe's only raven that daunting memory of those truths which had escaped
him in life, but which now are opened to you.

More importantly, if this manuscript has been found, it proves that what
is contained herein is the unerring truth. I do not write this to
exonerate myself, however let me say here that I am more the Andre' than
the Arnold, for I was but the emissary of history, not the traitor to
humanity, and if not me then some other would have filled the void. Let
it be remembered that it was Andre' who gave his life for his deeds, and
yet it is Andre' who is recollected with a sweet sorrow, and though
Arnold lived, he had no peace. Yet while history is vivid and
encyclopedic, in itself a living organism, it can speak only through the
mouths of men, who often misrepresent it for their own partisan and
prejudiced plans. It is strong and steadfast, though, and in time is
always victorious over its menial opposition, for what is history but
the past tense of truth, and it is justly said that veritas numquam
perit, truth never dies.

Going back to what I said before, namely that at my manuscript's
discovery my demise will itself be history: I am assured that such is
true, for even now as I write this my death is near at hand. How wide
the abyss of time that separates us is I cannot tell, but I do know that
it is beyond the reckoning of men, such an unknown barrage of hollow,
formless years. Yet as you read this it is as if I were speaking
directly to you, despite all of the desolation between our times. That
is what makes history an organic being, and by history I mean all of the
past, or all of the future, depending on your viewpoint.

A book is a connection between times and peoples, more so than any other
medium. As I put these words down in writing, it is as if I am imparting
my very self into the pages. And as you read them, the name Jehu slowly
forms into an image, into a personality, and from the empty word Jehu
comes the great well of affection springing from a personal intimacy. A
book is an enigma in which no time exists, and as it is read it brings
the reader into its eternal being, for while it sits closed on a shelf
it is no more than a forgotten memory, yet when it is opened its
contents come to life and its characters and locations are once more
existent in the same state as when they were written, the story becomes
once more reality.

While I have long been deceased, when you read this I am brought to life
once more, and with my rebirth I tell you my story, and make known to
you the truths contained therein. The words of this book are a rune
gate, a portal to the past, and as you read them, your present fades
away and you are drawn into my present, this very moment in which I now
write. Then you connect with me intimately, and for a brief time the
gulf of mortality is transcended and the depths of my being are laid
open to you. We commune together and you eat of my flesh and drink of my
blood, merging your existence with mine.

Come to me now, my friend, come to me across the gulf of mortality, for
I await you. Come, and in your spiritual peregrination meet with me, in
this land of the past which is so foreign and unfamiliar to you, but
which will become for a time your home. Come to me, my friend, and let
me tell you my story.






Chapter 2: Predestined Deja Vu



It was in the last stages of sleep that I began to feel the warm morning
sun strike my face, and hear the pleasant chirping of birds and
crickets. I rolled slowly over, stretched my legs and my back, and stood
up, with the last remnants of a dream playing quietly in my mind. But as
I came to my feet and got a clear view of where I was, I realized it was
not a dream that I had had at all, but something far more sobering. I
found myself somewhere in the center of a very large prairie which
covered the land for many miles around. From the sun's lowly position on
the eastern horizon, it was evident to me that the new day was just
dawning, casting a golden hue on the grasses that covered the prairie's
surface.

Around the distant outskirts of the plain I could make out a ring of
trees circumventing the whole, waving almost imperceptibly to and fro in
the light breeze that was blowing. A few miles to the southwest there
was a group of odd looking trees stretching up over the horizon to a
considerable height. They were closer than the outer ring, which kept a
uniform girth around the prairie, but somehow they looked very peculiar
and foreboding, and I got one of those sobering feelings which I like to
call predestined deja vu. What I mean is that I got a sense of deja vu,
but instead of the past converging with the present into one thought,
the present seemed to converge with the future, and the result was a
mysterious foreboding of something, though I couldn't tell what. That is
the sensation that I had when I saw what I assumed to be a small
grouping of trees somewhere in the southwestern portion of the savanna,
though that was merely a guess, for in the distance I could only make
out several dark forms rising out of the grassland like trees, or
possibly buildings, one of them being a great deal taller than the
others, with a spherical shape on top that only faintly resembled a
tree's crown. If it was indeed a tree, it was the largest that I have
ever seen, for it looked to be upwards of 800 feet tall.

My mental warning bells were ringing quite loudly, and I endeavored to
silence them by extreme exertions of the will, but they would not be
subdued. I assumed that they were not at all correct, much like the
fearful expectancy some have while swimming in the ocean, out of sight
of all land, of being attacked by an enormous leviathan of the deep. As
unfounded as the fear is, it places one into a frenzy of dubious
thoughts that inspire equally frantic and anarchist actions. Because of
this, I thought that my ideas were naught but superstitious fancies, yet
try as I might, I could not rid myself of them.

Instead, I made up my mind to set off in the opposite direction, north,
and to advance at a double march until I should reach the woody border,
which looked to present shelter not only from the southern apparitions,
but also from the shielded underworld of the grasses, in which also
dwelt the mysterious sense of fear and predestined deja vu. It was
slightly chilly, but beyond that nothing defaced the temperate beauty of
the day, and even that promised to soon dissipate with the continual
strengthening of the sun's warmth. As I walked, or rather, trotted
along, it did just that, and in the growing warmth of the day the sweet
fragrances of the many various grasses rose to the surface, delighting
my odor perceiving sensors with their earthy simplicity.

The day marched on, and with it I, and the distant wall of trees began
to slowly grow closer. At length, I found myself at their edge, at
around the noon hour, and as I came upon the first of them, I leaned
against the trunk of a large, thickset tree for a moment of repose and
reflection in its shade. It was by all appearances an ancient wood, for
the line between it and the prairie was distinct, appearing as if the
shrubs and lesser flora had acquiesced to fate and retreated beyond the
forest's claimed boundaries, rather than continue for countless ages to
charge and then be pushed back, to gain a foothold only to be thrown out
a year or two later. The trees themselves were mighty pinions of
strength, tall and of great girth, and spread far apart from one
another, leaving wide open spaces between their towering trunks. A
short, soft grass clothed the land that stretched on in their midst,
joined in its solitude by a hearty looking moss that stretched itself
out on the trunks of the trees and on the rocks and boulders that lay
scattered here and there among the open spaces. Far above, the trees'
great branches spread out a thick canopy, covering the whole of the
forest area in a relaxing and invigorating twilight, rendering itself
homely and quaint. After a few moments of enjoying that most pleasing
scene, I roused and extricated myself unwillingly from its enchanted
depths and set off once more into the heart of the woods, having no
where else to go.

After a time, I cannot say how long, I came upon a small, trickling
stream which flowed deeper into the woods, that direction being
northward. A short walk along its path, after refreshing myself to
content with its pure waters, brought me to its destination: a large
lake into which the forest opened. Its banks were very gradual and the
grass of the woodland led right up to the water's edge. The surface of
the water itself was smooth and delicate.

Amidst the pleasantness of the scene, there was something missing from
the feel of the area: inhabitants. There was an abundance of wild life
of all kinds, and much organic life as well, but something greater than
flora or fauna was missing: people. I had traveled so far, and without
any sighting of a person. It was a lonely and desolate feeling which
prevailed, despite the abundances of life. Novelties soon grow worthless
with no one to share them with, ideas become meaningless if not
communicated timely, emotions grow boisterous and uncontrollable with no
end to receive them.

I was quite alone, unfortunately, and it dampened my spirits
considerably. Feeling despondent, I turned and walked sullenly from the
lake's edge into the woodland once more, with no definite purpose in
mind, only a meandering thought of my dismal situation. My thoughts
morphed, in succession, from anxiety to despair, to anger, to
frustration, and in my frustration I knelt down and picked up a fallen
branch from the ground, walked to the nearest tree, and eyed a strange,
protruding knob that stuck out from the trunk. I held the branch at
shoulder's length and swung it at the knob with all the force of my
built up emotions. It hit with a crash and a hollow thud, leaving the
branch broken and my arm sore, but the knob undamaged.

But then something unexpected happened: with a grating noise, a small
hole appeared part way up the trunk, coming from what looked to be solid
wood, for no sign was seen before of its having an opening. From the
newly opened hole was then thrust out a head, hairy and with a short
snout-like edifice for a nose and mouth. Its eyes and the furry hair
which covered its face were brown, and a few wily whiskers protruded
from its snout. With a look of utter surprise, as if it had not expected
me as much as I had not expected it, it eyed me closely for a moment and
then looked anxiously from side to side and told me to come in.

When those words passed its lips, or whatever artifice it spoke from, a
great weight fell from my shoulders. After a short moment, quickened by
my relief, a door appeared in the trunk of the tree, its edges
previously hidden behind the thick mosses. Swinging inwards, it opened
and revealed the creature standing there, beckoning me to enter. I did,
and the door shut behind me, leaving me in the darkness of the hollow
tree.






Chapter 3: Zards and Canitaurs



My eyes quickly adjusted to the darkness, and once they did I saw that
the trunk was hollowed out to the extent of eight feet in diameter, with
two stairways, one up and another down, filling either corner of the
small entry room in which I found myself. Observing that my vision was
returned enough to see, the strange creature which had greeted me led me
down the descending staircase for a short way, until we came into a
cavern which was delved beneath the roots of the tree.

The walls and floor of the cavern, or more accurately, the sitting room,
for such it appeared to be, were paneled with a thick, heavy wood with
an almost artificially symmetric grain, and the ceiling was done in
diagonal boards of the same. Sitting in the center of the room was a
brick-laid pit in which burned an illuminating fire, and around it was
placed an odd covering frame that caught up the smoke and channeled it
via underground passages to some distant wilderness, where its sightless
remnants would dissipate into the atmosphere unnoticed. On the near side
of the fire was a round table flanked by four large, comfortable chairs,
padded by cushions made from the same material as the various carpets
and tapestries around the room.

There were two more of the strange creatures seated at the table, called
Canitaurs as I later found out, and as they are closely entwined with my
story, being prominent participants, I will describe them in some detail
here. They stood erect like a man, yet were quite contrasted in
appearance. Their skin for one was covered in a thick, impenetrable coat
of hair, much like a dog or a bear's. Their hands, also, were less
distinct in the fingers, though but slightly, and their limbs were a
little longer and thicker than a man's. The two most notable
differences, however, were the formation of their shoulders and chest,
which were very pronounced and muscular, and their faces. The latter's
features were brought to a point in the short snout, or muzzle, that
formed their nose and mouth, taking their chins with it and leaving a
long line from their neck to their chest open. Humanity prevailed in the
rest of their features, though, giving them the look of a man and canine
hybrid.

By then I had overcome my initial perplexion at the sight of the
Canitaurs, and I endeavored to put a strong check over my emotions in
order to prevent another outbreak of panic and to remain cool and
candid, come what would. Yet it was, ironically, the product of my
rashness that I had found their habitation at all. This I successfully
did, and as I entered the room, led by the Canitaur who was on watch,
the others stood politely and greeted me with an apparent intrigue.

Our conversation proceeded at follows:

"I am Wagner of the Canitaurs, my friend," said the one who appeared to
be the leader, "And these are Taurus and Bernibus," the latter being the
one who had led me down. "Welcome to Daem."

"I am Jehu," I told them, "It is a pleasure to meet you."

"Indeed, and under such circumstances as well. Tell me, how did you come
to be here?"

Here I smiled nervously, and replied, "I am a traveler from a distant
land, and came here by the advice of a friend."

At this somewhat false answer, more in character than in content, Wagner
looked at me wonderingly, as if detecting my falsehood, but did not
follow his look with any probing questions, to my great relief. In order
to steer the conversation away from this point, I added quickly, "I am
not at all disappointed, either, for the landscape is beautiful and the
trees and foliage are wondrously large, but I was surprised to find
that, from the prairie to the lake, I saw no one living among these
quaint locations."

Wagner looked at me closely, with a hint of almost reverencing respect
and said, "You were very fortunate in your travels, I assure you, for
had you arrived at any other time, you would have fallen into fouler
hands than ours by far."

"I do not understand what you mean," I said.

"Of course not, I am forgetting your new arrival has left you
unacquainted with affairs that I am faced with everyday. Let me explain:
we, that is, the Canitaurs, have been in open hostilities with the other
group of people on this island, the Zards, for as long as we can
remember. They have great military superiority in this section of Daem,
and when we come here we are forced to live in hiding, in outposts such
as this one."

"Why not just make peace?" I asked.

"Because it is our ideologies that conflict, neither group of us will
yield, and the solution can only be decided by force, military force. It
is fortunate that you have come among us first, for they would have
mistreated you."

"So you have said, though I do not see why I was not captured by them on
my journey through the plains, if they are as powerful in this quarter
as you say," I replied.

"As I said, the timing of your arrival was very fortunate," he said, "At
any other time you would have surely been caught, and then your fate
would have been uncertain, but yesterday was the Zard's new year, the
Kootch Patah, on which they spend all night in celebrations and
revelries. Because of this, they were all soundly asleep on your trip
through the prairie, very possibly laying at your feet, covered by the
tall grasses."

So my fears were not as unfounded as I had thought, was my predestined
deja vu, then, real as well? Only time would tell.

"I am indeed lucky then, as you have said, not only in the Zard's
unattentiveness, but also in finding of your secreted habitation, as
well as your friendly welcoming of me," I said.

"I must confess," he chuckled, "It is not merely from a one-sided
hospitality that you are welcomed."

"Indeed?" I said.

"Indeed," he answered, "For your appearance and the circumstances of
your arrival are almost uncannily the realizations of one of our most
ancient prophesies, one which we have longed to have fulfilled."

"Is that so?" I rhetorically asked.

"Surely it is," he said with a smile, though from happiness or humor I
could not tell. He went on soberly, saying: "The prophecy is concerning
the kinsman redeemer, one of the ancients sent by Onan, the Lord of the
Past, to redeem us from the destruction of this polluted world."

"What do you mean by 'one of the ancients'?" I interjected
questioningly.
