But he had made trial of a new life now, and was full of hopeful
confidence; and both mother and sister had begun to believe in him,
and had shown pride and satisfaction in his career.

So they rode forth in the first sunshine of a bright February
morning, with three stout serving men from Gablehurst to attend
them as far as Harwich. Lord Claude was willing to accept the
escort, as the road was unfamiliar to him, and he wanted no
needless delays along the route.

Rachel brought the stirrup cup, and the household assembled to
cheer the travellers as they rode away. There were tears in the
mother's eyes, but she smiled and waved her hand bravely. The
horses were in first-rate condition, and full of life and spirit.
They were delighted to find themselves travelling side by side
again; and the riders were pretty well occupied for the first few
miles of the road in curbing their gay spirits.

They had plenty of time to get to Harwich before the light failed
them, and the servants knew the road and the best inns to bait at.
The journey was performed without misadventure; and Tom dismissed
his retainers when he and his companion were safely installed in a
good inn upon the quay, as the servants intended making one or two
stages on the homeward road before stopping for the night.

Lord Claud had gone straight down to the harbour so soon as they
arrived, leaving Tom to make arrangements for the night. So far he
had said almost nothing as to the errand upon which they were bent,
and Tom had asked no questions, knowing he should be told what was
needful in due time. So when he had ordered a plentiful supper, he
strolled out upon the quay, and presently saw his comrade returning
with a satisfied look upon his face.

"Well, Tom, we are in luck's way. There is a skipper in harbour who
has unshipped his cargo, and is going back almost empty by the
morning's tide. He is glad enough to take us and our good horses
safely across to Rotterdam; and, with the light, favouring breeze
that has been blowing steadily these last three days, he declares
we ought to make the anchorage there before nightfall. With the sea
as smooth as this, too, I am not afraid to adventure the horses;
which I should be were a gale to blow."

"Do they suffer from seasickness?" asked Tom.

"Ay, from the nausea of it," answered Lord Claud; "but the relief
that we can gain by sickness is impossible to them, and therefore
they must needs die if things be too bad with them. But if the
weather change not--and there looks no fear of that--we shall have
a swift and prosperous voyage; so now let us to supper, and I will
tell you more of what lies before us."

But as it turned out, there were too many other guests at the table
for private talk to be possible; and only when on board the good
sloop Marlborough did Tom hear anything of the details of the
projected expedition.

It was a clear, promising morning, a light breeze blowing from the
west, but the sea still and smooth, only dimpling with the puffs of
wind. Tom stood on board beside the horses, soothing their fears at
the strange sights and sounds about them, his own heart beating
somewhat high with excitement at the thought of putting to sea for
the first time.

The sailors were busy hauling in ropes, singing and shouting. The
vessel gave a little start and shiver, there was a rattle of canvas
overhead, and a gentle lurching movement. Then the shore seemed
suddenly to be slipping away; and Tom knew, with a start of
surprise and exhilaration, that they were off upon their voyage to
unknown lands.

Presently the horses grew calm and quiet, used to their strange
surroundings, and willing to nibble at the heap of fragrant hay put
down at their feet. Tom was able to leave them with a clear
conscience, and came over to where Lord Claud was standing in the
fore part of the vessel, watching the sheets of green water that
fell away from the prow as the sloop cut her way through the waves.

"Well, friend Tom, so we are off at last."

"Yes, my lord; but I have not heard yet whither."

"No; and, like a wise and prudent fellow, have not desired to know
too much. You are a model of patience, Tom--an excellent companion
to have. But the time has come when I can safely enlighten you as
far as you need be enlightened. I shall not tell you all I know;
for, in truth, you would not understand it."

"That may very well be," answered Tom humbly.

"But I will tell you this much, Tom; we are bound upon an errand of
peril. We have some difficult journeyings to make, and there will
be certain persons lying in wait for messengers from Marlborough;
and we may be sore beset to avoid them. Tom, do you remember the
tall dark man with whom my duel was fought?"

"Sir James?"

"That is the name by which he goes in England. He passes there as
one Sir James Montacute, a man of bravery and wealth. But there is
another side to the picture. That man, Tom, is a spy, and in the
pay of the King of France. If I had known as much that day as I
have since learned from his Grace the Duke, methinks I should not
have left him alive upon the field. Tom, we shall probably have to
measure our wits against his in a duel of another sort ere long."

Tom threw back his head with a defiant gesture.

"Well, my lord; and I am ready!" he said.

"Very good, Tom; I thought as much. You did not love our
dark-skinned friend much better than I did. I think we shall find
him lurking in wait for us somewhere amid the snows of the St.
Bernard Pass. Hast ever heard of the St. Bernard, Tom, and the good
monks there?"

"I think I have," answered Tom, who had heard so many new things of
late that he could not be expected to keep them all in mind
together.

"Well, it may be we shall have to seek their hospitality yet;
although our way lies across the Little St. Bernard, as it is
called, that ancient pass which Hannibal and his host crossed when
they marched through the snows of Switzerland to pour themselves
upon the fertile plains of Italy. It is to this very day the only
route by which those snowy Alps may be crossed; and we must find
our way thither, Tom, and go down to the fair city of Turin."

"Is that where we are going?"

"Ay; hast heard of Victor Amadeus, Duke of Savoy?"

"Is he not one of the Allies?"

"Yes; albeit for a while he sided with the French King, who did
much to hold his fidelity. But now he is one of the Allies, and he
is sore beset by the armies of Louis. The King of Prussia is about
to send relief; but His Majesty is tardy, and the snows of winter
lie thick in his land, hindering rapid action. It is our part to
take the Duke news of the welcome aid, and of other matters I need
not be particular to name; and we shall need all our wits about us
to carry this matter to a successful issue."

"You mean that the pass will be watched?"

"Yes; we shall be certain to fall in with spies of the French King,
perhaps with Sir James himself. He has left England, so much is
known; and though he may be at the court of France, yet it may be
our hap to light upon him at any time. He is a man of cunning and
resource and ferocity. We shall want our best wits and our best
swordsmanship if we are to cope with him."

Tom's eyes sparkled with excitement and joy.

"And is the mountain pass the only way of getting into Italy, for I
have heard that Savoy lies in that land?" said Tom.

"Ay; Italy has had its strange vicissitudes of fortune, and has
been divided and redivided into duchies and kingdoms, till it needs
a clever scholar to tell her history aright. But it is enough for
our purpose that Savoy lies just beneath those grim mountains which
we must scale; and that for the present no other entrance is
possible."

"But there are other ways then?"

"Why, yes, we could at other times go by sea; but now that the
Spaniards are seeking to win back the rock of Gibraltar, which we
have lately reft from them, and which Marlborough says must never
be yielded up again, we cannot safely try that way; for we might
well fall into the hands of some Spanish vessel, and languish,
unknown and uncared for, in Spanish dungeons. We cannot travel
through France, and reach it from the shores of Genoa; because it
were too great peril for Englishmen to ride through the dominions
of the French monarch. So we must needs land at some friendly Dutch
port, and ride through their country, and so into Westphalia, and
thence to these mountain regions which cut us off from our
destination.

"Have you ever seen snow mountains, Tom, towering to the very skies
in virgin whiteness, with the rivers of ice, miles in width,
flowing silently down their rocky sides? It is a strange and
marvellous sight when viewed for the first time. I could find it in
my heart to wish I stood in your shoes, that all these new things
might be seen and heard for the first time!"

"And I would that I knew more of these strange lands, and the ways
of the people there," answered Tom; "for I fear me lest mine
ignorance may lead us into peril. But if such a thing as that were
to befall, I would lay down my life to save yours, my lord."

"I believe you, Tom," answered the other very gravely. He was
silent a while, and then he said slowly, "Tom, I am going to say a
strange thing to yon--at least it would sound strange to some; and,
indeed, I should not dare to say it to every companion in peril.
But I believe you to be stanch and true."

"I trust you will ever find me so, my lord."

"Well, Tom, this is the word that I would say to you. It may chance
that things come to this pass with us, that one of us twain must
needs fall into the hands of the enemy, and die; for there is
little hope of any other end when that befalls. And if we know and
can so arrange matters, it must be you and not I who will fall into
that peril."

Tom looked back without flinching.

"You speak well, my lord," he said. "It must be my lot to die. You
will not find me hold back when the moment comes."

Lord Claud took his hand and held it in both of his.

"It must be you, Tom; and yet I would rather it were myself. But I
have that intrusted to me which I must speak in the Duke's ear. The
despatches are as little compared with what I have had from
Marlborough's own lips--what may not be trusted upon paper.
Moreover, I could find my way through the countries, where you
would be lost for lack of words to ask your way. If one of us has
to be delivered over to death, it must be you."

"It must. I see it well."

"Yet we may both succeed in getting through, or we may both leave
our bones lying amid the eternal snows. Perhaps in years to come it
will matter little enough. Just now it seems a matter of more
importance. But I have told you this to show my trust in you, Tom.
There are not many comrades to whom I could have thus unburdened
myself. I should have had to use subtlety where now I use truth and
openness."

"You shall not find me fail you, my lord," answered Tom.



CHAPTER X. IN PERIL.


"Halt! and declare yourselves!" cried a hoarse voice speaking in
the French tongue.

"Now for it, Tom," said Lord Claud quietly, speaking between his
shut teeth. "Remember what I have told you. Be wary, be ready. We
shall get through all right. There are but two or three score, and
none of them mounted."

The travellers were passing now through the narrow territory of the
Margrave of Baden, with the Rhine upon their right, the only
protection from the frontier of France with all its hostile hosts.

The slow and inactive policy of the Margrave of Baden naturally
encouraged the enemy to send small parties of soldiers across to
harry his country; and already Tom and his master had had to dodge
and hide, or go out of their way, to avoid meeting with these bands
of inimical marauders. They were not the class of opponents whom
Lord Claud most dreaded, still they might well fall upon and make
prisoner the two English travellers; and if despatches were found
upon the person of either, they would almost certainly be shot as
spies. Indeed, so bitter was the feeling on the part of the French
after their defeat at Blenheim, that any travellers belonging to
the hated English nation went in danger of their lives.

For some time now Tom had been wearing the garb of a serving man.
His peruke had disappeared, and he wore a little dark wig that
looked like his natural hair. It excited less comment for master
and servant to travel from town to town together than for two
English gentlemen to be riding unattended through such a disturbed
country; and as they pursued their way, Lord Claud would give
minute and precise directions to Tom how to act in the event of
their falling in with one of these scouting or marauding parties,
showing such a wonderful knowledge of the tactics of forest warfare
that Tom was often astonished at him, and would have liked to ask
where he had obtained his experience.

And now, for the first time, Tom was face to face with a real
foe--no mere antagonist of the hour, with whom he had exchanged
some angry word, and was ready to follow it up with blows, but with
armed foes of a hostile race, whose blood was stirred by the hatred
bred of long-continued warfare, and who would think as little of
taking the lives of two Englishmen as Tom would of shooting a fat
buck in his native woodlands.

Again came the word of command in the hoarse voice.

"Halt! and declare yourselves, or--"

But the threat remained unspoken, for Lord Claud had drawn rein,
and was looking at the speaker with eyes of mild inquiry.

"What is your will, monsieur?" he asked, in his easy and excellent
French.

At this seeming show of submission the face of the officer relaxed,
and the men in his company lowered their carbines and stood more at
ease pending the result of the dialogue.

"Monsieur is not a Frenchman?" questioned the officer, with a look
from one face to the other.

Tom sat gazing before him with a stolid expression of countenance,
which greatly belied the tingling which he felt through every vein
in his body. It seemed as though this tingling sensation was in
some way communicated to the mare he rode, for she began fidgeting
in a fashion which plainly told Tom that she was ready to do her
part when the tussle should come.

"How know you that, sir?" asked Lord Claud with a smile. "If you
can tell me my nationality I shall be grateful, for I am ignorant
upon the point myself."

The man's face clouded a little; he felt a certain suspicion of the
handsome stranger, and yet he must not do despite to one of His
Majesty's subjects, and Lord Claud had the air of a man of no mean
status.

"Your servant is English," he said with a touch of sullenness, "and
I take it your horses are, too. The army of His Majesty of France
is badly in need of strong horses. If you are good subjects of his
you will be willing to part with them. My horse was killed but a
little way back; that one of yours would suit me right well," and
he made a step forward as though to lay a hand on Lucifer's rein.

"Now, Tom, my boy!" said Lord Claud in a clear, low tone.

In a moment he had whipped out his pistols and fired straight at
the officer, who fell face downwards almost without a groan. Tom
had meanwhile marked his man--the foremost in the rank behind; and
he rolled over like a log.

With a yell of rage and amaze the men were upon them; but Lucifer
and Nell Gwynne had already reared almost upright, and now were
fighting so wildly with their iron-shod hoofs that in fear and
dismay the assailants fell back, whilst a second report from each
pistol dropped another man dead upon the field.

"Forward! before they can take aim!" cried Lord Claud in a voice of
thunder; and the horses obeyed the word without any touch of spur
from their riders.

They bounded forward with an impetus which must have unseated any
but an experienced horseman, and then laying themselves along the
ground, they fled onwards at a gallop which astonished even Tom by
its wild velocity.

A shower of bullets fell round them, but none touched either steeds
or riders; the yells of the infuriated soldiers died away on their
ears; the horses sped on and on as though they had wings to their
feet, and only after some few miles had been traversed did the
riders draw rein.

"That is always the best plan of action," said Lord Claud, as
though such an occurrence as this was a matter of everyday
experience with him. "Always appear ready to pause and parley. It
invariably disarms suspicion. At the first every pistol or musket
is levelled at your head; but if you stop to talk, these are
lowered. Then, when you have put the enemy a little off guard, make
a dash for it; take them by surprise, drop a few, and confuse the
rest, and you almost invariably escape with a sound skin."

Then Lord Claud coolly proceeded to wipe and recharge his pistols,
as though the escape of half an hour back had been a mere detail
hardly worth discussion.

But Tom knew well that both his master and the horses they rode
must have been through many such perils before this, or they could
never (at any rate the horses) have shown such aptitude in playing
their parts. He had felt that the mare he rode was prepared to
fight furiously with hoofs and teeth; and, as it was, she had
struck down two men who had been preparing to spring at her.

"Ah, my lady had always a temper of her own," replied Lord Claud
with a smile, as Tom said something of this. "Yes; I have taken
some pains with my horses to teach them to help in a fight.
Travelling even in one's own land is none too safe, as you found to
your cost, honest Tom. Nell Gwynne comes of a fighting stock, and
showed an early aptitude for the fray. Trust to her, Tom, if ever
you are hard pressed; she will bring you safely through, if it can
be achieved at any price."

And, indeed, as the travellers pursued their long ride through a
disturbed and often half-hostile country, they had frequently to
depend as much upon the fleetness, fidelity, and strength of their
horses as upon the strength of their own right arms.

Well did Tom now understand why Lord Claud had made such a point of
having their own horses with them. Had they been jogging along upon
some beast hired or purchased in the country, they would never have
got through the divers perils of the way.

Once Tom was aroused from slumber in a little, ill-smelling inn by
the sound of kicking and stamping proceeding from the stable; and
when he had aroused his companion, and they had hastily dressed
themselves and descended, it was to find that a desperate fight was
going on between the two horses and a handful of French soldiers,
who had followed after the fine animals, and were seeking to steal
them whilst the travellers slept.

They had paid dearly for their temerity, however, for Nell Gwynne
was stamping the life out of one wretched fellow; whilst Lucifer
had broken the leg of a second, and had pinned his companion by the
arm, so that he was yelling aloud in his agony.

Lord Claud sprang in, and at the sound of his voice the horse
loosened his grip, and the man reeled hack against the wall, white
and bleeding, and cursing beneath his breath. Tom was too late to
save the life of the victim of the mare's anger, but he was in time
to strike up the pistol which another of the soldiers had pointed
at her, in the trembling hope of saving his comrade.

"If you fire you will drive her to madness, and she will kill every
man of you," said Lord Claud coolly. "She has a devil in her, and
is bullet proof; you had better leave meddling with both the
beasts."

The men crossed themselves in pious horror, and were glad enough to
back out of the place, carrying their dead and maimed companions
with them. Tom and Lord Claud did not linger longer than the time
needful for saddling the horses. They knew that the people of the
inn must be in collusion with the soldiers, and the sooner they
quitted the place the better.

They had long since left behind them the level plains, and were now
in a country that became increasingly mountainous and difficult.
