officer.

"Why did you not report this before?" demanded Mr. Edison.

"Because, sir," was the reply, "the discovery was not made until after
we arrived close to Mars, and since then there has been so much
excitement that I have hardly had time to make an investigation and find
out what the precise condition of affairs is; besides, I thought we
should land upon the planet and then we would be able to renew our
supplies."

I closely watched Mr. Edison's expression in order to see how this most
alarming news would affect him. Although he fully comprehended its
fearful significance, he did not lose his self-command.

"Well, well," he said, "then it will become necessary for us to act
quickly. Evidently we cannot wait for the smoke to clear off, even if
there was any hope of its clearing. We must get down on Mars now, having
conquered it first if possible, but anyway we must get down there, in
order to avoid starvation."

"It is very lucky," he continued, "that we have ten days' supply left. A
great deal can be done in ten days."

A few hours after this the commander called me aside, and said:

"I have thought it all out. I am going to reconstruct some of our
disintegrators, so as to increase their range and their power. Then I am
going to have some of the astronomers of the expedition locate for me
the most vulnerable points upon the planet, where the population is
densest and a hard blow would have the most effect, and I am going to
pound away at them, through the smoke, and see whether we cannot draw
them out of their shell."

With his expert assistants Mr. Edison set to work at once to transform a
number of the disintegrators into still more formidable engines of the
same description. One of these new weapons having been distributed to
each of the members of the squadron, the next problem was to decide
where to strike.

When we first examined the surface of the planet it will be remembered
that we had regarded the Lake of the Sun and its environs as being the
very focus of the planet. While it might also be a strong point of
defence, yet an effective blow struck there would go to the enemy's
heart and be more likely to bring the Martians promptly to terms than
anything else.

The first thing, then, was to locate the Lake of the Sun on the smoke
hidden surface of the planet beneath us. This was a problem that the
astronomers could readily solve.

Fortunately, in the flagship itself there was one of the star-gazing
gentlemen who had made a specialty of the study of Mars. That planet, as
I have already explained, was now in opposition to the earth. The
astronomer had records in his pocket which enabled him, by a brief
calculation, to say just when the Lakes of the Sun would be on the
meridian of Mars as seen from the earth. Our chronometers still kept
terrestrial time; we knew the exact number of days and hours that had
elapsed since we had departed, and so it was possible by placing
ourselves in a line between the earth and Mars to be practically in the
situation of an astronomer in his observatory at home.

Then it was only necessary to wait for the hour when the Lake of the Sun
would be upon the meridian of Mars in order to be certain what was the
true direction of the latter from the flagship.

Having thus located the heart of our foe behind its shield of darkness,
we prepared to strike.

"I have ascertained," said Mr. Edison, "the vibration period of the
smoke, so that it will be easy for us to shatter it into invisible
atoms. You will see that every stroke of the disintegrators will open a
hole through the black curtain. If their field of destruction could be
made wide enough, we might in that manner clear away the entire covering
of smoke, but all that we shall really be able to do will be to puncture
it with holes, which will, perhaps, enable us to catch glimpses of the
surface beneath. In that manner we may be able more effectually to
concentrate our fire upon the most vulnerable points."

Everything being prepared, and the entire squadron having assembled to
watch the effect of the opening blow and be ready to follow it up, Mr.
Edison himself poised one of the new disintegrators, which was too large
to be carried in the hand, and, following the direction indicated by the
calculations of the astronomers, launched the vibratory discharge into
the ocean of blackness beneath.

Instantly there opened beneath us a huge well-shaped hole from which the
black clouds rolled violently back in every direction.

Through this opening we saw the gleam of brilliant lights beneath.

We had made a hit.

"It's the Lake of the Sun!" shouted the astronomer who furnished the
calculation by means of which its position had been discovered.

And, indeed, it was the Lake of the Sun. While the opening in the clouds
made by the discharge was not wide, yet it sufficed to give us a view of
a portion of the curving shore of the lake, which was ablaze with
electric lights.

Whether our shot had done any damage, beyond making the circular opening
in the cloud curtain, we could not tell, for almost immediately the
surrounding black smoke masses billowed in to fill up the hole.

But in the brief glimpse we had caught sight of two or three large
airships hovering in space above that part of the Lake of the Sun and
its bordering city which we had beheld. It seemed to me in the brief
glance I had that one ship had been touched by the discharge and was
wandering in an erratic manner. But the clouds closed in so rapidly that
I could not be certain.

Anyhow, we had demonstrated one thing, and that was that we could
penetrate the cloud shield and reach the Martians in their hiding place.

It had been prearranged that the first discharge from the flagship
should be a signal for the concentration of the fire of all the other
ships upon the same spot.

A little hesitation, however, occurred, and a half a minute had elapsed
before the disintegrators from the other members of the squadron were
got into play.

Then, suddenly we saw an immense commotion in the cloud beneath us. It
seemed to be beaten and hurried in every direction and punctured like a
sieve with nearly a hundred great circular holes. Through these gaps we
could see clearly a large region of the planet's surface, with many
airships floating above it and the blaze of innumerable electric lights
illuminating it. The Martians had created an artificial day under the
curtain.

This time there was no question that the blow had been effective. Four
or five of the airships, partially destroyed, tumbled headlong toward
the ground, while even from our great distance there was unmistakable
evidence that fearful execution had been done among the crowded
structures along the shore of the lake.

As each of our ships possessed but one of the new disintegrators, and
since a minute or so was required to adjust them for a fresh discharge,
we remained for a little while inactive after delivering the blow.
Meanwhile the cloud curtain, though rent to shreds by the concentrated
discharge of the disintegrators, quickly became a uniform black sheet
again, hiding everything.

We had just had time to congratulate ourselves on the successful opening
of our bombardment, and the disintegrator of the flagship was poised for
another discharge, when suddenly out of the black expanse beneath,
quivered immense electric beams, clear cut and straight as bars of
steel, but dazzling our eyes with unendurable brilliance.

It was the reply of the Martians to our attack.

Three or four of the electrical ships were seriously damaged, and one,
close beside the flagship, changed color, withered and collapsed, with
the same sickening phenomena that had made our hearts shudder when the
first disaster of this kind occurred during our brief battle over the
asteroid.

Another score of our comrades were gone, and yet we had hardly begun the
fight.

Glancing at the other ships which had been injured, I saw that the
damage to them was not so serious, although they were evidently _hors de
combat_ for the present.

Our fighting blood was now boiling and we did not stop long to count our
losses.

"Into the smoke!" was the signal, and the ninety and more electric ships
which still remained in condition for action immediately shot downward.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

_THE EARTH GIRL_


It was a wild plunge. We kept off the decks while rushing through the
blinding smoke, but the instant we emerged below, where we found
ourselves still a mile above the ground, we were out again, ready to
strike.

I have simply a confused recollection of flashing lights beneath, and a
great, dark arch of clouds above, out of which our ships seemed dropping
on all sides, and then the fray burst on and around us, and no man could
see or notice anything except by half-comprehended glances.

Almost in an instant, it seemed, a swarm of airships surrounded us,
while from what, for lack of a more descriptive name, I shall call the
forts about the Lake of the Sun, leaped tongues of electric fire, before
which some of our ships, were driven like bits of flaming paper in a
high wind, gleaming for a moment, then curling up and gone forever!

It was an awful sight; but the battle fever was raging within us, and
we, on our part, were not idle.

Every man carried a disintegrator, and these hand instruments, together
with those of heavier caliber on the ship poured their resistless
vibrations in every direction through the quivering air.

The airships of the Martians were destroyed by the score, and yet they
flocked upon us thicker and faster.

We dropped lower and our blows fell upon the forts, and upon the wide
spread city bordering the Lake of the Sun. We almost entirely silenced
the fire of one of the forts; but there were forty more in full action
within reach of our eyes!

Some of the metallic buildings were partly unroofed by the
disintegrators and some had their walls riddled and fell with thundering
crashes, whose sound rose to our ears above the hellish din of battle. I
caught glimpses of giant forms struggling in the ruins and rushing
wildly through the streets, but there was no time to see anything
clearly.

Our flagship seemed charmed. A crowd of airships hung upon it like a
swarm of angry bees, and, at times, one could not see for the lightning
strokes--yet we escaped destruction, while ourselves dealing death on
every hand.

It was a glorious fight, but it was not war; no, it was not war. We
really had no more chance of ultimate success amid that multitude of
enemies than a prisoner running the gauntlet in a crowd of savages has
of escape.

A conviction of the hopelessness of the contest finally forced itself
upon our minds, and the shattered squadron, which had kept well together
amid the storm of death, was signalled to retreat.

Shaking off their pursuers, as a hunted bear shakes off the dogs, sixty
of the electrical ships rose up through the clouds where more than
ninety had gone down!

Madly we rushed upward through the vast curtain and continued our flight
to a great elevation, far beyond the reach of the awful artillery of the
enemy.

Looking back it seemed the very mouth of hell from which we had escaped.

The Martians did not for an instant cease their fire, even when we were
far beyond their reach. With furious persistence they blazed away
through the cloud curtain, and the vivid spikes of lightning shuddered
so swiftly on one another's track that they were like a flaming halo of
electric lances around the frowning helmet of the War Planet.

But after a while they stopped their terrific sparring, and once more
the immense globe assumed the appearance of a vast ball of black smoke
still widely agitated by the recent disturbance, but exhibiting no
opening through which we could discern what was going on beneath.

Evidently the Martians believed they had finished us.

At no time since the beginning of our adventure had it appeared to me
quite so hopeless, reckless and mad as it seemed at present.

We had suffered fearful losses, and yet what had we accomplished? We had
won two fights on the asteroid, it is true, but then we had overwhelming
numbers on our side.

Now we were facing millions on their own ground, and our very first
assault had resulted in a disastrous repulse, with the loss of at least
thirty electric ships and 600 men!

Evidently we could not endure this sort of thing. We must find some
other means of assailing Mars or else give up the attempt.

But the latter was not to be thought. It was no mere question of
self-pride, however, and no consideration of the tremendous interests at
stake, which would compel us to continue our apparently vain attempt.

Our provisions could last only a few days longer. The supply would not
carry us one-quarter of the way back to earth, and we must therefore
remain here and literally conquer or die.

In this extremity a consultation of the principal officers was called
upon the deck of the flagship.

Here the suggestion was made that we should attempt to effect by
strategy what we had failed to do by force.

An old army officer who had served in many wars against the cunning
Indians of the West, Colonel Alonzo Jefferson Smith, was the author of
this suggestion.

"Let us circumvent them," he said. "We can do it in this way. The
chances are that all of the available fighting force of the planet Mars
is now concentrated on this side and in the neighborhood of The Lake of
the Sun.

"Possibly, by some kind of X-ray business, they can only see us dimly
through the clouds, and if we get a little further away they will not be
able to see us at all.

"Now, I suggest that a certain number of the electrical ships be
withdrawn from the squadron to a great distance, while the remainder
stay here; or, better still, approach to a point just beyond the reach
of those streaks of lightning, and begin a bombardment of the clouds
without paying any attention to whether the strokes reach through the
clouds and do any damage or not.

"This will induce the Martians to believe that we are determined to
press our attack at this point.

"In the meantime, while these ships are raising a hulabaloo on this side
of the planet, and drawing their fire, as much as possible, without
running into any actual danger, let the others which have been selected
for the purpose, sail rapidly around to the other side of Mars and take
them in the rear."

It was not perfectly clear what Colonel Smith intended to do after the
landing had been effected in the rear of the Martians, but still there
seemed a good deal to be said for his suggestion, and it would, at any
rate, if carried out, enable us to learn something about the condition
of things on the planet, and perhaps furnish us with a hint as to how we
could best proceed in the further prosecution of the siege.

Accordingly it was resolved that about twenty ships should be told off
for this movement, and Colonel Smith himself was placed in command.

At my desire I accompanied the new commander in his flagship.

Rising to a considerable elevation in order that there might be no risk
of being seen, we began our flank movement while the remaining ships, in
accordance with the understanding, dropped nearer the curtain of cloud
and commenced a bombardment with the disintegrators, which caused a
tremendous commotion in the clouds, opening vast gaps in them, and
occasionally revealing a glimpse of the electric lights on the planet,
although it was evident that the vibratory currents did not reach the
ground. The Martians immediately replied to this renewed attack, and
again the cloud covered globe bristled with lightning, which flashed so
fiercely out of the blackness below that the stoutest hearts among us
quailed, although we were situated well beyond the danger.

But this sublime spectacle rapidly vanished from our eyes when, having
attained a proper elevation, we began our course toward the opposite
hemisphere of the planet.

We guided our flight by the stars, and from our knowledge of the
rotation period of Mars, and the position which the principal points on
its surface must occupy at certain hours, we were able to tell what part
of the planet lay beneath us.

Having completed our semi-circuit we found ourselves on the night side
of Mars, and determined to lose no time in executing our coup. But it
was deemed best that an exploration should first be made by a single
electrical ship, and Colonel Smith naturally wished to undertake the
adventure with his own vessel.

We dropped rapidly through the black cloud curtain, which proved to be
at least half a mile in thickness, and then suddenly emerged, as if
suspended at the apex of an enormous dome, arching above the surface of
the planet a mile beneath us, which sparkled on all sides with
innumerable lights.

These lights were so numerous and so brilliant as to produce a faint
imitation of daylight, even at our immense height above the ground, and
the dome of cloud out of which we had emerged assumed a soft fawn color
which produced an indescribably beautiful effect.

For a moment we recoiled from our undertaking, and arrested the motion
of the electric ship.

But on closely examining the surface beneath us we found that there was
a broad region, where comparatively few bright lights were to be seen.
From my knowledge of the geography of Mars I knew that this was a part
of the Land of Ausonia, situated a few hundred miles northeast of
Hellas, where we had first seen the planet.

Evidently it was not so thickly populated as some of the other parts of
Mars, and its comparative darkness was an attraction to us. We
determined to approach within a few hundred feet of the ground with the
electric ship, and then, in case no enemies appeared, to visit the soil
itself.

"Perhaps we shall see or hear something that will be of use to us," said
Colonel Smith, "and for the purposes of this first reconnaissance it is
better that we should be few in number. The other ships will await our
return, and at any rate we shall not be gone long."

As our car approached the ground we found ourselves near the tops of
some lofty trees.

"This will do," said Colonel Smith to the electrical steersman, "Stay
right here."

He and I then lowered ourselves into the branches of the trees, each
carrying a small disintegrator, and cautiously clambered down to the
ground.

We believed we were the first of the descendants of Adam to set foot on
the planet of Mars.

At first we suffered somewhat from the effects of the rare atmosphere.
It was so lacking in density that it resembled the air on the summits of
the loftiest terrestrial mountains.

Having reached the foot of the tree in safety, we lay down for a moment
on the ground to recover ourselves and to become accustomed to our new
surroundings.

A thrill, born half of wonder, half of incredulity, ran through me at
the touch of the soil of Mars. Here was I, actually on that planet,
which had seemed so far away, so inaccessible, and so full of mysteries
when viewed from the earth. And yet, surrounding me, were
things--gigantic, it is true--but still resembling and recalling the
familiar sights of my own world.

After a little while our lungs became accustomed to the rarity of the
atmosphere and we experienced a certain stimulation in breathing.

We then got upon our feet and stepped out from under the shadow of the
gigantic tree. High above we could faintly see our electrical ship,
gently swaying in the air close to the tree top.

There were no electric lights in our immediate neighborhood, but we
noticed that the whole surface of the planet around us was gleaming with
them, producing an effect like the glow of a great city seen from a
distance at night. The glare was faintly reflected from the vast dome of
clouds above, producing the general impression of a moonlight night upon
