
"I recently received the first issue of 'The Fantasy Fan' and I want
to congratulate you on your initial number. If future issues live up
to the promise of the first one, you have nothing to fear. Your
venture should be a successful one.

"Being essentially a collector, I enjoyed the articles 'How to Collect
Fantasy Fiction' and 'Science Fiction in English Magazines.' I hope
Mr. Tucker will be a more or less constant contributor to 'The Fantasy
Fan' with information regarding stories in the English magazines.

"I have only one fault to find with the first number of 'The Fantasy
Fan' and that's Forrest J. Ackerman. Can't you get along without him?
Isn't it bad enough to find his letters appearing in all of the other
magazines without having to endure more of him in 'The Fantasy Fan?'
Maybe he is the most active science fiction fan, but I wish he would
confine his activities to California. If you simply have to have him,
please keep his outbursts to a minimum. I wonder if the 'World's most
active science fiction fan;' 'The demon letter writer' realizes how
tiresome and boring his continual out-pourings may become.

"Once more permit me to congratulate you on your efforts. I am looking
forward with considerable interest to future issues. With best
luck."--H. Koenig

You will be pleased to hear that Mr. Tucker has promised us a column
on English science fiction every month. The second in the series
appear in this issue.

Of course, we cannot take sides with you as to whether Mr. Ackerman's
'outbursts' are boring. That is for the readers to decide. Yours is
the first unfavorable comment we have had upon Mr. Ackerman's efforts,
and we feel that the majority of the readers enjoy his articles.

"Your first issue certainly satisfies! Like Chesterfields, huh? Of
course, I don't know--I don't smoke. But I've just read TFF thru, and
it's a dandy first number.

"A real good idea, that, of reprinting the article about author
Kostkos from the paper. He sounds a real stf'ist.

"If you want to know, I think that 'Science Fiction Alphabet' poem by
Allen Glasser is great. I got a laugh out of every letter, and am
interested in seeing what happens from N to Z. Also, I greatly enjoyed
his 'Earthling Spurns Martian,' newspaper-of-the-future account--but
Efjay Akkamin for the terrestrial! From Ockermann to McKerman
misspellings have ranged (and, yes, someone even addressed me Mr.
Staples, once), but really----"--Forrest J. Ackerman

"I enjoyed the first issue of 'The Fantasy Fan' very much, your
features and news items were well chosen and well written. There is
little room for improvement, just more pages, better paper, and
stories, which will come in time."--Philip Bridges

Mr. Bridges' wishes have also come true.

"Just what I think of TFF:--every single word in it is GOOD--I can't
find a solitary thing to kick about. Its perfect. Superb. I'm sure
glad I'm a subscriber."--Ted Lutwin

No, readers, this is not a paid testimonial. Of course, we know the
magazine is far from perfect or superb, but we are pleased to see that
the greater part of our readers were not disappointed in it.

"Congrats on the first of the 'Fan,' it's darn good. The stf alphabet
is swell. Tucker's article and 'Club News' are good as are the
columns. Am eagerly awaiting No. 2 issue. 'The Fantasy Fan' is filling
a long-felt need and I expect it to grow and prosper. Bon
voyage."--Daniel McPhail

"Got my first issue of TFF other day. Best articles were 'Science
Fiction Alphabet,' 'About Authors,' and 'Conglamitorial.' I thought
the whole magazine was excellent."--J. Sam Smart

"'Earthling Spurns Martian' almost sent me into a fit. 'Tis a good
little mag. I hope you enlarge the size later."--David Stolaroff

"Received my copy of your magazine and liked it swell. Just what I've
been looking for! Your promise of some more new Clark Ashton Smith
stories make it even more enticing. Good luck to you!"--Duane W. Rimel

Well, fans, just to show you that the above has not gone to our head,
read what someone else says:

"At present, 'The Fantasy Fan' isn't worth the time it takes, to read
it or the ink to print it. And same can be said about all the Science
Fiction 'fan' magazines."--B. K. Goree, Jr.

Mr. Goree forgot to mention that "The Fantasy Fan" isn't worth the
paper it's printed on. Ink is very cheap.

"The first issue is really good, but I think a great many improvements
can be made. I would suggest that you use a stiff cover of some heavy
paper, with a table of contents either on the front cover, as in the
'Science Fiction Digest,' or on the inside of the front cover. A
better grade of paper should prove of advantage. Leave the size the
way it is.

"Now for the articles themselves. These were all good, especially
Julius Schwartz's on the collection of science fiction, Science
Fiction in English Magazines and Sequels by Popular Demand. I do not
care an awful lot for Mr. Smith's stories, but have read some dandies
by him. Some of his stories are a good cure for sleeping sickness, I
agree with Mr. Ackerman on some points in The Boiling Point, but on
others--aw, phooie, Mr. Ackerman! Because I just half agree with him,
I think I will stay neutral in the controversy. Best wishes to you in
your new venture. I hope you double your circulation in a few
months."--Oswald Train

We have made several of the improvements you mention, and will make
others in good time. Do you want a contents page, fans, or would you
rather have the space used for some interesting article? Give us your
opinions on the current issue, and tell us your likes and dislikes. We
want to hear from you.

The Editor




ARGOSY FANTASTICS

(Courtesy Don Moore, Managing Editor, Argosy)


Fantasy Fans may be interested to know some of the forthcoming
fantastic and weird stories scheduled for publication in Argosy, which
has always featured this type of fiction. In the November 4th issue,
Ray Cummings has a novelette, "Terror of the Unseen," in which a
criminal scientist masters the secret of electrical invisibility and
throws a great city into chaos. It is an exciting piece of science
fiction complete in this issue.

The following week, November 11th, Erle Stanley Gardner presents the
second of his series of stories about the Roadrunner, a lone wolf of
the Mexican border who has a strange faculty of seeing in the dark--a
scientifically possible but rare phenomenon which leads him into
unusual adventures. This novelette is entitled "Border Justice."

Otis Adelbert Kline starts his second novel of the red planet in the
November 25th issue. "The Outlaw of Mars" is a full length novel of
adventure in the weird world of canals, filled with amazing warfare
and fantastic animals.




The Kingdom Of The Worm

by Clark Ashton Smith


[Every fantasy reader knows Clark Ashton Smith, and he needs no
introduction. Not only is he the favorite of thousands, but his work
has been said to rival and even surpass Poe. Although, as a general
rule, we do not take sides, we admit without the slightest hesitation
that we enjoy Clark Ashton Smith's tales a great deal more than we do
Poe's. Even those that find Smith's work altogether too fantastic must
admit that no other author has nearly as beautiful a vocabulary, and
few have as great an ability to produce the utterly weird effect as
our present author. He claims that "The Kingdom of the Worm" is one of
his weirdest and most original of his tales, and we are inclined to
agree with him. Let the story speak for itself.]

                     *      *      *      *      *

FOREWORD

This tale was suggested by the reading of "The Voyages and Travels of
Sir John Maundeville," in which the fantastic realm of Abchaz and the
darkness covered province of Hanyson are actually described! I
recommend this colourful fourteenth-century book to lovers of fantasy.
