and, as usual in such cases, his speech became fluent and golden.

"Oh, you'll enjoy it, Monsieur Achille Garay," he said in his mellow,
persuasive voice. "The forest is beautiful at this time of the year
and the mountains are so magnificent always that they must appeal to
anyone who has in his soul the strain of poetry that I know you have.
The snow, too, I think has gone from the higher peaks and ridges and
you will not be troubled by extreme cold. If you should wander from
the path back to St. Luc you will have abundant leisure in which to
find it again, because for quite a while to come time will be of no
importance to you. And as you'll go unarmed, you'll be in no danger of
shooting your friends by mistake."

"You're not going to turn me into the wilderness to starve?"

"Not at all. We'll give you plenty of food. Tayoga and I will see you
well on your way. Now, since you've eaten enough, you start at once."

Tayoga and the hunter fell in readily with Robert's plan. The captive
received enough food to last four days, which he carried in a pack
fastened on his back, and then Robert and Tayoga accompanied him
northward and back on the trail.

Much of Garay's courage returned as they marched steadily on through
the forest. When he summed it up he found that he had fared well. His
captors had really been soft-hearted. It was not usual for one serving
as an intermediary and spy like himself to escape, when taken, with
his life and even with freedom. Life! How precious it was! Young
Lennox had said that the forest was beautiful, and it was! It was
splendid, grand, glorious to one who had just come out of the jaws of
death, and the air of late autumn was instinct with vitality. He drew
himself up jauntily, and his step became strong and springy.

They walked on many miles and Robert, whose speech had been so fluent
before, was silent now. Nor did the Onondaga speak either. Garay
himself hazarded a few words, but meeting with no response his spirits
fell a little. The trail led over a low ridge, and at its crest his
two guards stopped.

"Here we bid you farewell, Monsieur Achille Garay," said Robert.
"Doubtless you will wish to commune with your own thoughts and our
presence will no longer disturb you. Our parting advice to you is to
give up the trade in which you have been engaged. It is full perilous,
and it may be cut short at any time by sudden death. Moreover, it is
somewhat bare of honor, and even if it should be crowned by continued
success 'tis success of a kind that's of little value. Farewell."

"Farewell," said Garay, and almost before he could realize it, the two
figures had melted into the forest behind him. A weight was lifted
from him with their going, and once more his spirits bounded upward.
He was Achille Garay, bold and venturesome, and although he was
without weapons he did not fear two lads.

Three miles farther on he turned. He did not care to face St. Luc, his
letter lost, and the curious, dogged obstinacy that lay at the back of
his character prevailed. He would go back. He would reach those for
whom his letter had been intended, Martinus and the others, and he
would win the rich rewards that had been promised to him. He had
plenty of food, he would make a wide curve, advance at high speed and
get to Albany ahead of the foolish three.

He turned his face southward and walked swiftly through the thickets.
A rifle cracked and a twig overhead severed by a bullet fell upon his
face. Garay shivered and stood still for a long time. Courage trickled
back, and he resumed his advance, though it was slow. A second rifle
cracked, and a bullet passed so close to his cheek that he felt its
wind. He could not restrain a cry of terror, and turning again he fled
northward to St. Luc.




CHAPTER VI


PUPILS OF THE BEAR

When Robert and Tayoga returned to the camp and told Willet what they
had done the hunter laughed a little.

"Garay doesn't want to face St. Luc," he said, "but he will do it
anyhow. He won't dare to come back on the trail in face of bullets,
and now we're sure to deliver his letter in ample time."

"Should we go direct to Albany?" asked Robert.

The hunter cupped his chin in his hand and meditated.

"I'm all for Colonel Johnson," he replied at last. "He understands the
French and Indians and has more vigor than the authorities at Albany.
It seems likely to me that he will still be at the head of Lake George
where we left him, perhaps building the fort of which they were
talking before we left there."

"His wound did not give promise of getting well so very early," said
Robert, "and he would not move while he was in a weakened condition."

"Then it's almost sure that he's at the head of the lake and we'll
turn our course toward that point. What do you say, Tayoga?"

"Waraiyageh is the man to have the letter, Great Bear. If it becomes
necessary for him to march to the defense of Albany he will do it."

"Then the three of us are in unanimity and Lake George it is instead
of Albany."

They started in an hour, and changing their course somewhat, began a
journey across the maze of mountains toward Andiatarocte, the lake
that men now call George, and Robert's heart throbbed at the thought
that he would soon see it again in all its splendor and beauty. He had
passed so much of his life near them that his fortunes seemed to him
to be interwoven inseparably with George and Champlain.

They thought they would reach the lake in a few days, but in a
wilderness and in war the plans of men often come to naught. Before
the close of the day they came upon traces of a numerous band
traveling on the great trail between east and west, and they also
found among them footprints that turned out. These Willet and Tayoga
examined with the greatest care and interest and they lingered longest
over a pair uncommonly long and slender.

"I think they're his," the hunter finally said.

"So do I," said the Onondaga.

"Those long, slim feet could belong to nobody but the Owl."

"It can be only the Owl."

"Now, who under the sun is the Owl?" asked Robert, mystified.

"The Owl is, in truth, a most dangerous man," replied the hunter. "His
name, which the Indians have given him, indicates he works by night,
though he's no sloth in the day, either. But he has another name,
also, the one by which he was christened. It's Charles Langlade, a
young Frenchman who was a trader before the war. I've seen him more
than once. He's mighty shrewd and alert, uncommon popular among the
western Indians, who consider him as one of them because he married a
good looking young Indian woman at Green Bay, and a great forester and
wilderness fighter. It's wonderful how the French adapt themselves to
the ways of the Indians and how they take wives among them. I suppose
the marriage tie is one of their greatest sources of strength with the
tribes. Now, Tayoga, why do you think the Owl is here so far to the
eastward of his usual range?"

"He and his warriors are looking for scalps, Great Bear, and it may be
that they have seen St. Luc. They were traveling fast and they are now
between us and Andiatarocte. I like it but little."

"Not any less than I do. It upsets our plans. We must leave the trail,
or like as not we'll run squarely into a big band. What a pity our
troops didn't press on after the victory at the lake. Instead of
driving the French and Indians out of the whole northern wilderness
we've left it entirely to them."

They turned from the trail with reluctance, because, strong and
enduring as they were, incessant hardships, long traveling and battle
were beginning to tell upon all three, and they were unwilling to be
climbing again among the high mountains. But there was no choice and
night found them on a lofty ridge in a dense thicket. The hunter and
the Onondaga were disturbed visibly over the advent of Langlade, and
their uneasiness was soon communicated to the sympathetic mind of
Robert.

The night being very clear, sown with shining stars, they saw rings of
smoke rising toward the east, and outlined sharply against the dusky
blue.

"That's Langlade sending up signals," said the hunter, anxiously, "and
he wouldn't do it unless he had something to talk about."

"When one man speaks another man answers," said Tayoga. "Now from what
point will come the reply?"

Robert felt excitement. These rings of smoke in the blue were full
of significance for them, and the reply to the first signal would be
vital. "Ah!" he exclaimed suddenly. The answer came from the west,
directly behind them.

"I think they've discovered our trail," said Willet. "They didn't
learn it from Garay, because Langlade passed before we sent him back,
but they might have heard from St. Luc or Tandakora that we were
somewhere in the forest. It's bad. If it weren't for the letter we
could turn sharply to the north and stay in the woods till Christmas,
if need be."

"We may have to do so, whether we wish it or not," said Tayoga. "The
shortest way is not always the best."

Before morning they saw other smoke signals in the south, and it
became quite evident then that the passage could not be tried, except
at a risk perhaps too great to take.

"There's nothing for it but the north," said Willet, "and we'll trust
to luck to get the letter to Waraiyageh in time. Perhaps we can find
Rogers. He must be roaming with his rangers somewhere near Champlain."

At dawn they were up and away, but all through the forenoon they
saw rings of smoke rising from the peaks and ridges, and the last
lingering hope that they were not followed disappeared. It became
quite evident to their trained observation and the powers of inference
from circumstances which had become almost a sixth sense with them
that there was a vigorous pursuit, closing in from three points of the
compass, south, east and west. They slept again the next night in the
forest without fire and arose the following morning cold, stiff and
out of temper. While they eased their muscles and prepared for the
day's flight they resolved upon a desperate expedient.

It was vital now to carry the letter to Johnson and then to Albany,
which they considered more important than their own escape, and they
could not afford to be driven farther and farther into the recesses of
the north, while St. Luc might be marching with a formidable force on
Albany itself.

"With us it's unite to fight and divide for flight," said Robert,
divining what was in the mind of the others.

"The decision is forced upon us," said Willet, regretfully.

Tayoga nodded.

"We'll read the letter again several times, until all of us know it by
heart," said the hunter.

The precious document was produced, and they went over it until each
could repeat it from memory. Then Willet said:

"I'm the oldest and I'll take the letter and go south past their
bands. One can slip through where three can't."

He spoke with such decision that the others, although Tayoga wanted
the task of risk and honor, said nothing.

"And do you, Robert and Tayoga," resumed the hunter, "continue your
flight to the northward. You can keep ahead of these bands, and, when
you discover the chase has stopped, curve back for Lake George. If by
any chance I should fall by the way, though it's not likely, you can
repeat the letter to Colonel Johnson, and let's hope you'll be in
time. Now good-by, and God bless you both."

Willet never displayed emotion, but his feeling was very deep as he
wrung the outstretched hand of each. Then he turned at an angle to the
east and south and disappeared in the undergrowth.

"He has been more than a father to me," said Robert.

"The Great Bear is a man, a man who is pleasing to Areskoui himself,"
said Tayoga with emphasis.

"Do you think he will get safely through?"

"There is no warrior, not even of the Clan of the Bear, of the Nation
Onondaga, of the great League of the Hodenosaunee, who can surpass the
Great Bear in forest skill and cunning. In the night he will creep by
Tandakora himself, with such stealth, that not a leaf will stir, and
there will be not the slightest whisper in the grass. His step, too,
will be so light that his trail will be no more than a bird's in the
air."

Robert laughed and felt better.

"You don't stint the praise of a friend, Tayoga," he said, "but I know
that at least three-fourths of what you say is true. Now, I take it
that you and I are to play the hare to Langlade's hounds, and that in
doing so we'll be of great help to Dave."

"Aye," agreed the Onondaga, and they swung into their gait. Robert had
received Garay's pistol which, being of the same bore as his own, was
now loaded with bullet and powder, instead of bullet and paper, and it
swung at his belt, while Tayoga carried the intermediary's rifle, a
fine piece. It made an extra burden, but they had been unwilling
to throw it away--a rifle was far too valuable on the border to be
abandoned.

They maintained a good pace until noon, and, as they heard no sound
behind them, less experienced foresters than they might have thought
the pursuit had ceased, but they knew better. It had merely settled
into that tenacious kind which was a characteristic of the Indian
mind, and unless they could hide their trail it would continue in the
same determined manner for days. At noon, they paused a half hour in a
dense grove and ate bear and deer meat, sauced with some fine, black
wild grapes, the vines hanging thick on one of the trees.

"Think of those splendid banquets we enjoyed when Garay was sitting
looking at us, though not sharing with us," said Robert.

Tayoga smiled at the memory and said:

"If he had been able to hold out a little longer he would have had
plenty of food, and we would not have had the letter. The Great Bear
would never have starved him."

"I know that now, Tayoga, and I learn from it that we're to hold out
too, long after we think we're lost, if we're to be the victors."

They came in the afternoon to a creek, flowing in their chosen course,
and despite the coldness of its waters, which rose almost to their
knees, they waded a long time in its bed. When they went out on the
bank they took off their leggings and moccasins, wrung or beat out of
them as much of the water as they could, and then let them dry for a
space in the sun, while they rubbed vigorously their ankles and feet
to create warmth. They knew that Langlade's men would follow on either
side of the creek until they picked up the trail again, but their
maneuver would create a long delay, and give them a rest needed badly.

"Have you anything in mind, Tayoga?" asked Robert. "You know that the
farther north and higher we go the colder it will become, and our
flight may take us again into the very heart of a great snow storm."

"It is so, Dagaeoga, but it is also so that I do have a plan. I think
I know the country into which we are coming, and that tells me what to
do. The people of my race, living from the beginning of the world in
the great forest, have not been too proud to learn from the animals,
and of all the animals we know perhaps the wisest is the bear."

"The bear is scarcely an animal, Tayoga. He is almost a human being.
