disc to embrace no less than 240 deg. of its extent;[861] and in December,
1842, Mr. Guthrie, of Bervie, N.B., actually observed, under similar
conditions, the whole circumference to be lit up with a faint nebulous
glow.[862] The same curious phenomenon was intermittently seen by Mr.
Leeson Prince at Uckfield in September, 1861;[863] but with more
satisfactory distinctness by Mr. C. S. Lyman of Yale College,[864]
before and after the conjunction of December 11, 1866, and during nearly
five hours previous to the transit of 1874, when the yellowish ring of
refracted light showed at one point an approach to interruption,
possibly through the intervention of a bank of clouds. Again, on
December 2, 1898, Venus being 1 deg. 45' from the sun's centre, Mr. H. N.
Russell, of the Halsted Observatory, descried the coalescence of the
cusps, and founded on the observation a valuable discussion of such
effects.[865] Taking account of certain features in the case left
unnoticed by Neison[866] and Proctor,[867] he inferred from them the
presence of a Cytherean atmosphere considerably less refractive than our
own, although possibly, in its lower strata, encumbered with dust or
haze.

Similar appearances are conspicuous during transits. But while the
Mercurian halo is characteristically seen on the sun, the "silver
thread" round the limb of Venus commonly shows on the part _off_ the
sun. There are, however, instances of each description in both cases.
Mr. Grant, in collecting the records of physical phenomena accompanying
the transits of 1761 and 1769, remarks that no one person saw both kinds
of annulus, and argues a dissimilarity in their respective modes of
production.[868] Such a dissimilarity probably exists, in the sense that
the inner section of the ring is illusory, the outer, a genuine result
of the bending of light in a gaseous envelope; but the distinction of
separate visibility has not been borne out by recent experience. Several
of the Australian observers during the transit of 1874 witnessed the
complete phenomenon. Mr. J. Macdonnell, at Eden, saw a "shadowy nebulous
ring" surround the whole disc when ingress was two-thirds accomplished;
Mr. Tornaghi, at Goulburn, perceived a halo, entire and unmistakable, at
half egress.[869] Similar observations were made at Sydney,[870] and
were renewed in 1882 by Lescarbault at Orgeres, by Metzger in Java, and
by Barnard at Vanderbilt University.[871]

Spectroscopic indications of aqueous vapour as present in the atmosphere
of Venus, were obtained in 1874 and 1882, by Tacchini and Ricco in
Italy, and by Young in New Jersey.[872] Janssen, however, who made a
special study of the point subsequently to the transit of 1882, found
them much less certain than he had anticipated;[873] and Vogel, by
repeated examinations, 1871-73, could detect only the very slightest
variations from the pattern of the solar spectrum. Some additions there
indeed seem to be in the thickening of a few water and oxygen-lines; but
so nearly evanescent as to induce the persuasion that most of the light
we receive from Venus has traversed only the tenuous upper portion of
its atmosphere.[874] It is reflected, at any rate, with comparatively
slight diminution. On the 26th and 27th of September, 1878, a close
conjunction gave Mr. James Nasmyth the rare opportunity of watching
Venus and Mercury for several hours side by side in the field of his
reflector; when the former appeared to him like clean silver, the latter
as dull as lead or zinc.[875] Yet the light _incident_ upon Mercury is,
on an average, three and a half times as strong as the light reaching
Venus. Thus, the reflective power of Venus must be singularly strong.
And we find, accordingly, from a combination of Zoellner's with Mueller's
results, that its albedo is but little inferior to that of new-fallen
snow; in other words, it gives back 77 per cent. of the luminous rays
impinging upon it.

This extraordinary brilliancy would be intelligible were it permissible
to suppose that we see nothing of the planet but a dense canopy of
clouds. But the hypothesis is discountenanced by the Flagstaff
observations, and is irreconcilable with the visibility of mountainous
elevations, and permanent surface-markings. To Mr. Lowell these were so
distinct and unchanging as to furnish data for a chart of the Cytherean
globe, and the peculiar arrangement of divergent shading exhibited in it
cannot off-hand be set down as unreal, in view of Perrotin's earlier
discernment of analogous linear traces. Gruithuisen's "snow-caps,"[876]
however--it is safe to say--do not exist as such; although shining
regions near the poles form a well-attested trait of the strange
Cytherean landscape.

The "secondary," or "ashen light," of Venus was first noticed by
Riccioli in 1643; it was seen by Derham about 1715, by Kirch in 1721, by
Schroeter and Harding in 1806;[877] and the reality of the appearance has
since been authenticated by numerous and trustworthy observations. It is
precisely similar to that of the "old moon in the new moon's arms"; and
Zenger, who witnessed it with unusual distinctness, January 8,
1883,[878] supposes it due to the same cause--namely, to the faint gleam
of reflected earth-light from the night-side of the planet. When we
remember, however, that "full earth-light" on Venus, at its nearest, has
little more than 1/12000 its intensity on the moon, we see at once that
the explanation is inadequate. Nor can Professor Safarik's,[879] by
phosphorescence of the warm and teeming oceans with which Zoellner[880]
regarded the globe of Venus as mainly covered, be seriously entertained.
Vogel's suggestion is more plausible. He and O. Lohse, at Bothkamp,
November 3 to 11, 1871, saw the dark hemisphere _partially_ illuminated
by secondary light, extending 30 deg. from the terminator, and thought the
effect might be produced by a very extensive twilight.[881] Others have
had recourse to the analogy of our aurorae, and J. Lamp suggested that
the grayish gleam, visible to him at Bothkamp, October 21 and 26,
1887,[882] might be an accompaniment of electrical processes connected
with the planet's meteorology. Whatever the origin of the phenomenon, it
may serve, on a night-enwrapt hemisphere, to dissipate some of the thick
darkness otherwise encroached upon only by "the pale light of stars."

Venus was once supposed to possess a satellite. But belief in its
existence has died out. No one, indeed, has caught even a deceptive
glimpse of such an object during the last 125 years. Yet it was
repeatedly and, one might have thought, well observed in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. Fontana "discovered" it in 1645; Cassini--an
adept in the art of seeing--recognised it in 1672, and again in 1686;
Short watched it for a full hour in 1740 with varied instrumental means;
Tobias Mayer in 1759, Montaigne in 1761; several astronomers at
Copenhagen in March, 1764, noted what they considered its unmistakable
presence; as did Horrebow in 1768. But M. Paul Stroobant,[883] who in
1887 submitted all the available data on the subject to a searching
examination, identified Horrebow's satellite with Theta Librae, a
fifth-magnitude star; and a few other apparitions were, by his industry,
similarly explained away. Nevertheless, several withstood all efforts to
account for them, and together form a most curious case of illusion. For
it is quite certain that Venus has no such conspicuous attendant.

       *       *       *       *       *

The third planet encountered in travelling outward from the sun is the
abode of man. He has in consequence opportunities for studying its
physical habitudes altogether different from the baffling glimpse
afforded to him of the other members of the solar family.
Regarding the earth, then, a mass of knowledge so varied and
comprehensive has been accumulated as to form a science--or rather
several sciences--apart. But underneath all lie astronomical relations,
the recognition and investigation of which constitute one of the most
significant intellectual events of the present century.

It is indeed far from easy to draw a line of logical distinction between
items of knowledge which have their proper place here, and those which
should be left to the historian of geology. There are some, however, of
which the cosmical connections are so close that it is impossible to
overlook them. Among these is the ascertainment of the solidity of the
globe. At first sight it seems difficult to conceive what the apparent
positions of the stars can have to do with subterranean conditions; yet
it was from star measurements alone that Hopkins, in 1839, concluded the
earth to be solid to a depth of at least 800 or 1,000 miles.[884] His
argument was, that if it were a mere shell filled with liquid,
precession and nutation would be much larger than they are observed to
be. For the shell alone would follow the pull of the sun and moon on its
equatorial girdle, leaving the liquid behind; and being thus so much the
lighter, would move the more readily. There is, it is true, grave reason
to doubt whether this reasoning corresponds with the actual facts of the
case;[885] but the conclusion to which it led has been otherwise
affirmed and extended.

Indications of an identical purport have been derived from another kind
of external disturbance, affecting our globe through the same agencies.
Lord Kelvin (then Sir William Thomson) pointed out in 1862[886] that
tidal influences are brought to bear on land as well as on water,
although obedience to them is perceptible only in the mobile element.
Some bodily distortion of the earth's figure _must_, however, take
place, unless we suppose it of absolute or "preternatural" rigidity, and
the amount of such distortion can be determined from its effect in
diminishing oceanic tides below their calculated value. For if the earth
were perfectly plastic to the stresses of solar and lunar gravity,
tides--in the ordinary sense--would not exist. Continents and oceans
would swell and subside together. It is to the _difference_ in the
behaviour of solid and liquid terrestrial constituents that the ebb and
flow of the waters are due.

Six years later, the distinguished Glasgow professor suggested that this
criterion might, by the aid of a prolonged series of exact tidal
observations, be practically applied to test the interior condition of
our planet.[887] In 1882, accordingly, suitable data extending over
thirty-three years having at length become available, Mr. G. H. Darwin
performed the laborious task of their analysis, with the general result
that the "effective rigidity" of the earth's mass must be _at least_ as
great as that of steel.[888]

Ratification from an unexpected quarter has lately been brought to this
conclusion. The question of a possible mobility in the earth's axis of
rotation has often been mooted. Now at last it has received an
affirmative reply. Dr. Kuestner detected, in his observations of 1884-85,
effects apparently springing from a minute variation in the latitude of
Berlin. The matter having been brought before the International Geodetic
Association in 1888, special observations were set on foot at Berlin,
Potsdam, Prague, and Strasbourg, the upshot of which was to bring
plainly to view synchronous, and seemingly periodic fluctuations of
latitude to the extent of half a second of arc. The reality of these was
verified by an expedition to Honolulu in 1891-92, the variations there
corresponding inversely to those simultaneously determined in
Europe.[889] Their character was completely defined by Mr. S. C.
Chandler's discussion in October, 1891.[890] He showed that they could
be explained by supposing the pole of the earth to describe a circle
with a radius of thirty feet in a period of fourteen months.
Confirmation of this hypothesis was found by Dr. B. A. Gould in the
Cordoba observations,[891] and it was provided with a physical basis
through the able co-operation of Professor Newcomb.[892] The earth,
owing to its ellipsoidal shape, should, apart from disturbance, rotate
upon its "axis of figure," or shortest diameter; since thus alone can
the centrifugal forces generated by its spinning balance each other.
Temporary causes, however, such as heavy falls of snow or rain limited
to one continental area, the shifting of ice-masses, even the movements
of winds, may render the globe slightly lop-sided, and thus oblige it to
forsake its normal axis, and rotate on one somewhat divergent from it.
This "instantaneous axis" (for it is incessantly changing) must, by
mathematical theory, revolve round the axis of figure in a period of 306
days. Provided, that is to say, the earth were a perfectly rigid body.
But it is far from being so; it yields sensibly to every strain put upon
it; and this yielding tends to protract the time of circulation of the
displaced pole. The length of its period, then, serves as a kind of
measure of the plasticity of the globe; which, according to Newcomb's
and S. S. Hough's independent calculations,[893] seems to be a little
less than that of steel. In an earth compacted of steel, the
instantaneous axis would revolve in 441 days; in the actual earth, the
process is accomplished in 428 days. By this new path, accordingly,
astronomers have been led to an identical estimate of the consistence of
our globe with that derived from tidal investigations.

Variations of latitude are intrinsically complex. To produce them, an
incalculable interplay of causes must be at work, each with its proper
period and law of action.[894] All the elements of the phenomenon are
then in a perpetual state of flux,[895] and absorb for their continual
redetermination, the arduous and combined labours of many astronomers.
Nor is this trouble superfluous. Minute in extent though they be, the
shiftings of the pole menace the very foundations of exact celestial
science; their neglect would leave the entire fabric insecure. Just at
the beginning of the present century they reached a predicted minimum,
but are expected again to augment their range after the year 1902. The
interesting suggestion has been made by Mr. J. Halm that such
fluctuations are, in some obscure way, affected by changes in solar
activity, and conform like them to an eleven-year cycle.[896]

In a paper read before the Geological Society, December 15, 1830,[897]
Sir John Herschel threw out the idea that the perplexing changes of
climate revealed by the geological record might be explained through
certain slow fluctuations in the eccentricity of the earth's orbit,
produced by the disturbing action of the other planets. Shortly
afterwards, however, he abandoned the position as untenable;[898] and it
was left to the late Dr. James Croll, in 1864[899] and subsequent years,
to reoccupy and fortify it. Within restricted limits (as Lagrange and,
more certainly and definitely, Leverrier proved), the path pursued by
our planet round the sun alternately contracts, in the course of ages,
into a moderate ellipse, and expands almost to a circle, the major axis,
and consequently the mean distance, remaining invariable. Even at
present, when the eccentricity approaches a minimum, the sun is nearer
to us in January than in July by above three million miles, and some
850,000 years ago this difference was more than four times as great. Dr.
Croll brought together[900] a mass of evidence to support the view,
that, at epochs of considerable eccentricity, the hemisphere of which
the winter, occurring at aphelion, was both intensified and prolonged,
must have undergone extensive glaciation; while the opposite hemisphere,
with a short, mild winter, and long, cool summer, enjoyed an approach to
perennial spring. These conditions were exactly reversed at the end of
10,500 years, through the shifting of the perihelion combined with the
precession of the equinoxes, the frozen hemisphere blooming into a
luxuriant garden as its seasons came round to occur at the opposite
sites of the terrestrial orbit, and the vernal hemisphere subsiding
simultaneously into ice-bound rigour.[901] Thus a plausible explanation
was offered of the anomalous alternations of glacial and semi-tropical
periods, attested, on incontrovertible geological evidence, as having
succeeded each other in times past over what are now temperate regions.
They succeeded each other, it is true, with much less frequency and
regularity than the theory demanded; but the discrepancy was overlooked
or smoothed away. The most recent glacial epoch was placed by Dr. Croll
about 200,000 years ago, when the eccentricity of the earth's orbit was
3.4 times as great as it is now. At present a faint representation of
such a state of things is afforded by the southern hemisphere. One
condition of glaciation in the coincidence of winter with the maximum of
remoteness from the sun, is present; the other--a high eccentricity--is
deficient. Yet the ring of ice-bound territory hemming in the southern
pole is well known to be far more extensive than the corresponding
region in the north.

The verification of this ingenious hypothesis depends upon a variety of
intricate meteorological conditions, some of which have been adversely
interpreted by competent authorities.[902] What is still more serious,
its acceptance seems precluded by time-relations of a simple kind. Dr.
Wright[903] has established with some approach to certainty that glacial
conditions ceased in Canada and the United States about ten or twelve
thousand years ago. The erosive action of the Falls of Niagara qualifies
them to serve as a clepsydra, or water-clock on a grand scale; and their
chronological indications have been amply corroborated elsewhere and
otherwise on the same continent. The astronomical Ice Age, however,
should have been enormously more antique. No reconciliation of the facts
with the theory appears possible.

The first attempt at an experimental estimate of the "mean density" of
the earth was Maskelyne's observation in 1774 of the deflection of a
plumb-line through the attraction of Schehallien. The conclusion thence
derived, that our globe weighs 4-1/2 times as much as an equal bulk of
water,[904] was not very exact. It was considerably improved upon by
Cavendish, who, in 1798, brought into use the "torsion-balance"
constructed for the same purpose by John Michell. The resulting estimate
of 5.48 was raised to 5.66 by Francis Baily's elaborate repetition of
the process in 1838-42. From experiments on the subject made in 1872-73
by Cornu and Baille the slightly inferior value of 5.56 was derived; and
it was further shown that the data collected by Baily, when corrected
for a systematic error, gave practically the same result (5.55).[905] M.
Wilsing's of 5.58, obtained at Potsdam in 1889,[906] nearly agreed with
it; while Professor Poynting, by means of a common balance, arrived at a
terrestrial mean density of 5.49.[907] Professor Boys next entered the
field with an exquisite apparatus, in which a quartz fibre performed the
functions of a torsion-rod; and the figure 5.53 determined by him, and
exactly confirmed by Dr. Braun's research at Mariaschein, Bohemia, in
1896,[908] may be called the standard value of the required datum.
Newton's guess at the average weight of the earth as five or six times
that of water has thus been curiously verified.

Operations for determining the figure of the earth were carried out during
the last century on an unprecedented scale. The Russo-Scandinavian arc,
of which the measurement was completed under the direction of the elder
Struve in 1855, reached from Hammerfest to Ismailia on the Danube,
a length of 25 deg. 20'. But little inferior to it was the Indian arc,
begun by Lambton in the first years of the century, continued by Everest,
revised and extended by Walker. Both were surpassed in compass by the
Anglo-French arc, which embraced 28 deg.; and considerable segments of
meridians near the Atlantic and Pacific shores of North America were
measured under the auspices of the United States Coast Survey. But these
operations shrink into insignificance by comparison with Sir David
Gill's grandiose scheme for uniting two hemispheres by a continuous
network of triangulation. The history of geodesy in South Africa began
with Lacaille's measurements in 1752. They were repeated and enlarged in
scope by Sir Thomas Maclear in 1841-48; and his determinations prepared
the way for a complete survey of Cape Colony and Natal, executed during
the ten years 1883-92 by Colonel Morris, R.E., under the direction of
Sir David Gill.[909] Bechuanaland and Rhodesia were subsequently
included in the work; and the Royal Astronomer obtained, in 1900, the
support of the International Geodetic Association for its extension to
the mouth of the Nile. Nor was this the limit of his design. By carrying
the survey along the Levantine coast, connection can be established with
Struve's system, and the magnificent amplitude of 105 deg. will be given
to the conjoined African and European arcs. Meantime, the French have
undertaken the remeasurement of Bouguer's Peruvian arc, and a
corresponding Russo-Swedish[910] enterprise is progressing in
Spitzbergen; so that abundant materials will ere long be provided for
fresh investigations of the shape and size of our planet. The smallness
of the outstanding uncertainty can be judged of by comparing J. B.
Listing's[911] with General Clarke's[912] results, published in the same
year (1878). Listing stated the dimensions of the terrestrial spheroid
as follows: Equatorial radius = 3,960 miles; polar radius = 3,947 miles;
ellipticity = 1/288.5. Clarke's corresponding figures were: 3,963 and
3,950 miles, giving an ellipticity of 1/293.5. The value of the latter
fraction at present generally adopted is 1/292; that is to say, the
thickness of the protuberant equatorial ring is held to be 1/292 of the
equatorial radius. From astronomical considerations, it is true, Newcomb
estimated the ratio at 1/308;[913] but for obtaining this particular
datum, geodetical methods are unquestionably to be preferred.

       *       *       *       *       *

The moon possesses for us a unique interest. She in all probability
shared the origin of the earth; she perhaps prefigures its decay. She is
at present its minister and companion. Her existence, so far as we can
see, serves no other purpose than to illuminate the darkness of
terrestrial nights, and to measure, by swiftly-recurring and conspicuous
changes of aspect, the long span of terrestrial time. Inquiries
stimulated by visible dependence, and aided by relatively close
vicinity, have resulted in a wonderfully minute acquaintance with the
features of the single lunar hemisphere open to our inspection.

Selenography, in the modern sense, is little more than a hundred years
old. It originated with the publication in 1791 of Schroeter's
_Selenotopographische Fragmente_.[914] Not but that the lunar surface
had already been diligently studied, chiefly by Hevelius, Cassini,
Riccioli, and Tobias Mayer; the idea, however, of investigating the
moon's physical condition, and detecting symptoms of the activity there
of natural forces through minute topographical inquiry, first obtained
effect at Lilienthal. Schroeter's delineations, accordingly, imperfect
though they were, afforded a starting-point for a _comparative_ study of
the superficial features of our satellite.

The first of the curious objects which he named "rills" was noted by him
in 1787. Before 1801 he had found eleven; Lohrmann added 75; Maedler 55;
Schmidt published in 1866 a catalogue of 425, of which 278 had been
detected by himself;[915] and he eventually brought the number up to
nearly 1,000. They are, then, a very persistent lunar feature, though
wholly without terrestrial analogue. There is no difference of opinion
as to their nature. They are quite obviously clefts in a rocky surface,
100 to 500 yards deep, usually a couple of miles across, and pursuing
straight, curved, or branching tracks up to 150 miles in length. As
regards their origin, the most probable view is that they are fissures
produced in cooling; but Neison inclines to consider them rather as
dried watercourses.[916]

On February 24, 1792, Schroeter perceived what he took to be distinct
traces of a lunar twilight, and continued to observe them during nine
consecutive years.[917] They indicated, he thought, the presence of a
shallow atmosphere, about 29 times more tenuous than our own. Bessel, on
the other hand, considered that the only way of "saving" a lunar
atmosphere was to deny it any refractive power, the sharpness and
suddenness of star-occultations negativing the possibility of gaseous
surroundings of greater density (admitting an extreme supposition) than
1/500 that of terrestrial air.[918] Newcomb places the maximum at 1/400.
Sir John Herschel concluded "the non-existence of any atmosphere at the
moon's edge having 1/1980 part of the density of the earth's
atmosphere."[919]

This decision was fully borne out by Sir William Huggins's spectroscopic
observation of the disappearance behind the moon's limb of the small
star Eta Piscium, January 4, 1865.[920] Not the slightest sign of
selective absorption or unequal refraction was discernible. The entire
spectrum went out at once, as if a slide had suddenly dropped over it.
The spectroscope has uniformly told the same tale; for M. Thollon's
observation during the total solar eclipse at Sohag of a supposed
thickening at the moon's rim, of certain dark lines in the solar
spectrum, is now acknowledged to have been illusory. Moonlight, analysed
with the prism, is found to be pure reflected sunlight, diminished in
_quantity_, owing to the low reflective capability of the lunar surface,
to less than one-fifth its incident intensity, but wholly unmodified in
_quality_.

Nevertheless, the diameter of the moon appeared from the Greenwich
observations discussed by Airy in 1865[921] to be 4" smaller than when
directly measured; and the effect would be explicable by refraction in a
lunar atmosphere 2,000 times thinner than our own at the sea-level. But
the difference was probably illusory. It resulted in part, if not
wholly, from the visual enlargement by irradiation of the bright disc of
the moon. Professor Comstock, employing the 16-inch Clark equatoreal of
the Washburn Observatory, found in 1897 the refractive displacements of
occulted stars so trifling as to preclude the existence of a permanent
lunar atmosphere of much more than 1/5000 the density of the terrestrial
envelope.[922] The possibility, however, was admitted that, on the
illuminated side of the moon, temporary exhalations of aqueous vapour
might arise from ice-strata evaporated by sun-heat. Meantime, some
renewed evidence of actual crepuscular gleams on the moon had been
gathered by MM. Paul and Prosper Henry of the Paris Observatory, as well
as by Mr. W. H. Pickering, in the pure air of Arequipa, at an altitude
of 8,000 feet above the sea.[923] An occultation of Jupiter, too,
observed by him August 12, 1892,[924] was attended with a slight
flattening of the planet's disc through the effect, it was supposed, of
lunar refraction--but of refraction in an atmosphere possessing, at the
most, 1/4000 the density at the sea-level of terrestrial air, and
capable of holding in equilibrium no more than 1/250 of an inch of
mercury. Yet this small barometric value corresponds, Mr. Pickering
remarks, "to a pressure of hundreds of tons per square mile of the lunar
surface." The compression downward of gaseous strata on the moon should,
in any case, proceed very gradually, owing to the slight power of lunar
gravity,[925] and they might hence play an important part in the economy
of our satellite while evading spectroscopic and other tests. Thus--as
Mr. Ranyard remarked[926]--the cliffs and pinnacles of the moon bear
witness, by their unworn condition, to the efficiency of atmospheric
protection against meteoric bombardment; and Mr. Pickering shows that it
could be afforded by such a tenuous envelope as that postulated by him.

The first to emulate Schroeter's selenographical zeal was Wilhelm
Gotthelf Lohrmann, a land-surveyor of Dresden, who, in 1824, published
four out of twenty-five sections of the first scientifically executed
lunar chart, on a scale of 37-1/2 inches to a lunar diameter. His sight,
however, began to fail three years later, and he died in 1840, leaving
materials from which the work was completed and published in 1878 by Dr.
Julius Schmidt, late director of the Athens Observatory. Much had been
done in the interim. Beer and Maedler began at Berlin in 1830 their great
trigonometrical survey of the lunar surface, as yet neither revised nor
superseded. A map, issued in four parts, 1834-36, on nearly the same
scale as Lohrmann's, but more detailed and authoritative, embodied the
results. It was succeeded, in 1837, by a descriptive volume bearing the
imposing title, _Der Mond; oder allgemeine vergleichende Selenographie_.
This summation of knowledge in that branch, though in truth leaving many
questions open, had an air of finality which tended to discourage
further inquiry.[927] It gave form to a reaction against the sanguine
views entertained by Hevelius, Schroeter, Herschel and Gruithuisen as to
the possibilities of agreeable residence on the moon, and relegated the
"Selenites," one of whose cities Schroeter thought he had discovered, and
of whose festal processions Gruithuisen had not despaired of becoming a
spectator, to the shadowy land of the Ivory Gate. All examples of change
in lunar formations were, moreover, dismissed as illusory. The light
contained in the work was, in short, a "dry light," not stimulating to
the imagination. "A mixture of a lie," Bacon shrewdly remarks, "doth
ever add pleasure." For many years, accordingly, Schmidt had the field
of selenography almost to himself.

Reviving interest in the subject was at once excited and displayed by
the appointment, in 1864, of a Lunar Committee of the British
Association. The indirect were of greater value than the direct fruits
of its labours. An English school of selenography rose into importance.
Popularity was gained for the subject by the diffusion of works
conspicuous for ingenuity and research. Nasmyth's and Carpenter's
beautifully illustrated volume (1874) was succeeded, after two years, by
a still more weighty contribution to lunar science in Mr. Neison's
well-known book, accompanied by a map, based on the survey of Beer and
Maedler, but adding some 500 measures of positions, besides the
representation of several thousand new objects. With Schmidt's _Charte
der Gebirge der Mondes_, Germany once more took the lead. This splendid
delineation, built upon Lohrmann's foundation, embraced the detail
contained in upwards of 3,000 original drawings, representing the labour
of thirty-four years. No less than 32,856 craters are represented in it,
on a scale of seventy-five inches to a diameter. An additional help to
lunar inquiries was provided at the same time in this country by the
establishment, through the initiative of the late Mr. W. R. Birt, of the
Selenographical Society.

But the strongest incentive to diligence in studying the rugged features
of our celestial helpmate has been the idea of probable or actual
variation in them. A change always seems to the inquisitive intellect of
man like a breach in the defences of Nature's secrets, through which it
may hope to make its way to the citadel. What is desirable easily
becomes credible; and thus statements and rumours of lunar convulsions
have successively, during the last hundred years, obtained credence, and
successively, on closer investigation, been rejected. The subject is one
as to which illusion is peculiarly easy. Our view of the moon's surface
is a bird's-eye view. Its conformation reveals itself indirectly through
irregularities in the distribution of light and darkness. The forms of
its elevations and depressions can be inferred only from the shapes of
the black, unmitigated shadows cast by them. But these shapes are in a
state of perpetual and bewildering fluctuation, partly through changes
in the angle of illumination, partly through changes in our point of
view, caused by what are called the moon's "librations."[928] The result
is, that no single observation can be _exactly_ repeated by the same
observer, since identical conditions recur only after the lapse of a
great number of years.

Local peculiarities of surface, besides, are liable to produce
perplexing effects. The reflection of earth-light at a particular angle
from certain bright summits completely, though temporarily, deceived
Herschel into the belief that he had witnessed, in 1783 and 1787,
volcanic outbursts on the dark side of the moon. The persistent
recurrence, indeed, of similar appearances under circumstances less
amenable to explanation inclined Webb to the view that effusions of
native light actually occur.[929] More cogent proofs must, however, be
adduced before a fact so intrinsically improbable can be admitted as
true.

But from the publication of Beer and Maedler's work until 1866, the
received opinion was that no genuine sign of activity had ever been
seen, or was likely to be seen, on our satellite; that her face was a
stereotyped page, a fixed and irrevisable record of the past. A profound
sensation, accordingly, was produced by Schmidt's announcement, in
October, 1866, that the crater "Linne," in the Mare Serenitatis, had
disappeared,[930] effaced, as it was supposed, by an igneous outflow.
The case seemed undeniable, and is still dubious. Linne had been known
to Lohrmann and Maedler, 1822-32, as a deep crater, five or six miles in
diameter, the third largest in the dusky plain known as the "Mare
Serenitatis"; and Schmidt had observed and drawn it, 1840-43, under a
practically identical aspect. Now it appears under high light as a
whitish spot, in the centre of which, as the rays begin to fall
obliquely, a pit, scarcely two miles across, emerges into view.[931] The
crateral character of this comparatively minute depression was detected
by Father Secchi, February 11, 1867.

This is not all. Schroeter's description of Linne, as seen by him
November 5, 1788, tallies quite closely with modern observation;[932]
while its inconspicuousness in 1797 is shown by its omission from
Russell's lunar globe and maps.[933] We are thus driven to adopt one of
two suppositions: either Lohrmann, Maedler, and Schmidt were entirely
mistaken in the size and importance of Linne, or a real change in its
outward semblance supervened during the first half of the century, and
has since passed away, perhaps again to recur. The latter hypothesis
seems the more probable: and its probability is strengthened by much
evidence of actual obscuration or variation of tint in other parts of
the lunar surface, more especially on the floor of the great "walled
plain" named "Plato."[934] From a re-examination with a 13-inch
refractor at Arequipa in 1891-92, of this region, and of the Mare
Serenitatis, Mr. W. H. Pickering inclines to the belief that lunar
volcanic action, once apparently so potent, is not yet wholly
extinct.[935]

An instance of an opposite kind of change was alleged by Dr. Hermann J.
Klein of Cologne in March, 1878.[936] In Linne the obliteration of an
old crater had been assumed; in "Hyginus N.," the formation of a new
crater was asserted. Yet, quite possibly, the same cause may have
produced the effects thought to be apparent in both. It is, however, far
from certain that any real change has affected the neighbourhood of
Hyginus. The novelty of Klein's observation of May 19, 1877, may have
consisted simply in the detection of a hitherto unrecognised feature.
The region is one of complex formation, consequently of more than
ordinary liability to deceptive variations in aspect under rapid and
entangled fluctuations of light and shade.[937] Moreover, it seems to be
certain, from Messrs. Pratt and Capron's attentive study, that "Hyginus
N." is no true crater, but a shallow, saucer-like depression, difficult
of clear discernment.[938] Under suitable illumination, nevertheless, it
contains, and is marked by, an ample shadow.[939]

In both these controverted instances of change, lunar photography was
invoked as a witness; but, notwithstanding the great advances made in
the art by De la Rue in this country, by Draper, and, above all, by
Rutherford in America, without decisive results. Investigations of the
kind began to assume a new aspect in 1890, when Professor Holden
organised them at the Lick Observatory.[940] Autographic moon-pictures
were no longer taken casually, but on system; and Dr. Weinek's elaborate
study, and skilful reproductions of them at Prague,[941] gave them
universal value. They were designed to provide materials for an atlas on
the scale of Beer and Maedler's, of which some beautiful specimen-plates
have been issued. At Paris, in 1894, with the aid of a large "equatoreal
coude," a work of similar character was set on foot by MM. Loewy and
Puiseux. Its progress has been marked by the successive publication of
five instalments of a splendid atlas, on a scale of about eight feet to
the lunar diameter, accompanied by theoretical dissertations, designed
to establish a science of "selenology." The moon's formations are thus
not only delineated under every variety of light-incidence, but their
meaning is sought to be elicited, and their history and mutual relations
interpreted.[942] Henceforth, at any rate, the lunar volcanoes can
scarcely, without notice taken, breathe hard in their age-long sleep.

Melloni was the first to get undeniable heating effects from moonlight.
His experiments, made on Mount Vesuvius early in 1846,[943] were
repeated with like result by Zantedeschi at Venice four years later. A
rough measure of the intensity of those effects was arrived at by Piazzi
Smyth at Guajara, on the Peak of Teneriffe, in 1856. At a distance of
fifteen feet from the thermomultiplier, a Price's candle was found to
radiate just twice as much heat as the full moon.[944] Then, after
thirteen years, in 1869-72, an exact and extensive series of
observations on the subject were made by the present Earl of Rosse. The
lunar radiations, from the first to the last quarter, displayed, when
concentrated with the Parsonstown three-foot mirror, appreciable thermal
energy, increasing with the phase, and largely due to "dark heat,"
distinguished from the quicker-vibrating sort by inability to traverse a
plate of glass. This was supposed to indicate an actual heating of the
surface, during the long lunar day of 300 hours, to about 500 deg. F.[945]
(corrected later to 197 deg.),[946] the moon thus acting as a direct
radiator no less than as a reflector of heat. But the conclusion was
very imperfectly borne out by Dr. Boeddicker's observations with the
same instrument and apparatus during the total lunar eclipse of October
4, 1884.[947] This initial opportunity of measuring the heat phases of
an eclipsed moon was used with the remarkable result of showing that the
heat disappeared almost completely, though not quite simultaneously,
with the light. Confirmatory evidence of the extraordinary promptitude
with which our satellite parts with heat already to some extent
appropriated, was afforded by Professor Langley's bolometric
observations at Allegheny of the partial eclipse of September 23,
1885.[948] Yet it is certain that the moon sends us a perceptible
quantity of heat _on its own account_, besides simply throwing back
solar radiations. For in February, 1885, Professor Langley succeeded,
after many fruitless attempts, in getting measures of a "lunar
heat-spectrum." The incredible delicacy of the operation may be judged
of from the statement that the sum-total of the thermal energy dispersed
by his rock-salt prisms was insufficient to raise a thermometer fully
exposed to it one-thousandth of a degree Centigrade! The singular fact
was, however, elicited that this almost evanescent spectrum is made up
of two superposed spectra, one due to reflection, the other, with a
maximum far down in the infra-red, to radiation.[949] The corresponding
temperature of the moon's sunlit surface Professor Langley considers to
be about that of freezing water.[950] Repeated experiments having failed
to get any thermal effects from the dark part of the moon, it was
inferred that our satellite "has no internal heat sensible at the
surface"; so that the radiations from the lunar soil giving the low
maximum in the heat-spectrum, "must be due purely to solar heat which
has been absorbed and almost immediately re-radiated." Professor
Langley's explorations of the terra incognita of immensely long
wave-lengths where lie the unseen heat-emissions from the earth into
space, led him to the discovery that these, contrary to the received
opinion, are in good part transmissible by our atmosphere, although they
are completely intercepted by glass. Another important result of the
Allegheny work was the abolition of the anomalous notion of the
"temperature of space," fixed by Pouillet at -140 deg. C. For space in
itself can have no temperature, and stellar radiation is a negligible
quantity. Thus, it is safe to assume "that a perfect thermometer
suspended in space at the distance of the earth or moon from the sun,
but shielded from its rays, would sensibly indicate the absolute
zero,"[951] ordinarily placed at -273 deg. C.

A "Prize Essay on the Distribution of the Moon's Heat" (The Hague),
1891, by Mr. Frank W. Very, who had taken an active part in Professor
Langley's long-sustained inquiry, embodies the fruits of its
continuation. They show the lunar disc to be tolerably uniform in
thermal power. The brighter parts are also indeed hotter, but not much.
The traces perceived of a slight retention of heat by the substances
forming the lunar surface, agreed well with the Parsonstown observations
of the total eclipse of the moon, January 28, 1888.[952] For they
brought out an unmistakable divergence between the heat and light
phases. A curious decrease of heat previous to the first touch of the
earth's shadow upon the lunar globe remains unexplained, unless it be
admissible to suppose the terrestrial atmosphere capable of absorbing
heat at an elevation of 190 miles. The probable range of temperature on
the moon was discussed by Professor Very in 1898.[953] He concluded it
to be very wide. Hotter than boiling water under the sun's vertical
rays, the arid surface of our dependent globe must, he found, cool in
the 14-day lunar night to about the temperature of liquid air.

Although that fundamental part of astronomy known as "celestial
mechanics" lies outside the scope of this work, and we therefore pass
over in silence the immense labours of Plana, Damoiseau, Hansen,
Delaunay, G. W. Hill, and Airy in reconciling the observed and
calculated motions of the moon, there is one slight but significant
discrepancy which is of such importance to the physical history of the
solar system, that some brief mention must be made of it.

Halley discovered in 1693, by examining the records of ancient eclipses,
that the moon was going faster then than 2,000 years previously--so much
faster, as to have got ahead of the place in the sky she would otherwise
have occupied, by about two of her own diameters. It was one of
Laplace's highest triumphs to have found an explanation of this puzzling
fact. He showed, in 1787, that it was due to a very slow change in the
ovalness of the earth's orbit, tending, during the present age of the
world, to render it more nearly circular. The pull of the sun upon the
moon is thereby lessened; the counter-pull of the earth gets the upper
hand; and our satellite, drawn nearer to us by something less than an
inch each year,[954] proportionately quickens her pace. Many thousands
of years hence the process will be reversed; the terrestrial orbit will
close in at the sides, the lunar orbit will open out under the growing
stress of solar gravity, and our celestial chronometer will lose instead
of gaining time.

This is all quite true as Laplace put it; but it is not enough. Adams,
the virtual discoverer of Neptune, found with surprise in 1853 that the
received account of the matter was "essentially incomplete," and
explained, when the requisite correction was introduced, only half the
observed acceleration.[955] What was to be done with the remaining half?
Here Delaunay, the eminent French mathematical astronomer, unhappily
drowned at Cherbourg in 1872 by the capsizing of a pleasure-boat, came
to the rescue.[956]

It is obvious to anyone who considers the subject a little attentively,
that the tides must act to some extent as a friction-brake upon the
rotating earth. In other words, they must bring about an almost
infinitely slow lengthening of the day. For the two masses of water
piled up by lunar influence on the hither and farther sides of our
globe, strive, as it were, to detach themselves from the unity of the
terrestrial spheroid, and to follow the movements of the moon. The moon,
accordingly, holds them _against_ the whirling earth, which revolves
like a shaft in a fixed collar, slowly losing motion and gaining heat,
eventually dissipated through space.[957] This must go on (so far as we
can see) until the periods of the earth's rotation and of the moon's
revolution coincide. Nay, the process will be continued--should our
oceans survive so long--by the feebler tide-raising power of the sun,
ceasing only when day and night cease to alternate, when one side of our
planet is plunged in perpetual darkness and the other seared by
unchanging light.

Here, then, we have the secret of the moon's turning always the same
face towards the earth. It is that in primeval times, when the moon was
liquid or plastic, an earth-raised tidal wave rapidly and forcibly
reduced her rotation to its present exact agreement with her period of
revolution. This was divined by Kant[958] nearly a century before the
necessity for such a mode of action presented itself to any other
thinker. In a weekly paper published at Koenigsberg in 1754, the modern
doctrine of "tidal friction" was clearly outlined by him, both as
regards its effects actually in progress on the rotation of the earth,
and as regards its effects already consummated on the rotation of the
moon--the whole forming a preliminary attempt at what he called a
"natural history" of the heavens. His sagacious suggestion, however,
remained entirely unnoticed until revived--it would seem
independently--by Julius Robert Mayer in 1848;[959] while similar, and
probably original, conclusions were reached by William Ferrel of
Allensville, Kentucky, in 1858.[960]

Delaunay was not then the inventor or discoverer of tidal friction; he
merely displayed it as an effective cause of change. He showed reason
for believing that its action in checking the earth's rotation, far from
being, as Ferrel had supposed, completely neutralised by the contraction
of the globe through cooling, was a fact to be reckoned with in
computing the movements, as well as in speculating on the history, of
the heavenly bodies. The outstanding acceleration of the moon was thus
at once explained. It was explained as apparent only--the reflection of
a real lengthening, by one second in 100,000 years, of the day. But on
this point the last word has not yet been spoken.

Professor Newcomb undertook in 1870 the onerous task of investigating
the errors of Hansen's Lunar Tables as compared with observations prior
to 1750. The results, published in 1878,[961] proved somewhat
perplexing. They tend, in general, to reduce the amount of acceleration
left unaccounted for by Laplace's gravitational theory, and
proportionately to diminish the importance of the part played by tidal
friction. But, in order to bring about this diminution, and at the same
time conciliate Alexandrian and Arabian observations, it is necessary to
reject _as total_ the ancient solar eclipses known as those of Thales
and Larissa. This may be a necessary, but it must be admitted to be a
hazardous expedient. Its upshot was to indicate a possibility that the
observed and calculated values of the moon's acceleration might after
all prove to be identical; and the small outstanding discrepancy was
still further diminished by Tisserand's investigation, differently
conducted, of the same Arabian eclipses discussed by Newcomb.[962] The
necessity of having recourse to a lengthening day is then less pressing
than it seemed some time ago; and the effect, if perceptible in the
moon's motion, should, M. Tisserand remarked, be proportionately so in
the motions of all the other heavenly bodies. The presence of the
apparent general acceleration that should ensue can be tested with most
promise of success, according to the same authority, by delicate
comparisons of past and future transits of Mercury.

Newcomb further showed that small residual irregularities are still
found in the movements of our satellite, inexplicable either by any
known gravitational influence, or by any _uniform_ value that could be
assigned to secular acceleration.[963] If set down to the account of
imperfections in the "time-keeping" of the earth, it could only be on
the arbitrary supposition of fluctuations in its rate of going
themselves needing explanation. This, it is true, might be found in very
slight changes of figure,[964] not altogether unlikely to occur. But
into this cloudy and speculative region astronomers for the present
decline to penetrate. They prefer, if possible, to deal only with
calculable causes, and thus to preserve for their "most perfect of
sciences" its special prerogative of assured prediction.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 796: _Neueste Beytraege zur Erweiterung der Sternkunde_, Bd.
iii., p. 14 (1800).]

[Footnote 797: _Ibid._, p. 24.]

[Footnote 798: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xciii., p. 215.]

[Footnote 799: _Mem. Roy. Astr. Soc._, vol. vi., p. 116.]

[Footnote 800: _Month. Not._, vol. xix., pp. 11, 25.]

[Footnote 801: _Ibid._, vol. xxxviii., p. 398.]

[Footnote 802: _Am. Jour. of Sc._, vol. xvi., p. 124.]

[Footnote 803: _Wash. Obs._ for 1876, Part ii., p. 34.]

[Footnote 804: _Pop. Astr._, vol. ii., p. 168; _Astr. Jour._, No. 335.]

[Footnote 805: _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xiii., p. 866.]

[Footnote 806: _Ibid._, p. 867.]

[Footnote 807: _Month. Not._, vol. xxiv., p. 18.]

[Footnote 808: _Ibid._, vol. xxiii., p. 234 (Challis).]

[Footnote 809: _Untersuchungen ueber die Spectra der Planeten_, p. 9.]

[Footnote 810: _Sirius_, vol. vii., p. 131.]

[Footnote 811: _Potsdam Publ._, No. 30; _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,171; Frost,
_Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xii., p. 619.]

[Footnote 812: Zoellner and Winnecke made it=O.13, _Astr. Nach._, No.
2,245.]

[Footnote 813: _Neueste Beytraege_, Bd. iii., p. 50.]

[Footnote 814: _Astr. Jahrbuch_, 1804, pp. 97-102.]

[Footnote 815: Webb, _Celestial Objects_, p. 46 (4th ed.).]

[Footnote 816: _L'Astronomie_, t. ii., p. 141.]

[Footnote 817: _Observations sur les Planetes Venus et Mercure_, p. 87.]

[Footnote 818: _Observatory_, vol. vi., p. 40.]

[Footnote 819: _Atti dell' Accad. dei Lincei_, t. v. ii., p. 283, 1889;
_Astr. Nach._, No. 2,944.]

[Footnote 820: _Astr. Nach._ No. 2,479.]

[Footnote 821: _Memoirs Amer. Acad._, vol. xii., No. 4, p. 464.]

[Footnote 822: _Hist. de l'Astr._, p. 682.]

[Footnote 823: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xlix., p. 379.]

[Footnote 824: _Comptes Rendus_, t. l., p. 40.]

[Footnote 825: _Ibid._, p. 46.]

[Footnote 826: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 1,248 and 1,281.]

[Footnote 827: _Comptes Rendus_, t. lxxxiii., pp. 510, 561.]

[Footnote 828: _Handbuch der Mathematik_, Bd. ii., p. 327.]

[Footnote 829: _Comptes Rendus_, t. lxxxiii., p. 721.]

[Footnote 830: _Nature_, vol. xviii., pp. 461, 495, 539.]

[Footnote 831: Oppolzer, _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,239.]

[Footnote 832: _Ibid._, Nos. 2,253-4 (C. H. F. Peters).]

[Footnote 833: _Ibid._, Nos. 2,263 and 2,277. See also Tisserand in
_Ann. Bur. des Long._, 1882, p. 729.]

[Footnote 834: See J. Bauschinger's _Untersuchungen_ (1884), summarised
in _Bull. Astr._, t. i., p. 506, and _Astr. Nach._, No. 2,594. Newcomb
finds the anomalous motion of the perihelion to be even larger (43"
instead of 38") than Leverrier made it. _Month. Not._, February, 1884,
p. 187. Harzer's attempt to account for it in _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,030,
is more ingenious than successful.]

[Footnote 835: _Jour. des Scavans_, December, 1667, p. 122.]

[Footnote 836: _Elemens d'Astr._, p. 525. Cf. Chandler, _Pop. Astr._,
February, 1897, p. 393.]

[Footnote 837: _Beobachtungen ueber die sehr betraechtlichen Gebirge und
Rotation der Venus_, 1792, p. 35. Schroeter's final result in 1811 was
23h. 21m. 7.977s. _Monat. Corr._, Bd. xxv., p. 367.]

[Footnote 838: _Astr. Nach._, No. 404.]

[Footnote 839: _Rendiconti del R. Istituto Lombardo_, t. xxiii., serie
ii.]

[Footnote 840: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,304.]

[Footnote 841: _Bothkamp Beobachtungen_, Heft ii., p. 120.]

[Footnote 842: _Comptes Rendus_, t. cxi., p. 542; t. cxxii., p. 395.]

[Footnote 843: _Month. Not._, vol. lvii., p. 402; _Astr. Nach._, No.
3,406.]

[Footnote 844: _Mem. Spettroscopisti Italiani_, t. xxv., p. 93;
_Nature_, vol. liii., p. 306.]

[Footnote 845: _Astr. Nach._, No. 3,329.]

[Footnote 846: _Ibid._]

