"What puzzles me," said Files, "is that we are able to fall both ways."

"That," announced Tik-Tok, "is be-cause the world is round."

"Exactly," responded Shaggy. "The machinery in your head is in fine
working order, Tik-Tok. You know, Betsy, that there is such a thing as
the Attraction of Gravitation, which draws everything toward the center
of the earth. That is why we fall out of bed, and why everything clings
to the surface of the earth."

"Then why doesn't everyone go on down to the center of the earth?"
inquired the little girl.

"I was afraid you were going to ask me that," replied Shaggy in a sad
tone. "The reason, my dear, is that the earth is so solid that other
solid things can't get through it. But when there's a hole, as there is
in this case, we drop right down to the center of the world."

"Why don't we stop there?" asked Betsy.

"Because we go so fast that we acquire speed enough to carry us right
up to the other end."

"I don't understand that, and it makes my head ache to try to figure it
out," she said after some thought. "One thing draws us to the center
and another thing pushes us away from it. But--"

"Don't ask me why, please," interrupted the Shaggy Man. "If you can't
understand it, let it go at that."

"Do you understand it?" she inquired.

"All the magic isn't in fairyland," he said gravely. "There's lots of
magic in all Nature, and you may see it as well in the United States,
where you and I once lived, as you can here."

"I never did," she replied.

"Because you were so used to it all that you didn't realize it was
magic. Is anything more wonderful than to see a flower grow and
blossom, or to get light out of the electricity in the air? The cows
that manufacture milk for us must have machinery fully as remarkable as
that in Tik-Tok's copper body, and perhaps you've noticed that--"

And then, before Shaggy could finish his speech, the strong light of
day suddenly broke upon them, grew brighter, and completely enveloped
them. The dragon's claws no longer scraped against the metal Tube, for
he shot into the open air a hundred feet or more and sailed so far away
from the slanting hole that when he landed it was on the peak of a
mountain and just over the entrance to the many underground caverns of
the Nome King.

Some of the officers tumbled off their seats when Quox struck the
ground, but most of the dragon's passengers only felt a slight jar. All
were glad to be on solid earth again and they at once dismounted and
began to look about them. Queerly enough, as soon as they had left the
dragon, the seats that were strapped to the monster's back disappeared,
and this probably happened because there was no further use for them
and because Quox looked far more dignified in just his silver scales.
Of course he still wore the forty yards of ribbon around his neck, as
well as the great locket, but these only made him look "dressed up," as
Betsy remarked.

Now the army of nomes had gathered thickly around the mouth of the
Tube, in order to be ready to capture the band of invaders as soon as
they popped out. There were, indeed, hundreds of nomes assembled, and
they were led by Guph, their most famous General. But they did not
expect the dragon to fly so high, and he shot out of the Tube so
suddenly that it took them by surprise. When the nomes had rubbed the
astonishment out of their eyes and regained their wits, they discovered
the dragon quietly seated on the mountainside far above their heads,
while the other strangers were standing in a group and calmly looking
down upon them.

General Guph was very angry at the escape, which was no one's fault but
his own.

"Come down here and be captured!" he shouted, waving his sword at them.

"Come up here and capture us--if you dare!" replied Queen Ann, who was
winding up the clockwork of her Private Soldier, so he could fight more
briskly.

Guph's first answer was a roar of rage at the defiance; then he turned
and issued a command to his nomes. These were all armed with sharp
spears and with one accord they raised these spears and threw them
straight at their foes, so that they rushed through the air in a
perfect cloud of flying weapons.

Some damage might have been done had not the dragon quickly crawled
before the others, his body being so big that it shielded every one of
them, including Hank. The spears rattled against the silver scales of
Quox and then fell harmlessly to the ground. They were magic spears, of
course, and all straightway bounded back into the hands of those who
had thrown them, but even Guph could see that it was useless to repeat
the attack.

It was now Queen Ann's turn to attack, so the Generals yelled
"For--ward march!" and the Colonels and Majors and Captains repeated
the command and the valiant Army of Oogaboo, which seemed to be
composed mainly of Tik-Tok, marched forward in single column toward the
nomes, while Betsy and Polychrome cheered and Hank gave a loud
"Hee-haw!" and Shaggy shouted "Hooray!" and Queen Ann screamed: "At
'em, Tik-Tok--at 'em!"

The nomes did not await the Clockwork Man's attack but in a twinkling
disappeared into the underground caverns. They made a great mistake in
being so hasty, for Tik-Tok had not taken a dozen steps before he
stubbed his copper toe on a rock and fell flat to the ground, where he
cried: "Pick me up! Pick me up! Pick me up!" until Shaggy and Files ran
forward and raised him to his feet again.

The dragon chuckled softly to himself as he scratched his left ear with
his hind claw, but no one was paying much attention to Quox just then.

It was evident to Ann and her officers that there could be no fighting
unless the enemy was present, and in order to find the enemy they must
boldly enter the underground Kingdom of the nomes. So bold a step
demanded a council of war.

"Don't you think I'd better drop in on Ruggedo and obey the orders of
the Jinjin?" asked Quox.

"By no means!" returned Queen Ann. "We have already put the army of
nomes to flight and all that yet remains is to force our way into those
caverns, and conquer the Nome King and all his people."

"That seems to me something of a job," said the dragon, closing his
eyes sleepily. "But go ahead, if you like, and I'll wait here for you.
Don't be in any hurry on my account. To one who lives thousands of
years the delay of a few days means nothing at all, and I shall
probably sleep until the time comes for me to act."

Ann was provoked at this speech.

"You may as well go back to Tititi-Hoochoo now," she said, "for the
Nome King is as good as conquered already."

But Quox shook his head. "No," said he; "I'll wait."




Chapter Sixteen

The Naughty Nome


Shaggy Man had said nothing during the conversation between Queen Ann
and Quox, for the simple reason that he did not consider the matter
worth an argument. Safe within his pocket reposed the Love Magnet,
which had never failed to win every heart. The nomes, he knew, were not
like the heartless Roses and therefore could be won to his side as soon
as he exhibited the magic talisman.

Shaggy's chief anxiety had been to reach Ruggedo's Kingdom and now that
the entrance lay before him he was confident he would be able to rescue
his lost brother. Let Ann and the dragon quarrel as to who should
conquer the nomes, if they liked; Shaggy would let them try, and if
they failed he had the means of conquest in his own pocket.

But Ann was positive she could not fail, for she thought her Army could
do anything. So she called the officers together and told them how to
act, and she also instructed Tik-Tok what to do and what to say.

"Please do not shoot your gun except as a last resort," she added, "for
I do not wish to be cruel or to shed any blood--unless it is absolutely
necessary."

"All right," replied Tik-Tok; "but I do not think Rug-ge-do would bleed
if I filled him full of holes and put him in a ci-der press."

Then the officers fell in line, the four Generals abreast and then the
four Colonels and the four Majors and the four Captains. They drew
their glittering swords and commanded Tik-Tok to march, which he did.
Twice he fell down, being tripped by the rough rocks, but when he
struck the smooth path he got along better. Into the gloomy mouth of
the cavern entrance he stepped without hesitation, and after him
proudly pranced the officers and Queen Ann. The others held back a
little, waiting to see what would happen.

Of course the Nome King knew they were coming and was prepared to
receive them. Just within the rocky passage that led to the jeweled
throne-room was a deep pit, which was usually covered. Ruggedo had
ordered the cover removed and it now stood open, scarcely visible in
the gloom.

The pit was so large around that it nearly filled the passage and there
was barely room for one to walk around it by pressing close to the rock
walls. This Tik-Tok did, for his copper eyes saw the pit clearly and he
avoided it; but the officers marched straight into the hole and tumbled
in a heap on the bottom. An instant later Queen Ann also walked into
the pit, for she had her chin in the air and was careless where she
placed her feet. Then one of the nomes pulled a lever which replaced
the cover on the pit and made the officers of Oogaboo and their Queen
fast prisoners.

As for Tik-Tok, he kept straight on to the cavern where Ruggedo sat in
his throne and there he faced the Nome King and said:

"I here-by con-quer you in the name of Queen Ann So-forth of Oo-ga-boo,
whose Ar-my I am, and I de-clare that you are her pris-on-er!"

Ruggedo laughed at him.

"Where is this famous Queen?" he asked.

"She'll be here in a min-ute," said Tik-Tok. "Per-haps she stopped to
tie her shoe-string."

"Now, see here, Tik-Tok," began the Nome King, in a stern voice, "I've
had enough of this nonsense. Your Queen and her officers are all
prisoners, having fallen into my power, so perhaps you'll tell me what
you mean to do."

"My or-ders were to con-quer you," replied Tik-Tok, "and my
ma-chin-er-y has done the best it knows how to car-ry out those
or-ders."

Ruggedo pounded on his gong and Kaliko appeared, followed closely by
General Guph.

"Take this copper man into the shops and set him to work hammering
gold," commanded the King. "Being run by machinery he ought to be a
steady worker. He ought never to have been made, but since he exists I
shall hereafter put him to good use."

"If you try to cap-ture me," said Tik-Tok, "I shall fight."

"Don't do that!" exclaimed General Guph, earnestly, "for it will be
useless to resist and you might hurt some one."

But Tik-Tok raised his gun and took aim and not knowing what damage the
gun might do the nomes were afraid to face it.

While he was thus defying the Nome King and his high officials, Betsy
Bobbin rode calmly into the royal cavern, seated upon the back of Hank
the mule. The little girl had grown tired of waiting for "something to
happen" and so had come to see if Ruggedo had been conquered.

"Nails and nuggets!" roared the King; "how dare you bring that beast
here and enter my presence unannounced?"

"There wasn't anybody to announce me," replied Betsy. "I guess your
folks were all busy. Are you conquered yet?"

"No!" shouted the King, almost beside himself with rage.

"Then please give me something to eat, for I'm awful hungry," said the
girl. "You see, this conquering business is a good deal like waiting
for a circus parade; it takes a long time to get around and don't
amount to much anyhow."

The nomes were so much astonished at this speech that for a time they
could only glare at her silently, not finding words to reply. The King
finally recovered the use of his tongue and said:

"Earth-crawler! this insolence to my majesty shall be your
death-warrant. You are an ordinary mortal, and to stop a mortal from
living is so easy a thing to do that I will not keep you waiting half
so long as you did for my conquest."

"I'd rather you wouldn't stop me from living," remarked Betsy, getting
off Hank's back and standing beside him. "And it would be a pretty
cheap King who killed a visitor while she was hungry. If you'll give me
something to eat, I'll talk this killing business over with you
afterward; only, I warn you now that I don't approve of it, and never
will."

Her coolness and lack of fear impressed the Nome King, although he bore
an intense hatred toward all mortals.

"What do you wish to eat?" he asked gruffly.

"Oh, a ham-sandwich would do, or perhaps a couple of hard-boiled eggs--"

"Eggs!" shrieked the three nomes who were present, shuddering till
their teeth chattered.

"What's the matter?" asked Betsy wonderingly. "Are eggs as high here as
they are at home?"

"Guph," said the King in an agitated voice, turning to his General,
"let us destroy this rash mortal at once! Seize her and take her to the
Slimy Cave and lock her in."

Guph glanced at Tik-Tok, whose gun was still pointed, but just then
Kaliko stole softly behind the copper man and kicked his knee-joints so
that they suddenly bent forward and tumbled Tik-Tok to the floor, his
gun falling from his grasp.

Then Guph, seeing Tik-Tok helpless, made a grab at Betsy. At the same
time Hank's heels shot out and caught the General just where his belt
was buckled. He rose into the air swift as a cannon-ball, struck the
Nome King fairly and flattened his Majesty against the wall of rock on
the opposite side of the cavern. Together they fell to the floor in a
dazed and crumpled condition, seeing which Kaliko whispered to Betsy:

"Come with me--quick!--and I will save you."

She looked into Kaliko's face inquiringly and thought he seemed honest
and good-natured, so she decided to follow him. He led her and the mule
through several passages and into a small cavern very nicely and
comfortably furnished.

"This is my own room," said he, "but you are quite welcome to use it.
Wait here a minute and I'll get you something to eat."

When Kaliko returned he brought a tray containing some broiled
mushrooms, a loaf of mineral bread and some petroleum-butter. The
butter Betsy could not eat, but the bread was good and the mushrooms
delicious.

"Here's the door key," said Kaliko, "and you'd better lock yourself in."

"Won't you let Polychrome and the Rose Princess come here, too?" she
asked.

"I'll see. Where are they?"

"I don't know. I left them outside," said Betsy.

"Well, if you hear three raps on the door, open it," said Kaliko; "but
don't let anyone in unless they give the three raps."

"All right," promised Betsy, and when Kaliko left the cosy cavern she
closed and locked the door.

In the meantime Ann and her officers, finding themselves prisoners in
the pit, had shouted and screamed until they were tired out, but no one
had come to their assistance. It was very dark and damp in the pit and
