
Brighteyes said no more.  She was pleased with the thorough confidence
her daughter had in her natural protectors, and quietly went on with the
moccasin which she was embroidering with the dyed quills of the
porcupine for Little Tim.

We have said that Moonlight was rather self-willed.  She would not
indeed absolutely disobey the express commands of her father or mother,
but when she had made no promise, she was apt to take her own way, not
perceiving that to neglect or to run counter to a parent's known wishes
is disobedience.

As the night was fine and the moon bright, our self-willed heroine, with
her skipping playmate, rambled about the camp until they got so far in
the outskirts as to come upon one of the sentinels.  The dark-skinned
warrior gravely told her to go back.  Had she been any other Indian
girl, she would have meekly obeyed at once; but being Little Tim's
daughter, she was prone to assert the independence of her white blood,
and, to say truth, the young braves stood somewhat in awe of her.

"The Blackfoot does not make war against women," said Moonlight, with a
touch of lofty scorn in her tone.  "Is the young warrior afraid that
Rushing River will kill and eat us?"

"The young warrior fears nothing," answered the sentinel, with a dark
frown; "but his chief's orders are that no one is to leave or enter the
camp, so Moonlight must go home."

"Moonlight will do as she pleases," returned the girl loftily.  At the
same time, knowing that the man would certainly do his duty, and prevent
her from passing the lines, she turned sharply round, and walked away as
if about to return to the camp.  On getting out of the sentinel's sight,
however, she stopped.

"Now, Skipping Rabbit," she said, "you and I will teach that fellow
something of the art of war.  Will you follow me?"

"Will the little buffalo follow its mother?" returned the child.

"Come, then," said Moonlight, with a slight laugh; "we will go beyond
the lines.  Do as I do.  You are well able to copy the snake."

The girl spoke truly.  Both she and Skipping Rabbit had amused
themselves so often in imitating the actions of the Indian braves that
they could equal if not beat them, at least in those accomplishments
which required activity and litheness of motion.  Throwing herself on
her hands and knees, Moonlight crept forward until she came again in
sight of the sentinel.  Skipping Rabbit followed her trail like a little
shadow.  Keeping as far from the man as possible without coming under
the observation of the next sentinel, they sank into the long grass, and
slowly wormed their way forward so noiselessly that they were soon past
the lines, and able to rise and look about with caution.

The girl had no thought of doing more than getting well out of the camp,
and then turning about and walking boldly past the young sentinel, just
to show that she had defeated him, but at Skipping Rabbit's suggestion
she led the way to a neighbouring knoll just to have one look round
before going home.

It was on this very knoll that Rushing River and Eaglenose lay, like
snakes in the grass.

As the girls drew near, chatting in low, soft, musical tones, the two
men lay as motionless as fallen trees.  When they were within several
yards of them the young Indian glanced at his chief, and pointed with
his conveniently prominent feature to Skipping Rabbit.  A slight nod was
the reply.

On came the unconscious pair, until they almost trod on the prostrate
men.  Then, before they could imagine what had occurred, each found
herself on the ground with a strong hand over her mouth.

It was done so suddenly and effectually that there was no time to utter
even the shortest cry.

Without removing their hands for an instant from their mouths, the
Indians gathered the girls in their left arms as if they had been a
couple of sacks or bundles, and carried them swiftly into the forest,
the chief leading, and Eaglenose stepping carefully in his footsteps.
It was not a romantic or lover-like way of carrying off a bride, but Red
Indian notions of chivalry may be supposed to differ from those of the
pale-faces.

After traversing the woods for several miles they came to the spot where
Rushing River had left his men.  They were unusually excited by the
unexpected capture, and, from their animated gestures and glances during
the council of war which was immediately held, it was evident to poor
Moonlight that her fate would soon be decided.

She and Skipping Rabbit sat cowering together at the foot of the tree
where they had been set down.  For one moment Moonlight thought of her
own lithe and active frame, her powers of running and endurance, and
meditated a sudden dash into the woods, but one glance at the agile
young brave who had been set to watch her would have induced her to
abandon the idea even if the thought of leaving Skipping Rabbit behind
had not weighed with her.

In a few minutes Rushing River left his men and approached the tree at
the foot of which the captives were seated.

The moon shone full upon his tall figure, and revealed distinctly every
feature of his grave, handsome countenance as he approached.

The white spirit of her father stirred within the maiden.  Discarding
her fears, she rose to meet him with a proud glance, such as was not
often seen among Indian girls.  Instead of being addressed, however, in
the stern voice of command with which a red warrior is apt to speak to
an obstreperous squaw, he spoke in a low, soft respectful tone, which
seemed to harmonise well with the gravity of his countenance, and
thrilled to the heart of Moonlight.  She was what is familiarly
expressed in the words "done for."  Once more we have to record a case
of love at first sight.

True, the inexperienced girl was not aware of her condition.  Indeed, if
taxed with it, she would probably have scorned to admit the possibility
of her entertaining even mild affection--much less love--for any man of
the Blackfoot race.  Still, she had an uneasy suspicion that something
was wrong, and allowed an undercurrent of feeling to run within her,
which, if reduced to language, would have perhaps assumed the form,
"Well, but he _is_ so gentle, so respectful, so very unlike all the
braves I have ever seen; but I hate him, for all that!  Is he not the
enemy of my tribe?"

Moonlight would not have been a daughter of Little Tim had she given in
at once.  Indeed, if she had known that the man who spoke to her so
pleasantly was the renowned Rushing River--the bitter foe of her father
and of Bounding Bull--it is almost certain that the indignant tone and
manner which she now assumed would have become genuine.  But she did not
know this; she only knew from his dress and appearance that the man
before her was a Blackfoot, and the knowledge raised the whole Blackfoot
race very much in her estimation.

"Is the fair-faced maiden," said Rushing River, referring to the girl's
comparatively light complexion, "willing to share the wigwam of a
Blackfoot chief?"

Moonlight received this very decided and unusually civil proposal of
marriage with becoming hauteur, for she was still ruffled by the
undignified manner in which she had been carried off.

"Does the fawn mate with the wolf?" she demanded.  "Does the chief
suppose that the daughter of Little Tim can willingly enter the lodge of
a Blackfoot?"

A gleam of surprise and satisfaction for a moment lighted up the grave
countenance of the chief.

"I knew not," he replied, "that the maiden who has fallen into my hands
is a child of the brave little pale-face whose deeds of courage are
known all over the mountains and prairies."

This complimentary reference to her father went far to soften the
maiden's heart, but her sense of outraged dignity required that she
should be loyal to herself as well as to her tribe, therefore she
sniffed haughtily, but did not reply.

"Who is the little one?" asked the chief, pointing to Skipping Rabbit,
who, in a state of considerable alarm, had taken refuge behind her
friend, and only peeped at her captor.

Moonlight paused for a few seconds before answering, uncertain whether
it would be wiser to say who she was, or merely to describe her as a
child of the tribe.  Deciding on the former course, in the hope of
impressing the Blackfoot with a sense of his danger, she said--

"Skipping Rabbit is the daughter of Bounding Bull."  Then, observing
another gleam of surprise and triumph on the chief's face, she added
quickly, "and the Blackfoot knows that Bounding Bull and his tribe are
very strong, very courageous, and very revengeful.  If Moonlight and
Skipping Rabbit are not sent home at once, there will be war on the
mountains and the plains, for Whitewing, the great chief of the
prairies, is just now in the camp of Bounding Bull with his men.  Little
Tim, as you know, is terrible when his wrath is roused.  If war is
carried into the hunting-grounds of the Blackfeet, many scalps will be
drying in our lodges before the snows of winter begin to descend.  If
evil befalls Skipping Rabbit or Moonlight, before another moon is passed
Rushing River himself, the chicken-hearted chief of the Blackfeet, will
be in the dust with his fathers, and his scalp will fringe the leggings
of Little Tim."

We have given but a feeble translation of this speech, which in the
Indian tongue was much more powerful; but we cannot give an adequate
idea of the tone and graceful gesticulation of the girl as, with
flashing orbs and heightened colour, she delivered it.  Yet it seemed to
have no effect whatever on the man to whom it was spoken.  Without
replying to it, he gently, almost courteously, took the maiden's hand,
and led her to a spot where his men were stationed.

They were all on horseback, ready for an immediate start.  Two horses
without riders stood in the midst of the group.  Leading Moonlight to
one of these, Rushing River lifted her by the waist as if she had been a
feather, and placed her thereon.  Skipping Rabbit he placed in front of
Eaglenose.  Then, vaulting on to his own steed, he galloped away through
the forest, followed closely by the whole band.

Now it so happened that about the same hour another band of horsemen
started from the camp of Bounding Bull.

Under the persuasive eloquence of Little Tim, the chief had made up his
mind to set out for the fortress without waiting for daylight.

"You see," Tim had said, "we can't tell whether the preacher is goin' to
live or die, an' it would be a pity to risk lettin' him miss seein' the
old woman and my wife if he _is_ goin' to die; an' if he isn't goin'
under this time, why, there's no harm in hurryin' a bit--wi' the moon,
too, shinin' like the bottom of a new tin kettle in the sky."

The chief had no objections to make.  There were plenty of men to guard
the camp, even when a few were withdrawn for the trip.  As Whitewing was
also willing, the order to mount and ride was given at once.

The absence of Moonlight and Skipping Rabbit had not at the time been
sufficiently prolonged to attract notice.  If they had been thought of
at all, it is probable they were supposed to be in one or other of the
wigwams.  As the moon could not be counted on beyond a certain time,
haste was necessary, and thus it came to pass that the party set forth
without any knowledge of the disappearance of the girls.

The "dear old one" was fain to journey like the rest on horseback, but
she was so well accustomed to that mode of locomotion that she suffered
much less than might have been expected.  Besides, her son had taken
care to secure for her the quietest, meekest, and most easy-going horse
belonging to the tribe--a creature whose natural spirit had been reduced
by hardship and age to absolute quiescence, and whose gait had been
trained down to something like a hobby-horse amble.

Seated astride of this animal, in gentleman fashion, the mother of
Whitewing swayed gently to and fro like a partially revived mummy of an
amiable type, with her devoted son on one side and Little Tim on the
other, to guard against accidents.

It chanced that the two parties of horsemen journeyed in nearly opposite
directions, so that every hour of the night separated them from each
other more and more.

It was not until Whitewing's party had proceeded far on their way to
Tim's Folly that suspicion began to be aroused and inquiry to be made in
the camp.  Then, as the two girls were nowhere to be found, the alarm
spread; the warriors sallied out, and the trail of the Blackfeet was
discovered.  It was not, however, until daylight came to their aid that
the Indians became fully aware of their loss, and sent out a strong band
in pursuit of their enemies, while a messenger was despatched in hot
haste to inform Little Tim and Bounding Bull that Moonlight and Skipping
Rabbit had been spirited away.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE PURSUIT, FAILURE, DESPAIR.

Ever dreaming of the thunderbolt that was about to be launched,
Whitewing, Little Tim, Bounding Bull, and the rest of the party arrived
at the little fortress in the gorge.

They found Big Tim on the _qui vive_, and Brighteyes with Whitewing's
mother was soon introduced to the wounded preacher.

The meeting of the three was impressive, for not only had they been much
attached at the time of the preacher's former visit, but the women were
deeply affected by the sad circumstances in which they found their old
friend.

"Not much changed, I see, Brighteyes," he said, as the two women sat
down on the floor beside his couch.  "Only a little stouter; just what
might have been expected.  God has been kind to you--but, indeed, God is
kind to all, only some do not see or believe in the kindness.  It is
equally kindness in Him whether He sends joy or sorrow, adversity or
prosperity.  If we only saw the end from the beginning, none of us would
quarrel with the way.  Love has induced Him to lay me low at present.
You have another child, I am told, besides Big Tim?"

"Yes, a daughter--Moonlight we call her," said Brighteyes, with a
pleased look.

"Is she here with you?"

"No; we left her in the camp."

"And my good old friend," he said, turning on his couch, and grasping
the withered hand of Whitewing's mother, "how has she prospered in all
these years?"

The "old one," who was, as we have said, as deaf as a post, wrinkled her
visage up into the most indescribable expression of world-embracing
benignity, expanded her old lips, displayed her toothless gums, and
chuckled.

"The dear old one," said her son, "bears the snows of many winters on
her head.  Her brain could not now be touched by the thunders of
Niagara.  But the eyes are still bright inlets to her soul."

"Bright indeed!" exclaimed the preacher, as he gazed with deep interest
at the old face; "wonderful, considering her great age.  I trust that
these portals may remain unclosed to her latest day on earth."

He was still talking to Whitewing about her when a peculiar whistle was
heard outside, as of some water-bird.

Instantly dead silence fell upon all present, and from the fixed gaze
and motionless attitude of each it was evident that they anxiously
expected a repetition of the sound.  It was not repeated, but a moment
later voices were heard outside, then a hurried step, and next instant
Big Tim sprang into the room.

"A messenger from the camp!" he cried.  "Moonlight and Skipping Rabbit
have been carried off by Blackfeet."

It could easily be seen at that moment how Bounding Bull had acquired
his name.  From a sitting posture he sprang to his feet at one bound,
darted through the doorway of the hut, cleared the low parapet like a
deer, and went down the zigzag path in a succession of leaps that might
