The Project Gutenberg EBook of Facing the World, by Horatio Alger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Facing the World

Author: Horatio Alger


Release Date: September, 2004 [EBook #6461]
This file was first posted on December 17, 2002
Last Updated: April 10, 2013

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FACING THE WORLD ***




Produced by Karen Fabrizius, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team







FACING THE WORLD

By Horatio Alger, Jr.




PREFACE

Horatio Alger, Jr., in "Facing the World," gives us as his hero a boy
whose parents have both died and the man appointed as his guardian is
unjust and unkind to him. In desperation he runs away and is very
fortunate in finding a true friend in a man who aids him and makes him
his helper in his work as magician.

They travel over the country and have many interesting experiences,
some narrow escapes and thrilling adventures.




CHAPTER I

HARRY RECEIVES A LETTER


"Here's a letter for you, Harry," said George Howard. "I was passing
the hotel on my way home from school when Abner Potts called out to me
from the piazza, and asked me to bring it."

The speaker was a bright, round-faced boy of ten. The boy whom he
addressed was five or six years older. Only a week previous he had
lost his father, and as the family consisted only of these two, he was
left, so far as near relatives were concerned, alone in the world.

Immediately after the funeral he had been invited home by Mr. Benjamin
Howard, a friend of his father, but in no manner connected with him by
ties of relationship.

"You can stay here as long as you like, Harry," said Mr. Howard,
kindly. "It will take you some time to form your plans, perhaps, and
George will be glad to have your company."

"Thank you, Mr. Howard," said Harry, gratefully.

"Shall you look for some employment here?"

"No; my father has a second cousin in Colebrook, named John Fox.
Before he died he advised me to write to Mr. Fox, and go to his house
if I should receive an invitation."

"I hope for your sake, he will prove a good man. What is his
business?"

"I don't know, nor did my father. All I know is, that he is considered
a prosperous man. This letter is from him."

It was inclosed in a brown envelope, and ran as follows:

"HARRY VANE: I have received your letter saying that your father wants
me to be your guardeen. I don't know as I have any objections, bein' a
business man it will come easy to me, and I think your father was wise
to seleck me. I am reddy to receave you any time. You will come to
Bolton on the cars. That is eight miles from here, and there is a
stage that meats the trane. It wouldn't do you any harm to walk, but
boys ain't so active as they were in my young days. The stage fare is
fifty cents, which I shall expect you to pay yourself, if you ride.

"There is one thing you don't say anything about--how much proparty
your pa left. I hope it is a good round sum, and I will take good care
of it for you. Ennybody round here will tell you that John Fox is a
good man of business, and about as sharp as most people. Mrs. Fox will
be glad to see you, and my boy, Joel, will be glad to have someone to
keep him company. He is about sixteen years old. You don't say how old
you are, but from your letter I surmise that you are as much as that.
You will find a happy united famerly, consistin' of me and my wife,
Joel and his sister, Sally. Sally is fourteen, just two years younger
than Joel. We live in a comfortable way, but we don't gorge ourselves
on rich, unhelthy food. No more at present. Yours to command,

"JOHN FOX."

Harry smiled more than once as he read this letter.

"Your relative isn't strong on spelling," remarked Mr. Howard, as he
laid the letter on the table.

"No, sir; but he appears to be strong on economy. It is a comfort to
know that I shall not be injured by 'rich, unhelthy food.'"

"When do you mean to start for Colebrook?" asked Mr. Howard.

"To-morrow morning. I have been looking at a railroad guide, and I
find it will bring me to Colebrook in time for supper."

"We should be glad to have you stay with us as long as possible,
Harry."

"Thank you, Mr. Howard, I don't doubt that, but the struggle of life
is before me, and I may as well enter upon it at once."

At four o'clock in the afternoon the conductor of the train on which
Harry was a passenger called out Bolton.

Harry snatched up his carpetbag, and made his way to the door, for
this was the place where he was to take the stage for Colebrook.

Two other passengers got out at the same time. One was an elderly man,
and the other a young man of twenty-five. They appeared to be father
and son, and, as Harry learned afterward they were engaged in farming.

"Any passengers for Colebrook?" inquired the driver of the
old-fashioned Concord stage, which was drawn up beside the platform.

"There's Obed and me," said the old farmer.

"May I ride on the seat with you?" asked Harry of the driver.

"Sartain. Where are you going?"

"To Colebrook."

"Then this is your team."

Harry climbed up with a boy's activity, and sat down on the broad
seat, congratulating himself that he would have a chance to see the
country, and breathe better air than those confined inside.

Soon the driver sat down on the box beside him, and started the
horses.

"You're a stranger, ain't you?" he remarked, with an inquisitive
glance at his young traveling companion.

"Yes; I've never been here before."

"Are you going to the tavern?"

"No; I'm going to the house of Mr. John Fox. Do you know him?"

"I reckon everybody round here knows John Fox."

"I don't know him. He is to be my guardian."

"Sho! You'll have a queer guardeen."

"Why queer?"

"The fact is, old John'll cheat you out of your eye teeth ef he gets a
chance. He's about the sharpest man round."

"He can't cheat me out of much," returned Harry, not especially
reassured by this remark. "What is the business of Mr. Fox?"

"Well, he's got some land, but he makes his livin' chiefly by tradin'
hosses, auctioneerin', and such like."

"What sort of a woman is Mrs. Fox?"

"She's a good match for the old man. She's about as mean as he is."

"Mr. Fox wrote me that he had two children."

"Yes, there's Joel--he's about your age. He's a chip of the old
block--red-headed and freckled, just like the old man. I don't believe
Joel ever spent a cent in his life. He hangs on to money as tight as
ef his life depended on it."

"There's a girl, too, isn't there?"

"Yes, Sally. She looks like her ma, except she's red-headed like her
pa."

"I'm glad to know something of the family, but I'm afraid I shan't
enjoy myself very much among the Foxes."

With such conversation Harry beguiled the way. On the whole, he
enjoyed the ride. There were hills and here and there the road ran
through the woods. He could hear the singing of birds, and,
notwithstanding what he had heard he felt in good spirits.

At length the stage entered the village of Colebrook. It was a village
of moderate size--about two hundred houses being scattered over a
tract half a mile square. Occupying a central position was the tavern,
a square, two-story building, with a piazza in front, on which was
congregated a number of villagers. After rapidly scanning them, the
driver said:

"Do you see that tall man over there leanin' against a post?"

"Yes."

"That's your guardeen! That's John Fox himself, as large as life, and
just about as homely."




CHAPTER II

THE DANGER SIGNAL


The man pointed out to Harry as his guardian was tall, loosely put
together, with a sharp, thin visage surrounded by a thicket of
dull-red hair. He came forward as Harry jumped to the ground after
descending from the elevated perch, and said: "I reckon this is Harry
Vane?"

"That is my name, sir."

"Glad to see you. Just take your traps, and come along with me.
Mrs. Fox will have supper ready by the time we come."

Harry was not, on the whole, attracted by the appearance of his
guardian. There was a crafty look about the eyes of Mr. Fox which
seemed to make his name appropriate. He surveyed his young ward
critically.

"You're pretty well grown," he said.

"Yes, sir."

"And look stout and strong."

"I believe I am both."

"My boy, Joel, is as tall as you, but not so hefty. He's goin' to be
tall like me. He's a sharp boy--Joel."

"By the way, you didn't write how much property your father left."

"After the funeral bills are paid, I presume there'll be only about
three hundred dollars left."

Mr. Fox stopped short and whistled.

"Father hadn't much talent at making money," said Harry, soberly.

"I should say not. Why, that money won't last you no time at all."

"I am old enough to work for a living. Isn't there something I can
find to do in Colebrook?"

"I guess I can give you work myself--There's always more or less to do
'round a place. I keep a man part of the time, but I reckon I can let
him go and take you on instead. You see, that will count on your
board, and you don't want to spend your money too fast."

"Very well, sir. There's only one thing I will stipulate; I will wait
a day or two before going to work. I want to look about the place a
little."

While this conversation was going on, they had traveled a considerable
distance. A little distance ahead appeared a square house, painted
yellow, with a barn a little back on the left, and two old wagons
alongside.

"That's my house," said John Fox. "There's Joel."

Joel, a tall boy in figure, like his father, came forward and eyed
Harry with sharp curiosity.

"How are ye?" said Joel, extending a red hand, covered with warts.

"Pretty well, thank you," said Harry, not much attracted to his new
acquaintance.

"Here's Sally, too!" said John Fox. "Sally, this is my ward, Harry
Vane."

Sally, who bore a striking family resemblance to her father and
brother, giggled.

Mrs. Fox, to whom Harry was introduced at the supper table, was as
peculiar in her appearance and as destitute of beauty as the rest of
the family.

The next day, Harry, feeling it must be confessed, rather homesick,
declined Joel's company, and took an extended stroll about the town.
He found that though the railway by which he had come was eight miles
distant, there was another, passing within a mile of the village. He
struck upon it, and before proceeding far made a startling discovery.
There had been some heavy rains, which had washed out the road for a
considerable distance, causing the track to give way.

"Good heavens!" thought Harry, "if a train comes over the road before
this is mended, there'll be a wreck and loss of life. What can I do?"

Just across the field stood a small house. In the yard the week's
washing was hung out. Among the articles was a red tablecloth.

"May I borrow that tablecloth?" asked Harry, in excitement, of a woman
in the doorway.

"Land sakes! what for?" she asked.

"To signal the train. The road's washed away."

"Yes, yes; I'm expectin' my darter on that train," answered the woman,
now as excited as our hero. "Hurry up! the train's due in fifteen
minutes."

Seizing the tablecloth, Harry gathered it quickly into a bundle and
ran back to the railroad. He hurried down the track west of a curve
which was a few hundred feet beyond the washout, and saw the train
coming at full speed. He jumped on a fence skirting the tracks, and
waved the tablecloth wildly.

"Will they see it?" he asked himself, anxiously.

It was an anxious moment for Harry as he stood waving the danger
signal, uncertain whether it would attract the attention of the
engineer. It did! The engineer, though not understanding the meaning
of the signal, not knowing indeed, but it might be a boy's freak,
prudently heeded it, and reversing the engine, stopped the train a
short distance of the place of danger.

"Thank God!" exclaimed Harry, breathing a deep sigh of relief.

The engineer alighted from the train, and when he looked ahead, needed
no explanation.

"My boy!" he said, with a shudder, "you have saved the train."

"I am glad of it, sir. My heart was in my mouth, lest you should not
see my signal."

By this time the passengers, whose curiosity had been roused by the
sudden halt, began to pour out of the cars.

When they saw the washout, strong men turned pale, and ladies grew
faint, while many a fervent ejaculation of gratitude was heard at the
wonderful escape.

"We owe our lives to this boy!" said the engineer. "It was he who
stood on the fence and signaled me. We owe our deliverance to
this--tablecloth."

A small man, somewhat portly, pushed his way up to Harry.

"What is your name, my lad?" he asked, brusquely.

"Harry Vane."

"I am the president and leading stockholder of the road, and my
property has come very near being the death of me. Gentlemen"--here
the president turned to the group of gentlemen around him--"don't you
think this boy deserves a testimonial?"

"Yes, yes!" returned the gentlemen, in chorus.

"So do I, and I lead off with a subscription of twenty dollars."

One after another followed the president's lead, the president himself
making the rounds bareheaded, and gathering the contributions in his
hat.

"Oh, sir!" said Harry, as soon as he understood what was going
forward, "don't reward me for what was only my duty. I should be
ashamed to accept anything for the little I have done."

"You may count it little to save the lives of a train full of people,"
said the president, dryly, "but we set a slight value upon our lives
and limbs. Are you rich?"

"No, sir."

"So I thought. Well, you needn't be ashamed to accept a little
testimonial of our gratitude. You must not refuse."

When all so disposed had contributed, the president gathered the bills
from the hat and handed the pile to Harry.

"Take them, my boy," he said, "and make good use of them. I shall owe
you a considerable balance, for I value my life at more than twenty
dollars. Here is my card. If you ever need a friend, or a service,
call on me."

Then the president gave directions to the engineer to run back to the
preceding station, where there was a telegraph office, from which
messages could be sent in both directions to warn trains of the
washout.

Harry was left with his hands full of money, hardly knowing whether he
was awake or dreaming.

One thing seemed to him only fair--to give the owner of the tablecloth
some small share of the money, as an acknowledgment for the use of her
property.

"Here, Madam," said Harry, when he had retraced his steps to the
house, "is your tablecloth, for which I am much obliged. It saved the
train."

"Well, I'm thankful! Little did I ever think a tablecloth would do so
much good. Why, it only cost me a dollar and a quarter."

"Allow me to ask your acceptance of this bill to pay you for the use
of it."

"Land sakes! why, you've given me ten dollars!"

"It's all right. It came from the passengers. They gave me something
too."

"You didn't tell me your name."

"My name is Harry Vane."

"Do you live round here? I never heerd the name afore."

"I've just come to the village. I'm going to live with John Fox."

"You don't say! Be you any kin to Fox?"

"Not very near. He's my guardian."

"If he hears you've had any money give you, he'll want to take care of
it for you."

This consideration had not occurred to Harry. Indeed, he had for so
short a time been the possessor of the money, of which he did not know
the amount, that this was not surprising.

"Well, good-morning!" he said.
