to keep out of the way of the mischievous Tottenhots.

There seemed no furniture in the round den, but soft cushions were
strewn about the floor and these they found made very comfortable beds.
They did not close the hole in the roof but left it open to admit air.
It also admitted the shouts and ceaseless laughter of the impish
Tottenhots as they played outside, but Dorothy and Ojo, being weary
from their journey, were soon fast asleep.

Toto kept an eye open, however, and uttered low, threatening growls
whenever the racket made by the creatures outside became too
boisterous; and the Scarecrow and the Patchwork Girl sat leaning
against the wall and talked in whispers all night long. No one
disturbed the travelers until daylight, when in popped the Tottenhot
who owned the place and invited them to vacate his premises.




Chapter Twenty

The Captive Yoop


As they were preparing to leave, Dorothy asked: "Can you tell us where
there is a dark well?"

"Never heard of such a thing," said the Tottenhot. "We live our lives
in the dark, mostly, and sleep in the daytime; but we've never seen a
dark well, or anything like one."

"Does anyone live on those mountains beyond here?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Lots of people. But you'd better not visit them. We never go there,"
was the reply.

"What are the people like?" Dorothy inquired.

"Can't say. We've been told to keep away from the mountain paths, and
so we obey. This sandy desert is good enough for us, and we're not
disturbed here," declared the Tottenhot.

So they left the man snuggling down to sleep in his dusky dwelling, and
went out into the sunshine, taking the path that led toward the rocky
places. They soon found it hard climbing, for the rocks were uneven and
full of sharp points and edges, and now there was no path at all.
Clambering here and there among the boulders they kept steadily on,
gradually rising higher and higher until finally they came to a great
rift in a part of the mountain, where the rock seemed to have split in
two and left high walls on either side.

"S'pose we go this way," suggested Dorothy; "it's much easier walking
than to climb over the hills."

"How about that sign?" asked Ojo.

"What sign?" she inquired.

The Munchkin boy pointed to some words painted on the wall of rock
beside them, which Dorothy had not noticed. The words read:

    "LOOK OUT FOR YOOP."


The girl eyed this sign a moment and turned to the Scarecrow, asking:

"Who is Yoop; or what is Yoop?"

The straw man shook his head. Then looked at Toto and the dog said
"Woof!"

"Only way to find out is to go on," said Scraps.

This being quite true, they went on. As they proceeded, the walls of
rock on either side grew higher and higher. Presently they came upon
another sign which read:

    "BEWARE THE CAPTIVE YOOP."


"Why, as for that," remarked Dorothy, "if Yoop is a captive there's no
need to beware of him. Whatever Yoop happens to be, I'd much rather
have him a captive than running around loose."

"So had I," agreed the Scarecrow, with a nod of his painted head.

"Still," said Scraps, reflectively:

    "Yoop-te-hoop-te-loop-te-goop!
    Who put noodles in the soup?
    We may beware but we don't care,
    And dare go where we scare the Yoop."


"Dear me! Aren't you feeling a little queer, just now?" Dorothy asked
the Patchwork Girl.

"Not queer, but crazy," said Ojo. "When she says those things I'm sure
her brains get mixed somehow and work the wrong way.

"I don't see why we are told to beware the Yoop unless he is
dangerous," observed the Scarecrow in a puzzled tone.

"Never mind; we'll find out all about him when we get to where he is,"
replied the little girl.

The narrow canyon turned and twisted this way and that, and the rift
was so small that they were able to touch both walls at the same time
by stretching out their arms. Toto had run on ahead, frisking
playfully, when suddenly he uttered a sharp bark of fear and came
running back to them with his tail between his legs, as dogs do when
they are frightened.

"Ah," said the Scarecrow, who was leading the way, "we must be near
Yoop."

Just then, as he rounded a sharp turn, the Straw man stopped so
suddenly that all the others bumped against him.

"What is it?" asked Dorothy, standing on tip-toes to look over his
shoulder. But then she saw what it was and cried "Oh!" in a tone of
astonishment.

In one of the rock walls--that at their left--was hollowed a great
cavern, in front of which was a row of thick iron bars, the tops and
bottoms being firmly fixed in the solid rock. Over this cavern was a
big sign, which Dorothy read with much curiosity, speaking the words
aloud that all might know what they said:

    "MISTER YOOP--HIS CAVE

    The Largest Untamed Giant in Captivity.
    Height, 21 Feet.--(And yet he has but 2 feet.)
    Weight, 1640 Pounds.--(But he waits all the time.)
    Age, 400 Years 'and Up' (as they say in the
      Department Store advertisements).
    Temper, Fierce and Ferocious.--(Except when asleep.)
    Appetite, Ravenous.--(Prefers Meat People and
      Orange Marmalade.)

    STRANGERS APPROACHING THIS CAVE DO SO AT THEIR
      OWN PERIL!

    P.S.--Don't feed the Giant yourself."


"Very well," said Ojo, with a sigh; "let's go back."

"It's a long way back," declared Dorothy.

"So it is," remarked the Scarecrow, "and it means a tedious climb over
those sharp rocks if we can't use this passage. I think it will be best
to run by the Giant's cave as fast as we can go. Mister Yoop seems to
be asleep just now."

But the Giant wasn't asleep. He suddenly appeared at the front of his
cavern, seized the iron bars in his great hairy hands and shook them
until they rattled in their sockets. Yoop was so tall that our friends
had to tip their heads way back to look into his face, and they noticed
he was dressed all in pink velvet, with silver buttons and braid. The
Giant's boots were of pink leather and had tassels on them and his hat
was decorated with an enormous pink ostrich feather, carefully curled.

"Yo-ho!" he said in a deep bass voice; "I smell dinner."

"I think you are mistaken," replied the Scarecrow. "There is no orange
marmalade around here."

"Ah, but I eat other things," asserted Mister Yoop. "That is, I eat
them when I can get them. But this is a lonely place, and no good meat
has passed by my cave for many years; so I'm hungry."

"Haven't you eaten anything in many years?" asked Dorothy.

"Nothing except six ants and a monkey. I thought the monkey would taste
like meat people, but the flavor was different. I hope you will taste
better, for you seem plump and tender."

"Oh, I'm not going to be eaten," said Dorothy.

"Why not?"

"I shall keep out of your way," she answered.

"How heartless!" wailed the Giant, shaking the bars again. "Consider
how many years it is since I've eaten a single plump little girl! They
tell me meat is going up, but if I can manage to catch you I'm sure it
will soon be going down. And I'll catch you if I can."

With this the Giant pushed his big arms, which looked like tree-trunks
(except that tree-trunks don't wear pink velvet) between the iron bars,
and the arms were so long that they touched the opposite wall of the
rock passage. Then he extended them as far as he could reach toward our
travelers and found he could almost touch the Scarecrow--but not quite.

"Come a little nearer, please," begged the Giant.

"I'm a Scarecrow."

"A Scarecrow? Ugh! I don't care a straw for a scarecrow. Who is that
bright-colored delicacy behind you?"

"Me?" asked Scraps. "I'm a Patchwork Girl, and I'm stuffed with cotton."

"Dear me," sighed the Giant in a disappointed tone; "that reduces my
dinner from four to two--and the dog. I'll save the dog for dessert."

Toto growled, keeping a good distance away.

"Back up," said the Scarecrow to those behind him. "Let us go back a
little way and talk this over."

So they turned and went around the bend in the passage, where they were
out of sight of the cave and Mister Yoop could not hear them.

"My idea," began the Scarecrow, when they had halted, "is to make a
dash past the cave, going on a run."

"He'd grab us," said Dorothy.

"Well, he can't grab but one at a time, and I'll go first. As soon as
he grabs me the rest of you can slip past him, out of his reach, and he
will soon let me go because I am not fit to eat."

They decided to try this plan and Dorothy took Toto in her arms, so as
to protect him. She followed just after the Scarecrow. Then came Ojo,
with Scraps the last of the four. Their hearts beat a little faster
than usual as they again approached the Giant's cave, this time moving
swiftly forward.

It turned out about the way the Scarecrow had planned. Mister Yoop was
quite astonished to see them come flying toward him, and thrusting his
arms between the bars he seized the Scarecrow in a firm grip. In the
next instant he realized, from the way the straw crunched between his
fingers, that he had captured the non-eatable man, but during that
instant of delay Dorothy and Ojo had slipped by the Giant and were out
of reach. Uttering a howl of rage the monster threw the Scarecrow after
them with one hand and grabbed Scraps with the other.

The poor Scarecrow went whirling through the air and so cleverly was he
aimed that he struck Ojo's back and sent the boy tumbling head over
heels, and he tripped Dorothy and sent her, also, sprawling upon the
ground. Toto flew out of the little girl's arms and landed some
distance ahead, and all were so dazed that it was a moment before they
could scramble to their feet again. When they did so they turned to
look toward the Giant's cave, and at that moment the ferocious Mister
Yoop threw the Patchwork Girl at them.

Down went all three again, in a heap, with Scraps on top. The Giant
roared so terribly that for a time they were afraid he had broken
loose; but he hadn't. So they sat in the road and looked at one another
in a rather bewildered way, and then began to feel glad.

"We did it!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, with satisfaction. "And now we
are free to go on our way."

"Mister Yoop is very impolite," declared Scraps. "He jarred me
terribly. It's lucky my stitches are so fine and strong, for otherwise
such harsh treatment might rip me up the back."

"Allow me to apologize for the Giant," said the Scarecrow, raising the
Patchwork Girl to her feet and dusting her skirt with his stuffed
hands. "Mister Yoop is a perfect stranger to me, but I fear, from the
rude manner in which he has acted, that he is no gentleman."

Dorothy and Ojo laughed at this statement and Toto barked as if he
understood the joke, after which they all felt better and resumed the
journey in high spirits.

"Of course," said the little girl, when they had walked a way along the
passage, "it was lucky for us the Giant was caged; for, if he had
happened to be loose, he--he--"

"Perhaps, in that case, he wouldn't be hungry any more," said Ojo
gravely.




Chapter Twenty-One

Hip Hopper the Champion


They must have had good courage to climb all those rocks, for after
getting out of the canyon they encountered more rock hills to be
surmounted. Toto could jump from one rock to another quite easily, but
the others had to creep and climb with care, so that after a whole day
of such work Dorothy and Ojo found themselves very tired.

As they gazed upward at the great mass of tumbled rocks that covered
the steep incline, Dorothy gave a little groan and said:

"That's going to be a ter'ble hard climb, Scarecrow. I wish we could
find the dark well without so much trouble."

"Suppose," said Ojo, "you wait here and let me do the climbing, for
it's on my account we're searching for the dark well. Then, if I don't
find anything, I'll come back and join you."

"No," replied the little girl, shaking her head positively, "we'll all
go together, for that way we can help each other. If you went alone,
something might happen to you, Ojo."

So they began the climb and found it indeed difficult, for a way. But
presently, in creeping over the big crags, they found a path at their
feet which wound in and out among the masses of rock and was quite
smooth and easy to walk upon. As the path gradually ascended the
mountain, although in a roundabout way, they decided to follow it.

"This must be the road to the Country of the Hoppers," said the
Scarecrow.

"Who are the Hoppers?" asked Dorothy.

"Some people Jack Pumpkinhead told me about," he replied.

"I didn't hear him," replied the girl.

"No; you were asleep," explained the Scarecrow. "But he told Scraps and
me that the Hoppers and the Horners live on this mountain."

"He said in the mountain," declared Scraps; "but of course he meant on
it."

"Didn't he say what the Hoppers and Horners were like?" inquired
Dorothy.

"No; he only said they were two separate nations, and that the Horners
were the most important."

"Well, if we go to their country we'll find out all about 'em," said
the girl. "But I've never heard Ozma mention those people, so they
can't be very important."

"Is this mountain in the Land of Oz?" asked Scraps.

"Course it is," answered Dorothy. "It's in the South Country of the
Quadlings. When one comes to the edge of Oz, in any direction, there is
nothing more to be seen at all. Once you could see sandy desert all
around Oz; but now it's diff'rent, and no other people can see us, any
more than we can see them."

"If the mountain is under Ozma's rule, why doesn't she know about the
Hoppers and the Horners?" Ojo asked.

"Why, it's a fairyland," explained Dorothy, "and lots of queer people
live in places so tucked away that those in the Emerald City never even
hear of 'em. In the middle of the country it's diff'rent, but when you
get around the edges you're sure to run into strange little corners
that surprise you. I know, for I've traveled in Oz a good deal, and so
has the Scarecrow."

"Yes," admitted the straw man, "I've been considerable of a traveler,
in my time, and I like to explore strange places. I find I learn much
more by traveling than by staying at home."

During this conversation they had been walking up the steep pathway and
now found themselves well up on the mountain. They could see nothing
around them, for the rocks beside their path were higher than their
heads. Nor could they see far in front of them, because the path was so
crooked. But suddenly they stopped, because the path ended and there
was no place to go. Ahead was a big rock lying against the side of the
mountain, and this blocked the way completely.

"There wouldn't be a path, though, if it didn't go somewhere," said the
Scarecrow, wrinkling his forehead in deep thought.

"This is somewhere, isn't it?" asked the Patchwork Girl, laughing at
the bewildered looks of the others.

    "The path is locked, the way is blocked,
    Yet here we've innocently flocked;
    And now we're here it's rather queer
    There's no front door that can be knocked."


"Please don't, Scraps," said Ojo. "You make me nervous."

"Well," said Dorothy, "I'm glad of a little rest, for that's a drea'ful
steep path."

As she spoke she leaned against the edge of the big rock that stood in
their way. To her surprise it slowly swung backward and showed behind
it a dark hole that looked like the mouth of a tunnel.

"Why, here's where the path goes to!" she exclaimed.

"So it is," answered the Scarecrow. "But the question is, do we want to
