Project Gutenberg's Expositions of Holy Scripture, by Alexander Maclaren

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Expositions of Holy Scripture
       Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and First Book of Samuel,
       Second Samuel, First Kings, and Second Kings chapters I
       to VII

Author: Alexander Maclaren

Posting Date: October 18, 2012 [EBook #8068]
Release Date: May, 2005
First Posted: June 11, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXPOSITIONS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE ***




Produced by Charles Franks, Anne Folland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.











  EXPOSITIONS OF
  HOLY SCRIPTURE

ALEXANDER MACLAREN, D. D., Litt. D.


DEUTERONOMY, JOSHUA, JUDGES, RUTH, AND FIRST BOOK OF SAMUEL

SECOND SAMUEL, FIRST KINGS, AND SECOND KINGS _CHAPTERS I to VII_




CONTENTS


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY


  GOD'S FAITHFULNESS (Deut. vii. 9)
  THE LESSON OF MEMORY (Deut. viii. 2)
  THE EATING OF THE PEACE-OFFERING (Deut. xii. 18)
  PROPHETS AND THE PROPHET (Deut. xviii. 9-22)
  A CHOICE OF MASTERS (Deut. xxviii. 47, 48)
  THE SPIRIT OF THE LAW (Deut. xxx. 11-20)
  GOD'S TRUE TREASURE IN MAN (Deut. xxxii. 9; TITUS ii. 14)
  THE EAGLE AND ITS BROOD (Deut. xxxii. 11)
  THEIR ROCK AND OUR ROCK (Deut. xxxii. 31)
  GOD AND HIS SAINTS (Deut. xxxiii. 3)
  ISRAEL THE BELOVED (Deut. xxxiii. 12)
  'AT THE BUSH' (Deut. xxxiii. 16)
  SHOD FOR THE ROAD (Deut. xxxiii. 25)
  A DEATH IN THE DESERT (Deut. xxxiv. 5, 6)


THE BOOK OF JOSHUA


  THE NEW LEADER'S COMMISSION (Joshua i. 1-11)
  THE CHARGE TO THE SOLDIER OF THE LORD (Joshua i. 7, 8)
  THE UNTRODDEN PATH AND THE GUIDING ARK (Joshua iii. 4)
  'THE WATERS SAW THEE; THEY WERE AFRAID' (Joshua iii. 5-17)
  STONES CRYING OUT (Joshua iv. 10-24)
  THE CAPTAIN OF THE LORD'S HOST (Joshua v. 14)
  THE SIEGE OF JERICHO (Joshua vi. 10, 11)
  RAHAB (Joshua vi. 25)
  ACHAN'S SIN, ISRAEL'S DEFEAT (Joshua vii. 1-12)
  THE SUN STAYED (Joshua x. 12)
  UNWON BUT CLAIMED (Joshua xiii. 1-6)
  CALEB-A GREEN OLD AGE (Joshua xiv. 6)
  THE CITIES OF REFUGE (Joshua xx. 1-9)
  THE END OF THE WAR (Joshua xxi. 43-45; xxii. 1-9)
  THE NATIONAL OATH AT SHECHEM (Joshua xxiv. 19-28)


THE BOOK OF JUDGES


  A SUMMARY OF ISRAEL'S FAITHLESSNESS AND GOD'S PATIENCE (Judges ii. 1-10)
  ISRAEL'S OBSTINACY AND GOD'S PATIENCE (Judges ii. 11-23)
  RECREANT REUBEN (Judges v. 16, R.V.)
  'ALL THINGS ARE YOURS' (Judges v. 20; Job v. 23)
  LOVE MAKES SUNS (Judges v. 31)
  GIDEON'S ALTAR (Judges vi. 24)
  GIDEON'S FLEECE (Judges vi. 37)
  'FIT, THOUGH FEW'(Judges vii. 1-8)
  A BATTLE WITHOUT A SWORD (Judges vii. 13-23)
  STRENGTH PROFANED AND LOST (Judges xvi. 21-31)


THE BOOK OF RUTH


GENTLE HEROINE, A GENTILE CONVERT (Ruth i. 16-22)


THE FIRST BOOK OF SAMUEL


  THE CHILD PROPHET (1 Samuel iii. 1-14)
  FAITHLESSNESS AND DEFEAT (1 Samuel iv. 1-18)
  REPENTANCE AND VICTORY (1 Samuel vii, 1-12)
  'MAKE US A KING' (1 Samuel viii. 4-20)
  THE OLD JUDGE AND THE YOUNG KING (1 Samuel ix. 16-27)
  THE KING AFTER MAN'S HEART (1 Samuel x. 17-27)
  SAMUEL'S CHALLENGE AND CHARGE (1 Samuel xii. 1-15)
  OLD TRUTH FOR A NEW EPOCH (1 Samuel xii. 13-25)
  SAUL REJECTED (1 Samuel xv. 10-23)
  THE SHEPHERD-KING (1 Samuel xvi. 1-13)
  THE VICTORY OF UNARMED FAITH (1 Samuel xvii. 32-51)
  A SOUL'S TRAGEDY (1 Samuel xviii. 5-16)
  JONATHAN, THE PATTERN OF FRIENDSHIP (1 Samuel xx.1-13)
  LOVE FOR HATE, THE TRUE _QUID PRO QUO_ (1 Samuel xxiv.4-17)
  LOVE AND REMORSE (1 Samuel xxvi. 5-12; 21-25)
  SAUL (1 Samuel xxviii. 15)
  'WHAT DOEST THOU HERE?' (1 Samuel xxix. 3; I Kings xix. 9)
  THE SECRET OF COURAGE (1 Samuel xxx. 6)
  AT THE FRONT OR THE BASE (1 Samuel xxx. 24)
  THE END OF SELF-WILL (1 Samuel xxxi. 1-13)




THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY


GOD'S FAITHFULNESS

'Know therefore that the Lord thy God, He is God, the faithful God,
which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love Him.'--DEUT. vii.
9.


'Faithful,' like most Hebrew words, has a picture in it. It means
something that can be (1) leant on, or (2) builded on.

This leads to a double signification--(1) trustworthy, and that because
(2) rigidly observant of obligations. So the word applies to a steward,
a friend, or a witness. Its most wonderful and sublime application is
to God. It presents to our adoring love--

I. God as coming under obligations to us.

A marvellous and blessed idea. He limits His action, regards Himself as
bound to a certain line of conduct.

1. Obligations from His act of creation.

'A faithful Creator,' bound to take care of those whom He has made. To
supply their necessities. To satisfy their desires. To give to each the
possibility of discharging its ideal.

2. Obligations from His past self.

'God is faithful by whom ye were called,' therefore He will do all that
is imposed on Him by His act of calling.

He cannot begin without completing. There are no abandoned mines. There
are no half-hewn stones in His quarries, like the block at Baalbec. And
this because the divine nature is inexhaustible in power and
unchangeable in purpose.

3. Obligations from His own word.

A revelation is presupposed by the notion of faithfulness. It is not
possible in heathenism. 'Dumb idols,' which have given their
worshippers no promises, cannot be thought of as faithful. By its grand
conception of Jehovah as entering into a covenant with Israel, the Old
Testament presents Him to our trust as having bound Himself to a known
line of action. Thereby He becomes, if we may so phrase it, a
constitutional monarch.

That conception of a Covenant is the negation of caprice, of arbitrary
sovereignty, of mystery. We know the principles of His government. His
majestic 'I wills' cover the whole ground of human life and needs for
the present and the future. We can go into no region of life but we
find that God has defined His conduct to us there by some word spoken
to our heart and binding Him.

4. Obligations from His new Covenant and highest word in Jesus Christ.

'He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins.'

II. God as recognising and discharging these obligations.

That He will do so comes from His very nature. With Him there is no
change of disposition, no emergence of unseen circumstances, no failure
or exhaustion of power.

That He does so is matter of fact. Moses in the preceding context had
pointed to facts of history, on which he built the 'know therefore' of
the text. On the broad scale the whole world's history is full of
illustrations of God's faithfulness to His promises and His threats.
The history of Judaism, the sorrows of nations, and the complications
of national events, all illustrate this fact.

The personal history of each of us. The experience of all Christian
souls. No man ever trusted in Him and was ashamed. He wills that we
should put Him to the proof.

III. God as claiming our trust.

He is faithful, worthy to be trusted, as His deeds show.

Faith is our attitude corresponding to His faithfulness. Faith is the
germ of all that He requires from us. How much we need it! How firm it
might be! How blessed it would make us!

The thought of God as 'faithful' is, like a precious stone, turned in
many directions in Scripture, and wherever turned it flashes light.
Sometimes it is laid as the foundation for the confidence that even our
weakness will be upheld to the end, as when Paul tells the Corinthians
that they will be confirmed to the end, because 'God is faithful,
through whom ye were called into the fellowship of His Son' (1 Cor. i.
9). Sometimes there is built on it the assurance of complete
sanctification, as when he prays for the Thessalonians that their
'whole spirit and soul and body may be preserved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord' and finds it in his heart to pray thus because
'Faithful is He that calleth you, who will also do it' (1 Thess. v.
24). Sometimes it is presented as the steadfast stay grasping which
faith can expect apparent impossibilities, as when Sara 'judged Him
faithful who had promised' (Heb. xi. 11). Sometimes it is adduced as
bringing strong consolation to souls conscious of their own feeble and
fluctuating faith, as when Paul tells Timothy that 'If we are
faithless, He abideth faithful; for He cannot deny Himself' (2 Tim. ii.
13). Sometimes it is presented as an anodyne to souls disturbed by
experience of men's unreliableness, as when the apostle heartens the
Thessalonians and himself to bear human untrustworthiness by the
thought that though men are faithless, God 'is faithful, who shall
establish you and keep you from evil' (2 Thess. in. 2, 3). Sometimes it
is put forward to breathe patience into tempted spirits, as when the
Corinthians are comforted by the assurance that 'God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able' (1 Cor. x.
13). Sometimes it is laid as the firm foundation for our assurance of
pardon, as when John tells us that 'If we confess our sins, He is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins' (1 John i. 9). And sometimes
that great attribute of the divine nature is proposed as holding forth
a pattern for us to follow, and the faith in it as tending to make us
in a measure steadfast like Himself, as when Paul indignantly rebuts
his enemies' charge of levity of purpose and vacillation, and avers
that 'as God is faithful, our word toward you is not yea and nay' (2
Cor. L 18).




THE LESSON OF MEMORY

'Thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these
lofty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to
know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep His
commandments, or no.'--DEUT. viii.2.


The strand of our lives usually slips away smoothly enough, but days
such as this, the last Sunday in a year, are like the knots on a
sailor's log, which, as they pass through his fingers, tell him how
fast it is being paid out from the reel, and how far it has run off.

They suggest a momentary consciousness of the swift passage of life,
and naturally lead us to a glance backwards and forwards, both of which
occupations ought to be very good for us. The dead flat upon which some
of us live may be taken as an emblem of the low present in which most
of us are content to pass our lives, affording nowhere a distant view,
and never enabling us to see more than a street's length ahead of us.
It is a good thing to get up upon some little elevation and take a
wider view, backwards and forwards.

And so now I venture to let the season preach to us, and to confine
myself simply to suggesting for you one or two very plain and obvious
thoughts which may help to make our retrospect wise and useful. And
there are two main considerations which I wish to submit. The first
is--what we ought to be chiefly occupied with as we look back; and
secondly, what the issue of such a retrospect ought to be.

I. With what we should be mainly occupied as we look back. Memory, like
all other faculties, may either help us or hinder us. As is the man, so
will be his remembrance. The tastes which rule his present will
determine the things that he likes best to think about in the past.
There are many ways of going wrong in our retrospects. Some of us, for
instance, prefer to think with pleasure about things that ought never
to have been done, and to give a wicked immortality to thoughts that
ought never to have had a being. Some men's tastes and inclinations are
so vitiated and corrupted that they find a joy in living their
badnesses over again. Some of us, looking back on the days that are
gone, select by instinctive preference for remembrance, the vanities
and frivolities and trifles which were the main things in them whilst
they lasted. Such a use of the great faculty of memory is like the
folly of the Egyptians who embalmed cats and vermin. Do not let us be
of those, who have in their memories nothing but rubbish, or something
worse, who let down the drag-net into the depths of the past and bring
it up full only of mud and foulnesses, and of ugly monsters that never
ought to have been dragged into the daylight.

Then there are some of us who abuse memory just as much by picking out,
with perverse ingenuity, every black bit that lies in the distance
behind us, all the disappointments, all the losses, all the pains, all
the sorrows. Some men look back and say, with Jacob in one of his
moods, 'Few and evil have been the days of the years of my life!' Yes!
and the same man, when he was in a better spirit, said, and a great
deal more truly, 'The God that fed me all my life long, the Angel which
redeemed me from all evil.' Do not paint like Rembrandt, even if you do
not paint like Turner. Do not dip your brush only in the blackness,
even if you cannot always dip it in molten sunshine.

And there are some of us who, in like manner, spoil all the good that
we could get out of a wise retrospect, by only looking back in such a
fashion as to feed a sentimental melancholy, which is, perhaps, the
most profitless of all the ways of looking backwards.

Now here are the two points, in this verse of my text, which would put
all these blunders and all others right, telling us what we should
chiefly think about when we look back, and from what point of view the
retrospect of the past must be taken in order that it should be
salutary. 'Thou shalt remember all the way by which the Lord thy God
hath led thee.' Let memory work under the distinct recognition of
divine guidance in every part of the past. That is the _first_
condition of making the retrospect blessed. 'To humble thee and to
prove thee, and to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest
keep His commandments, or no'; let us look back with a clear
recognition of the fact that the use of life is to test, and reveal,
and to make, character. This world, and all its outward engagements,
duties, and occupations, is but a scaffolding, on which the builders
may stand to rear the true temple, and when the building is reared you
may do what you like with the scaffolding. So we have to look back on
life from this point of view, that its joys and sorrows, its ups and
downs, its work and repose, the vicissitudes and sometimes contrariety
of its circumstances and conditions, are all for the purpose of making
_us_, and of making plain to ourselves, what we are. 'To humble thee,'
that is, to knock the self-confidence out of us, and to bring us to
say: 'I am nothing and Thou art everything; I myself am a poor weak rag
of a creature that needs Thy hand to stiffen me, or I shall not be able
to resist or to do.' That is one main lesson that life is meant to
teach us. Whoever has learnt to say by reason of the battering and
shocks of time, by reason of sorrows and failures, by reason of joys,
too, and fruition,--'Lord, I come to Thee as depending upon Thee for
everything,' has wrung its supreme good out of life, and has fulfilled
the purpose of the Father, who has led us all these years, to humble us
into the wholesome diffidence that says: 'Not in myself, but in Thee
are all my strength and my hope.'

I need not do more than remind you of the other cognate purposes which
are suggested here. Life is meant, not only to bring us to humble
self-distrust, as a step towards devout dependence on God, but also to
reveal us to ourselves; for we only know what we are by reflecting on
what we have done, and the only path by which self-knowledge can be
attained is the path of observant recollection of our conduct in daily
life.

Another purpose for which the whole panorama of life is made to pass
before us, and for which all the gymnastic of life exercises us, is
that we may be made submissive to the great Will, and may keep His
commandments.

These thoughts should be with us in our retrospect, and then our
retrospect will be blessed: First, we are to look back and see God's
guidance everywhere, and second, we are to judge of the things that we
remember by their tendency to make character, to make us humble, to
reveal us to ourselves, and to knit us in glad obedience to our Father
God.

II. And now turn to the other consideration which may help to make
remembrance a good, viz., the issues to which our retrospect must tend,
if it is to be anything more than sentimental recollection.

First, let me say: Remember and be thankful. If what I have been saying
as to the standard by which events are to be tried be true; if it be
the case that the main fact about things is their power to mould
persons and to make character, then there follows, very plainly and
clearly, that all things that come within the sweep of our memory may
equally contribute to our highest good.

Good does not mean pleasure. Bright-being may not always be well-being,
and the highest good has a very much nobler meaning than comfort and
satisfaction. And so, realising the fact that the best of things is
that they shall make us like God, then we can turn to the past and
judge it wisely, because then we shall see that all the diversity, and
even the opposition, of circumstances and events, may co-operate
towards the same end. Suppose two wheels in a great machine, one turns
from right to left and the other from left to right, but they fit into
one another, and they both produce one final result of motion. So the
moments in my life which I call blessings and gladness, and the moments
in my life which I call sorrows and tortures, may work into each other,
and they will do so if I take hold of them rightly, and use them as
they ought to be used. They will tend to the highest good whether they
be light or dark; even as night with its darkness and its dews has its
ministration and mission of mercy for the wearied eye no less than day
with its brilliancy and sunshine; even as the summer and the winter are
equally needful, and equally good for the crop. So in our lives it is
good for us, sometimes, that we be brought into the dark places; it is
good for us sometimes that the leaves be stripped from the trees, and
the ground be bound with frost.

And so for both kinds of weather, dear brethren, we have to remember
and be thankful. It is a hard lesson, I know, for some of us. There may
be some listening to me whose memory goes back to this dying year as
the year that has held the sorest sorrow of their lives; to whom it has
brought some loss that has made earth dark. And it seems hard to tell
quivering lips to be thankful, and to bid a man be grateful though his
eyes fill with tears as he looks back on such a past. But yet it is
true that it is good for us to be drawn, or to be driven, to Him; it is
good for us to have to tread even a lonely path if it makes us lean
more on the arm of our Beloved. It is good for us to have places made
empty if, as in the year when Israel's King died, we shall thereby have
our eyes purged to behold the Lord sitting on the Royal Seat.

               'Take it on trust a little while,
                  Thou soon shalt read the mystery right,
                In the full sunshine of His smile.'

And for the present let us try to remember that He dwelleth in the
darkness as in the light, and that we are to be thankful for the things
that help us to be near Him, and not only for the things that make us
outwardly glad. So I venture to say even to those of you who may be
struggling with sad remembrances, remember and be thankful.

I have no doubt there are many of us who have to look back, if not upon
a year desolated by some blow that never can be repaired, yet upon a
year in which failing resources and declining business, or diminished
health, or broken spirits, or a multitude of minute but most disturbing
cares and sorrows, do make it hard to recognise the loving Hand in all
that comes. Yet to such, too, I would say: 'All things work together
for good,' therefore all things are to be embraced in the thankfulness
of our retrospect.

The second and simple practical suggestion that I make is this:
Remember, and let the memory lead to contrition. Perhaps I am speaking
to some men or women for whom this dying year holds the memory of some
great lapse from goodness; some young man who for the first time has
been tempted to sensuous sin; some man who may have been led into
slippery places in regard to business integrity. I draw a 'bow at a
venture' when I speak of such things--perhaps some one is listening to
me who would give a great deal if he or she could forget a certain past
moment of this dying year, which makes their cheeks hot yet whilst they
think of it. To such I say: Remember, go close into the presence of the
black thing, and get the consciousness of it driven into your heart;
for such remembrance is the first step to deliverance from the load,
and to your passing, emancipated from the bitterness, into the year
that lies before you.

But even if there are none of us to whom such remarks would specially
apply, let us summon up to ourselves the memories of these bygone days.
In all the three hundred and sixty-five of them, my friend, how many
moments stand out distinct before you as moments of high communion with
God? How many times can you remember of devout consecration to Him? How
many, when--as visitors to the Riviera reckon the number of days in the
season in which, far across the water, they have seen Corsica--you can
remember this year to have beheld, faint and far away, 'the mountains
that are round about' the 'Jerusalem that is above'? How many moments
do you remember of consecration and service, of devotion to your God
and your fellows? Oh! what a miserable, low-lying stretch of
God-forgetting monotony our lives look when we are looking back at them
in the mass. One film of mist is scarcely perceptible, but when you get
a mile of it you can tell what it is--oppressive darkness. One drop of
muddy water does not show its pollution, but when you have a pitcherful
of it you can see how thick it is. And so a day or an hour looked back
upon may not reveal the true godlessness of the average life, but if
you will take the twelvemonth and think about it, and ask yourself a
question or two about it, I think you will feel that the only attitude
for any of us in looking back across a stretch of such brown barren
moorland is that of penitent prayer for forgiveness and for cleansing.

But I dare say that some of you say: 'Oh! I look back and I do not feel
anything of that kind of regret that you describe; I have done my duty,
and nobody can blame me. I am quite comfortable in my retrospect. Of
course there have been imperfections; we are all human, and these need
not trouble a man.' Let me ask you, dear brother, one question: Do you
believe that the law of a man's life is, 'Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself'? Do you
believe that that is what you ought to do? Have you done it? If you
have not, let me beseech you not to go out of this year, across the
artificial and imaginary boundary that separates you from the next,
with the old guilt upon your back, but go to Jesus Christ, and ask Him
to forgive you, and then you may pass into the coming twelvemonth
without the intolerable burden of unremembered, unconfessed, and
therefore unforgiven, sin.

The next point that I would suggest is this: Let us remember in order
that from the retrospect we may gain practical wisdom. It is
astonishing what unteachable, untamable creatures men are. They learn
wisdom about all the little matters of daily life by experience, but
they do not seem to do so about the higher. Even a sparrow comes to
understand a scarecrow after a time or two, and any rat in a hole will
learn the trick of a trap. But you can trick men over and over again
with the same inducement, and, even whilst the hook is sticking in
their jaws, the same bait will tempt them once more. That is very
largely the case because they do not observe and remember what has
happened to them in bygone days.

There are two things that any man, who will bring his reason and
common-sense to bear upon the honest estimate and retrospect of the
facts of his life, may be fully convinced of. These are, first, his own
weakness. One main use of a wise retrospect is to teach us where we are
weakest. What an absurd thing it would be if the inhabitants of a Dutch
village were to let the sea come in at the same gap in the same dyke a
dozen times! What an absurd thing it would be if a city were captured
over and over again by assaults at the same point, and did not
strengthen its defences there! But that is exactly what you do; and all
the while, if you would only think about your own past lives wisely and
reasonably, and like men with brains in your heads, you might find out
where it was that you were most open to attack; what it was in your
character that most needed strengthening, what it was wherein the devil
caught you most quickly, and might so build yourselves up in the most
defenceless points.

Do not look back for sentimental melancholy; do not look back with
unavailing regrets; do not look back to torment yourselves with useless
self-accusation; but look back to see how good God has been, and look
back to see where you are weak, and pile the wall, higher there, and so
learn practical wisdom from retrospect.

Another phase of the practical wisdom which memory should give is
deliverance from the illusions of sense and time. Remember how little
the world has ever done for you in bygone days. Why should you let it
befool you once again? If it has proved itself a liar when it has
tempted you with gilded offers that came to nothing, and with beauty
that was no more solid than the 'Easter-eggs' that you buy in the
shops--painted sugar with nothing inside--why should you believe it
when it comes to you once more? Why not say: 'Ah! once burnt, twice
shy! You have tried that trick on me before, and I have found it out!'
Let the retrospect teach us how hollow life is without God, and so let
it draw us near to Him.

The last thing that I would say is: 'Let us remember that we may hope.
It is the prerogative of Christian remembrance, that it merges into
Christian hope. The forward look and the backward look are really but
the exercise of the same faculty in two different directions. Memory
does not always imply hope, we remember sometimes because we do not
hope, and try to gather round ourselves the vanished past because we
know it never again can be a present or a future. But when we are
occupied with an unchanging Friend, whose love is inexhaustible, and
whose arm is unwearied, it is good logic to say: 'It has been,
therefore it shall be.'

With regard to this fleeting life, it is a delusion to say 'to-morrow
shall be as this day, and much more abundant'; but with regard to the
life of the soul that lives in God, that is true, and true for ever.
The past is a specimen of the future. The future for the man who lives
in Christ is but the prolongation, and the heightening into superlative
excellence and beauty, of all that is good in the past and in the
present. As the radiance of some rising sun may cast its bright beams
into the opposite sky, even so the glowing past behind us flings its
purples and its golds and its scarlets on to the else dim curtain of
the future.

Remember that you may hope. A paradox, but a paradox that is a truth in
the case of Christians whose memory is of a God that has loved and
blessed them whose hope is in a God that changes never; whose memory is
charged with 'every good and perfect gift that came down from the
Father of Lights,' whose hope is in that same Father, 'with whom is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning.' So on every stone of
remembrance, every Ebenezer on which is graved: 'Hitherto hath the Lord
helped us,' we can mount a telescope--if I may so say--that will look
into the furthest glories of the heavens, and be sure that the past
will be magnified and perpetuated in the future. Our prayer may
legitimately be; 'Thou hast been my help, leave me not, neither forsake
me!' And His answer will be: 'I will not leave thee until I have done
that which I have spoken to thee of.' Remember that you may hope, and
hope because you remember.




THE EATING OF THE PEACE-OFFERING

'But thou must eat them before the Lord thy God in the place which the
Lord thy God shall choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy
manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy
gates: and thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that thou
puttest thine hands unto.'--DEUT. xii. 18.


There were three bloody sacrifices, the sin-offering, the
burnt-offering, and the peace-offering. In all three expiation was the
first idea, but in the second of them the act of burning symbolised a
further thought, namely, that of offering to God, while in the third,
the peace-offering, there was added to both of these the still further
thought of the offerer's participation with God, as symbolised by the
eating of the sacrifice. So we have great verities of the most
spiritual religion adumbrated in this external rite. The rind is hard
and forbidding, the kernel is juicy and sweet.

I. Communion with God based on atonement.

II. Feeding on Christ.

What was sacrifice becomes food. The same Person and facts, apprehended
by faith, are, in regard to their bearing on the divine government, the
ground of pardon, and in regard to their operation within us, the
source of spiritual sustenance. Christ for us is our pardon; Christ in
us is our life.

III. The restoration to the offerer of all which he lays on God's altar.

The sacrifice was transformed and elevated into a sacrament. By being
offered the sacrifice was ennobled. The offerer did not lose what he
laid on the altar, but it came back to him, far more precious than
before. It was no longer mere food for the body, and to eat it became
not an ordinary meal, but a sacrament and means of union with God. It
was a hundredfold more the offerer's even in this life. All its savour
was more savoury, all its nutritive qualities were more nutritious. It
had suffered a fiery change, and was turned into something more rich
and rare.

That is blessedly true as to all which we lay on God's altar. It is far
more ours than it ever was or could be, while we kept it for ourselves,
and our enjoyment of, and nourishment from, our good things, when
offered as sacrifices, are greater than when we eat our morsel alone.
If we make earthly joys and possessions the materials of our sacrifice,
they will not only become more joyful and richer, but they will become
means of closer union with Him, instead of parting us from Him, as they
do when used in selfish disregard of Him.

Nor must we forget the wonderful thought, also mirrored in this piece
of ancient ritual, that God delights in men's sacrifices and surrenders
and services. 'If I were hungry, I would not tell thee,' said the
Psalmist in God's name in regard to outward sacrifices; 'Will I eat the
flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?' But he does 'eat' the
better sacrifices that loving hearts or obedient wills lay on His
altar. He seeks for these, and delights when they are offered to Him.
'He hungered, and seeing a fig tree by the wayside, He came to it.' He
still hungers for the fruit that we can yield to Him, and if we will,
He will enter in and sup with us, not disdaining to sit at the poor
table which we can spread for Him, nor to partake of the humble fare
which we can lay upon it, but mending the banquet by what He brings for
_our_ nourishment, and hallowing the hour by His presence.




PROPHETS AND THE PROPHET

'When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee,
thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those nations. 10.
There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his
daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an
observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, 11. Or a charmer, or a
consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. 12. For
all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord: and because
of these abominations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before
thee. 13. Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God. 14. For these
nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto observers of times,
and unto diviners: but as for thee, the Lord thy God hath not suffered
thee so to do. 15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet
from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto Him ye
shall hearken; 16. According to all that thou desiredst of the Lord thy
God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again
the voice of the Lord my God, neither let me see this great fire any
more, that I die not. 17. And the Lord said unto me, They have well
spoken that which they have spoken. 18. I will raise them up a Prophet
from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put My words in His
mouth; and He shall speak unto them all that I shall command Him. 19.
And it shall come to pass that whosoever will not hearken unto My words
which He shall speak in My name, I will require it of him. 20. But the
prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in My name, which I have
not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other
gods, even that prophet shall die. 21. And if thou say in thine heart,
How shall we know the word which the Lord hath not spoken? 22. When a
prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor
come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken, but the
prophet hath spoken it presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of
him.'--DEUT. xviii. 9-22.


It is evident from the connection in which the promise of 'a prophet
like unto Moses' is here introduced that it does not refer to Jesus
only; for it is presented as Israel's continuous defence against the
temptation of seeking knowledge of the divine will by the illegitimate
methods of divination, soothsaying, necromancy, and the like, which
were rampant among the inhabitants of the land. A distant hope of a
prophet in the far-off future could afford no motive to shun these
superstitions. We cannot understand this passage unless we recognise
that the direct reference is to the institution of the prophetic order
as the standing means of imparting the reliable knowledge of God's
will, possessing which, Israel had no need to turn to them 'that peep
and mutter' and bring false oracles from imagined gods. But that
primary reference of the words does not exclude, but rather demands,
their ultimate reference to Him in whom the divine word is perfectly
enshrined, and who is the bright, consummate flower of the prophetic
order, which 'spake of Him,' not only in its individual predictions,
but by its very existence.

A glance must be given to the exhaustive list of pretenders to
knowledge of the future or to power of shaping it magically, which
occurs in verses 10,11, and suggests a terrible picture of the burdens
of superstition which weighed on men in these days of ignorance, as the
like burdens do still, wherever Jesus is not known as the one Revealer
of God, and the sole Lord of all things. Of the eight terms employed,
the first three refer to different means of reading the future, the
next two to different means of influencing events, and the last three
to different ways of consulting the dead. The first of these eight
properly refers to drawing lots, but includes other methods; the second
is an obscure word, which is supposed by some to mean a 'murmurer,' and
may refer rather to the low mutterings of the soothsayer than to the
method of his working; the third is probably a general expression for
an interpreter of omens, especially of those given by the play of
liquid in a 'cup,' such as Joseph 'divined' by.

Two names for magicians follow, of which the former seems to mean one
who worked with charms such as African or American Indian 'medicine
men' use, and the latter, one who binds by incantations, or one who
ties magic knots, which are supposed to have the power of hindering the
designs of the person against whom they are directed. The word employed
means 'binding,' and maybe used either literally or metaphorically. The
malicious tying of knots in order to work harm is not dead yet in some
backward corners of Britain. Then follow three names for traffickers
with spirits,--those who raise ghosts as did the witch of Endor, those
who have a 'familiar spirit,' and those who in any way consult the
dead. It is a grim catalogue, bearing witness to the deep-rooted
longing in men to peer into the darkness ahead, and to get some
knowledge of the purposes of the awful unseen Power who rules there.
The longing is here recognised as legitimate, while the methods are
branded as bad, and Israel is warned from them, by being pointed to the
merciful divine institution which meets the longing.

It is clear, from this glance at the context, that the 'prophet'
promised to Israel must mean the order, not the individual; and it is
interesting to note, first, the relation in which that order is
presented as standing towards all that rabble of diviners and
sorcerers, with their rubbish of charms and muttered spells. It sweeps
them off the field, because it is truly what they pretend to be. God
knows men's longings, and God will meet them so far as meeting them is
for men's good. But the characteristics of the prophet are set in
strong contrast to those of the diviners and magicians, and lift the
order high above all the filth and folly of these others. First, the
prophet is 'raised up' by God; the individual holder of the office has
his 'call' and does not 'prophesy out of his own heart.' The man who
takes this office on himself without such a call is _ipso facto_
branded as a false prophet. Then he is 'from the midst of thee, of thy
brethren,'--springing from the people, not an alien, like so many of
these wandering soothsayers, but with the national life throbbing in
his veins, and himself participant of the thoughts and emotions of his
brethren. Then he is to be 'like unto' Moses,--not in all points, but
in his receiving direct communications from God, and in his authority
as God's messenger. The crowning characteristic, 'I will put My words
into his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command
him,' invests his words with divine authority, calls for obedience to
them as the words of God Himself, widens out his sphere far beyond that
of merely foretelling, brings in the moral and religious element which
had no place in the oracles of the soothsayer, and opens up the
prospect of a continuous progressive revelation throughout the ages
('all that I _shall_ command him'). We mutilate the grand idea of the
prophet in Israel if we think of his work as mainly prediction, and we
mutilate it no less if we exclude prediction from it. We mutilate it
still more fatally if we try to account for it on naturalistic
principles, and fail to see in the prophet a man directly conscious of
a divine call, or to hear in his words the solemn accents of the voice
of God.

The loftiness and the limitations of 'the goodly fellowship of the
prophets' alike point onwards to Jesus Christ. In Him, and in Him
alone, the idea of the prophet is fully realised. The imperfect
embodiments of it in the past were prophecies as well as prophets. The
fact that God has 'spoken unto the fathers by the prophets,' leads us
to expect that He will speak 'to us in a Son,' and that not by
fragments of His mighty voice, but in one full, eternal, all-embracing
and all-sufficient Word. Every divine idea, which has been imperfectly
manifested in fragmentary and sinful men and in the material creation,
is completely incarnated in Him. He is the King to whom the sins and
the saintlinesses of Israel's kings alike pointed. He is the Priest,
whom Aaron and his sons foreshadowed, who perfectly exercises the
sympathy which they could only feel partially, because they were
compassed with infirmity and self-regard, and who offers the true
sacrifice of efficacy higher than 'the blood of bulls and goats.' He is
the Prophet, who makes all other means of knowing the divine will
unnecessary, hearing whom we hear the very voice of God speaking in His
gentle words of love, in His authoritative words of command, in His
illuminating words of wisdom, and speaking yet more loudly and
heart-touchingly in the eloquence of deeds no less than divine; who is
'not ashamed to call us brethren,' and is 'bone of our bone and flesh
of our flesh'; who is like, but greater than, the great lawgiver of
Israel, being the Son and Lord of the 'house' in which Moses was but a
servant. 'To Him give all the prophets witness,' and the greatest of
them was honoured when, with Moses, Elijah stood on the Mount of
Transfiguration, subordinate and attesting, and then faded away when
the voice proclaimed, 'This is My beloved Son, hear Him,'--and they
'saw no one save Jesus only.'




A CHOICE OF MASTERS

'Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with
gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things; 48. Therefore shalt
thou serve thine enemies ... in want of all things: and He shall put a
yoke of iron upon thy neck, until He have destroyed thee.'--DEUT.
xxviii. 47, 48


The history of Israel is a picture on the large scale of what befalls
every man.

A service--we are all born to obedience, to depend on and follow some
person or thing. There is only a choice of services; and he who boasts
himself free is but a more abject slave, as the choice for a nation is
either the rule of settled order and the sanctities of an established
law, or the usurpation of a mob and the intolerable tyranny of
unbridled and irresponsible force.

I. The service of God or the service of our enemies.

Israel was the servant in turn of Egypt, Philistia, Edom, Assyria,
Babylon, Syria, and Rome. It was every invader's prey. God's invisible
arm was its only guard from these, and an all-sufficient guard as long
as it leaned on Him. When it turned from Him it fell under their yoke.
Its lawful Lord loved it; its tyrants hated it.

So with us. We have to serve God or enemies. Our lusts, our passions,
the world, evil habits--in a word, our sins ring us round. God is the
only defence against them.

