"You keep off or I'll hit you again," answered Joe.

There was a pause and Sagger sprang forward, trying to catch Joe around
the arms. But our hero was too quick for him and ducked once more. Then
he hit the bully in the ear and gave him another blow in the left eye.

"Ouch!" roared Jack Sagger. "Don't! Oh, my eye!"

"Have you had enough?" demanded Joe, who was commencing to warm up.

"Pitch in, fellers!" came from Jack Sagger. "Throw him down!"

"Ain't you going to do it alone?" queried Nick Sammel, in wonder, not
unmingled with a suspicion that Joe would not be as easy to handle as
anticipated.

"I--I've got a--a heartburn," came lamely from Sagger. "It come on me
all at onct. If it wasn't fer that I'd do him up all alone."

"You're a fraud, and you haven't any heart-burn!" cried Joe. "You're
afraid, that's all. If you want to fight, stand up, and we'll have it
out."

"Don't you call me afraid," said Sagger, but his voice had lost much of
its bullying tone.

"You're a big coward, Jack Sagger. After this I want you to leave me
alone."

"Ain't you fellers going to pitch in?" demanded Sagger, turning to his
cohorts.

"The first boy to hit me will get paid back with interest," said Joe,
sharply. "I don't like to fight but I can do it if I have to."

One or two had edged forward but when they saw his determined air they
slunk back.

"Go on and fight him, Jack," said one. "This is your mix-up, not ours."

"You said you was going to do him up brown," put in another.

"Ain't I got the heartburn?" blustered the bully. "I can't do nuthin'
when I git that. Wait till I'm well; then I'll show him."

"If you ever touch me again, Jack Sagger, I'll give you the worst
thrashing you ever had," said Joe, loudly. "Remember, I am not the least
bit afraid of you. The best thing you can do is to keep your distance."

"Humph!"

"I don't want to quarrel with anybody, but I am always ready to stick up
for my rights, just you remember that."

So speaking Joe backed out of the crowd, that opened to let him pass.
Several of the boys wanted to detain him, but not one had the courage to
do so. As soon as he was clear of his tormentors, he hurried back to the
hotel.

"How did you make out?" asked Mr. Drew.

"It's all right, sir, and they'll send the things to-night, sure,"
answered Joe. He hesitated for a moment. "I had a little excitement on
the way."

"How was that?"

"Jack Sagger and some other boys followed me up and wanted to polish me
off."

"You don't look as if they had done much polishing." And the hotel man
smiled.

"No, Jack Sagger got the worst of it. I guess he'll leave me alone in
the future."

"You mustn't fight around the hotel, Joe."

"This was on the way to Jackson & Bell's, sir. I was bound to defend
myself."

"To be sure. Sagger came to me yesterday and wanted to be taken back,
but I told him no--that I wouldn't have such an impudent fellow around."

As the winter season came on the hotel began to fill up and Joe was kept
busy from early in the morning until late at night, and so was Frank
Randolph. The two boys were firm friends, and on Sunday went to Sunday
School together and also to church, when their hotel duties permitted of
it.

In the corridor of the hotel Joe, one day, met the timid Felix Gussing,
the young man who had once had so much trouble in driving a horse.

"How do you do, Mr. Gussing," said our hero politely.

"Why if it isn't Joe!" cried the young man, and smiled. "What are you
doing here?"

"I work at this hotel now."

"Is it possible! Didn't you like it at Riverside?"

"Yes, but the place is shut up for the winter."

"Ah, I see."

"Are you stopping here, sir?"

"Yes, I came in an hour ago. I have business in Philadelphia."

"Maybe you're buying horses," said Joe, slyly.

"No! no! No more horses for me," ejaculated the dude. "I--er--this is of
more importance."

No more was said just then, but later our hero met Felix Gussing again,
and on the day following had an errand that took him to the young man's
room.

"Joe, you are quite a wise boy, perhaps I can confide in you," said
Felix Gussing, after some talk on other subjects.

"I'll be glad to be of service to you, Mr. Gussing."

"I have a delicate problem to solve. Sometimes a young man can give
better advice than an older person," went on the dude.

"Don't flatter me, Mr. Gussing."

"I am in love," went on the young man, flatly.

"Yes, sir."

"I am quite sure the young lady loves me."

"Then I suppose you are going to get married."

"There is an obstacle in the way."

"Oh!"

"Perhaps I had better tell you the whole story--if you'll listen to me,"
went on the dude.

"Certainly I'll listen," said Joe. "I've got a little time off."

And then Felix Gussing told his tale of woe, as will be found in the
next chapter.



CHAPTER XIX.


ONE KIND OF A DUEL.


"Her name is Clara, and she is the daughter of Major Thomas Botts
Sampson, of the regular army," began Felix Gussing.

"Then her father is a military man."

"Exactly, and that is the trouble," and the dude gave a groan. "It is
this way: When I went to see Major Sampson he greeted me very cordially,
until I disclosed the object of my visit.

"'Sir,' said he 'This is a matter which requires consideration. Have
you gained my daughter's consent?'

"'I have,' I answered.

"'So far so good,' said he. 'But there is one thing more. Have you
served in the army?'

"'No,' said I.

"'Or fought a duel?'

"'No.'

"Then he told me to remember that he had served in the army and that his
daughter was the daughter of an army man, one who had gone through many
battles. After that he said he was resolved that his daughter should
marry only somebody who had proved himself a man of courage."

"What did you do then?" asked Joe, becoming interested.

"What could I do? I am--er--no army man--no fighter. Evidently the major
wants a fighter for a son-in-law," and Felix Gussing groaned once more.

"You'll have to become a fighter," said Joe.

"No! no! I am a er--a man of peace!" cried the dude, in alarm.

"Mr. Gussing, I think I can arrange matters for you," said Joe, struck
by a certain idea.

"What can you mean, Joe?"

"I mean that I can prove to Major Sampson that you are a brave man."

"Do that, Joe, and I shall be your friend for life!" gasped the dude.

"Will you wait until to-morrow, Mr. Gussing?"

"Certainly, but do not keep me in suspense too long."

"This may cost you a little money."

"I don't care if it costs a hundred dollars."

"Then I am sure I can fix it up for you," answered Joe.

There was stopping at the hotel a man named Montgomery. He had at
different times been an auctioneer, a book-agent, a schoolmaster, and
a traveling salesman. He was just now selling curiosities and Joe felt
that he would be only too glad to do Felix Gussing a good turn if he
were paid for it.

Our hero had a talk with this man, and the upshot of the matter was that
Montgomery and the dude were introduced on the following morning.

"I think I can help you, Mr. Gussing," said the curiosity man, who, it
may be mentioned here, was a tall and important-looking personage. "I
was once in the army."

"What can you do?" questioned the dude, hopefully.

"Will it be worth fifty dollars to you if I aid you in winning the
consent of Major Sampson to wed his daughter?"

"Decidedly."

"This is also Joe's plan, so you will have to pay him, too."

"I don't want any money," put in our hero.

"Joe shall have ten dollars--if your plan wins out. But how is all this
to be accomplished?" continued Felix Gussing.

"We will take the earliest possible opportunity to visit Major Sampson,"
said Ulmer Montgomery.

"Well?"

"When we are all together, we'll get into some sort of an argument.
You shall call me a fool and I'll slap you in the face. Then you shall
challenge me to a duel."

"A duel! Why, sir, I--er--I never could shoot you, and I don't want to
be shot myself."

"My dear Mr. Gussing, you don't understand me. Don't you comprehend, the
pistols shall be loaded with powder only."

"Ah, that's the idea!" exclaimed the dude, much relieved.

"Yes. You see it will only be a sham duel so far as we are concerned,
but will, in the most harmless fashion possible, prove you to be a man
of honor and courage. Major Sampson's scruples will vanish, and you will
have the pleasure of gaining his daughter's hand in marriage.

"I agree, Mr. Montgomery--the plan is a famous one. Is it yours or is it
Joe's?"

"Joe's--but it will fall to me to help carry it out," said the
Jack-of-all-trades, who did not lose sight of the fifty dollars that had
been promised to him.

On the following day Felix Gussing and Mr. Montgomery took themselves
to Major Sampson's residence, where the stranger was introduced as a
curiosity hunter from Chicago.

"He wishes to look at your collection of swords," said the dude.

"I shall be delighted to show them," said the major, who was a person of
great self-importance.

"Ah, this is a fine sword from the Holy Land," said Mr. Montgomery,
handling one of the blades.

"I don't know where it came from," said the major. "It was presented to
me by a friend from Boston."

"That is a Russian sword," said the dude. "I know it by its handle."

"That sword is from the Holy Land," insisted Mr. Montgomery.

"Anybody is a fool to talk that way," cried Felix Gussing.

"Ha! do you call me a fool, sir!" stormed Montgomery.

"Gentlemen!" put in the major. "I think----"

"I am not a fool, sir, and I want you to know it!" bellowed Ulmer
Montgomery. "It's an outrage to call me such. Take that, sir!" and he
slapped Felix Gussing lightly on the cheek.

"Gentlemen, this must cease!" cried the major, coming between them. "In
my house, too! Disgraceful!"

"He has got to apologize to me!" roared the dude, acting his part to
perfection.

"Never!" shouted Montgomery.

"If you will not, I demand satisfaction. I--I will fight you in a duel."

"A duel!"

"Yes, a duel. Pistols, at ten paces," went on Felix Gussing.

"Well! well!" came from the major in amazement.

"Can I do less?" demanded the would-be son-in-law. "My honor is at
stake."

"Then stand by your honor by all means," cried the military man, who, at
times, was as hot-blooded as anybody.

During the talk the major's daughter had come upon the scene.

"Oh, Felix, what does this mean?" she demanded.

"I am going to fight this--this fellow a duel, pistols at ten paces,"
answered Felix, firmly.

"Felix!" she gasped. "You will not, you cannot fight. For my sake, do
not."

"Clara," answered the dude, smiling affectionately upon her. "For your
sake I would forego any personal gratification, but I must not suffer a
stain upon the honor."

"Well said!" exclaimed the major. "Felix is behaving well. I couldn't
have done better myself. I admire his courage and I give him free
permission to wed you after the--the--"

"But father, if he should be killed?" faltered the fair Clara.

"Never fear, Clara; all will go well," interposed Felix.

More words followed, but the dude pretended to be stubborn and so did
Ulmer Montgomery. Both went off to arrange about the duel, and the major
insisted upon it that he must be on hand to see the affair come off.

Matters were hurried along with all speed, and it was arranged that the
duel should take place on the following morning at ten o'clock, in a
country spot just outside of the city. Joe was invited to go along, and
carried the pistols, and two others were let into the secret, including
a doctor, who went fully prepared to attend to any wounds that might be
inflicted.

It did not take long to load the pistols, with powder only. Great care
was taken so that Major Sampson should not suspect the truth.

"Major," said Felix, in a trembling voice. "If I--if anything serious
happens to me tell Clara that--that I died like a man."

"Noble boy! I will! I will!" answered the military man.

"When I give the word, gentlemen, you will both fire!" said one of the
seconds.

"Very well," answered both of the duelists.

"Ready? One--two--three--fire!"

Both pistols were simultaneously discharged. When the smoke cleared away
it was ascertained that both parties were unharmed.

"Gentlemen, are you satisfied?" asked the seconds.

"I am," answered Ulmer Montgomery, quickly.

