After a while, with the parrot's help, the Doctor got to learn the
language of the animals so well that he could talk to them himself and
understand everything they said.  Then he gave up being a people's
doctor altogether.

As soon as the Cat's-meat-Man had told every one that John Dolittle was
going to become an animal-doctor, old ladies began to bring him their
pet pugs and poodles who had eaten too much cake; and farmers came many
miles to show him sick cows and sheep.

One day a plow-horse was brought to him; and the poor thing was
terribly glad to find a man who could talk in horse-language.

"You know, Doctor," said the horse, "that vet over the hill knows
nothing at all.  He has been treating me six weeks now--for spavins.
What I need is SPECTACLES.  I am going blind in one eye.  There's no
reason why horses shouldn't wear glasses, the same as people.  But that
stupid man over the hill never even looked at my eyes.  He kept on
giving me big pills. I tried to tell him; but he couldn't understand a
word of horse-language.  What I need is spectacles."

"Of course--of course," said the Doctor. "I'll get you some at once."

"I would like a pair like yours," said the horse--"only green.  They'll
keep the sun out of my eyes while I'm plowing the Fifty-Acre Field."

"Certainly," said the Doctor.  "Green ones you shall have."

"You know, the trouble is, Sir," said the plow-horse as the Doctor
opened the front door to let him out--"the trouble is that ANYBODY
thinks he can doctor animals--just because the animals don't complain.
As a matter of fact it takes a much cleverer man to be a really good
animal-doctor than it does to be a good people's doctor.  My farmer's
boy thinks he knows all about horses.  I wish you could see him--his
face is so fat he looks as though he had no eyes--and he has got as
much brain as a potato-bug. He tried to put a mustard-plaster on me
last week."

"Where did he put it?" asked the Doctor.

"Oh, he didn't put it anywhere--on me," said the horse.  "He only tried
to.  I kicked him into the duck-pond."

"Well, well!" said the Doctor.

"I'm a pretty quiet creature as a rule," said the horse--"very patient
with people--don't make much fuss.  But it was bad enough to have that
vet giving me the wrong medicine. And when that red-faced booby started
to monkey with me, I just couldn't bear it any more."

"Did you hurt the boy much?" asked the Doctor.

"Oh, no," said the horse.  "I kicked him in the right place.  The vet's
looking after him now.  When will my glasses be ready?"

"I'll have them for you next week," said the Doctor.  "Come in again
Tuesday--Good morning!"

Then John Dolittle got a fine, big pair of green spectacles; and the
plow-horse stopped going blind in one eye and could see as well as ever.

And soon it became a common sight to see farm-animals wearing glasses
in the country round Puddleby; and a blind horse was a thing unknown.

And so it was with all the other animals that were brought to him.  As
soon as they found that he could talk their language, they told him
where the pain was and how they felt, and of course it was easy for him
to cure them.

Now all these animals went back and told their brothers and friends
that there was a doctor in the little house with the big garden who
really WAS a doctor.  And whenever any creatures got sick--not only
horses and cows and dogs--but all the little things of the fields, like
harvest-mice and water-voles, badgers and bats, they came at once to
his house on the edge of the town, so that his big garden was nearly
always crowded with animals trying to get in to see him.

There were so many that came that he had to have special doors made for
the different kinds. He wrote "HORSES" over the front door, "COWS" over
the side door, and "SHEEP" on the kitchen door.  Each kind of animal
had a separate door--even the mice had a tiny tunnel made for them into
the cellar, where they waited patiently in rows for the Doctor to come
round to them.

And so, in a few years' time, every living thing for miles and miles
got to know about John Dolittle, M.D.  And the birds who flew to other
countries in the winter told the animals in foreign lands of the
wonderful doctor of Puddleby-on-the-Marsh, who could understand their
talk and help them in their troubles. In this way he became famous
among the animals--all over the world--better known even than he had
been among the folks of the West Country.  And he was happy and liked
his life very much.

One afternoon when the Doctor was busy writing in a book, Polynesia sat
in the window--as she nearly always did--looking out at the leaves
blowing about in the garden. Presently she laughed aloud.

"What is it, Polynesia?" asked the Doctor, looking up from his book.

"I was just thinking," said the parrot; and she went on looking at the
leaves.

"What were you thinking?"

"I was thinking about people," said Polynesia. "People make me sick.
They think they're so wonderful.  The world has been going on now for
thousands of years, hasn't it?  And the only thing in animal-language
that PEOPLE have learned to understand is that when a dog wags his tail
he means 'I'm glad!'--It's funny, isn't it?  You are the very first man
to talk like us. Oh, sometimes people annoy me dreadfully--such airs
they put on--talking about 'the dumb animals.' DUMB!--Huh!  Why I knew
a macaw once who could say 'Good morning!' in seven different ways
without once opening his mouth.  He could talk every language--and
Greek.  An old professor with a gray beard bought him.  But he didn't
stay.  He said the old man didn't talk Greek right, and he couldn't
stand listening to him teach the language wrong. I often wonder what's
become of him.  That bird knew more geography than people will ever
know.--PEOPLE, Golly!  I suppose if people ever learn to fly--like any
common hedge-sparrow--we shall never hear the end of it!"

"You're a wise old bird," said the Doctor. "How old are you really?  I
know that parrots and elephants sometimes live to be very, very old."

"I can never be quite sure of my age," said Polynesia.  "It's either a
hundred and eighty-three or a hundred and eighty-two.  But I know that
when I first came here from Africa, King Charles was still hiding in
the oak-tree--because I saw him.  He looked scared to death."



THE THIRD CHAPTER

MORE MONEY TROUBLES

AND soon now the Doctor began to make money again; and his sister,
Sarah, bought a new dress and was happy.  Some of the animals who came
to see him were so sick that they had to stay at the Doctor's house for
a week.  And when they were getting better they used to sit in chairs
on the lawn.

And often even after they got well, they did not want to go away--they
liked the Doctor and his house so much.  And he never had the heart to
refuse them when they asked if they could stay with him.  So in this
way he went on getting more and more pets.

Once when he was sitting on his garden wall, smoking a pipe in the
evening, an Italian organ-grinder came round with a monkey on a string.
The Doctor saw at once that the monkey's collar was too tight and that
he was dirty and unhappy.  So he took the monkey away from the Italian,
gave the man a shilling and told him to go.  The organ-grinder got
awfully angry and said that he wanted to keep the monkey. But the
Doctor told him that if he didn't go away he would punch him on the
nose.  John Dolittle was a strong man, though he wasn't very tall.  So
the Italian went away saying rude things and the monkey stayed with
Doctor Dolittle and had a good home.  The other animals in the house
called him "Chee-Chee"--which is a common word in monkey-language,
meaning "ginger."

And another time, when the circus came to Puddleby, the crocodile who
had a bad tooth-ache escaped at night and came into the Doctor's
garden.  The Doctor talked to him in crocodile-language and took him
into the house and made his tooth better.  But when the crocodile saw
what a nice house it was--with all the different places for the
different kinds of animals--he too wanted to live with the Doctor. He
asked couldn't he sleep in the fish-pond at the bottom of the garden,
if he promised not to eat the fish.  When the circus-men came to take
him back he got so wild and savage that he frightened them away.  But
to every one in the house he was always as gentle as a kitten.

But now the old ladies grew afraid to send their lap-dogs to Doctor
Dolittle because of the crocodile; and the farmers wouldn't believe
that he would not eat the lambs and sick calves they brought to be
cured.  So the Doctor went to the crocodile and told him he must go
back to his circus.  But he wept such big tears, and begged so hard to
be allowed to stay, that the Doctor hadn't the heart to turn him out.

So then the Doctor's sister came to him and said, "John, you must send
that creature away. Now the farmers and the old ladies are afraid to
send their animals to you--just as we were beginning to be well off
again.  Now we shall be ruined entirely.  This is the last straw.  I
will no longer be housekeeper for you if you don't send away that
alligator."

"It isn't an alligator," said the Doctor--"it's a crocodile."

"I don't care what you call it," said his sister. "It's a nasty thing
to find under the bed.  I won't have it in the house."

"But he has promised me," the Doctor answered, "that he will not bite
any one.  He doesn't like the circus; and I haven't the money to send
him back to Africa where he comes from.  He minds his own business and
on the whole is very well behaved.  Don't be so fussy."

"I tell you I WILL NOT have him around," said Sarah.  "He eats the
linoleum.  If you don't send him away this minute I'll--I'll go and get
married!"

"All right," said the Doctor, "go and get married.  It can't be
helped."   And he took down his hat and went out into the garden.

So Sarah Dolittle packed up her things and went off; and the Doctor was
left all alone with his animal family.

And very soon he was poorer than he had ever been before.  With all
these mouths to fill, and the house to look after, and no one to do the
mending, and no money coming in to pay the butcher's bill, things began
to look very difficult.  But the Doctor didn't worry at all.

"Money is a nuisance," he used to say. "We'd all be much better off if
it had never been invented.  What does money matter, so long as we are
happy?"

But soon the animals themselves began to get worried.  And one evening
when the Doctor was asleep in his chair before the kitchen-fire they
began talking it over among themselves in whispers.  And the owl,
Too-Too, who was good at arithmetic, figured it out that there was only
money enough left to last another week--if they each had one meal a day
and no more.

Then the parrot said, "I think we all ought to do the housework
ourselves.  At least we can do that much.  After all, it is for our
sakes that the old man finds himself so lonely and so poor."

So it was agreed that the monkey, Chee-Chee, was to do the cooking and
mending; the dog was to sweep the floors; the duck was to dust and make
the beds; the owl, Too-Too, was to keep the accounts, and the pig was
to do the gardening.  They made Polynesia, the parrot, housekeeper and
laundress, because she was the oldest.

Of course at first they all found their new jobs very hard to do--all
except Chee-Chee, who had hands, and could do things like a man.  But
they soon got used to it; and they used to think it great fun to watch
Jip, the dog, sweeping his tail over the floor with a rag tied onto it
for a broom.  After a little they got to do the work so well that the
Doctor said that he had never had his house kept so tidy or so clean
before.

In this way things went along all right for a while; but without money
they found it very hard.

Then the animals made a vegetable and flower stall outside the
garden-gate and sold radishes and roses to the people that passed by
along the road.

But still they didn't seem to make enough money to pay all the
bills--and still the Doctor wouldn't worry.  When the parrot came to
him and told him that the fishmonger wouldn't give them any more fish,
he said,

"Never mind.  So long as the hens lay eggs and the cow gives milk we
can have omelettes and junket.  And there are plenty of vegetables left
in the garden.  The Winter is still a long way off.  Don't fuss.  That
was the trouble with Sarah--she would fuss.  I wonder how Sarah's
getting on--an excellent woman--in some ways--Well, well!"

But the snow came earlier than usual that year; and although the old
lame horse hauled in plenty of wood from the forest outside the town,
so they could have a big fire in the kitchen, most of the vegetables in
the garden were gone, and the rest were covered with snow; and many of
the animals were really hungry.



THE FOURTH CHAPTER

A MESSAGE FROM AFRICA

THAT Winter was a very cold one.  And one night in December, when they
were all sitting round the warm fire in the kitchen, and the Doctor was
reading aloud to them out of books he had written himself in
animal-language, the owl, Too-Too, suddenly said, "Sh!  What's that
noise outside?"

They all listened; and presently they heard the sound of some one
running.  Then the door flew open and the monkey, Chee-Chee, ran in,
badly out of breath.

"Doctor!" he cried, "I've just had a message from a cousin of mine in
Africa.  There is a terrible sickness among the monkeys out there. They
are all catching it--and they are dying in hundreds.  They have heard
of you, and beg you to come to Africa to stop the sickness."

"Who brought the message?" asked the Doctor, taking off his spectacles
and laying down his book.

"A swallow," said Chee-Chee.  "She is outside on the rain-butt."

"Bring her in by the fire," said the Doctor. "She must be perished with
the cold.  The swallows flew South six weeks ago!"

So the swallow was brought in, all huddled and shivering; and although
she was a little afraid at first, she soon got warmed up and sat on the
edge of the mantelpiece and began to talk.

When she had finished the Doctor said,

"I would gladly go to Africa--especially in this bitter weather.  But
I'm afraid we haven't money enough to buy the tickets.  Get me the
money-box, Chee-Chee."

So the monkey climbed up and got it off the top shelf of the dresser.

There was nothing in it--not one single penny!

"I felt sure there was twopence left," said the Doctor.

"There WAS," said the owl.  "But you spent it on a rattle for that
badger's baby when he was teething."

"Did I?" said the Doctor--"dear me, dear me!  What a nuisance money is,
to be sure! Well, never mind.  Perhaps if I go down to the seaside I
shall be able to borrow a boat that will take us to Africa.  I knew a
seaman once who brought his baby to me with measles. Maybe he'll lend
us his boat--the baby got well."

So early the next morning the Doctor went down to the seashore.  And
when he came back he told the animals it was all right--the sailor was
going to lend them the boat.

Then the crocodile and the monkey and the parrot were very glad and
began to sing, because they were going back to Africa, their real home.
And the Doctor said,

"I shall only be able to take you three--with Jip the dog, Dab-Dab the
duck, Gub-Gub the pig and the owl, Too-Too.  The rest of the animals,
like the dormice and the water-voles and the bats, they will have to go
back and live in the fields where they were born till we come home
again.  But as most of them sleep through the Winter, they won't mind
that--and besides, it wouldn't be good for them to go to Africa."

So then the parrot, who had been on long sea-voyages before, began
telling the Doctor all the things he would have to take with him on the
ship.

"You must have plenty of pilot-bread," she said--"'hard tack' they call
it.  And you must have beef in cans--and an anchor."

"I expect the ship will have its own anchor," said the Doctor.

"Well, make sure," said Polynesia.  "Because it's very important.  You
can't stop if you haven't got an anchor.  And you'll need a bell."

"What's that for?" asked the Doctor.

"To tell the time by," said the parrot.  "You go and ring it every
half-hour and then you know what time it is.  And bring a whole lot of
rope--it always comes in handy on voyages."

Then they began to wonder where they were going to get the money from
to buy all the things they needed.

"Oh, bother it!  Money again," cried the Doctor.  "Goodness!  I shall
be glad to get to Africa where we don't have to have any!  I'll go and
ask the grocer if he will wait for his money till I get back--No, I'll
send the sailor to ask him."

So the sailor went to see the grocer.  And presently he came back with
all the things they wanted.

Then the animals packed up; and after they had turned off the water so
the pipes wouldn't freeze, and put up the shutters, they closed the
house and gave the key to the old horse who lived in the stable.  And
