"Can we not think of something?  Let us try, Karl!"

"Ah! dear brother, I have been trying for days, and in vain.  There is
nothing within this valley at all suitable for the purpose."

"Would canvas do?  Have you thought of that?"

"I have.  It would be too coarse and heavy."

"But, with great pains, could we not make it light enough?  We might
choose the finer fibres of the hemp; and spin and weave it with
scrupulous care.  Ossaroo here is a perfect Omphale in his way.  I'll
warrant he could beat Hercules with the distaff."

"Ho! brother!" exclaimed Karl, a little astonished.  "You are quite
classical in your speech this morning.  Where learnt you the history of
Hercules--you who have never seen the inside of a university?"

"You forget, brother Karl, that you yourself have been my instructor in
these classical themes, as you call them.  Though I must tell you that,
with the exception of their occasionally lending a little ornament to my
speech, I have derived not the slightest advantage from them; nor is it
likely I ever shall."

"Well, Caspar," answered the botanist, "I am not going to stand up for
the classics, as you are well aware.  Although I have taught you a
little of their lore, it was when I had nothing to do, and you were
equally idle; otherwise I should have considered that both of us were
wasting time.  You already know my opinions on that subject--which are:
that a knowledge of what is usually termed `the classics' is of about as
much use to a reasoning man as might be an equally profound knowledge of
Chinese _mnemonics_.  The time I have spent in the study of the _dead_
languages has been sheer waste; and all I have learnt wont raise us a
foot higher here.  My knowledge of Jupiter and Juno is not likely to
gain us the means of getting out of our difficulty, no more than my
acquaintance with Mercury will help me to a pair of wings.  So a truce
to classical ideas, and let us see whether scientific ones may not serve
us better just now.  You have a quick invention, brother Caspar; can you
think of anything--I mean anything within our reach--that would make the
air-bag of a balloon?"

"But could you make the balloon, if you had the stuff?" inquired Caspar,
still in doubt whether any other than an experienced aeronaut could
construct so wonderful a machine.

"Pooh!" replied the philosopher, "the making of a balloon is almost as
easy as making a soap-bubble.  Any air-tight bag, filled with heated
atmosphere, becomes a balloon.  The question is, what weight it can be
made to carry--including the materials out of which it may be
constructed."

"But how are you to get the heated air into it?"

"Simply by making a fire under an aperture left open below."

"But would not this air soon become cold again?"

"Yes; and then the balloon would sink back to the earth from the air
inside getting cooled, and becoming as heavy as that without.  Of
course," continued the philosopher, "you are aware that heated air is
much lighter than the ordinary atmosphere; and that is why a balloon
filled with the former, rises, and will continue rising, till it has
reached that elevation, where the rarefied atmosphere is as light as the
heated air.  Then it can go no further, and the weight of the balloon
itself will bring it down again.  A bladder of ordinary air sunk in
water, or a corked bottle, will illustrate this point to your
comprehension."

"I comprehend it well enough," rejoined Karl, rather piqued at being
treated too much _a l'enfant_ by his learned brother.  "But I thought
that, in a balloon, it was necessary to keep a fire constantly burning--
a sort of grate or fire-basket suspended below.  Now, even if we had the
silk to make the great spherical bag, how could we make a fire-basket
without iron?"

"We should not need the fire-basket you speak of.  That is only
required, when you design to keep your balloon some length of time in
the air.  If you only wish to make a short ascent, once filling the bag
with hot air is sufficient; as it would be for us here.  Even if we
wanted a suspended grate, surely, brother, you have enough ingenuity to
get over such a trifling difficulty as that?"

"Well, I'm not so sure that I could.  How would you get over it?"

"Why, by making a common basket, and lining it with clay.  That would
carry fire, as well as a vessel of either cast or wrought iron--at least
sufficient to serve for a short excursion such as we should care to
make.  Now-a-days, fire is not used for inflating balloons.  Inflammable
gas has been found to be far superior for this purpose; but as we have
no such thing in stock, we should have to proceed on the old original
plan--that employed by the brothers Montgolfier--the first inventors of
the balloon."

"You think, then, that the fire apparatus could be dispensed with, if we
could only discover some material that would make the great globe-shaped
bag to contain the heated air?"

"Ay," replied Karl; "think of something to do that, and I promise to
make you a balloon."

Thus challenged, Caspar set his wits to work; and for a long while he
sat in silence, as if buried in some very profound speculation.
Probably, there was no material substance in that valley that did not
pass in review before the retina of his mental vision; and all were
considered in turn.

"It must be light, air-tight, and strong?" asked he, at length, as if
there was something in his thoughts possessing these three requisites.

"Light, air-tight, and strong," answered Karl, simply repeating his
words.

"The two last I am sure of," rejoined Caspar.  "Of the first only have I
my doubts."

"What is it?" asked Karl, in a tone that betrayed his interest in what
Caspar had said.

"Eel-skins!" was the laconic answer.



CHAPTER FIFTY.

THE SKIN BALLOON.

"Eel-skins," said Caspar, repeating the phrase, as he saw that Karl
hesitated before pronouncing an opinion.  "Don't you think they would
do?"

Karl had it on the tip of his tongue to cry out--"The very thing!" but
something withheld him from making this unqualified declaration.

"They might--it is possible they might," said he, apparently debating
the question within himself--"just possible; and yet I fear--"

"What do you fear?" asked Caspar.

"Do you think they would not be strong enough?"

"Strong enough," replied Karl.  "That's not what I fear."

"The air can't pass through an eel-skin?"

"No--not that."

"At the seams, perhaps?  We can stitch them neatly; and then gum them
over at the joinings.  I'll warrant Ossaroo can sew like a shoemaker."

The shikaree could do all that.  Karl knew it.  It was not there the
difficulty lay.

"The weight, then?" pursued Caspar interrogatively.

"Precisely that," answered Karl; "I fear they will be too heavy.  Bring
one, Ossaroo; and let us have a look at it."

The shikaree rose from his seat; and going into the hovel, returned
presently--bringing back with him a long shrivelled object, which any
one could tell to be a dried eel-skin.

There were many like it inside: for they had carefully preserved the
skins of the eels they had caught, induced to do so by a sort of
presentiment, that some day they might find a use for them.  In this
case their prudent providence was likely to prove of service to them.

Karl took the skin; and, holding it out on the palm of his hand,
appeared to make an estimate of its weight.  Caspar watched his
brother's countenance, and waited to hear what he would say; but Karl
only expressed himself by a doubtful shake of the head, which seemed to
show that his opinion was _against_ the eel-skins.

"They might be made much lighter, I fancy," suggested Caspar: "scraping
would do a deal for them; and by the way, why would not boiling make
them light enough?  It would take all the fatty, oily substance out of
them."

"There's something in what you say," rejoined Karl, apparently impressed
by the last suggestion.  "Boiling might render them a good deal lighter.
We can easily try it."

As Karl said this, he proceeded to the boiling spring, and plunged the
eel-skin under the water.  There it was permitted to remain for about
half an hour, when it was taken out; and, after being scraped with the
blade of a knife, was spread upon a rock, under the sun, where it would
soon get thoroughly dry.

They all waited patiently for the completion of this process.  The
result was of too interesting a character to allow of their occupying
themselves with anything else.

In due time the eel-skin had become sufficiently dry, to be submitted to
examination; and Karl, once more taking it up, balanced it upon his
palm.

Tested, even in this inexact fashion, it was evidently much lighter than
before; and, by the gratified look with which the philosopher regarded
it, he appeared to be much better satisfied with its weight.  Still,
however, he was not sanguine: as his words testified.  They were almost
a repetition of what he had said before.

"It may do--it is just possible.  At all events, there can be no harm in
trying.  Let us try it, then."

To say, "Let us try it," meant the same as to say, "Let us make the
balloon."  The others understood that; and of course acquiesced in the
determination.

As there was nothing to interfere with the immediate commencement of the
work, they resolved to set about it at once; and in fact did set about
it without farther delay.

The number of eel-skins on hand, though very considerable, would not be
near enough for covering a balloon; and therefore Ossaroo went to work
with his hooks and lines to catch a few hundreds more.  Karl was able to
tell how many it would take; or he could at least make an estimate
sufficiently exact for the purpose.  He designed a balloon of twelve
feet diameter: for he knew that one of less size would not have power
enough to carry up the weight of a man.  Of course, Karl knew how to
calculate the surface of a sphere whose diameter should be twelve feet.
He had only to multiply the diameter on the circumference; or the square
of the diameter on the fixed number 3.1416; or find the convex surface
of the circumscribing cylinder; or else find four times the area of a
great circle of the said sphere.  Any one of these methods would give
him the correct result.

On making the calculation, he found that a sphere of 12 feet diameter
would have a surface of 452 square feet, within a trifling fraction.
Therefore 452 square feet of eel-skins would be required to cover it.
In other words, that quantity would be required to make the balloon.

As the eels happened to be of large size--most of them being over a yard
in length, and full four inches in average girth--the skin of one when
spread out would yield about a square foot of surface.  Taking large and
small together--and allowing for waste, the heads and tails that would
have to be chopped off--Karl calculated that he would get nearly a
square foot each out of the eels; and that about five hundred skins
would make the balloon bag.  But as they would have to be cut
occasionally with a slant, in order to get the globe shape, perhaps a
few more would be needed; and therefore Ossaroo was to keep his baits in
the water, until the requisite number of eels should be hooked out of
it.

Ossaroo had another department assigned to him besides catching the
fish; and one that took up more of his time: since the baiting of the
hooks, and looking after them, required only his occasional attention.
Spinning the thread by which the skins were to be sewed together, was a
much more delicate operation: since in these both strength and fineness
were absolutely necessary.  But as Caspar had said, Ossaroo was an adept
with the distaff; and several large skeins of the finest twist were soon
turned off from his nimble fingers.

When enough thread had been thus produced, Ossaroo proceeded to making
the cords and stronger ropes, that would be needed for attaching the
"boat"--as well as to hold the balloon in its place, while being got
ready for its ascent.

Caspar's employment was--first, the skinning of the eels; and afterwards
the scraping, boiling, and drying of the skins; while Karl, who acted as
engineer-in-chief, besides giving a general superintendence to the work,
occupied himself in imparting the final dressing to the material, and
cutting it into such shapes, that it could be closely and conveniently
stitched together.

Karl had also made an excursion into the forest, and brought back with
him large quantities of a gum, which he had extracted from a tree of the
genus _ficus_--a sort of _caoutchouc_--which is yielded by many species
of _ficus_ in the forests of the Lower Himalayas.  Karl had gone in
search of this substance, because he knew it would be required for
paying the seams, and rendering them air-tight.

When they had pursued their various avocations for about a week, it was
thought that material enough of every kind was collected and made ready;
and then Ossaroo was set to stitching.  Fortunately, they were provided
with needles: for these had formed a part of the _accoutrement_ of the
plant-hunters--when originally starting upon their expedition.

As neither Karl nor Caspar had any experience in handling such sharp
tools, the sewing had all to be done by Ossaroo; and it took another
full week to accomplish this Sartorean task.

At the end of that time, it was fully accomplished and complete; and the
huge bag was ready to receive its coat of gum varnish.  A day sufficed
for "paying;" and nothing more remained but to attach the "boat," or
"car," that was to carry them aloft in their daring flight into the
"azure fields of air."



CHAPTER FIFTY ONE.

MAKING READY FOR THE ASCENT.

Karl was the only one of the three who knew anything about a balloon, or
the mode of inflating it.  Had it been their intention of navigating the
air, an apparatus would have been required to carry up a fire.  This
Karl could easily have contrived.  A basket of wicker-work, as he had
said, well lined with clay, would have answered the purpose after a
fashion; but as they did not intend to use the balloon for any purpose
beyond making the single ascent to lift them over the cliffs, a
continuous fire would not be required.  The first inflation would answer
that end well enough; and therefore a grate or fire-basket was not
thought of.

The car to carry the passengers--or boat, as it is sometimes styled:
since, for reasons easily understood, it is usually a boat--was quite
another affair; and had it been designed for more than a mere temporary
use, would have taken a considerable time in the making; but for what
they wanted almost anything would serve; and all that they intended
employing was a sort of wicker basket, or deep hamper, suspended by
stout ropes.  This had been already prepared; and only needed to be
attached to the bottom of the air-bag.

In the present case, the "bottom of the bag" is quite a figure of
speech--_lucus a non lucendo_.  Strictly speaking, it had no bottom;
but, where this should have been, there was a round aperture, formed by
a stout hoop of ringall bamboo, to which the skin covering was lashed,
and to which, also, the cords intended to sustain the afore-mentioned
basket, as also the stay-ropes, were to be attached.

The object of this aperture will be easily understood.  It was by it
that the hot air was to be admitted inside the balloon, for the purpose
of inflating it.

And how was this hot air to be obtained?  That was a question which Karl
alone could answer.  Of course, fire was to be the agent for producing
it: but how was it to be got into the bag?  Karl could tell that, and
Karl only; and, now that the time had arrived for trying the experiment,
he condescended to explain to his coadjutors how he meant to proceed.

The bag was to be propped up between tall stakes set in the ground; its
bottomless bottom turned towards the earth, so that the aperture would
be below.  Under this a fire was to be kindled--not, however, until
everything else should be ready; and the hot air rising up into the
aperture would enter the balloon, and cause it to swell out to its full
globular dimensions.  More hot air being admitted, the cooler atmosphere
within would be expelled, the balloon would become lighter than the
surrounding air, and by the simple principle of atmospheric pressure it
would ascend into the air.  It was expected it would do so--it was hoped
it would.

To say the truth, the hopes of the engineer were far from being high--
his expectations anything but sanguine.  He had observed all along,
that, notwithstanding the process employed for lightening the eel-skins,
they were still far heavier than silk; and perhaps, after all, the
experiment might not succeed.  There was another circumstance that had
as much _weight_ on the mind of Karl as the eel-skins; and that was
quite as likely to have a _bearing_ upon the balloon.  He had not
overlooked the fact, that the spot, from which they proposed making the
ascent, was nearly ten thousand feet above the level of the sea.  He
knew that the atmosphere in such a situation would be extremely
rarefied, and that a balloon, which might easily ascend many thousand
feet into the air starting from the level of the sea, would not stir
from the ground if carried to the top of a mountain ten thousand feet
high.  This was the circumstance which preyed upon the spirit of the
young philosopher, and hindered him from entertaining any very sanguine
hopes of success in the experiment they were making.

The philosophical truth had been before his mind from the first, and at
times had almost determined him to abandon the project.  But as he was
not sufficiently acquainted with the laws of aerostation as to be
certain of failure, he had worked on with the determination to seek
success, though it must be acknowledged with but faint hopes of finding
it.

Thus stood matters on the morning when it was finally arranged to launch
their great aerial ship, and ascertain whether it would swim.

All things were made ready at an early hour.  The huge bag was set up
between the supporting stakes the _car_ was attached to it, as also
several ropes to keep the balloon from being carried away; and these
were fastened at their other ends to stout pegs, driven firmly into the
ground; while a little furnace of stones was built underneath to hold
the fire, whose ascending caloric was to expand the balloon, and raise
it into the air.

The fuel out of which this fire was to be made had been already
collected near the spot.  It was not wood, nor faggots of any kind; for
although these might have served after a fashion, Karl was acquainted
with a better material.  He remembered that the Montgolfiers, and other
early aerostats--previous to the introduction of the inflammable gas--
had used chopped straw and wool, and regarded these materials to be the
best substances for inflating their balloons.  Karl had adopted their
idea; and had provided chopped grass as a substitute for the chopped
straw, and in lieu of sheep's wool he had procured a quantity of the
_poshm_ of the ibex, and other animals, that had been killed--the rich
shawl-wool of Cashmere!

The car, which has already been described as a sort of deep hamper, was
not over three feet in diameter.  It was evidently not equal to the
holding of three persons--to say nothing of a large dog--for it is
hardly necessary to say that Fritz was not going to be left behind.  The
faithful creature had too long followed the fortunes of our adventurers
to be abandoned by them now.

But there was not the slightest danger of that.  The dimensions of the
car were large enough for what the "vehicle" was intended to carry,
which was only _one_.

Karl believed that there would be little chance of the balloon having
sufficient power to take up all three of them, their united weight being
over four hundred pounds.  He would be but too contented if one should
be carried aloft; and if that one should succeed in effecting a landing
on the summit of the cliff, it was of no importance what afterwards
became of the aerial ship.  Having completed that one voyage, it might
make another on its own account--either south to Calcutta or eastward to
Hong Kong, if it liked China better.

Of course, if any one of them should succeed in surmounting the cliff,
it would be an easy matter to get over the mountain; and as they had
passed native villages on their way upward, these could be reached in a
day or two, and a party of men, with a proper rope-ladder, brought to
the rescue of the others.

Even had there been no prospect of assistance from any one outside, it
would not matter very much.  If only one of them could get to the top of
the cliffs, they could construct a rope-ladder of themselves--by which
the other two would be able to make the ascent.

It is hardly necessary to say who was to make the attempt--Ossaroo was
to be the aeronaut.  Ossaroo had voluntarily offered himself for this
perilous performance; and his offer had been accepted.

Not that either of the others were at all afraid to have run the risk.
It was from no desire to shirk the danger that they had appointed
Ossaroo to undertake it; but simply because, once outside, the shikaree
would be far better able to find his way down the mountains: and in his
native language could readily communicate with the villagers, and give a
correct account of their situation.
