but the primitive Christians also were in this kinde guilty; which made
S. _Ambrose_ so tartly to rebuke those of his time, when he said,

  _Tum turbatur carminibus Globus Lunae, quando calicibus turbantur &
  oculi_.

"When your heads are troubled with cups, then you thinke the Moone to be
troubled with charmes."

And for this reason also did _Maximus_ a Bishop,[1] write a Homily
against it, wherein hee shewed the absurditie of that foolish
superstition. I remember, that _Ludovicus Uives_ relates a more
ridiculous story of a people that imprisoned an Asse for drinking up the
Moone, whose image appearing in the water was covered with a cloud, as
the Asse was drinking, for which the poore beast was afterward brought
to the barre to receive a sentence according to his deserts, where the
grave Senate being set to examine the matter, one of the Counsell
(perhaps wiser than the rest) rises up, and out of his deepe judgement,
thinkes it not fit that their Towne should lose its Moone, but that
rather the Asse should be cut up, and that taken out of him, which
sentence being approved by the rest of those Politicians, as the
subtillest way for the conclusion of the matter was accordingly
performed. But whether this tale were true or no I will not question,
however there is absurdity enough in that former custome of the
ancients, that may confirme the truth to be proved, and plainly declare
the insufficiency of common opinion to adde true worth or estimation
unto any thing. So that from that which I have said may be gathered thus
much.

  [Sidenote 1: _Turinens. Episc._]

1. That a new truth may seeme absurd and impossible not onely to the
   vulgar, but to those also who are otherwise wise men, and excellent
   schollers; and hence it will follow, that every new thing which
   seemes to oppose common Principles is not presently to be rejected,
   but rather to be pry'd into with a diligent enquiry, since there
   are many things which are yet hid from us, and reserv'd for future
   discovery.

2. That it is not the commonnesse of an opinion that can priviledge it
   for a truth, the wrong way is sometime a well beaten path, whereas
   the right way (especially to hidden truths) may bee lesse trodden
   and more obscure.

True indeed, the strangeness of this opinion will detract much from its
credit; but yet we should know that nothing is in its selfe strange,
since every naturall effect has an equall dependance upon its cause, and
with the like necessity doth follow from it, so that 'tis our ignorance
which makes things appeare so, and hence it comes to passe that many
more evident truths seeme incredible to such who know not the causes of
things: you may as soone perswade some Country peasants that the Moone
is made of greene Cheese (as wee say) as that 'tis bigger than his
Cart-wheele, since both seeme equally to contradict his sight, and hee
has not reason enough to leade him farther than his senses. Nay, suppose
(saith _Plutarch_) a Philosopher should be educated in such a secret
place, where hee might not see either Sea or River, and afterwards
should be brought out where one might shew him the great Ocean telling
him the quality of that water, that it is blackish, salt, and not
potable, and yet there were many vast creatures of all formes living in
it, which make use of the water as wee doe of the aire, questionlesse he
would laugh at all this, as being monstrous lies & fables, without any
colour of truth. Just so will this truth which I now deliver appeare
unto others; because we never dreamt of any such matter as a world in
the Moone, because the state of that place hath as yet been vailed from
our knowledge, therefore wee can scarcely assent to any such matter.
Things are very hardly received which are altogether strange to our
thoughts and our senses. The soule may with lesse difficulty be brought
to believe any absurdity, when as it has formerly beene acquainted with
some colours and probabilities for it, but when a new, and an unheard of
truth shall come before it, though it have good grounds and reasons, yet
the understanding is afraid of it as a stranger, and dares not admit it
into its beliefe without a great deale of reluctancy and tryall. And
besides things that are not manifested to the senses, are not assented
unto without some labour of mind, some travaile and discourse of the
understanding, and many lazie soules had rather quietly repose
themselves in an easie errour, then take paines to search out the truth.
The strangenesse then of this opinion which I now deliver will be a
great hinderance to its beliefe, but this is not to be respected by
reason it cannot bee helped. I have stood the longer in the Preface,
because that prejudice which the meere title of the booke may beget
cannot easily be removed without a great deale of preparation, and I
could not tell otherwise how to rectifie the thoughts of the Reader for
an impartiall survey of the following discourse.

I must needs confesse, though I had often thought with my selfe that it
was possible there might be a world in the Moone, yet it seemed such an
uncouth opinion that I never durst discover it, for feare of being
counted singular and ridiculous, but afterward having read _Plutarch_,
_Galilaeus_, _Keplar_, with some others, and finding many of mine owne
thoughts confirmed by such strong authority, I then concluded that it
was not onely possible there might bee, but probable that there was
another habitable world in that Planet. In the prosecuting of this
assertion, I shall first endeavour to cleare the way from such doubts as
may hinder the speed or ease of farther progresse; and because the
suppositions imply'd in this opinion may seeme to contradict the
principles of reason or faith, it will be requisite that I first remove
this scruple, shewing the conformity of them to both these, and proving
those truths that may make way for the rest, which I shall labour to
performe in the second, third, fourth, and fifth Chapters, and then
proceede to confirme such Propositions, which doe more directly belong
to the maine point in hand.




Proposition 2.

_That a plurality of worlds doth not contradict any principle of
  reason or faith._


Tis reported of _Aristotle_ that when hee saw the bookes of _Moses_ he
commended them for such a majesticke stile as might become a God, but
withall hee censured that manner of writing to be very unfitting for a
Philosopher because there was nothing proved in them, but matters were
delivered as if they would rather command than perswade beliefe. And
'tis observed that hee sets downe nothing himselfe, but he confirmes it
by the strongest reasons that may be found, there being scarce an
argument of force for any subject in Philosophy which may not bee picked
out of his writings, and therefore 'tis likely if there were in reason a
necessity of one onely world, that hee would have found out some such
necessary proofe as might confirme it: Especially since hee labours for
it so much in two whole Chapters. But now all the arguments which he
himselfe urges in this subject,[1] are very weake and farre enough from
having in them any convincing power. Therefore 'tis likely that a
plurality of worlds doth not contradict any principle of reason.
However, I will set downe the two chiefe of his arguments from his owne
workes, and from them you may guesse the force of the other. The 1. is
this,[2] since every heavy body doth naturally tend downwards, and every
light body upwards, what a hudling and confusion must there bee if there
were two places for gravity and two places for lightnesse: for it is
probable that the Earth of that other World would fall downe to this
Center, and so mutually the aire and fire here ascend to those Regions
in the other, which must needes much derogate from the providence of
nature, and cause a great disorder in his workes. To this I answere,
that if you will consider the nature of gravity, you will plainely see
there is no ground to feare any such confusion, for heavinesse is
nothing else but such a quality as causes a propension in 'its subject
to tend downewards towards its owne Centre, so that for some of that
earth to come hither would not bee said a fall but an ascension, since
it moved from its owne place, and this would bee impossible (saith
_Ruvio_) because against nature,[3] and therefore no more to bee feared
than the falling of the Heavens.

  [Sidenote 1: _De Coelo_ l. 1. c. 8. 9.]

  [Sidenote 2: _Ibid._]

  [Sidenote 3: _De Coelo_ l. 1. c. 9. q. 1.]

Another Argument hee had from his master _Plato_,[1] that there is but
one World, because there is but one first mover, God.[2]

  [Sidenote 1: _Metaphys._ l. 12. c. 8.]

  [Sidenote 2: _Diog. Laert. lib._ 3.]

But here I may deny the consequence, since a plurality of worlds doth
not take away the unity of the first mover.

  _Vt enim forma substantialis, sic primum efficiens apparentem
  solummodo multiplicitatem induit per signatam materiam_

(saith a Countreyman of ours.)[1] As the substantiall forme, so the
efficient cause hath onely an appearing multiplicity from its particular
matter. You may see this point more largely handled, and these Arguments
more fully answered by _Plutarch_ in his Booke (why Oracles are silent)
and _Iacob Carpentarius_ in his comment on _Alcinous_.

  [Sidenote 1: _Nic. Hill. de Philosop. Epic. partic. 379._]

But our opposites the Interpreters themselves, (who too often doe
_jurare in verba magistri_) will grant that there is not any strength in
these consequences, and certainely their such weake arguments could not
convince that wise Philosopher, who in his other opinions was wont to
bee swayed by the strength and power of reason: wherefore I should
rather thinke that he had some by-respect, which made him first assent
to this opinion, and afterwards strive to prove it. Perhaps it was
because hee feared to displease his scholler _Alexander_, of whom 'tis
related[1] that he wept to heare a disputation of another world, since
he had not then attained the Monarchy of this, his restlesse wide heart
would have esteemed this Globe of Earth not big enough for him, if there
had beene another, which made the Satyrist say of him,

  _AEstuat infoelix angusto limite mundi._[2]

  "That he did vexe himselfe and sweate in his desires, as being pend
  up in a narrow roome, when hee was confin'd but to one world."

Before he thought to seate himselfe next the Gods, but now when hee had
done his best, hee must be content with some equall, or perhaps
superiour Kings.

  [Sidenote 1: _Plutarch. de tranq. anim._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Iuvenal._]

It may be, that _Aristotle_ was moved to this opinion, that hee might
thereby take from _Alexander_ the occasion of this feare and discontent,
or else, perhaps, _Aristotle_ himselfe was as loth to hold the
possibility of a world which he could not discover, as _Alexander_ was
to heare of one which he could not conquer. Tis likely that some such
by-respect moved him to this opinion, since the arguments he urges for
it are confest by his zealous followers and commentators, to be very
sleight and frivolous, and they themselves grant, what I am now to
prove, that there is not any evidence in the light of naturall reason,
which can sufficiently manifest that there is but one world.

But however some may object, would it not be inconvenient and dangerous
to admit of such opinions that doe destroy those principles of
_Aristotle_, which all the world hath so long followed?

This question is much controverted by the _Romish_ Divines; _Campanella_
hath writ a Treatise[1] in defence of it, in whom you may see many
things worth the reading and notice.

  [Sidenote 1: _Apologia pro Galilaeo._]

To it I answer, that this position in Philosophy, doth not bring any
inconvenience to the rest, since tis not _Aristotle_, but truth that
should be the rule of our opinions, and if they be not both found
together, wee may say to him, as hee said to his Master _Plato_,

  +amphoin gar ontoin philoin, hosion protiman ten aletheian+.[1]

  "Though _Plato_ were his friend, yet hee would rather adhere to
  truth than him."

  [Sidenote 1: _Ethic. l. 1. c. 6._]

I must needs grant, that wee are all much beholden to the industry of
the ancient Philosophers, and more especially to _Aristotle_, for the
greater part of our learning, but yet tis not ingratitude to speake
against him, when hee opposeth truth; for then many of the Fathers would
be very guilty, especially _Iustin_, who hath writ a Treatise purposely
against him.

But suppose this opinion were false, yet 'tis not against the faith, and
so it may serve for the better confirmation of that which is true; the
sparkes of errour, being forc'd out by opposition, as the sparkes of
fire, by the striking of the flint and steele. But suppose too that it
were hereticall, and against the faith, yet may it be admitted with the
same priviledge as _Aristotle_, from whom many more dangerous opinions
have proceeded: as that the world is eternall, that God cannot have
while to looke after these inferiour things, that after death there is
no reward or punishment, and such like blasphemies, which strike
directly at the fundamentalls of our Religion.

So that it is justly to be wondred why some should be so superstitious
in these daies, as to sticke closer unto him, than unto Scripture, as if
his Philosophy were the onely foundation of all divine truths.

Upon these grounds both St. _Uincentius_and _Senafinus_ _de firmo_ (as I
have seene them quoted) thinke that _Aristotle_ was the viol of Gods
wrath, which was powred out upon the waters of Wisedome by the third
Angel;[1] But for my part, I thinke the world is much beholden to
_Aristotle_ for all its sciences. But yet twere a shame for these later
ages to rest our selves meerely upon the labours of our Fore-fathers, as
if they had informed us of all things to be knowne, and when wee are set
upon their shoulders, not to see further then they themselves did.
'Twere a superstitious, a lazie opinion to thinke _Aristotles_ workes
the bounds and limits of all humane invention, beyond which there could
be no possibility of reaching. Certainly there are yet many things left
to discovery, and it cannot be any inconvenience for us, to maintaine a
new truth, or rectifie an ancient errour.

  [Sidenote 1: Rev. 16. 4.]

But the position (say some) is directly against Scripture, for

1. _Moses_ tells us but of one world, and his History of the creation
had beene very imperfect if God had made another.

2. Saint _John_ speaking of Gods workes, saies he made the world, in the
singular number, and therefore there is but one:[1] 'tis the argument of
_Aquinas_, and he thinks that none will oppose it, but such who with
_Democritus_ esteeme some blinde chance, and not any wise providence to
be the framer of all things.

  [Sidenote 1: Part 1. Q. 47. Art. 3.]

3. The opinion of more worlds has in ancient time beene accounted a
heresie, and _Baronius_ affirmes that for this very reason, _Virgilius_
was cast out of his Bishopricke, and excommunicated from the Church.[1]

  [Sidenote 1: _Annal. Eccl. A.D. 748._]

4. A fourth argument there is urged by _Aquinas_, if there be more
worlds than one, then they must either be of the same, or of a diverse
nature, but they are not of the same kinde,[1] for this were needlesse,
and would argue an improvidence, since one would have no more perfection
than the other; not of divers kinds, for then one of them could not be
called the world or universe, since it did not containe universall
perfection, I have cited this argument, because it is so much stood upon
by _Iulius Caesar la Galla_,[2] one that has purposely writ a Treatise
against this opinion which I now deliver, but the Dilemma is so blunt,
that it cannot cut on either side, and the consequences so weake, that I
dare trust them without an answer; And (by the way) you may see this
Author in that place, where he endeavours to prove a necessity of one
world, doth leave the chiefe matter in hand, and take much needlesse
paines to dispute against _Democritus_, who thought that the world was
made by the casuall concourse of _atoms_ in a great _vacuum_. It should
seeme, that either his cause, or his skill was weake, or else he would
have ventured upon a stronger adversary. These arguments which I have
set downe, are the chiefest which I have met with against this subject,
and yet the best of these hath not force enough to endanger the truth
that I have delivered.

  [Sidenote 1: _Ibid._]

  [Sidenote 2: _De Phaenom. in orbe lunae._]

Unto the two first it may be answered, that the negative authority of
Scripture is not prevalent in those things which are not the
fundamentalls of Religion.

But you'le reply, though it doe not necessarily conclude, yet 'tis
probable if there had beene another world, wee should have had some
notice of it in Scripture.

I answer, 'tis as probable that the Scripture should have informed us of
the Planets they being very remarkable parts of the Creation, and yet
neither _Moses_ nor _Job_, nor the _Psalmes_ (the places most frequent
in Astronomicall observations) mention any of them but the Sunne and
Moone, and moreover, you must know, that 'tis besides the scope of the
Holy Ghost either in the new Testament or in the old, to reveale any
thing unto us concerning the secrets of Philosophy; 'tis not his intent
in the new Testament, since we cannot conceive how it might any way
belong either to the Historicall exegeticall or propheticall parts of
it: nor is it his intent in the old Testament, as is well observed by
our Countrey-man Master WRIGHT.[1]

  _Non Mosis aut Prophetarum institutum fuisse videtur Mathematicas
  aliquas aut Physicas subtilitates promulgare, sed ad vulgi captum
  & loquendi morem quemadmodum nutrices infantulis solent sese
  accommodare._

  "'Tis not the endeavour of _Moses_ or the Prophets to discover any
  Mathematicall or Philosophicall subtilties, but rather to accomodate
  themselves to vulgar capacities, and ordinary speech, as nurses are
  wont to use their infants."

True indeede, _Moses_ is there to handle the history of the Creation,
but 'tis observed that he does not any where meddle with such matters as
were very hard to be apprehended, for being to informe the common people
as well as others, he does it after a vulgar way, as it is commonly
noted, declaring the originall chiefely of those things which were
obvious to the sense, and being silent of other things, which then could
not well be apprehended. And therefore _Aquinas_ observes,[2] that
_Moses_ writes nothing of the aire, because that being invisible, the
people knew not whether there were any such body or no. And for this
very reason Saint _Austin_ also thinkes that there is nothing exprest
concerning the creation of Angels which notwithstanding are as
remarkable parts of the creatures, and as fit to be knowne as another
world. And therefore the Holy Ghost too uses such vulgar expressions
which set things forth rather as they appeare, then as they are,[3] as
when he calls the Moone one of the greater lights #hame'orot hagdolim#
whereas 'tis the least, but one that wee can see in the whole heavens.
So afterwards speaking of the great raine which drowned the world,[4]
he saies, the windowes of heaven were opened, because it seemed to
come with that violence, as if it were, poured out from windows in the
Firmament.[5] So that the phrases which the Holy Ghost uses concerning
these things are not to be understood in a literall sense; but rather
as vulgar expressions, and this rule is set downe by Saint _Austin_,
where speaking concerning that in the Psalme, _who stretched the earth
upon the waters_,[6] hee notes, that when the words of Scripture shall
seeme to contradict common sense or experience, there are they to be
understood in a qualified sense, and not according to the letter. And
'tis observed that for want of this rule, some of the ancients have
fastened strange absurdities upon the words of the Scripture. So Saint
_Ambrose_ esteemed it a heresie, to thinke, that the Sunne and starres
were not very hot, as being against the words of Scripture,[7] _Psalm._
19. 6. where the _Psalmist_ sayes that there is nothing that is hid from
the heate of the Sunne. So others there are that would prove the heavens
not to be round, out of that place, _Psal._ 104. 2. _Hee stretcheth out
the heavens like a curtaine._[8] So _Procopius_ also was of opinion,
that the earth was founded upon the waters, nay, he made it part of his
faith, proving it out of _Psal._ 24. 2. _Hee hath founded the earth
upon the seas, and established it upon the flouds._ These and such like
absurdities have followed, when men looke for the grounds of Philosophie
in the words of Scripture. So that from what hath beene said, I may
conclude that the silence of Scripture concerning any other world is
not sufficient argument to prove that there is none. Thus for the two
first arguments.

  [Sidenote 1: _In Epist. ad Gilbert._]

  [Sidenote 2: Part 1. Q. 68. Art. 3.]

  [Sidenote 3: Gen. 1. 16]

  [Sidenote 4: Gen. 11.]

  [Sidenote 5: Sr. _W. Rawly_ c. 7. Sec.. 6.]

  [Sidenote 6: l. 2. in Gen. / Psal. 136. 6.]

  [Sidenote 7: Wisd. 2. 4. 17. 5. / Ecclus. 43. 3. 4.]

  [Sidenote 8: _Com. in c. 1. Gen._]

Unto the third, I may answer, that this very example is quoted by
others, to shew the ignorance of those primative times, who did
sometimes condemne what they did not understand, and have often censur'd
the lawfull & undoubted parts of Mathematiques for hereticall, because
they themselves could not perceive a reason of it, and therefore their
practise in this particular, is no sufficient testimony against us.

But lastly I answer to all the above named objections, that the terme
World, may be taken in a double sense, more generally for the whole
Universe, as it implies in it the elementary and aethereall bodies, the
starres and the earth. Secondly, more particularly for an inferiour
World consisting of elements. Now the maine drift of all these
arguments, is to confute a plurality of worlds in the first sense, and
if there were any such, it might, perhaps, seeme strange, that _Moses_,
or St. _John_ should either not know, or not mention its creation. And
_Virgilius_ was condemned for this opinion, because he held, _quod sit
alius mundus sub terra, aliusque Sol & Luna_, (as _Baronius_) that
within our globe of earth, there was another world, another Sunne and
Moone, and so he might seeme to exclude this from the number of the
other creatures.

But now there is no such danger in this opinion, which is here
delivered, since this world said to be in the Moone, whose creation is
particularly exprest.

So that in the first sense I yeeld, that there is but one world, which
is all that the arguments do prove, but understand it in the second
sense, and so I affirme there may be more nor doe any of the above named
objections prove the cotrary.

Neither can this opinion derogate from the divine Wisdome (as _Aquinas_
thinkes) but rather advance it, shewing a _compendium_ of providence,
that could make the same body a world, and a Moone; a world for
habitation, and a Moone for the use of others, and the ornament of the
whole frame of Nature. For as the members of the body serve not onely
for the preservation of themselves, but for the use and conveniency of
the whole, as the hand protects the head as well as saves it selfe,[1]
so is it in the parts of the Universe, where each one may serve, as well
for the conservation of that which is within it, as the helpe of others
without it.

