stars situated near the one in question will also send beams of light
along slightly different directions to the lens, and these will be
concentrated, each in its appropriate place, in the _focal plane_,
_F H_, passed through the focus, _F_, perpendicular to the line, _F G_,
and we shall find in this plane a picture of all the stars or other
objects within the range of the lens.

[Illustration: FIG. 39.--Essential parts of a reflecting telescope.]

78. TELESCOPES.--The simplest kind of telescope consists of a concave
mirror to produce images, and a magnifying glass, called an _eyepiece_,
through which to examine them; but for convenience' sake, so that the
observer may not stand in his own light, a small mirror is frequently
added to this combination, as at _H_ in Fig. 39, where the lines
represent the directions along which the energy is propagated. By
reflection from this mirror the focal plane and the images are shifted
to _F_, where they may be examined from one side through the magnifying
glass _E_.

[Illustration: FIG. 40.--A simple form of refracting telescope.]

Such a combination of parts is called a _reflecting_ telescope, while
one in which the images are produced by a lens or combination of lenses
is called a _refracting_ telescope, the adjective having reference to
the bending, refraction, produced by the glass upon the direction in
which the energy is propagated. The customary arrangement of parts in
such a telescope is shown in Fig. 40, where the part marked _O_ is
called the objective and _V E_ (the magnifying glass) is the eyepiece,
or ocular, as it is sometimes called.

Most objects with which we have to deal in using a telescope send to it
not light of one color only, but a mixture of light of many colors,
many different wave lengths, some of which are refracted more than
others by the glass of which the lens is composed, and in consequence of
these different amounts of refraction a single lens does not furnish a
single image of a star, but gives a confused jumble of red and yellow
and blue images much inferior in sharpness of outline (definition) to
the images made by a good concave mirror. To remedy this defect it is
customary to make the objective of two or more pieces of glass of
different densities and ground to different shapes as is shown at _O_ in
Fig. 40. The two pieces of glass thus mounted in one frame constitute a
compound lens having its own focal plane, shown at _F_ in the figure,
and similarly the lenses composing the eyepiece have a focal plane
between the eyepiece and the objective which must also fall at _F_, and
in the use of a telescope the eyepiece must be pushed out or in until
its focal plane coincides with that of the objective. This process,
which is called focusing, is what is accomplished in the ordinary opera
glass by turning a screw placed between the two tubes, and it must be
carefully done with every telescope in order to obtain distinct vision.

79. MAGNIFYING POWER.--The amount by which a given telescope magnifies
depends upon the focal length of the objective (or mirror) and the focal
length of the eyepiece, and is equal to the ratio of these two
quantities. Thus in Fig. 40 the distance of the objective from the focal
plane _F_ is about 16 times as great as the distance of the eyepiece
from the same plane, and the magnifying power of this telescope is
therefore 16 diameters. A magnifying power of 16 diameters means that
the diameter of any object seen in the telescope looks 16 times as large
as it appears without the telescope, and is nearly equivalent to saying
that the object appears only one sixteenth as far off. Sometimes the
magnifying power is assumed to be the number of times that the _area_ of
an object seems increased; and since areas are proportional to the
squares of lines, the magnifying power of 16 diameters might be called
a power of 256. Every large telescope is provided with several eyepieces
of different focal lengths, ranging from a quarter of an inch to two and
a half inches, which are used to furnish different magnifying powers as
may be required for the different kinds of work undertaken with the
instrument. Higher powers can be used with large telescopes than with
small ones, but it is seldom advantageous to use with any telescope an
eyepiece giving a higher power than 60 diameters for each inch of
diameter of the objective.

The part played by the eyepiece in determining magnifying power will be
readily understood from the following experiment:

Make a pin hole in a piece of cardboard. Bring a printed page so close
to one eye that you can no longer see the letters distinctly, and then
place the pin hole between the eye and the page. The letters which were
before blurred may now be seen plainly through the pin hole, even when
the page is brought nearer to the eye than before. As it is brought
nearer, notice how the letters seem to become larger, solely because
they are nearer. A pin hole is the simplest kind of a magnifier, and the
eyepiece in a telescope plays the same part as does the pin hole in the
experiment; it enables the eye to be brought nearer to the image, and
the shorter the focal length of the eyepiece the nearer is the eye
brought to the image and the higher is the magnifying power.

80. THE EQUATORIAL MOUNTING.--Telescopes are of all sizes, from the
modest opera glass which may be carried in the pocket and which requires
no other support than the hand, to the giant which must have a special
roof to shelter it and elaborate machinery to support and direct it
toward the sky. But for even the largest telescopes this machinery
consists of the following parts, which are illustrated, with exception
of the last one, in the small equatorial telescope shown in Fig. 41. It
is not customary to place a driving clock on so small a telescope as
this:

(_a_) A supporting pier or tripod.

(_b_) An axis placed parallel to the axis of the earth.

(_c_) Another axis at right angles to _b_ and capable of revolving upon
_b_ as an axle.

(_d_) The telescope tube attached to _c_ and capable of revolving about
_c_.

(_e_) Graduated circles attached to _c_ and _b_ to measure the amount by
which the telescope is turned on these axes.

(_f_) A driving clock so connected with _b_ as to make _c_ (and _d_)
revolve about _b_ with an angular velocity equal and opposite to that
with which the earth turns upon its axis.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.--A simple equatorial mounting.]

[Illustration: FIG. 42.--Equatorial mounting of the great telescope of
the Yerkes Observatory.]

Such a support is called an equatorial mounting, and the student should
note from the figure that the circles, _e_, measure the hour angle and
declination of any star toward which the telescope is directed, and
conversely if the telescope be so set that these circles indicate the
hour angle and declination of any given star, the telescope will then
point toward that star. In this way it is easy to find with the
telescope any moderately bright star, even in broad daylight, although
it is then absolutely invisible to the naked eye. The rotation of the
earth about its axis will speedily carry the telescope away from the
star, but if the driving clock be started, its effect is to turn the
telescope toward the west just as fast as the earth's rotation carries
it toward the east, and by these compensating motions to keep it
directed toward the star. In Fig. 42, which represents the largest and
one of the most perfect refracting telescopes ever built, let the
student pick out and identify the several parts of the mounting above
described. A part of the driving clock may be seen within the head of
the pier. In Fig. 43 trace out the corresponding parts in the mounting
of a reflecting telescope.

[Illustration: FIG. 43.--The reflecting telescope of the Paris
Observatory.]

A telescope is often only a subordinate part of some instrument or
apparatus, and then its style of mounting is determined by the
requirements of the special case; but when the telescope is the chief
thing, and the remainder of the apparatus is subordinate to it, the
equatorial mounting is almost always adopted, although sometimes the
arrangement of the parts is very different in appearance from any of
those shown above. Beware of the popular error that an object held close
in front of a telescope can be seen by an observer at the eyepiece. The
numerous stories of astronomers who saw spiders crawling over the
objective of their telescope, and imagined they were beholding strange
objects in the sky, are all fictitious, since nothing on or near the
objective could possibly be seen through the telescope.

81. PHOTOGRAPHY.--A photographic camera consists of a lens and a device
for holding at its focus a specially prepared plate or film. This plate
carries a chemical deposit which is very sensitive to the action of
light, and which may be made to preserve the imprint of any picture
which the lens forms upon it. If such a sensitive plate is placed at the
focus of a reflecting telescope, the combination becomes a camera
available for astronomical photography, and at the present time the
tendency is strong in nearly every branch of astronomical research to
substitute the sensitive plate in place of the observer at a telescope.
A refracting telescope may also be used for astronomical photography,
and is very much used, but some complications occur here on account of
the resolution of the light into its constituent colors in passing
through the objective. Fig. 44 shows such a telescope, or rather two
telescopes, one photographic, the other visual, supported side by side
upon the same equatorial mounting.

[Illustration: FIG. 44.--Photographic telescope of the Paris
Observatory.]

One of the great advantages of photography is found in connection with
what is called--

82. PERSONAL EQUATION.--It is a remarkable fact, first investigated by
the German astronomer Bessel, three quarters of a century ago, that
where extreme accuracy is required the human senses can not be
implicitly relied upon. The most skillful observers will not agree
exactly in their measurement of an angle or in estimating the exact
instant at which a star crossed the meridian; the most skillful artists
can not draw identical pictures of the same object, etc.

These minor deceptions of the senses are included in the term _personal
equation_, which is a famous phrase in astronomy, denoting that the
observations of any given person require to be corrected by means of
some equation involving his personality.

General health, digestion, nerves, fatigue, all influence the personal
equation, and it was in reference to such matters that one of the most
eminent of living astronomers has given this description of his habits
of observing:

"In order to avoid every physiological disturbance, I have adopted the
rule to abstain for one or two hours before commencing observations from
every laborious occupation; never to go to the telescope with stomach
loaded with food; to abstain from everything which could affect the
nervous system, from narcotics and alcohol, and especially from the
abuse of coffee, which I have found to be exceedingly prejudicial to the
accuracy of observation."[3] A regimen suggestive of preparation for an
athletic contest rather than for the more quiet labors of an astronomer.

  [3] Schiaparelli, Osservazioni sulle Stelle Doppie.

83. VISUAL AND PHOTOGRAPHIC WORK.--The photographic plate has no stomach
and no nerves, and is thus free from many of the sources of error which
inhere in visual observations, and in special classes of work it
possesses other marked advantages, such as rapidity when many stars are
to be dealt with simultaneously, permanence of record, and owing to the
cumulative effect of long exposure of the plate it is possible to
photograph with a given telescope stars far too faint to be seen through
it. On the other hand, the eye has the advantage in some respects, such
as studying the minute details of a fairly bright object--e. g., the
surface of a planet, or the sun's corona and, for the present at least,
neither method of observing can exclude the other. For a remarkable case
of discordance between the results of photographic and visual
observations compare the pictures of the great nebula in the
constellation Andromeda, which are given in Chapter XIV. A partial
explanation of these discordances and other similar ones is that the eye
is most strongly affected by greenish-yellow light, while the
photographic plate responds most strongly to violet light; the
photograph, therefore, represents things which the eye has little
capacity for seeing, and _vice versa_.

84. THE SPECTROSCOPE.--In some respects the spectroscope is the exact
counterpart of the telescope. The latter condenses radiant energy and
the former disperses it. As a measuring instrument the telescope is
mainly concerned with the direction from which light comes, and the
different colors of which that light is composed affect it only as an
obstacle to be overcome in its construction. On the other hand, with the
spectroscope the direction from which the radiant energy comes is of
minor consequence, and the all-important consideration is the intrinsic
character of that radiation. What colors are present in the light and in
what proportions? What can these colors be made to tell about the nature
and condition of the body from which they come, be it sun, or star, or
some terrestrial source of light, such as an arc lamp, a candle flame,
or a furnace in blast? These are some of the characteristic questions of
the spectrum analysis, and, as the name implies, they are solved by
analyzing the radiant energy into its component parts, setting down the
blue light in one place, the yellow in another, the red in still
another, etc., and interpreting this array of colors by means of
principles which we shall have to consider. Something of this process of
color analysis may be seen in the brilliant hues shown by a soap bubble,
or reflected from a piece of mother-of-pearl, and still more strikingly
exhibited in the rainbow, produced by raindrops which break up the
sunlight into its component colors and arrange them each in its
appropriate place. Any of these natural methods of decomposing light
might be employed in the construction of a spectroscope, but in
spectroscopes which are used for analyzing the light from feeble
sources, such as a star, or a candle flame, a glass prism of triangular
cross section is usually employed to resolve the light into its
component colors, which it does by refracting it as shown at the edges
of the lens in Fig. 38.

[Illustration: FIG. 45.--Resolution of light into its component colors.]

The course of a beam of light in passing through such a prism is shown
in Fig. 45. Note that the bending of the light from its original course
into a new one, which is here shown as produced by the prism, is quite
similar to the bending shown at the edges of a lens and comes from the
same cause, the slower velocity of light in glass than in air. It takes
the light-waves as long to move over the path _A B_ in glass as over the
longer path _1_, _2_, _3_, _4_, of which only the middle section lies in
the glass.

Not only does the prism bend the beam of light transmitted by it, but it
bends in different degree light of different colors, as is shown in the
figure, where the beam at the left of the prism is supposed to be made
up of a mixture of blue and red light, while at the right of the prism
the greater deviation imparted to the blue quite separates the colors,
so that they fall at different places on the screen, _S S_. The compound
light has been analyzed into its constituents, and in the same way every
other color would be put down at its appropriate place on the screen,
and a beam of white light falling upon the prism would be resolved by it
into a sequence of colors, falling upon the screen in the order red,
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. The initial letters of
these names make the word _Roygbiv_, and by means of it their order is
easily remembered.

[Illustration: FIG. 46.--Principal parts of a spectroscope.]

If the light which is to be examined comes from a star the analysis made
by the prism is complete, and when viewed through a telescope the image
of the star is seen to be drawn out into a band of light, which is
called a _spectrum_, and is red at one end and violet or blue at the
other, with all the colors of the rainbow intervening in proper order
between these extremes. Such a prism placed in front of the objective of
a telescope is called an objective prism, and has been used for stellar
work with marked success at the Harvard College Observatory. But if the
light to be analyzed comes from an object having an appreciable extent
of surface, such as the sun or a planet, the objective prism can not be
successfully employed, since each point of the surface will produce its
own spectrum, and these will appear in the _view telescope_ superposed
and confused one with another in a very objectionable manner. To avoid
this difficulty there is placed between the prism and the source of
light an opaque screen, _S_, with a very narrow slit cut in it, through
which all the light to be analyzed must pass and must also go through a
lens, _A_, placed between the slit and the prism, as shown in Fig. 46.
The slit and lens, together with the tube in which they are usually
supported, are called a _collimator_. By this device a very limited
amount of light is permitted to pass from the object through the slit
and lens to the prism and is there resolved into a spectrum, which is in
effect a series of images of the slit in light of different colors,
placed side by side so close as to make practically a continuous ribbon
of light whose width is the length of each individual picture of the
slit. The length of the ribbon (dispersion) depends mainly upon the
shape of the prism and the kind of glass of which it is made, and it may
be very greatly increased and the efficiency of the spectroscope
enhanced by putting two, three, or more prisms in place of the single
one above described. When the amount of light is very great, as in the
case of the sun or an electric arc lamp, it is advantageous to alter
slightly the arrangement of the spectroscope and to substitute in place
of the prism a grating--i. e., a metallic mirror with a great number of
fine parallel lines ruled upon its surface at equal intervals, one from
another. It is by virtue of such a system of fine parallel grooves that
mother-of-pearl displays its beautiful color effects, and a brilliant
spectrum of great purity and high dispersion is furnished by a grating
ruled with from 10,000 to 20,000 lines to the inch. Fig. 47 represents,
rather crudely, a part of the spectrum of an arc light furnished by such
a grating, or rather it shows three different spectra arranged side by
side, and looking something like a rude ladder. The sides of the ladder
are the spectra furnished by the incandescent carbons of the lamp, and
the cross pieces are the spectrum of the electric arc filling the space
between the carbons. Fig. 48 shows a continuation of the same spectra
into a region where the radiant energy is invisible to the eye, but is
capable of being photographed.

[Illustration: FIG. 47.--Green and blue part of the spectrum of an
electric arc light.]

It is only when a lens is placed between the lamp and the slit of the
spectroscope that the three spectra are shown distinct from each other
as in the figure. The purpose of the lens is to make a picture of the
lamp upon the slit, so that all the radiant energy from any one point of
the arc may be brought to one part of the slit, and thus appear in the
resulting spectrum separated from the energy which comes from every
other part of the arc. Such an instrument is called an _analyzing
spectroscope_ while one without the lens is called an _integrating
spectroscope_, since it furnishes to each point of the slit a sample of
the radiant energy coming from every part of the source of light, and
thus produces only an average spectrum of that source without
distinction of its parts. When a spectroscope is attached to a
telescope, as is often done (see Fig. 49), the eyepiece is removed to
make way for it, and the telescope objective takes the part of the
analyzing lens. A camera is frequently combined with such an apparatus
to photograph the spectra it furnishes, and the whole instrument is then
called a _spectrograph_.

[Illustration: FIG. 48.--Violet and ultraviolet parts of spectrum of an
arc lamp.]

[Illustration: FIG. 49.--A spectroscope attached to the Yerkes
telescope.]

85. SPECTRUM ANALYSIS.--Having seen the mechanism of the spectroscope by
which the light incident upon it is resolved into its constituent parts
and drawn out into a series of colors arranged in the order of their
wave lengths, we have now to consider the interpretation which is to be
placed upon the various kinds of spectra which may be seen, and here we
rely upon the experience of physicists and chemists, from whom we learn
as follows:

The radiant energy which is analyzed by the spectroscope has its source
in the atoms and molecules which make up the luminous body from which
the energy is radiated, and these atoms and molecules are able to
impress upon the ether their own peculiarities in the shape of waves of
different length and amplitude. We have seen that by varying the
conditions of the experiment different kinds of waves may be produced in
a bucket of water; and as a study of these waves might furnish an index
to the conditions which produced them, so the study of the waves
peculiar to the light which comes from any source may be made to give
information about the molecules which make up that source. Thus the
molecules of iron produce a system of waves peculiar to themselves and
which can be duplicated by nothing else, and every other substance gives
off its own peculiar type of energy, presenting a limited and definite
number of wave lengths dependent upon the nature and condition of its
molecules. If these molecules are free to behave in their own
characteristic fashion without disturbance or crowding, they emit light
of these wave lengths only, and we find in the spectrum a series of
bright lines, pictures of the slit produced by light of these particular
wave lengths, while between these bright lines lie dark spaces showing
the absence from the radiant energy of light of intermediate wave
lengths. Such a spectrum is shown in the central portion of Fig. 47,
which, as we have already seen, is produced by the space between the
carbons of the arc lamp. On the other hand, if the molecules are closely
packed together under pressure they so interfere with each other as to
give off a jumble of energy of all wave lengths, and this is translated
by the spectroscope into a continuous ribbon of light with no dark
spaces intervening, as in the upper and lower parts of Figs. 47 and 48,
produced by the incandescent solid carbons of the lamp. These two types
are known as the continuous and discontinuous spectrum, and we may lay
down the following principle regarding them:

A discontinuous spectrum, or bright-line spectrum as it is familiarly
called, indicates that the molecules of the source of light are not
crowded together, and therefore the light must come from an incandescent
