remember that the aberrations of Indian religion are due not to its
inherent depravity, but to its universality. In Europe those who
follow disreputable occupations rarely suppose that they have anything
to do with the Church. In India, robbers, murderers, gamblers,
prostitutes, and maniacs all have their appropriate gods, and had the
Marquis de Sade been a Hindu he would probably have founded a new
tantric sect. But though the details of Saktism are an unprofitable
study, it is of some importance to ascertain when it first invaded
Buddhism and to what extent it superseded older ideas.

Some critics[304] seem to imply--for their statements are not very
explicit--that Saktism formed part if not of the teaching of the
Buddha, at least of the medley of beliefs held by his disciples. But I
see no proof that Saktist beliefs--that is to say erotic mysticism
founded on the worship of goddesses--were prevalent in Magadha or
Kosala before the Christian era. Although Siri, the goddess of luck,
is mentioned in the Pitakas, the popular deities whom they bring on
the scene are almost exclusively masculine.[305] And though in the
older Brahmanic books there are passages which might easily become
tantric, yet the transition is not made and the important truths of
religion are kept distinct from unclean rites and thoughts. The
Brihad-aranyaka contains a chapter which hardly admits of
translation but the object of the practices inculcated is simply to
ensure the birth of a son. The same work (not without analogies in the
ecstatic utterances of Christian saints) boldly compares union with
the Atman to the bliss of one who is embraced by a beloved wife, but
this is a mere illustration and there is no hint of the doctrine that
the goal of the religious life is obtainable by _maithuna_. Still such
passages, though innocent in themselves, make it easy to see how
degrading superstitions found an easy entrance into the noblest
edifices of Indian thought and possibly some heresies condemned in the
Kathavatthu[306] indicate that even at this early date the Buddhist
Church was contaminated by erotic fancies. But, if so, there is no
evidence that such malpractices were widespread. The appendices to the
Lotus[307] show that the worship of a many-named goddess, invoked as a
defender of the faith, was beginning to be a recognized feature of
Buddhism. But they contain no indications of left-handed Tantrism and
the best proof that it did not become prevalent until much later is
afforded by the narratives of the three Chinese pilgrims who all
describe the condition of religion in India and notice anything which
they thought singular or reprehensible. Fa-Hsien does not mention the
worship of any female deity,[308] nor does the Life of Vasubandhu, but
Asanga appears to allude to Saktism in one passage.[309] Hsuean Chuang
mentions images of Tara but without hinting at tantric ritual, nor
does I-Ching allude to it, nor does the evidence of art and
inscriptions attest its existence. It may have been known as a form of
popular superstition and even have been practised by individual
Bhikshus, but the silence of I-Ching makes it improbable that it was
then countenanced in the schools of Magadha. He complains[310] of
those who neglect the Vinaya and "devote their whole attention to the
doctrine of nothingness," but he says not a word about tantric
abuses.[311]

The change probably occurred in the next half century[312] for
Padma-Sambhava, the founder of Lamaism who is said to have resided in
Gaya and Nalanda and to have arrived in Tibet in 747 A.D., is
represented by tradition as a tantric wizard, and about the same time
translations of Tantras begin to appear in Chinese. The translations
of the sixth and seventh centuries, including those of I-Ching,
comprise a considerable though not preponderant number of Dharanis.
After the seventh century these became very numerous and several
Tantras were also translated.[313] The inference seems to be that
early in the eighth century Indian Buddhists officially recognized
Tantrism.

Tantric Buddhism was due to the mixture of Mahayanist teaching with
aboriginal superstitions absorbed through the medium of Hinduism,
though in some cases there may have been direct contact and mutual
influence between Mahayanism and aboriginal beliefs. But as a rule
what happened was that aboriginal deities were identified with Hindu
deities and Buddhism had not sufficient independence to keep its own
pantheon distinct, so that Vairocana and Tara received most of the
attributes, brahmanic or barbarous, given to Siva or Kali. The worship
of the goddesses, described in their Hinduized form as Durga, Kali,
etc., though found in most parts of India was specially prevalent in
the sub-himalayan districts both east and west. Now Padma-Sambhava was
a native of Udyana or Swat and Taranatha represents the chief
Tantrists[314] as coming from there or visiting it. Hsuean Chuang[315]
tells us that the inhabitants were devout Mahayanists but specially
expert in magic and exorcism. He also describes no less than four
sacred places in it where the Buddha in previous births gave his
flesh, blood or bones for the good of others. Have we here in a
Buddhist form some ancient legend of dismemberment like that told of
Sati in Assam? Of Kashmir he says that its religion was a mixture of
Buddhism with other beliefs.[316] These are precisely the conditions
most favourable to the growth of Tantrism and though the bulk of the
population are now Mohammedans, witchcraft and sorcery are still
rampant. Among the Hindu Kashmiris[317] the most prevalent religion
has always been the worship of Siva, especially in the form
representing him as half male, half female. This cult is not far from
Saktism and many allusions[318] in the Rajatarangini indicate that
left-hand worship was known, though the author satirizes it as a
corruption. He also several times mentions[319] Matri-cakras, that is
circles sacred to the Mothers or tantric goddesses. In Nepal and Tibet
tantric Buddhism is fully developed but these countries have received
so much from India that they exhibit not a parallel growth, but late
Indian Tantrism as imported ready-made from Bengal. It is here that we
come nearest to the origins of Tantrism, for though the same beliefs
may have flourished in Udyana and Kashmir they did not spread much in
the Panjab or Hindustan, where their progress was hindered at first by
a healthy and vigorous Hinduism and subsequently by Mohammedan
invasions. But from 700 to 1197 A.D. Bengal was remote alike from the
main currents of Indian religion and from foreign raids: little Aryan
thought or learning leavened the local superstitions which were
infecting and stifling decadent Buddhism. Hsuean Chuang informs us that
Bhaskaravarma king of Kamarupa[320] attended the fetes celebrated by
Harsha in 644 A.D. and inscriptions found at Tezpur indicate that
kings with Hindu names reigned in Assam about 800 A.D. This is
agreeable to the supposition that an amalgamation of Sivaism and
aboriginal religion may have been in formation about 700 A.D. and have
influenced Buddhism.

In Bihar from the eighth century onwards the influence of Tantrism was
powerful and disastrous. The best information about this epoch is
still to be found in Taranatha, in spite of his defects.

He makes the interesting statement that in the reign of Gopala who was
a Buddhist, although his ministers were not (730-740 A.D.), the
Buddhists wished their religious buildings to be kept separate from
Hindu temples but that, in spite of protests, life-sized images of
Hindu deities were erected in them.[321] The ritual too was affected,
for we hear several times of burnt offerings[322] and how Bodhibhadra,
one of the later professors of Vikramasila, was learned in the mystic
lore of both Buddhists and Brahmans. Nalanda and the other viharas
continued to be seats of learning and not merely monasteries, and for
some time there was a regular succession of teachers. Taranatha gives
us to understand that there were many students and authors but that
sorcery occupied an increasingly important position. Of most teachers
we are told that they saw some deity, such as Avalokita or Tara. The
deity was summoned by the rites already described[323] and the object
of the performer was to obtain magical powers or siddhi. The
successful sorcerer was known as siddha, and we hear of 84
mahasiddhas, still celebrated in Tibet, who extend from Rahulabhadra
Nagarjuna to the thirteenth century. Many of them bear names which
appear not to be Indian.

The topics treated of in the Tantras are divided into Kriya (ritual),
Carya (apparently corresponding to Vinaya), Yoga, and Anuttara-yoga.
Sometimes the first three are contrasted with the fourth and sometimes
the first two are described as lower, the third and fourth as higher.
But the Anuttara-yoga is always considered the highest and most
mysterious.[324] Taranatha says[325] that the Tantras began to appear
simultaneously with the Mahayana sutras but adds that the
Anuttara-yoga tantras appeared gradually.[326] He also observes that
the Acarya Ananda-garbha[327] did much to spread them in Magadha. It
is not until a late period of the Pala dynasty that he mentions the
Kalacakra which is the most extravagant form of Buddhist Tantrism.

This accords with other statements to the effect that the Kalacakra
tantra was introduced in 965 A.D. from Sambhala, a mysterious country
in Central Asia. This system is said to be Vishnuite rather than
Sivaite. It specially patronizes the cult of the mystic Buddhas such
as Kalacakra and Heruka, all of whom appear to be regarded as forms of
Adi-Buddha or the primordial Buddha essence. The Siddha named Pito is
also described as the author of this doctrine,[328] which had less
importance in India than in Tibet.

On the other hand Taranatha gives us the names of several doctors of
the Vinaya who flourished under the Pala dynasty. Even as late as the
reign of Ramapala (? 1080-1120) we hear that the Hinayanists were
numerous. In the reign of Dharmapala (_c_. 800 A.D.) some of them
broke up the great silver image of Heruka at Bodh-Gaya and burnt the
books of Mantras.[329] These instances show that the older Buddhism
was not entirely overwhelmed by Tantrism[330] though perhaps it was
kept alive more by pilgrims than by local sentiment. Thus the Chinese
inscriptions of Bodh-Gaya though they speak at length of the three
bodies of Buddha show no signs of Tantrism. It would appear that the
worship celebrated in the holy places of Magadha preserved a
respectable side until the end. In the same way although Tantrism is
strong in the literature of the Lamas, none of the many descriptions
of Tibet indicate that there is anything scandalous in the externals
of religion. Probably in Tibet, Nepal and mediaeval Magadha alike the
existence of disgraceful tantric literature does not indicate such
widespread depravity as might be supposed. But of its putrefying
influence in corrupting the minds of those who ought to have preserved
the pure faith there can be no doubt. More than any other form of
mixed belief it obliterated essential differences, for Buddhist
Tantrism and Sivaite Tantrism are merely two varieties of Tantrism.

What is happening at Bodh-Gaya at present[331] illustrates how
Buddhism disappeared from India. The abbot of a neighbouring Sivaite
monastery who claims the temple and grounds does not wish, as a
Mohammedan might, to destroy the building or even to efface Buddhist
emblems. He wishes to supervise the whole establishment and the visits
of pilgrims, as well as to place on the images of Buddha Hindu
sectarian marks and other ornaments. Hindu pilgrims are still taken by
their guides to venerate the Bodhi tree and, but for the presence of
foreign pilgrims, no casual observer would suppose the spot to be
anything but a Hindu temple of unusual construction. The same process
went a step further in many shrines which had not the same celebrity
and effaced all traces and memory of Buddhism.

At the present day the Buddha is recognized by the Brahmans as an
incarnation of Vishnu,[332] though the recognition is often qualified
by the statement that Vishnu assumed this form in order to mislead the
wicked who threatened to become too powerful if they knew the true
method of attaining superhuman powers. But he is rarely worshipped _in
propria persona_.[333] As a rule Buddhist images and emblems are
ascribed to Vishnu or Siva, according to sectarian preferences, but
in spite of fusion some lingering sense of original animosity
prevents Gotama from receiving even such respect as is accorded to
incarnations like Parasu-rama. At Bodh-Gaya I have been told that
Hindu pilgrims are taken by their guides to venerate the Bodhi-tree
but not the images of Buddha.

Yet in reviewing the disappearance of Buddhism from India we must
remember that it was absorbed not expelled. The result of the mixture
is justly called Hinduism, yet both in usages and beliefs it has taken
over much that is Buddhist and without Buddhism it would never have
assumed its present shape. To Buddhist influence are due for instance
the rejection by most sects of animal sacrifices: the doctrine of the
sanctity of animal life: monastic institutions and the ecclesiastical
discipline found in the Dravidian regions. We may trace the same
influence with more or less certainty in the philosophy of Sankara
and outside the purely religious sphere in the development of Indian
logic. These and similar points are dealt with in more detail in other
parts of this work and I need not dwell on them here.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 264: Written before the war.]

[Footnote 265: Even at Kanauj, the scene of Harsha's pious
festivities, there were 100 Buddhist monasteries but 200 Deva
temples.]

[Footnote 266: Rice, _Mysore and Coorg from the Inscriptions_, p.
203.]

[Footnote 267: See the note by Buehler in _Journ. Pali Text Soc._ 1896,
p. 108.]

[Footnote 268: Rajatarangini, III. 12.]

[Footnote 269: See for the supposed persecution of Buddhism in India,
_J.P.T.S._ 1896, pp. 87-92 and 107-111 and _J.R.A.S._ 1898, pp.
208-9.]

[Footnote 270: As contained in the Sankara-dig-vijaya ascribed to
Madhava and the Sankara-vijaya ascribed to Anandagiri.]

[Footnote 271: Taranatha in his twenty-eighth and following chapters
gives an account, unfortunately very confused, of the condition of
Buddhism under the Pala dynasty. See also B.K. Sarkar, _Folklore
Element in Hindu Culture_, chap. XII, in which there are many
interesting statements but not sufficient references.]

[Footnote 272: See Vidyabhusana's _Mediaeval School of Indian Logic_,
p. 150, for an account of this monastery which was perhaps at the
modern Parthaghata. I have found no account of what happened to
Nalanda in this period but it seems to have disappeared as a seat of
learning.]

[Footnote 273: See Taranatha, chap. XXVIII.]

[Footnote 274: Chap. XXXVI. It is interesting to notice that even at
this late period he speaks of Hinayanists in Bengal.]

[Footnote 275: Often called Muhammad Bakhtyar but Bakhtyar seems to
have been really his father's name.]

[Footnote 276: Raverty, _Tabat-i-Nasiri_, p. 552. "It was discovered
that the whole of that fortress and city was a college and in the
Hindi tongue they call a college Bihar."]

[Footnote 277: Many of them have been collected by Pandit Haraprasad
Sastri in _Jour. As. Soc._ Bengal, 1895, pp. 55 ff. and in his
_Discovery of living Buddhism in Bengal_, Calcutta, 1897.]

[Footnote 278: Chap. XL _ad fin._ Is the Ramacandra whom he mentions
the last Yadava King (about 1314)? Taranatha speaks of his son.]

[Footnote 279: Caitanya-caritamrita, chap. VII, transl. by Jadunath
Sarkar, p. 85. This biography was written in 1582 by Krishnadas.
Caitanya died in 1533.]

[Footnote 280: _Census of India_, 1901: vol. VI. Bengal, pp. 427-430.]

[Footnote 281: _The Archaeological Survey of Mayurabhanj_ (no date?
1911), vol. I. pp. cv-cclxiii. The part containing an account of
Buddhism in Orissa is also printed separately with the title _Modern
Buddhism_, 1911.]

[Footnote 282: For Ramai Pandit see Dinesh Chandra Sen, _Hist. Bengali
Language and Lit._ pp. 30-37, and also B.K. Sarkar, _Folklore Element
in Hindu Culture_, p. 192, and elsewhere. He appears to have been born
at the end of the tenth century and though the Sunya Purana has been
re-edited and interpolated parts of it are said to be in very old
Bengali.]

[Footnote 283: Nagendranath Vasu quotes a couplet from the Mahabharata
of the poet Saraladasa: "I pay my humble respects to the incarnation
of Buddha who in the form of Buddha dwells in the Nilacala, _i.e._
Puri." The Imperial Gazetteer of India (s.v. Puri Town) states that in
modern representations of Vishnu's ten avataras, the ninth, or
Buddhavatara, is sometimes represented by Jagannatha.]

[Footnote 284: I give the dates or the authority of Narandra Nath
while thinking that they may be somewhat too early. The two authors
named wrote the Sunya Samhita and Nirguna Mahatmya respectively.]

[Footnote 285: _l.c._ clxxvi ff., ccxix-ccxxiii, ccxxxi.]

[Footnote 286: Author of a poem called Dharmagita.]

[Footnote 287: _l.c._ cxvi ff. and ccxxxii.]

[Footnote 288: _l.c._ ccxxxiv ff.]

[Footnote 289: See Haraprasad Sastri, _l.c._ He gives a curious
account of one of his temples in Calcutta. See also B.K. Sarkar,
_Folklore Element in Hindu Culture_ for the decadence of Buddhism in
Bengal and its survival in degenerate forms.]

[Footnote 290: See B.H. Hodgson, _Essays on the languages, literature
and religion of Nepal and Tibet_, 1874. For the religion of Nepal see
also Wright, _History of Nepal_, 1877; C. Bendall, _Journal of
Literary and Archaeological Research in Nepal_, 1886; Rajendralal
Mitra, _Sanskrit Buddhist literature of Nepal_; and especially S.
Levi, _Le Nepal_, 3 vols. 1905-8.]

[Footnote 291: S. Levi in _J.A._ II. 1904, p. 225. He gives the date
as 627.]

[Footnote 292: The doctrine of the Adi-Buddha is fully stated in the
metrical version of the Karanda-vyuha which appears to be a later
paraphrase of the prose edition. See Winternitz, _Gesch. Ind. Lit_.
II. i. 238.]

[Footnote 293: Compare the fusion of Sivaism and Buddhism in Java.]

[Footnote 294: Or Vajracarya-arhat-bhikshu-buddha, which in itself
shows what a medley Nepalese Buddhism has become.]

[Footnote 295: See above chap. XX. for some account of these works.]

[Footnote 296: Dedicated to the sacred river Vagvati or Bagmati.]

[Footnote 297: Hardly any Buddhist Tantras have been edited in Europe.
See Bendall, _Subhashita-sangraha_ for a collection of extracts (also
published in _Museon_, 1905), and De la Vallee Poussin, _Bouddhisme,
Etudes el Materiaux. Id._ Pancakrama, 1896.

While this book was going through the press I received the Tibetan
Tantra called Shrichakrasambhara (Avalon's Tantric Texts, vol. VII)
with introduction by A. Avalon, but have not been able to make use of
it.]

[Footnote 298: See Foucher, _Iconographie bouddhique_, pp. 8 ff. De la
Vallee Poussin, _Bouddhisme, Etudes et Materiaux_, pp. 213 ff. For
Japanese tantric ceremonies see the Si-Do-In-Dzon in the _Annales du
Musee Guimet_, vol. VIII.]

[Footnote 299: In ancient Egypt also the Kher heb or magician-priest
claimed the power of becoming various gods. See Budge, _Osiris_, II.
170 and Wiedemann, _Magic im alten Aegypten_, 13 ff.]

[Footnote 300: The Brahma-viharas. _E.g._ Dig. Nik. XIII.]

[Footnote 301: Mahasukhakaya or vajrakaya.]

[Footnote 302: De la Vallee Poussin, _Bouddhisme, Etudes et
Materiaux_, p. 153.]

[Footnote 303: See _Subhashita-sangraha_ edited by Bendall. Part II. pp.
29 ff. especially p. 41. Parasvaharanam karyam paradaranishevanam
Vaktavyam canritam nityam sarvabuddhamsca ghatayet. See also
Tathagata-guhyaka in Rajendralal Mitra's _Sanskrit Literature in Nepal_,
pp. 261-264.]

[Footnote 304: For instance De la Vallee Poussin in his _Bouddhisme,
Etudes et Materiaux_, 1896. In his later work, _Bouddhisme, Opinions
sur l'histoire de la dogmatique_, he modifies his earlier views.]

[Footnote 305: See Dig. Nik. XX. and XXXII.]

[Footnote 306: Kathav. XXIII. 1 and 2.]

[Footnote 307: These appendices are later additions to the original
text but they were translated into Chinese in the third century. Among
the oldest Sanskrit MSS. from Japan is the Ushnisha-vijaya-dharani
and there is a goddess with a similar name. But the Dharani is not
Saktist. See text in Anec. Oxon. Aryan series.]

[Footnote 308: He speaks of Kwan-shih-yin but this is probably the
male Avalokita.]

[Footnote 309: Mahayana-sutralankara, IX. 46. Of course there may be
many other allusions in yet unedited works of Asanga but it is
noticeable that this allusion to _maithuna_ is only made in passing
and is not connected with the essence of his teaching.]

[Footnote 310: Transl. Takakusu, p. 51.]

[Footnote 311: Taranatha, chap. XXII seems also to assign a late
origin to the Tantras though his remarks are neither clear nor
consistent with what he says in other passages. He is doubtless right
in suggesting that tantric rites were practised surreptitiously before
they were recognized openly.]

[Footnote 312: It is about this time too that we hear of Tantrism in
Hinduism. In the drama Malati and Madhava (_c_. 730 A.D.) the heroine
is kidnapped and is about to be sacrificed to the goddess Canda when
she is rescued.]

[Footnote 313: See the latter part of Appendix II in Nanjio's
Catalogue.]

[Footnote 314: _E.g._ Lalitavajra, Lilavajra, Buddhasanti, Ratnavajra.
Taranatha also (tr. Schiefner, p. 264) speaks of Tantras "Welche aus
Udyana gebracht und nie in Indien gewesen sind." It is also
noticeable, as Gruenwedel has pointed out, that many of the siddhas or
sorcerers bear names which have no meaning in Aryan languages:
Bir-va-pa, Na-ro-pa, Lui-pa, etc. A curious late tradition represents
Saktism as coming from China. See a quotation from the Mahacinatantra
in the _Archaeological Survey of Mayurabhanj_, p. xiv. Either China is
here used loosely for some country north of the Himalayas or the story
is pure fancy, for with rare exceptions (for instance the Lamaism of
the Yuean dynasty) the Chinese seem to have rejected Saktist works or
even to have expurgated them, _e.g._ the Tathagata-guhyaka.]

[Footnote 315: His account of Udyana and Kashmir will be found in
Watters, chapters VII and VIII.]

[Footnote 316: Traces of Buddhism still exist, for according to Buehler
the Nilamata Purana orders the image of Buddha to be worshipped on
Vaisakha 15 to the accompaniment of recitations by Buddhist ascetics.]

[Footnote 317: For notices of Kashmirian religion see Stein's
translation of the Rajatarangini and Buehler, _Tour in Search of
Sanskrit manuscripts. J. Bomb. A.S._ 1877.]

[Footnote 318: VI. 11-13, VII. 278-280, 295, 523.]

[Footnote 319: I. 122, 335, 348: III. 99, V. 55.]

[Footnote 320: Also called Kumara.]

[Footnote 321: Similarly statues of Mahadevi are found in Jain temples
now, _i.e._ in Gujarat.]

[Footnote 322: This very unbuddhist practice seems to have penetrated
even to Japan. Burnt offerings form part of the ritual in the temple
of Narita.]

[Footnote 323: See for instance the account of how Kamalarakshita
summoned Yamari.]

[Footnote 324: So too the Samhitas of the Vaishnavas and the Agamas
of the Saivas are said to consist of four quarters teaching Jnana,
Yoga, Kriya and Carya respectively. See Schrader, _Introd. to
Pancaratra_, p. 22. Sometimes five classes of Tantras are enumerated
which are perhaps all subdivisions of the Anuttara-yoga, namely
Guhyasamaja, Mayajala, Buddhasammayoga, Candraguhyatilaka,
Manjusrikrodha. See Taranatha (Schiefner), p. 221.]

[Footnote 325: Chap. XLIII. But this seems hardly consistent with his
other statements.]

[Footnote 326: The Lamas in Tibet have a similar theory of progressive
tantric revelation. See Waddell, _Buddhism of Tibet_, pp. 56, 57.]

[Footnote 327: In the reign of Mahipala, 978-1030 A.D.]

[Footnote 328: Taranatha, p. 275. For the whole subject see Gruenwedel,
_Mythologie des Buddhismus_, pp. 41-2 and my chapters on Tibet below.]

[Footnote 329: Schiefner (transl. Taranatha, p. 221) describes these
Sravakas or Hinayanists as "Saindhavas welche Cravakas aus Simhala
u.s.w. waren." They are apparently the same as the Saindhava-cravakas
often mentioned by Taranatha. Are they Hinayanists from Sindh where
the Sammitiya school was prevalent? See also Pag Sam Jon Zang, pp.
cxix, 114 and 134 where Sarat Chandra Das explains Sendha-pa as a
brahmanical sect.]

[Footnote 330: The curious story (Taranatha, p. 206) in which a
Buddhist at first refuses on religious grounds to take part in the
evocation of a demon seems also to hint at a disapproval of magic.]

[Footnote 331: This passage was written about 1910. In the curious
