rosy-fingered morn has shone forth, draw up the infantry and cavalry
with all haste before the ships, cheering them: and do thou thyself
likewise fight in the foremost ranks."

Thus he spake, but all the kings approved, admiring the speech of
Diomede, the breaker of steeds. Having then offered libations, they
departed each to his tent; there they lay do to to rest, and enjoyed the
boon of sleep.[331]

   [Footnote 330: I am indebted to Milton.]

   [Footnote 331: Id.]




                            BOOK THE TENTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

Diomede and Ulysses, as spies, penetrate the camp of the Trojans by
night, and first entrap and slay Dolon, who had set out on the same
errand for the Trojans. Having obtained from him the desired
information, they then attack the Thracians, and slay their king,
Rhesus, while asleep. At the suggestion of Minerva, they then return to
the camp.

The other chiefs, indeed, of all the Greeks were sleeping the whole
night at the ships, overcome by soft slumber; but sweet sleep possessed
not Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, shepherd of the people, revolving many
things in his mind. As when the husband of fair-haired Juno thunders,
preparing either an abundant, immense shower, or hail or snow, when the
snow whitens the fields; or somewhere [preparing] the wide mouth[332] of
bitter war; so frequently groaned Agamemnon in his breast from the
bottom of his heart, and his mind was troubled within him. As often
indeed as he looked towards the Trojan plain, he wondered at the many
fires which were burning before Ilium, the sound of flutes and pipes,
and the tumult of men. But when he looked towards the ships and army of
the Greeks, he tore up many hairs from his head by the roots,[333]
[enraged at] Jove who dwells aloft, and deeply he groaned in his noble
heart. But this plan appeared best to him in his judgment; to repair
first to Neleian Nestor, [and see] whether with him he might contrive
some blameless counsel, which might be an averter of evil. Rising,
therefore, he wrapped his coat around his breast, and beneath his smooth
feet bound the beautiful sandals; next he threw around him the
blood-stained skin of a huge, tawny[334] lion, stretching to his ankles,
and grasped his spear. In like manner, a tremor possessed Menelaus, for
neither did sleep rest upon his eyelids, [through fear] lest the Greeks
should suffer aught, who on his account had come over the wide sea to
Troy, waging daring war. First with a spotted leopard's skin he covered
his broad back; and next, lifting his brazen helmet, placed it upon his
head, and grasped a spear in his stout hand. But he went to awaken his
brother, who had the chief command of all the Greeks, and was honoured
by the people like a god. Him he found by the prow of his ship, putting
his bright armour around his shoulders; and arriving, he was welcome to
him. Him first Menelaus, valiant in the din of war, addressed: "Why arm
thus, my respected brother? Or whom dost thou urge of thy companions to
go as a spy amongst the Trojans? In truth I very much fear that no one
will undertake this deed, going alone through the dead of night to
reconnoitre the enemy. Any one [who does so] will be bold-hearted
indeed."

   [Footnote 332: Cicero pro Arch. Sec. 5, "Totius belli ore ac
   faucibus."]

   [Footnote 333: Or "one after another." Schol.: [Greek: ep'
   allelous, e prorrizous]. See Merrick on Tryphiodor. 388; Alberti
   on Hesych. t. ii. p. 1029.]

   [Footnote 334: Or, "active, raging." The other interpretation is,
   however, favoured by Virg. AEn. ii. 721: "Fulvique insternor pelle
   leonis."]

But him king Agamemnon, answering, addressed: "O Jove-nurtured Menelaus,
need of prudent counsel [comes upon] both thee and me, which will
protect and preserve the Greeks and their ships, since the mind of Jove
is altered. Surely he has rather given his attention to the Hectorean
sacrifices; for never have I beheld, nor heard a person who related,
that one man has devised so many arduous deeds in one day as Hector,
dear to Jove, hath performed upon the sons of the Greeks in such a
manner, [although] the dear child neither of a goddess nor of a god. But
such deeds hath he done as I conceive will long and for many a day be a
cause of care to the Greeks; so many evils hath he wrought against the
Greeks. But go now, call Ajax and Idomeneus, running quickly to their
ships, but I will go to noble Nestor, and exhort him to arise, if he be
willing to go to the sacred company[335] of guards and give orders; for
to him will they most attentively listen, because his son commands the
guards, along with Meriones, the armour-bearer of Idomeneus; for to them
we intrusted the chief charge."

   [Footnote 335: Some picked troop chosen for the especial purpose
   of keeping watch. Heyne compares S, 504: [Greek: ieros kuklos];
   681: [Greek: lathon ierous pulaorous]. Compare, also, the [Greek:
   ieros lochos] of the Thebans, Plutarch, in Pelop. t. i. p. 285;
   E. Athen. xiii. p. 561.]

But him Menelaus, valiant in the din of war, then answered: "In what
manner dost thou command and exhort me in thy speech? Shall I remain
there with them, waiting till thou come, or shall I run back again to
thee, after I have duly given them orders?"

But him, in turn, Agamemnon, king of men, addressed: "Wait there, lest,
as we come, we miss[336] one another; for there are many ways through
the camp. But shout aloud whithersoever thou goest, and enjoin them to
be watchful, accosting each man by a name from his paternal race,[337]
honourably addressing all; nor be thou haughty in thy mind. Nay, let
even us ourselves labour, whatever be our station, so heavy a calamity
hath Jove laid upon us at our birth."

Thus saying, he dismissed his brother, having duly charged him. But he
hastened to go to Nestor, the shepherd of the people. Him he found on
his soft couch beside his tent and black ship, and by him lay his
variegated arms, a shield, two spears, and a glittering helmet: beside
him also lay a flexible belt, with which the old man girded himself,
when he was arming for man-destroying war, leading on his people; since
he by no means yielded to sad old age. Being supported on his
elbow,[338] and lifting up his head, he addressed the son of Atreus, and
questioned him in [these] words:

   [Footnote 336: Buttmann, Lexil. p. 85, comes to the conclusion
   that "we must include [Greek: athrotazein] among the forms of
   [Greek: amartano], whose etymological connections, as long as we
   are ignorant of them, we can easily do without."]

   [Footnote 337: Instances of this complimentary style of address
   occur in ver. 144. [Greek: Diogenes Laertiade. 86: Nestor
   Neleiade].]

   [Footnote 338: Cf. Propert. 1. 3, 34. "Sic ait in molli fixa toro
   cubitum."]

"Who art thou who comest thus alone by the ships, along the army, during
the gloomy night, when other mortals are asleep? Whether seeking any of
the guards, or any of thy companions? Speak, nor approach me in silence;
of what is there need to thee?"

But him Agamemnon, king of men, then answered: "O Nestor, son of Neleus,
great glory of the Greeks, thou wilt recognize Agamemnon, the son of
Atreus, whom beyond all Jove hath plunged into toils continually, whilst
breath remains in my breast, or my knees have the power of motion. I
wander[339] thus, because sweet sleep sits not on mine eyes, but war and
the calamities of the Greeks are my care. For I greatly fear for the
Greeks, neither is my heart firm, but I am confounded.[340] My heart
leaps without my breast, and my fair limbs tremble beneath. But if thou
canst do aught (since neither doth sleep come upon thee), come, let us
go down to the guards, that we may see whether, worn out by toil and
[overpowered][341] by sleep, they slumber, and are altogether forgetful
of the watch. And hostile men are encamped near, nor do we at all know
but that they perhaps meditate in their minds to engage even during the
night." [342]

But him Nestor, the Gerenian knight, then answered: "Agamemnon, most
glorious son of Atreus, king of men, assuredly provident Jove will not
accomplish to Hector all those devices, which now, perhaps, he expects;
but I think that he will labour under even more cares if Achilles shall
but turn away his heart from heavy wrath. Yet will I willingly follow
thee; and let us moreover incite others, both spear-renowned Diomede,
and Ulysses, swift Ajax, and the valiant son of Phyleus. But if any one
going, would call godlike Ajax, and king Idomeneus; for their ships are
the farthest off,[343] and by no means near at hand. But I will chide
Menelaus, dear and respected though he be, nor will I conceal, even if
thou shouldst be displeased with me, since thus he sleeps, and has
permitted thee alone to labour. For now ought he to labour, supplicating
among all the chiefs, for a necessity, no longer tolerable, invades us."

   [Footnote 339: AEsch. Ag. 12: [Greek: Eyt' an de nuktiplankton
   endroson t' echo Einen oneirois ouk episkopoumenen Emen, phothos
   gar anth' opnou parastatei].]

   [Footnote 340: Cicero ad Attic, ix. 6: "Non angor, sed ardeo
   dolore; [Greek: oude moi etor empedon, all' alalyktemai]. Non
   sum, inquam, mihi crede, mentis compos."]

   [Footnote 341: Observe the zeugma, which has been imitated by
   Hor. Od. III. 4, 11: "Ludo fatigatumque somno." Compare the
   learned dissertation on this subject by D'Orville on Chariton,
   iv. 4, p. 440, sqq. ed. Lips.]

   [Footnote 342: AEsch. Sept. c. Th. 28: [Greek: Legei megisten
   proszalen Achaida Nukinegoreisthai kopithouleyein polei].]

   [Footnote 343: Soph. Aj. 3: [Greek: Kai nun epi skenais se
   nautikais oro Aiantos, entha taxin eschaten echei].]

But him Agamemnon, king of men, in turn addressed: "Old man, at other
times I would even bid thee blame him, for he is frequently remiss, and
is not willing to labour, yielding neither to sloth, nor thoughtlessness
of mind, but looking to me, and awaiting my commencement. But now he
arose long before me, and stood beside me; him I have sent before to
call those whom thou seekest. But let us go, and we shall find them
before the gates among the guards; for there I bade them be assembled."

But him the Gerenian knight Nestor then answered: "If so, none of the
Greeks will be angry, nor disobey when he may exhort or give orders to
any."

Thus saying, he put on his tunic around his breast, and beneath his
shining feet he placed the beautiful sandals, and fastened about him his
purple cloak with a clasp, double, ample;[344] and the shaggy pile was
thick upon it: and he seized a doughty spear, pointed with sharp brass.
He proceeded first to the ships of the brazen-mailed Achaeans; then the
Gerenian knight Nestor, vociferating, aroused from his sleep Ulysses,
equal to Jove in counsel. But the voice immediately penetrated his mind,
and he came out from the tent, and addressed them:

"Why, I pray, wander ye thus alone through the ambrosial night, near the
ships, through the army; what so great necessity now comes upon you?"

   [Footnote 344: Schol.: [Greek: Ten megalen oste kai diple aute
   chromenon echein ektetamenen]. The epithet [Greek: phoinikoessa]
   denotes that it was the garb of royalty.]

But him Nestor, the Gerenian knight, then answered: "Jove-sprung son of
Laertes, much-scheming Ulysses, be not indignant, for so great a sorrow
hath oppressed the Greeks. But follow, that we may arouse even another,
whomsoever it is fit, to deliberate whether to fly or fight."

Thus he spake, and much-counselling Ulysses returning into his tent,
flung around his shoulders his variegated shield, and followed them. But
they proceeded to Diomede, the son of Tydeus, and him they found
without, before his tent, with his arms; and his companions slept around
him. Beneath their heads they had their shields, and their spears were
fixed erect upon the nether point;[345] and afar off glittered the
brass, like the lightning of father Jove. The hero himself however
slumbered, and beneath him was strewed the hide of a wild bull; but
under his head was spread a splendid piece of tapestry. Standing by him,
the Gerenian knight Nestor awoke him, moving him on the heel with his
foot,[346] he roused him, and upbraided [him] openly:

"Arise, son of Tydeus, why dost thou indulge in sleep all night? Hearest
thou not how the Trojans are encamped upon an eminence in the plain near
the ships, and that now but a small space keeps them off?"

   [Footnote 345: [Greek: Sauroteroi' tois sturaxin ton opiso ton
   doraton]. Hesychius, who also, with reference to the present
   passage, has [Greek: Sauroteros' tou sideriou]. Pollux, x. 31,
   well explains it, [Greek: to tou doratos istamenon]. It is also
   called [Greek: styrax] and [Greek: styra].]

   [Footnote 346: Not "calce pedis movens." See Kennedy.]

Thus he spoke: but he leaped up very quickly from slumber, and
addressing him, spoke winged words:

"Indefatigable art thou, old man: never, indeed, dost thou cease from
labour. Are there not even other younger sons of the Greeks, who, going
about in every direction, might arouse each of the kings? But, O old
man, thou art impossible to be wearied."

But him then the Gerenian knight Nestor in turn addressed: "Truly, my
friend, thou hast spoken all these things aright. I have to be sure
blameless sons, and I have numerous troops, some of whom indeed, going
round, might give the summons. But a very great necessity hath oppressed
the Greeks, and now are the affairs of all balanced on a razor's
edge[347], whether there be most sad destruction to the Greeks, or life.
Yet go now, since thou art younger, arouse swift Ajax, and the son of
Phyleus, if thou hast pity on me."

   [Footnote 347: Herodot. vii. 11: [Greek: Epi xyrou gar tes akmes
   echetai ymin ta pragmata]. Soph. Antig. 996: [Greek: phronei
   bezos au nun epi xyrou tyne]. Theocrit. xxii. 6: [Greek:
   Anthropon soteres epi xuoou ede eonton].]

Thus he spake; but the other threw around his shoulders the skin of a
huge tawny lion, reaching to his feet, and took his spear. He hastened
forth, and the hero, having aroused the rest, led them thence.

But when they now came to the assembled guards, they found not the
leaders of the guards slumbering, but all were sitting vigilantly with
their arms. As dogs with care keep watch around the sheep in a fold,
hearing the furious wild beast, which comes through the wood from the
mountains, but much clamour of men and dogs is against it, and sleep is
utterly lost to them; so was sweet slumber lost to their eyelids,
keeping guard during the sad night, for they were ever turned towards
the plain, whensoever they heard the Trojans advancing. But the old man
seeing them, rejoiced, and encouraged them with a speech, and addressing
them, spoke winged words:

"Thus now, dear children, keep watch; nor let sleep seize upon any, lest
we become a mockery to the enemy."

Thus saying, he crossed the trench; and with him followed the chiefs of
the Greeks, as many as had been summoned to the council. Along with
these went Meriones, and the illustrious son of Nestor; for they had
invited them, that they might consult with them. Having therefore passed
over the dug trench, they sat down in a clear space, where a piece of
ground appeared free from fallen dead bodies, whence impetuous Hector
had turned back, having destroyed the Greeks, when night at length
enveloped them. There sitting down, they addressed words to each other,
and to them the Gerenian knight Nestor began discourse:

"O friends, would not now some man put such confidence in his own
daring mind as to go against the magnanimous Trojans, if perchance he
might take some of the enemy straying in the outskirts of the camp, or
perhaps even learn some report among the Trojans, what they deliberate
among themselves; whether they intend to remain here by the ships at a
distance, or are about to return to the city, since they have subdued
the Greeks? Could he but hear all this, and come back to us unscathed,
great glory would be his under heaven amongst all men, and he shall have
a good reward. For as many chiefs as command the vessels, of all these
each will give a black sheep, a ewe, having a lamb at its udders; to
which indeed no possession will be like; and he will ever be present at
our banquets and feasts."

Thus he spoke; and they were all mute in silence; but to them Diomede,
valiant in the din of battle, said:

"Nestor, my heart and gallant spirit urge me to enter the camp of the
hostile Trojans, which is near; but if some other man were to go along
with me, there would be more pleasure, and it would be more encouraging.
For when two go together, the one perceives before the other how the
advantage may be. But if one being alone should observe anything, his
perception is nevertheless more tardy, and his judgment weak."

Thus he spoke: and the greater number wished to follow Diomede. The two
Ajaces wished it, servants of Mars; Meriones wished it; the son of
Nestor very earnestly desired it; the spear-renowned son of Atreus,
Menelaus, desired it; and hardy Ulysses was eager to penetrate the crowd
of the Trojans; for ever daring was his mind within his breast. Among
them, however, Agamemnon, the king of men, spoke:

"Diomede, son of Tydeus, most dear to my soul, select the companion whom
thou desirest, the bravest of those who present themselves, since many
are ready. Nor do thou, paying deference in thy mind, leave indeed the
better, and select as follower the worse, through respect [for rank];
looking neither to family, nor whether one is more the king."

Thus he spake, for he feared for yellow-haired Menelaus; but amongst
them Diomede, brave in the din of battle, again spoke:

"If then ye now order me to select a companion myself, how can I now
forget godlike Ulysses, whose heart is prudent, and spirit gallant in
all labours; and whom Pallas Minerva loves. He following, we should both
return even from burning fire, for he is skilled in planning beyond [all
others]."

But him much-enduring, noble Ulysses in turn addressed: "Son of Tydeus,
neither praise me beyond measure, nor at all blame, for thou speakest
these things amongst Argives, who are acquainted with them already. But
let us go, for night hastens on, and morn is at hand. The stars have
already far advanced, and the greater portion of the night, by two
parts, has gone by, but the third portion remains."

Thus having spoken, they clad themselves in their terrible arms. To
Diomede, Thrasymedes, firm in war, gave his two-edged sword, because his
own was left at the ships, and a shield. Upon his head he placed his
bull's-hide helmet, coneless, crestless, which is called cataityx,[348]
and protects the heads of blooming youths. And Meriones gave a bow,
quiver, and sword to Ulysses, and put upon his head a casque of hide;
and within, it was firmly bound with many straps; whilst without, the
white teeth of an ivory-tusked boar set thick together on all sides
fenced it well, and skilfully; and in the midst a woollen
head-piece[349] was sewed. It Autolycus once brought from Eleon, the
city of Amyntor, son of Hormenus, having broken into his large mansion.
He gave it, however, to Amphidamas, the Cytherian, to bear to Scandea,
and Amphidamas bestowed it upon Molus, to be a gift of hospitality, but
he gave it to his son Meriones to be worn. Then at last, being placed
around, it covered the head of Ulysses. But they, when they had girt
themselves in dreadful arms, hastened to advance, and left all the
chiefs at the same place. And to them near the way, Pallas Minerva sent
a heron upon the right hand: they did not discern it with their eyes,
because of the gloomy night, but heard it rustling. And Ulysses was
delighted on account of the bird, and prayed to Minerva:

"Hear me, thou daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, who standest by me in all
labours, nor do I escape thy notice, having moved.[350] Now again do
thou, O Minerva, especially befriend me, and grant that, covered with
glory, we may return back to the well-benched barks, having performed a
mighty deed, which will surely occasion care to the Trojans."

   [Footnote 348: "The [Greek: kataityx] might be termed the undress
   helmet of the chief who wore it."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 349: Or, "it was stuffed with felt."--Oxford Transl.
   "Wool was inlaid between the straps, in order to protect the
   head, and make the helmet fit closer."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 350: Soph. Aj. 18: [Greek: Kai nun epegnos eu m ep'
   andri ousmenei Basin eyklount'].]

Then Diomede, brave in the din of battle, next prayed: "Now hear me,
too, O daughter of Jove, invincible. Attend me, as once thou didst
attend my sire, the noble Tydeus, to Thebes, what time he went as an
ambassador for the Achaeans; he left the brazen-mailed Achaeans at the
Asopus, and he himself bore thither a mild message to the Cadmaeans: but
when returning he performed many arduous deeds, with thy aid, O noble
goddess, when thou propitious didst stand beside him. Thus now willingly
stand by and protect me; and in return I will sacrifice to thee a heifer
of a year old, with broad forehead, untamed, which no man hath yet
brought under the yoke. This will I sacrifice to thee, encircling its
horns with gold."

Thus they spoke, praying; and Pallas Minerva heard them. But when they
had supplicated the daughter of mighty Jove, they hastened to advance,
like two lions, through the dark night, through slaughter, through
bodies through arms, and black blood.

Nor did Hector allow the gallant Trojans to sleep; but he summoned all
the chiefs together, as many as were leaders and rulers over the
Trojans. Having summoned them together, he framed prudent counsel:

"Who, undertaking it for me, will accomplish this deed for a great
reward? And there shall be sufficient payment for him; for I will give a
chariot and two rough-maned steeds, which excel in speed at the swift
sailing ships of the Greeks, to him whosoever would dare (he will also
obtain glory for himself) to approach near the swift-sailing ships, and
learn whether the fleet ships are guarded as formerly, or whether, now
subdued by our hands, they meditate flight among themselves, nor wish to
keep watch during the night, overcome with grievous toil."

Thus he spoke; but they were all still in silence. But among the Trojans
there was one Dolon, the son of Eumedes, a divine herald, rich in gold,
and wealthy in brass, who in aspect indeed was deformed, but [was]
swift-footed, and he was an only [son] among five sisters. Who then,
standing by, addressed the Trojans and Hector:

"Hector, my heart and gallant spirit urge me to approach the
swift-sailing ships, and gain information. But come, raise up thy
sceptre to me, and swear that thou wilt assuredly give me the horses and
chariot, variegated with brass, which now bear the illustrious son of
Peleus, and I will not be a vain spy to thee, nor frustrate thy
expectation; for I will go so far into the camp till I reach the ship of
Agamemnon, where the chiefs will perchance be consulting whether to fly
or fight."

Thus he spoke; but he took the sceptre in his hand and swore to him:
"Let Jove himself now be my witness, the loudly-thundering spouse of
Juno, that no other man of the Trojans shall be carried by these horses:
but I declare that thou shalt entirely have the glory of them."

Thus he spoke, and indeed swore a vain oath;[351] nevertheless he
encouraged him. Immediately he threw around his shoulders his crooked
bow, and put on above the hide of a grey wolf, with a casque of
weasel-skin upon his head; and seized a sharp javelin. And he set out to
go from the camp towards the ships: nor was he destined to bring back
intelligence to Hector, returning from the ships. But when now he had
quitted the crowd of horses and men, he eagerly held on his way. But him
godlike Ulysses observed advancing, and addressed Diomede:

   [Footnote 351: "There is no necessity for supposing that Hector
   meditated any deceit. The poet contemplates the event, which
   frustrated his hopes, and rendered his oath nugatory."--Kennedy.]

"Hark! Diomede, a man comes from the camp; I know not whether as a spy
upon our vessels, or to plunder some of the dead bodies. But let us
suffer him first to pass by a little through the plain, and afterwards,
hastily rushing upon him, let us take him. If, however, he surpasses us
in speed, attacking him with the spear, let us continually drive him
from the camp towards the ships, lest by chance he escape towards the
city."

Then having thus spoken, they lay down out of the pathway among the
dead; but he, in thoughtlessness, ran hastily past. But when now he was
as far off as is the space ploughed at one effort[352] by mules (for
they are preferable to oxen in drawing the well-made plough through the
deep fallow), they indeed ran towards him; but he stood still, hearing a
noise; for he hoped within his mind that his companions had come from
the Trojans to turn him back, Hector having ordered. But when now they
were distant a spear's cast, or even less, he perceived that they were
enemies, and moved his active knees to fly; and they immediately
hastened to follow. As when two rough-toothed hounds, skilled in the
chase, ever incessantly pursue through the woody ground either a fawn or
hare, whilst screaming it flies before; thus did Tydides and Ulysses,
sacker of cities, pursue him ever steadily, having cut him off from his
own people. But when now flying towards the ships, he would speedily
have mingled with the watch, then indeed Minerva infused strength into
Tydides, that none of the brazen-mailed Greeks might be beforehand in
boasting that he had wounded him, but he himself come second; then
gallant Diomede, rushing on him with his spear, addressed him:

"Either stop, or I will overtake thee with my spear; nor do I think that
thou wilt long escape certain destruction from my hand."

   [Footnote 352: See the Scholiast, and Kennedy's note.]

He said, and hurled his spear, but intentionally missed the man. Over
the right shoulder the point of the well-polished spear stuck in the
ground. Then indeed he stood still, and trembled, stammering (and there
arose a chattering of the teeth in his mouth), pale through fear.
Panting they overtook him, and seized his hands; but he weeping, spoke
thus:

"Take me alive, and I will ransom myself; for within [my house] I have
brass, and gold, and well-wrought iron; from which my father will bestow
upon you countless ransoms, if he shall hear that I am alive at the
ships of the Greeks."

But him much-planning Ulysses answering addressed: "Take courage, nor
suffer death at all to enter thy mind; but come, tell me this, and state
it correctly: Why comest thou thus alone from the camp towards the
fleet, through the gloomy night, when other mortals sleep? Whether that
thou mightst plunder any of the dead bodies, or did Hector send thee
forth to reconnoitre everything at the hollow ships? Or did thy mind
urge thee on?"

But him Dolon then answered, and his limbs trembled under him: "Contrary
to my wish, Hector hath brought me into great detriment, who promised
that he would give me the solid-hoofed steeds of the illustrious son of
Peleus, and his chariot adorned with brass. And he enjoined me, going
through the dark and dangerous[353] night, to approach the enemy, and
learn accurately whether the swift ships be guarded as before, or
whether, already subdued by our hands, ye plan flight with yourselves,
nor choose to keep watch during the night, overcome by severe toil."

   [Footnote 353: Buttm. Lexil. p. 369: "I translate [Greek: thon
   nyx] by _the quick and fearful_ night; and if this be once
   admitted as the established meaning of the Homeric epithet, it
   will certainly be always intelligible to the hearer and full of
   expression. 'Night,' says a German proverb, 'is no man's friend;'
   the dangers which threaten the nightly wanderer are formed into a
   quick, irritable, hostile goddess. Even the other deities are
   afraid of her, who is (Il. th, 259) [Greek: theon oneteira kai
   andron]; and Jupiter himself, in the midst of his rage, refrains
   from doing what might be [Greek: nykti thon apothymia]. Nor is
   the epithet less natural when the night is not personified: for
   as [Greek: oxeis kairoi] are _dangerous_ times, so by this word
   [Greek: thoe] it may be intended to mark the swiftness and
   imminency of dangers which threaten men who go [Greek: dia nukta
   melainan]."]

But him crafty Ulysses smiling addressed: "Assuredly thy mind aimed at
mighty gifts, the horses of warlike AEacides; but these are difficult to
be governed by mortal men, and to be driven by any other than Achilles,
whom an immortal mother bore. But come, tell me this, and state
correctly; where now, when coming hither, didst thou leave Hector, the
shepherd of the people? Where lie his martial arms, and where his
steeds? And how [stationed are] the watches and tents of the other
Trojans? What do they consult among themselves? Do they meditate to
remain there at a short distance from the ships, or will they return
again to the city, since, forsooth, they have subdued the Greeks?"

But him Dolon, the son of Eumedes, again addressed: "Therefore will I
indeed detail these things to thee very correctly. Hector, with those,
as many as are counsellors, is deliberating upon plans at the tomb of
divine Ilus, apart from the tumult: but for the watches of which thou
inquirest, O Hero, no chosen [band] defends or watches the camp. But as
many as are the hearths of fires among the Trojans, those at them are
they to whom there is compulsion;[354] and they are both wakeful, and
exhort one another to keep watch. But the allies, on the contrary,
summoned from afar, are sleeping; for they commit it to the Trojans to
keep watch, for their children and wives lie not near them."

   [Footnote 354: Construe, [Greek: kata tosas men puros escharas,
   osai isi Troon, oide oisin ananke estin, egregorthasi, k. t. l.]]

But him much-planning Ulysses answering addressed: "In
what manner now do they sleep: mingled with the horse-breaking
Trojans, or apart? Tell me, that I may know."

But him Dolon, the son of Eumedes, answered: "Therefore will I indeed
detail these things also very correctly. On the one hand, towards the
sea, [are] the Carians and Poeonians, armed with crooked bows, the
Lelegans, and Cauconians, and noble Pelasgians. Towards Thymbra, on the
other, the Lycians are allotted their place, and the haughty Mysians,
the horse-breaking Phrygians, and the Maeonian cavalry[355] warriors. But
why inquire ye of me these things separately? For if ye are now eager to
penetrate the host of the Trojans, those Thracians lately arrived are
apart, the last of all the others. And among them is their king Rhesus,
son of Eioneus. And his horses are the most beautiful and largest I have
seen. They are whiter than snow, and like to the winds in speed. And his
chariot is well adorned with both gold and silver; and he himself came,
wearing golden armour of mighty splendour, a marvel to behold; which
does not indeed suit mortal men to wear, but the immortal gods. But now
remove me to the swift ships, or, having bound me with a cruel bond,
leave me here until ye return, and make trial of me, whether I have
indeed spoken to you truly, or not."

   [Footnote 355: _I.e._ charioteers.]

But him then valiant Diomede sternly regarding, addressed: "Think not
within thy mind to escape from me, O Dolon, although thou hast reported
good tidings, since thou hast once come into my hands. For if indeed we
shall now release thee, or set thee at liberty, hereafter thou wouldst
surely return to the swift ships of the Achaeans, either in order to
become a spy, or to fight against us. But if, subdued by my hands, thou
lose thy life, thou wilt not ever afterwards be a bane to the Greeks."

He said; and the other was preparing to supplicate him, taking him by
the chin with his strong hand; but he, rushing at him with his sword,
smote the middle of his neck, and cut through both the tendons; and the
head of him, still muttering, was mingled with the dust. From his head
they took the weasel-skin helmet, and the wolf skin, with the bent bow
and long spear; and noble Ulysses raised them on high with his hand to
Minerva, the goddess of plunder, and praying, spake:

"Rejoice, O goddess, in these, for thee, first of all the immortals in
Olympus, do we invoke; but guide us likewise to the horses and tents of
the Thracian men."

Thus he said; and raising them high above himself, he hung them on a
tamarisk-branch. But beside it he placed a conspicuous mark, pulling up
handfuls of reeds,[356] and the wide-spreading branches of the tamarisk,
lest they should escape their notice whilst they were returning through
the dark and dangerous night. Then both advanced onwards through arms
and black blood; and proceeding, they came immediately to the band of
the Thracian heroes. But they were sleeping, overpowered with fatigue;
and their beautiful armour lay upon the ground beside them, carefully in
order, in three rows: and by each of them [stood] a yoke of horses.
Rhesus slept in the midst, and beside him his swift horses were fastened
by the reins to the outer rim[357] of the chariot. And Ulysses first
observing, pointed him out to Diomede:

"This [is] the man, O Diomede, and these [are] the horses, which Dolon,
whom we slew, pointed out to us. But come now, exert thy mighty
strength; nor does it at all become thee to stand leisurely with thy
armour. Loose therefore the steeds, or do thou slay the men, and the
horses shall be my care."

   [Footnote 356: [Greek: Summarpsas]. Ernesti says: "Confregit
   leviter arundines, et addidit similiter confractis myricae
   frondibus."]

   [Footnote 357: Ernesti regards [Greek: epidiphriados] as an
   adjective, with [Greek: antygos] understood.]

Thus he spoke; but into him azure-eyed Minerva breathed valour, and he
slaughtered, turning himself on every side, and a dreadful groaning
arose of those smitten with the sword; and the earth grew red with
blood. As when a lion, coming upon unprotected flocks of goats or sheep,
rushes upon them, designing evils, so fell the son of Tydeus upon the
Thracian men, until he had slain twelve. But much-counselling
Ulysses--whomsoever Diomede standing beside struck with the sword--him
Ulysses dragged backwards, seizing by the foot; meditating these things
in his mind, that the fair-maned steeds should pass through easily, nor
should tremble in spirit, treading on the corses; for as yet they were
unused to them. But when now the son of Tydeus had reached the king,
him, the thirteenth, he deprived of sweet life, panting; for by the
counsel of Minerva an evil dream had stood over his head during the
night, [in likeness of] the son of oeneus: but in the meantime patient
Ulysses was untying the solid-hoofed steeds. With the reins he bound
them together and drove them from the crowd, lashing them with his bow,
because he thought not of taking with his hands the splendid lash from
the well-wrought chariot seat; and then he whistled as a signal to noble
Diomede. But he remaining, was meditating what most daring deed he
should do; whether seizing the car, where lay the embroidered armour, he
should drag it out by the pole[358] or bear it away, raising it aloft;
or take away the life of more of the Thracians. Whilst he was revolving
these things within his mind, Minerva in the meantime standing near,
addressed noble Diomede:
