have always observed in the course of my professional visits there,
the reverse of agreeable.

"If this is the case, not improbably there may be one or other of
these women with whom you might open direct negotiations. What has
struck me is this. The men who were over there with me of course slept
and took their meals in the village; still, going about as they did in
the house, no doubt they talked with the servants. The Miss Penfolds
were away, and I dare say the women had plenty of time to gossip; and
it is probable the men gathered from their talk something of their
sentiments toward the Miss Penfolds and their brother, and which side
they would be likely to go with. I might ask the foreman about it."

"I think the idea is a capital one, Mr. Tallboys; but there is one
detail I think might be improved. I imagine that if instead of asking
the foreman you choose the youngest and best-looking of the men,
provided he is unmarried, you are more likely to get at the women's
sentiments."

Mr. Tallboys laughed. "No doubt you are right, Mrs. Conway. That shall
be done. I must get the foreman first, though, for I don't know the
names or addresses of the other men. I shall tell him frankly that I
want to find out the opinions of the servants at the Hall about the
missing will, ask him which of his men was the most given to gossip
with them, and tell him to send him here to me at ten o'clock
to-morrow morning; then when you see him and hear what he has to say,
you can judge for yourself how far you care to trust him in the
matter, or whether to trust him at all. Perhaps you will come here a
few minutes before ten, and then I can tell you what the foreman has
said first."

Accordingly at a quarter to ten the next day Mrs. Conway was again at
the office.

"I think, Mrs. Conway, that things are going even better than we
hoped. The foreman said that from what little talk he had with the
servants, he thought they had all been attached to Mr. Penfold, and
that his sisters were by no means popular among them. He said very
often one or other of them would come into the room where they were
working and make suggestions, and hunt about themselves to see if they
could find anything. But the best part of it is that one of the
carpenters, a steady fellow of twenty-five, took up, as he calls it,
with the upper housemaid, and he believes there is a talk about their
being married some day. If this is so it would be the very thing for
you. You could help him to get married, and the girl could help you to
get her place."

"The very thing," Mrs. Conway said. "Nothing could have turned out
better."

In a few minutes the young carpenter arrived. He was a
pleasant-looking young fellow, and Mrs. Conway was not surprised at
the impression he had made upon the housemaid at the Hall.

"Sit down, Johnson," Mr. Tallboys began. "You know what I asked you to
come here for?"

"Mr. Peters told me that it was something to do with that job we had
at the Miss Penfolds', sir."

"Yes, that is it, Johnson. You know we were looking for a missing will
there?"

"Yes, sir; so I understood."

"Now, what we wanted to ask you specially, Johnson, was whether you
can tell us what the servants at the Hall thought about it?"

The young carpenter turned rather red in the face, and twisted his cap
about in his fingers.

"Well, sir, I don't know that I can say much about that. I don't think
most of them was overfond of the Miss Penfolds, and wouldn't have been
sorry if the will had been found that would have given them another
master or mistress."

"Just so, Johnson, that is what I thought was likely. Now, the point I
want to know, Johnson, and this lady here is, I may tell you,
interested in the matter of this will being found, is as to whether
there is in your opinion any one of the maids at the Hall who could be
trusted to aid us in this business? Of course we should make it worth
her while to do so."

Again the young carpenter colored, and fidgeted on his chair,
examining his cap intently.

"I suppose it would depend on what you wanted her to do," he said at
last. "The Hall is a good service, though they don't like the
mistresses, and of course none of them would like to do anything that
might risk their place."

"That's natural enough, Johnson. But, you see, we could perhaps more
than make up to her for that risk."

"Well, I don't know, sir," the man said after another pause. "It isn't
only the place; but, you see, a young woman wouldn't like to risk
getting into a row like and being turned away in disgrace, or perhaps
even worse. I don't know what you want, you see, sir?"

Mr. Tallboys looked at Mrs. Conway, and his eyes expressed the
question, How far shall we go? She replied by taking the matter in her
own hands.

"We can trust you, can't we, whether you agree to help us or not?"

"Yes, ma'am," he said more decidedly than he had hitherto spoken. "You
can trust me. If you tell me what you want, I will tell you straight
whether I can do anything. If I don't like it, the matter shan't go
beyond me."

"Very well, then, I will tell you exactly what we want. We believe
that the will is still there, and we believe that if some one in the
house were to make a thorough search it might be found. It is right
that it should be found, and that the property should go to those to
whom Mr. Penfold left it, and who are now being kept out of it by the
Miss Penfolds. I am very much interested in the matter, because it is
my son who is being cheated out of his rights; and I have made up my
mind to find the will. Now, what I want to know is, do you think that
one of the housemaids would be willing to give up her place and
introduce me as her successor, if I gave her twenty-five pounds? That
would be a nice little sum, you know, to begin housekeeping with."

Mrs. Conway saw at once by the expression of the young carpenter's
face that she had secured him as an ally.

"I think that might be managed, ma'am," he said in a tone that showed
her he was endeavoring to hide his gladness. "Yes, I think that could
be managed. There is certainly a young woman at the Hall--" and he
stopped.

Mrs. Conway helped him. "I may tell you, Mr. Johnson, that the foreman
hinted to Mr. Tallboys that he thought you and the upper housemaid
were likely one of these days to come together, and that is
principally why we spoke to you instead of to one of the others who
were there. We thought, you see, that she might probably be leaving
her place one of these days, and that perhaps this twenty-five pounds
might enable you and her to marry earlier than you otherwise would
have done. In that case, you see, it would suit us all. You and she
would, moreover, have the satisfaction of knowing that you were aiding
to right a great wrong, and to restore to those who have been
defrauded the property Mr. Penfold intended for them. What do you
say?"

"Well, ma'am, I think that, as you say, it would be doing the right
thing; and I don't deny that Martha and I have agreed to wait a year
or two, till we could save up enough between us for me to start on my
own account; for as long as I am a journeyman, and liable to lose my
work any day, I would not ask her to come to me. But what with what we
have laid by, and this money you offer, I think we might very well
venture," and his radiant face showed the happiness the prospect
caused him.

"Very well, then. We may consider that as settled," Mrs. Conway said.
"What I want is for you to tell your Martha that she is to give notice
to leave at once, and that if she has an opportunity she is to mention
to Miss Penfold that she has a friend who is out of place at present,
and whom she is sure will suit. Of course as she will say that she is
going to leave to be married, Miss Penfold cannot be vexed with her,
as she might be otherwise, and may take her friend on her
recommendation."

"But suppose she shouldn't, ma'am," and the young carpenter's face
fell considerably at the thought, "where would Martha be then?"

"I shall pay the money, of course," Mrs. Conway said, "whether I get
the place through her or not. I should think that Miss Penfold will
very likely be glad to be saved the trouble of looking for another
servant. But, if not, I must try some other way to get the place."

"What name am I to say her friend has?"

"Let me think. Ann Sibthorpe."

"But suppose she asks about where her friend has been in service,
ma'am, and about her character?"

"We will settle that afterward. The first thing to do is for you to go
over and see her, and ask her if she is willing to leave and do this."

"I think I can answer for that, ma'am," the young carpenter said with
a quiet smile.

"Very well. Still, we had better have it settled. Will you go over
to-day and see her? and then by to-morrow Mr. Tallboys and I will have
talked the matter over and settled about the other points. Of course
you will tell her not to give notice until she has heard from you as
to what she is to say about me."

"Very well, ma'am. I will start at once."

"I can arrange about the character," Mr. Tallboys said when they were
alone. "I have a cousin in London, to whom I shall write and explain
the matter, and who will, I am sure, oblige me by writing to say that
Ann Sibthorpe is all that can be desired as a servant: steady, quiet,
industrious and capable. Well, I really congratulate you, Mrs. Conway.
At first I thought your project a hopeless one; now I think you have
every chance of success."




CHAPTER X.

ON DETACHMENT.


Ralph was soon at home in the regiment. He found his comrades a cheery
and pleasant set of men, ready to assist the newly-joined young
officers as far as they could. A few rough practical jokes were
played; but Ralph took them with such perfect good temper that they
were soon abandoned.

He applied himself very earnestly to mastering the mystery of drill,
and it was not long before he was pronounced to be efficient, and he
was then at Captain O'Connor's request appointed to his company, in
which there happened to be a vacancy for an ensign. He had had the
good luck to have an excellent servant assigned to him. Denis Mulligan
was a thoroughly handy fellow, could turn his hand to anything, and
was always good tempered and cheery.

"The fellow is rather free and easy in his ways," Captain O'Connor
told Ralph when he allotted the man to him; "but you will get
accustomed to that. Keep your whisky locked up, and I think you will
be safe in all other respects with him. He was servant to Captain
Daly, who was killed at Toulouse, and I know Daly wouldn't have parted
with him on any account. His master's death almost broke Denis' heart,
and I have no doubt he will get just as much attached to you in time.
These fellows have their faults, and want a little humoring; but, take
them as a whole, I would rather have an Irish soldier servant than one
of any other nationality, provided always that he is not too fond of
the bottle. About once in three months I consider reasonable, and I
don't think you will find Mulligan break out more frequently than
that."

Ralph never regretted the choice O'Connor had made for him, and found
Denis an excellent servant; and his eccentricities and the opinions
which he freely expressed afforded him a constant source of amusement.

A few days later Captain O'Connor came into his room. "Pack up your
kit. The company is ordered on detached duty, and there is an end to
your dancing and flirting."

"I don't know about flirting," Ralph laughed. "As far as I can see you
do enough for the whole company in that way. But where are we going
to?"

"We are ordered to Ballyporrit. An out of the way hole as a man could
wish to be buried in. It seems that there are a lot of stills at work
in the neighborhood. The gauger has applied for military aid. A nice
job we have got before us. I have had my turn at it before, and know
what it means. Starting at nightfall, tramping ten or fifteen miles
over the hills and through bogs, and arriving at last at some wretched
hut only to find a wretched old woman sitting by a peat fire, and
divil a sign of still or mash tubs or anything else. We start the
first thing to-morrow morning; so you had better get your kit packed
and your flask filled to-night. We have nineteen miles march before
us, and a pretty bad road to travel. I have just been in to Desmond's
quarters, and he is tearing his hair at the thought of having to leave
the gayeties of Cork."

"I think it is a nice change," Ralph said, "and shall be very glad to
have done with all these parties and balls. Ballyporrit is near the
sea, isn't it?"

"Yes. About a mile away, I believe. Nearly forty miles from here."

The detachment marched next morning. Ralph enjoyed the novelty of the
march, but was not sorry when at the end of the second day's tramp
they reached the village. The men were quartered in the houses of the
villagers, and the officers took rooms at the inn. Except when engaged
in expeditions to capture stills--of which they succeeded in finding
nearly a score--there was not much to do at Ballyporrit. All the
gentry resident within a wide circle called upon them, and invitations
to dinners and dances flowed in rapidly. As one officer was obliged to
remain always in the village with the detachment, Ralph seldom availed
himself of these invitations. O'Connor and Lieutenant Desmond were
both fond of society; and, as Ralph very much preferred staying
quietly in his quarters, he was always ready to volunteer to take duty
upon these occasions.

Ballyporrit lay within a mile of the sea, and Ralph, when he had
nothing else to do, frequently walked to the edge of the cliffs, and
sat there hour after hour watching the sea breaking among the rocks
three or four hundred feet below him, and the sea-birds flying here
and there over the water, and occasionally dashing down to its
surface. A few fishing boats could be seen, but it was seldom that a
distant sail was visible across the water; for not one vessel in those
days sailed for the west to every fifty that now cross the Atlantic.
The rocks upon which he sat rose in most places almost sheer up from
the edge of the sea; but occasionally they fell away, and a good
climber could make his way over the rough rocks and bowlders down to
the water's edge. As, however, there was nothing to be gained by it,
Ralph never made the attempt.

Looking back over the land the view was a dreary one. There was not a
human habitation within sight, the hills were covered with brown
heather, while in the bottoms lay bogs, deep and treacherous to those
who knew not the way across. It was rarely that a human figure was
visible. Once or twice a day a revenue man came along the edge of the
cliff, and would generally stop for a talk with Ralph.

"There was," he said, "a good deal of smuggling carried on along that
part of the coast during the war; but there is not so much of it now,
though no doubt a cargo is run now and then. It does not pay as it did
when the French ports were all closed, and there was not a drop of
brandy to be had save that which was run by the smugglers. Now that
trade is open again there is only the duty to save, and I fancy a good
many of the boats have gone out of the business. You see, the revenue
has got its agents in the French ports, and gets news from them what
craft are over there loading, and what part of the coast they come
from. Along the English coast there is still a good deal of it. There
lace pays well; but there is not much sale for lace in Ireland, and
not much sale for brandy either, excepting in the towns. The peasants
and farmers would not thank you for it when they can get home-made
whisky for next to nothing."

"I suppose that there is a good deal of that going on."

"Any amount of it, sir. For every still that is captured I reckon
there must be a hundred at work that no one dreams of, and will be as
long as barley grows and there are bogs and hills all over the
country, and safe hiding-places where no one not in the secret would
dream of searching. The boys know that we are not in their line of
business, and mind our own affairs. If it were not for that, I can
tell you, I wouldn't go along these cliffs at night for any pay the
king would give me; for I know that before a week would be out my body
would be found some morning down there on the rocks, and the coroner's
jury would bring in a verdict of tumbled over by accident, although
there wouldn't be a man of them but would know better."

"Well, I am sure I don't want to find out anything about them. I
belong to the detachment in Ballyporrit, and of course if the gauger
calls upon us we must march out and aid him in seizing a still. But
beyond that it's no affair of ours."

And yet although he so seldom saw any one to speak to, Ralph had
sometimes a sort of uncomfortable feeling that he was being watched.
Once or twice he had caught a glimpse of what he thought was a man's
head among some rocks; but on walking carelessly to the spot he could
see no signs of any one. Another time, looking suddenly round, he saw
a boy standing at the edge of some boggy ground where the land dipped
suddenly away some two hundred yards from the edge of the cliff; but
directly he saw that he was observed he took to his heels, and
speedily disappeared down the valley.

Ralph did not trouble himself about these matters, nor did he see any
reason why any one should interest himself in his movements. Had he
wandered about among the hills inland he might be taken for a spy
trying to find out some of the hidden stills; but sitting here at the
edge of the cliff watching the sea, surely no such absurd suspicion
could fall upon him. Had he been there at night the smugglers might
have suspected him of keeping watch for them; but smugglers never
attempted to run their cargoes in broad daylight, and he never came
down there after dark. One day a peasant came strolling along. He was
a powerful-looking man and carried a heavy stick. Ralph was lying on
his back looking up at the clouds and did not hear the man approach
till he was close to him, then with a quick movement he sprang to his
feet.

"I did not hear you coming," he said. "You have given me quite a
start."

"It's a fine day, yer honor, for sleeping on the turf here," the man
said civilly.

"I was not asleep," Ralph said; "though I own that I was getting on
for it."

"Is yer honor expecting to meet any one here?" the man asked. "Sure,
it's a mighty lonesome sort of place."

"No, I am not expecting any one. I have only come out for a look at
the sea. I am never tired of looking at that."

"It's a big lot of water, surely," the man replied, looking over the
sea with an air of interest as if the sight were altogether novel to
him. "A powerful lot of water. And I have heard them say that you
often come out here?"

"Yes, I often come out," Ralph assented.

"Don't you think now it is dangerous so near the edge of the cliff,
yer honor? Just one step and over you would go, and it would be ten
chances to one that the next tide would drift your body away, and
divil a one know what had become of you."

"But I don't mean to take a false step," Ralph said.

"Sure, there is many a one takes a false step when he isn't dreaming
about it; and if ye didn't tumble over by yourself, just a push would
do it."

"Yes, but there is no one to give one a push," Ralph said.

"Maybe and maybe not," the man replied. "I don't say if I was a
gentleman, and could spind me time as I liked, that I would be sitting
here on the edge of these cliffs, where you might come to harm any
minute."

"I have no fear of coming to harm," Ralph answered; "and I should be
sorry for any one who tried. I always carry a pistol. Not that I think
there is any chance of having to use it but it's always as well to be
prepared."

"It is that, yer honor, always as well; but I don't think I should be
always coming out here if I was you."

"Why not, my good fellow? I harm no one, and interfere with no one.
Surely it is open to me to come here and look at the sea without any
one taking offense at it."

"That's as it may be, yer honor. Anyhow I have told you what I think
of it. Good-morning to you."

"I wonder what that fellow meant," Ralph said, looking after him. "He
meant something, I feel certain, though what it is I can't imagine. I
thought it was as well to let him know that I had a pistol handy,
though he didn't look as if he intended mischief. I suppose after this
I had better not come here so often, though I have not the remotest
idea in the world why I should annoy any one more by standing here
than if I was standing on the cliff in front of Dover Castle. However,
it certainly is a lonely place, and I should have precious little
chance if two or three men took it into their heads to attack me
here."

"They are queer people these Irish peasants of yours, O'Connor," Ralph
said as they sat at dinner that evening.

"What's the matter with them now, Conway?"
