The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Knights of Arthur, by Frederik Pohl

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Knights of Arthur

Author: Frederik Pohl

Illustrator: Martin

Release Date: April 16, 2010 [EBook #32004]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KNIGHTS OF ARTHUR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction January
    1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
    U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.




The Knights of Arthur


By FREDERIK POHL


Illustrated by MARTIN


    _With one suitcase as his domain, Arthur was desperately in
    need of armed henchmen ... for his keys to a kingdom were
    typewriter keys!_


I


There was three of us--I mean if you count Arthur. We split up to
avoid attracting attention. Engdahl just came in over the big bridge,
but I had Arthur with me so I had to come the long way around.

    [Illustration]

When I registered at the desk, I said I was from Chicago. You know how
it is. If you say you're from Philadelphia, it's like saying you're
from St. Louis or Detroit--I mean _nobody_ lives in Philadelphia any
more. Shows how things change. A couple years ago, Philadelphia was
all the fashion. But not now, and I wanted to make a good impression.

I even tipped the bellboy a hundred and fifty dollars. I said: "Do me
a favor. I've got my baggage booby-trapped--"

"Natch," he said, only mildly impressed by the bill and a half, even
less impressed by me.

"I mean _really_ booby-trapped. Not just a burglar alarm. Besides the
alarm, there's a little surprise on a short fuse. So what I want you
to do, if you hear the alarm go off, is come running. Right?"

"And get my head blown off?" He slammed my bags onto the floor.
"Mister, you can take your damn money and--"

"Wait a minute, friend." I passed over another hundred. "Please? It's
only a shaped charge. It won't hurt anything except anybody who messes
around, see? But I don't want it to go off. So you come running when
you hear the alarm and scare him away and--"

"No!" But he was less positive. I gave him two hundred more and he
said grudgingly: "All right. If I hear it. Say, what's in there that's
worth all that trouble?"

"Papers," I lied.

He leered. "Sure."

"No fooling, it's just personal stuff. Not worth a penny to anybody
but me, understand? So don't get any ideas--"

He said in an injured tone: "Mister, naturally the _staff_ won't
bother your stuff. What kind of a hotel do you think this is?"

"Of course, of course," I said. But I knew he was lying, because I
knew what kind of hotel it was. The staff was there only because being
there gave them a chance to knock down more money than they could make
any other way. What other kind of hotel was there?

Anyway, the way to keep the staff on my side was by bribery, and when
he left I figured I had him at least temporarily bought. He promised
to keep an eye on the room and he would be on duty for four more
hours--which gave me plenty of time for my errands.

       *       *       *       *       *

I made sure Arthur was plugged in and cleaned myself up. They had
water running--New York's very good that way; they always have water
running. It was even hot, or nearly hot. I let the shower splash over
me for a while, because there was a lot of dust and dirt from the
Bronx that I had to get off me. The way it looked, hardly anybody had
been up that way since it happened.

I dried myself, got dressed and looked out the window. We were fairly
high up--fifteenth floor. I could see the Hudson and the big bridge up
north of us. There was a huge cloud of smoke coming from somewhere
near the bridge on the other side of the river, but outside of that
everything looked normal. You would have thought there were people in
all those houses. Even the streets looked pretty good, until you
noticed that hardly any of the cars were moving.

I opened the little bag and loaded my pockets with enough money to run
my errands. At the door, I stopped and called over my shoulder to
Arthur: "Don't worry if I'm gone an hour or so. I'll be back."

I didn't wait for an answer. That would have been pointless under the
circumstances.

After Philadelphia, this place seemed to be bustling with activity.
There were four or five people in the lobby and a couple of dozen more
out in the street.

I tarried at the desk for several reasons. In the first place, I was
expecting Vern Engdahl to try to contact me and I didn't want him
messing with the luggage--not while Arthur might get nervous. So I
told the desk clerk that in case anybody came inquiring for Mr.
Schlaepfer, which was the name I was using--my real name being Sam
Dunlap--he was to be told that on no account was he to go to my room
but to wait in the lobby; and in any case I would be back in an hour.

"Sure," said the desk clerk, holding out his hand.

I crossed it with paper. "One other thing," I said. "I need to buy an
electric typewriter and some other stuff. Where can I get them?"

"PX," he said promptly.

"PX?"

"What used to be Macy's," he explained. "You go out that door and turn
right. It's only about a block. You'll see the sign."

"Thanks." That cost me a hundred more, but it was worth it. After all,
money wasn't a problem--not when we had just come from Philadelphia.

       *       *       *       *       *

The big sign read "PX," but it wasn't big enough to hide an older sign
underneath that said "Macy's." I looked it over from across the
street.

Somebody had organized it pretty well. I had to admire them. I mean I
don't like New York--wouldn't live there if you gave me the place--but
it showed a sort of go-getting spirit. It was no easy job getting a
full staff together to run a department store operation, when any city
the size of New York must have a couple thousand stores. You know what
I mean? It's like running a hotel or anything else--how are you going
to get people to work for you when they can just as easily walk down
the street, find a vacant store and set up their own operation?

But Macy's was fully manned. There was a guard at every door and a
walking patrol along the block-front between the entrances to make
sure nobody broke in through the windows. They all wore green armbands
and uniforms--well, lots of people wore uniforms.

I walked over.

"Afternoon," I said affably to the guard. "I want to pick up some
stuff. Typewriter, maybe a gun, you know. How do you work it here?
Flat rate for all you can carry, prices marked on everything, or what
is it?"

He stared at me suspiciously. He was a monster; six inches taller than
I, he must have weighed two hundred and fifty pounds. He didn't look
very smart, which might explain why he was working for somebody else
these days. But he was smart enough for what he had to do.

He demanded: "You new in town?"

I nodded.

He thought for a minute. "All right, buddy. Go on in. You pick out
what you want, see? We'll straighten out the price when you come out."

"Fair enough." I started past him.

He grabbed me by the arm. "No tricks," he ordered. "You come out the
same door you went in, understand?"

"Sure," I said, "if that's the way you want it."

That figured--one way or another: either they got a commission, or,
like everybody else, they lived on what they could knock down. I filed
that for further consideration.

Inside, the store smelled pretty bad. It wasn't just rot, though there
was plenty of that; it was musty and stale and old. It was dark, or
nearly. About one light in twenty was turned on, in order to conserve
power. Naturally the escalators and so on weren't running at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

I passed a counter with pencils and ball-point pens in a case. Most of
them were gone--somebody hadn't bothered to go around in back and had
simply knocked the glass out--but I found one that worked and an old
order pad to write on. Over by the elevators there was a store
directory, so I went over and checked it, making a list of the
departments worth visiting.

Office Supplies would be the typewriter. Garden & Home was a good
bet--maybe I could find a little wheelbarrow to save carrying the
typewriter in my arms. What I wanted was one of the big ones where all
the keys are solenoid-operated instead of the cam-and-roller
arrangement--that was all Arthur could operate. And those things were
heavy, as I knew. That was why we had ditched the old one in the
Bronx.

Sporting Goods--that would be for a gun, if there were any left.
Naturally, they were about the first to go after it happened, when
_everybody_ wanted a gun. I mean everybody who lived through it. I
thought about clothes--it was pretty hot in New York--and decided I
might as well take a look.

Typewriter, clothes, gun, wheelbarrow. I made one more note on the
pad--try the tobacco counter, but I didn't have much hope for that.
They had used cigarettes for currency around this area for a while,
