
"How can I tell, Rose? Instinct is my guide in a matter of this sort."

Maggie stepped back and looked haughty.

"Well," said Rose, "the principals won't ever know; we are taking good
care of that."

"Oh! I hope you may be successful. Good night."

Maggie turned to walk away. She saw Priscilla standing not far off.

"Come, Prissie," she said affectionately, "you did admirably to-night,
but you must have another lesson. You missed two of the best points in
that last speech. Come back with me into the theater at once."

Rose bit her lips with vexation. She was wildly anxious to be at the
auction. The sealskin might be put up for sale, and she not present.
The corals might go to some other happy girl; but she had made a
resolve to bring some of the very best girls in the college to this
scene of rioting. Her reckless companions had dared her to do this,
and she felt what she called "her honor" at stake. Nancy Banister had
declined her invitation with decision; Constance Field had withered
her with a look. Now she must secure Maggie.

"I wish you'd come," she said, following Maggie and Prissie to the
door of the theater. "It will be an awful disappointment if you don't!
We all reckoned on having you."

"What do you mean, Rose?"

"We thought you wouldn't be above a bit of fun. You never used to be,
you know. You never used to be strict and proper and over-righteous,
used you?"

Priscilla was startled to see the queer change these few words made on
Maggie. Her cheeks lost their roses; her eyes grew big, pathetic,
miserable. Then a defiant expression filled them.

"If you put it in that way," she said, "I'll go and peep at the thing.
It isn't my taste nor my style, but goodness knows I'm no better than
the rest of you. Come, Prissie."

Maggie seized Priscilla's hand; her clasp was so tight as to be almost
painful. She hurried Prissie along so fast that Rose could scarcely
keep up with them.

They entered the hall. Maggie seized a hat for herself and another for
Prissie from the hat-stand; then the three girls crossed the garden to
Katharine Hall. A moment or two later they had reached the scene of
the evening's amusement

Loud voices and laughter greeted them; they entered a large room
crowded to overflowing. The atmosphere here was hot and stifling and
chaos reigned supreme. Pictures, ornaments of all kinds had been
removed roughly and hastily from the walls; clothes and even jewels
were piled on the tables, and a tall girl, standing on a chair, was
declaiming volubly for the benefit of her companions.

When Maggie, Rose and Priscilla entered the room Polly was exhibiting
the charms of a yellow silk dress somewhat the worse for wear.
Laughter choked her voice; her bright blue eyes shone with excitement
and amusement.

"Who'll try this?" she began. "It has a double charm. Not only has it
reposed round this fair and lovely form, but the silk of which it is
made was given to me by my mother's aunt, who had it from her mother
before her. When I part with this, I part with a relic. Those who
purchase it secure for themselves a piece of history. Who will buy,
who will buy, who will buy? An historical dress going-- such a
bargain! Who, who will buy?"

"I'll give you five shillings, Polly," screamed a darkeyed girl who
stood near.

"Five shillings! This lovely dress going for five shillings!"
proceeded Polly.

"And sixpence," added another voice.

"This beautiful, historical robe going for five-and-sixpence," said
Miss Singleton in her gay voice. "Oh, it's a bargain-- it's dirt
cheap! Who will buy? who will buy?"

The bids went up, and finally the yellow dress was knocked down to a
rosy-faced country girl for the sum of thirteen shillings and
ninepence.

Polly's various other possessions were one by one brought to the
hammer, some of them fetching fairly large sums, for they were most of
them good and worth having, and there were wealthy girls at the
college who were not above securing a bargain when it came in their
way.

At last the prize on which all Rose's hopes were set was put up for
sale. Polly's magnificent sealskin jacket was held aloft and displayed
to the admiring and coveteous gaze of many. Rose's face brightened; an
eager, greedy look filled her eyes. She actually trembled in her
anxiety to secure this prize of prizes.

Maggie Oliphant, who was standing in a listless, indifferent attitude
near the door, not taking the smallest part in the active proceedings
which were going forward, was for the first time aroused to interest
by the expression on Rosalind's face. She moved a step or two into the
crowd, and when one or two timid bids were heard for the coveted
treasure, she raised her own voice and for the first time appeared
eager to secure something for herself.

Rose bid against her, an angry flush filling her blue eyes as she did
so. Maggie nonchalantly made her next bid a little higher-- Rose
raised hers. Soon they were the only two in the field; other girls had
come to the limit of their purses and withdrew vanquished.

Rosalind's face grew very white. Could she have knock Maggie Oliphant
down with a blow she would have done so at that moment. Maggie calmly
and quietly continued her bids, raising them gradually higher and
higher. Five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten pounds: Rose had come to
the end of her resources. She stepped away with a bitter smile on her
face. The sealskin jacket was Maggie Oliphant's property for ten
guineas.

Maggie laid it carelessly on a table near, and returning once more to
her position near the door, watched the sale proceed. One by one Polly
Singleton parted with her dresses, her pictures, her furniture. At
last, opening a case, she proceeded to dispose of some trinkets, none
of which, with the exception of the pink coral set, was of very high
value. This, which consisted of necklace, bracelets, and earrings, and
some pretty pins for the hair, was most eagerly coveted by many.
Several girls bid for the coral, and Maggie, who had not raised her
voice since she secured the sealskin jacket, once more noticed the
greedy glitter in Rosalind's eyes.

"I can't help it," she said, turning and speaking in a low voice to
Priscilla, who stood by her side-- "I can't help it, Prissie; I don't
want that coral a bit-- coral doesn't suit me: I dislike it as an
ornament. But something inside of me says Rose Merton shall not wear
it. Stay here, Prissie, I'll be back in a minute."

Miss Oliphant moved forward; she was so tall that her head could be
seen above those of most of the other girls.

The bids for the coral had now risen to three pounds ten. Maggie at
one bound raised them ten shillings. Rose bid against her, and for a
short time one or two other girls raised their previous offers. The
price for the coral rose and rose. Soon a large sum was offered for
it, and still the bids kept rising. Rosalind and Maggie were once more
alone in the field, and now any onlooker could perceive that it was
not the desire to obtain the pretty ornaments, but the wish for
victory which animated both girls.

When the bids rose above ten guineas Rosalind's face assumed a ghastly
hue, but she was now far too angry with Maggie to pause or consider
the fact that she was offering more money for the pink coral than she
possessed in the world. The bids still went higher and higher. There
was intense excitement in the room; all the noisy babel ceased. No
sound was heard but the eager voices of the two who were cruelly
fighting each other and the astonished tones of the young auctioneer.
Twelve, thirteen, fourteen pounds were reached. Maggie's bid was
fourteen pounds.

"Guineas!" screamed Rose with a weak sort of gasp.

Maggie turned and looked at her, then walked slowly back to her place
by Priscilla's side.

The coral belonged to Rose Merton, and she had four guineas too little
to pay for it.

  CHAPTER XVIII

 A BLACK SELF AND A WHITE SELF

"IT is quite true, Maggie," said Nancy Banister. "It is about the
auction. Yes, there is no doubt about that. What possessed you to go?"

Maggie Oliphant was standing in the center of her own room with an
open letter in her hand. Nancy was reading it over her shoulder:

  KATHARINE HALL,

  "Dec. 2.

  "Miss Eccleston and Miss Heath request Miss Oliphant and Miss Peel
  to present themselves in Miss Eccleston's private sitting-room this
  evening at seven o'clock."

"That is all," said Maggie. "It sounds as solemn and unfriendly as if
one were about to be tried for some capital offense."

"It's the auction, of course," repeated Nancy. "Those girls thought
they had kept it so quiet, but some one must have 'peached,' I
suppose, to curry favor. Whatever made you go, Maggie? You know you
have never mixed yourself up with that Day, and Merton, and Marsh set.
As to that poor Polly Singleton, there's no harm in her, but she's a
perfect madcap. What could have possessed you to go?"

"My evil genius," repeated Maggie in a gloomy tone. "You don't suppose
I wished to be there, Nancy; but that horrid little Merton girl said
something taunting, and then I forgot myself. Oh, dear, Nancy! what
shall I ever do with that other self of mine? It will ruin me in the
end. It gets stronger every day."

Maggie sat down on the sofa. Nancy suddenly knelt by her side.

"Dear Meg," she said caressingly, "you're the noblest, and the
sweetest, and the most beautiful girl at St. Benet's! Why can't you
live up to your true self?"

"There are two selfs in me," replied Maggie. "And if one even
approaches the faintest semblance of angel-hood, the other is black as
pitch. There, it only wastes time to talk the thing over. I'm in for
the sort of scrape I hate most. See, Nancy, I bought this at the
auction."

She opened her wardrobe, and taking out Polly Singleton's magnificent
eighty-guinea sealskin jacket, slipped it on.

"Don't I look superb?" said Maggie. She shut the wardrobe-door and
surveyed herself in its long glass. Brown was Maggie Oliphant's color.
It harmonized with the soft tints of her delicately rounded face, with
the rich color in her hair, with the light in her eyes. It added to
all these charms, softening them, giving to them a more perfect
luster.

"Oh, Maggie!" said Nancy, clasping her hands, "you ought always to be
dressed as you are now."

Maggie dropped her arms suddenly to her sides. The jacket, a little
too large for her, slid off her shoulders and lay in a heap on the
floor.

"What?" she said suddenly. "Am I never to show my true and real self?
Am I always to be disguised in sham beauty and sham goodness? Oh,
Nancy, Nancy! if there is a creature I hate-- I hate-- her name is
Maggie Oliphant!"

Nancy picked up the sealskin jacket and put it back into the wardrobe.

"I am sorry you went to the auction, Maggie," she repeated, "and I'm
sorry still to find you bought poor Polly Singleton's sealskin. Well,
it's done now, and we have to consider how to get you out of this
scrape.

There's no time for you to indulge in that morbid talk of yours
to-day, Maggie, darling. Let us consider what's best to be done."

"Nothing," retorted Maggie. "I shall simply go to Miss Heath and Miss
Eccleston and tell them the truth. There's nothing else to be done. No
hope whatever of getting out of the affair. I went to Polly
Singleton's auction because Rosalind Merton raised the demon in me. I
tried to become the possessor of the sealskin jacket because her heart
was set on it. I won an eighty-guinea jacket for ten guineas. You see
how ignoble my motives were, also how unworthy the results. I did
worse even than that-- for I will out with the truth to you, Nancy-- I
revenged myself still further upon that spiteful little gnat,
Rosalind, and raised the price of her coveted coral to such an extent
that I know by her face she is pounds in debt for it. Now, my dear,
what have you to say to me? Nothing good, I know that. Let me read
Aristotle for the next hour just to calm my mind."

Maggie turned away, seated herself by her writing bureau and tried to
lose both the past and the present in her beloved Greek.

"She will do it, too," whispered Nancy as she left the room. "No one
ever was made quite like Maggie. She can feel tortures and yet the
next moment she can be in ecstasy. She is so tantalizing that at times
you are almost brought to believe her own stories about herself. You
are almost sure that she has got the black self as well as the white
self. But through it all, yes, through it all, you love her. Dear
Maggie! Whatever happens, I must always-- always love her."

Nancy was walking slowly down the corridor when a room-door was gently
opened and the sweet, childish, innocent face of Rosalind peeped out.

"Nancy, is that you? Do, for Heaven's sake, come in and speak to me
for a moment."

"What about, Rosalind? I have only a minute or two to spare. My German
lecture is to begin immediately."

"Oh, what does that signify? You don't know the awful trouble we've
got into."

"You mean about the auction?"

"Yes-- yes; so you have heard?"

"Of course I've heard. If that is all, Rosalind, I cannot wait to
discuss the matter now. I am very sorry for you, of course, but as I
said to Maggie, why did you do it?"

"Oh, you've been talking to Miss Oliphant? Thank goodness she'll have
to answer for her sins as well as the rest of us."

"Maggie is my friend, so you need not abuse her, Rosalind."

"Lucky for her that she has got one true friend!" retorted Rosalind.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean what I say. Maggie is making such a fool of herself that we
are all laughing at her behind her back."

"Indeed? I fail to understand you."

"You are being made a fool of, too, Nancy. Oh, I did think you'd have
had more sense."

"How? Speak. Say at once what you want to say, Rosalind, and stop
talking riddles, for I must fly to my work."

"Fly then," retorted Rosalind, "only think twice before you give your
confidence to a certain person. A person who makes a fine parade of
