come to?"

"That's eight," said the Black Prince.  "All right.  We only want two
more.  Go on."

"`Richard the First, surnamed the Lion Heart, was the strongest and
bravest man in England, and won many glorious battles in the Holy
Land.'"

"Hullo, I say," said the judge.  "That's pitching it just a little
strong, isn't it?  What have you got to say to that, Dicky?"

"Seems pretty square," said Richard modestly.  "He doesn't say what a
good dentist I was, though.  My! the dozens I used to pull out; and--oh,
I say--look here, he says nothing about Blondel, and the tune I
composed.  That's far more important than the Crusades.  It was an
andante in F minor, you know, and--"

"That'll do, that'll do, Dicky.  We've heard that before," interrupted
the judge.  "Score him down half a lie, Nigger, and call up Johnny."

"`King John, surnamed Lackland, was a wicked king.  He was forced to
yield to the barons, and he lost all his clothes in the Wash.'"

"Well, I never!" said John, foaming with rage; "if that isn't the
coolest bit of lying I ever heard!  Here have I been and worn my fingers
to the bone writing Magna Charta and giving England all her liberties,
and he never once mentions it!  My lord and gentlemen, I should like to
read you the document I hold in my hand, in order that you may judge--"

"What, eh?  Read that thing?" exclaimed Henry the Eighth, in horror.
"You'd better try it on, that's all.  Good gracious me, what next?  I've
a good mind to commit you for contempt of court.  The question is, were
you a wicked king? and did you lose your clothes in the Wash?"

"I am surprised and pained that your lordship should ask me either
question.  When I assure you, my lord and gentlemen, that a more dutiful
son, a wiser monarch, a tenderer husband, and a more estimable man than
the humble individual who now addresses you, never drew--"

"Teeth," put in Richard I.

"No, breath," continued John.  "And when I further tell you that I never
even sent my clothes to the wash, and therefore could not possibly have
lost them there, you will--"

"All right, pull up," said the judge.  "That'll do.  Keep the rest, my
boy.  That makes ten and a half--more than we want.  Now, then, the next
thing is, what sort of execution shall we have?"

"Oh, please," said the ladies, "_please_, Harry, darling, let the jury
go out and bring the verdict in.  It will be such fun."

"Eh, what?" said Henry, "oh, bother the jury!  Where are they?  Clear
out, do you hear!" said he, addressing the twelve.  "Go up to the
Napoleon room and talk it over, and stay till I send for you."

The jury obeyed, and I was left alone in the dock.

"Now," said the judge, evidently relieved, "let's have the execution."

"But we've not had the verdict yet," said Anne Boleyn.

"That'll do any time," said Henry.  "Just as much fun to have it
afterwards.  Besides, it's a wonderful saving of time to get the
execution over now, while we're waiting; and then we can go straight to
the refreshment-room.  Eh, girls?  Eh, what?  Ah, I thought so."

"Oh, well," said Catherine of Aragon, "but _do_ put him in the condemned
cell for a minute or so, and then have him brought out, like they all
are, and--"

"_As_ they all are," said Henry the First.  "Like is only used when--"

"Hold your tongue, you impertinent, forward young man!" said Catherine
in a rage.  "There, now!" added she, beginning to cry, "I've forgotten
what I was going to say, all through you!"

"I think," said Henry the Eighth, waving his hand for silence, "he'd
better be hung.  Marwood tells me it's a very pretty sight; and the
gallows are there quite handy.  Besides," added he confidentially, "we
should have to tip him in any case, so we may as well let him have the
job, and get what we can for our money.  What, eh?"

Every one approved of this, and the executioner was summoned.

Then, as I stood there, shivering in every limb, unable to speak, or
even to move, I was aware once more of the lantern coming towards me,
and of a hand laid heavily on my shoulder.

"Come, young gentleman," said the voice, "wake up--or you'll get locked
in.  They're shutting the doors.  Tumble up, and look sharp."

It was Madame Tussaud's porter; and I had been fast asleep, after all!



CHAPTER EIGHT.

A STORY OF THE CIVIL WARS.

Sub-Chapter I.

THE INTERRUPTED FEAST.

The Singletons were a small Lowland clan, or rather faction, for their
name does not appear in history as a clan.  For all that, they were as
loyal to their king and as devoted to their chief as any clan in
Scotland, and when the time for sacrifice and hard blows came, the
Singletons, as every one knew, were ever to the front.

And it is only fair to say the Singletons were _always_ in the wars.
When they were not fighting the Roundheads they were fighting the
Campbells or the Frasers or the Macintoshes, or others of their
hereditary foes; or if none of these were obliging enough, or at liberty
to indulge them in their favourite pastime, then they made enemies for
themselves among the neighbouring clans, or else crossed over to Holland
to keep their hands in there till fortune favoured them once more at
home.  The old castle, with its rambling towers, and walls, and
buttresses was a sort of rallying-point for all the pugnacious spirits
of the time, and its bluff walls showed many a scar and many a dint
where hostile guns had played upon them, not, you may be sure, without
reply.

The Singletons, in fact (and specially since the old laird had died),
thrived on fighting.  At the present day they might, perhaps, have
passed as freebooters and outlaws, but during the troubled times of the
Commonwealth they were looked upon as a noble band of patriots, whose
swords were ever ready in the king's cause, and whose castle was as open
and hospitable to a friend as it was unyielding to a foe.

Such was the place within whose weather-beaten and war-beaten walls a
festive company was assembled one November afternoon in the year of our
Lord 16--.

For once in a way the Singletons were at peace.  The king's cause was
for a time under a cloud, and the Campbells and the Frasers and the
Macintoshes were far too busy about their own affairs to come out of the
way to defy this small bulldog of a clan in the south.  The Singletons
had serious thoughts of invading some place, or sacking some castle, or
making a raid across the border, just to pass the time.  It was like
being out of work!  They fretted and chafed in their fortress, and
nearly fell out among themselves, and very heartily wished some one
would give them a pretext for a fight.  But no one did.

It was at least a diversion for them to celebrate the coming of age of
the young laird, and the event, which in times of war might have passed
scarcely heeded, now became one of mighty importance to these restless
Singletons.

They called together every man of the name who could easily be found
between the Solway and the Tay.  They hoisted the old family ensign on
the castle walls, and by way of mischief some of them displayed the
pennant of the Macfies--another rival clan--below it.  They drove in
twelve head of oxen, regardless of proprietorship, wherewith to make
good cheer at table, and they decked the grand old banqueting-hall with
branches and heather, till it was more like a bower than a room.

These and many other things the Singletons did by way of showing honour
to the occasion, and when that evening thirty of them sat round the
festive board, with the young chief at the head, and with pyramids of
beef and mutton and bread before them, their satisfaction and enthusiasm
reached its highest pitch.

"Here's luck to the Singleton!" shouted they, "root and branch, laird
and clan."

And amid cheers, prolonged and deafening, the health was honoured and
the banquet proceeded.

"Was ever luck like ours?" growled one youth to his neighbour.  "Here
have we been six weeks idle, with never a knock."

"And it'll be six weeks longer before we get one again, I'm thinking,
unless the king's party gather," said his comrade.  "We don't get our
fair share of fighting, Tam, that's what it is."

"May be the young laird will change all that.  But, I say, Donald, I
have my doubts of it."

"What, of the young laird?" exclaimed the others.

"Ay, he's been brought up in a queer school in England, they tell me,
where it's considered ill-breeding to molest your neighbour."

"Do you say so?  The barbarians!  That would never do for us, Tam.  But
of course the young laird taught them better?"

"They say they taught him worse, and that-- Well, never mind.  What is
auld Geordie saying?"

Auld Geordie was on his feet, announcing with great glee that a convoy
of treasure, bound for Edinburgh, was on its way at that moment from
Newcastle, so he had heard, and would pass within three miles of
Singleton Towers.

"And it'll be ours, boys," cried the old man, turning to his comrades;
"and the young laird shall win his spurs upon it!  What do you say?"

A shout was the only answer.  The proposal was one after the Singletons'
own heart.  Every one looked towards the young laird.

Singleton was a dark, mild-looking youth, old for his years, and up till
the present time a stranger to his clan.  For, as has already been
hinted, he had but just returned from England, where his boyhood had
been spent, to celebrate his coming of age.  Great things were expected
of him, not only as the head of the clan, but as the son of his brave
father, who had died twelve years ago; and since whose death the
Singletons had been leaderless.  With a bold leader they might achieve
anything; and they now welcomed the presence of a chief once more in
their midst with all the hope and confidence of sons welcoming a father.
It was, therefore, with astonishment and dismay that they heard him
reply to auld Geordie's proposal--

"I did not know the Singletons were highwaymen!"

If the roof had fallen in it could not have caused greater
consternation.  The Singletons looked aghast to hear such a speech from
their chief!

"Is the boy mad?" said one in a whisper.

"Or a coward?" said another.

"Or a fool?" said another.

"The laird's joking," said auld Geordie, in a coaxing voice; "and we are
glad to see ye so merry.  But ye'll be in earnest to-morrow, I warrant,
with a score of troopers between you and a thousand pounds!"

"I'm in earnest now," replied young Singleton.  "I'm no robber chief, I
tell you.  The convoy shall go safe to Edinburgh, as far as we are
concerned.  But, come now, Geordie, I want to hear something about this
old castle of mine, for you know I was scarcely in it since I was a
boy."

But it was easier to turn the talk than to turn the thoughts of his
clansmen.  They experienced, all of them, a distinct disappointment at
this first exercise of authority on the part of their young laird; and
the cheeks of some of the younger among them actually coloured with
shame at the thought that a Singleton--the Singleton--should be lacking
(as they could not help thinking he was) in bravery.  However, they said
nothing, but seemed to listen to auld Geordie, as he launched out into
an account of the old castle of Singleton Towers.

"It's a brave old place," said he.  "Sir David Singleton it was who
built it here, on this arm of the sea, in the time of King Wallace.  The
story goes that Wallace himself set the top stone of the great tower
with his own hands.  Sir David did not live long to enjoy the
stronghold, as you have heard."

"How did he die?  I never heard that," asked the young laird.

"Alas! it is a sad story, though a short one.  Sir David had a son, and
that son was a coward--the first, and we hope the last, coward who ever
bore the name."

Here all looked hard at the youth, who, not noticing their meaning
glances, said--

"Amen, with all my heart!  Go on."

"Well, this son grew up, like you, in England, and it was not till he
had reached man's estate that he came here.  His father, a proud man,
and ambitious, rejoiced, as your father would have rejoiced this day, to
see a son in his place, ready, as he hoped, to carry on the brave
traditions of his name to a future generation.  The youth was welcomed
home with great pomp and rejoicing, and for aught men could see he was a
worthy son of a worthy sire.

"But, alas! as the Bible says, `Pride comes before the fall.'  A few
days after his home-coming, the news came that a party of English was
advancing on Singleton Towers.  The old laird, nothing doubting, ordered
his son to take fifty men and meet the enemy, while he himself stayed
behind to guard this place.

"The lad obeyed, and marched forth.  They met, he and the English, under
Brantor Hill yonder; and then appeared the real character of the boy.
At the first onset, before ever a blow was struck, he turned and fled,
no one knows whither.

"The old laird for long would not believe it; but when on all hands the
story was confirmed, and no news came of the lad, he sickened and
drooped.  He shut himself up in the turret-room out there and never left
it except at night, when his one walk was on the east terrace, over this
very room.

"One night they missed the sound of his footsteps, and next morning he
was found dead in his little chamber--dead of a broken heart.  And they
say that if ever again a coward should be the laird of Singleton, that
that old man will walk out there where he walked four centuries ago."

A dead silence followed the close of this story, and all eyes, by a sort
of common instinct, were turned towards the head of the table.  At that
moment, apparently from the terrace outside, came a sound of footsteps;
and as they listened, every cheek grew suddenly pale, and a shudder
crept round the assembly.  The silence, however, was broken by a laugh
from the young laird himself, who had been the only unmoved hearer of
this last mysterious sound.

"Why, there is my poor dog, Jupiter, out there!  I had quite forgotten
him.  Let him in, some one!"

No one stirred.  The young chief looked round perplexed, and then rose
himself and went to the window and opened it.  As he did so, a huge
shaggy mastiff bounded into the apartment, barking and capering for glee
at seeing once again his master and hearing his voice.

"Lie down, sir, quiet.  Now, my men, what think you of this for a ghost?
Thanks, Geordie, for your story.  I remember now, I heard it when a
child.  Well, let's hope it will be a long while yet before Sir David's
ghost is put to the trouble of a midnight walk."

"Hist, my young master," said Tam; "it's ill jesting with the spirits."

"What, Tam! one would think, now, by the way you speak, you would not
dare to keep a solitary watch on the east terrace yourself."

"I'd dare anything," replied Tam, "but--"

"But you would rather not," replied Singleton, laughing.

That laugh roused the spirit of Tam, who, though superstitious, was
hardly a coward.

