enough reason to decide them to reject the more simple hypothesis.
Moreover, the rays of Schumann are, as we have seen, extraordinarily
absorbable,--so much so that they have to be observed in a vacuum. The
most striking property of the X rays is, on the contrary, the facility
with which they pass through obstacles, and it is impossible not to
attach considerable importance to such a difference.

Some attribute this marvellous radiation to longitudinal vibrations,
which, as M. Duhem has shown, would be propagated in dielectric media
with a speed equal to that of light. But the most generally accepted
idea is the one formulated from the first by Sir George Stokes and
followed up by Professor Wiechert. According to this theory the X rays
should be due to a succession of independent pulsations of the ether,
starting from the points where the molecules projected by the cathode
of the Crookes tube meet the anticathode. These pulsations are not
continuous vibrations like the radiations of the spectrum; they are
isolated and extremely short; they are, besides, transverse, like the
undulations of light, and the theory shows that they must be
propagated with the speed of light. They should present neither
refraction nor reflection, but, under certain conditions, they may be
subject to the phenomena of diffraction. All these characteristics are
found in the Roentgen rays.

Professor J.J. Thomson adopts an analogous idea, and states the
precise way in which the pulsations may be produced at the moment when
the electrified particles forming the cathode rays suddenly strike the
anticathode wall. The electromagnetic induction behaves in such a way
that the magnetic field is not annihilated when the particle stops,
and the new field produced, which is no longer in equilibrium, is
propagated in the dielectric like an electric pulsation. The electric
and magnetic pulsations excited by this mechanism may give birth to
effects similar to those of light. Their slight amplitude, however, is
the cause of there here being neither refraction nor diffraction
phenomena, save in very special conditions. If the cathode particle is
not stopped in zero time, the pulsation will take a greater amplitude,
and be, in consequence, more easily absorbable; to this is probably to
be attributed the differences which may exist between different tubes
and different rays.

It is right to add that some authors, notwithstanding the proved
impossibility of deviating them in a magnetic field, have not
renounced the idea of comparing them with the cathode rays. They
suppose, for instance, that the rays are formed by electrons animated
with so great a velocity that their inertia, conformably with theories
which I shall examine later, no longer permit them to be stopped in
their course; this is, for instance, the theory upheld by Mr
Sutherland. We know, too, that to M. Gustave Le Bon they represent the
extreme limit of material things, one of the last stages before the
vanishing of matter on its return to the ether.

Everyone has heard of the N rays, whose name recalls the town of
Nancy, where they were discovered. In some of their singular
properties they are akin to the X rays, while in others they are
widely divergent from them.

M. Blondlot, one of the masters of contemporary physics, deeply
respected by all who know him, admired by everyone for the penetration
of his mind, and the author of works remarkable for the originality
and sureness of his method, discovered them in radiations emitted from
various sources, such as the sun, an incandescent light, a Nernst
lamp, and even bodies previously exposed to the sun's rays. The
essential property which allows them to be revealed is their action on
a small induction spark, of which they increase the brilliancy; this
phenomenon is visible to the eye and is rendered objective by
photography.

Various other physicists and numbers of physiologists, following the
path opened by M. Blondlot, published during 1903 and 1904 manifold
but often rather hasty memoirs, in which they related the results of
their researches, which do not appear to have been always conducted
with the accuracy desirable. These results were most strange; they
seemed destined to revolutionise whole regions not only of the domain
of physics, but likewise of the biological sciences. Unfortunately the
method of observation was always founded on the variations in
visibility of the spark or of a phosphorescent substance, and it soon
became manifest that these variations were not perceptible to all
eyes.

No foreign experimenter has succeeded in repeating the experiments,
while in France many physicists have failed; and hence the question
has much agitated public opinion. Are we face to face with a very
singular case of suggestion, or is special training and particular
dispositions required to make the phenomenon apparent? It is not
possible, at the present moment, to declare the problem solved; but
very recent experiments by M. Gutton and a note by M. Mascart have
reanimated the confidence of those who hoped that such a scholar as M.
Blondlot could not have been deluded by appearances. However, these
last proofs in favour of the existence of the rays have themselves
been contested, and have not succeeded in bringing conviction to
everyone.

It seems very probable indeed that certain of the most singular
conclusions arrived at by certain authors on the subject will lapse
into deserved oblivion. But negative experiments prove nothing in a
case like this, and the fact that most experimenters have failed where
M. Blondlot and his pupils have succeeded may constitute a
presumption, but cannot be regarded as a demonstrative argument. Hence
we must still wait; it is exceedingly possible that the illustrious
physicist of Nancy may succeed in discovering objective actions of the
N rays which shall be indisputable, and may thus establish on a firm
basis a discovery worthy of those others which have made his name so
justly celebrated.

According to M. Blondlot the N rays can be polarised, refracted, and
dispersed, while they have wavelengths comprised within .0030 micron,
and .0760 micron--that is to say, between an eighth and a fifth of
that found for the extreme ultra-violet rays. They might be, perhaps,
simply rays of a very short period. Their existence, stripped of the
parasitical and somewhat singular properties sought to be attributed
to them, would thus appear natural enough. It would, moreover, be
extremely important, and lead, no doubt, to most curious applications;
it can be conceived, in fact, that such rays might serve to reveal
what occurs in those portions of matter whose too minute dimensions
escape microscopic examination on account of the phenomena of
diffraction.

From whatever point of view we look at it, and whatever may be the
fate of the discovery, the history of the N rays is particularly
instructive, and must give food for reflection to those interested in
questions of scientific methods.


Sec. 6. THE ETHER AND GRAVITATION

The striking success of the hypothesis of the ether in optics has, in
our own days, strengthened the hope of being able to explain, by an
analogous representation, the action of gravitation.

For a long time, philosophers who rejected the idea that ponderability
is a primary and essential quality of all bodies have sought to reduce
their weight to pressures exercised in a very subtle fluid. This was
the conception of Descartes, and was perhaps the true idea of Newton
himself. Newton points out, in many passages, that the laws he had
discovered were independent of the hypotheses that could be formed on
the way in which universal attraction was produced, but that with
sufficient experiments the true cause of this attraction might one day
be reached. In the preface to the second edition of the Optics he
writes: "To prove that I have not considered weight as a universal
property of bodies, I have added a question as to its cause,
preferring this form of question because my interpretation does not
entirely satisfy me in the absence of experiment"; and he puts the
question in this shape: "Is not this medium (the ether) more rarefied
in the interior of dense bodies like the sun, the planets, the comets,
than in the empty spaces which separate them? Passing from these
bodies to great distances, does it not become continually denser, and
in that way does it not produce the weight of these great bodies with
regard to each other and of their parts with regard to these bodies,
each body tending to leave the most dense for the most rarefied
parts?"

Evidently this view is incomplete, but we may endeavour to state it
precisely. If we admit that this medium, the properties of which would
explain the attraction, is the same as the luminous ether, we may
first ask ourselves whether the action of gravitation is itself also
due to oscillations. Some authors have endeavoured to found a theory
on this hypothesis, but we are immediately brought face to face with
very serious difficulties. Gravity appears, in fact, to present quite
exceptional characteristics. No agent, not even those which depend
upon the ether, such as light and electricity, has any influence on
its action or its direction. All bodies are, so to speak, absolutely
transparent to universal attraction, and no experiment has succeeded
in demonstrating that its propagation is not instantaneous. From
various astronomical observations, Laplace concluded that its
velocity, in any case, must exceed fifty million times that of light.
It is subject neither to reflection nor to refraction; it is
independent of the structure of bodies; and not only is it
inexhaustible, but also (as is pointed out, according to M. Hannequin,
by an English scholar, James Croll) the distribution of the effects of
the attracting force of a mass over the manifold particles which may
successively enter the field of its action in no way diminishes the
attraction it exercises on each of them respectively, a thing which is
seen nowhere else in nature.

Nevertheless it is possible, by means of certain hypotheses, to
construct interpretations whereby the appropriate movements of an
elastic medium should explain the facts clearly enough. But these
movements are very complex, and it seems almost inconceivable that the
same medium could possess simultaneously the state of movement
corresponding to the transmission of a luminous phenomenon and that
constantly imposed on it by the transmission of gravitation.

Another celebrated hypothesis was devised by Lesage, of Geneva. Lesage
supposed space to be overrun in all directions by currents of
_ultramundane_ corpuscles. This hypothesis, contested by Maxwell, is
interesting. It might perhaps be taken up again in our days, and it is
not impossible that the assimilation of these corpuscles to electrons
might give a satisfactory image.[28]

[Footnote 28: M. Sagnac (_Le Radium_, Jan. 1906, p. 14), following
perhaps Professors Elster and Geitel, has lately taken up this idea
anew.--ED.]

M. Cremieux has recently undertaken experiments directed, as he
thinks, to showing that the divergences between the phenomena of
gravitation and all the other phenomena in nature are more apparent
than real. Thus the evolution in the heart of the ether of a quantity
of gravific energy would not be entirely isolated, and as in the case
of all evolutions of all energy of whatever kind, it should provoke a
partial transformation into energy of a different form. Thus again the
liberated energy of gravitation would vary when passing from one
material to another, as from gases into liquids, or from one liquid to
a different one.

On this last point the researches of M. Cremieux have given
affirmative results: if we immerse in a large mass of some liquid
several drops of another not miscible with the first, but of identical
density, we form a mass representing no doubt a discontinuity in the
ether, and we may ask ourselves whether, in conformity with what
happens in all other phenomena of nature, this discontinuity has not a
tendency to disappear.

If we abide by the ordinary consequences of the Newtonian theory of
potential, the drops should remain motionless, the hydrostatic
impulsion forming an exact equilibrium to their mutual attraction. Now
M. Cremieux remarks that, as a matter of fact, they slowly approach
each other.

Such experiments are very delicate; and with all the precautions taken
by the author, it cannot yet be asserted that he has removed all
possibility of the action of the phenomena of capillarity nor all
possible errors proceeding from extremely slight differences of
temperature. But the attempt is interesting and deserves to be
followed up.

Thus, the hypothesis of the ether does not yet explain all the
phenomena which the considerations relating to matter are of
themselves powerless to interpret. If we wished to represent to
ourselves, by the mechanical properties of a medium filling the whole
of the universe, all luminous, electric, and gravitation phenomena, we
should be led to attribute to this medium very strange and almost
contradictory characteristics; and yet it would be still more
inconceivable that this medium should be double or treble, that there
should be two or three ethers each occupying space as if it were
alone, and interpenetrating it without exercising any action on one
another. We are thus brought, by a close examination of facts, rather
to the idea that the properties of the ether are not wholly reducible
to the rules of ordinary mechanics.

The physicist has therefore not yet succeeded in answering the
question often put to him by the philosopher: "Has the ether really an
objective existence?" However, it is not necessary to know the answer
in order to utilize the ether. In its ideal properties we find the
means of determining the form of equations which are valid, and to the
learned detached from all metaphysical prepossession this is the
essential point.




CHAPTER VII

A CHAPTER IN THE HISTORY OF SCIENCE: WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY


Sec. 1

I have endeavoured in this book to set forth impartially the ideas
dominant at this moment in the domain of physics, and to make known
the facts essential to them. I have had to quote the authors of the
principal discoveries in order to be able to class and, in some sort,
to name these discoveries; but I in no way claim to write even a
summary history of the physics of the day.

I am not unaware that, as has often been said, contemporary history is
the most difficult of all histories to write. A certain step backwards
seems necessary in order to enable us to appreciate correctly the
relative importance of events, and details conceal the full view from
eyes which are too close to them, as the trees prevent us from seeing
the forest. The event which produces a great sensation has often only
insignificant consequences; while another, which seemed at the outset
of the least importance and little worthy of note, has in the long run
a widespread and deep influence.

If, however, we deal with the history of a positive discovery,
contemporaries who possess immediate information, and are in a
position to collect authentic evidence at first hand, will make, by
bringing to it their sincere testimony, a work of erudition which may
be very useful, but which we may be tempted to look upon as very easy
of execution. Yet such a labour, even when limited to the study of a
very minute question or of a recent invention, is far from being
accomplished without the historian stumbling over serious obstacles.

An invention is never, in reality, to be attributed to a single
author. It is the result of the work of many collaborators who
sometimes have no acquaintance with one another, and is often the
fruit of obscure labours. Public opinion, however, wilfully simple in
face of a sensational discovery, insists that the historian should
also act as judge; and it is the historian's task to disentangle the
truth in the midst of the contest, and to declare infallibly to whom
the acknowledgments of mankind should be paid. He must, in his
capacity as skilled expert, expose piracies, detect the most carefully
hidden plagiarisms, and discuss the delicate question of priority;
while he must not be deluded by those who do not fear to announce, in
bold accents, that they have solved problems of which they find the
solution imminent, and who, the day after its final elucidation by
third parties, proclaim themselves its true discoverers. He must rise
above a partiality which deems itself excusable because it proceeds
from national pride; and, finally, he must seek with patience for what
has gone before. While thus retreating step by step he runs the risk
of losing himself in the night of time.

An example of yesterday seems to show the difficulties of such a task.
Among recent discoveries the invention of wireless telegraphy is one
of those which have rapidly become popular, and looks, as it were, an
exact subject clearly marked out. Many attempts have already been made
to write its history. Mr J.J. Fahie published in England as early as
1899 an interesting work entitled the _History of Wireless
Telegraphy_; and about the same time M. Broca published in France a
very exhaustive work named _La Telegraphie sans fil_. Among the
reports presented to the Congres international de physique (Paris,
1900), Signor Righi, an illustrious Italian scholar, whose personal
efforts have largely contributed to the invention of the present
system of telegraphy, devoted a chapter, short, but sufficiently
complete, of his masterly report on Hertzian waves, to the history of
wireless telegraphy. The same author, in association with Herr
Bernhard Dessau, has likewise written a more important work, _Die
Telegraphie ohne Draht_; and _La Telegraphie sans fil et les ondes
Electriques_ of MM. J. Boulanger and G. Ferrie may also be consulted
with advantage, as may _La Telegraphie sans fil_ of Signor Dominico
Mazotto. Quite recently Mr A. Story has given us in a little volume
called _The Story of Wireless Telegraphy_, a condensed but very
precise recapitulation of all the attempts which have been made to
establish telegraphic communication without the intermediary of a
conducting wire. Mr Story has examined many documents, has sometimes
brought curious facts to light, and has studied even the most recently
adopted apparatus.

It may be interesting, by utilising the information supplied by these
authors and supplementing them when necessary by others, to trace the
sources of this modern discovery, to follow its developments, and thus
to prove once more how much a matter, most simple in appearance,
demands extensive and complex researches on the part of an author
desirous of writing a definitive work.


Sec. 2

The first, and not the least difficulty, is to clearly define the
subject. The words "wireless telegraphy," which at first seem to
correspond to a simple and perfectly clear idea, may in reality apply
to two series of questions, very different in the mind of a physicist,
between which it is important to distinguish. The transmission of
signals demands three organs which all appear indispensable: the
transmitter, the receiver, and, between the two, an intermediary
establishing the communication. This intermediary is generally the
most costly part of the installation and the most difficult to set up,
while it is here that the sensible losses of energy at the expense of
good output occur. And yet our present ideas cause us to consider this
intermediary as more than ever impossible to suppress; since, if we
are definitely quit of the conception of action at a distance, it
becomes inconceivable to us that energy can be communicated from one
point to another without being carried by some intervening medium.
But, practically, the line will be suppressed if, instead of
constructing it artificially, we use to replace it one of the natural
media which separate two points on the earth. These natural media are
divided into two very distinct categories, and from this
classification arise two series of questions to be examined.

Between the two points in question there are, first, the material
media such as the air, the earth, and the water. For a long time we
have used for transmissions to a distance the elastic properties of
the air, and more recently the electric conductivity of the soil and
of water, particularly that of the sea.

Modern physics leads us on the other hand, as we have seen, to
consider that there exists throughout the whole of the universe
another and more subtle medium which penetrates everywhere, is endowed
with elasticity _in vacuo_, and retains its elasticity when it
penetrates into a great number of bodies, such as the air. This medium
is the luminous ether which possesses, as we cannot doubt, the
property of being able to transmit energy, since it itself brings to
us by far the larger part of the energy which we possess on earth and
which we find in the movements of the atmosphere, or of waterfalls,
and in the coal mines proceeding from the decomposition of carbon
compounds under the influence of the solar energy. For a long time
also before the existence of the ether was known, the duty of
transmitting signals was entrusted to it. Thus through the ages a
double evolution is unfolded which has to be followed by the historian
who is ambitious of completeness.


Sec. 3

If such an historian were to examine from the beginning the first
order of questions, he might, no doubt, speak only briefly of the
attempts earlier than electric telegraphy. Without seeking to be
paradoxical, he certainly ought to mention the invention of the
speaking-trumpet and other similar inventions which for a long time
have enabled mankind, by the ingenious use of the elastic properties
of the natural media, to communicate at greater distances than they
could have attained without the aid of art. After this in some sort
prehistoric period had been rapidly run through, he would have to
follow very closely the development of electric telegraphy. Almost
from the outset, and shortly after Ampere had made public the idea of
constructing a telegraph, and the day after Gauss and Weber set up
between their houses in Goettingen the first line really used, it was
thought that the conducting properties of the earth and water might be
made of service.

The history of these trials is very long, and is closely mixed up with
the history of ordinary telegraphy; long chapters for some time past
have been devoted to it in telegraphic treatises. It was in 1838,
however, that Professor C.A. Steinheil of Munich expressed, for the
first time, the clear idea of suppressing the return wire and
replacing it by a connection of the line wire to the earth. He thus at
one step covered half the way, the easiest, it is true, which was to
lead to the final goal, since he saved the use of one-half of the line
of wire. Steinheil, advised, perhaps, by Gauss, had, moreover, a very
exact conception of the part taken by the earth considered as a
conducting body. He seems to have well understood that, in certain
conditions, the resistance of such a conductor, though supposed to be
unlimited, might be independent of the distance apart of the
electrodes which carry the current and allow it to go forth. He
likewise thought of using the railway lines to transmit telegraphic
signals.

Several scholars who from the first had turned their minds to
telegraphy, had analogous ideas. It was thus that S.F.B. Morse,
superintendent of the Government telegraphs in the United States,
whose name is universally known in connection with the very simple
apparatus invented by him, made experiments in the autumn of 1842
before a special commission in New York and a numerous public
audience, to show how surely and how easily his apparatus worked. In
the very midst of his experiments a very happy idea occurred to him of
replacing by the water of a canal, the length of about a mile of wire
which had been suddenly and accidentally destroyed. This accident,
which for a moment compromised the legitimate success the celebrated
engineer expected, thus suggested to him a fruitful idea which he did
not forget. He subsequently repeated attempts to thus utilise the
earth and water, and obtained some very remarkable results.

It is not possible to quote here all the researches undertaken with
the same purpose, to which are more particularly attached the names of
S.W. Wilkins, Wheatstone, and H. Highton, in England; of Bonetti in
Italy, Gintl in Austria, Bouchot and Donat in France; but there are
some which cannot be recalled without emotion.

On the 17th December 1870, a physicist who has left in the University
of Paris a lasting name, M. d'Almeida, at that time Professor at the
Lycee Henri IV. and later Inspector-General of Public Instruction,
quitted Paris, then besieged, in a balloon, and descended in the midst
