main business. I am already on four different committees for women's
trade unions, the female franchise, and all the rest of it. I must crib
a little more time for my hand and foot. Don't you know?--Drawing my own
hand and foot from their reflection in a looking-glass till I can put
them in any position, and foreshorten them to my mind."

Rose competed for the scroll-work order, and did it so well that she got
the order, and along with it a note of commendation, a tolerably large
extension of the commission, and the first instalment of a liberal
payment for the kind of work. Her elation knew no bounds--

"Oh! Hester, I should never, never even have heard of this delightful
job but for you. What can I ever do for you?"

"Don't hug me," said Hester, retreating in veritable terror, for she had
a peculiar genuine aversion to caresses, still more than to thanks.
"Don't knock off my hat, for I cannot spare another minute to put it
straight again."

The next thing Hester heard was a half-impetuous, half-shamefaced
admission from Rose that she had resigned her post as assistant
drawing-mistress at the Misses Stone's school.

Hester looked grave on the instant. "What did you do that for?" she
demanded gruffly. "Did you mention it to your sister? Have you told them
at home?"

"No," Rose was forced to own--at least not till the deed was done. She
had acted on her own responsibility. "But indeed, Hester, it is the best
plan," she argued volubly. "Annie and all of them will say so when they
know how I mean to cultivate this scroll-work, which is paying me twice
as well already. I put it to you if I could do two things at once, and
if it would be wise to sacrifice the more profitable for the less
remunerative. Why it would be quite shortsighted and cowardly."

"Humph," said Hester, without the smallest disguise, "much experience
you have had of it! Do you know, Rose Millar, these decorators' fads are
constantly changing? Perhaps in three months they will all be for
mosaic, or tiles, or peacocks' feathers again. If I had thought you were
such a rash idiotic little goose, I should never have breathed a word to
you of this man and his scroll-work."

"Oh! but, Hester," pled Rose, determined not to be offended, "I was only
relieving the poor Misses Stone of a painful necessity. I am sure they
have never put any dependence on me since the day I broke down--I grant
you idiotically. I cannot stand the repression--suppression--whatever
you like to call it. Now that there is a way out of it, I have felt
like a wild beast in the school--the girls are so very tame--so much
tamer than we were at Miss Burridge's--where I was not a black
sheep--May will tell you if you care to ask her," protested Rose with
wounded feeling. "But I am so tired of the rosy and snowy cottages and
the ruins, and of that long-nosed collie. Sometimes I feel as if I would
give the world for him to wag his tail one day, just to give me an
excuse for crying out and flinging my india-rubber at him. I wish May
saw him; it might stop her ecstasies over her new acquisition--the brute
at home. I feel that this other brute, and the rest of the Misses
Stone's copies and models, are injuring my drawing--I know they are
making it cramped; while the scrolls help my freedom of touch like
Hogarth's line of beauty or Giotto's O. And it is such humbug, and so
horrid to have to swallow these doses of _sel-volatile_--a great healthy
girl like me!"

"Humph!" said Hester again, "I hope you may not repent what you have
done--if so, you need not blame me."




CHAPTER XIV.

THE OLD TOWN, WITH ITS AIR STAGNANT YET TROUBLED. IS MAY TO BECOME A
SCHOLAR OR A SHOP-GIRL?


The spring found Redcross still staggering under the failure of Carey's
Bank. Hardly a week passed yet without some painful result of the
disaster coming to light. These results had ceased to startle, there had
been so many of them; but they still held plenty of interest for the
fellow-sufferers, and Dora and May's letters were full of the details.

Bell Hewett had left Miss Burridge's; she had got a situation, or
rather, she had been appointed to a junior form in the Girls' Day School
at Deweshurst, going in the morning and returning in the afternoon by
train. It was a good thing for Bell on the whole. She was more
independent, had a recognized position as a public school-mistress,
which she would not have had as a private governess; and if she
continued to study, and passed various examinations, she might rise to
higher and higher forms until she blossomed into a head-mistress--fancy
Bell a head-mistress! She had quite a handsome salary, more than poor
Ned's according to the chroniclers, Dora and May. That was the bright
side of it. Unluckily for Bell, as most people thought, there was
another. The daily journeys, together with the school-work, constituted
a heavy task for a girl. Bell, toiling up from the railway station on a
rainy day, with her umbrella ready to turn inside out, and her
waterproof flying open, because her left hand, cramped and numb, was
laden with a great bundle of exercises to correct at home, presented a
dejected figure, tired out and three-fourths beaten. So the Miss Dyers
thought as they rolled past her in their carriage, and debated whether
they should not stop to pick her up and save her walking the rest of the
road. But she was such a fright, positively bedraggled with mud enough
to soil the cushions, and she could speak of nothing now save the
Deweshurst Girls' Day School and her duties there. It was too tiresome
to be borne with. Poor Bell was not clever, she was one-idea'd and slow
at work like Ned, and she had also his conscientiousness. Probably
promotion was not for her; she must drudge on as best she might. Her
great encouragement at this time, next to her father's and sister's
approbation and sympathy, was, as she told Dora, the prospect of
spending her Easter holidays with Ned at his station-house. What did she
care for its being only a station-house? after the fagging school-work
it would be great fun to put Ned's small house in order, and play at
housekeeping with him for a fortnight. She was bent on making him
comfortable, and cheering him as well as herself. If the weather would
but be fine they might have glorious rambles on the Yorkshire moors when
no trains were due.

Colonel Russell was sailing once more for India, to lay his bones there
without fail, the little Doctor prophesied sadly. In the meantime he had
got, and been glad to get, a subordinate post in his old field. At the
last moment, after he had established Mrs. Russell and her children in a
cheerful house in Bath, he made up his mind to take his grown-up
daughter out with him. But she was not to stay in his bungalow, for he
was going to a small out-of-the-way station where there would be no
accommodation or society in the barrack circle for a solitary young
lady. Fanny was to be left with a cousin of her father's, in the Bombay
Presidency. The lady had offered to take charge of her, and have her for
a long visit.

Did Annie and Rose know what that meant? Could they form an indignant,
affronted guess? "Father said," Dora quoted, "that if Colonel Russell,
an honourable gentleman and gallant officer, had not lived in the old
days and had his feelings blunted to the situation, he would never have
consented to such an arrangement for his daughter. But he had seen his
sisters come out to India for the well-understood purpose of getting
married to any eligible man in want of a wife, so why should not Fanny
do the same thing, when his pecuniary losses rendered it particularly
desirable and the opportunity offered itself? It was not in Colonel
Russell's eyes an unworthy resource. Of course Fanny was going out to be
married and creditably disposed of within a given time, else her father
would not have felt justified in paying her outfit and passage-money.
Certainly he had no intention of paying her passage-money home as a
single woman."

What would the Millars have done in Fanny's case? For was it not
dreadful--particularly when all the young people interested in the
subject remembered quite well that there had been "something" between
Cyril Carey and Fanny Russell for more than a year back? Annie had
always wondered what Fanny could see in a silly, trifling fop like
Cyril. Rose had not been without a corresponding sense of wonder as to
what Cyril could find in Fanny, who, in spite of her grand Norman
peasant's carriage and profile, was dawdling and discontented with
things in general, and though she pretended to a little knowledge of
art, did not in the least understand what she was talking about.
However, Annie's and Rose's opinions were of very little consequence
when the matter concerned--not them--but Cyril and Fanny. There had been
"something" between them which had changed the whole world to them last
summer. They would never entirely outlive and forget it--not though
Fanny went to far Cathay and married, not one, but half a dozen of
Nabobs. For she was going to obey her father, and give herself to the
first eligible bidder for her hand. No doubt she would do it with set
lips, blanched face, and great black eyes looking not only twice as
large as their natural size, but hollow and worn in the young face,
because of the dark rings round them. These were produced by the
sleepless nights which she pretended were occasioned by the hurry of her
preparations, and of her having to say good-bye to all her old friends.
But she would do it all the same.

Dora had only once caught Fanny Russell alone, and ventured on a timid,
heart-felt expostulation.

"Must you go to India, Fanny? We shall all miss you so much, and it is
not as if you were to be with your father, but just to stay with a
distant relative whom you have never seen; it does appear such a
sacrifice."

"And what should I do if I stayed behind papa, Dora?" asked Fanny,
turning upon her with those great burning eyes and parched lips. "The
house here is to be given up and the furniture sold immediately--of
course you know that. It will take all that he can spare after
discharging his share of the bank debts to keep Mrs. Russell and the
children. I am a useless sort of person--a blank in the world. I could
not nurse like Annie, or paint like Rose. I could not even be a
school-mistress like Bell Hewett. Supposing I were qualified I should
break down in a month. I was born in India, and spent the first five
years of my life there, so that I am idle and languid, without stamina
or moral courage; I am like the poor Bengalees, whom I can just
remember. There is nobody who will undertake to keep me in England,"
ended Fanny, with a short, hard laugh.

And Dora, thinking of Cyril Carey--still one of the unemployed, with his
old supercilious airs lost in the gait that was getting slouching, in
keeping with the clothes becoming shabbier and shabbier, and the
downcast, moody looks--could not find words with which to contradict
her.

Indeed, when Dora was betrayed into giving her mother a hint of that
"something," unsuspected by the seniors of the circle, which had been
between Cyril Carey and Fanny Russell, and rendered Fanny's destination
still more heartless and hateful, Mrs. Millar took an entirely
different view of the circumstances from that taken by her daughters,
and was both indignant and intolerant. "What presumption in Cyril
Carey!" broke out the gentle mother of marriageable daughters, full of
righteous wrath. "To dream of making up to a girl and perhaps engaging
her simple affections, with the danger of breaking her heart and
spoiling her prospects, when he had just failed to pass at college, and
had not so much as a calling--not to say an income, with which to keep a
wife! I shall think worse of him than I did before, after hearing this."

"But you forget, mother," remonstrated Dora, "that the bank was in
existence then. His father might have been able to do something for
Cyril."

"He was not going to live on the bank's capital and credit. There was
too much of that going on already with poor James Carey's encroaching,
dishonest relations and their friends. And I beg to tell you, Dora, that
a man who cannot help himself, but has to wait for his father to do
something for him, is a very poor match for any girl. Fanny Russell is
well rid of him. I have no doubt she will think so before she is many
years older--that is, if this is not all a piece of foolish nonsense
such as girls are apt to take into their heads about their companions.
If there was anything in it, and she had not been going away, her
father ought to have been warned, and Cyril Carey spoken to in the way
he deserved--selfish scapegrace! As it is, the bare suspicion is enough
to reconcile one to Fanny Russell's going out to India, though that
custom for girls has fallen into disrepute, and I never had any liking
for it. Still I hope that Fanny will soon make an excellent marriage,
and will learn to laugh at Cyril Carey and his unwarrantable
presumption, together with any girlish folly of which she may have been
guilty."

Mrs. Millar spoke in another fashion to the little Doctor. She had
happened to be at the railway station on the raw, chill morning when
Fanny Russell, in her smart new gray travelling suit--part of her
outfit--was put into a railway carriage by her father and left there
alone, while he went to look after the luggage and find a
smoking-carriage for himself.

Fanny sat like a statue. She did not even raise her veil when she was
bidding farewell to Lucy Hewett and Dora, who were seeing her off--not
to take a last look at Redcross, where she had spent her youth.

Mrs. Millar understood it better when she stumbled against Cyril Carey
half hidden by a lamp-post, watching the vanishing train. She might have
taken the opportunity to rebuke him for his unprincipled recklessness;
instead of doing so--after one glance at the young fellow's haggard
face--the ordinary words of greeting died away on the kind woman's lips.
She turned aside in another direction, making as if she had not seen
him, without breathing a word of the encounter until she had her
husband's ear all to herself in the privacy of the dining-room.

"O Jonathan!" she said, "I am so glad, so thankful that you did not
interfere and use any influence, any pressure on Dora about Tom
Robinson. I think it would have broken my heart to see any daughter of
mine going off as Fanny Russell went to-day, leaving the look I declare
I beheld on that poor lad's face. I should not wonder though she has
given him the last push on the road to destruction."

"Oh, come now; it is not so bad as that," protested Dr. Millar, and then
he was guilty of a most audacious paraphrase of a piece of schoolboy
slang, for which he had some excuse in the habits of his wife--"Keep
your cap on, Maria. In the first place, I see no analogy between the
cases. Dora had not a private love affair--at least I was never told of
it."

"Father, what are you thinking of? A private love affair in this house!
It was very different with poor Fanny Russell, who had only her silly,
selfish young stepmother between her and her father. I dare say she
would never have looked at an empty coxcomb like Cyril Carey if she had
been happy at home."

"And did I not hear you say," asked the gentleman, who had before now
been made the recipient of the disastrous complication of the story,
"that the girl was well quit of the jackanapes, for she could not have a
worse bargain made for her than she had nearly blundered into on her own
account?"

"Yes, I did say so," the lady admitted, when thus brought to book; "and
I'd say it again, if I had not seen that miserable, desperate expression
on his face, and he so young, and such a light-hearted, foolish dandy
only the other day. I may be sorry for him, I suppose, though I have no
son of my own. And I am grieved for poor James Carey, who is breaking up
so fast, and for poor, poor Mrs. Carey."

It was a positive relief when Dr. Millar came in one day and announced
that he had a piece of good news for the family, by far the best where
the Careys were concerned that he had heard for many a day. Cyril had
got an appointment at last; he had been offered the command of the
mounted police at Deweshurst.

"A policeman. Oh! what a downfall," cried Mrs. Millar and Dora. But when
the Doctor reminded them that there were policemen and policemen,
insisted on the fact that the practice of placing gentlemen at the head
of the constabulary was gaining ground, and asked them what they had
been in the habit of calling Colonel Shaw and Sir Edmund Henderson when
they were the chiefs of the London police, his womankind gave in.

Mrs. Carey did not say there would be another mouth less for her to
feed, but she remarked, with the same sardonic calmness, that Cyril's
clothes would be provided for him, which would be one good thing. Cyril
himself was only too glad to get away. He would have something to do,
however unpalatable in itself, instead of digging in the garden, and
going through the form of helping Robinson, his clerks, and cashier,
with their books. He would have a good horse under him once more, if he
were only to ride it to police drill.

Dora could not be sure whether he experienced a throb of thankfulness at
the thought that this had not happened till Fanny Russell was gone.
Where was constancy to draw the line? A man was not less a man because
he was also a mounted policeman. He might even be grandiloquently
styled, by those who were particular about the names of things, the
soldier of peace. Still Dora had an irresistible conception of the
pained disdain, the latent superciliousness, which would have sprung
into full force in Fanny's dark eyes, if she had ever seen the once
magnificent Cyril in the most careful modification of a _bobby's_
braided tunic and helmet.

Bell Hewett would not look so, if she, in her school-mistress character,
