which supplied food for the mother and child, while the father received
his board through the week on the farms where he worked from morning until
night. Only on Sunday was he at home with his wife and little Toni. The
wife Elsbeth, kept her little house in good order; it was narrow and tiny,
but it always looked so clean and cheerful that every one liked to come
into the sunny room, and the father, Toni, was never so happy as when he
was at home in the stone hut with his little boy on his knee.

For five years the family lived in harmony and undisturbed peace. Although
they had no abundance and little worldly goods, they were happy and
content. The husband earned enough, so they did not suffer want, and they
desired nothing beyond their simple manner of life, for they loved each
other and their greatest delight was little Toni.

The little boy grew strong and healthy and with his merry ways delighted
his father's heart, when he remained at home on Sundays, and sweetened all
his mother's work on week-days, when his father was away until late in the
evening.

Little Toni was now four years old and already knew how to be helpful in
all sorts of small ways, in the house and the goat's shed and also in the
field behind the hut. From morning until night he tripped happily behind
his mother for he was as content as the little birds up in the old
fir-tree.

When Saturday night came the mother scrubbed and cleaned with doubled
energy, to finish early, for on that day the father was through his work
earlier than other days, and she always went with little Toni by the hand,
part way to meet him. This was a great delight to the child. He now knew
very well how one task followed another in the household. When his mother
began to scrub, he jumped around in the room, with delight and cried out
again and again: "Now we are going for Father! Now we are going for
Father!" until the moment came when his mother took him by the hand and
started along.

Saturday evening had come again in the lovely month of May. Outdoors the
birds in the trees were singing merrily up to the blue sky; indoors the
mother was cleaning busily, in order to get out early into the golden
evening, and meanwhile now outside, now in the house, little Toni was
hopping around and shouting:

"Now we are going for Father!"

It was not long before the work was finished. The mother put on her shawl,
tied on her best apron and stepped out of the house.

Toni jumped for joy and ran three times around his mother, then seized her
hand and shouted once more:

"Now we are going for Father!"

Then he tripped along beside his mother in the lovely, sunny evening.
They wandered to the Wild brook, over the wooden bridge, which crosses it,
and came to the narrow foot-path, winding up through the flower-laden
meadows to the farm where the father worked.

The last rays of the setting sun fell across the meadows and the sound of
the evening bells came up from Kandergrund.

The mother stood still and folded her hands.

"Lay your hands together Toneli," she said, "it is the Angelus."

The child obeyed.

"What must I pray, Mother?" he asked.

"Give us and all tired people a blessed Sunday! Amen!" said the mother
devoutly.

Toneli repeated the prayer. Suddenly he screamed: "Father is coming!"

Down from the farm some one was running as fast as he could come.

"That is not Father," said his mother, and both went towards the running
man. When they met, the man stood still and said, gasping:

"Don't go any farther, turn around, Elsbeth. I came straight to you, for
something has happened."

"Oh, my God!" cried the woman in the greatest anguish, "has something
happened to Toni?"

"Yes, he was with the wood-cutters, and then he was struck. They have
brought him back; he is lying up at the farm-but don't go up there," he
added, holding Elsbeth fast, for she wanted to start off as soon as she
heard the news.

"Not go up?" she said quickly. "I must go to him; I must help him and see
about bringing him home."

"You cannot help him, he is--he is already dead," said the messenger in an
unsteady voice. Then he turned and ran back again, glad to have the
message off his mind.

Elsbeth threw herself down on a stone by the way, unable to stand or to
walk. She held her apron before her face and burst into weeping and
sobbing, so that Toneli was distressed and frightened. He pressed close
to his mother and began to cry too.

It was already dark, when Elsbeth finally came to herself and could think
of her child. The little one was still sitting beside her on the ground,
with both hands pressed to his eyes, and sobbing pitifully. His mother
lifted him up.

"Come, Toneli, we must go home; it is late," she said, taking him by the
hand.

But he resisted.

"No, no, we must wait for Father!" he said and pulled his mother back.

Again she could not keep back the tears. "Oh, Toneli, Father will come no
more," she said, stifling her sobs; "he is already enjoying the blessed
Sunday, we prayed for, for the weary. See, the dear Lord has taken him to
Heaven; it is so beautiful there, he will prefer to stay there."

"Then we will go too," replied Toneli, starting

"Yes, yes, we shall go there too," promised his mother, "but now we must
first go home to the stone hut," and without a word she went with the
little one back to the silent cottage.

The proprietor of the Matten farm sent word to Elsbeth the following day
that he would do everything necessary for her husband, and so she need not
come until it was time for the service, for she would not recognize her
husband. He sent her some money in order that she would not have too much
care in the next few days, and promised to think of her later on.

Elsbeth did as he advised and remained at home until the bells in
Kandergrund rang for the service. Then she went to accompany her husband
to his resting place.

Sad and hard days came for Elsbeth. She missed her good, kind husband
everywhere, and felt quite lost without him. Besides, cares came now which
she had known little about before, for her husband had had his good, daily
work. But now she felt sometimes as if she would almost despair. She had
nothing but her goat and the little potato field behind the cottage, and
from these she had to feed and clothe herself and the little one, and
besides furnish rent for the little house.

Elsbeth had only one consolation, but one that always supported her when
pain and care oppressed her; she could pray, and although often in the
midst of tears, still always with the firm belief that the dear Lord would
hear her supplication.

When at night she had put little Toni in his tiny bed she would kneel down
beside him and repeat aloud the old hymn, which now came from the depths
of her heart, as never before:

  Oh, God of Love, oh Father-heart,
    In whom my trust is founded,
  I know full well how good Thou art--
    E'en when by grief I am wounded.

  Oh Lord, it surely can not be
    That Thou wilt let me languish
  In hopeless depths of misery,
    And live in tears of anguish.

  Oh Lord, my soul yearns for thine aid
    In this dark vale of weeping;
  For thee I've waited, hoped and prayed
    Assured of thy safe keeping.
