selection considered simply as literature.

RECITATIONS.--There are some selections marked for recitation. The
public recitation of these extracts will banish awkwardness of manner,
beget self-confidence, and lay the foundation for subsequent
elocutionary work. Besides, experience teaches that a single poem or
address based upon some heroic or historic event, recited before a class
or a school, will often do more to build up a noble character and foster
a love of history, than a full term of instruction by question and
answer.

POETRY.--The numerous poetic selections, some of which are partly
analyzed by way of suggestion, will create a love for the highest and
purest forms of literature, will broaden the field of knowledge, and
emphasize the teachings of some of the prose selections. Many of them
have been written by American authors. Every American boy and girl
should be acquainted with the works of poets who have done so much for
the development of American literature and nationality.

MEMORY GEMS.--"The memorizing of choice bits of prose and poetry
enriches the vocabulary of the pupils, adorns their memory, suggests
delicate and noble thoughts, and puts them in possession of sentences of
the best construction. The recitation of these expressive texts
accustoms the children to speak with ease, grace and elegance."
("Elements of Practical Pedagogy.")

BIOGRAPHIES.--Young children enjoy literature for its own sake, and take
little interest in the personality of the writer; but as they grow
older, pleasure in the work of an author arouses an interest in the
writer himself. Brief biographical sketches are given at the close of
the volume as helps in the study of the authors from whom selections are
drawn, and to induce the pupils to read further.


       *       *       *       *       *




_4_



SUGGESTIONS


WORD STUDY.--The pupil should know how to spell and pronounce correctly
all the words of the selection he is preparing to read. He should know
their ordinary meanings and the special meanings they may have in the
text. He should be able to write them correctly from dictation and to
use them in sentences of his own. He should examine if they are
primitive, derivative, or compound; he should be able to name the
prefixes and suffixes and show how the meanings of the original words
are modified by their use. He should cultivate the habit of word
mastery. What is read will not otherwise be understood. Without it there
can be no good reading, speaking or writing.

EXPRESSIVE READING.--There should be constant drill to secure correct
pronunciation, distinct articulation, proper emphasis, and an agreeable
tone of voice, without which there can be no expressive reading. This is
a difficult task, and will take much time, trouble and practice; but it
has far-reaching results. It enlarges the sympathy of the pupil and lays
the foundation for a genuine love of literature. Do not, then, let the
reading lesson drift into a dull and monotonous calling of words. On the
contrary, let it be intelligent, spirited, enthusiastic. Emotion comes
largely from the imagination. The pupil himself must be taught not only
to feel what he reads, but to make its meaning clear to others. It is
important that children be taught to acquire thought through the ear.

CONCERT READING.--Reading in concert is generally of little value, and
the time given to it ill-spent. It does not aid the children in getting
thought, or in expressing it fluently. As an exercise in teaching
reading it is ineffective and often positively harmful. A concert
recitation to which special training has been given partakes of the
nature of a hymn or a song, and then becomes an element of value. If
occasionally there must be concert reading in the class room, it should
always be preceded by individual mastery of the selection.

POEMS.--In the first lesson, a poem, like a picture, should be presented
as a whole, and never dissected. The teacher should first read it
through, not stopping for note or comment. He should then read it again,
part by part, stopping, for question, explanation and discussion.
Lastly, the whole poem, should be read with suitable emotion, so that
the final impression may be made by the author's own words. It is
important that the pupil get the message which the author intended to
give. In teaching a descriptive poem, make the pictures as vivid as
possible, and thus awaken the imagination. In dealing with a narrative
poem, the sequence of events must first be made clear. When this is
done, the aim should be to give fuller meaning to the story by bringing
out clearly the causes, motives and results of acts. All this will take
time. Be it so. One poem well read, well studied, is worth more than a
volume carelessly read over. In reading poetry, be careful that the
pupils, while giving the rhythm of the lines, do not fall into the
singsong tone so common and so disagreeable.

EXPLANATIONS.--Explanations should accompany every reading lesson,
without which there can be no serious teaching of the vernacular. By
their means the teacher enters into communication with his pupils; he
gets them to speak, he corrects their errors, trains their reason, and
forms their taste. It has been said that a teacher able to explain
selections in prose and poetry "holds his class in the hollow of his
hand." The teacher should insist that the pupil express himself clearly
and correctly, not only during the reading lesson, but on every subject
he has occasion to deal with, either orally or in writing, throughout
the day's recitations.

REVIEWS.--As the memory of children, though prompt, is weak, frequent
reviews should be held. They are necessary for the backward pupils and
advantageous for the others. Have an informal talk with the children on
what they have read, what they have learned, what they have liked, and
what has interested them. Some important parts of the prose and poetry
previously studied might, during this exercise, be re-read with profit.

COMPOSITION.--Continue oral and written composition. The correct use of
written language is best taught by selecting for compositions
subject-matter that deeply interests the children. If persevered in,
this will secure a good, strong, idiomatic use of English. If the words
of a selection that has been studied appear now and then in the
children's conversation or writing, it should be a matter for praise;
for this means that new words have been added to their vocabulary, and
that the children have a new conception of beauty of thought and speech.

See that all written work be done neatly and legibly. Slovenly or
careless habits should never be allowed in any written work.

MEMORY GEMS.--Do not lose sight of the memory gems. Familiarize the
pupil with them. Their value to the child lies more in future good
resulting from them than in present good. These treasures of thought
will live in the memory and influence the daily lives of the children
who learn them by heart.

THE DICTIONARY.--The use of the dictionary is a necessary part of
education. It is a powerful aid in self-education. Its use will double
the value of study in connection with reading and language. Every
Grammar School, High School and College should be supplied with several
copies of a good unabridged dictionary, and every pupil taught how to
consult it, and encouraged to do so. The dictionary should be the book
of first and last and constant resort.

USE OF THE LIBRARY.--The teacher should endeavor to create an interest
in those books from which the selections in the Reader are taken, and in
others of equal grade and quality. Encourage the children to take books
from the library. Direct them in their choice. Encourage home reading.
The reading of good books should be a part of regular school work;
otherwise little or no true progress can be made in speaking and
writing. The best way to learn to speak and write good English is to
read good English.

For additional suggestions as to the best means of teaching Reading and
Language, teachers are referred to Chapters II and IV, Part IV, of
"Elements of Practical Pedagogy," by the Christian Brothers, and
published by the La Salle Bureau of Supplies, 50 Second Street, New
York.


       *       *       *       *       *


Acknowledgments are gratefully made to the following authors,
publishers, and owners of copyright, who have courteously granted
permission to use the selections which bear their names:

"Mercedes," Miss Eleanor C. Donnelly, Miss Mary Boyle O'Reilly, Miss
Kate Putnam Osgood, Miss P.C. Donnelly, Mrs. Margaret E. Sangster, Mr.
Denis A. McCarthy, Mr. James Whitcomb Riley, Mr. George Cooper, Mr. J.T.
Trowbridge, "Rev. Richard W. Alexander;" University of Notre Dame; The
Ladies' Home Journal; Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Co.; The Educational
Publishing Co.; Little, Brown & Co.; The Bobbs-Merrill Co.; P.J. Kenedy
& Sons; The Hinds & Noble Co.; Charles Scribner's Sons.

The selections from Longfellow, Whittier, Holmes, Hawthorne, Fields,
Trowbridge, Phoebe Cary, Charles Dudley Warner, are used by permission
of, and by special arrangement with, Houghton, Mifflin & Co., publishers
of the works of these authors, and to these gentlemen are tendered
expressions of sincere thanks.


       *       *       *       *       *




_5_



GUIDE TO PRONUNCIATION


NOTE.--This Guide is given to aid the pupil in the use of the
dictionary, and will be found to cover all ordinary cases. In the
diacritical marking, as in accentuation and syllabication, Webster's
International Dictionary has been taken as authority.




VOWELS


(Transcriber's Note: Equivalent sound shown within round brackets.)



[=a]            as in gate--g[=a]te

[^a]            as in care--c[^a]re

[)a]            as in cat--c[)a]t

[.a]            as in ask--[.a]sk

[a.]  ([)o])    as in what--wh[a.]t

[:a]            as in car--c[:a]r

[a:]            as in all--[a:]ll

ai  ([^a])      as in air--[^a]ir

ai  ([=a])      as in aim--[=a]im

au  ([:a])      as in aunt--[:a]unt

[=e]            as in eve--[=e]ve

[)e]            as in end--[)e]nd

[~e]            as in her--h[~e]r

[^e]            as in there--th[^e]re

[e=]  ([=a])    as in they--th[e=]y

ea  ([=e])      as in ear--[=e]ar

ei  ([=e])      as in receive--rec[=e]ive

[=i]            as in ice--[=i]ce

[)i]            as in pin--p[)i]n

[~i]  ([~e])    as in bird--b[~i]rd

[:i]  ([=e])    as in police--pol[:i]ce

i[e=]  ([=e])   as in chief--chi[=e]f

[=o]            as in old--[=o]ld

[^o]            as in lord--l[^o]rd

[)o]            as in not--n[)o]t

[.o]  ([)u])    as in son--s[.o]n

[o.]  ([u.])    as in wolf--w[o.]lf

[o:]  ([=oo])   as in do--d[o:]

oa  ([=o])      as in boat--b[=o]at

[=oo]  ([o:])   as in moon--m[=oo]n

[)oo]  ([o.])   as in foot--f[)oo]t

[=u]            as in pure--p[=u]re

[)u]            as in cup--c[)u]p

[^u]            as in burn--b[^u]rn

[u.]  ([o.])    as in full--f[u.]ll

[u:]            as in rude--r[u:]de

ew  ([=u])      as in new

[=y]  ([=i]     as in fly--fl[=y]

[)y]  ([)i])    as in hymn--h[)y]mn

[~y]  ([~e])    as in myrrh--m[~y]rrh



CONSONANTS


c   (s)        as in cent

c   (k)        as in cat

ce  (sh)       as in ocean

ch  (k)        as in school

ch  (sh)       as in machine

ci  (sh)       as in gracious

dg  (j)        as in edge

ed  (d)        as in burned

ed  (t)        as in baked

f   (v)        as in of

g   (hard)     as in get

g   (j)        as in gem

gh  (f)        as in laugh

n   (ng)       as in ink

ph  (f)        as in sulphur

qu  (kw)       as in queen

s   (z)        as in has

s   (sh)       as in sure

s   (zh)       as in pleasure

ssi (sh)       as in passion

si  (zh)       as in occasion

ti  (sh)       as in nation

wh  (hw)       as in when

x   (z)        as in Xavier

x   (ks)       as in tax

