silver.

'Oh, what luck! Now, if only I knew how I could take this treasure home
with me----but I can never hope to hide it from my wife, and once
she knows of it she'll tell all the world, and then I shall get into
trouble.'

He sat down and thought over the matter a long time, and at last he made
a plan. He covered up the pot again with earth and twigs, and drove
on into the town, where he bought a live pike and a live hare in the
market.

Then he drove back to the forest and hung the pike up at the very top
of a tree, and tied up the hare in a fishing net and fastened it on the
edge of a little stream, not troubling himself to think how unpleasant
such a wet spot was likely to be to the hare.

Then he got into his cart and trotted merrily home.

'Wife!' cried he, the moment he got indoors. 'You can't think what a
piece of good luck has come our way.'

'What, what, dear husband? Do tell me all about it at once.'

'No, no, you'll just go off and tell everyone.'

'No, indeed! How can you think such things! For shame! If you like I
will swear never to----'

'Oh, well! if you are really in earnest then, listen.'

And he whispered in her ear: 'I've found a pot full of gold and silver
in the forest! Hush!----'

'And why didn't you bring it back?'

'Because we'll drive there together and bring it carefully back between
us.'

So the man and his wife drove to the forest.

As they were driving along the man said:

'What strange things one hears, wife! I was told only the other day
that fish will now live and thrive in the tree tops and that some wild
animals spend their time in the water. Well! well! times are certainly
changed.'

'Why, you must be crazy, husband! Dear, dear, what nonsense people do
talk sometimes.'

'Nonsense, indeed! Why, just look. Bless my soul, if there isn't a fish,
a real pike I do believe, up in that tree.'

'Gracious!' cried his wife. 'How did a pike get there? It IS a pike--you
needn't attempt to say it's not. Can people have said true----'

But the man only shook his head and shrugged his shoulders and opened
his mouth and gaped as if he really could not believe his own eyes.

'What are you standing staring at there, stupid?' said his wife. 'Climb
up the tree quick and catch the pike, and we'll cook it for dinner.'

The man climbed up the tree and brought down the pike, and they drove
on.

When they got near the stream he drew up.

'What are you staring at again?' asked his wife impatiently. 'Drive on,
can't you?'

'Why, I seem to see something moving in that net I set. I must just go
and see what it is.'

He ran to it, and when he had looked in it he called to his wife:

'Just look! Here is actually a four-footed creature caught in the net. I
do believe it's a hare.'

'Good heavens!' cried his wife. 'How did the hare get into your net? It
IS a hare, so you needn't say it isn't. After all, people must have said
the truth----'

But her husband only shook his head and shrugged his shoulders as if he
could not believe his own eyes.

'Now what are you standing there for, stupid?' cried his wife. 'Take up
the hare. A nice fat hare is a dinner for a feast day.'

The old man caught up the hare, and they drove on to the place where the
treasure was buried. They swept the twigs away, dug up the earth, took
out the pot, and drove home again with it.

And now the old couple had plenty of money and were cheery and
comfortable. But the wife was very foolish. Every day she asked a lot
of people to dinner and feasted them, till her husband grew quite
impatient. He tried to reason with her, but she would not listen.

'You've got no right to lecture me!' said she. 'We found the treasure
together, and together we will spend it.'

Her husband took patience, but at length he said to her: 'You may do as
you please, but I sha'n't give you another penny.'

The old woman was very angry. 'Oh, what a good-for-nothing fellow to
want to spend all the money himself! But just wait a bit and see what I
shall do.'

Off she went to the governor to complain of her husband.

'Oh, my lord, protect me from my husband! Ever since he found the
treasure there is no bearing him. He only eats and drinks, and won't
work, and he keeps all the money to himself.'

The governor took pity on the woman, and ordered his chief secretary to
look into the matter.

The secretary called the elders of the village together, and went with
them to the man's house.

'The governor,' said he, 'desires you to give all that treasure you
found into my care.'

The man shrugged his shoulders and said: 'What treasure? I know nothing
about a treasure.'

'How? You know nothing? Why your wife has complained of you. Don't
attempt to tell lies. If you don't hand over all the money at once you
will be tried for daring to raise treasure without giving due notice to
the governor about it.'

'Pardon me, your excellency, but what sort of treasure was it supposed
to have been? My wife must have dreamt of it, and you gentlemen have
listened to her nonsense.'

'Nonsense, indeed,' broke in his wife. 'A kettle full of gold and
silver, do you call that nonsense?'

'You are not in your right mind, dear wife. Sir, I beg your pardon. Ask
her how it all happened, and if she convinces you I'll pay for it with
my life.'

'This is how it all happened, Mr. Secretary,' cried the wife. 'We
were driving through the forest, and we saw a pike up in the top of a
tree----'

'What, a PIKE?' shouted the secretary. 'Do you think you may joke with
me, pray?'

'Indeed, I'm not joking, Mr. Secretary! I'm speaking the bare truth.'

'Now you see, gentlemen,' said her husband, 'how far you can trust her,
when she chatters like this.'

'Chatter, indeed? I!! Perhaps you have forgotten, too, how we found a
live hare in the river?'

Everyone roared with laughter; even the secretary smiled and stroked his
beard, and the man said:

'Come, come, wife, everyone is laughing at you. You see for yourself,
gentlemen, how far you can believe her.'

'Yes, indeed,' said the village elders, 'it is certainly the first time
we have heard that hares thrive in the water or fish among the tree
tops.'

The secretary could make nothing of it all, and drove back to the town.
The old woman was so laughed at that she had to hold her tongue and
obey her husband ever after, and the man bought wares with part of the
treasure and moved into the town, where he opened a shop, and prospered,
and spent the rest of his days in peace.




TWO IN A SACK

What a life that poor man led with his wife, to be sure! Not a day
passed without her scolding him and calling him names, and indeed
sometimes she would take the broom from behind the stove and beat him
with it. He had no peace or comfort at all, and really hardly knew how
to bear it.

One day, when his wife had been particularly unkind and had beaten him
black and blue, he strolled slowly into the fields, and as he could not
endure to be idle he spread out his nets.

What kind of bird do you think he caught in his net? He caught a crane,
and the crane said, 'Let me go free, and I'll show myself grateful.'

The man answered, 'No, my dear fellow. I shall take you home, and then
perhaps my wife won't scold me so much.'

Said the crane: 'You had better come with me to my house,' and so they
went to the crane's house.

When they got there, what do you think the crane took from the wall? He
took down a sack, and he said:

'Two out of a sack!'

Instantly two pretty lads sprang out of the sack. They brought in oak
tables, which they spread with silken covers, and placed all sorts of
delicious dishes and refreshing drinks on them. The man had never seen
anything so beautiful in his life, and he was delighted.

Then the crane said to him, 'Now take this sack to your wife.'

The man thanked him warmly, took the sack, and set out.

His home was a good long way off, and as it was growing dark, and he was
feeling tired, he stopped to rest at his cousin's house by the way.

The cousin had three daughters, who laid out a tempting supper, but the
man would eat nothing, and said to his cousin, 'Your supper is bad.'

'Oh, make the best of it,' said she, but the man only said: 'Clear
away!' and taking out his sack he cried, as the crane had taught him:

'Two out of the sack!'

And out came the two pretty boys, who quickly brought in the oak tables,
spread the silken covers, and laid out all sorts of delicious dishes and
refreshing drinks.

Never in their lives had the cousin and her daughters seen such a
supper, and they were delighted and astonished at it. But the cousin
quietly made up her mind to steal the sack, so she called to her
daughters: 'Go quickly and heat the bathroom: I am sure our dear guest
would like to have a bath before he goes to bed.'

When the man was safe in the bathroom she told her daughters to make a
sack exactly like his, as quickly as possible. Then she changed the two
sacks, and hid the man's sack away.

The man enjoyed his bath, slept soundly, and set off early next morning,
taking what he believed to be the sack the crane had given him.

All the way home he felt in such good spirits that he sang and whistled
as he walked through the wood, and never noticed how the birds were
twittering and laughing at him.

As soon as he saw his house he began to shout from a distance, 'Hallo!
old woman! Come out and meet me!'

His wife screamed back: 'You come here, and I'll give you a good
thrashing with the poker!'

The man walked into the house, hung his sack on a nail, and said, as the
crane had taught him:

'Two out of the sack!'

But not a soul came out of the sack.

Then he said again, exactly as the crane had taught him:

'Two out of the sack!'

His wife, hearing him chattering goodness knows what, took up her wet
broom and swept the ground all about him.

The man took flight and rushed oft into the field, and there he found
the crane marching proudly about, and to him he told his tale.

'Come back to my house,' said the crane, and so they went to the crane's
house, and as soon as they got there, what did the crane take down from
the wall? Why, he took down a sack, and he said:

'Two out of the sack!'

And instantly two pretty lads sprang out of the sack, brought in oak
tables, on which they laid silken covers, and spread all sorts of
delicious dishes and refreshing drinks on them.

'Take this sack,' said the crane.

The man thanked him heartily, took the sack, and went. He had a long
way to walk, and as he presently got hungry, he said to the sack, as the
crane had taught him:

'Two out of the sack!'

And instantly two rough men with thick sticks crept out of the bag and
began to beat him well, crying as they did so:

  'Don't boast to your cousins of what you have got,
         One--two--
            Or you'll find you will catch it uncommonly hot,
                        One--two--'

And they beat on till the man panted out:

'Two into the sack.'

The words were hardly out of his mouth, when the two crept back into the
sack.

Then the man shouldered the sack, and went off straight to his cousin's
house. He hung the sack up on a nail, and said: 'Please have the
bathroom heated, cousin.'

The cousin heated the bathroom, and the man went into it, but he neither
washed nor rubbed himself, he just sat there and waited.

Meantime his cousin felt hungry, so she called her daughters, and all
four sat down to table. Then the mother said:

'Two out of the sack.'

Instantly two rough men crept out of the sack, and began to beat the
cousin as they cried:

            'Greedy pack!  Thievish pack!
                  One--two--
                      Give the peasant back his sack!
                           One--two--'

And they went on beating till the woman called to her eldest daughter:
'Go and fetch your cousin from the bathroom. Tell him these two ruffians
are beating me black and blue.'

'I've not finished rubbing myself yet,' said the peasant.

And the two ruffians kept on beating as they sang:

          'Greedy pack!  Thievish pack!
                  One--two--                     Give the peasant back his sack!

                          One--two--'

Then the woman sent her second daughter and said: 'Quick, quick, get him
to come to me.'

'I'm just washing my head,' said the man.

Then she sent the youngest girl, and he said: 'I've not done drying
myself.'

At last the woman could hold out no longer, and sent him the sack she
had stolen.

NOW he had quite finished his bath, and as he left the bathroom he
cried:

'Two into the sack.'

And the two crept back at once into the sack.

Then the man took both sacks, the good and the bad one, and went away
home.

When he was near the house he shouted: 'Hallo, old woman, come and meet
me!'

His wife only screamed out:

'You broomstick, come here! Your back shall pay for this.'

The man went into the cottage, hung his sack on a nail, and said, as the
crane had taught him:

'Two out of the sack.'

Instantly two pretty lads sprang out of the sack, brought in oak tables,
laid silken covers on them, and spread them with all sorts of delicious
dishes and refreshing drinks.

The woman ate and drank, and praised her husband.

'Well, now, old man, I won't beat you any more,' said she.

When they had done eating, the man carried off the good sack, and put
it away in his store-room, but hung the bad sack up on the nail. Then he
lounged up and down in the yard.

Meantime his wife became thirsty. She looked with longing eyes at the
sack, and at last she said, as her husband had done:

'Two out of the sack.'

And at once the two rogues with their big sticks crept out of the sack,
