challenge in ape language while Manape talked?

No, at first she might have understood. Now it would have been even
more horrifying for her to hear the truth. She must think what she
would, and be allowed to adjust herself to the astounding state of
affairs. Apeman could not be moved for some time. Ellen would not
leave him, naturally. Nor would Manape. And the apes apparently
intended to remain with them. Which made the problem, after all, a
simple one. The trio must remain for the time being among the great
apes. They needed one another in a strange way, and they needed the
apes themselves, which were like a formidable army at their backs, as
protection against the other beasts of the wilds.

Bentley watched the great she continue her rude first aid for Apeman.
Apeman was still moaning, though less fitfully, like a child that
nuzzles the milk bottle, but is drifting away into sleep. The she gave
the travesty her full attention. There was something horribly human
about her maternal care of this creature before her. Her great arms
held Apeman close while her tongue caressed his wounds. Bentley knew
that that tongue was an excellent antiseptic, too. All animals licked
their own wounds, and those wounds healed. Only human beings knew the
dangers of infection, because they had departed from Nature's
doctrines and had tried to cheat her with substitutes. Only the
animals, like that great she, still were Nature's children, healing
their own wounds in Nature's way.

       *       *       *       *       *

Satisfied that the apes would not molest Ellen, so long as she kept
her distance from Apeman, Bentley decided to seek food, which Ellen
must sorely need. The need for water was urgent, too. Bentley knew the
danger of drinking water found in the jungle--but an ape could
scarcely be expected to build a fire with which to boil the water, nor
to produce a miracle in the shape of something to hold it in over the
fire.

Here were many makeshifts indicated, then. Bentley smiled inwardly,
the only way he could smile. He must feed himself, too. He must go
wandering through the woods, feeding the body of Manape with grubs,
worms and such nauseous provender, because it was the food to which
Manape was accustomed. Apeman, when he was well enough to eat, would
sicken the body of Bentley with the same sort of food, because the
brain of Apeman would not know what was good or bad for the body of a
human being--nor even would understand that his body was human. What
_did_ Apeman think of his condition, anyway?

That question, of course, would never be answered--unless Barter could
really speak the language of the great apes and somehow managed to
secure from Apeman, if Apeman lived, a recital of these hours in the
jungle.

What food should Manape secure for Ellen? What fruits were edible,
what poisonous? How could he tell? He watched the other apes, which
were scattering here and there now, tipping over rocks and sticks to
search for grubs and worms--to see what fruits they ate, if any. They
would know what fruits to avoid.

An hour passed before Bentley saw one of the brutes feed upon anything
except insects. A cluster of a peculiar fruit which looked like wild
currants, but whose real name Bentley did not know. Now, feeling safe
in his choice, because the ape was eating the berries with relish,
Bentley searched until he found a quantity of the same berries, and
bore them back to Ellen Estabrook.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beside Apeman, who now was awake and exchanging crazy gibberish with
the she who had licked his wounds, Ellen Estabrook, trying to be
brave, did not cry aloud. But her face was dirty, and her tears made
furrows through the grime.

Manape dropped the berries beside her. The she snarled as Ellen
reached for the berries. Manape flung himself forward as the she
strove to take the berries before Ellen could grasp them--and cuffed
her over backward with a cumbersome but lightning-fast right swing.

"Manape," said Ellen, "if only you could talk! I feel that you are my
friend, and my fears are less when you are with me. I'll pretend that
you can understand me. It helps a little to talk, for one scarcely
seems so much alone. How would you feel, I wonder, Manape, if you were
suddenly taken entirely out of the life you've always known, and
forced to live in another world entirely? It would not be easy to be
brave, would it? Suppose you were taken out of the wilds and dropped
into a ballroom?"

Bentley could have laughed had the jest not been such a grim one. What
would Ellen think if he were to answer her:

"I would be much more at home in that ballroom than that thing on the
ground that you love--as matters are at this moment!"

She would not understand that.

Nor did she understand when the she went away for a time and came back
with a supply of worms and grubs--which nauseous supply vanished with
great speed under the wolfish appetite of Apeman. There was little
wonder that Ellen found it difficult to orient herself.

"I must tell her somehow," thought Bentley, "and that soon. Surely
enough has been done to satisfy the devilish curiosity of Caleb
Barter."

Toward evening the apes began to drift further into the jungle. The
she gathered Apeman in her arms and moved off with him. There was
nothing for Manape to do but follow, and nothing for Ellen to do but
follow, too--if she loved the thing she thought was Bentley. She did
not hesitate.

With unfaltering courage she followed on, and the lumbering forms of
the great apes drifted further away from the sea, seemingly headed
toward some mutely agreed upon jungle rendezvous. Everything depended
for the time upon the return to health of Apeman. All other matters
depended upon that. Each in his own way, Manape and Ellen, realized
this. Caleb Barter had schemed better than he could possibly have
foreseen.


CHAPTER X

_Written in Dust_

As Apeman was borne deeper into the jungle in the great arms of the
she, what was more natural in the circumstances than that Ellen keep
close to her only remaining link with the world she had left--Manape,
the trained anthropoid of Caleb Barter? A natural thing, and one that
filled Manape with obvious pleasure.

Once she touched his hand, rested her own small one in his mighty palm
for a moment--and Bentley was afraid to return the pressure of her
palm with the hand of Manape, lest he crush every bone in her fingers.
Thereafter at intervals, while the whole aggregation drifted deeper
into the jungle, Ellen clung to Manape; depended upon him. Was it her
woman's intuition which told her that Manape was a safe guardian?

Bentley refused to dwell on that phase of this wild adventure however,
for there were other things to think about. It required many hours for
him to discover the truth, but he knew it at last. He, Manape-Bentley,
was the lord of the great apes! Before his capture, or before the
capture of Manape by Caleb Barter, Manape had been leader of these
apes. Now he had returned and was their ruler once more. Upstarts had
taken his place, and he had slain them--back there when Apeman had
tried to escape into the jungle with Ellen in his arms. To the apes
this must have seemed the way it was.

Bentley was putting things together, hoping and believing that they
made four--yet not sure but that he was forcing them to equal four
when in actuality they were five or six. If Manape--the original ape
of Barter's capture, whose body now was Bentley's--had been the leader
of the great apes, that explained why the animals remained constantly
in the vicinity of Barter's dwelling. Barter had needed them in his
plans, and had made certain their remaining near by making their
leader captive. And of course only an ape sufficiently intelligent to
rule other apes would have suited the evil scheme which must have been
growing for years in the mind of Caleb Barter. Barter had merely
waited with philosophic calmness for human beings to drift into this
territory--and the _Bengal Queen_ had obligingly gone down off the
coast, throwing Ellen Estabrook and Lee Bentley into Barter's power.

       *       *       *       *       *

What was Barter doing now? Would he not be striving to watch the
course of his experiment? Would he not think of details hitherto
overlooked and plan further experiments, or an enlarging of this
experiment of which three creatures were the victims? Surely Barter
would not remain quietly at Barterville while the subjects of his
experiment went deeper into the jungle with the great apes. Barter was
too thorough a scientist for that. Somehow, Bentley was sure, Barter
would know what was happening, even at this very moment.

He would wish to know how a modern woman would conduct herself if
suddenly forced to live among apes. Therefore he would try in some
manner to keep watch over the conduct of Ellen Estabrook. He would
wonder how a modern man would conduct himself if he suddenly found,
himself the leader of that same group of apes, and how an ape would
behave if he suddenly discovered himself a man. It was a neat
"experiment," and Bentley was beginning to believe that there was
probably far more to it than there first had seemed.

Barter would wish to know how all three creatures would conduct
themselves in certain circumstances--Apeman, Ellen and Bentley. He
would not leave it to chance, for Bentley now realized that Barter
himself did not feel inimical to either Ellen, Apeman or Bentley. To
him they were merely an experiment. Barter would not wish for Apeman
to die, and thus deprive Barter of a certain knowledge relative to one
angle of his unholy experiment. He would not wish for Manape-Bentley
to remain forever as Manape-Bentley, lacking the power of speech,
either human speech or the gibberish of the apes.

No, all this was not being left to chance. Bentley believed that
Barter was directing the destination of these three subjects of his,
as surely as though he were right with them at this moment, driving
them to his will with that awful lash which had made him feared by the
great apes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yes, Barter was still the master mind. It made Bentley feel awfully
helpless. Yet--he was the leader of the great apes. That, too, Barter
must have foreseen. Would Barter try in any way to discover how
Bentley would behave in an emergency as leader of the apes? Would he
wish to know sufficiently to create an emergency? From Bentley's
knowledge of the twisted genius of Caleb Barter, he fully believed
that Barter planned yet other angles to his experiment.

If he did, then what would he do next?

It was not until the storm broke over the strange aggregation of great
apes, who seemed to be holding two white people prisoners, that
Bentley understood that from the very beginning he should have been
able to see the obvious denouement--the mad climax which even then was
preparing in the jungle ahead, simply waiting for the great apes to
drift, feeding as they went without a thought of danger, into the trap
set for them.

Ellen now kept her hand in the great palm of Manape. She wept on
occasions, when she thought of the apparent hopelessness of her
position, but for the most part she was brave, and Bentley grew to
love her more as the hours passed--even as he grew more impatient at
his inability to express his love. If he tried he could simply
frighten her--fill her with horror because, gentle though he was with
her and he was a great ape, a fact which nothing could change. Nor
could anybody change the fact, except Caleb Barter. Where was the
scientist? What would be his next move if he were not leaving the
working out of his experiment entirely to chance, which seemed not at
all in keeping with the thorough manner of his experiment thus far.

The future was a dark, painful obscurity, in which all things were
hidden, in which anything might happen--because Caleb Barter would
wish for it to happen.

       *       *       *       *       *

How long would Barter wait before making his next move? Long enough
for Ellen to accustom herself to life among the apes? Long enough to
discover whether her natural intelligence would guide her to eke out
existence among hardships such as human beings never thought of,
except perhaps in nightmares? Long enough to allow the brain of
Bentley to discover what miracles intellect might do with the body of
Manape? Long enough for Apeman to be well of his illness, so that he
might observe what havoc an ape's brain might work with a human body?

Certainly when one gave the hideous experiment full thought, its
possible angles of development, its many potential ramifications, were
astounding in the extreme. Was it not up to Bentley then to do
something besides mope and pine for the impossible, and thus hasten
the hour when Barter should be wholly satisfied with his experiment?

What would Apeman do, how would he behave, when the white body of
Bentley was well again? Would that body grow well faster when guided
by an ape's brain than when a human brain was in command? Certainly
Caleb Barter must have listed all these questions and hundreds of
others which had not as yet occurred to Bentley. If he had he would
not transfer the two intelligences back to their proper places until
all of his questions were answered to his satisfaction. Bentley
himself must somehow force an answer to some of them.

To do this he must try to guess what sort of questions Barter would
have listed, and try to work out their answers--assuming all the time
that Barter, from some undiscovered coign of vantage would be watching
for the answers he hoped his experiment would provide.

Bentley arrived at a decision. Ellen must long since have become
numbed to the horror which encompassed her. Bentley knew that a human
brain could stand only so much, beyond which it was no longer
surprised or horrified. He guessed, noting the pale face of his
beloved, that Ellen had well nigh reached that stage.

He decided to take a tremendous risk with her sanity, hoping thereby
to do his part in working out the details of Barter's experiment.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun was creeping into the west when the roving apes came to pause
in a sort of clearing. Some of them curled up in sleep. The she who
carried Apeman squatted with Apeman in her arms, and licked his wounds
again.

That Apeman was recovering was plainly evident, and when he saw it
filled Bentley with an odd mixture of thankfulness and revulsion.
Apeman was essentially an ape. With all his strength back he would
revert to type, and what if he forced the body of Bentley to do
horrible things that Ellen would never be able to forget or
condone--even when she at last knew the truth? What if Apeman
selected, for example, a mate--from among the hairy she's? For Apeman
that would be natural, for Bentley horrible.

Yet it might easily transpire. Apeman might relinquish the white she
to a successful rival--which he would regard Manape as being--and
content himself with a choice from the ape she's. Somehow that unholy
thing must not happen. That was up to Manape-Bentley.

Or, with his strength fully returned, Apeman might again desire Ellen,
and force the issue with Manape for her possession--which seemed
equally horrible to the brain of Bentley.

Ellen remained as close to Apeman as the she would permit her.
Manape-Bentley crouched close by. After a time Apeman slept, and
Bentley was pleased to notice that the agony sweat no longer beaded
Apeman's body, and that Apeman was recovering with superhuman
swiftness--thanks to the ministrations of the unnamed she who had
taken charge of him. Apeman now rarely groaned, sleeping or waking.

Ellen watched the sleeping Apeman with her heart--and her fears--in
her eyes. Satisfied that he slept, and that his sleep was healthy,
Ellen again approached the creature she knew as Manape, Barter's
trained ape.

"If only you could talk," she said to him. "If only you were able to
give some hope. If only there were some way I could cause you to
understand my wishes--understand and help me."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bentley did not answer. He knew that to be useless. But his brain
remembered something. His brain recalled that moment in the cage in
the dwelling of Barter, when his human brain had tried to force
obedience from the great clumsy hands of Manape, when he had tried to
force those mighty fingers to unfasten the knots which held the cage
door secure.

Could he force those hands to something else?

Did he dare try?

It was a terrible risk to take with Ellen's sanity, but Bentley felt
it must be taken. She was watching him hopelessly, and her lips moved
as though she prayed for a miracle--as though by some weird necromancy
she might force Manape to understand her words, and to answer her,
allaying her fears, destroying her hopelessness.
