Therefore, Teule, make merry while you may, and die bravely when you
must. Your case is no worse than mine and that of many others, for death
awaits us all. Farewell.'

When he had gone I rose, and leaving the gardens I passed into the
chamber where it was my custom to give audience to those who wished to
look upon the god Tezcat as they called me. Here I sat upon my golden
couch, inhaling the fumes of tobacco, and as it chanced I was alone, for
none dared to enter that room unless I gave them leave. Presently the
chief of my pages announced that one would speak with me, and I bent
my head, signifying that the person should enter, for I was weary of my
thoughts. The page withdrew, and presently a veiled woman stood before
me. I looked at her wondering, and bade her draw her veil and speak. She
obeyed, and I saw that my visitor was the princess Otomie. Now I rose
amazed, for it was not usual that she should visit me thus alone. I
guessed therefore that she had tidings, or was following some custom of
which I was ignorant.

'I pray you be seated,' she said confusedly; 'it is not fitting that you
should stand before me.'

'Why not, princess?' I answered. 'If I had no respect for rank, surely
beauty must claim it.'

'A truce to words,' she replied with a wave of her slim hand. 'I come
here, O Tezcat, according to the ancient custom, because I am charged
with a message to you. Those whom you shall wed are chosen. I am the
bearer of their names.'

'Speak on, princess of the Otomie.'

'They are'--and she named three ladies whom I knew to be among the
loveliest in the land.

'I thought that there were four,' I said with a bitter laugh. 'Am I to
be defrauded of the fourth?'

'There is a fourth,' she answered, and was silent.

'Give me her name,' I cried. 'What other slut has been found to marry a
felon doomed to sacrifice?'

'One has been found, O Tezcat, who has borne other titles than this you
give her.'

Now I looked at her questioningly, and she spoke again in a low voice.

'I, Otomie, princess of the Otomie, Montezuma's daughter, am the fourth
and the first.'

'You!' I said, sinking back upon my cushions. 'YOU!'

'Yes, I. Listen: I was chosen by the priests as the most lovely in the
land, however unworthily. My father, the emperor, was angry and said
that whatever befell, I should never be the wife of a captive who must
die upon the altar of sacrifice. But the priests answered that this was
no time for him to claim exception for his blood, now when the gods were
wroth. Was the first lady in the land to be withheld from the god? they
asked. Then my father sighed and said that it should be as I willed. And
I said with the priests, that now in our sore distress the proud must
humble themselves to the dust, even to the marrying of a captive slave
who is named a god and doomed to sacrifice. So I, princess of the
Otomie, have consented to become your wife, O Tezcat, though perchance
had I known all that I read in your eyes this hour, I should not have
consented. It may happen that in this shame I hoped to find love if
only for one short hour, and that I purposed to vary the custom of our
people, and to complete my marriage by the side of the victim on the
altar, as, if I will, I have the right to do. But I see well that I am
not welcome, and though it is too late to go back upon my word, have
no fear. There are others, and I shall not trouble you. I have given my
message, is it your pleasure that I should go? The solemn ceremony of
wedlock will be on the twelfth day from now, O Tezcat.'

Now I rose from my seat and took her hand, saying:

'I thank you, Otomie, for your nobleness of mind. Had it not been for
the comfort and friendship which you and Guatemoc your cousin have given
me, I think that ere now I should be dead. So you desire to comfort me
to the last; it seems that you even purposed to die with me. How am I
to interpret this, Otomie? In our land a woman would need to love a
man after no common fashion before she consented to share such a bed as
awaits me on yonder pyramid. And yet I may scarcely think that you whom
kings have sued for can place your heart so low. How am I to read the
writing of your words, princess of the Otomie?'

'Read it with your heart,' she whispered low, and I felt her hand
tremble in my own.

I looked at her beauty, it was great; I thought of her devotion, a
devotion that did not shrink from the most horrible of deaths, and a
wind of feeling which was akin to love swept through my soul. But even
as I looked and thought, I remembered the English garden and the English
maid from whom I had parted beneath the beech at Ditchingham, and the
words that we had spoken then. Doubtless she still lived and was true to
me; while I lived should I not keep true at heart to her? If I must wed
these Indian girls, I must wed them, but if once I told Otomie that I
loved her, then I broke my troth, and with nothing less would she be
satisfied. As yet, though I was deeply moved and the temptation was
great, I had not come to this.

'Be seated, Otomie,' I said, 'and listen to me. You see this golden
token,' and I drew Lily's posy ring from my hand, 'and you see the
writing within it.'

She bent her head but did not speak, and I saw that there was fear in
her eyes.

'I will read you the words, Otomie,' and I translated into the Aztec
tongue the quaint couplet:


Heart to heart, Though far apart.


Then at last she spoke. 'What does the writing mean?' she said. 'I can
only read in pictures, Teule.'

'It means, Otomie, that in the far land whence I come, there is a woman
who loves me, and who is my love.'

'Is she your wife then?'

'She is not my wife, Otomie, but she is vowed to me in marriage.'

'She is vowed to you in marriage,' she answered bitterly: 'why, then we
are equal, for so am I, Teule. But there is this difference between us;
you love her, and me you do not love. That is what you would make clear
to me. Spare me more words, I understand all. Still it seems that if I
have lost, she is also in the path of loss. Great seas roll between
you and this love of yours, Teule, seas of water, and the altar of
sacrifice, and the nothingness of death. Now let me go. Your wife I must
be, for there is no escape, but I shall not trouble you over much, and
it will soon be done with. Then you may seek your desire in the Houses
of the Stars whither you must wander, and it is my prayer that you shall
win it. All these months I have been planning to find hope for you, and
I thought that I had found it. But it was built upon a false belief, and
it is ended. Had you been able to say from your heart that you loved
me, it might have been well for both of us; should you be able to say
it before the end, it may still be well. But I do not ask you to say it,
and beware how you tell me a lie. I leave you, Teule, but before I go
I will say that I honour you more in this hour than I have honoured you
before, because you have dared to speak the truth to me, Montezuma's
daughter, when a lie had been so easy and so safe. That woman beyond
the seas should be grateful to you, but though I bear her no ill will,
between me and her there is a struggle to the death. We are strangers to
each other, and strangers we shall remain, but she has touched your
hand as I touch it now; you link us together and are our bond of enmity.
Farewell my husband that is to be. We shall meet no more till that sorry
day when a "slut" shall be given to a "felon" in marriage. I use your
own words, Teule!'

Then rising, Otomie cast her veil about her face and passed slowly
from the chamber, leaving me much disturbed. It was a bold deed to have
rejected the proffered love of this queen among women, and now that
I had done so I was not altogether glad. Would Lily, I wondered, have
offered to descend from such state, to cast off the purple of her
royal rank that she might lie at my side on the red stone of sacrifice?
Perhaps not, for this fierce fidelity is only to be found in women of
another breed. These daughters of the Sun love wholly when they love at
all, and as they love they hate. They ask no priest to consecrate their
vows, nor if these become hateful, will they be bound by them for duty's
sake. Their own desire is their law, but while it rules them they follow
it unflinchingly, and if need be, they seek its consummation in the
gates of death, or failing that, forgetfulness.



CHAPTER XIX

THE FOUR GODDESSES


Some weary time went by, and at last came the day of the entry into
Mexico of Cortes and his conquerors. Now of all the doings of the
Spaniards after they occupied the city, I do not propose to speak at
length, for these are matters of history, and I have my own story to
tell. So I shall only write of those of them with which I was concerned
myself. I did not see the meeting between Montezuma and Cortes, though
I saw the emperor set out to it clad like Solomon in his glory and
surrounded by his nobles. But I am sure of this, that no slave being
led to sacrifice carried a heavier heart in his breast than that of
Montezuma on this unlucky day. For now his folly had ruined him, and I
think he knew that he was going to his doom.

Afterwards, towards evening, I saw the emperor come back in his golden
litter, and pass over to the palace built by Axa his father, that stood
opposite to and some five hundred paces from his own, facing the western
gate of the temple. Presently I heard the sound of a multitude shouting,
and amidst it the tramp of horses and armed soldiers, and from a seat
in my chamber I saw the Spaniards advance down the great street, and my
heart beat at the sight of Christian men. In front, clad in rich armour,
rode their leader Cortes, a man of middle size but noble bearing,
with thoughtful eyes that noted everything, and after him, some few
on horseback but the most of them on foot, marched his little army of
conquerors, staring about them with bold wondering eyes and jesting to
each other in Castilian. They were but a handful, bronzed with the sun
and scarred by battle, some of them ill-armed and almost in rags, and
looking on them I could not but marvel at the indomitable courage
that had enabled them to pierce their way through hostile thousands,
sickness, and war, even to the home of Montezuma's power.

By the side of Cortes, holding his stirrup in her hand, walked a
beautiful Indian woman dressed in white robes and crowned with flowers.
As she passed the palace she turned her face. I knew her at once; it
was my friend Marina, who now had attained to the greatness which she
desired, and who, notwithstanding all the evil that she had brought upon
her country, looked most happy in it and in her master's love.

As the Spaniards went by I searched their faces one by one, with the
vague hope of hate. For though it might well chance that death had put
us out of each other's reach, I half thought to see de Garcia among the
number of the conquerors. Such a quest as theirs, with its promise of
blood, and gold, and rapine, would certainly commend itself to his evil
heart should it be in his power to join it, and a strange instinct told
me that he was NOT dead. But neither dead nor living was he among those
men who entered Mexico that day.

That night I saw Guatemoc and asked him how things went.

'Well for the kite that roosts in the dove's nest,' he answered with a
bitter laugh, 'but very ill for the dove. Montezuma, my uncle, has been
cooing yonder,' and he pointed to the palace of Axa, 'and the captain of
the Teules has cooed in answer, but though he tried to hide it, I could
hear the hawk's shriek in his pigeon's note. Ere long there will be
merry doings in Tenoctitlan.'

He was right. Within a week Montezuma was treacherously seized by the
Spaniards and kept a prisoner in their quarters, watched day and night
by their soldiers. Then came event upon event. Certain lords in the
coast lands having killed some Spaniards, were summoned to Mexico by the
instigation of Cortes. They came and were burned alive in the courtyard
of the palace. Nor was this all, for Montezuma, their monarch, was
forced to witness the execution with fetters on his ankles. So low had
the emperor of the Aztecs fallen, that he must bear chains like a common
felon. After this insult he swore allegiance to the King of Spain, and
even contrived to capture Cacama, the lord of Tezcuco, by treachery and
to deliver him into the hands of the Spaniards on whom he would have
made war. To them also he gave up all the hoarded gold and treasure of
the empire, to the value of hundreds of thousands of English pounds. All
this the nation bore, for it was stupefied and still obeyed the commands
of its captive king. But when he suffered the Spaniards to worship the
true God in one of the sanctuaries of the great temple, a murmur of
discontent and sullen fury rose among the thousands of the Aztecs. It
filled the air, it could be heard wherever men were gathered, and its
sound was like that of a distant angry sea. The hour of the breaking of
the tempest was at hand.

Now all this while my life went on as before, save that I was not
allowed to go outside the walls of the palace, for it was feared lest
I should find some means of intercourse with the Spaniards, who did
not know that a man of white blood was confined there and doomed to
sacrifice. Also in these days I saw little of the princess Otomie,
the chief of my destined brides, who since our strange love scene had
avoided me, and when we met at feasts or in the gardens spoke to me only
on indifferent matters, or of the affairs of state. At length came the
day of my marriage. It was, I remember, the night before the massacre of
the six hundred Aztec nobles on the occasion of the festival of Huitzel.

On this my wedding day I was treated with great circumstance and
worshipped like a god by the highest in the city, who came in to do me
reverence and burned incense before me, till I was weary of the smell of
it, for though such sorrow was on the land, the priests would abate no
jot of their ceremonies or cruelties, and great hopes were held that I
being of the race of Teules, my sacrifice would avert the anger of the
gods. At sunset I was entertained with a splendid feast that lasted two
hours or more, and at its end all the company rose and shouted as with
one voice:

'Glory to thee, O Tezcat! Happy art thou here on earth, happy mayst thou
be in the Houses of the Sun. When thou comest thither, remember that we
dealt well by thee, giving thee of our best, and intercede for us that
our sins may be forgiven. Glory to thee, O Tezcat!'

Then two of the chief nobles came forward, and taking torches led me to
a magnificent chamber that I had never seen before. Here they changed my
apparel, investing me in robes which were still more splendid than any
that I had worn hitherto, being made of the finest embroidered cotton
and of the glittering feathers of the humming bird. On my head they set
wreaths of flowers, and about my neck and wrists emeralds of vast size
and value, and a sorry popinjay I looked in this attire, that seemed
more suited to a woman's beauty than to me.

When I was arrayed, suddenly the torches were extinguished and for a
while there was silence. Then in the distance I heard women's voices
singing a bridal song that was beautiful enough after its fashion,
though I forbear to write it down. The singing ceased and there came a
sound of rustling robes and of low whispering. Then a man's voice spoke,
saying:

'Are ye there, ye chosen of heaven?'

And a woman's voice, I thought it was that of Otomie, answered:

'We are here.'

'O maidens of Anahuac,' said the man speaking from the darkness, 'and
you, O Tezcat, god among the gods, listen to my words. Maidens, a great
honour has been done to you, for by the very choice of heaven, you have
been endowed with the names, the lovelinesses, and the virtues of the
four great goddesses, and chosen to abide a while at the side of this
god, your maker and your master, who has been pleased to visit us for a
space before he seeks his home in the habitations of the Sun. See that
you show yourselves worthy of this honour. Comfort him and cherish him,
that he may forget his glory in your kindness, and when he returns to
his own place may take with him grateful memories and a good report of
your people. You have but a little while to live at his side in this
life, for already, like those of a caged bird, the wings of his spirit
beat against the bars of the flesh, and soon he will shake himself
free from us and you. Yet if you will, it is allowed to one of you to
accompany him to his home, sharing his flight to the Houses of the Sun.
But to all of you, whether you go also, or whether you stay to mourn him
during your life days, I say love and cherish him, be tender and gentle
towards him, for otherwise ruin shall overtake you here and hereafter,
and you and all of us will be ill spoken of in heaven. And you, O
Tezcat, we pray of you to accept these maidens, who bear the names and
wear the charms of your celestial consorts, for there are none more
beautiful or better born in the realms of Anahuac, and among them is
numbered the daughter of our king. They are not perfect indeed, for
perfection is known to you in the heavenly kingdoms only, since these
ladies are but shadows and symbols of the divine goddesses your true
wives, and here there are no perfect women. Alas, we have none better to
offer you, and it is our hope that when it pleases you to pass hence you
will think kindly of the women of this land, and from on high bless them
with your blessing, because your memory of these who were called your
wives on earth is pleasant.'

The voice paused, then spoke again:

'Women, in your own divine names of Xochi, Xilo, Atla, and Clixto,
and in the name of all the gods, I wed you to Tezcat, the creator, to
sojourn with him during his stay on earth. The god incarnate takes you
in marriage whom he himself created, that the symbol may be perfect and
the mystery fulfilled. Yet lest your joy should be too full--look now on
that which shall be.'

As the voice spoke these words, many torches sprang into flame at the
far end of the great chamber, revealing a dreadful sight. For there,
stretched upon a stone of sacrifice, was the body of a man, but whether
the man lived or was modelled in wax I do not know to this hour, though
unless he was painted, I think that he must have been fashioned in wax,
since his skin shone white like mine. At the least his limbs and head
were held by five priests, and a sixth stood over him clasping a knife
of obsidian in his two hands. It flashed on high, and as it gleamed the
torches were extinguished. Then came the dull echo of a blow and a sound
of groans, and all was still, till once more the brides broke out into
their marriage song, a strange chant and a wild and sweet, though after
what I had seen and heard it had little power to move me.

They sang on in the darkness ever more loudly, till presently a single
torch was lit at the end of the chamber, then another and another,
though I could not see who lit them, and the room was a flare of light.
Now the altar, the victim, and the priests were all gone, there was no
one left in the place except myself and the four brides. They were tall
and lovely women all of them, clad in white bridal robes starred over
with gems and flowers, and wearing on their brows the emblems of the
four goddesses, but Otomie was the stateliest and most beautiful of the
four, and seemed in truth a goddess. One by one they drew near to me,
smiling and sighing, and kneeling before me kissed my hand, saying:

'I have been chosen to be your wife for a space, Tezcat, happy maid that
I am. May the good gods grant that I become pleasing to your sight, so
that you may love me as I worship you.'

Then she who had spoken would draw back again out of earshot, and the
next would take her place.

Last of all came Otomie. She knelt and said the words, then added in a
low voice,

'Having spoken to you as the bride and goddess to the husband and the
god Tezcat, now, O Teule, I speak as the woman to the man. You do not
love me, Teule, therefore, if it is your will, let us be divorced of our
own act who were wed by the command of others, for so I shall be spared
some shame. These are friends to me and will not betray us;' and she
nodded towards her companion brides.

'As you will, Otomie,' I answered briefly.

'I thank you for your kindness, Teule,' she said smiling sadly, and
withdrew making obeisance, looking so stately and so sweet as she went,
that again my heart was shaken as though with love. Now from that night
till the dreadful hour of sacrifice, no kiss or tender word passed
between me and the princess of the Otomie. And yet our friendship and
affection grew daily, for we talked much together, and I sought to turn
her heart to the true King of Heaven. But this was not easy, for like
her father Montezuma, Otomie clung to the gods of her people, though
she hated the priests, and save when the victims were the foes of her
country, shrank from the rites of human sacrifice, which she said were
instituted by the pabas, since in the early days there were no men
offered on the altars of the gods, but flowers only. Daily it grew and
ripened till, although I scarcely knew it, at length in my heart, after
Lily, I loved her better than anyone on earth. As for the other women,
though they were gentle and beautiful, I soon learned to hate them.
Still I feasted and revelled with them, partly since I must, or bring
them to a miserable death because they failed to please me, and partly
that I might drown my terrors in drink and pleasure, for let it be
remembered that the days left to me on earth were few, and the awful end
drew near.


The day following the celebration of my marriage was that of the
shameless massacre of six hundred of the Aztec nobles by the order of
the hidalgo Alvarado, whom Cortes had left in command of the Spaniards.
For at this time Cortes was absent in the coast lands, whither he had
gone to make war on Narvaez, who had been sent to subdue him by his
enemy Velasquez, the governor of Cuba.

On this day was celebrated the feast of Huitzel, that was held with
sacrifice, songs, and dances in the great court of the temple, that
court which was surrounded by a wall carved over with the writhing
shapes of snakes. It chanced that on this morning before he went to
join in the festival, Guatemoc, the prince, came to see me on a visit of
ceremony.

I asked him if he intended to take part in the feast, as the splendour
of his apparel brought me to believe.

'Yes,' he answered, 'but why do you ask?'

'Because, were I you, Guatemoc, I would not go. Say now, will the
dancers be armed?'

'No, it is not usual.'

'They will be unarmed, Guatemoc, and they are the flower of the land.
Unarmed they will dance in yonder enclosed space, and the Teules will
watch them armed. Now, how would it be if these chanced to pick a
quarrel with the nobles?'

'I do not know why you should speak thus, Teule, for surely these white
men are not cowardly murderers, still I take your words as an omen, and
though the feast must be held, for see already the nobles gather, I will
not share in it.'

'You are wise, Guatemoc,' I said. 'I am sure that you are wise.'

Afterwards Otomie, Guatemoc, and I went into the garden of the palace
and sat upon the crest of a small pyramid, a teocalli in miniature that
Montezuma had built for a place of outlook on the market and the courts
of the temple. From this spot we saw the dancing of the Aztec nobles,
and heard the song of the musicians. It was a gay sight, for in the
bright sunlight their feather dresses flashed like coats of gems, and
none would have guessed how it was to end. Mingling with the dancers
were groups of Spaniards clad in mail and armed with swords and
matchlocks, but I noted that, as the time went on, these men separated
themselves from the Indians and began to cluster like bees about the
gates and at various points under the shadow of the Wall of Serpents.

'Now what may this mean?' I said to Guatemoc, and as I spoke, I saw a
Spaniard wave a white cloth in the air. Then, in an instant, before the
cloth had ceased to flutter, a smoke arose from every side, and with it
came the sound of the firing of matchlocks. Everywhere among the dancers
men fell dead or wounded, but the mass of them, unharmed as yet,
huddled themselves together like frightened sheep, and stood silent and
terror-stricken. Then the Spaniards, shouting the name of their patron
saint, as it is their custom to do when they have some such wickedness
in hand, drew their swords, and rushing on the unarmed Aztec nobles
began to kill them. Now some shrieked and fled, and some stood still
till they were cut down, but whether they stayed or ran the end was the
same, for the gates were guarded and the wall was too high to climb.
There they were slaughtered every man of them, and may God, who sees
all, reward their murderers! It was soon over; within ten minutes of
the waving of the cloth, those six hundred men were stretched upon the
pavement dead or dying, and with shouts of victory the Spaniards were
despoiling their corpses of the rich ornaments they had worn.

Then I turned to Guatemoc and said, 'It seems that you did well not to
join in yonder revel.'

But Guatemoc made no answer. He stared at the dead and those who had
murdered them, and said nothing. Only Otomie spoke: 'You Christians are
a gentle people,' she said with a bitter laugh; 'it is thus that you
repay our hospitality. Now I trust that Montezuma, my father, is pleased
with his guests. Ah! were I he, every man of them should lie on the
stone of sacrifice. If our gods are devils as you say, what are those
who worship yours?'

Then at length Guatemoc said, 'Only one thing remains to us, and that is
vengeance. Montezuma has become a woman, and I heed him no more, nay,
if it were needful, I would kill him with my own hand. But two men are
still left in the land, Cuitlahua, my uncle, and myself. Now I go to
summon our armies.' And he went.

All that night the city murmured like a swarm of wasps, and next day at
dawn, so far as the eye could reach, the streets and market place were
filled with tens of thousands of armed warriors. They threw themselves
like a wave upon the walls of the palace of Axa, and like a wave from
a rock they were driven back again by the fire of the guns. Thrice they
attacked, and thrice they were repulsed. Then Montezuma, the woman king,
appeared upon the walls, praying them to desist because, forsooth, did
