hole punched into another stick. Next easiest way is to find a piece of
flint, strike two pieces together to make sparks and hope one will set a
wad of punk on fire. If no other way, rubbing two dry sticks together
will do it if you can rub them fast enough, get them hot enough to make
the powdered fibers burst into flame. Or if they'd had some of those
quartz crystals from the top of the mountain to focus sun rays....

But they couldn't make a bow, or strike two stones together, or rub two
sticks together. It couldn't be done. Well, Cal had seen for himself
what happened when it was tried. All the men were trying it, and for a
little bit everybody thought it was only happening to him, that he must
have lost the knack, or something. For a little bit there the men were
more worried about how their wife would bring it up for weeks or
months, how he had let the rest of the men show him up when it came to
building a fire.

One of the men tore it then.

He yelled out that somebody he couldn't see was watching him over his
shoulder, that it wasn't meant they should have fire.

Cal looked quickly at Louie at that point of the story. Louie was
staring, with mouth open, at Jed; and in his eyes was confirmation of
that same feeling. But Jed didn't notice the effect, and went on with
the telling.

Everybody stopped and listened to the man, because they were having the
same feeling. Jed knew it. Him, too. The crowd might have panicked right
there if the man had let it rest, but he started explaining it, the way
a man does, and makes himself ridiculous.

He kept on yelling how the men shouldn't listen to the women. That it
was in the first Garden of Eden that man had made the mistake of
listening to woman; that it was Eve who had egged Adam into eating that
apple because a woman was never satisfied to leave well enough alone.
And now, he said, in this new Eden, man was being given another chance.
If he was smart, if he's learned anything at all, this time he wouldn't
listen to no woman.

Somebody bust out laughing when he said that, and it kind of eased the
tension a little.

A woman said, real disgusted, that if the men was too helpless to start
a little fire, least they could do was scrape up some dry leaves because
in a few hours it would get dark. Magic or no magic, watchers or no
watchers, night would fall, and she for one liked a soft bed. That
caused them to look up at the sky, and sure enough the sun, Ceti, was
already half way down the sky from where it had been at noon. At least
the world was turning and time was moving. That, at least. About three
hours had passed in what seemed like minutes.

Somebody else, one of the men this time, said why didn't they go a
little farther than scraping up some leaves. Why didn't they get busy
and knock together some shelters in case it rained during the night--the
way it often did.

Now any one of them, man or woman, ought to have been able to put up a
small shelter in less time than it takes to tell about it, even without
no tools. Break off a limb, or take a sharp stone, dig holes in the
ground with it. Take straight saplings, trim them, stick them upright in
the ground, tamp in the dirt good and hard, lash them together with
vines, lash other poles together to make the frame of the roof, lift
that onto the poles and lash them all together with braces. Thatch it
with grass, and there you were.

But there they weren't. They couldn't do it.

Things just wouldn't behave. They dug a hole, and it filled right up
again. They couldn't cut down a sapling, because the sharp stone, the
only tool they had, would fly out of their hands. They even tried
lashing some saplings together where they grew, and the saplings were
like things alive. They wouldn't be bound. The vines slithered out of
their hands and dropped to the ground, and the saplings sprang up again
straight.

Not only that. They could scrape together some leaves into a pile, all
right, but when anybody tried to lie down in them the leaves would
scatter as if blown by a wind. Only there wasn't any wind.

Some of the women got pretty disgusted with their menfolks. They tried
it themselves, and the same things happened. After that, they was a
little more forgiving.

A couple more hours had passed while they were trying that. The sun got
low. People began to realize they were getting hungry, and they began to
realize there wasn't any way to cook supper.

Now there wasn't any real hardship, not physical. Nobody'd been hurt.
Shook up a little, scared for sure. But not hurt.

The river was still flowing good, clean water. All they had to do was go
down to the river bank and cup the water in their hands, lift it to
their lips; or even better, lie down on the bank and lower their faces
into the water. They could do that. It helped a little to know they
could.

The wild bushes and trees all around had plenty of fruit and nuts to
eat. One thing you could say for Eden, the fruit didn't seem to depend
on seasons. There was always something ripe, and plenty of it.

The people wandered off from the village site then, to forage their
supper, for all the world like animals grazing in a pasture. They sort
of hung together, in herds, glad to be together--then.

By dark they all came back and sat around in a circle, the way people in
the wilds sit around a campfire. It seemed funny without a campfire. The
darker it got, the funnier it felt. The more you thought about it, the
stranger it got. The excitement had begun to wear off, and people were
starting to think a little. It got stranger and stranger. In the dusk
you could see the same thought in all the gleaming eyes.

They couldn't have fire!

Maybe the strangest thing of all, nobody was trying to explain what had
happened. Now you take mankind, he's always right in there with an
explanation for everything. Maybe it's not the right one, maybe, looking
back, it's a silly one--but at the time he believes it, and that's a
comfort.

But this was like being in a dream, knowing it's a dream, knowing it
can't happen this way, and so it doesn't have to be explained. And yet,
isn't that the worst part of a bad dream? No explanation for what's
happening in it? Nothing you can do about it, either?

Somebody said, it being dark and all, they should get some sleep.
Somebody mentioned being thankful there weren't any children. That was
one of the hardships of being an experimental colonist, you couldn't
have children. Wouldn't be right to expose children to hardships they'd
have to suffer helpless. Only here, the way kids were, he wouldn't have
been surprised if kids would have taken to it a lot easier than the
grown folks.

The people sort of bedded down all together, the way a herd of animals
take shelter, each, even in its sleep, taking comfort from the presence
and protection of the others. They bedded around on the ground, making
themselves comfortable as possible. One thing you could say,
experimental colonists might not be long on brains, the way scientists
are, but they weren't picked for that. They were picked for endurance,
and the brainy will often crack up under a strain that the enduring kind
hardly notices. Far as endurance went, physical, this wasn't bad.

Up through the leaves, and in between the trees, the stars were as
bright as ever--brighter because there wasn't no fire to dim their glow.
They couldn't see Earth, of course, but everybody knew right where to
look for Sol. There it was, a tiny little spot of light in its
constellation. It was still there.

Somebody said into the darkness that it was only two more days until the
regular monthly communication with Earth was due. That as soon as E.H.Q.
didn't hear from them, there'd be a rescue party out here in nothing
flat. So, at worst, it meant living this way only five or six more days.

That made everybody feel better. It was a comforting thing to look up
through the leaves, to see Sol in the sky, to know they weren't
forgotten back home; that on Earth people would soon be buzzing around
like a disturbed hive of hornets, with stingers cocked and ready as soon
as the message didn't get through.

Yep, somebody said, just like the museum collection of Western movies
where the U.S. cavalry always got there in time. At least they weren't
being attacked by no Indians, somebody said.

Or were they? Maybe everybody asked that to themselves, but nobody said
it.

Most everybody got some sleep. No one really suffered, any discomfort
just showed them how soft they were getting with easy living.
Considering everything, they were coming along just fine. And in a few
days everything would be all right again. They went to sleep thinking
that even if there was some equivalent to the old-time Indians attacking
them, rescue would soon be here and they would be safe.

Because man always wins.

Most people were wide awake by dawn. Some had slept in little bits,
waking often enough to keep a sense of continuity. Others, those who
slept better, awoke with a start; looked around themselves wildly,
realized they were lying out in the open plumb naked in front of other
people; maybe wondered for an instant what kind of party they'd been to
the night before; and nearly bolted in panic before they remembered.

Most everyone felt sort of surprised that things weren't back to normal,
with yesterday being something soonest forgot soonest mended. It takes
time for folks to realize--things.

Not having a hot drink for breakfast was another little hardship, a
reminder of how soft they'd got. But nobody complained. Seemed like
everybody had woke with a determination to make the best of things and
help one another do the same. Everybody was pitching in together to make
the best of things. Once they bit into the cool fruit on the trees
around them, even not having a hot drink to start the day didn't seem to
matter.

Some of the women got together and decided it would help things get back
to normal if the people covered their nakedness, or least parts of it.
It might be all right just among themselves, they said, because
everybody was in the same fix and knew what happened--but how would they
feel when the rescue ship landed and they had to walk out in front of
strange men with nothing on?

They picked some big green leaves without any trouble. But when they
strove to pin them together with thorns, the thorns just slipped out and
fell to the ground. Then they tried sewing the leaves together with
bindweed. Same thing. The bindweed slithered out and fell to the ground.

One woman figured to stick some leaves together with thick mud from the
river and paste them with more mud on her body. It wouldn't stick,
peeled right off like she was oiled. One man said he could do it without
leaves, just cover himself with mud. He lay down in a muddy pool and got
himself covered with wet clay.

He was a sight. All at once he looked vulgar, obscene. And nobody had,
before. That did it. Somebody said they were humans, not pigs, and if
the men on the rescue ship had never seen a naked body before it was
time they did. What was so wrong about the human body, anyhow?

They made the muddy man go bathe himself in the river, and gave up
trying to cover themselves. All at once the desire to cover themselves
was a nasty kind of thinking, something to be ashamed of.

Midmorning somebody got to wondering if the ten colonists who'd broken
off from the main colony and moved across the ridge were all right.

Soon as he reminded them, everybody began to laugh. What fools they'd
all been. Showed you how a bit of trouble could keep a man from thinking
straight. Here they'd been eating and sleeping like animals when, all
the while, just across the ridge there'd be houses and beds, fires and
clothes. Sure, those folks might differ in some opinions, but humans
always stood ready to help one another in distress, differences
forgotten.

In a body, they started for the ridge. Everybody knew just where the
dissidents had built their homes. But when they got to the top of the
ridge there weren't no houses there. Nothing but virgin woods, same as
this side. That shook them up. They'd been so sure.

Maybe it was the jolt of that, maybe it was a measure that we still
weren't thinking straight, something--they didn't go on down and join
forces. Nobody thought of it, somehow. They went back down and
congregated around where the village had been. Maybe it was the
beginning of something that would come later, something Cal would see
for himself. That they were already not thinking the way humans do.
Thinking and behaving more the way dumb animals do.

Nothing else worth mentioning happened that day, nor the next. In some
ways it was still like a dream. The way people were just accepting
things, without question, maybe without curiosity. Jed remembered one
time an E had said there was a wider gap between the thinking man and
the average man than there was between that average man and the ape.
He'd resented it at the time, of course, but now he thought of it again
and began to realize what the E had meant.

Two or three people commented on how easy it was to go back to nature,
wondered why they hadn't all done it before. How stupid it was for man
to knock himself out chasing all over the universe, undergoing such
hardships, when all a man could ever want was right here.

Jed tried to put down this kind of talk when it came up. He reminded
them it was Lotus Land thinking, and would be the ruination of a prime
bunch of colonists. He reminded them they'd been through hardships worse
than this, and had ought to keep their wits about them.

Funny thing, though. He couldn't get very excited about it. Just did it
because it was his duty. Maybe not even that strong, maybe because once
upon a time, long ago, hardly remembered, it had been his duty.

It was the next day that things got real rough.

Somebody, in a clearer-thinking moment, said they couldn't be sure when
the rescue ship would get here; that when the rescuers came and didn't
see any village they wouldn't know what to think--maybe they'd just go
away. Shows we weren't thinking so straight after all, to believe that
you'd go away just because you didn't find our village.

Anyhow, hadn't we ought to work out some kind of a message? Maybe scrape
some kind of a message on the ground? They decided the smooth sand above
the tide line down on the sea shore was the best place for it.

Nobody had anything else to do, so the whole colony, all forty of them,
walked the couple of miles down to the seashore. They picked out a nice
stretch of white sand, and with a broken piece of driftwood they started
to scratch a message, just a big SOS. The driftwood wriggled out of
their hands like a snake. Nobody could hold it. Several men tried
together, made no difference.

Somebody started scooping out a furrow with his hands. The furrow
closed up and smoothed out right behind him. Somebody tried piling up
sand, first in letters, then in code signals. Made no difference. Sand
smoothed right out again.

Then somebody got a bright idea. All right, he said. Didn't need to use
a stick, or scoop out a furrow, or pile up the sand. They had their bare
feet, didn't they? They could tromp out the letters that way.
Footprints, close together, would be as good as a furrow.

That's when it happened.

Jed tried it himself. And his footprints disappeared. They just weren't
there. Everybody looked behind himself, where he'd been walking. Nobody
was leaving any footprints.

That's when they bolted in panic.




17


Jed looked quickly at Cal when he told him how the colonists had
spooked, bolted in panic. As if he expected disbelief.

"Maybe that seems funny to you," he commented. "After taking so much
we'd spook like crazy animals and hightail for the woods over not making
footprints."

"Pretty fundamental thing," Cal said with a shrug. "Animals are aware of
spoor long before they are aware of tools. It hit deep down into
fundamental being, a thing like that."

Jed looked relieved. Hussein and Van Tassel exchanged glances, as if
confirming their belief that an E would understand their problems. Cal
appreciated the confidence expressed in that glance, but did not feel it
was justified. It was now pretty obvious that this was some alien
co-ordinate system, never before encountered by man. But how to get hold
of it? How to reconcile with it? Coexist with it?

Never before encountered by man? What if the myths of early man be true?
And too authentic the legends of his being a pawn to the will of the
gods? Could there have been some factual basis for the gods? And not, as
was supposed, rationalizations dreamed up by man to account for the
control of phenomena at a level beyond his own power to control?

"It's been bad since then," Jed continued. "Seems like once they got
the wind up, the whole thing hit them all over again. Like cattle in a
stampede, they didn't have a lick of sense. They didn't even stay
together. They scattered in all directions, hid out in the bushes from
each other.

"You could hunt for 'em, call for 'em, yell your lungs out. You could
pass within ten feet of one of 'em, callin', pleadin', and they wouldn't
say a word. Just stand there and watch you like a hunted animal, not
even breathin' lest you discover them.

"After a couple of days, some of us kind of pulled ourselves
together--me and Martha, Ahmed and Dirk here. Maybe a dozen of us now
have got together again. Funny thing though, even so, all we want is to
hide. Can't get over hidin', somehow. That's why you didn't see us from
