The Project Gutenberg EBook The Parisians, by E. B. Lytton, Book 11.
#174 in our series by Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Parisians, Book 11.

Author: Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Release Date: March 2005  [EBook #7747]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 20, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII




*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PARISIANS, B11, LYTTON ***




Produced by David Widger




                              THE PARISIANS

                         By Edward Bulwer-Lytton


                                 BOOK XI.


CHAPTER I.

Amoung the frets and checks to the course that "never did run smooth,"
there is one which is sufficiently frequent, for many a reader will
remember the irritation it caused him.  You have counted on a meeting
with the beloved one unwitnessed by others, an interchange of confessions
and vows which others may not hear.  You have arranged almost the words
in which your innermost heart is to be expressed; pictured to yourself
the very looks by which those words will have their sweetest reply.  The
scene you have thus imagined appears to you vivid and distinct, as if
foreshown in a magic glass.  And suddenly, after long absence, the
meeting takes place in the midst of a common companionship: nothing that
you wished to say can be said.  The scene you pictured is painted out by
the irony of Chance; and groups and backgrounds of which you had never
dreamed start forth from the disappointing canvas.  Happy if that be all!
But sometimes, by a strange, subtle intuition, you feel that the person
herself is changed; and sympathetic with that change, a terrible chill
comes over your own heart.

Before Graham had taken his seat at the table beside Isaura, he felt that
she was changed to him.  He felt it by her very touch as their hands met
at the first greeting,--by the tone of her voice in the few words that
passed between them,--by the absence of all glow in the smile which had
once lit up her face, as a burst of sunshine lights up a day in spring,
and gives a richer gladness of colour to all its blooms.  Once seated
side by side they remained for some moments silent.  Indeed, it would
have been rather difficult for anything less than the wonderful
intelligence of lovers between whom no wall can prevent the stolen
interchange of tokens, to have ventured private talk of their own amid
the excited converse which seemed all eyes, all tongues, all ears,
admitting no one present to abstract himself from the common emotion.
Englishmen do not recognise the old classic law which limited the number
of guests, where banquets are meant to be pleasant, to that of the Nine-
Muses.  They invite guests so numerous, and so shy of launching talk
across the table, that you may talk to the person next to you not less
secure from listeners than you would be in talking with the stranger whom
you met at a well in the Sahara.  It is not so, except on state
occasions, at Paris.  Difficult there to retire into solitude with your
next neighbour.  The guests collected by Duplessis completed with himself
the number of the Sacred Nine--the host, Valerie, Rochebriant, Graham,
Isaura, Signora Venosta, La Duchesse de Tarascon, the wealthy and high-
born Imperialist, Prince --------, and last and least, one who shall be
nameless.

I have read somewhere, perhaps in one of the books which American
superstition dedicates to the mysteries of Spiritualism, how a gifted
seer, technically styled medium, sees at the opera a box which to other
eyes appears untenanted and empty, but to him is full of ghosts, well
dressed in _costume de-regle_, gazing on the boards and listening to the
music.  Like such ghosts are certain beings whom I call Lookers-on.
Though still living, they have no share in the life they survey, they
come as from another world to hear and to see what is passing in ours.
In ours they lived once, but that troubled sort of life they have
survived.  Still we amuse them as stage-players and puppets amuse
ourselves.  One of these Lookers-on completed the party at the house of
Duplessis.

How lively, how animated the talk was at the financier's pleasant table
that day, the 8th of July!  The excitement of the coming war made itself
loud in every Gallic voice, and kindled in every Gallic eye.  Appeals at
every second minute were made, sometimes courteous, sometimes sarcastic,
to the Englishman--promising son of an eminent statesman, and native of a
country in which France is always coveting an ally, and always suspecting
an enemy.  Certainly Graham could not have found a less propitious moment
for asking Isaura if she really were changed.  And certainly the honour
of Great Britain was never less ably represented (that is saying a great
deal) than it was on this occasion by the young man reared to diplomacy
and aspiring to Parliamentary distinction.  He answered all questions
with a constrained voice and an insipid smile,--all questions pointedly
addressed to him as to what demonstrations of admiring sympathy with the
gallantry of France might be expected from the English Government and
people; what his acquaintance with the German races led him to suppose
would be the effect on the Southern States of the first defeat of the
Prussians; whether the man called Moltke was not a mere strategist on
paper, a crotchety pedant; whether, if Belgium became so enamoured of the
glories of France as to solicit fusion with her people, England would
have a right to offer any objection,&c., &c.  I do not think that during
that festival Graham once thought one-millionth so much about the fates
of Prussia and France as he did think, "Why is that girl so changed to
me?  Merciful heaven! is she lost to my life?"

By training, by habit, even by passion, the man was a genuine politician,
cosmopolitan as well as patriotic, accustomed to consider what effect
every vibration in that balance of European power, which no deep thinker
can despise, must have on the destinies of civilised humanity, and on
those of the nation to which he belongs.  But are there not moments in
life when the human heart suddenly narrows the circumference to which its
emotions are extended?  As the ebb of a tide, it retreats from the shores
it had covered on its flow, drawing on with contracted waves the
treasure-trove it has selected to hoard amid its deeps.




CHAPTER II.

On quitting the dining-room, the Duchesse de Tarascon said to her host,
on whose arm she was leaning, "Of course you and I must go with the
stream.  But is not all the fine talk that has passed to-day at your
table, and in which we too have joined, a sort of hypocrisy?  I may say
this to you; I would say it to no other."

"And I say to you, Madame la Duchesse, that which I would say to no
other.  Thinking over it as I sit alone, I find myself making a 'terrible
hazard;' but when I go abroad and become infected by the general
enthusiasm, I pluck up gaiety of spirit, and whisper to myself, 'True,
but it may be an enormous gain.'  To get the left bank of the Rhine is a
trifle; but to check in our next neighbour a growth which a few years
hence would overtop us,--that is no trifle.  And, be the gain worth the
hazard or not, could the Emperor, could any Government likely to hold its
own for a week, have declined to take the chance of the die?"

The Duchesse mused a moment, and meanwhile the two seated themselves on a
divan in the corner of the salon.  Then she said very slowly--

"No Government that held its tenure on popular suffrage could have done
so.  But if the Emperor had retained the personal authority which once
allowed the intellect of one man to control and direct the passions of
many, I think the war would have been averted.  I have reason to know
that the Emperor gave his emphatic support to the least bellicose members
of the Council, and that Gramont's speech did not contain the passage
that precipitates hostilities when the Council in which it was framed
broke up.  These fatal Ministers found the Chamber, and the reports of
the popular excitement which could not be resisted without imminent
danger of revolution.  It is Paris that has forced the war on the
Emperor.  But enough of this subject.  What must be, must, and, as you
say, the gain may be greater than the hazard.  I come to something else
you whispered to me before we went in to dinner,--a sort of complaint
which wounds me sensibly.  You say I had assisted to a choice of danger
and possibly of death a very distant connection of mine, who might have
been a very near connection of yours.  You mean Alain de Rochebriant?"

"Yes; I accept him as a suitor for the hand of my only daughter."

"I am so glad, not for your sake so much as for his.  No one can know him
well without appreciating in him the finest qualities of the finest order
of the French noble; but having known your pretty Valerie so long, my
congratulations are for the man who can win her.  Meanwhile, hear my
explanation: when I promised Alain any interest I can command for the
grade of officer in a regiment of Mobiles, I knew not that he had formed,
or was likely to form, ties or duties to keep him at home.  I withdraw my
promise."

"No, Duchesse, fulfil it.  I should be disloyal indeed if I robbed a
sovereign under whose tranquil and prosperous reign I have acquired,
with no dishonour, the fortune which Order proffers to Commerce, of one
gallant defender in the hour of need.  And, speaking frankly, if Alain
were really my son, I think I am Frenchman enough to remember that France
is my mother."

"Say no more, my friend--say no more," cried the Duchesse, with the warm
blood of the heart rushing through all the delicate coatings of pearl-
powder.  "If every Frenchman felt as you do; if in this Paris of ours all
hostilities of class may merge in the one thought of the common country;
if in French hearts there yet thrills the same sentiment as that which,
in the terrible days when all other ties were rent asunder, revered
France as mother, and rallied her sons to her aid against the confederacy
of Europe,--why, then, we need not grow pale with dismay at the sight of
a Prussian needle-gun.  Hist! look yonder: is not that a tableau of Youth
in Arcady?  Worlds rage around, and Love, unconcerned, whispers to Love!"
The Duchesse here pointed to a corner of the adjoining room in which
Alain and Valerie sat apart, he whispering into her ear; her cheek
downcast, and, even seen at that distance, brightened by the delicate
tenderness of its blushes.




CHAPTER III.

But in that small assembly there were two who did not attract the notice
of Duplessis or of the lady of the Imperial Court.  While the Prince ----
and the placid Looker-on were engaged at a contest of ecarte, with the
lively Venosta, for the gallery, interposing criticisms and admonitions,
Isaura was listlessly turning over a collection of photographs, strewed
on a table that stood near to an open window in the remoter angle of the
room, communicating with a long and wide balcony filled partially with
flowers and overlooking the Champs Elysees, softly lit up by the
innumerable summer stars.  Suddenly a whisper, the command of which she
could not resist, thrilled through her ear, and sent the blood rushing
back to her heart.

"Do you remember that evening at Enghien?  how I said that our
imagination could not carry us beyond the question whether we two should
be gazing together that night twelve months on that star which each of us
had singled out from the hosts of heaven?  That was the 8th of July.  It
is the 8th of July once more.  Come and seek for our chosen star--come.
I have something to say, which say I must.  Come."

Mechanically, as it were,--mechanically, as they tell us the Somnambulist
obeys the Mesmeriser,--Isaura obeyed that summons.  In a kind of dreamy
submission she followed his steps, and found herself on the balcony,
flowers around her and stars above, by the side of the man who had been
to her that being ever surrounded by flowers and lighted by stars,--the
ideal of Romance to the heart of virgin Woman.

"Isaura," said the Englishman, softly.  At the sound of her own name for
the first time heard from those lips, every nerve in her frame quivered.
"Isaura, I have tried to live without you.  I cannot.  You are all in all
to me: without you it seems to me as if earth had no flowers, and even
heaven had withdrawn its stars.  Are there differences between us,
differences of taste, of sentiments, of habits, of thought?  Only let me
hope that you can love me a tenth part so much as I love you, and such
differences cease to be discord.  Love harmonises all sounds, blends all
colours into its own divine oneness of heart and soul.  Look up! is not
the star which this time last year invited our gaze above, is it not
still there?  Does it not still invite our gaze?  Isaura, speak!"

"Hush, hush, hush,"--the girl could say no more, but she recoiled from
his side.

The recoil did not wound him: there was no hate in it.  He advanced, he
caught her hand, and continued, in one of those voices which become so
musical in summer nights under starry skies:

"Isaura, there is one name which I can never utter without a reverence
due to the religion which binds earth to heaven--a name which to man
should be the symbol of life cheered and beautified, exalted, hallowed.
That name is 'wife.'  Will you take that name from me?"

And still Isaura made no reply.  She stood mute, and cold, and rigid as a
statue of marble.  At length, as if consciousness had been arrested and
was struggling back, she sighed heavily, and passed her hands slowly over
her forehead.

"Mockery, mockery," she said then, with a smile half bitter, half
plaintive, on her colourless lips.  "Did you wait to ask me that question
till you knew what my answer must be?  I have pledged the name of wife to
another."

"No, no; you say that to rebuke, to punish me!  Unsay it! unsay it!"

Isaura beheld the anguish of his face with bewildered eyes.  "How can my
words pain you?" she said, drearily.  "Did you not write that I had
unfitted myself to be wife to you?"

"I?"

"That I had left behind me the peaceful immunities of private life?  I
felt you were so right!  Yes!  I am affianced to one who thinks that in
spite of that misfortune--"

"Stop, I command you--stop!  You saw my letter to Mrs. Morley.  I have
not had one moment free from torture and remorse since I wrote it.  But
whatever in that letter you might justly resent--"

"I did not resent--"

Graham heard not the interruption, but hurried on.  "You would forgive
could you read my heart.  No matter.  Every sentiment in that letter,
except those which conveyed admiration, I retract.  Be mine, and instead
of presuming to check in you the irresistible impulse of genius to the
first place in the head or the heart of the world, I teach myself to
encourage, to share, to exult in it.  Do you know what a difference there
is between the absent one and the present one--between the distant image
against whom our doubts, our fears, our suspicions, raise up hosts of
imaginary giants, barriers of visionary walls, and the beloved face
before the sight of which the hosts are fled, the walls are vanished?
Isaura, we meet again.  You know now from my own lips that I love you.  I
think your lips will not deny that you love me.  You say that you are
affianced to another.  Tell the man frankly, honestly, that you mistook
your heart.  It is not yours to give.  Save yourself, save him, from a
union in which there can be no happiness."

"It is too late," said Isaura, with hollow tones, but with no trace of
vacillating weakness on her brow and lips.  "Did I say now to that other
one, 'I break the faith that I pledged to you,' I should kill him, body
and soul.  Slight thing though I be, to him I am all in all; to you, Mr.
Vane, to you a memory--the memory of one whom a year, perhaps a month,
hence, you will rejoice to think you have escaped."

She passed from him--passed away from the flowers and the starlight; and
when Graham,--recovering from the stun of her crushing words, and with
the haughty mien and stop of the man who goes forth from the ruin of his
hopes, leaning for support upon his pride,--when Graham re-entered the
room, all the guests had departed save only Alain, who was still
exchanging whispered words with Valerie.




CHAPTER IV.

The next day, at the hour appointed, Graham entered Alain's apartment.
"I am glad to tell you," said the Marquis, gaily, "that the box has
arrived, and we will very soon examine its contents.  Breakfast claims
precedence."  During the meal Alain was in gay spirits, and did not at
first notice the gloomy countenance and abstracted mood of his guest.  At
length, surprised at the dull response to his lively sallies on the part
of a man generally so pleasant in the frankness of his speech, and the
cordial ring of his sympathetic laugh, it occurred to him that the change
in Graham must be ascribed to something that had gone wrong in the
meeting with Isaura the evening before; and remembering the curtness with
which Graham had implied disinclination to converse about the fair
Italian, he felt perplexed how to reconcile the impulse of his good
nature with the discretion imposed on his good-breeding.  At all events,
a compliment to the lady whom Graham had so admired could do no harm.

"How well Mademoiselle Cicogna looked last night!"

"Did she?  It seemed to me that, in health at least, she did not look
very well.  Have you heard what day M. Thiers will speak on the war?"

"Thiers?  No.  Who cares about Thiers?  Thank heaven his day is past!
I don't know any unmarried woman in Paris, not even Valerie--I mean
Mademoiselle Duplessis--who has so exquisite a taste in dress as
Mademoiselle Cicogna.  Generally speaking, the taste of a female author
is atrocious."

"Really--I did not observe her dress.  I am no critic on subjects so
dainty as the dress of ladies, or the tastes of female authors."

"Pardon me," said the beau Marquis, gravely.  "As to dress, I think that
so essential a thing in the mind of woman, that no man who cares about
women ought to disdain critical study of it.  In woman, refinement of
character is never found in vulgarity of dress.  I have only observed
that truth since I came up from Bretagne."

"I presume, my dear Marquis, that you may have read in Bretagne books
which very few not being professed scholars have ever read at Paris;
and possibly you may remember that Horace ascribes the most exquisite
refinement in dress, denoted by the untranslatable words, 'simplex
munditiis,' to a lady who was not less distinguished by the ease and
rapidity with which she could change her affection.  Of course that
allusion does not apply to Mademoiselle Cicogna, but there are many other
exquisitely dressed ladies at Paris of whom an ill-fated admirer

                                 'fidem
                    Mutatosque deos flebit.'

"Now, with your permission, we will adjourn to the box of letters."

The box being produced and unlocked, Alain looked with conscientious care
at its contents before he passed over to Graham's inspection a few
epistles, in which the Englishman immediately detected the same
handwriting as that of the letter from Louise which Richard King had
bequeathed to him.

