height for the person taking the shower bath.

The water will run from 10 to 15 minutes. The addition of some hot
water will make a splendid shower bath.
--Contributed by Dr. C. H. Rosenthal, Cincinnati, O.



** How to Make Small Sprocket Wheels [15]

As I needed several small sprocket wheels and had none on hand, I
made them quickly without other expense than the time required,
from scrap material. Several old hubs with the proper size bore
were secured. These were put on an arbor and turned to the size of
the bottom of the teeth. Hole were drilled and tapped to
correspond to the number of teeth required and old stud bolts
turned into them. The wheels were again placed on the arbor and
the studs turned to the required size. After rounding the ends of
the studs, the sprockets were ready for use and gave perfect
satisfaction.
--Contributed by Charles Stem, Phillipsburg, New York.



** Pot-Cover Closet [16]

The sides of the cover closet are cut as shown in Fig. 1 and
shelves are nailed between them at a slight angle.

[Illustration: FIG. 1  FIG. 2  Closet for Holding Pot Covers]

No dimensions are given as the space and the sizes of the covers
are not always the same. The back is covered with thin boards
placed vertically. The front can be covered with a curtain or a
paneled door as shown.
--Contributed by Gilbert A. Wehr, Baltimore, Md.



** Aid in Mixing Salad Dressing [16]

Some cooks find it a very difficult matter to prepare salad
dressing, principally mayonnaise dressing, as the constant
stirring and pouring of oil and liquids are required in the
operation. The simple homemade device shown in the accompanying
sketch greatly assists

[Illustration: Bottle in Stand]

in this work. It consists of a stand to hold a bottle, the mouth
of which rests against a. small gate directly in the rear of the
attached tin trough. The weight of the bottle and the contents
against the gate serves as a check or stopper. If the gate is
raised slightly, it will permit a continuous flow of liquid of the
desired amount.



** Saving Overexposed Developing Prints [16]

In using developing papers, either for contact printing or
enlargements, you are, by all rules of the game, entitled to a
certain number of overexposed prints, says a correspondent of
Camera Craft. But there is no reason why you should lose either
the paper or the time and trouble expended in making these prints.
By using the following method, you can turn these very dark prints
into good ones.

First: these overexposed prints must be fully developed. Do not
try to save them by rushing them out of the developer into the
short-stop or fixing bath. The results will be poor, and, if you
try to tone them afterward, the color will be an undesirable,
sickly one. Develop them into strong prints, thoroughly fix, and
wash until you are sure all hypo is removed. In my own practice, I
carry out this part of the work thoroughly, then dry the prints
and lay aside these dark ones until there is an accumulation of a
dozen or more, doing this to avoid too frequent use of the very
poisonous bleaching solution. The bleacher is made up as follows
and should be plainly marked "Poison."

    Cyanide of potassium ....... 2 oz.
    Iodide of potassium ....... 20 gr.
    Water ..................... 16 oz.

Place the dry print, without previous wetting, in this solution.
It will bleach slowly and evenly, but, when it starts to bleach,
transfer it to a tray of water, where it will continue to bleach.
When the desired reduction has taken place, stop the action at
once by immersing the print in a 10-per-cent solution of borax.
The prints may be allowed to remain in this last solution until
they are finished. A good final washing completes the process.
This washing must be thorough and a sponge or a tuft of cotton
used to clean the surface of the print.

With a little practice, this method of saving prints that are too
dark becomes easy and certain. The prints are lightened and at the
same time improved in tone, being made blue-black with a delicate
and pleasing quality that will tempt you to purposely overexpose
some of your prints in order to tone them by this method for
certain effects. The process is particularly valuable to the
worker in large sizes, as it provides a means of making quite a
saving of paper that would otherwise be thrown away.



** An Ironing-Board Stand [17]

An ordinary ironing board is cut square on the large end and a
slot cut 1-1/2 in. wide and 4 in. long to admit the angle support.
The support is placed against the table and the board

[Illustration: Stand Attached to Table]

is pressed down against the outer notch which jams against the
table, thus holding the board rigid and in such a position as to
give free access for ironing dresses, etc.
--Contributed by T. L. Gray, San Francisco, Cal.



** A Desk Blotting Pad [17]

Procure four sheets of blotting paper, preferably the colored
kind, as it will appear clean much longer than the white. The size
of the pad depends on the size of the blotting paper.

Fold four pieces of ordinary wrapping paper, 5 by 15 in. in size,
three times, to make it 5 by 5 in. Fold each one from corner to
corner as shown in Fig. 1 and again as in Fig. 2. Paste the last
fold together and the corner holders are complete. Put one on each
corner of the blotting paper. They can be fastened with a small
brass paper fastener put through the top of the holder. The
blotting paper can

[Illustration: Fig. 1, 2, 3 Paper Corners for Blotter Pads]

be easily changed by removing the holders and fasteners. Corners
complete are shown in Fig. 3.
--Contributed by J. Wilson Aldred Toronto, Canada.



** Sleeve Holders for Lavatories [17]

A very handy article is an attachment on wash basins or lavatories
for holding the sleeves back while washing the hands. It is very
annoying to have the sleeves continually slip down and become wet
or soiled. The simple device shown herewith can be made with bent
wires or hooks and attached in such a way that it can be dropped
out

[Illustration: Wires Attached to a Lavatory]

of the way when not in use.
--Contributed by L.J. Monahan, Oshkosh, Wisconsin.



** Removing Tarnish [17]

A pencil eraser will remove the tarnish from nickel plate, and the
ink eraser will remove the rust from drawing instruments.



** How to Make a Brass Bookmark [18]

Secure a piece of brass of No. 20 gauge, having a width of 2-1/4
in. and a length of 5 in. Make a design similar to that shown, the
head of which is 2 in. wide, the shaft 1 in. wide below the

[Illustration: FIG. 1 Fig. 2 The Pattern and the Finished
Bookmark]

head and the extreme length 4-1/2 in. Make one-half of the design,
as shown in Fig. 1, freehand, then trace the other half in the
usual way, after folding along the center line. Trace the design
on the metal, using carbon paper, which gives the outline of the
design Fig. 2.

With the metal shears, cut out the outline as indicated by the
drawing. With files, smooth off any roughness

[Illustration: Drilling and Sawing the Metal]

and form the edge so that it shall be nicely rounded.

The parts of the design in heavy color may be treated in several
ways. A very satisfactory treatment is obtained by etching, then
coloring. Clean the metal thoroughly with pumice stone and water
or with alcohol before the design is applied. Cover all the metal
that is not to be lowered with a thick coating of asphaltum. Allow
this to dry, then put on a second coat. After this has dried,
thoroughly immerse the metal in a solution composed as follows: 3
parts water, 1 part sulphuric acid, 1 part nitric acid.

Allow the metal to remain in this solution until the exposed part
has been eaten about 1/32 in. deep, then remove it and clean off
the asphaltum, using turpentine. Do not put the hands in the
solution, but use a swab on a stick.

For coloring olive green, use 2 parts water to 1 part permuriate
of iron. Apply with a small brush.

The lines at A and B will need to be cut, using a small metal saw.
Pierce a hole with a small drill, Fig. 3, large enough to receive
the saw and cut along the lines as in Fig. 4. A piece of wood with
a V-shaped notch which is fastened firmly to the bench forms the
best place in which to do such sawing. The teeth of the saw should
be so placed that the sawing will be done on the downward stroke.
The metal must be held firmly, and the saw allowed time to make
its cut, being held perpendicular to the work.

After the sawing, smooth the edges of the metal with a small file
and emery paper. The metal clip may be bent outward to do this
part of the work.



** Cheesebox-Cover Tea Tray [18]

The cover from a cheesebox can be converted into a tea tray that
is very dainty for the piazza, or for serving an invalid's
breakfast.

First sandpaper the wood until it is smooth, then stain it a
mahogany color. The mahogany stain can be obtained ready prepared.
After the stain has dried, attach brass handles, which can be
obtained for a small sum at an upholsterer's shop. A round
embroidered doily in the bottom adds to the appearance of the
tray.
--Contributed by Katharine D. Morse, Syracuse, New York.



** Piercing-Punch for Brass [19]

Drill a 1/2-in. hole through a block of pine or other soft wood 2
in. thick. Tack over one end of the hole a piece of pasteboard in
which seven coarse sewing-machine needles have been inserted. The
needles should be close together and pushed through the pasteboard
until the points show. The hole is then filled with melted babbitt
metal. When this is cold, the block is split and the pasteboard
removed. This tool makes neat pierced work and in making brass
shades, it does the work rapidly.
--Contributed by H. Carl Cramer, East Hartford, Conn.



** Kitchen Chopping Board [19]

Cooks can slice, chop or mince vegetables and various other food
rapidly by placing the little device, as shown, on a chopping
board. Ii is an ordinary staple, driven in just far enough to
allow a space for the end of an ordinary pointed kitchen knife to
fit in it. The staple is driven in the edge of the chopping board.
The knife can be raised and lowered with one hand, as

[Illustration: Knife Attached to the Board]

the material is passed under the blade with the other. Great
pressure can be applied and the knife will not slip. --Contributed
by M. M. Burnett, Richmond, Cal.



** Carrying Mattresses [19]

Sew straps to the sides of mattresses and they can be handled much
easier.



** A Carpenter's Gauge [19]

The home workshop can be supplied with a carpenter's gauge without
any expense by the use of a large spool and

[Illustration: Round Stick In a Spool]

a round stick of wood. The stick should be dressed to fit the hole
in the spool snugly and a small brad driven through one end so
that the point will protrude about 1/16 in.

The adjustment of the gauge is secured by driving the stick in the
hole in the direction desired. A better way and one that will make
the adjusting easy is to file the point end of a screw eye flat
and use it as a set screw through a hole in the side of the spool.



** A Flatiron Rest [19]

The iron rest and wall hanger shown in the sketch is made of sheet
iron. The upturned edges of the metal are

[Illustration: Board or Wall Iron Rest]

bent to fit the sloping sides of the iron. The holder and iron can
be moved at the same time.
--Contributed by W. A. Jaquythe, Richmond, Cal.



** Use for Paper Bags [19]

When groceries are delivered, save the paper bags and use them for
staring bread and cakes. Tie the neck of the bag with a string and
it will keep the contents fresh and clean.
--Contributed by Mrs. L. H. Atwell, Kissimmee, Florida.



** Use Chalk on Files [19]

If a little chalk is rubbed on a file before filing steel, it will
keep the chips from sticking in the cuts on the file and
scratching the work.



** A Homemade Steam Turbine [20]
By WILLIAM H. WARNECKE

Procure some brass, about 3/16 in. thick and 4 in. square; 53
steel pens, not over 1/4 in. in width at the shank; two enameled,
or tin, saucers or pans, having a diameter on the inside part of
about 4-1/2 in.; two stopcocks with 1/8 in. holes; one shaft; some
pieces of

[Illustration: Details of Turbine]

brass, 1/4 in. thick, and several 1/8-in. machine screws.

Lay out two circles on the 3/16-in. brass, one having a diameter
of 3-1/2 in. and the other with a diameter of 2-3/4 in. The
outside circle is the size of the finished brass wheel, while the
inside circle indicates the depth to which the slots are to be
cut. Mark the point where a hole is to be drilled for the shaft,
also locate the drill holes, as shown at A, Fig. 1. After the
shaft hole and the holes A are drilled in the disk, it can be used
as template for drilling the side plates C.

The rim of the disk is divided into 53 equal parts and radial
lines drawn from rim to line B, indicating the depth of the slots.
Slots are cut in the disk with a hacksaw on the radial lines. A
small vise is convenient for holding the disk while cutting the
slots.

When cutting the disk out of the rough brass, sufficient margin
should be left for filing to the true line. The slots should be
left in their rough state as they have a better hold on the pens
which are used for the blades. The pens are inserted in the slots
and made quite secure by forcing ordinary pins on the inside of
the pens and breaking them off at the rim, as shown in Fig. 4.

When the pens are all fastened two pieces of metal are provided,
each about 1 in. in diameter and 1/32 in. thick, with a 3/8-in.
hole in the center, for filling pieces which are first placed
around the shaft hole between the disk and side plates C, Fig. 1.
The side plates are then secured with some of the 1/8-in. machine
screws, using two nuts on each screw. The nuts should be on the
side opposite the inlet valves. The shaft hole may also be filed
square, a square shaft used, and the ends filed round for the
bearings.

The casing for the disk is made of two enameled-iron saucers, Fig.
2, bolted together with a thin piece of asbestos between them to
make a tight joint. A 3/4-in. hole is cut near the edge of one of
the saucers for the exhaust. If it is desired to carry the exhaust
beyond the casing, a thin pipe can be inserted 1/4 in. into the
hole. Holes are drilled through the pipe on both inside and
outside of the casing, and pins inserted, as shown in Fig. 5.
Solder is run around the outside pin to keep the steam from
escaping. At the lowest point of the saucer or casing a 1/8-in.
hole is drilled to run off the water. A wood plug will answer for
a stopcock.

If metal dishes, shaped from thick material with a good coating of
tin, can be procured, it will be much easier to construct the
casing than if enameled ware is used. The holes can be easily
drilled and the parts fitted together closely. All seams and
surfaces around fittings can be soldered.

Nozzles are made of two stopcocks having a 1/8-in. hole. These are
connected to a 3/8-in. supply pipe. The nozzles should be set at
an angle of 20 deg. with the face of the disk. The nozzle or
stopcock will give better results if the discharge end is filed
parallel to the face of the disk when at an angle of 20 deg. There
should be a space of 1/16 in. between the nozzle and the blades to
allow for sufficient play, Fig. 3.

The bearings are made of 1/4-in. brass and bolted to the casing,
as shown, with 1/8-in. machine screws and nuts. Two nuts should be
placed on each screw. The pulley is made by sliding a piece of
steel pipe on the engine shaft and fastening it with machine
screws and nuts as shown in Fig. 6. If the shaft is square, lead
should be run into the segments.

The driven shaft should have a long bearing. The pulley on this
shaft is made of pieces of wood nailed together, and its
circumference cut out with a scroll saw. Flanges are screwed to
the pulley and fastened to the shaft as shown in Fig. 7.

The bearings are made of oak blocks lined with heavy tin or sheet
iron for the running surface. Motion is transmitted from the
engine to the large pulley by a thin but very good leather belt.



** Homemade Telegraph Key [21]

A simple and easily constructed telegraph key may be made in the
following manner: Procure a piece of sheet brass, about 1/32 in.
thick, and cut out a strip 3-1/2 in. long by 3/4 in. wide. Bend as
shown in Fig. 1 and drill a hole for the knob in one end and a
hole for a screw in the other. Procure a small wood knob and
fasten it in place with a small screw. Cut a strip of the same
brass 2-3/4 in. long and 5/16 in. wide and bend as shown in Fig.
2. Drill two holes in the feet for screws to fasten it to the
base, and one hole in the top part for a machine screw, and solder
a small nut on the under side of the metal over the hole.

Mount both pieces on a base 4-1/4 by 2-3/4 by 1/4 in., as in Fig.
3, and where

[Illustration: Brass Key on a Wood Base]

the screw of the knob strikes the base when pressed down, put in a
screw or brass-headed tack for a contact. Fasten the parts down
with small brass wood-screws and solder the connections beneath
the base. Binding posts from an old battery cell are used on the
end of the base. The screw on top of the arch is used to adjust
the key for a long or short stroke.
--Contributed by S. V. Cooke, Hamilton, Canada.



** Keeping Food Cool in Camps [21]

Camps and suburban homes located where ice is hard to get can be
provided with a cooling arrangement herein described that will
make a good substitute for the icebox. A barrel is sunk in the
ground in a shady place, allowing plenty of space about the
outside to fill in with gravel. A quantity of small stones and
sand is first put in wet. A box is placed in the hole over the top
of the barrel and filled in with clay or earth well tamped. The
porous condition of the gravel drains the surplus water after a
rain.

The end of the barrel is fitted with a light cover and a heavy
door hinged to the box. A small portion of damp sand is sprinkled
on the bottom of the barrel. The covers should be left open
occasionally to prevent mold and to remove any bad air that may
have collected from the contents.
--Contributed by F. Smith, La Salle, Ill.



** Homemade Work Basket [22]

Secure a cheese box about 12 in. high and 15 in. or more in
diameter. It will pay you to be careful in selecting this box. Be
sure to have the cover. Score the wood deeply with a carpenter's
gauge inside and out 3-1/2 in. from the top of the box. With
repeated scoring the wood will be almost cut through or in shape
to finish the cut with a knife. Now you will have the box in two
pieces. The lower part, 8-1/2 in. deep over all, we will call the
basket, and the smaller part will be known as the tray.

Remove the band from the cover and cut the boards to fit in the
tray flush with the lower edge, to make the bottom. Fasten with
3/4-in brads. The kind of wood used in making these boxes cracks
easily and leaves a rough surface which should be well
sandpapered.

The four legs are each 3/4-in. square and 30-1/2 in. long. The
tops should be beveled to keep them from splintering at the edges.
With a string or tape measure, find the circumference of the tray
or basket and divide this into four equal parts, arranging the lap
seam on both to come midway between two of the marks. When
assembling, make these seams come between the two back legs.

The tray is placed 1-1/4 in. from the top end and the basket 6-3/4
in. from the bottom end of the legs. Notch the legs at the lower
point about 1/8 in. deep and 1-1/4 in. wide to receive the band at
the lower end of the basket. Fasten with 3/4-in. screws, using
four to each leg, three of which are in the basket. Insert the
screws from the inside of the box into the legs.

Stain the wood before putting in the

[Illustration: Work Basket]

lining. If all the parts are well sandpapered, the wood will take
the stain nicely: Three yards of cretonne will make a very
attractive lining. Cut two sheets of cardboard to fit in the
bottom of the tray and basket. Cover them with the cretonne,
sewing on the back side. Cut four strips for the sides from the
width of the goods 5-1/2 in. wide and four strips 10 in. wide. Sew
them end to end and turn down one edge to a depth of 1 in. and
gather it at that point, also the lower edge when necessary. Sew
on to the covered cardboards. Fasten them to the sides of the tray
and basket with the smallest upholsterers' tacks. The product of
your labor will be a very neat and useful piece of furniture.
--Contributed by Stanley H. Packard, Boston, Mass.



** A Window Display [22]

A novel and attractive aeroplane window display can be easily made
in the following manner: Each aeroplane is cut from folded paper,
as shown in the sketch, and the wings bent out on the dotted
lines. The folded part in the center is pasted together. Each
aeroplane is fastened with a small thread from the point A as
shown. A figure of an airman can be pasted to each aeroplane. One
or more of the aeroplanes can be fastened in the blast of an
electric fan and kept in flight the same as a kite. The fan can be
concealed to make the display more real. When making the display,
have the background of such

[Illustration: Paper Aeroplanes in Draft]

a color as to conceal the small threads holding the aeroplanes.
--Contributed by Frederick Hennighausen, Baltimore, Md.



** How to Make a Flint Arrowhead [23]

If you live where flints abound, possess the requisite patience
and the knack of making things, you can, with the crudest of tools
and a little practice, chip out as good arrowheads as any painted
savage that ever drew a bow.

Select a piece of straight-grained flint as near the desired shape
as possible. It may be both longer and wider than the finished
arrow but it should not be any thicker. The side, edge and end
views of a suitable fragment are shown in Fig. 1. Hold the piece
with one edge or end resting on a block of wood and strike the
upper edge lightly with a hammer, a small boulder or anything that
comes handy until the piece assumes the shape shown in Fig. 2.

[Illustration: Fig.2  Fig.3  The Stone Chipped into Shape]

The characteristic notches shown in the completed arrow, Fig. 3,
are chipped out by striking the piece lightly at the required
points with the edge of an old hatchet or a heavy flint held at
right angles to the edge of the arrow. These heads can be made so
that they cannot be distinguished from the real Indian arrowheads.
--Contributed by B. Orlando Taylor, Cross Timbers, Mo.



** An Opening Handle for a Stamp Pad [23]

A stamp pad is a desk necessity and the cleanliness of one depends
on keeping it closed when it is not in use. The opening and
closing of a pad requires both hands and consequently the closing
of a pad is often neglected in order to avoid soiling the fingers.
This trouble can be avoided if the pad is fitted with a small
handle as shown in the sketch. Take the ordinary pad and work the
hinge until it opens freely.

[Illustration: Handle on Cover]

If necessary apply a little oil and spread the flanges of the
cover slightly.

Saw off the top of a common wood clothespin just above the slot,
saving all the solid part. Fasten this to the cover near the back
side in an upright position with a screw. A tap on the front side
of the pin will turn it over backward until the head rests on the
desk thus bringing the cover up in the upright position. When
through using the pad, a slight tap on the back side of the cover
will turn it down in place.
--Contributed by H. L. Crockett, Gloversville, N. Y.



** Concrete Kennel [23]

The kennel shown in the illustration is large enough for the usual
size of dog. It is cleanly, healthful and more ornamental than the
average kennel.

[Illustration: Finished Kennel]

This mission style would be in keeping with the now popular
mission and semi-mission style home, and, with slight
modifications, it could be made to conform with the ever beautiful
colonial home. It is not difficult to

[Illustration: Concrete Forms]

build and will keep in good shape for many years. The dimensions
and the manner of making the forms for the concrete, and the
location for the bolts to hold the plate and rafters, are shown in
the diagram.
--Contributed by Edith E. Lane, El Paso, Texas.



** Nutshell Photograph Novelty [24]

Split an English walnut in the center, remove the contents, and
scrape out the rough parts. Make an oval

[Illustration: Photograph in the Shell]

opening by filing or grinding. If a file is used, it should be new
and sharp. After this is done, take a small half round file and
smooth the edges into shape and good form.

The photograph print should be quite small--less than 1/2 in.
across the face. Trim the print to a size a little larger than the
opening in the shell, and secure it in place with glue or paste.
It may be well to fill the shell with cotton. Mount the shell on a
small card with glue, or if desired, a mount of different shape
can be made of burnt woodwork.
--Contributed by C. S. Bourne, Lowell, Mass.



** Spoon Holder on a Kettle [24]

In making marmalade and jellies the ingredients must be stirred
from time to time as the cooking proceeds. After stirring, some of
the mixture always remains on the spoon. Cooks often lay the spoon
on a plate or stand it against the cooking utensil with the handle
down. Both of these methods are wasteful. The accompanying
illustration shows a device made of sheet copper to hold the spoon
so that the drippings will return to the cooking utensil. The
copper is not hard to bend and it can be shaped so that the device
can be used on any pot or kettle.
--Contributed by Edwin Marshall, Oak Park, Ill.

[Illustration: Spoon Holder]



** Repairing Cracked Gramophone Records [24]

Some time ago I received two gramophone records that were cracked
in shipment but the parts were held together with the paper label.
As these were single-faced disk records, I used the following
method to stick them together: I covered the back of one with
shellac and laid the two back to back centering the holes with the
crack in one running at right angles to the crack in the other.
These were placed on a flat surface and a weight set on them.
After several hours' drying, I cleaned the surplus shellac out of
the holes and played them.

As the needle passed over the cracks the noise was hardly audible.
These records have been played for a year and they sound almost as
good as new.
--Contributed by Marion P. Wheeler, Greenleaf, Oregon.



** New Use for a Vacuum Cleaner [25]

An amateur mechanic who had been much annoyed by the insects which
were attracted to his electric lights found a solution in the
pneumatic moth trap described in a recent issue of Popular
Mechanics. He fixed a funnel to the end of the intake tube of a
vacuum cleaner and hung it under a globe. The insects came to the
light, circled over the funnel and disappeared. He captured
several pounds in a few hours.
--Contributed by Geo. F. Turl, Canton, Ill.



** Filtering with a Small Funnel [25]

In filtering a large amount of solution one usually desires some
means other than a large funnel and something to make the watching
of the process unnecessary. If a considerable quantity of a
solution be placed in a large bottle or flask, and a cork with a
small hole in it inserted in the mouth, and the apparatus
suspended in an inverted position over a small funnel so that the
opening of the cork is just below the water level in the funnel,
the filtering process goes on continuously with no overflow of the
funnel.

As soon as the solution in the funnel is below the cork, air is
let into the flask and a small quantity of new solution is let
down into the funnel. The process works well and needs no
watching, and instead of the filtrate being in a large filter
paper, it is on one small piece and can be handled with ease.
--Contributed by Loren Ward, Des Moines, Iowa.



** A Postcard Rack [25]

The illustration shows a rack for postcards. Those having houses

[Illustration: Finished Rack]

with mission-style furniture can make such a rack of the same
material as the desk, table or room furnishings and finish it in
the same manner.

The dimensions are given in the detail sketch. The two ends are
cut from 1/4-in. material, the bottom being 3/8 in. thick. Only
three pieces are required, and as they are simple in design,
anyone can cut them out with a

[Illustration: Details of the Rack]

saw, plane and pocket knife.
--Contributed by Wm. Rosenberg, Worcester, Mass.



** Substitute Shoe Horn [25]

A good substitute for a shoe horn is a handkerchief or any piece
cloth used in the following way: Allow part of the handkerchief or
cloth to enter the shoe, place the toe of the foot in the shoe so
as to hold down the cloth, and by pulling up on the cloth so as to
keep it taut around the heel the foot will slide into the shoe
just as easily as if a shoe horn were used.
--Contributed by Thomas E. Dobbins, Glenbrook, Conn.



** Building a Small Photographic Dark Room [26]

In building a photographic dark room, it is necessary to make it
perfectly light-tight, the best material to use being matched
boards. These boards are tongued and grooved and when put together
effectually prevent the entrance of light.

The next important thing to be considered is to make it
weather-tight, and as far as the sides are concerned the matched
boards will do this also, but it is necessary to cover the roof
with felt or water-proof paper.

The best thickness for the boards is 1 in., but for cheapness 3/4
in. will do as well, yet the saving is so little that the 1-in.
boards are preferable.

The dark room shown in the accompanying sketch measures 3 ft. 6
in. by 2 ft. 6 in., the height to the eaves being 6 ft. Form the
two sides shown in Fig 1, fixing the crosspieces which hold the
boards together in such positions that the bottom one will act as
a bearer for the floor, and the second one for the developing
bench. Both sides can be put together in this way, and both
exactly alike. Keep the ends of the crosspieces back from the
edges of the boards far enough to allow the end boards to fit in
against them.

One of the narrow sides can be formed in the same way, fixing the
crosspieces on to correspond, and then these three pieces can be
fastened together by screwing the two wide sides on the narrow
one.

Lay the floor next, screwing or nailing the boards to the
crosspieces, and making the last board come even with the ends of
the crosspieces, not even with the boards themselves. The single
boards can then be fixed, one on each side of what will be the
doorway, by screwing to the floor, and to the outside board of the
sides. At the top of the doorway, fix a narrow piece between the
side boards, thus leaving a rectangular opening for the door.

The roof boards may next be put on, nailing them to each other at
the ridge, and to the sides of the room at the outsides and eaves.
They should overhang at the sides and eaves about 2 in., as shown
in Figs. 3 and 4.

One of the sides with the crosspieces in place will be as shown in
Fig. 2 in section, all the crosspieces and bearers intersecting
around the room.

The door is made of the same kind of boards held together with
crosspieces, one of which is fastened so as to fit closely to the
floor when the door is hinged, and act as a trap for the light.
The top crosspiece is also fastened within 1 in. of the top of the
door for the same reason.

Light traps are necessary at the sides and top of the door. That
at the hinged side can be as shown at A, Fig. 5, the closing side
as at B, and the top as at C in the same drawing. These are all in
section and are self-explanatory. In hinging the door, three butt
hinges should be used so as to keep the joint close.

The fittings of the room are as shown sectionally in Fig. 6, but
before fixing these it is best to line the room with heavy, brown
wrapping paper, as an additional safeguard against the entrance of
light.

The developing bench is 18 in. wide, and in the middle an opening,
9 by 11 in., is cut, below which is fixed the sink. It is shown in
detail in Fig. 7, and should be zinc lined.

The zinc should not be cut but folded as shown in Fig. 8, so that
it will fit inside the sink. The bench at each side of the sink
should be fluted (Fig. 9), so that the water will drain off into
the sink. A strip should be fixed along the back of the bench as
shown in Figs. 6 and 9, and an arrangement of slats (Fig. 10),
hinged to it, so as to drop on the sink as in Fig. 6, and shown to
a larger scale in Fig. 11.

A shelf for bottles and another for plates, etc., can be fixed
above the developing bench as at D and E (Fig. 6) and another as F
in the same drawing. This latter forms the bottom of the tray
rack, which is fixed on as shown

[Illustration: Details of the Dark Rook]

in Fig. 13. The divisions of the tray rack are best fitted loosely
in grooves formed by fixing strips to the shelves and under the
bench and sink as in Fig. 13.

Extra bearing pieces will be wanted for the shelves mentioned
above, these being shown in Fig. 14. The window is formed by
cutting an opening in the side opposite the door, and fixing in it
a square of white glass with strips of wood on the inside and
putty on the outside, as in Fig. 15. A ruby glass is framed as
shown at G, Fig. 16, and arranged to slide to and fro in the
grooved runners H, which makes it possible to have white light, as
at I, or red light as at K, Fig. 16. The white glass with runners
in position is shown at L in the same drawing, but not the red
glass and frame. Ventilation is arranged for by boring a series of
holes near the floor, as at M, Fig. 6, and near the roof as at N
in the same drawing, and trapping the light without stopping the
passage of air, as shown in the sections, Fig. 17.

The finish of the roof at the gables is shown in Fig. 18, the
strip under the boards holding the felt in position when folded
under, and the same is true of the roll at the top of the roof in
Fig. 19.

The house will be much strengthened if strips, as shown in Fig.
20, are fastened in the corners inside, after lining with brown
paper, screwing them each way into the boards. The door may have a
latch or lock with a knob, but should in addition have two buttons
on the inside, fixed so as to pull it shut tightly at top and
bottom. A waste pipe should be attached to the sink and arranged
to discharge through the floor. A cistern with pipe and tap can be
fastened in the top of the dark room, if desired, or the room may
be made with a flat roof, and a tank stand on it, though this is
hardly advisable.

It is absolutely necessary that the room be well painted, four
coats at first is not too many, and one coat twice a year will
keep it in good condition.

A brick foundation should be laid so that no part of the room
touches the ground.



** The Versatile Querl [28]

"Querl" is the German name for a kitchen utensil which may be used
as an egg-beater, potato-masher or a lemon-squeezer. For beating
up an egg in a glass, mixing flour and water, or stirring cocoa or
chocolate, it is better than anything on the market.

[Illustration: Querl Made of Wood]

This utensil is made of hardwood,  preferably maple or ash. A
circular piece about 2 in. in diameter is cut from 1/2-in. stock
and shaped like a star as shown in Fig. 1, and a 3/8-in. hole
bored in the center for a handle. The handle should be at least 12
in. in length and fastened in the star as shown in Fig. 2.

In use, the star is placed in the dish containing the material to
be beaten or mixed and the handle is rapidly rolled between the
palms of the hands.
--Contributed by W. Karl Hilbrich, Erie, Pennsylvania.



** An Emergency Soldering Tool [28]

Occasionally one finds a piece of soldering to do which is
impossible to reach with even the smallest of the ordinary
soldering irons or coppers. If a length of copper wire as large as
the job will permit and sufficiently long to admit being bent at
one end to form a rough handle, and filed or dressed to a point on
the other, is heated and tinned exactly as a regular copper should
be, the work will cause no trouble on account of inaccessibility.
--Contributed by E. G. Smith, Eureka Springs, Ark.



** Smoothing Paper after Erasing [29]

When an ink line is erased the roughened surface of the paper
should be smoothed or polished so as to prevent the succeeding
lines of ink from spreading. A convenient desk accessory for this
purpose can be made of a short

[Illustration: Collar Button Ends In Wood Stick]

piece of hardwood and two bone collar buttons.

File off the head of one button at A and the base from another at
B. Bore a small hole D and E in each end of the wood handle C and
fasten the button parts in the holes with glue or sealing wax. The
handle can be left the shape shown or tapered as desired. The
small end is used for smoothing small erasures and the other end
for larger surfaces.



** A Cherry Seeder [29]

An ordinary hairpin is driven part way into a small round piece of
wood, about 3/8 in. in diameter and 2 or 2-1/2 in. long, for a
handle, as shown in the sketch. The hairpin should be a very

[Illustration: Hairpin In Stick]

small size. To operate, simply insert the wire loop into the
cherry where the stem has been pulled off and lift out the seed.
--Contributed by L. L. Schweiger, Kansas City, Mo.



** A Dovetail Joint  [29]

The illustration shows an unusual dovetail joint, which, when put
together properly is a puzzle. The tenon or tongue of the joint is
sloping on three surfaces and the mortise is cut sloping to match.
The bottom surface of the mortise is the same width at

[Illustration: Shape of Tenon and Mortise]

both ends, the top being tapering toward the base of the tongue.
--Contributed by Wm. D. Mitchell, Yonkers, New York.



** Base for Round-End Bottles [29]

The many forms of round-bottomed glass bottles used in chemical
laboratories require some special kind of support on which they
can be safely placed from time to time when the chemist

[Illustration: Base Made-of Corks]

does not, for the moment, need them. These supports should not be
made of any hard material nor should they be good conductors of
heat, as such qualities would result in frequent breakage.

A French magazine suggests making the supports from the large
corks of glass jars in which crystal chemicals are usually
supplied from the dealers. The manner of making them is clearly
shown in the sketch. Each cork is cut as in Fig. 1 and placed on a
wire ring (Fig. 2) whose ends are twisted together and the last
section of cork is cut through from the inner side to the center
and thus fitted over the wire covering the twisted ends, which
binds them together. The corks in use are shown in Fig. 3.



** Rustic Window Boxes [30]

Instead of using an ordinary green-painted window box, why not
make an artistic one in which the color does not clash with the
plants contained in it but rather harmonizes with them.

Such a window box can be made by anyone having usual mechanical
ability, and will furnish more opportunities for artistic and
original design than many other articles of more complicated
construction.

The box proper should be made a little shorter than the length of
the window to allow for the extra space taken up in trimming and
should be nearly equal in width to the sill, as shown in Fig. 1.
If the sill is inclined, as is usually the case, the box will
require a greater height in front, to make it set level, as shown
in Fig. 2.

The box should be well nailed or screwed together and should then
be painted all over to make it more durable. A number of 1/2-in.
holes should be drilled in the bottom, to allow the excess water
to run out and thus prevent rotting of the plants and box.

Having completed the bare box, it may be trimmed to suit the fancy
of the maker. The design shown in Fig. 1 is very simple and easy
to construct, but may be replaced with a panel or other design.
One form of panel design is shown in Fig. 3.

Trimming having too rough a surface will be found unsuitable for
this work as it is difficult to fasten and cannot be split as well
as smooth trimming. It should be cut the proper length before
being split and should be fastened with brads. The half-round
hoops of barrels will be found very useful in trimming, especially
for filling-in purposes, and by using them the operation of
splitting is avoided. After the box is trimmed, the rustic work
should be varnished, in order to thoroughly preserve it, as well
as improve its appearance.

[Illustration: Artistic Flower Boxes]



** Antidote for Squirrel Pest [30]

To the owner of a garden in a town where squirrels are protected
by law, life in the summer time is a vexation. First the squirrels
