The Project Gutenberg EBook of Adolescents Only, by Irving E. Cox

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Adolescents Only

Author: Irving E. Cox

Release Date: June 2, 2010 [EBook #32651]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADOLESCENTS ONLY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            ADOLESCENTS ONLY

                           By Irving Cox, Jr.

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Imagination Stories of
Science and Fantasy January 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any
evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: Elvin wasn't sure how it had started--maybe it was the
Schermerhorn twins--or the mysterious "meteorite"--or else the world had
gone crazy....]


He tried to convince himself he had no right to gripe. It was a pleasant
place to live; he had privacy and a bath of his own. And the
Schermerhorns were reasonably broadminded people. They never objected to
his smoking or an occasional glass of beer. Last year at the
Neuhavens'--Gary Elvin cringed inwardly at the recollection.

Just the same, this was going too far. It was enough to endure their
kids all day long, five days of the week, without the addition of these
juvenile parties. This one had started an hour after dinner and it was
still going strong when Elvin returned from the late show at the Fox.

Naturally the Schermerhorn twins were popular tenth graders--husky,
blond Greek Gods who had everything, including a red Convertible and a
swimming pool Pop Schermerhorn had built for them at the ranch. Gary
Elvin had expected a certain number of parties when he decided to board
and room with the Schermerhorns, but hardly one every weekend.

He fled through the cluttered hall where a buxom lass was organizing
something called a bubble gum contest and took refuge on the damp and
deserted patio. He flung himself on a wet, canvas lounge, and looked up
at the bright night sky.

Bitterly he counted off the weeks. It was still early in November. He
had eight more months to endure before June came with its temporary
illusion of escape. As he always did, Elvin resolved to find a better
job next year. He had been teaching for five years now. He knew all the
tricks of classroom control and smooth community relations. Surely if he
started looking early enough, he ought to be able to get something at a
small college....

Suddenly he was jerked back to reality by a curious spot of red that
appeared in the sky. It moved closer and he saw that it was a falling
object followed by a long plume of red flame. It flashed momentarily
overhead and Elvin heard a dull thud as it fell into a field beyond the
ranch house.

He sprang up from the couch and moved off in the darkness. It had been a
meteorite, of course; if it had survived the friction of the atmosphere
it would make an interesting exhibit for the science classroom. Miss
Gerken would be glassy-eyed with pleasure.

There was no moon. As soon as he crossed the driveway, Elvin stumbled
over the damp furrows of a newly ploughed field. He was sweating when he
reached the row of palms that lined the irrigation ditch. He paused to
wipe his face.

And he heard a weird, shrill, rhythmic sound. It might have been called
music, but there was no definable melody or beat. It was faint at first,
but as he moved to the right, paralleling the ditch, the sound came
louder.

[Illustration: As he cautiously approached the alien object, it seemed
as if a soft melody were being wafted on the night breeze. The sound
made him nervous and instilled fear....]

Then, beyond the trees, in a glow of blue light emanating from the thing
itself, he saw the rocket. It was not quite five feet long, a slim
projectile of glowing metal nosed deeply into the soft earth. The four
fins were rotating slowly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gary Elvin might, quite properly, have been frightened, but he was
totally unacquainted with modern fiction dealing with the probable
potentials of science and the universes beyond the earth. Such material
he classified, along with comic books and television, as the pap of
mediocre minds.

Now, when he first saw the rocket, he came to the somewhat prosaic
conclusion that it had strayed from the government experimental site at
Muroc. He walked closer. The glow of the metal brightened; the slow
rotation of the fins and the weird music became hypnotic. For a moment
Elvin felt a surge of fear. He tried to turn away, but he could not.

Instead, moving against his will, he took two of the fins in his hands
and pulled on them. The rotation and the music stopped as the tailpiece
of the rocket fell open. Elvin's mind cleared as he looked into a tiny
chamber capped by a small rectangular sheet of metal which was dotted
with tiny globes of a translucent material. Gingerly he picked up the
seal.

As he touched the metal, a strange sensation, like a flood of jumbled
words, tumbled through his mind. The feeling was neither unpleasant nor
frightening. He was tempted to relax and enjoy it; and he would have, if
he had not been distracted by a second object in the chamber. He thrust
the strip of metal into the pocket of his coat.

Elvin's second find was a small, transparent cylinder, filled with tiny,
multi-colored spheres, exactly like a jar of hard candy. There was
nothing else in the rocket, except for the motor built into the
tailpiece. The blue glow of the rocket began to fade.

Vaguely Elvin became aware that something was amiss. He began to suspect
that he had stumbled upon something more than a stray rocket from Muroc.
He wanted to tell somebody about it. Clutching the cylinder of colored
balls he ran back to the house.

The party had reached one of its numerous climaxes. The hall was jammed
with chattering high school students. They swirled in a flood around
Mrs. Schermerhorn, who seemed to be enjoying herself as much as they
were.

Gary Elvin grabbed her arm. "I've found a rocket!" he cried.

"Rocket?" she frowned for a moment, and then smiled brightly. "Oh, the
racket. Yes, but they do have so much energy, don't they?"

He held up the cylinder. "This was in it!"

"Oh, you found it, Mr. Elvin. We looked high and low; now we--"

"It was in the rocket."

"... now we can have our contest."

Desperately a new idea occurred to him. "Can you get these kids quiet? I
want to 'phone."

"But it's so early, Mr. Elvin. We can't expect them to go home yet."
