spoken in type and shadow, in stammering words, 'at sundry times and
in divers manners,' to the former generations--viz. the coming of
the great Sacrifice and the offering of the great Propitiation. All
the past of Israel pointed onwards to the Cross, and in that Cross
its highest word was transcended, its faintest emblems were
explained and expressed, its unsolved problems which it had raised
in order that they might be felt to be unsolved, were all answered,
and that which had been set forth but in shadow and symbol was given
to the world in reality for evermore. In Moses Law and Sacrifice,
and in Elijah the prophetic function, met by the side of Christ,
'and spake of His decease.'

Now, dear friends, let me say one word here before I pass on. There
is a great deal being said nowadays about the position of the Old
Testament, the origin of its ritual, and other critical, and, to some
extent, historical, questions. I have no doubt that we have much to
learn upon these subjects; but what I would now insist upon is this,
that all these subjects, about which people are getting so excited,
and some of them so angry, stand, and may be dealt with, altogether
apart from this central thought, that the purpose and meaning, the
end and object of the whole preliminary and progressive revelation of
God from the beginning, are to lead straight up to Jesus Christ and
to His Cross. And if we understand that, and feel that 'the testimony
of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy,' and that law and sacrifice,
commandments and altar, Sinai and Zion, the fiery words that were
spoken in the wilderness, and the perpetual burnt-offering that went
up in the Temple, had one mission--viz. to 'prepare the way of the
Lord'--we have grasped the essential truth as to the Old Revelation;
and if we do not understand that, we may be as scholarly and erudite
and original as we please, but we miss the one truth which is worth
grasping. The relation between the Old revelation and the New is this,
that Christ was pointed to by it all, and that in Himself He sums up
and surpasses and antiquates, because He fulfils, all the past.

Therefore Moses and Elijah came to witness as well as to encourage.
Their presence proclaimed that Christ was the meaning of all the
past, and the crown of the divine revelation. And they faded away,
and Jesus was found alone standing there, as He stands for ever
before all generations and all lands, the sole, the perfect, the
eternal Revealer of the heart and will of God. 'God, who at sundry
times and in divers manners spake unto the fathers by the prophets,
hath in these last days spoken unto us by His Son.'

III. Again, we have here set before us the death of Christ in its
relation to past generations.

I need not dwell upon anything that was mysterious or anomalous in
the last moments upon earth of either Moses or Elijah. I do not
suppose that there is any reference to the undoubted peculiarities
which existed in the case of both. But they came from that dim
region where the dead were waiting for the coming of the Saviour,
and by some means, we know not how, were clothed with something that
was like an immortal body, and capable of entering into this
material universe. There they stood, witnesses that Christ's death
was of interest to all those sleeping generations in the past. We
know not anything, or scarcely anything, of the condition of the
sainted dead who died before Christ came. But this is clear, that
these two came from the land where silent expectancy had ruled, and
came perhaps to carry back to their brethren the tidings that the
hour was ready to strike, and that soon amongst them there would
stand the Eternal Life.

But, be that as it may, does not that group on the mountain-side
teach us this, that the Cross of Jesus Christ had a backward as well
as a forward power, and that for all the generations who had died,
'not having received the promises, but having seen them and saluted
them from afar,' the influence of that Sacrifice had opened the
gates of the Kingdom where they were gathered in hope, even as it
opens for us, and all subsequent generations, the gates of the
paradise of God?

I know not whether there be truth in the ancient idea that when the
Master died He passed into that _Hades_ where were assembled
the disembodied spirits of the righteous dead, and led captivity
captive, taking them with Him into a loftier Paradise. But this I am
sure of, that Christ's Cross has always been the means and channel
whereby forgiveness and hope and heaven have been given to men, and
that the old dream of the devout painter which he has breathed upon
the walls of the convent in Florence is true in spirit whatever it
may be in letter, that the Christ who died went down into the dark
regions, burst the bars and broke the gates of iron, and crushed the
demon porter beneath the shattered portal, and that out of the dark
rock-hewn caverns there came streaming the crowds of the sainted
dead, with Adam at their head, and many another who had seen His day
afar off and been glad, stretching out eager hands to grasp the
life-giving hand of the Redeemer that had come to them too.

Moses and Elias were the 'first-fruits of them that slept,' and
there were others, when the bodies of the saints rose from the grave
and appeared in the Holy City unto many. And their presence, and the
presence of these two there, typified for us the great fact that the
Cross of Christ is the redemption of pre-Christian as well as of
Christian ages; and that He is the Lord both of the dead and of the
living.

IV. And so, lastly, this incident may suggest also what that death
of Jesus Christ may be in reference to the deaths of His servants.

I do not find that thought in the words of our text, but in the
reference to them which is made in the second epistle attributed to
Peter, who was present at the Transfiguration. There is a very
remarkable passage in that Epistle, in the context of which there
are distinct verbal allusions to the narrative of the Transfiguration,
and in it the writer employs the same word to describe his own death
which is employed here. It is the only other instance in Scripture
of its use in that sense. And so I draw this simple lesson; that
mighty death which was accomplished upon Calvary, which is the crown
and summit of all Revelation, beyond which God has nothing that He
can say or do to make men sure of His heart and recipients of
forgiveness, which was the channel of pardon for all past ages, and
the hope of the sainted dead--that death may turn for us our departure
into its own likeness. For us, too, all the grimness, all the darkness,
all the terror, may pass away, and it may become simply a change of
place, and a going home to God. If we believe that Jesus died, we
believe that He has thereby smoothed and softened and lessened our
death into a sleep in Him.

Nor need we forget the special meaning of the word. If we have set
our hopes upon Christ, and, as sinful men and women, have cast the
burden of our sins, and the weight of our salvation, on His strong
arm, then life will be blessed, and death, when it comes, will be a
true Exodus, the going out of the slaves from the land of bondage,
and passing through the divided sea, not into a weary wilderness,
but into the light of the love and the blessedness of the land where
our Brother is King, and where we shall share His reign.

I have been speaking to you of what Christ's death is in many
regions of the universe, in many eras of time. My brother, what is
Christ's death to you? Can you say, 'The life that I live in the
flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
Himself for me?'




CHRIST HASTENING TO THE CROSS


    'And it came to pass, when the time was come that He
    should be received up, He stedfastly set His face to
    go to Jerusalem.'--LUKE ix. 51.

There are some difficulties, with which I need not trouble you here,
as to bringing the section of this Gospel to which these words are
the introduction, into its proper chronological place in relation to
the narratives; but, putting these on one side for the present,
there seems no doubt that the Evangelist's intention here is to
represent the beginning of our Lord's last journey from Galilee to
Jerusalem--a journey which was protracted and devious, and the
narrative of which in this Gospel, as you will perceive, occupies a
very large portion of its whole contents.

The picture that is given in my text is that of a clear knowledge of
what waited Him, of a steadfast resolve to accomplish the purpose of
the divine love, and that resolve not without such a shrinking of
some part of His nature that He had 'to _set_ His face to go to
Jerusalem.'

The words come into parallelism very strikingly with a great
prophecy of the Messiah in the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, where we
read, 'The Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be
confounded'--or, as the words have been rendered, 'shall not suffer
myself to be overcome by mockery'--'therefore have I set my face
like a flint.' In the words both of the Prophet and of the
Evangelist there is the same idea of a resolved will, as the result
of a conscious effort directed to prevent circumstances which tended
to draw Him back, from producing their effect. The graphic narrative
of the Evangelist Mark adds one more striking point to that picture
of high resolve. He tells us, speaking of what appears to be the
final epoch in this long journey to the Cross, 'They were in the
way, going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus went before them; and they
were amazed: and as they followed, they were afraid.' What a picture
that is, Christ striding along the steep mountain path far in
advance--impelled by that same longing which sighs so wonderfully
in His words, 'How am I straitened till it be accomplished,'--with
solemn determination in the gentle face, and His feet making haste to
run in the way of the Father's commandments! And lagging behind, the
little group, awed into almost stupor, and shrinking in
uncomprehending terror from that light of unconquerable resolve and
more than mortal heroism that blazed in His eyes!

If we fix, then, on this picture, and as we are warranted in doing,
regard it as giving us a glimpse of the very heart of Christ, I
think it may well suggest to us considerations that may tend to make
more real to us that sacrifice that He made, more deep to us that
love by which He was impelled, and may perhaps tend to make our love
more true and our resolve more fixed. 'He set His face to go to
Jerusalem.'

I. First, then, we may take, I think, from these words, the thought
of the perfect clearness with which all through Christ's life He
foresaw the inevitable and purposed end.

Here, indeed, the Evangelist leaps over the suffering of the Cross,
and thinks only of the time when He shall be lifted up upon the
throne; but in that calm and certain prevision which, in His
manhood, the Divine Son of God did exercise concerning His own
earthly life, between Him and the glory there ever stood the black
shadow thrown by Calvary. When He spoke of being 'lifted up,' He
ever meant by that pregnant and comprehensive word, at once man's
elevation of Him on the accursed tree, and the Father's elevation of
Him upon the throne at His right hand! The future was, if I may so
say, in His eye so foreshortened that the two things ran into one,
and the ambiguous expression did truly connote the one undivided act
of prescient consciousness in which He at once recognised the Cross
and the throne. And so, when the time was come that He should be
received up, He 'steadfastly set His face to go to Jerusalem.'

Now, there is another thing to be noticed. That vision of the
certain end which here fills His mind and impels His conduct, was by
no means new with Him. Modern unbelieving commentators and critics
upon the Gospels have tried their best to represent Christ's life
as, at a certain point in it, being modified by His recognition of
the fact that His mission was a failure, and that there was nothing
left for Him but martyrdom! I believe that that is as untrue to the
facts of the Gospel story upon any interpretation of them, as it is
repulsive to the instincts of devout hearts; and without troubling
you with thoughts about it I need only refer to two words of His.
When was it that He said, 'Destroy this temple, and in three days I
will build it up'? When was it that He said, 'As Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted
up'? The one saying was uttered at the very beginning of His public
work, and the other in His conversation with Nicodemus. On the
testimony of these two sayings, if there were none else, I think
there is no option but to believe that from the first there stood
clear before Him the necessity and the certainty of the Cross, and
that it was no discovery made at a certain point of His course.

And then, remember that we are not to think of Him as, like many an
earthly hero and martyr, regarding a violent and bloody death as
being the very probable result of faithful boldness, but to believe
that He, looking on from the beginning to that end, regarded it
always as being laid upon Him by a certain divine necessity, into
which necessity He entered with the full submission and acquiescence
of His own will, and from the beginning knew that Calvary was the
work for which He had come, and that His love would fail of its
expression, and the divine purpose would fail of its realisation,
and His whole mission would fail of all its meaning, unless He died
for men. The martyr looks to the scaffold and says, 'It stands in my
way, and I must either be untrue to conscience or I must go there,
and so I will go.' Christ said, 'The Cross is in My path, and on it
and from it I shall exercise the influence, to exercise which I have
come into the world, and there I shall _do_ the thing which I
came forth from the Father to do.' He thought of His death not as
the end of His work, but as the centre-point of it; not as the
termination of His activity, but as its climax, to which all the
rest was subordinated, and without which all the rest was nought. He
does not die, and so seal a faithful life by an heroic death,--but
dies, so bearing and bearing away man's sin. He regarded from the
beginning 'the glory that should follow,' and the suffering through
which He had to wade to reach it, in one and the same act of
prescience, and said, 'Lo, I come, in the volume of the book it is
written of Me.'

And I think, dear friends, if we carried with us more distinctly
than we do that one simple thought, that in all the human joys, in
all the apparently self-forgetting tenderness, of that Lord who had
a heart for every sorrow and an ear for every complaint, and a hand
open as day and full of melting charity for every need--that in
every moment of that life, in the boyhood, in the dawning manhood,
in the maturity of His growing human powers--there was always
present one black shadow, towards which He ever went straight with
the consent of His will and with the clearest eye, we should
understand something more of how His life as well as His death was a
sacrifice for us sinful men!

We honour and love men who crush down their own sorrows in order to
help their fellows. We wonder with almost reverence when we see some
martyr, in sight of the faggots, pause to do a kindness to some
weeping heart in the crowd, or to speak a cheering word. We admire
the leisure and calm of spirit which he displays. But all these
pale, and the very comparison may become an insult, before that
heart which ever discerned Calvary, and never let the sight hinder
one deed of kindness, nor silence one gracious word, nor check one
throb of sympathy.

II. Still further, the words before us lead to a second
consideration, which I have just suggested in my last sentence--Our
Lord's perfect willingness for the sacrifice which He saw before
Him.

We have here brought into the narrowest compass, and most clearly
set forth, the great standing puzzle of all thought, which can only
be solved by action. On the one side there is the distinctest
knowledge of a divine purpose that _will_ be executed; on the
other side there is the distinctest consciousness that at each step
towards the execution of it He is constrained by no foreign and
imposed necessity, but is going to the Cross by His own will. 'The
Son of Man must be lifted up.' 'It _became_ Him to make the
Captain of salvation perfect through sufferings.' 'It _behoved_
Him to be made in all points like His brethren.' The Eternal Will of
the Father, the purpose purposed before the foundation of the world,
the solemn prophecies from the beginning of time, constituted the
necessity, and involved the certainty, of His death on the Cross.
But are we, therefore, to think that Jesus Christ was led along the
path that ended there, by a force which overbore and paralysed His
human will? Was not His life, and especially His death,
_obedience_? Was there not, therefore, in Him, as in us all,
the human will that could cheerfully submit; and must there not,
then, have been, at each step towards the certain end, a fresh act
of submission and acceptance of the will of the Father that had sent
Him?

'Clear knowledge of the end as divinely appointed and certain'; yes,
one might say, and if so, there could have been no voluntariness in
treading the path that leads to it. 'Voluntariness in treading the
path that leads to it, and if so, there could have been no divine
ordination of the end.' Not so! When human thought comes, if I may
so say, full butt against a stark, staring contradiction like that,
it is no proof that either of the propositions is false. It is only
like the sign-boards that the iceman puts upon the thin ice,
'dangerous!' a warning that that is not a place for us to tread. We
have to keep a firm hold of what is certified to us, on either side,
by its appropriate evidence, and leave the reconciliation, if it can
ever be given to finite beings, to a higher wisdom, and, perchance,
to another world!

But that is a digression from my more immediate purpose, which is
simply to bring before our minds, as clearly as I can, that perfect,
continuous, ever-repeated willingness, expressing itself in a chain
of constant acts that touch one upon the other, which Christ
manifested to embrace the Cross, and to accomplish what was at once
the purpose of the Father's will and the purpose of His own.

And it may be worth while, just for a moment, to touch lightly upon
some of the many points which bring out so clearly in these Gospel
narratives the wholly and purely voluntary character of Christ's
death.

Take, for instance, the very journey which I am speaking of now. Christ
went up to Jerusalem, says my text. What did He go there for? He went,
as you will see, if you look at the previous circumstance,--He went in
order, if I might use such a word, to precipitate the collision, and to
make His Crucifixion certain. He was under the ban of the Sanhedrim;
but perfectly safe as long as He had stopped up among the hills of
Galilee. He was as unsafe when He went up to Jerusalem as John Huss
when he went to the Council of Constance with the Emperor's safe-conduct
in his belt; or as a condemned heretic would have been in the old days,
if he had gone and stood in that little dingy square outside the palace
of the Inquisition at Rome, and there, below the obelisk, preached his
heresies! Christ had been condemned in the council of the nation; but
there were plenty of hiding-places among the Galilean hills, and the
frontier was close at hand, and it needed a long arm to reach from
Jerusalem all the way across Samaria to the far north. Knowing that,
He steadfastly set His face to go to Jerusalem, and, if I might use
the expression, went straight into the lion's mouth. Why? Because He
chose to die.

And, then, take another circumstance. If you will look carefully at
the Scripture narrative, you will find that from about this point in
His life onwards there comes a distinct change in one very important
respect. Before this He shunned publicity; after this He courted it.
Before this, when He spoke in veiled words of His sufferings, He
said to His disciples, 'Tell no man till the Son of man be risen
from the dead.' Hereafter though there are frequent prophecies of
His sufferings, there is no repetition of that prohibition. He goes
up to Jerusalem, and His triumphal entry adds fuel to the fire. His
language at the last moment appeals to the publicity of His final
visit to that city--'Was I not daily with you in the Temple and ye
laid no hands upon Me?' Everything that He could do He does to draw
attention to Himself--everything, that is to say, within the limits
of the divine decorum, which was ever observed in His life, of whom
it was written long, long ago, 'He shall not strive, nor cry, nor
cause His voice to be heard in the streets.' There is, then, a most
unmistakable change to be felt by any who will carefully read the
narratives in their bearing upon this one point--a resolve to draw
the eyes of the enemy upon Himself.

And to the same purpose, did you ever notice how calmly, with full
self-consciousness, distinctly understanding what He is doing,
distinctly knowing to what it will lead, He makes His words ever
heavier and heavier, and more and more sharply pointed with
denunciations, as the last loving wrestle between Himself and the
scribes and Pharisees draws near to its bloody close? Instead of
softening He hardens His tones--if I dare use the word, where all is
the result of love--at any rate He keeps no terms; but as the danger
increases His words become plainer and sterner, and approach as near
as ever _His_ words could do to bitterness and rebuke. It was
then, whilst passionate hate was raging round Him, and eager eyes
were gleaming revenge, that He poured out His sevenfold woes upon
the 'hypocrites,' the 'blind guides,' the 'fools,' the 'whited
sepulchres,' the 'serpents,' the 'generation of vipers,' whom He
sees filling up the measure of their fathers in shedding His
righteous blood.

And again, the question recurs--Why? And again, besides other
reasons, which I have not time to touch upon here, the answer, as it
seems to me, must unmistakably be, Because He willed to die, and He
willed to die because He loved us.

The same lesson is taught, too, by that remarkable incident
preserved for us by the Gospel of John, of the strange power which
accompanied His avowal of Himself to the rude soldiers who had come
to seize Him, and which struck them to the ground in terror and
impotence. One flash comes forth to tell of the sleeping lightning
that He will not use, and then having revealed the might that could
have delivered Him from their puny arms, He returns to His attitude
of self-surrender for our sakes, with those wonderful words which
tell how He gave up Himself that we might be free, 'If ye seek Me,
let these go their way.' The scene is a parable of the whole work of
Jesus; it reveals His power to have shaken off every hand laid upon
Him, His voluntary submission to His else impotent murderers, and
the love which moved Him to the surrender.

Other illustrations of the same sort I must leave untouched at
present, and only remind you of the remarkable peculiarity of the
language in which all the Evangelists describe the supreme moment
when Christ passed from His sufferings. 'When He had cried with a
loud voice, He yielded up the ghost,'--He sent away the spirit--'He
breathed out' (His spirit), 'He gave up the ghost.' In simple truth,
He 'committed His spirit' into the Father's hand. And I believe that
it is an accurate and fair comment to say, that that is no mere
euphemism for death, but carries with it the thought that He was
_active_ in that moment; that the nails and the spear and the
Cross did not kill Christ, but that Christ _willed_ to die! And
though it is true on the one side, as far as men's hatred and
purpose are concerned. 'Whom with wicked hands ye have crucified and
slain'; on the other side, as far as the deepest verity of the fact
is concerned, it is still more true, 'I have power to lay it down,
and I have power to take it again.'

But at all events, whatever you may think of such an exposition as
that, the great principle which my text illustrates for us at an
earlier stage is, at least, irrefragably established--that our dear
Lord, when He died, died, because He _willed_ to do so. He was
man and therefore He _could_ die; but He was not man in such
fashion as that He _must_ die. In His bodily frame was the
possibility, not the necessity, of death. And that being so, the
very fact of His death is the most signal proof that He is Lord of
death as well as of life. He dies not because He must, He dies not
because of faintness and pain and wounds. These and they who
inflicted them had no power at all over Him. He chooses to die; and
He wills it because He wills to fulfil the eternal purpose of divine
love, which is His purpose, and to bring life to the world. His hour
of weakness was His hour of strength. They lifted Him on a cross,
and it became a throne. In the moment when death seemed to conquer
Him, He was really using it that He might abolish it. When He gave
tip the ghost, He showed Himself Lord of death as marvellously and
as gloriously as when He burst its bands and rose from the grave;
for this grisly shadow, too, was His servant, and He says to him,
'Come, and he cometh; do this, and he doeth it.' 'Thou didst
overcome the sharpness of death' when Thou didst willingly bow Thy
head to it, and didst die not because Thou _must_, but because
Thou _wouldest_.

III. Still further, let me remind you how, in the language of this
verse, there is also taught us that there was in Christ a natural
human shrinking from the Cross.

The steadfast and resolved will held its own, overcoming the natural
human reluctance. 'He _set_ His face.' People are afraid to
talk--and the instinct, the reverent instinct, is right, however we
may differ from the application of it--people are afraid to talk, as
if there was any shrinking in Christ from the Cross. I believe there
was. Was the agony in Gethsemane a reality or a shadow, when He
said, 'O My Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass?' What did
that prayer mean, if there was not something in His nature that
recoiled from the agony and mysterious horror of these awful hours?
Let us take heed lest in our reverence we destroy the very notion on
which our hope rests--that of Christ as suffering. For that one word
involves all that I say--Did Christ _suffer_ or did He not? If
He suffered, then human nature shrank from it. The two ideas are
correlative, you cannot part them--suffering and reluctance, a
perfectly innocent, natural, inevitable, human instinct, inseparable
from corporeity, that makes men recoil from pain. 'He endured the
Cross,' says the Book--if there was not reluctance what was there to
'endure'? 'Despising the shame'--if there was not something from
which He shrank, what was there to 'despise'? 'He _set_ His
face'--if there was not something in Him that hung back, what need
was there for the hardening of the countenance? If Christ has
suffered, then His flesh and blood quivered beforehand with the
pangs and shrank from these, and He would have been spared the cup.
Such instinctive recoil is not evil, it is not rebellion, it is not
unwillingness to submit to the Father's will. His whole being clave
to that, and never swerved from it for one moment. But still,
because the path was darkened by mysterious blackness, and led to a
Cross, therefore He, even He, who did always the things that pleased
the Father, and ever delighted to do His will, needed to '_set_
His face' to go up to the mountain of sacrifice.

And now, if you will take along with that the other thought that I
suggested at the beginning of these remarks, and remember that this
shrinking must have been as continuous as the vision, and that this
overcoming of it must have been as persistent and permanent as the
resolve, I think we get a point of view from which to regard that
life of Christ's--full of pathos, full of tender appeals to our
hearts and to our thankfulness.

All along that consecrated road He walked, and each step represented
a separate act of will, and each separate act of will represented a
triumph over the reluctance of flesh and blood. As we may say, every
time that He planted His foot on the flinty path the blood flowed.
Every step was a pain like that of a man enduring the ordeal and
walking on burning iron or sharp steel.

The old taunt of His enemies, as they stood beneath His Cross, might
have been yielded to--'If Thou be the Son of God, come down and we
will believe.' I ask why did not He? I know that, to those who think
less loftily of Christ than we who believe Him to be the Son of God,
the words sound absurd--but I for one believe that the only thing
that kept Him there, the only answer to that question is--Because He
loved me with an everlasting love, and died to redeem me. Because of
that love, He came to earth; because of that love, He tabernacled
among us; because of that love, He gazed all His life long on the
Cross of shame; because of that love, He trod unfaltering, with
eager haste and solemn resolve, the rough and painful road; because
of that love, He listened not to the voice that at the beginning
tempted Him to win the world for Himself by an easier path; because
of that love, He listened not--though He could have done so--to the
voices that at the end taunted Him with their proffered allegiance
if He would come down from the Cross; because of that love, He gave
up His spirit. And through all the weariness and contumely and pain,
that love held His will fixed to its purpose, and bore Him over
every hindrance that barred His path. Many waters quench it not.
_That_ love is stronger than death; mightier than all opposing
powers; deep and great beyond all thought or thankfulness. It
silences all praise. It beggars all recompense. To believe it is
life. To feel it is heaven.

But one more remark I would make on this whole subject. We are far
too much accustomed to think of our Saviour as presenting only the
gentle graces of human nature. He presents those that belong to the
strong side of our nature just as much. In Him are all power, manly
energy, resolved consecration; everything which men call heroism is
there. 'He steadfastly set His face.' And everything which men call
tenderest love, most dewy pity, most marvellous and transcendent
patience, is all there too. The type of manhood and the type of
womanhood are both and equally in Jesus Christ; and He is _the_
Man, whole, entire, perfect, with all power breathed forth in all
gentleness, with all gentleness made steadfast and mighty by His
strength. 'And he said unto me, Behold the lion of the tribe of
Judah. And I beheld, and lo, a lamb!'--the blended symbols of kingly
might, and lowly meekness, power in love, and love in power. The
supremest act of resolved consecration and heroic self-immolation
that ever was done upon earth--an act which we degrade by
paralleling it with any other--was done at the bidding of love that
pitied us. As we look up at that Cross we know not whether is more
wonderfully set forth the pitying love of Christ's most tender
heart, or the majestic energy of Christ's resolved will. The blended
rays pour out, dear brethren, and reach to each of us. Do not look
to that great sacrifice with idle wonder. Bend upon it no eye of
mere curiosity. Beware of theorising merely about what it reveals
and what it does. Turn not away from it carelessly as a twice-told
tale. But look, believing that all that divine and human love pours
out its treasure upon you, that all that firmness of resolved
consecration and willing surrender to the death of the Cross was for
you. Look, believing that you had then, and have now, a place in His
heart, and in His sacrifice. Look, remembering that it was because
He would save you, that Himself He could not save,

And as, from afar, we look on that great sight, let His love melt
our hearts to an answering fervour, and His fixed will give us, too,
strength to delight in obedience, to set our faces like a flint. Let
the power of His sacrifice, and the influence of His example which
that sacrifice commends to our loving copy, and the grace of His
Spirit whom He, since that sacrifice, pours upon men, so mould us
that we, too, like Him, may 'quit us like men, be strong,' and all
our strength and 'all our deeds' be wielded and 'done in charity.'




CHRIST'S MESSENGERS: THEIR EQUIPMENT AND WORK


    'After these things, the Lord appointed other seventy
    also, and sent them two and two before His face into
    every city and place whither He Himself would come.
    2. Therefore said He unto them, The harvest truly is
    great, but the labourers are few: pray ye therefore
    the Lord of the harvest, that He would send forth
    labourers into His harvest. 3. Go your ways: behold, I
    send you forth as lambs among wolves. 4. Carry neither
    purse, nor scrip, nor shoes; and salute no man by the
    way. 5. And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say,
    Peace be to this house. 6. And if the son of peace be
    there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall
    turn to you again. 7. And in the same house remain,
    eating and drinking such things as they give: for the
    labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to
    house. 8. And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they
    receive  you, eat such things as are set before you:
    9. And heal the sick that are therein; and say unto
    them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 10. But
    into  whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you
    not, go your ways out into the streets of the same,
    and say, 11. Even the very dust of your city, which
    cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you:
    notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom
    of God is come nigh unto you.... 17. And the seventy
    returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils
    are subject unto us through Thy name. 18. And He said
    unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
    heaven. 19. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on
    serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the
    enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you.
    20. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the
    spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice,
    because your names are written in heaven.'
    --LUKE x. 1-11: 17-20.

The mission of the Seventy is clearly distinguished from and
contrasted with that of the Twelve by the word 'others' in verse 1,
which points back to Luke ix.1. The Twelve were prohibited from
going beyond Jews;  the Seventy were under no such restriction, and
were probably sent to the half-Gentile districts on the east of
Jordan. The number of twelve had reference to the number of the
tribes; that of seventy may have referred to the number of the
elders, but it has also been suggested that its reference is to the
supposed number of the nations. The appointment of the Twelve was to
a permanent office; that of the Seventy to a transitory mission.
Much of the charge given to either is given to both, as is most
natural, since they had the same message, and both were sent to
prepare for Christ's personal ministry. But though the Seventy were
sent out but for a short time, permanent principles for the
guidance, not only of Christian workers, but of all Christian lives,
are embodied in the charge which they received.

We note, first, that all personal service should be preceded by
intense realisation of the immense field, and of the inadequacy, of
Christian effort, which vision will culminate in prayer for more
toilers to be 'sent forth.' The word implies a certain measure of
compulsion, for an overmastering impulse is always needed to
overcome human reluctance and laziness. No man has ever done large
service for God who has not felt that, like the prophet, he was laid
hold of by the Spirit, and borne away, whether he would or no. 'I
must speak,' is felt by every true messenger of God. The prayer was
answered by the sending of the pray-ers, as it often is. Note how
Jesus implies that He is Lord of the harvest, in that His sending
them is the answer to the petition. Note, too, the authority which
He claims to exercise supreme sovereignty over the lives of men. He
has the right to fling them into deadly peril for no other purpose
than to proclaim His name. Lambs, ringed round by wolves with white,
gleaming teeth, have little chance of life. Jesus gives His servants
full warning of dangers, and on the very warning builds an
exhortation to quiet confidence; for, if the sentence ends with
'lambs in the midst of wolves,' it begins with 'I send you forth,'
and that is enough, for He will defend them when He seeth the wolf
coming. Not only so, but He will also provide for all their needs,
so they want no baggage nor money, nor even a staff. A traveller
without any of these would be in poor case, but they are not to
carry such things, because they carry Jesus. He who sends them forth
goes with them whom He sends. Now, this precept, in its literal
form, was expressly abolished afterwards (Luke xxii. 36), but the
spirit of it is permanent. If Christ sends us, we may trust Him to
take care of us as long as we are on His errands.

Energetic pursuit of their work, unimpeded by distractions of social
intercourse, is meant by the prohibition of saluting by the way.
That does not mean churlish isolation, but any one who has ever seen
two Easterns 'saluting' knows what a long-drawn-out affair it is.
How far along the road one might have travelled while all that empty
ceremony was being got through! The time for salutations is when the
journey is over. They mean something then. The great effect of the
presence of Christ's servants should be to impart the peace which
they themselves possess. We should put reality into conventional
courtesies. All Christians are to be peacemakers in the deepest
sense, and especially in regard to men's relations with God. The
whole scope of our work may be summed up as being to proclaim and
bring peace with God, with ourselves, with all others, and with
circumstances. The universality of our message is implied in the
fact that the salutation is to be given in every house entered, and
without any inquiry whether a 'son of peace' is there. The reflex
blessedness of Christian effort is taught in the promise that the
peace, vainly wished for those who would not receive it, is not
wasted like spilt water, but comes back like a dove, to the hand of
its sender. If we do no other person good, we bless ourselves by all
work for others.

The injunctions as to conduct in the house or city that receives the
messengers carry two principles of wide application. First, they
demand clear disinterestedness and superiority to vulgar appetites.
Christ's servants are not to be fastidious as to their board and
lodging. They are not to make demands for more refined diet than
their hosts are accustomed to have, and they are not to shift their
quarters, though it were from a hovel to a palace. The suspicion
that a Christian worker is fond of good living and sensuous delights
robs his work of power. But the injunction teaches also that there
is no generosity in those who hear the message giving, and no
obligation laid on those who deliver it by their receiving, enough
to live and work on. The less we obviously look for, the more shall
we probably receive. A high-minded man need not scruple to take the
'hire'; a high-minded giver will not suppose that he has hired the
receiver to be his servant.

The double substance of the work is next briefly stated. The order
in which its two parts stands is remarkable, for the healing of the
sick is put first, and the proclamation of the nearness of the
kingdom second. Possibly the reason is that the power to heal was a
new gift. Its very priority in mention may imply that it was but a
means to an end, a part of the equipment for the true and proper
work of preaching the coming of the kingdom and its King. At all
events, let us learn that Jesus wills the continual combination of
regard to the bodily wants and sicknesses, and regard to the
spiritual needs of men.

The solemn instructions as to what was to be done in the case of
rejection breathe a spirit the reverse of sanguine. Jesus had no
illusions as to the acceptance of the message, and He will send no
man out to work hiding from him the difficulties and opposition
probably to be encountered. Much wisdom lies in deciding when a field
of labour or a method of work should be abandoned as hopeless--for
the present and for the individual worker, at all events. To do it
too soon is cowardice; to delay it too long is not admirable
perseverance, but blindness to plain providences. To shake off the
dust is equivalent to severing all connection. The messenger will
not bring away the least thing belonging to the city. But whatever
men's unbelief, it does not affect the fact, but it does affect
their relation to the fact. The gracious message was at first that
'the kingdom of God is come nigh _unto you_,' but the last
shape of it leaves out 'unto you': for rejection of the word cuts
off from beneficial share in the word, and the kingdom, when it
comes, has no blessing for the unbelieving soul.

The return of the Seventy soon followed their being sent forth. They
came back with a childish, surprised joy, and almost seem to have
thought that Jesus would be as much astonished and excited as they
were with the proof of the power of His name. They had found that
they could not only heal the sick, but cast out demons. Jesus'
answer is meant to quiet down their excitement by teaching them that
He had known what they were doing whilst they were doing it. When
did He behold Satan fall from heaven? The context seems to require
that it should be at the time when the Seventy were casting out
demons. The contest between the personal Source of evil and Jesus
was fought out by the principals, not by their subordinates, and it
is already victoriously decided in Christ's sight. Therefore, as the
sequel of His victory, He enlarges His gifts to His servants,
couching the charter in the words of a psalm (Ps. xci.). Nothing can
harm the servant without the leave of the Master, and if any evil
befall him in his work, the evil in the evil, the poison on the
arrow-head, will be wiped off and taken away. But great as are the
gifts to the faithful servant, they are less to be rejoiced in than
his personal inclusion among the citizens of heaven. Gifts and
powers are good, and may legitimately be rejoiced in; but to possess
eternal life, and to belong to the mother-city of us all, the New
Jerusalem, is better than all gifts and all powers.




NEIGHBOURS FAR OFF


    'And, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted
    Him, saying, Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal
    life? 26. He said unto him, What is written in the law?
    how readest thou? 27. And he, answering, said, Thou
    shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
    with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with
    all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself. 28. And He
    said unto him, Thou hast answered right: this do, and
    thou shalt live. 29. But he, willing to justify
    himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbour?
    30. And Jesus, answering, said, A certain man went down
    from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves,
    which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and
    departed, leaving him half dead. 31. And by chance
    there came down a certain priest that way; and when he
    saw him, he passed by on the other side. 32. And
    likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and
    looked on him, and passed by on the other side. 33. But
    a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he
    was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him,
    34. And went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring
    in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and
    brought him to an inn, and took care of him. 35. And on
    the morrow, when he departed, he took out two pence,
    and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care
    of him: and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come
    again, I will repay thee. 36. Which now of these three,
    thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among
    the thieves! 37. And he said. He that showed mercy on
    him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise.'
    --LUKE x. 25-37.

The lawyer's first question was intended to 'tempt' Jesus, which
here seems to mean, rather, 'to test'; that is, to ascertain His
orthodoxy or His ability. Christ walks calmly through the snare, as
if not seeing it. His answer is unimpeachably orthodox, and withal
just hints in the slightest way that the question was needless,
since one so learned in the law knew well enough what were the
conditions of inheriting life. The lawyer knows the letter too well
to be at a loss what to answer. But it is remarkable that he gives
the same combination of two passages which Jesus gives in His last
duel with the Pharisees (Matt. xxii; Mark xii.). Did Jesus adopt
this lawyer's summary? Or is Luke's narrative condensed, omitting
stages by which Jesus led the man to so wise an answer?

Our Lord's rejoinder has a marked tone of authority, which puts the
lawyer in his right place. His answer is commended, as by one whose
estimate has weight; and his practice is implicitly condemned, as by one
who knows, and has a right to judge. 'This do' is a sharp sword-thrust.
It also unites the two 'loves' as essentially one, by saying 'This'-not
'these'--'do.' The lawyer feels the prick, and it is his defective
practice, not his question, which he seeks to 'justify.' He did not
think that his love to God needed any justification. He had fully done
his duty there, but about the other half he was less sure. So he tried
to ride off, lawyer-like, on a question of the meaning of words. 'Who
is my neighbour?' is the question answered by the lovely story of the
kindly Samaritan.

I. The main purpose, then, is to show how far off men may be, and
yet be neighbours. The lawyer's question, 'Who is my neighbour?' is
turned round the other way in Christ's form of it at the close. It
is better to ask 'Whose neighbour am I?' than 'Who is my neighbour?'
The lawyer meant by the word 'a person whom I am bound to love.' He
wanted to know how far an obligation extended which he had no mind
to recognise an inch farther than he was obliged. Probably he had in
his thought the Rabbinical limitations which made it as much duty to
'hate thine enemy' as to 'love thy neighbour.' Probably, too, he
accepted the national limitations, which refused to see any
neighbours outside the Jewish people.

'Neighbourhood,' in his judgment, implied 'nearness,' and he wished to
know how far off the boundaries of the region included in the command
lay. There are a great many of us like him, who think that the
obligation is a matter of geography, and that love, like force, is
inversely as the square of the distance. A good deal of the so-called
virtue of 'patriotism' is of this spurious sort. But Christ's way of
putting the question sweeps all such limitations aside. 'Who became
neighbour to' the wounded man? 'He who showed mercy on him,' said the
lawyer, unwilling to name the Samaritan, and by his very reluctance
giving the point to his answer which Christ wished to bring out. We
are not to love because we are neighbours in any geographical sense,
but we become neighbours to the man farthest from us when we love and
help him. The relation has nothing to do with proximity. If we prove
ourselves neighbours to any man by exercising love to him, then the
relation intended by the word is as wide as humanity. We recognise
that A. is our neighbour when a throb of pity shoots through our
heart, and thereby we become neighbours to him.

The story is not, properly speaking, a parable, or imaginary
narrative of something in the physical world intended to be
translated into something in the spiritual region, but it is an
illustration (by an imaginary narrative) of the actual virtue in
