one.

"Oh!" exclaimed Sally, under her breath.

"An' look here," said Matt, leading the girl to a sandy spot close by.
They both stood transfixed and silent, for there were _strange
foot-prints_ on the sand.

They could not be mistaken.  Sally and Matt knew every foot and every
shoe, white or black, in Pitcairn.  The marks before them had been made
by unknown shoes.

Just in proportion as youth is more susceptible of astonishment than
age, so was the surprise of those little ones immeasurably greater than
that of Robinson Crusoe in similar circumstances.  With awestruck faces
they traced the foot-prints down to the water's edge.  Then, for the
first time, it struck Matt that he had forgotten something.

"Oh, me forget de sip--de sip!" he cried, and pointed out to sea.

Sally raised her eyes and uttered an exclamation of fresh astonishment,
as well she might, for there, like a seagull on the blue wave, was a
ship under full sail.  It was far-off, nearly on the horizon, but quite
distinct, and large enough to be recognised.

Of course the gazers were spellbound again.  It was the first real ship
they had ever seen, but they easily recognised it, being familiar with
man's floating prisons from the frequent descriptions given to them by
John Adams, and especially from a drawing made by him, years ago, on the
back of an old letter, representing a full-rigged man-of-war.  This
masterpiece of fine art had been nailed up on the walls of John Adams's
hut, and had been fully expounded to each child in succession, as soon
after its birth as was consistent with common-sense--sometimes sooner.

Suddenly Otaheitan Sally recovered herself.

"Come, Matt, we must run home an' tell what we've seen."

Away they went like two goats up the cliffs.  Panting and blazing, they
charged down on their amazed playmates, shouting, "A sip! a sip!" but
never turning aside nor slacking their pace until they burst with the
news on the astonished mutineers.

Something more than astonishment, however, mingled with the feelings of
the seamen, and it was not until they had handled the knife, and visited
the sandy cove, and seen the foot-prints, and beheld the vessel herself,
that they became fully convinced that she had really been close to the
island, that men had apparently landed to gather cocoa-nuts, and had
gone away without having discovered the settlement, which was hid from
their view by the high cliffs to the eastward of Bounty Bay.

The vessel had increased her distance so much by the time the men
reached the cove, that it was impossible to make out what she was.

"A man-o'-war, mayhap, sent to search for us," suggested Quintal.

"Not likely," said Adams.  "If she'd bin sent to search for us, she
wouldn't have contented herself with only pickin' a few nuts."

"I should say she is a trader that has got out of her course," said
Young; "but whatever she is, we've seen the last of her.  I'm not sure
that I wouldn't have run the risk of having our hiding-place found out,
and of being hung, for the sake of seeing once more the fresh face of a
white man."

He spoke with a touch of sadness in his tone, which contrasted forcibly
with the remark that followed.

"It's little _I_ would care about the risk o' bein' scragged," said
Quintal, "if I could only once more have a stiff glass o' grog an' a
pipe o' good, strong, genuine baccy!"

"You'll maybe have the first sooner than you think," observed McCoy,
with a look of intelligence.

"What d'ye mean?" asked Quintal.

"Ax no questions an' you'll be told no lies," was McCoy's polite
rejoinder, to which Quintal returned a not less complimentary remark,
and followed Young and Adams, who had already begun to reascend the
cliffs.

This little glimpse of the great outer world was obtained by the
mutineers in 1795, and was the only break of the kind that occurred
during a residence of many years on the lonely island.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  We are led to this conclusion in regard to the children by the
fact that in the various records which tell us of these women attempting
their flight, no mention is made of the children being with them.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE CLOUDS GROW THICKER AND BLACKER.

This glimpse of a stray vessel left a deep impression on the minds of
the exiles for many days, and it so far influenced the women that they
postponed their scheme of vengeance for some time.

It must not be supposed, however, that all of those women, whom we have
described as being so gentle in character, were suddenly transformed
into demons.  It was only two or three of the more energetic and
passionate among them who stirred up the rest, and forced them to fall
in with their views.  These passionate ones were the widows of the men
who had been slain.  They not only felt their loss most bitterly, but
became almost mad with the despair caused by their forlorn condition,
and the apparent hopelessness of deliverance.

The sight of the passing ship had diverted their thoughts for a time,
perhaps had infused a little hope; but when the excitement died down
they renewed their plots against the men and at last made a desperate
attempt to carry them out.

It was on a dark and stormy night.  Thunder was rolling in the sky.
Lightning flashed among the mountain-peaks.  Rain, the first that had
descended for many days, fell in fitful showers.  It must have seemed to
the women either that the elements sympathised with them, or that the
extreme darkness was favourable to the execution of their plan, for
about midnight one of them rose from her bed, and crept noiselessly to
the corner of her hut, where she had seen Quintal deposit a loaded
musket the previous day.  Possessing herself of the weapon, she went
straight to the widow of Fletcher Christian, and wakened her.  She rose,
somewhat reluctantly, and followed the woman, whose face was concealed
in a kerchief of native cloth.  The two then went cautiously to another
hat, where two of the wives of the murdered Otaheitans awaited them, the
one with a long knife, the other with an axe in her hand.

They whispered together for a few seconds.  As they did so there came a
tremendous crash of thunder, followed by a flash which revealed the dark
heads and glistening eyeballs drawn together in a group.

"We had better not try to-night," said one voice, timidly.

"Faint heart, you may stay behind," replied another voice, firmly.
"Come, let us not delay.  They were cruel; we will be cruel too."

They all crouched down, and seemed to melt into the dark earth.  When
the next lightning-flash rent the heavens they were gone.

Lying in his bunk, opposite the door of his house, that night, John
Adams lay half asleep and half-conscious of the storm outside.  As he
lay with closed eyes there came a glaring flash of light.  It revealed
in the open doorway several pallid faces and glistening eyeballs.

"A strange dream," thought Adams; "stranger still to dream of dreaming."

The thunder-clap that followed was mingled with a crash, a burst of
smoke, and a shriek that caused Adams to leap from his couch as a bullet
whistled past his ear.  In the succeeding lightning-flash he beheld a
woman near him with an uplifted axe, another with a gleaming knife, and
Edward Young, who slept in his house that night, in the act of leaping
upon her.

Adams was prompt to act on all occasions.  He caught the uplifted axe,
and wrenching it from her grasp, thrust the woman out of the door.

"There," he said, quietly, "go thy way, lass.  I don't care to know
which of 'ee's done it.  Let the other one go too, Mr Young.  It's not
worth while making a work about it."

The midshipman obeyed, and going to a shelf in a corner, took down a
torch made of small nuts strung on a palm-spine, struck a light, and
kindled it.

"Poor things," he said, "I'm sorry for them.  They've had hard times
here."

"They won't try it again," remarked Adams, as he closed the door, and
quietly turned again into his sleeping-bunk.

But John Adams was wrong.  Foiled though they were on this occasion, and
glad though some of them must have been at their failure, there were one
or two who could not rest, and who afterwards made another attempt on
the lives of the men.  This also failed.  The first offence had been
freely forgiven, but this time it was intimated that if another attempt
were made, they should all be put to death.  Fortunately, the courage of
even the most violent of the women had been exhausted.  To the relief of
the others they gave up their murderous designs, and settled down into
that state of submission which was natural to them.

One might have thought that now, at last, the little colony of Pitcairn
had passed its worst days, most of the disturbing elements having been
removed; but there was yet one other cloud, the blackest of all, to
burst over them.  One of the world's greatest curses was about to be
introduced among them.  It happened thus:--

One night William McCoy went to his house up on the mountain-side,
entered it, and shut and bolted the door.  This was an unusual
proceeding on his part, and had no connection with the recent attempts
at murder made by the women, because he was quite fearless in regard to
that, and scoffed at the possibility of being killed by women.  He also
carefully fastened the window-shutters.  He appeared to be somewhat
excited, and went about his operations with an air at once of slyness
and of mystery.

A small torch or nut-candle which he lighted and set on a bracket on the
wall gave out a faint flickering light, which barely rendered darkness
visible, and from its position threw parts of the chamber into deepest
gloom.  It looked not unlike what we suppose would be the laboratory of
an alchemist of the olden time, and McCoy himself, with his eager yet
frowning visage, a native-made hat slouched over his brows, and a piece
of native cloth thrown over his shoulders like a plaid, was no bad
representative of an old doctor toiling for the secrets that turn base
metal into gold, and old age into youth--secrets, by the way, which have
been lying open to man's hand for centuries in the Word of God.

Taking down from a shelf a large kettle which had formed part of the
furniture of the _Bounty_, and a twisted metal pipe derived from the
same source, he fitted them up on a species of stove or oven made of
clay.  The darkness of the place rendered his movements not very
obvious; but he appeared to put something into the kettle, and fill it
with water.  Then he put charcoal into the oven, kindled it, and blew it
laboriously with his mouth until it became red-hot.  This flameless fire
did not tend much to enlighten surrounding objects; it merely added to
them a lurid tinge of red.  The operator's face, being close in front of
the fire as he blew, seemed almost as hot as the glowing coals.

With patient watchfulness he sat there crouching over the fire for
several hours, occasionally blowing it up or adding more fuel.

As the experiment went on, McCoy's eyes seemed to dilate with
expectation, and his breathing quickened.  After a time he rose and
lifted a bottle out of a tub of water near the stove.  The bottle was
attached to one end of the twisted tube, which was connected with the
kettle on the fire.  Detaching it therefrom, he raised it quickly to the
light.  Then he put it to his nose and smelt it.  As he did so his face
lit up with an expression of delight.  Taking down from a shelf a
cocoa-nut cup, he poured into it some sparkling liquid from the bottle.
It is a question which at that moment sparkled most, McCoy's eyes or the
liquid.

He sipped a little, and his rough visage broke into a beaming smile.  He
drank it all, and then he smacked his lips and laughed--not quite a
joyous laugh, but a wild, fierce, triumphant laugh, such as one might
imagine would issue from the panting lips of some stout victor of the
olden time as he clutched a much-coveted prize, after slaying some
half-dozen enemies.

"Ha ha!  I've got it at last!" he cried aloud, smacking his lips again.

And so he had.  Long and earnestly had he laboured to make use of a
fatal piece of knowledge which he possessed.  Among the hills of
Scotland McCoy had learned the art of making ardent spirits.  After many
failures, he had on this night made a successful attempt with the
ti-root, which grew in abundance on Pitcairn.  The spirit was at last
produced.  As the liquid ran burning down his throat, the memory of a
passion which he had not felt for years came back upon him with
overwhelming force.  In his new-born ecstasy he uttered a wild cheer,
and filling more spirit into the cup, quaffed it again.

"Splendid!" he cried, "first-rate.  Hurrah!"

A tremendous knocking at the door checked him, and arrested his hand as
he was about to fill another cup.

"Who's that?" he demanded, angrily.

"Open the door an' you'll see."

The voice was that of Matthew Quintal.  McCoy let him in at once.

"See here," he cried, eagerly, holding up the bottle with a leer, "I've
got it at last!"

"So any deaf man might have found out by the way you've bin shoutin' it.
Why didn't you open sooner?"

"Never heard you, Matt.  Was too much engaged with my new friend, I
suppose.  Come, I'll introdooce him to you."

"Look alive, then," growled Quintal, impatiently, for he seemed to have
smelt the spirit, as the warhorse is said to smell the battle from afar.
"Give us hold o' the cup and fill up; fill up, I say, to the brim.
None o' your half measures for me."

He took a mouthful, rolled it round and round with his tongue once or
twice, and swallowed it.

"Heh, that's _it_ once more!  Come, here's your health, McCoy!  We'll be
better friends than ever now; good luck to 'ee."

McCoy thought that there was room for improvement in their friendship,
but said nothing, as he watched his comrade pour the fiery liquid slowly
down his throat, as if he wished to prolong the sensation.

"Another," he said, holding out the cup.

"No, no; drink fair, Matt Quintal; wotever you do, drink fair.  It's my
turn now."

"Your turn?" retorted Quintal, fiercely; "why, you've bin swillin' away
for half-an-hour before I came."

"No, Matt, no; honour bright.  I'd only just begun.  But come, we won't
quarrel over it.  Here's the other half o' the nut, so we'll drink
together.  Now, hold steady."

"More need for me to give you that advice; you shake the bottle as if
you'd got the ague.  If you spill a drop, now, I'll--I'll flatten your
big nose on your ugly face."

Not in the least hurt by such uncomplimentary threats, McCoy smiled as
he filled the cup held by his comrade.  The spirit was beginning to tell
on him, and the smile was of that imbecile character which denotes
perfect self-satisfaction and good-will.  Having poured the remainder
into his own cup, he refixed the bottle to the tube of the "still," and
while more of the liquid was being extracted, the cronies sat down on
low stools before the stove, to spend a pleasant evening in poisoning
themselves!

It may be interesting and instructive, though somewhat sad, to trace the
steps by which those two men, formed originally in God's image, reduced
themselves, of their own free will, to a level much lower than that of
the brutes.

"Doesn't the taste of it bring back old times?" said McCoy, holding his
cup to the light as he might have held up a transparent glass.

"Ay," assented Quintal, gradually becoming amiable, "the good old times
before that fool Fletcher Christian indooced us to jine him.  Here's to
'ee, lad, once more."

"Why, when I think o' the jolly times I've had at the Blue Boar of
Plymouth," said McCoy, "or at the Swan wi' the two throttles, in--in--I
forget where, I feel--I feel--like--like--here's your health again, Matt
Quintal.  Give us your flipper, man.  You're not a bad feller, if you
wasn't given to grumpin' so much."

Quintal's amiability, even when roused to excess by drink, was easily
dissipated.  The free remarks of his comrade did not tend to increase
it, but he said nothing, and refreshed himself with another sip.

"I really do think," continued McCoy, looking at his companion with an
intensity of feeling which is not describable, "I really do think that--
that--when I think o' that Blue Boar, I could a'most become poetical."

"If you did," growled Quintal, "you would not be the first that had
become a big fool on a worse subjec'."

"I shay, Matt Quintal," returned the other, who was beginning to talk
rather thickly, so powerful was the effect of the liquor on his
unaccustomed nerves; "I shay, ole feller, you used to sing well once.
Come g-give us a stave now."

"Bah!" was Quintal's reply, with a look of undisguised contempt.

"Jus-so.  'Xactly my opinion about it.  Well, as you won't sing, I'll
give you a ditty myself."

