of machines had impressed him, even if Lambert did seem a fool.

"You insist upon remaining, so it is your own risk," said Lambert
coolly.

Lambert, in the strange robes, was a bizarre figure. The hood was
thrown back, exposing his pale, black-bearded face, the wan eyes with
dark circles under them, and the twitching lips.

"If you find yourself leaving this vale of tears," went on the
scientist, ironically, to the sleuth, "you will at least have the
comfort of realizing that as the sound-force disintegrates your mortal
form you are among the first of men to be attuned to the vibrations of
the unknown sound world. All matter is vibration; that has been
proven. A building of bricks, if shaken in the right manner, falls
into its component parts; a bridge, crossed by soldiers in certain
rhythmic time, is torn from its moorings. A tuning fork, receiving the
sound vibrations from one of a similar size and shape begins to
vibrate in turn. These are homely analogies, but applied to the less
familiar sound vibrations, which make up our atomic world, they may
help you to understand how the terrific forces I have discovered can
disintegrate flesh."

The scientist looked inquiringly at Phillips. As the sleuth did not
move, but sat with folded arms, Lambert shrugged and said, "I am
ready."

Lambert raised his hood, and Phillips said, in a spirit of bravado,
"You can't scare me out of here."

"Here goes the switch," cried Lambert.

He made the contact, as he had before. He stood for a moment, and this
time the current gained force. The experimenter pushed his lever all
the way over.

       *       *       *       *       *

A terrible greenish-blue light suddenly illuminated the laboratory,
and through the air there came sound vibrations which seemed to tear
at Phillips' body. He found himself on the floor, knocked from his
chair, and he writhed this way and that, speechless, suffering a
torment of agony. His whole flesh seemed to tremble in unison with the
waves which emanated from the machines which Lambert manipulated.

After what seemed hours to the suffering sleuth, the force diminished,
and soon Phillips was able to rise. Trembling, the detective cursed
and yelled for help in a high-pitched voice.

Lambert had thrown back his hood, and was rocking to and fro in agony.

"Madge, Madge," he cried, "what have I done! Come back to me, come
back!"

Doherty and the others came running in at their chief's shouts.
"Arrest him," ordered Phillips shakily. "I've stood enough of this
nonsense."

The detectives started for Lambert. He saw them coming, and swiftly
threw off the protective garments he wore.

"Stand back!" he cried, and threw the switch all the way over. The
verditer green light smashed through the air, and the queer sound
sensations smacked and tore them; Doherty, who had drawn a revolver
when he was answering Phillips' cries, fired the gun into the air, and
the report seemed to battle with the vibrating ether.

Lambert, as he threw the switch, leaped forward and landed on the
metal plate under the ceiling studs, in the very center of the awful
disturbance and unprotected from its force.

For a few moments, Lambert felt racking pain, as though something were
tearing at his flesh, separating the very atoms. The scientist saw the
wriggling figures of the sleuths, in various strange positions, but his
impressions were confused. His head whirled round and round, he swayed
to and fro, and, finally, he thought he fell down, or rather, that he
had melted, as a lump of sugar dissolves in water.

"He's gone--gone--"

In the heart of nothingness was Lambert, his body torn and racked in a
shrieking chaos of sound and a blinding glare of iridescent light
which seemed too much to bear.

His last conscious thought was a prayer, that, having failed to bring
back his sweetheart, Madge Crawford, he was undergoing a step toward
the same destination to which he had sent her.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Lambert came to with a shudder. But it was not a mortal shudder.
He could sense no body; had no sense of being confined by matter. He
was in a strange, chilly place--a twilight region, limitless, without
dimensions.

Yet he could feel something, in an impersonal way, vaguely
indifferent. He had no pain now.

He was moving, somehow. He had one impelling desire, and that was to
discover Madge Crawford. Perhaps it was this thought which directed
his movements.

Intent upon finding the girl, if she was indeed in this same strange
world that he was, he did not notice for some time--how long, he had
no way of telling--that there were other beings which tried to impede
his progress. But as he grew more accustomed to the unfamiliar
sensations he was undergoing, he found his path blocked again and
again by queer beings.

They were living, without doubt, and had intelligence, and evinced
hostility toward him. But they were shapeless, shapeless as amoebas.
He heard them in a sort of soundless whisper, and could see them
without the use of eyes. And he shuddered, though he could feel no
body in which he might be confined. Still, when he pinched viciously
with invisible fingers at the spot where his face should have been, a
twinge of pain registered on the vague consciousness which appeared to
be all there was to him.

He was not sure of his substance, though he could evidently experience
human sensations with his amorphous body. He did not know whether he
could see; yet, he was dodging this way and that, as the beings who
occupied this world tried to stop him.

They gave him the impression of gray shapes, and in coppery shadows
things gleamed and closed in on him.

He seemed to hear a cry, and he knew that he was receiving a call for
help from Madge Crawford. He tried to run, pushed determinedly toward
the spot, impelled by his love for the girl.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, as he hurried, he occasionally was stopped short by collision
with the formless shapes which were all about him. He was hampered by
them, for they followed him, making a sound like wind heard in a
dream. Whatever medium he was in was evidently thickly inhabited by
the hostile beings who claimed this world as their own. Though he
could not actually feel the medium, he could sense that it was heavy.
He leaped and ran, fighting his way through the increasing hosts, and
the roar of their voice-impressions increased in his consciousness.

Yet there seemed to be nothing, nothing tangible save vagueness. He
felt he was in a blind spot in space, a place of no dimensions, no
time, where beings abhorred by nature, things which had never
developed any dimensional laws, existed.

The cry for help struck him, with more force this time. Lambert,
whatever form he was in, realised that he was close to the end of his
journey to Madge Crawford.

He tried to speak, and had the impression that he said something
reassuring. He then bumped into some vibrational being which he knew
was Madge. His ears could not hear, nor could his flesh feel, but his
whole form or cerebrum sensed he held the woman he loved in his arms.

And she was speaking to him, in accents of fear, begging him to save
her.

"John, John, you have come at last. They have been torturing me
terribly. Save me."

"Darling Madge, I will do everything I can. Now I have found you, and
we are together and will never part. Can you hear me?"

"I know what you are thinking, and what you wish to say. I can't
exactly hear; it all seems vague, and impossible. Yet I can suffer.
They have been hitting me with something which makes me shudder and
shake--there, they are at it again."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lambert felt the sensations, now, which the girl had made known to
him. He felt crowded by gray beings, and his existence was troubled by
spasms of pain-impressions. He knew Madge was crying out, too.

He could not comprehend the attacks, or guess their meaning. But the
situation was unendurable.

Anger shook him, and he began to fight, furiously but vaguely. They
were closely hemmed in, but when Lambert began to strike out with
hands and legs, the beings gave way a little. The scientist tried to
shout, and though he could actually hear nothing, the result was
gratifying. The formless creatures seemed to scatter and draw back in
confusion as he yelled his defiance.

"They hate that," Madge said to him. "I have screamed myself hoarse
and that is why they have not killed me--if I can be killed."

"I do not believe we can. But they can torture us," replied Lambert.
"It is an everlasting half-life or quarter-life, and these creatures
who call this Hell's Dimension home, have nothing but hatred for us in
their consciousness."

The inhabitants of the imperfect world had closed in once again and
the sharp instruments of torture they used were being thrust into the
invisible bodies of the two humans. Each time, Lambert was unable to
restrain his cries, for it seemed that he was being torn to pieces by
vibrations.

He yelled until he could not speak above a whisper, or at least until
the impressions of speech he gave forth did not trouble the beings.
The two humans, still bound to some extent by their mortal beliefs,
were chivvied to and fro, and struck and bullied. The creatures seemed
to delight in this sport.

The two felt they could not die; yet they could suffer terribly. Would
this go on through eternity? Was there no release?

       *       *       *       *       *

They were trying to tear Madge away from him. She was fighting them,
and Lambert, in a frenzy of rage, made a determined effort to get away
with the girl from their tormentors.

They retreated before his onslaughts. Drawing Madge after him, Lambert
put down his head--or believed he was doing so--and ran as fast as he
could at the beings.

He bumped into some invisible forms and was slowed in his rush, but he
shouted and flailed about with his arms, and tried to kick. Madge
helped by screaming and striking out. They made some distance in this
way, or so they thought, and the horrid creatures gave way before
them.

All about them was the coppery sensation of the medium in which they
moved: Lambert as he became more used to the form he was inhabiting,
he began to think he could discern dreadful eyes which stared
unblinkingly at the couple.

He fought on, and believed they had come to a spot where the beings
did not molest them, though they still sensed the things glaring at
them.

Were they on some invisible eminence, above the reach of these queer
creatures?

"We might as well stop here, for if we try to go farther we may come
to a worse place," said Lambert.

They rested there, in temporary peace, together at last.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I seem to be happy now," said Madge, clinging close. "I feared I
would never see you again. John dear. I ran to you when you called out
that day and when I crossed the plate, I was torn and racked and
knocked down. When I next experienced sensation, it was in this
terrible form. I am becoming more used to it, but I kept crying out
for you: the beings, as soon as they discovered my presence, began to
torment me. More and more have been collecting, and I have a sensation
of seeing them as horrible, revolting beasts. Oh, John, I don't think
I could have stood it much longer, if you hadn't come to me. They were
driving me on, on, on, ceaselessly torturing me."

"Curse them," said Lambert. "I wish I could really get hold of some of
them. Perhaps, Madge, I will be able to think of some escape for us
from this Hell's Dimension."

"Yes, darling. I could not bear to think that we are eternally damned
to exist among these beings, hurt by them and unable to get away. How
I wish we were back in the laboratory, at the tea table. How happy we
were there!"

"And we will be again, Madge." Lambert was far from feeling hopeful,
but he tried to encourage the girl into thinking they might get away.

However, he was unable to dissimulate. She felt his anguish for her
safety. "But I know now that you love me. I can feel it stronger than
ever before, John. It seems like a great rock to which I can always
cling, your love. It projects me from the hatred that these beasts
pour out against us."

Since they had no sense of time, they could not tell how long they
were allowed to remain unmolested. But in each other's company they
were happy, though each one was afraid for the safety of the loved
one.

They spoke of the mortal life they had lived, and their love. They
felt no need of food or water, but clung together in a dimensionless
universe, held up by love.

       *       *       *       *       *

The lull came to an end, at last. There was no change in the coppery
vagueness about them which they sensed as the surrounding ether, but
all was changeless, boundless. Lambert, close to Madge Crawford, felt
that they were about to be attacked.

He had swift, temporary impressions of seeing saucerlike, unblinking
eyes, and then hordes of bizarre inhabitants started to climb up to
their perch.

For a short while, Lambert and Madge fought them off, thrusting at
them, seeming to push them backward down the intangible slope; the
cries which the dematerialized humans uttered also helped to hold the
leaders of the attacking army partially in check, but the vast number
of beings swept forward.

The thrusts of the torture-fields they emanated became more and more
racking, as the two unfortunates shuddered in horror and pain.

The power to demonstrate loud noise was evidently impossible to the
creatures, for their only sounds came to Madge Crawford and John
Lambert as long-drawn out, almost unbearable squeaks, mouse-like in
character. Perhaps they had never had the faculty of speech, since
they did not need it to communicate with one another; perhaps they
realized that the racket they could make would hurt them as much as it
did their enemies.

Lambert, Madge clinging to him, was forced backward down the slope,
and the beings had the advantage of height. He could not again reach
the eminence, but the way behind seemed to clear quickly enough,
though thrusts were made at him, innumerable times with the
torture-fields.

The hordes pushed them backward, and ever back.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were forced on for some distance. As they retreated, the way
become easier, and fewer and fewer of the beings impeded the channel
along which they moved, though in front of them and on all sides,
above, beneath, they were pressed by the hordes.

"They are forcing us to some place they want us to go," said Lambert
desperately.

"We can do nothing more," replied the girl.

Lambert felt her quiet confidence in him, and that as long as they
were together, all was well.

"Maybe they can kill us, somehow," he said.

And now, Lambert felt the way was clear to the rear. There was a
sudden rush of the creatures, and needlelike fields were impelled
viciously into the spaces the two humans occupied.

Madge cried out in pain, and Lambert shouted. The throng drew away
from them as suddenly as it had surged forward, and an instant later
the pair, clinging together, felt that they were falling, falling,
falling....

"Are you all right, Madge?"

"Yes, John."

But he knew she was suffering. How long they fell he did not know, but
they stopped at last. No sooner had they come to rest than they were
assailed with sensations of pain which made both cry out in anguish.

There, in the spot where they had been thrust by the hordes, they felt
that there was some terrific vibration which racked and tore at their
invisible forms continuously, sending them into spasms of sharp
misery.

They both were forced to give vent to their feelings by loud cries.
But they could not command their movements any longer. When they tried
to get away, their limbs moved but they felt that they remained in the
same spot.

