some universal and permanent truths that must remain to influence
mankind?"




II.

HISTORICAL AMERICANS.


As introductory to these considerations, let us think about some of
these historical Americans whose influence upon their countrymen is to
be eclipsed, perhaps, by the "Mormon Prophet." Among our patriots and
statesmen will be remembered Patrick Henry, with his doctrine of the
inherent right of revolution against intolerable oppression;
Jefferson, and his "Declaration of Independence" and the "Statute of
Virginia for Religious Freedom," the principle of which finally found
its way into our national and state Constitutions; Alexander Hamilton
and his political interpretation of the constitutional powers of our
general government; Webster and his doctrine of the sacredness of the
American Union of States--the statesman of nationalism; Monroe, with
the doctrine which bears his name, politically segregating the
American continents from Europe, and dedicating the western world to
free institutions; Lincoln, with his doctrine of the rightfulness of
personal freedom for every man, woman and child of Adam's race--the
doctrine of the universal application of the self-evident principles
of the Declaration of Independence--the right of men to live, to be
free, to pursue happiness--principles he invoked in behalf of the
African race in the United States. Among inventors will be remembered
Fulton, Whitney, Morse and Edison; among the philosophers, practical
and speculative, Franklin, Emerson and John Fiske; among the poets,
Longfellow, Poe, Whitman, and Lowell; among the preachers and
theologians, Jonathan Edwards and his cruel orthodoxy; Wm. E. Channing
and his Unitarian liberalism; Henry Ward Beecher and his successor,
Lyman Abbott, with their efforts at reconciliation of Christianity and
evolution.

This enumeration does not exhaust the list of historical Americans who
have powerfully influenced their countrymen, but it will not be
doubted that they represent the very chief of the respective groups
that have so influenced their countrymen.

Thinking of the achievements of these great Americans, and weighing
the influence of each upon his countrymen, do you not really think,
even with Josiah Quincy on our side, it looks presumptuous in us to
hold that Joseph Smith may yet exert a greater influence over his
countrymen than any one of these, his compatriots? That is the
question I propose to put on trial here this afternoon.




III.

WHAT IS A PROPHET?


First of all, a word of definition: This term "prophet"--what do you
make of it? Generally, when you speak of a "prophet," you have in mind
a predictor of future events, one who foretells things that are to
come to pass, and indeed that is, in part, the office of a prophet--in
part what is expected of him. But really this is the very least of his
duties. A prophet should be a "forth-teller" rather than a
fore-teller. Primarily he must be a teacher of men, an expounder of
the things of God. The inspiration of the Almighty must give him
understanding, and when given he must expound it to his people, to his
age. He must be a Seer that can make others see. A Teacher sent of God
to instruct a people--to enlighten an age. This is the primary office
of a prophet. And now I want to show you how well and faithfully our
Prophet performed such duties.

To do this it is necessary that I say something about the ideas
prevailing in the world at the Prophet's advent among men--I mean as
to their religions and philosophies, the doctrines by which they were
influenced. And this not only as to truth, but also as to error--and
chiefly as to error, for, among other things, a prophet must correct
the errors of men. It is a capital method of teaching truth--this
correcting of errors.




IV.

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL BELIEFS OF ONE HUNDRED YEARS AGO.


REVELATION: At the commencement of the nineteenth century the general
idea prevailed in Christendom that a great while ago a very definite
revelation from God had been given; angels had visited the earth and
imparted divine knowledge to men; the Spirit of the Almighty had
rested upon some and had given them understanding by which they were
able to declare the mind of God and the will of God. These were
prophets. Some prophets there were who even talked with God "face to
face, as a man speaketh unto his friend." So communed Moses with God
(Ex. 33:11); so, too, Isaiah (Isa. 6:1-6). But while this belief as to
revelation in the past everywhere prevailed, orthodox Christendom was
equally certain that no revelation was being given in their day; and
not only was no revelation then being given, but neither would there
be any revelation given in future time. "The volume of revelation is
completed and forever closed," was dogma in all Christendom. There
would be no future visitation of angels. No more would the heavens be
opened, or man stand face to face with his God, or speak to his Lord
as a man speaketh to his friend. All this was ended. The canon of
scripture was completed, and forever closed. That canon consisted of
the Old and New Testaments; all other books were secular--this alone
sacred. There was no other word of God.


IDEAS OF DEITY: In regard to deity, Christian men, at the beginning of
the nineteenth century, believed that God was an incorporeal,
immaterial being, without body--that is, not material, not matter;
without parts; without passions. And yet, with gravest inconsistency,
they held that God was of love the essence; that He loved
righteousness, that He hated iniquity; that He so loved the world that
He gave His only begotten Son that whosoever believeth on Him should
not perish, but have everlasting life! Notwithstanding this "love" and
this "hate" God was without passions! He was, too, according to men's
creeds, without form. Notwithstanding Moses, one of the God-inspired
teachers of men, said that "God created man in His own image, in the
image of God created He him;" and Jesus, by a prophet of the New
Testament, was declared to be the express image of God's person
(Hebrews i: 2, 3). Notwithstanding this, I say, men, in the early
decades of the nineteenth century, were possessed of a "morbid terror"
of anthropomorphism--the ascription of human form, feeling or
qualities to God--as if they could escape it and still hold belief in
the Bible revelation of God! Or, for matter of that, hold to any
doctrine of God taught either by religion or philosophy. At the very
least, if the God-idea survive at all, God must be held to possess
consciousness, both consciousness of self, and of other than
self--self-consciousness, and other-consciousness; also He must be
thought of as possessed of volition; and what are these but human
qualities, which present God to our thought as anthropomorphic? Strip
God of these attributes and He is reduced to the atheists' "force;" to
blind, purposeless force, that can sustain no possible personal
relationship whatsoever to men or other things in the universe. As one
writer in a great magazine recently said: "If we are to know the
Supreme Reality at all, it can only be through the attribution to Him
of qualities analogous to, though infinitely transcending, the
qualities which we recognize as highest in man, and consequently
[highest] in the world as we know it."

But I must pass by these inconsistencies of the creeds of men. I shall
have no time to discuss them. Indeed, I must ask you to think with me
in headlines, and to think fast. We have no time for argument. We
shall barely have time to pass over the ground proposed, and must
depend upon the truth of our statements being self-evident, or
conceded to be accurate statements of fact.


OF THE UNIVERSE: Respecting the universe, Christendom, at the
beginning of the nineteenth century, believed that it was created of
God from nothing, and that no great while ago. "Calling forth from
nothing" was held to be indeed the meaning of "create." God
transcended the universe; was, in fact, outside of it; was what an
American philosopher (Fiske) some years afterwards called an "Absentee
God." Absent, "except for a little jog or poke here and there in the
shape of a special providence."

"Down to a period almost within living memory," says Andrew Dixon
White, in his great work, "Warfare of Science with Theology," "it was
held, virtually 'always, everywhere, and by all,' that the universe,
as we now see it, was created literally and directly by the voice or
hands of the Almighty, or by both--out of nothing--in an instant, or
in six days, or in both--about four thousand years before the
Christian era--and for the convenience of the dwellers upon the earth,
which was at the base and foundation of the whole structure." Such
were the views of men concerning the universe during the period here
considered.


OF MAN: Respecting man, it was taught that while he was created of
God, his origin was purely an earthly one, his body made of the earth,
a spirit breathed into him when his body was made, and so man became a
living soul. All taught that he was a created thing, a creature.


MAN AND HIS SALVATION: As to man's salvation, some of the creeds
taught that God, of His own volition, had foreordained that some men
and angels were doomed to everlasting destruction, and others
predestined to eternal life and glory. Not "for any good or ill" that
they had done or could do, but their fate was fixed by the volition of
God alone. These whom He would save, He would move by irresistible
grace to their salvation; those whom He had pre-determined should be
damned might not escape, struggle they never so persistently; no
prayers could save them; no act of obedience might mitigate their
punishment; no hungering and thirsting after righteousness, bring them
to blessedness; they must perish, and that eternally! Those who perish
in ignorance of Christ--the heathen races--were damned. "The heathen
in mass, with no single definite and unquestionable exception on
record, are evidently strangers to God, and going down to death in an
unsaved condition. The presumed possibility of being saved without a
knowledge of Christ remains, after 1,800 years, a possibility
illustrated by no example." So said those who expounded this creed.
Others, still, taught that infants dying in infancy without receiving
Christian baptism were damned, and that everlastingly. By some,
unbaptized infants were denied burial in sanctified ground. "Hell's
Half Acre" was a reality in some Christian graveyards.


OF THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SALVATION AND DAMNATION: Salvation and
damnation meant, as to the former, the attainment of heaven; as to the
latter, assignment to hell. The former, judging from the descriptions
of it, a mysterious, indefinite state "enjoyed" somewhere "beyond the
bounds of time and space * * * the saints secure abode;" the latter, a
very definite place, with very definite and very hot conditions, that
had power to endure and that everlastingly, to the eternal misery of
the damned. Time might come and time might go, but this torture,
undiminished, went on forever. If one gained heaven, even by ever so
small a margin, he entered upon a complete possession of all its
