and a tapir had also been seen, but no danger was to be anticipated from
those creatures.

"Shall we have a stormy night, think you?" asked Nigel, as he assisted
in striking a light.

"It may be so," replied the hermit, flinging down one after another of
his wet matches, which failed to kindle. "What we hear may be distant
thunder, but I doubt it. The sounds seem to me more like the mutterings
of a volcano. Some new crater may have burst forth in the Sumatran
ranges. This thick darkness inclines me to think so--especially after
the new activity of volcanic action we have seen so recently at
Krakatoa. Let me try your matches, Nigel, perhaps they have
escaped--mine are useless."

But Nigel's matches were as wet as those of the hermit. So were those of
the professor. Luckily Moses carried the old-fashioned flint and steel,
with which, and a small piece of tinder, a spark was at last kindled,
but as they were about to apply it to a handful of dry bamboo scrapings,
an extra spirt of rain extinguished it. For an hour and more they made
ineffectual attempts to strike a light. Even the cessation of the rain
was of no avail.

"Vat must ve do _now_?" asked the professor in tones that suggested a
wo-begone countenance, though there was no light by which to distinguish
it.

"Grin and bear it," said Nigel, in a voice suggestive of a slight
expansion of the mouth--though no one could see it.

"Dere's nuffin' else left to do," said Moses, in a tone which betrayed
such a very wide expansion that Nigel laughed outright.

"Hah! you may laugh, my yoong frond, hot if zee tigers find us out or
zee elephants trample on us, your laughter vill be turned to veeping.
Vat is zat? Is not zat vonderful?"

The question and exclamation were prompted by the sudden appearance of
faint mysterious lights among the bushes. That the professor viewed them
as unfriendly lights was clear from the click of his rifle-locks which
followed.

"It is only phosphoric light," explained Van der Kemp. "I have often
seen it thus in electric states of the atmosphere. It will probably
increase--meanwhile we must seat ourselves on our boxes and do the best
we can till daylight. Are you there, boys?"

This question, addressed to the bearers in their native tongue, was not
answered, and it was found, on a _feeling_ examination, that, in spite
of leeches, tigers, elephants, and the whole animal creation, the
exhausted porters had flung themselves on the wet ground and gone to
sleep while their leaders were discussing the situation.

Dismal though the condition of the party was, the appearances in the
forest soon changed the professor's woe into eager delight, for the
phosphorescence became more and more pronounced, until every tree-stem
blinked with a palish green light, and it trickled like moonlight over
the ground, bringing out thick dumpy mushrooms like domes of light.
Glowing caterpillars and centipedes crawled about, leaving a trail of
light behind them, and fireflies darting to and fro peopled the air and
gave additional animation to the scene.

In the midst of the darkness, thus made singularly visible, the white
travellers sat dozing and nodding on their luggage, while the cries of
metallic-toned horned frogs and other nocturnal sounds peculiar to that
weird forest formed their appropriate lullaby.

But Moses neither dozed nor nodded. With a pertinacity peculiarly his
own he continued to play a running accompaniment to the lullaby with his
flint and steel, until his perseverance was rewarded with a spark which
caught on a dry portion of the tinder and continued to burn. By that
time the phosphoric lights had faded, and his spark was the only one
which gleamed through intense darkness.

How he cherished that spark! He wrapped it in swaddling clothes of dry
bamboo scrapings with as much care as if it had been the essence of his
life. He blew upon it tenderly as though to fan its delicate brow with
the soft zephyrs of a father's affection. Again he blew more vigorously,
and his enormous pouting lips came dimly into view. Another blow and his
flat nose and fat cheeks emerged from darkness. Still another--with
growing confidence--and his huge eyes were revealed glowing with hope.
At last the handful of combustible burst into a flame, and was thrust
into a prepared nest of twigs. This, communicating with a heap of logs,
kindled a sudden blaze which scattered darkness out of being, and
converted thirty yards of the primeval forest into a chamber of glorious
light, round which the human beings crowded with joy enhanced by the
unexpectedness of the event, and before which the wild things of the
wilderness fled away.

When daylight came at last, they found that the village for which they
had been searching was only two miles beyond the spot where they had
encamped.

Here, being thoroughly exhausted, it was resolved that they should spend
that day and night, and, we need scarcely add, they spent a considerable
portion of both in sleep--at least such parts of both as were not
devoted to food. And here the professor distinguished himself in a way
that raised him greatly in the estimation of his companions and caused
the natives of the place to regard him as something of a demi-god. Of
course we do not vouch for the truth of the details of the incident, for
no one save himself was there to see, and although we entertained the
utmost regard for himself, we were not sufficiently acquainted with his
moral character to answer for his strict truthfulness. As to the main
event, there was no denying that. The thing happened thus:--

Towards the afternoon of that same day the travellers began to wake up,
stretch themselves, and think about supper. In the course of
conversation it transpired that a tiger had been prowling about the
village for some days, and had hitherto successfully eluded all attempts
to trap or spear it. They had tethered a goat several times near a small
pond and watched the spot from safe positions among the trees, with
spears, bows and arrows, and blow-pipes ready, but when they watched,
the tiger did not come, and when they failed to watch, the tiger did
come and carried off the goat. Thus they had been baffled.

"Mine frond," said the professor to the hermit on hearing this. "I vill
shot zat tiger! I am resolved. Vill you ask zee chief to show me zee
place ant zen tell his people, on pain of def, not to go near it all
night, for if zey do I vill certainly shot zem--by accident of course!"

The hermit did as he was bid, but advised his sanguine friend against
exposing himself recklessly. The chief willingly fell in with his
wishes.

"Won't you tell us what you intend to do, professor?" asked Nigel, "and
let us help you."

"No, I vill do it all by mineself--or die! I vill vant a shofel or a
spade of some sort."

The chief provided the required implement, conducted his visitor a
little before sunset to the spot, just outside the village, and left him
there armed with his rifle, a revolver, and a long knife or kriss,
besides the spade.

When alone, the bold man put off his glasses, made a careful inspection
of the ground, came to a conclusion--founded on scientific data no
doubt--as to the probable spot whence the tiger would issue from the
jungle when about to seize the goat, and, just opposite that spot, on
the face of a slope about ten yards from the goat, he dug a hole deep
enough to contain his own person. The soil was sandy easy to dig, and
quite dry. It was growing dusk when the professor crept into this
rifle-pit, drew his weapons and the spade in after him, and closed the
mouth of the pit with moist earth, leaving only a very small eye-hole
through which he could see the goat standing innocently by the brink of
the pool.

"Now," said he, as he lay resting on his elbows with the rifle laid
ready to hand and the revolver beside it; "now, I know not vezer you can
smell or not, but I have buried mineself in eart', vich is a
non-conductor of smell. Ve shall see!"

It soon became very dark, for there was no moon, yet not so dark but
that the form of the goat could be seen distinctly reflected in the
pond. Naturally the professor's mind reverted to the occasion when Nigel
had watched in the branches of a tree for another tiger. The conditions
were different, and so, he thought, was the man!

"Mine yoong frond," he said mentally, "is brav', oondoubtedly, but his
nerves have not been braced by experience like mine. It is vell, for
zere is more dancher here zan in a tree. It matters not. I am resolf to
shot zat tigre--or die!"

In this resolute and heroic frame of mind he commenced his vigil.

It is curious to note how frequently the calculations of men fail
them--even those of scientific men! The tiger came indeed to the spot,
but he came in precisely the opposite direction from that which the
watcher expected, so that while Verkimier was staring over the goat's
head at an opening in the jungle beyond the pond, the tiger was
advancing stealthily and slowly through the bushes exactly behind the
hole in which he lay.

Suddenly the professor became aware of _something_! He saw nothing
consciously, he heard nothing, but there stole over him, somehow, the
feeling of a dread presence!

Was he asleep? Was it nightmare? No, it was night-tiger! He knew it,
somehow; he _felt_ it--but he could not see it.

To face death is easy enough--according to some people--but to face
nothing at all is at all times trying. Verkimier felt it to be so at
that moment. But he was a true hero and conquered himself.

"Come now," he said mentally, "don't be an ass! Don't lose your shance
by voomanly fears. Keep kviet."

Another moment and there was a very slight sound right over his head. He
glanced upwards--as far as the little hole would permit--and there, not
a foot from him, was a tawny yellow throat! with a tremendous paw moving
slowly forward--so slowly that it might have suggested the imperceptible
movement of the hour-hand of a watch, or of a glacier. There was indeed
motion, but it was not perceptible.

The professor's perceptions were quick. He did not require to think. He
knew that to use the rifle at such close quarters was absolutely
impossible. He knew that the slightest motion would betray him. He could
see that as yet he was undiscovered, for the animal's nose was straight
for the goat, and he concluded that either his having buried himself was
a safeguard against being smelt, or that the tiger had a cold in its
head. He thought for one moment of bursting up with a yell that would
scare the monster out of his seven senses--if he had seven--but
dismissed the thought as cowardly, for it would be sacrificing success
to safety. He knew not what to do, and the cold perspiration consequent
upon indecision at a supreme moment broke out all over him. Suddenly he
thought of the revolver!

Like lightning he seized it, pointed it straight up and fired. The
bullet--a large army revolver one--entered the throat of the animal,
pierced the root of the tongue, crashed through the palate obliquely,
and entered the brain. The tiger threw one indescribable somersault and
fell--fell so promptly that it blocked the mouth of the pit, all the
covering earth of which had been blown away by the shot, and Verkimier
could feel the hairy side of the creature, and hear the beating of its
heart as it gasped its life away. But in his cramped position he could
not push it aside. Well aware of the tenacity of life in tigers, he
thought that if the creature revived it would certainly grasp him even
in its dying agonies, for the weight of its body and its struggles were
already crushing in the upper part of the hole.

To put an end to its sufferings and his own danger, he pointed the
revolver at its side and again fired. The crash in the confined hole was
tremendous--so awful that the professor thought the weapon must have
burst. The struggles of the, tiger became more violent than ever, and
its weight more oppressive as the earth crumbled away. Again the cold
perspiration broke out all over the man, and he became unconscious.

It must not be supposed that the professor's friends were unwatchful.
Although they had promised not to disturb him in his operations, they
had held themselves in readiness with rifle, revolver, and spear, and
the instant the first shot was heard, they ran down to the scene of
action. Before reaching it the second shot quickened their pace as they
ran down to the pond--a number of natives yelling and waving torches at
their heels.

"Here he is," cried Moses, who was first on the scene, "dead as mutton!"

"What! the professor?" cried Nigel in alarm.

"No; de tiger."

"Where's Verkimier?" asked the hermit as he came up.

"I dun know, massa," said Moses, looking round him vacantly.

"Search well, men, and be quick, he may have been injured," cried Van
der Kemp, seizing a torch and setting the example.

"Let me out!" came at that moment from what appeared to be the bowels of
the earth, causing every one to stand aghast gazing in wonder around and
on each other.

"Zounds! vy don't you let me _out_?" shouted the voice again.

There was an indication of a tendency to flight on the part of the
natives, but Nigel's asking "Where _are_ you?" had the effect of
inducing them to delay for the answer.

"Here--oonder zee tigre! Kveek, I am suffocat!"

Instantly Van der Kemp seized the animal by the 'tail, and, Avith a
force worthy of Hercules, heaved it aside as if it had been a dead cat,
revealing the man of science underneath--alive and well, but
dishevelled, scratched, and soiled--also, as deaf as a door-post!




CHAPTER XXII.

A PYTHON DISCOVERED AND A GEYSER INTERVIEWED.


"It never rains but it pours" is a well-known proverb which finds,
frequent illustration in the experience of almost every one. At all
events Verkimier had reason to believe in the truth of it at that time,
for adventures came down on him, as it were, in a sort of deluge, more
or less astounding, insomuch that his enthusiastic spirit, bathing, if
we may say so, in an ocean of scientific delight, pronounced Sumatra to
be the very paradise of the student of nature.

We have not room in this volume to follow him in the details of his
wonderful experiences, but we must mention one adventure which he had on
the very day after the tiger-incident, because it very nearly had the
effect of separating him from his travelling companions.

Being deaf, as we have said--owing to the explosion of his revolver in
the hole--but not necessarily dumb, the professor, after one or two
futile attempts to hear and converse, deemed it wise to go to bed and
spend the few conscious minutes that might precede sleep in watching Van
der Kemp, who kindly undertook to skin his tiger for him. Soon the
self-satisfied man fell into a sweet infantine slumber, and dreamed of
tigers, in which state he gave vent to sundry grunts, gasps, and
half-suppressed cries, to the immense delight of Moses, who sat watching
him, indulging in a running commentary suggestive of the recent event,
and giving utterance now and then to a few imitative growls by way of
enhancing the effect of the dreams!

"Look! look! Massa Nadgel, he's twitchin' all ober. De tiger's comin' to
him now."

"Looks like it, Moses."

"Yes--an', see, he grip de 'volver--no, too soon, or de tiger's goed
away, for he's stopped twichin'--dare; de tiger comes agin!"

A gasp and clenching of the right hand seemed to warrant this
assumption. Then a yell rang through the hut; Moses displayed all, and
more than all his teeth, and the professor, springing up on one elbow,
glared fearfully.

"I'n't it awrful?" inquired Moses in a low tone.

The professor awoke mentally, recognised the situation, smiled an
imbecile smile, and sank back again on his pillow with a sigh of relief.

After that, when the skinning of the tiger was completed, the dreams
appeared to leave him, and all his comrades joined him in the land of
Nod. He was first to awake when daylight entered their hut the following
morning, and, feeling in a fresh, quiescent state of mind after the
excitement of the preceding night, he lay on his back, his eyes fixed
contentedly on the grand tiger-skin which hung on the opposite wall.

By degrees his eyes grew wearied of that object, and he allowed them to
travel languidly upwards and along the roof until they rested on the
spot directly over his head, where they became fixed, and, at the same
time, opened out to a glare, compared to which all his previous glaring
was as nothing--for there, in the thatch, looking down upon him, was the
angular head of a huge python. The snake was rolled up in a tight coil,
and had evidently spent the night within a yard of the professor's head!
Being unable to make out what sort of snake it was, and fearing that it
might be a poisonous one, he crept quietly from his couch, keeping his
eyes fixed on the reptile as he did so. One result of this mode of
action was that he did not see where he was going, and inadvertently
thrust one finger into Moses' right eye, and another into his open
mouth. The negro naturally shut his mouth with a snap, while the
professor opened his with a roar, and in another moment every man was
on his feet blinking inquiringly.

"Look! zee snake!" cried the professor, when Moses released him.

"We must get him out of that," remarked Van der Kemp, as he quietly made
a noose with a piece of rattan, and fastened it to the end of a long
pole. With the latter he poked the creature up, and, when it had
uncoiled sufficiently, he slipped the noose deftly over its head.

"Clear out, friends," he said, looking round.

All obeyed with uncommon promptitude except the professor, who valiantly
stood his ground. Van der Kemp pulled the python violently down to the
floor, where it commenced a tremendous scuffle among the chairs and
posts. The hermit kept its head off with the pole, and sought to catch
its tail, but failed twice. Seeing this the professor caught the tail as
it whipped against his legs, and springing down the steps so violently
that he snapped the cord by which the hermit held it, and drew the
creature straight out--a thick monster full twelve feet long, and
capable of swallowing a dog or a child.

"Out of zee way!" shouted the professor, making a wild effort to swing
the python against a tree, but the tail slipped from his grasp, the
professor fell, and the snake went crashing against a log, under which
it took refuge.

Nigel, who was nearest to it, sprang forward, fortunately caught its
tail, and, swinging it and himself round with such force that it could
not coil up at all, dashed it against a tree. Before it could recover
from the shock, Moses had caught up a hatchet and cut its head off with
one blow. The tail wriggled for a few seconds, and the head gaped once
or twice, as if in mild surprise at so sudden a finale.

"Zat is strainch--very strainch," slowly remarked the professor, as,
still seated on the ground, he solemnly noted these facts.

"Not so _very_ strange, after all," said Van der Kemp; "I've seen the
head of many a bigger snake cut off at one blow."

"Mine frond, you mistake me. It is zee vorking of physical law in zee
spiritual vorld zat perplexes me. Moses has cut zee brute in
two--physical fact, substance can be divided. Zee two parts are still
alife, zerfore, zee life--zee spirit--has also been divided!"

"It is indeed very strange," said Nigel, with a laugh. "Stranger still
that you may cut a worm into several parts, and the life remains in
each, but, strangest of all, that you should sit on the ground,
professor, instead of rising up, while you philosophise. You are not
hurt, I hope--are you?"

"I razer zink I am," returned the philosopher with a faint smile; "mine
onkle, I zink, is spraint."

This was indeed true, and it seemed as if the poor man's wanderings
were to be, for a time at least, brought to an abrupt close. Fortunately
it was found that a pony could be procured at that village, and, as they
had entered the borders of the mountainous regions, and the roads were
more open and passable than heretofore, it was resolved that the
professor should ride until his ankle recovered.

We must now pass over a considerable portion of time and space, and
convey the reader, by a forced march, to the crater of an active
volcano. By that time Verkimier's ankle had recovered and the pony had
been dismissed. The heavy luggage, with the porters, had been left in
the low grounds, for the mountain they had scaled was over 10,000 feet
above the sea-level. Only one native from the plain below accompanied
them as guide, and three of their porters whose inquiring minds tempted
them to make the ascent.

At about 10,000 feet the party reached what the natives called the dempo
or edge of the volcano, whence they looked down into the sawah or
ancient crater, which was a level space composed of brown soil
surrounded by cliffs, and lying like the bottom of a cup 200 feet below
them. It had a sulphurous odour, and was dotted here and there with
clumps of heath and rhododendrons. In the centre of this was a cone
which formed the true--or modern--crater. On scrambling up to the lip
of the cone and looking down some 300 feet of precipitous rock they
beheld what seemed to be a pure white lake set in a central basin of 200
feet in diameter. The surface of this lakelet smoked, and although it
reflected every passing cloud as if it were a mirror, it was in reality
a basin of hot mud, the surface of which was about thirty feet below its
rim.

"You will soon see a change come over it," said the hermit, as the party
gazed in silent admiration at the weird scene.

He had scarcely spoken, when the middle of the lake became intensely
black and scored with dark streaks. This, though not quite obvious at
first from the point where they stood, was caused by the slow formation
of a great chasm in the centre of the seething lake of mud. The lake was
sinking into its own throat. The blackness increased. Then a dull sullen
roar was heard, and next moment the entire lake upheaved, not violently,
but in a slow, majestic manner some hundreds of feet into the air,
whence it fell back into its basin with an awful roar which reverberated
and echoed from the rocky walls of the caldron like the singing of an
angry sea. An immense volume of steam--the motive power which had blown
up the lake--was at the same time liberated and dissipated in the air.

The wave-circles died away on the margin of the lake, and the placid,
cloud-reflecting surface was restored until the geyser had gathered
fresh force for another upheaval.

"Amazing!" exclaimed Nigel, who had gazed with feelings of awe at this
curious exhibition of the tremendous internal forces with which the
Creator has endowed the earth.

"Vonderful!" exclaimed the professor, whose astonishment was such, that
his eyebrows rose high above the rim of his huge blue binoculars.

Moses, to whom such an exhibition of the powers of nature was familiar,
was, we are sorry to say, not much impressed, if impressed at all!
Indeed he scarcely noticed it, but watched, with intense teeth-and-gum
disclosing satisfaction, the faces of two of the native porters who had
never seen anything of the kind before, and whose terrified expressions
suggested the probability of a precipitate flight when their trembling
limbs became fit to resume duty.

"Will it come again soon?" asked Nigel, turning to Van der Kemp.

"Every fifteen or twenty minutes it goes through that process all day
and every day," replied the hermit.

"But, if I may joodge from zee stones ant scoriae around," said the
professor, "zee volcano is not alvays so peaceful as it is joost now."

"You are right. About once in every three years, and sometimes oftener,
the crops of coffee, bananas, rice, etc., in this region are quite
destroyed by sulphur-rain, which covers everything for miles around the
crater."

"Hah! it vould be too hote a place zis for us, if zat vas to happin
joost now," remarked Verkimier with a smile.

"It cannot be far off the time now, I should think," said Yan der Kemp.

All this talk Moses translated, and embellished, to the native porters
with the solemn sincerity of a true and thorough-paced hypocrite. He had
scarcely finished, and was watching with immense delight the changeful
aspect of their whitey-green faces, when another volcanic fit came on,
and the deep-toned roar of the coming explosion was heard. It was so
awesome that the countenance even of Van der Kemp became graver than
usual. As for the two native porters, they gazed and trembled. Nigel and
the professor also gazed with lively expectation. Moses--we grieve to
record it--hugged himself internally, and gloated over the two porters.

Another moment and there came a mighty roar. Up went the mud-lake
hundreds of feet into the air; out came the steam with the sound of a
thousand trombones, and away went the two porters, head ever heels, down
the outer slope of the cone and across the sawah as if the spirit of
evil were after them.

There was no cause, however, for alarm. The mud-lake, falling back into
its native cup, resumed its placid aspect and awaited its next upheaval
