his conduct. These particulars I have mentioned, that if these papers
fall into friendly hands, the boy may be sought after and submitted to
examination.

His eloquence being unable to persuade me that I should take any
pleasure in seeing the fruitless struggles of the fish when left in the
nets and deserted by the tide, he artfully suggested, that Mr. and Miss
Geddes, a respectable Quaker family well known in the neighbourhood
and with whom I had contracted habits of intimacy, would possibly be
offended if I did not make them an early visit. Both, he said, had been
particularly inquiring the reasons of my leaving their house rather
suddenly on the previous day. I resolved, therefore, to walk up to Mount
Sharon and make my apologies; and I agreed to permit the boy to attend
upon me, and wait my return from the house, that I might fish on my way
homeward to Shepherd's Bush, for which amusement, he assured me, I would
find the evening most favourable. I mention this minute circumstance,
because I strongly suspect that this boy had a presentiment how the
evening was to terminate with me, and entertained the selfish though
childish wish of securing to himself an angling-rod which he had often
admired, as a part of my spoils. I may do the boy wrong, but I had
before remarked in him the peculiar art of pursuing the trifling objects
of cupidity proper to his age, with the systematic address of much riper
years.

When we had commenced our walk, I upbraided him with the coolness of
the evening, considering the season, the easterly wind, and other
circumstances, unfavourable for angling. He persisted in his own story,
and made a few casts, as if to convince me of my error, but caught
no fish; and, indeed, as I am now convinced, was much more intent on
watching my motions than on taking any. When I ridiculed him once more
on his fruitless endeavours, he answered with a sneering smile, that
'the trouts would not rise, because there was thunder in the air;' an
intimation which, in one sense, I have found too true.

I arrived at Mount Sharon; was received by my friends there with their
wonted kindness; and after being a little rallied on my having suddenly
left them on the preceding evening, I agreed to make atonement
by staying all night, and dismissed the lad who attended with my
fishing-rod, to carry that information to Shepherd's Bush. It may be
doubted whether he went thither, or in a different direction.

Betwixt eight and nine o'clock, when it began to become dark, we walked
on the terrace to enjoy the appearance of the firmament, glittering with
ten million stars; to which a slight touch of early frost gave tenfold
lustre. As we gazed on this splendid scene, Miss Geddes, I think, was
the first to point out to our admiration a shooting or falling star,
which, she said, drew a long train after it. Looking to the part of
the heavens which she pointed out, I distinctly observed two successive
sky-rockets arise and burst in the sky.

'These meteors,' said Mr. Geddes, in answer to his sister's observation,
'are not formed in heaven, nor do they bode any good to the dwellers
upon earth.'

As he spoke, I looked to another quarter of the sky, and a rocket, as if
a signal in answer to those which had already appeared, rose high from
the earth, and burst apparently among the stars.

Mr. Geddes seemed very thoughtful for some minutes, and then said to
his sister, 'Rachel, though it waxes late. I must go down to the fishing
station, and pass the night in the overseer's room there.'

'Nay, then,' replied the lady, 'I am but too well assured that the sons
of Belial are menacing these nets and devices. Joshua, art thou a man of
peace, and wilt thou willingly and wittingly thrust thyself where thou
mayst be tempted by the old man Adam within thee, to enter into debate
and strife?'

'I am a man of peace, Rachel,' answered Mr. Geddes, 'even to the utmost
extent which our friends can demand of humanity; and neither have I ever
used, nor, with the help of God, will I at any future time employ, the
arm of flesh to repel or to revenge injuries. But if I can, by mild
reasons and firm conduct, save those rude men from committing a crime,
and the property belonging to myself and others from sustaining damage,
surely I do but the duty of a man and a Christian.'

With these words, he ordered his horse instantly; and his sister,
ceasing to argue with him, folded her arms upon her bosom, and looked up
to heaven with a resigned and yet sorrowful countenance.

These particulars may appear trivial; but it is better, in my present
condition, to exert my faculties in recollecting the past, and in
recording it, than waste them in vain and anxious anticipations of the
future.

It would have been scarcely proper in me to remain in the house from
which the master was thus suddenly summoned away; and I therefore begged
permission to attend him to the fishing station, assuring his sister
that I would be a guarantee for his safety.

That proposal seemed to give much pleasure to Miss Geddes. 'Let it be
so, brother,' she said; 'and let the young man have the desire of his
heart, that there may be a faithful witness to stand by thee in the hour
of need, and to report how it shall fare with thee.

'Nay, Rachel,' said the worthy man, 'thou art to blame in this, that
to quiet thy apprehensions on my account, thou shouldst thrust into
danger--if danger it shall prove to be--this youth, our guest; for
whom, doubtless, in case of mishap, as many hearts will ache as may be
afflicted on our account.'

'No, my good friend,' said I, taking Mr. Geddes's hand, 'I am not so
happy as you suppose me. Were my span to be concluded this evening, few
would so much as know that such a being had existed for twenty years on
the face of the earth; and of these few, only one would sincerely regret
me. Do not, therefore, refuse me the privilege attending you; and of
showing, by so trifling an act of kindness, that if I have few friends,
I am at least desirous to serve them.'

'Thou hast a kind heart, I warrant thee,' said Joshua Geddes, returning
the pressure of my hand. 'Rachel, the young man shall go with me. Why
should he not face danger, in order to do justice and preserve peace?
There is that within me,' he added, looking upwards, and with a passing
enthusiasm which I had not before observed and the absence of
which perhaps rather belonged to the sect than to his own personal
character--'I say, I have that within which assures me, that though the
ungodly may rage even like the storm of the ocean, they shall not have
freedom to prevail against us.'

Having spoken thus, Mr. Geddes appointed a pony to be saddled for my
use; and having taken a basket with some provisions, and a servant
to carry back the horses for which there was no accommodation at the
fishing station, we set off about nine o'clock at night, and after
three-quarters of an hour's riding, arrived at our place of destination.

The station consists, or then consisted, of huts for four or five
fishermen, a cooperage and shed, and a better sort of cottage at which
the superintendent resided. We gave our horses to the servant, to be
carried back to Mount Sharon; my companion expressing himself humanely
anxious for their safety--and knocked at the door of the house. At
first we only heard a barking of dogs; but these animals became quiet on
snuffing beneath the door, and acknowledging the presence of friends. A
hoarse voice then demanded, in rather unfriendly accents, who we were,
and what we wanted and it was not; until Joshua named himself, and
called upon his superintendent to open, that the latter appeared at the
door of the hut, attended by three large dogs of the Newfoundland breed.
He had a flambeau in his hand, and two large heavy ship-pistols stuck
into his belt. He was a stout elderly man, who had been a sailor, as I
learned, during the earlier part of his life, and was now much confided
in by the Fishing Company, whose concerns he directed under the orders
of Mr. Geddes.

'Thou didst not expect me to-night, friend Davies?' said my friend to
the old man, who was arranging seats for us by the fire.

'No, Master Geddes,' answered he, 'I did not expect you, nor, to speak
the truth, did I wish for you either.'

'These are plain terms: John Davies,' answered Mr. Geddes.

'Aye, aye, sir, I know your worship loves no holiday speeches.'

'Thou dost guess, I suppose, what brings us here so late, John Davies?'
said Mr. Geddes.

'I do suppose, sir,' answered the superintendent, 'that it was because
those d--d smuggling wreckers on the coast are showing their lights to
gather their forces, as they did the night before they broke down the
dam-dyke and weirs up the country; but if that same be the case, I wish
once more you had stayed away, for your worship carries no fighting
tackle aboard, I think; and there will be work for such ere morning,
your worship.'

'Worship is due to Heaven only, John Davies,' said Geddes, 'I have often
desired thee to desist from using that phrase to me.'

'I won't, then,' said John; 'no offence meant: But how the devil can a
man stand picking his words, when he is just going to come to blows?'

'I hope not, John Davies,' said Joshua Geddes. 'Call in the rest of the
men, that I may give them their instructions.'

'I may cry till doomsday Master Geddes, ere a soul answers--the cowardly
lubbers have all made sail--the cooper, and all the rest of them, so
soon as they heard the enemy were at sea. They have all taken to the
long-boat, and left the ship among the breakers, except little Phil and
myself--they have, by--!'

'Swear not at all, John Davies--thou art an honest man; and I believe,
without an oath, that thy comrades love their own bones better than
my goods and chattels. And so thou hast no assistance but little Phil
against a hundred men or two?'

'Why, there are the dogs, your honour knows, Neptune and Thetis--and
the puppy may do something; and then though your worship--I beg
pardon--though your honour be no great fighter, this young gentleman may
bear a hand.'

'Aye, and I see you are provided with arms,' said Mr. Geddes; 'let me
see them.'

'Aye, aye, sir; here be a pair of buffers will bite as well as
bark--these will make sure of two rogues at least. It would be a shame
to strike without firing a shot. Take care, your honour, they are
double-shotted.'

'Aye, John Davies, I will take care of them, throwing the pistols into a
tub of water beside him; 'and I wish I could render the whole generation
of them useless at the same moment.'

A deep shade of displeasure passed over John Davies's weatherbeaten
countenance. 'Belike your honour is going to take the command yourself,
then?' he said, after a pause. 'Why, I can be of little use now; and
since your worship, or your honour, or whatever you are, means to strike
quietly, I believe you will do it better without me than with me, for I
am like enough to make mischief, I admit; but I'll never leave my post
without orders.'

'Then you have mine, John Davies, to go to Mount Sharon directly, and
take the boy Phil with you. Where is he?'

'He is on the outlook for these scums of the earth,' answered Davies;
'but it is to no purpose to know when they come, if we are not to stand
to our weapons.'

'We will use none but those of sense and reason, John.'

'And you may just as well cast chaff against the wind, as speak sense
and reason to the like of them.'

'Well, well, be it so,' said Joshua; 'and now, John Davies, I know thou
art what the world calls a brave fellow, and I have ever found thee an
honest one. And now I command you to go to Mount Sharon, and let Phil
lie on the bank-side--see the poor boy hath a sea-cloak, though--and
watch what happens there, and let him bring you the news; and if
any violence shall be offered to the property there, I trust to your
fidelity to carry my sister to Dumfries to the house of our friends
the Corsacks, and inform the civil authorities of what mischief hath
befallen.'

The old seaman paused a moment. 'It is hard lines for me,' he said, 'to
leave your honour in tribulation; and yet, staying here, I am only like
to make bad worse; and your honour's sister, Miss Rachel, must be looked
to, that's certain; for if the rogues once get their hand to mischief,
they will come to Mount Sharon after they have wasted and destroyed this
here snug little roadstead, where I thought to ride at anchor for life.'

'Right, right, John Davies,' said Joshua Geddes; 'and best call the dogs
with you.'

'Aye, aye, sir,' said the veteran, 'for they are something of my mind,
and would not keep quiet if they saw mischief doing; so maybe they might
come to mischief, poor dumb creatures. So God bless your honour--I
mean your worship--I cannot bring my mouth to say fare you well. Here,
Neptune, Thetis! come, dogs, come.'

So saying, and with a very crestfallen countenance, John Davies left the
hut.

'Now there goes one of the best and most faithful creatures that ever
was born,' said Mr. Geddes, as the superintendent shut the door of the
cottage. 'Nature made him with a heart that would not have suffered him
to harm a fly; but thou seest, friend Latimer, that as men arm their
bull-dogs with spiked collars, and their game-cocks with steel spurs, to
aid them in fight, so they corrupt, by education, the best and mildest
natures, until fortitude and spirit become stubbornness and ferocity.
Believe me, friend Latimer, I would as soon expose my faithful household
dog to a vain combat with a herd of wolves, as yon trusty creature to
the violence of the enraged multitude. But I need say little on this
subject to thee, friend Latimer, who, I doubt not, art trained to
believe that courage is displayed and honour attained, not by doing
and suffering as becomes a man that which fate calls us to suffer and
justice commands us to do, but because thou art ready to retort violence
for violence, and considerest the lightest insult as a sufficient cause
for the spilling of blood, nay, the taking of life. But, leaving these
points of controversy to a more fit season, let us see what our basket
of provision contains; for in truth, friend Latimer, I am one of those
whom neither fear nor anxiety deprives of their ordinary appetite.'

We found the means of good cheer accordingly, which Mr. Geddes seemed to
enjoy as much as if it had been eaten in a situation of perfect safety;
nay, his conversation appeared to be rather more gay than on ordinary
occasions. After eating our supper, we left the hut together, and walked
for a few minutes on the banks of the sea. It was high water, and the
ebb had not yet commenced. The moon shone broad and bright upon the
placid face of the Solway Firth, and showed a slight ripple upon the
stakes, the tops of which were just visible above the waves, and on
the dark-coloured buoys which marked the upper edge of the enclosure of
nets. At a much greater distance--for the estuary is here very wide--the
line of the English coast was seen on the verge of the water, resembling
one of those fog-banks on which mariners are said to gaze, uncertain
whether it be land or atmospherical delusion.

'We shall be undisturbed for some hours,' said Mr. Geddes; 'they will
not come down upon us: till the state of the tide permits them to
destroy the tide-nets. Is it not strange to think that human passions
will so soon transform such a tranquil scene as this into one of
devastation and confusion?'

It was indeed a scene of exquisite stillness; so much so, that the
restless waves of the Solway seemed, if not absolutely to sleep, at
least to slumber; on the shore no night-bird was heard--the cock had not
sung his first matins, and we ourselves walked more lightly than by day,
as if to suit the sounds of our own paces to the serene tranquillity
around us. At length, the plaintive cry of a dog broke the silence, and
on our return to the cottage, we found that the younger of the three
animals which had gone along with John Davies, unaccustomed, perhaps,
to distant journeys, and the duty of following to heel, had strayed from
the party, and, unable to rejoin them, had wandered back to the place of
its birth.

'Another feeble addition to our feeble garrison,' said Mr. Geddes, as he
caressed the dog, and admitted it into the cottage. 'Poor thing! as thou
art incapable of doing any mischief, I hope thou wilt sustain none. At
least thou mayst do us the good service of a sentinel, and permit us to
enjoy a quiet repose, under the certainty that thou wilt alarm us when
the enemy is at hand.'

There were two beds in the superintendent's room, upon which we threw
ourselves. Mr. Geddes, with his happy equanimity of temper, was asleep
in the first five minutes. I lay for some time in doubtful and anxious
thoughts, watching the fire, and the motions of the restless dog, which,
disturbed probably at the absence of John Davies, wandered from the
hearth to the door and back again, then came to the bedside and licked
my hands and face, and at length, experiencing no repulse to its
advances, established itself at my feet, and went to sleep, an example
which I soon afterwards followed.

The rage of narration, my dear Alan--for I will never relinquish the
hope that what I am writing may one day reach your hands--has
not forsaken me, even in my confinement, and the extensive though
unimportant details into which I have been hurried, renders it necessary
that I commence another sheet. Fortunately, my pygmy characters
comprehend a great many words within a small space of paper.




CHAPTER IV

DARSIE LATIMER'S JOURNAL, IN CONTINUATION

The morning was dawning, and Mr. Geddes and I myself were still sleeping
soundly, when the alarm was given by my canine bedfellow, who first
growled deeply at intervals, and at length bore more decided testimony
to the approach of some enemy. I opened the door of the cottage, and
perceived, at the distance of about two hundred yards, a small but close
column of men, which I would have taken for a dark hedge, but that I
could perceive it was advancing rapidly and in silence.

The dog flew towards them, but instantly ran howling back to me, having
probably been chastised by a stick or a stone. Uncertain as to the plan
of tactics or of treaty which Mr. Geddes might think proper to adopt, I
was about to retire into the cottage, when he suddenly joined me at the
door, and, slipping his arm through mine, said, 'Let us go to meet them
manfully; we have done nothing to be ashamed of.--Friends,' he said,
raising his voice as we approached them, 'who and what are you, and with
what purpose are you here on my property?'

A loud cheer was the answer returned, and a brace of fiddlers who
occupied the front of the march immediately struck up the insulting air,
the words of which begin--

  Merrily danced the Quaker's wife,
  And merrily danced the Quaker.

Even at that moment of alarm, I think I recognized the tones of the
blind fiddler, Will, known by the name of Wandering Willie, from his
itinerant habits. They continued to advance swiftly and in great order,
in their front

  The fiery fiddlers playing martial airs;

when, coming close up, they surrounded us by a single movement, and
there was a universal cry, 'Whoop, Quaker--whoop, Quaker! Here have we
them both, the wet Quaker and the dry one.'

'Hang up the wet Quaker to dry, and wet the dry one with a ducking,'
answered another voice.

'Where is the sea-otter, John Davies, that destroyed more fish than any
sealch upon Ailsa Craig?' exclaimed a third voice. 'I have an old crow
to pluck with him, and a pock to put the feathers in.'

We stood perfectly passive; for, to have attempted resistance against
more than a hundred men, armed with guns, fish-spears, iron-crows,
spades, and bludgeons, would have been an act of utter insanity. Mr.
Geddes, with his strong sonorous voice, answered the question about the
superintendent in a manner the manly indifference of which compelled
them to attend to him.

'John Davies,' he said, 'will, I trust, soon be at Dumfries'--

'To fetch down redcoats and dragoons against us, you canting old
villain!'

A blow was, at the same time, levelled at my friend, which I parried by
interposing the stick I had in my hand. I was instantly struck down, and
have a faint recollection of hearing some crying, 'Kill the young spy!'
and others, as I thought, interposing on my behalf. But a second blow
on the head, received in the scuffle, soon deprived me of sense and
consciousness, and threw me into it state of insensibility, from which
I did not recover immediately. When I did come to myself, I was lying
on the bed from which I had just risen before the fray, and my poor
companion, the Newfoundland puppy, its courage entirely cowed by the
tumult of the riot, had crept as close to me as it could, and lay
trembling and whining, as if under the most dreadful terror. I doubted
at first whether I had not dreamed of the tumult, until, as I attempted
to rise, a feeling of pain and dizziness assured me that the injury
I had sustained was but too real. I gathered together my senses
listened--and heard at a distance the shouts of the rioters, busy,
doubtless, in their work of devastation. I made a second effort to rise,
or at least to turn myself, for I lay with my face to the wall of
the cottage, but I found that my limbs were secured, and my motions
effectually prevented--not indeed by cords, but by linen or cloth
bandages swathed around my ankles, and securing my arms to my sides.
Aware of my utterly captive condition, I groaned betwixt bodily pain and
mental distress,

A voice by my bedside whispered, in a whining tone, 'Whisht a-ye,
hinnie--Whisht a-ye; haud your tongue, like a gude bairn--ye have cost
us dear aneugh already. My hinnie's clean gane now.'

Knowing, as I thought, the phraseology of the wife of the itinerant
musician, I asked her where her husband was, and whether he had been
hurt.

'Broken,' answered the dame, 'all broken to pieces; fit for naught but
to be made spunks of--the best blood that was in Scotland.'

'Broken?--blood?--is your husband wounded; has there been bloodshed
broken limbs?'

'Broken limbs I wish,' answered the beldam, 'that my hinnie had broken
the best bane in his body, before he had broken his fiddle, that was the
best blood in Scotland--it was a Cremony, for aught that I ken.'

'Pshaw--only his fiddle?' said I.

'I dinna ken what waur your honour could have wished him to do, unless
he had broken his neck; and this is muckle the same to my hinnie Willie
and me. Chaw, indeed! It is easy to say chaw, but wha is to gie us ony
thing to chaw?--the bread-winner's gane, and we may e'en sit down and
starve.'

'No, no,' I said, 'I will pay you for twenty such fiddles.'

'Twenty such! is that a' ye ken about it? the country hadna the like
o't. But if your honour were to pay us, as nae doubt wad be to your
credit here and hereafter, where are ye to get the siller?'

'I have enough of money,' said I, attempting to reach my hand towards my
side-pocket; 'unloose these bandages, and I will pay you on the spot.'

This hint appeared to move her, and she was approaching the bedside, as
I hoped, to liberate me from my bonds, when a nearer and more desperate
shout was heard, as if the rioters were close by the hut.

'I daurna I daurna,' said the poor woman, 'they would murder me and my
hinnie Willie baith, and they have misguided us aneugh already;--but if
there is anything worldly I could do for your honour, leave out loosing
ye?'

What she said recalled me to my bodily suffering. Agitation, and the
effects of the usage I had received, had produced a burning thirst. I
asked for a drink of water.

'Heaven Almighty forbid that Epps Ainslie should gie ony sick gentleman
cauld well-water, and him in a fever. Na, na, hinnie, let me alane, I'll
do better for ye than the like of that.'

'Give me what you will,' I replied; 'let it but be liquid and cool.'

The woman gave me a large horn accordingly, filled with spirits and
water, which, without minute inquiry concerning the nature of its
contents, I drained at a draught. Either the spirits taken in such a
manner acted more suddenly than usual on my brain, or else there was
some drug mixed with the beverage. I remember little after drinking it
off, only that the appearance of things around me became indistinct;
that the woman's form seemed to multiply itself, and to flit in various
figures around me, bearing the same lineaments as she herself did. I
remember also that the discordant noises and cries of those without the
cottage seemed to die away in a hum like that with which a nurse hushes
her babe. At length I fell into a deep sound sleep, or rather, a state
of absolute insensibility.

I have reason to think this species of trance lasted for many hours;
indeed, for the whole subsequent day and part of the night. It was not
uniformly so profound, for my recollection of it is chequered with many
dreams, all of a painful nature, but too faint and too indistinct to be
remembered. At length the moment of waking came, and my sensations were
horrible.

A deep sound, which, in the confusion of my senses, I identified with
the cries of the rioters, was the first thing of which I was sensible;
next, I became conscious that I was carried violently forward in some
conveyance, with an unequal motion, which gave me much pain. My position
was horizontal, and when I attempted to stretch my hands in order to
find some mode of securing myself against this species of suffering, I
found I was bound as before, and the horrible reality rushed on my
mind that I was in the hands of those who had lately committed a great
outrage on property, and were now about to kidnap, if not to murder me.
I opened my eyes, it was to no purpose--all around me was dark, for
a day had passed over during my captivity. A dispiriting sickness
oppressed my head--my heart seemed on fire, while my feet and hands were
chilled and benumbed with want of circulation. It was with the utmost
difficulty that I at length, and gradually, recovered in a sufficient
degree the power of observing external sounds and circumstances; and
when I did so, they presented nothing consolatory.

Groping with my hands, as far as the bandages would permit, and
receiving the assistance of some occasional glances of the moonlight, I
became aware that the carriage in which I was transported was one of the
light carts of the country, called TUMBLERS, and that a little attention
had been paid to my accommodation, as I was laid upon some sacks covered
with matting, and filled with straw. Without these, my condition would
have been still more intolerable, for the vehicle, sinking now on one
side, and now on the other, sometimes sticking absolutely fast and
requiring the utmost exertions of the animal which drew it to put it
once more in motion, was subjected to jolts in all directions, which
were very severe. At other times it rolled silently and smoothly over
what seemed to be wet sand; and, as I heard the distant roar of the
tide, I had little doubt that we were engaged in passing the formidable
estuary which divides the two kingdoms.

There seemed to be at least five or six people about the cart, some on
foot, others on horseback; the former lent assistance whenever it was in
danger of upsetting, or sticking fast in the quicksand; the others rode
before and acted as guides, often changing the direction of the vehicle
as the precarious state of the passage required.

I addressed myself to the men around the cart, and endeavoured to move
their compassion. I had harmed, I said, no one, and for no action in my
life had deserved such cruel treatment, I had no concern whatever in
the fishing station which had incurred their displeasure, and my
acquaintance with Mr. Geddes was of a very late date. Lastly, and as my
strongest argument, I endeavoured to excite their fears, by informing
them that my rank in life would not permit me to be either murdered or
secreted with impunity; and to interest their avarice, by the promises
I made them of reward, if they would effect my deliverance. I only
received a scornful laugh in reply to my threats; my promises might have
done more, for the fellows were whispering together as if in hesitation,
and I began to reiterate and increase my offers, when the voice of one
of the horsemen, who had suddenly come up, enjoined silence to the
men on foot, and, approaching the side of the cart, said to me, with
a strong and determined voice, 'Young man, there is no personal harm
designed to you. If you remain silent and quiet, you may reckon on
good treatment; but if you endeavour to tamper with these men in the
execution of their duty, I will take such measures for silencing you, as
you shall remember the longest day you have to live.'

I thought I knew the voice which uttered these threats; but, in such
a situation, my perceptions could not be supposed to be perfectly
accurate. I was contented to reply, 'Whoever you are that speak to me, I
entreat the benefit of the meanest prisoner, who is not to be subjected,
legally to greater hardship than is necessary for the restraint of his
person. I entreat that these bonds, which hurt me so cruelly, may be
slackened at least, if not removed altogether.'

'I will slacken the belts,' said the former speaker; 'nay, I will
altogether remove them, and allow you to pursue your journey in a more
convenient manner, provided you will give me your word of honour that
you will not attempt an escape?'

'NEVER!' I answered, with an energy of which despair alone could have
rendered me capable--'I will never submit to loss of freedom a moment
longer than I am subjected to it by force.'

'Enough,' he replied; 'the sentiment is natural; but do not on your side
complain that I, who am carrying on an important undertaking, use the
only means in my power for ensuring its success.'

I entreated to know what it was designed to do with me; but my
conductor, in a voice of menacing authority, desired me to be silent on
my peril; and my strength and spirits were too much exhausted to permit
my continuing a dialogue so singular, even if I could have promised
myself any good result by doing so.

It is proper here to add, that, from my recollections at the time, and
from what has since taken place, I have the strongest possible belief
that the man with whom I held this expostulation was the singular person
residing at Brokenburn, in Dumfriesshire, and called by the fishers of
that hamlet, the Laird of the Solway Lochs. The cause for his inveterate
persecution I cannot pretend even to guess at.

In the meantime, the cart was dragged heavily and wearily on, until the
nearer roar of the advancing tide excited the apprehension of another
danger. I could not mistake the sound, which I had heard upon another
occasion, when it was only the speed of a fleet horse which saved me
from perishing in the quicksands. Thou, my dear Alan, canst not but
remember the former circumstances; and now, wonderful contrast! the very
man, to the best of my belief, who then saved me from peril, was
the leader of the lawless band who had deprived me of my liberty. I
conjectured that the danger grew imminent; for I heard some words and
circumstances which made me aware that a rider hastily fastened his own
horse to the shafts of the cart in order to assist the exhausted animal
which drew it, and the vehicle was now pulled forward at a faster pace,
which the horses were urged to maintain by blows and curses. The
men, however, were inhabitants of the neighbourhood; and I had strong
personal reason to believe that one of them, at least, was intimately
acquainted with all the depths and shallows of the perilous paths in
which we were engaged. But they were in imminent danger themselves; and
if so, as from the whispering and exertions to push on with the cart
was much to be apprehended, there was little doubt that I should be left
behind as a useless encumbrance, and that, while I was in a condition
which rendered every chance of escape impracticable. These were awful
apprehensions; but it pleased Providence to increase them to a point
which my brain was scarcely able to endure.

As we approached very near to a black line, which, dimly visible as it
was, I could make out to be the shore, we heard two or three sounds,
which appeared to be the report of fire-arms. Immediately all was bustle
among our party to get forward. Presently a fellow galloped up to us,
crying out, 'Ware hawk! ware hawk! the land-sharks are out from Burgh,
and Allonby Tom will lose his cargo if you do not bear a hand.'

Most of my company seemed to make hastily for the shore on receiving
this intelligence. A driver was left with the cart; but at length, when,
after repeated and hairbreadth escapes, it actually stuck fast in a
slough or quicksand, the fellow, with an oath, cut the harness, and, as
I presume, departed with the horses, whose feet I heard splashing over
the wet sand and through the shallows, as he galloped off.

The dropping sound of fire-arms was still continued, but lost almost
entirely in the thunder of the advancing surge. By a desperate effort I
raised myself in the cart, and attained a sitting posture, which served
only to show me the extent of my danger. There lay my native land--my
own England--the land where I was born, and to which my wishes, since
my earliest age, had turned with all the prejudices of national
feeling--there it lay, within a furlong of the place where I yet was;
that furlong, which an infant would have raced over in a minute, was yet
a barrier effectual to divide me for ever from England and from life. I
soon not only heard the roar of this dreadful torrent, but saw, by
the fitful moonlight, the foamy crests of the devouring waves, as they
advanced with the speed and fury of a pack of hungry wolves.

The consciousness that the slightest ray of hope, or power of
struggling, was not left me, quite overcame the constancy which I had
hitherto maintained. My eyes began to swim--my head grew giddy and mad
with fear--I chattered and howled to the howling and roaring sea. One
or two great waves already reached the cart, when the conductor of the
party whom I have mentioned so often, was, as if by magic, at my side.
He sprang from his horse into the vehicle, cut the ligatures which
restrained me, and bade me get up and mount in the fiend's name.

Seeing I was incapable of obeying, he seized me as if I had been a
child of six months old, threw me across the horse, sprang on behind,
supporting with one hand, while he directed the animal with the other.
In my helpless and painful posture, I was unconscious of the degree
of danger which we incurred; but I believe at one time the horse was
swimming, or nearly so; and that it was with difficulty that my stern
and powerful assistant kept my head above water. I remember particularly
the shock which I felt when the animal, endeavouring to gain the bank,
reared, and very nearly fell back on his burden. The time during which
I continued in this dreadful condition did not probably exceed two or
three minutes, yet so strongly were they marked with horror and agony,
that they seem to my recollection a much more considerable space of
time.

When I had been thus snatched from destruction, I had only power to say
to my protector,--or oppressor,--for he merited either name at my hand,
'You do not, then, design to murder me?'

He laughed as he replied, but it was a sort of laughter which I scarce
desire to hear again,--'Else you think I had let the waves do the work?
But remember, the shepherd saves his sheep from the torrent--is it to
preserve its life?--Be silent, however, with questions or entreaties.
What I mean to do, thou canst no more discover or prevent, than a man,
with his bare palm, can scoop dry the Solway.'
