
There are several references to _Rahab_, as "the dragon which is in the
sea," all clearly referring to the kingdom of Egypt, personified as one
of her own crocodiles lying-in-wait in her own river, the Nile, or
transferred, by a figure of speech, to the Red Sea, which formed her
eastern border. Thus in chapter li. Isaiah apostrophizes "the arm of the
Lord."

     "Art Thou not It that cut Rahab in pieces,
        That pierced the dragon?
      Art Thou not It that dried up the sea,
        The waters of the great deep;
      That made the depths of the sea a way for the redeemed to pass
          over?"

And in Psalm lxxxix. we have--

     "Thou rulest the raging of the sea;
        When the waves thereof arise Thou stillest them.
      Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces as one that is slain,
        Thou hast scattered Thine enemies with Thy strong arm."

So the prophet Ezekiel is directed--

     "Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh, king of Egypt,
     and say unto him, thou wast likened unto a young lion of the
     nations: yet art thou as a dragon in the seas."

In all these passages it is only in an indirect and secondary sense that
we can see any constellational references in the various descriptions of
"the dragon that is in the sea." It is the crocodile of Egypt that is
intended; Egypt the great oppressor of Israel, and one of the great
powers of evil, standing as a representative of them all. The serpent or
dragon forms in the constellations also represented the powers of evil;
especially the great enemy of God and man, "the dragon, that old
serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan." So there is some amount of
appropriateness to the watery dragons of the sky--_Hydra_ and
_Cetus_--in these descriptions of _Rahab_, the dragon of Egypt, without
there being any direct reference. Thus it is said of the Egyptian
"dragon in the seas," "I have given thee for meat to the beasts of the
earth, and to the fowls of the heaven;" and again, "I will cause all the
fowls of the heaven to settle upon thee," just as _Corvus_, the Raven,
is shown as having settled upon _Hydra_, the Water-snake, and is
devouring its flesh. Again, Pharaoh, the Egyptian dragon, says, "My
river is mine own, and I have made it for myself;" just as _Cetus_, the
Sea-monster, is represented as pouring forth _Eridanus_, the river, from
its mouth.

[Illustration: ANDROMEDA AND CETUS.]

But a clear and direct allusion to this last grouping of the
constellations occurs in the Apocalypse. In the twelfth chapter, the
proud oppressor dragon from the sea is shown us again with much fulness
of detail. There the Apostle describes his vision of a woman, who
evidently represents the people of God, being persecuted by a dragon.
There is still a reminiscence of the deliverance of Israel in the Exodus
from Egypt, for "the woman _fled into the wilderness_, where she hath a
place prepared of God, that there they may nourish her a thousand two
hundred and threescore days." And the vision goes on:--

     "And the serpent cast out of his mouth, after the woman water
     as a river, that he might cause her to be carried away by the
     stream. And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened
     her mouth, and swallowed up the river which the dragon cast
     out of his mouth."

This appears to be precisely the action which is presented to us in the
three constellations of _Andromeda_, _Cetus_, and _Eridanus_. Andromeda
is always shown as a woman in distress, and the Sea-monster, though
placed far from her in the sky, has always been understood to be her
persecutor. Thus Aratus writes--

     "Andromeda, though far away she flies,
      Dreads the Sea-monster, low in southern skies."

The latter, baffled in his pursuit of his victim, has cast the river,
_Eridanus_, out of his mouth, which, flowing down below the southern
horizon, is apparently swallowed up by the earth.

It need occasion no surprise that we should find imagery used by St.
John in his prophecy already set forth in the constellations nearly
3,000 years before he wrote. Just as, in this same book, St. John
repeated Daniel's vision of the fourth beast, and Ezekiel's vision of
the living creatures, as he used the well-known details of the Jewish
Temple, the candlesticks, the laver, the altar of incense, so he used a
group of stellar figures perfectly well known at the time when he wrote.
In so doing the beloved disciple only followed the example which his
Master had already set him. For the imagery in the parables of our Lord
is always drawn from scenes and objects known and familiar to all men.

In two instances in which _leviathan_ is mentioned, a further expression
is used which has a distinct astronomical bearing. In the passage
already quoted, where Job curses the day of his birth, he desires that
it may not "behold the eyelids of the morning." And in the grand
description of _leviathan_, the crocodile, in chapter xli., we have--

     "His neesings flash forth light,
      And his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning."

Canon Driver considers this as an "allusion, probably to the reddish
eyes of the crocodile, which are said to appear gleaming through the
water before the head comes to the surface." This is because of the
position of the eyes on the animal's head, not because they have any
peculiar brilliancy.

     "It is an idea exclusively Egyptian, and is another link in
     the chain of evidence which connects the author of the poem
     with Egypt. The crocodile's head is so formed that its highest
     points are the eyes; and when it rises obliquely to the
     surface the eyes are the first part of the whole animal to
     emerge. The Egyptians observing this, compared it to the sun
     rising out of the sea, and made it the hieroglyphic
     representative of the idea of sunrise. Thus Horus Apollo says:
     When the Egyptians represent the sunrise, they paint the eye
     of the crocodile, because it is first seen as that animal
     emerges from the water."[209:1]

In this likening of the eyes of the crocodile to the eyelids of the
morning, we have the comparison of one natural object with another. Such
comparison, when used in one way and for one purpose, is the essence of
poetry; when used in another way and for another purpose, is the essence
of science. Both poetry and science are opposed to myth, which is the
confusion of natural with imaginary objects, the mistaking the one for
the other.

Thus it is poetry when the Psalmist speaks of the sun "as a bridegroom
coming out of his chamber"; for there is no confusion in his thought
between the two natural objects. The sun is like the bridegroom in the
glory of his appearance. The Psalmist does not ascribe to him a bride
and children.

It is science when the astronomer compares the spectrum of the sun with
the spectra of various metals in the laboratory. He is comparing natural
object with natural object, and is enabled to draw conclusions as to the
elements composing the sun, and the condition in which they there exist.

But it is myth when the Babylonian represents Bel or Merodach as the
solar deity, destroying Tiamat, the dragon of darkness, for there is
confusion in the thought. The imaginary god is sometimes given solar,
sometimes human, sometimes superhuman characteristics. There is no
actuality in much of what is asserted as to the sun or as to the wholly
imaginary being associated with it. The mocking words of Elijah to the
priests of Baal were justified by the intellectual confusion of their
ideas, as well as by the spiritual degradation of their idolatry.

     "Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is
     pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth,
     and must be awakened."

Such nature-myths are not indications of the healthy mental development
of a primitive people; they are the clear signs of a pathological
condition, the symptoms of intellectual disease.

It is well to bear in mind this distinction, this opposition between
poetry and myth, for ignoring it has led to not a little misconception
as to the occurrence of myth in Scripture, especially in connection with
the names associated with the crocodile. Thus it has been broadly
asserted that "the original mythical signification of the monsters
_tehom_, _livy[=a]th[=a]n_, _tannim_, _rahab_, is unmistakably evident."

Of these names the first signifies the world of waters; the second and
third real aquatic animals; and the last, "the proud one," is simply an
epithet of Egypt, applied to the crocodile as the representation of the
kingdom. There is no more myth in setting forth Egypt by the crocodile
or leviathan than in setting forth Great Britain by the lion, or Russia
by the bear.

The Hebrews in setting forth their enemies by crocodile and other
ferocious reptiles were not describing any imaginary monsters of the
primaeval chaos, but real oppressors. The Egyptian, with his "house of
bondage," the Assyrian, "which smote with a rod," the Chaldean who made
havoc of Israel altogether, were not dreams. And in beseeching God to
deliver them from their latest oppressor the Hebrews naturally recalled,
not some idle tale of the fabulous achievements of Babylonian deities,
but the actual deliverance God had wrought for them at the Red Sea.
There the Egyptian crocodile had been made "meat to the people
inhabiting the wilderness" when the corpses of Pharaoh's bodyguard, cast
up on the shore, supplied the children of Israel with the weapons and
armour of which they stood in need. So in the day of their utter
distress they could still cry in faith and hope--

     "Yet God is my King of old,
      Working salvation in the midst of the earth.
      Thou didst divide the sea by Thy strength:
      Thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters.
      Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces,
      And gavest him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.
      Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood:
      Thou driedst up mighty rivers.
      The day is Thine, the night also is Thine:
      Thou hast prepared the light and the sun.
      Thou hast set all the borders of the earth:
      Thou hast made summer and winter."


FOOTNOTES:

[209:1] P. H. Gosse, in the _Imperial Bible-Dictionary_.




CHAPTER VI

THE PLEIADES


The translators of the Bible, from time to time, find themselves in a
difficulty as to the correct rendering of certain words in the original.
This is especially the case with the names of plants and animals. Some
sort of clue may be given by the context, as, for instance, if the
region is mentioned in which a certain plant is found, or the use that
is made of it; or, in the case of an animal, whether it is "clean" or
"unclean," what are its habits, and with what other animals it is
associated. But in the case of the few Scripture references to special
groups of stars, we have no such help. We are in the position in which
Macaulay's New Zealander might be, if, long after the English nation had
been dispersed, and its language had ceased to be spoken amongst men, he
were to find a book in which the rivers "Thames," "Trent," "Tyne," and
"Tweed" were mentioned by name, but without the slightest indication of
their locality. His attempt to fit these names to particular rivers
would be little more than a guess--a guess the accuracy of which he
would have no means for testing.

This is somewhat our position with regard to the four Hebrew names,
_K[=i]mah_, _K[)e]s[=i]l_, _`Ayish_, and _Mazzaroth_; yet in each case
there are some slight indications which have given a clue to the
compilers of our Revised Version, and have, in all probability, guided
them correctly.

The constellations are not all equally attractive. A few have drawn the
attention of all men, however otherwise inattentive. North-American
Indians and Australian savages have equally noted the flashing
brilliancy of Orion, and the compact little swarm of the Pleiades. All
northern nations recognize the seven bright stars of the Great Bear, and
they are known by a score of familiar names. They are the "Plough," or
"Charles's Wain" of Northern Europe; the "Seven Plough Oxen" of ancient
Rome; the "Bier and Mourners" of the Arabs; the "Chariot," or "Waggon,"
of the old Chaldeans; the "Big Dipper" of the prosaic New England
farmer. These three groups are just the three which we find mentioned in
the earliest poetry of Greece. So Homer writes, in the Fifth Book of the
_Odyssey_, that Ulysses--

     "There view'd the Pleiads, and the Northern Team,
      And Great Orion's more refulgent beam,
      To which, around the axle of the sky,
      The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye."

It seems natural to conclude that these constellations, the most
striking, or at all events the most universally recognized, would be
those mentioned in the Bible.

The passages in which the Hebrew word _K[=i]mah_, is used are the
following--

     (God) "maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades (_K[=i]mah_), and
     the chambers of the south" (Job ix. 9).

     "Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades
     (_K[=i]mah_), or loose the bands of Orion?" (Job xxxviii. 31).

     "Seek Him that maketh the seven stars (_K[=i]mah_) and Orion"
     (Amos v. 8).

In our Revised Version, _K[=i]mah_ is rendered "Pleiades" in all three
instances, and of course the translators of the Authorized Version meant
the same group by the "seven stars" in their free rendering of the
passage from Amos. The word _k[=i]mah_ signifies "a heap," or "a
cluster," and would seem to be related to the Assyrian word _kimtu_,
"family," from a root meaning to "tie," or "bind"; a family being a
number of persons bound together by the very closest tie of
relationship. If this be so we can have no doubt that our translators
have rightly rendered the word. There is one cluster in the sky, and one
alone, which appeals to the unaided sight as being distinctly and
unmistakably a family of stars--the Pleiades.

The names _`Ash_, or _`Ayish_, _K[)e]s[=i]l_, and _K[=i]mah_ are
peculiar to the Hebrews, and are not, so far as we have any evidence at
present, allied to names in use for any constellation amongst the
Babylonians and Assyrians; they have, as yet, not been found on any
cuneiform inscription. Amos, the herdsman of Tekoa, living in the eighth
century B.C., two centuries before the Jews were carried into exile to
Babylon, evidently knew well what the terms signified, and the writer of
the Book of Job was no less aware of their signification. But the
"Seventy," who translated the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek, were not at
all clear as to the identification of these names of constellations;
though they made their translation only two or three centuries after the
Jews returned to Jerusalem under Ezra and Nehemiah, when oral tradition
should have still supplied the meaning of such astronomical terms. Had
these names been then known in Babylon, they could not have been unknown
to the learned men of Alexandria in the second century before our era,
since at that time there was a very direct scientific influence of the
one city upon the other. This Hebrew astronomy was so far from being due
to Babylonian influence and teaching, that, though known centuries
before the exile, after the exile we find the knowledge of its technical
terms was lost. On the other hand, _k[=i]ma_ was the term used in all
Syriac literature to denominate the Pleiades, and we accordingly find in
the Peschitta, the ancient Syriac version of the Bible, made about the
second century A.D., the term _k[=i]ma_ retained throughout, but _kesil_
and _`ayish_ were reduced to their supposed Syriac equivalents.

Whatever uncertainty was felt as to the meaning of _k[=i]mah_ by the
early translators, it is not now seriously disputed that the Pleiades is
the group of stars in question.

The word _k[=i]mah_ means, as we have seen, "cluster" or "heap," so also
the word _Pleiades_, which we use to-day, is probably derived from the
Greek _Pleiones_, "many." Several Greek poets--Athenaeus, Hesiod, Pindar,
and Simonides--wrote the word _Peleiades_, i. e. "rock pigeons,"
considered as flying from the Hunter Orion; others made them the seven
doves who carried ambrosia to the infant Zeus. D'Arcy Thompson says,
"The Pleiad is in many languages associated with bird-names, . . . and I
am inclined to take the bird on the bull's back in coins of Eretria,
Dicaea, and Thurii for the associated constellation of the
Pleiad"[217:1]--the Pleiades being situated on the shoulder of Taurus
the Bull.

The Hyades were situated on the head of the Bull, and in the Euphrates
region these two little groups of stars were termed together,
_Mas-tab-ba-gal-gal-la_, the Great Twins of the ecliptic, as Castor and
Pollux were the Twins of the zodiac. In one tablet _'Imina bi_, "the
sevenfold one," and _Gut-dua_, "the Bull-in-front," are mentioned side
by side, thus agreeing well with their interpretation of "Pleiades and
Hyades." The Semitic name for the Pleiades was also _Temennu_; and these
groups of stars, worshipped as gods by the Babylonians, may possibly
have been the _Gad_ and _Meni_, "that troop," and "that number,"
referred to by the prophet Isaiah (lxv. 11).

On many Babylonian cylinder seals there are engraved seven small discs,
in addition to other astronomical symbols. These seven small stellar
discs are almost invariably arranged in the form :::' or:::. much as we
should now-a-days plot the cluster of the Pleiades when mapping on a
small scale the constellations round the Bull. It is evident that these
seven little stellar discs do not mean the "seven planets," for in many
cases the astronomical symbols which accompany them include both those
of the sun and moon. It is most probable that they signify the Pleiades,
or perhaps alternatively the Hyades.

Possibly, reference is made to the worship of the Pleiades when the
king of Assyria, in the seventh century B.C., brought men from Babylon
and other regions to inhabit the depopulated cities of Samaria, "and the
men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth." The Rabbis are said to have
rendered this by the "booths of the Maidens," or the "tents of the
Daughters,"--the Pleiades being the maidens in question.

Generally they are the Seven Sisters. Hesiod calls them the Seven
Virgins, and the Virgin Stars. The names given to the individual stars
are those of the seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione; thus Milton terms
them the Seven Atlantic Sisters.

As we have seen (p. 189), the device associated expressly with Joseph is
the Bull, and Jacob's blessing to his son has been sometimes rendered--

     "Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well;
     _the daughters walk upon the bull_."

That is, "the Seven Sisters," the Pleiades, are on the shoulder of
Taurus.

Aratus wrote of the number of the Pleiades--

     "Seven paths aloft men say they take,
      Yet six alone are viewed by mortal eyes.
      From Zeus' abode no star unknown is lost,
      Since first from birth we heard, but thus the tale is told."

[Illustration: STARS OF THE PLEIADES.]

Euripides speaks of these "seven paths," and Eratosthenes calls them
"the seven-starred Pleiad," although he describes one as
"All-Invisible." There is a surprisingly universal tradition that they
"were seven who now are six." We find it not only in ancient Greece and
Italy, but also among the black fellows of Australia, the Malays of
Borneo, and the negroes of the Gold Coast. There must be some reason to
account for this widespread tradition. Some of the stars are known to be
slightly variable, and one of the fainter stars in the cluster may have
shone more brightly in olden time;--the gaseous spectrum of Pleione
renders it credible that this star may once have had great brilliancy.
Alcyone, now the brightest star in the cluster, was not mentioned by
Ptolemy among the four brightest Pleiads of his day. The six now visible
to ordinary sight are Alcyone, Electra, Atlas, Maia, Merope and Taygeta.
Celoeno is the next in brightness, and the present candidate for the
seventh place. By good sight, several more may be made out: thus
Maestlin, the tutor of Kepler, mapped eleven before the invention of the
telescope, and in our own day Carrington and Denning have counted
fourteen with the naked eye.

In clear mountain atmosphere more than seven would be seen by any
keen-sighted observer. Usually six stars may be made out with the naked
eye in both the Pleiades and the Hyades, or, if more than six, then
several more; though with both groups the number of "seven" has always
been associated.

In the New Testament we find the "Seven Stars" also mentioned. In the
first chapter of the Revelation, the Apostle St. John says that he "saw
seven golden candlesticks; and in the midst of the seven candlesticks
one like unto the Son of Man, . . . and He had in His right hand seven
stars." Later in the same chapter it is explained that "the seven stars
are the angels of the seven churches; and the seven candlesticks which
thou sawest are the seven churches." The seven stars in a single compact
cluster thus stand for the Church in its many diversities and its
essential unity.

This beautiful little constellation has become associated with a foolish
fable. When it was first found that not only did the planets move round
the sun in orbits, but that the sun itself also was travelling rapidly
through space, a German astronomer, Maedler, hazarded the suggestion that
the centre of the sun's motion lay in the Pleiades. It was soon evident
that there was no sufficient ground for this suggestion, and that many
clearly established facts were inconsistent with it. Nevertheless the
idea caught hold of the popular mind, and it has acquired an amazing
