extremities and opposite to one another. Fig. 33 represents a ground
plan, in which may also be observed the location of each of the four
Mid[-e]/ posts. Fig. 34 shows general view of same structure. A short
distance from the eastern entrance is deposited the sacred stone, beyond
which is an area reserved for the presents to be deposited by an
applicant for initiation. The remaining two-thirds of the space toward
the western door is occupied at regular intervals by four posts, the
first being painted red with a band of green around the top. (Pl. XV,
No. 1.) The second post is red, and has scattered over its surface spots
of white clay to symbolize the sacred m[-i]/gis shell. Upon it is
perched the stuffed skin of an owl--k[)o]-k['o]-k[)o]-[-o]/. (Pl. XV,
No. 2.) The third post is black; but instead of being round is cut
square. (Pl. XV, No. 3.) The fourth post, that nearest the western
extremity, is in the shape of a cross, painted white, with red spots,
excepting the lower half of the trunk, which is squared, the colors upon
the four sides being white on the east, green on the south, red on the
west, and black on the north. (Pl. XV, No. 4.)

  [Illustration: Fig. 34.--General view of Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n.]

About 10 paces east of the main entrance, in a direct line between it
and the sweat lodge, is planted a piece of thin board 3 feet high and 6
inches broad, the top of which is cut so as to present a three-lobed
apex, as shown in Fig. 3. The eastern side of this board is painted
green; that facing the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n red. Near the top is a small
opening, through which the Mid[-e]/ are enabled to peep into the
interior of the sacred structure to observe the angry man/id[-o]s
occupying the structure and opposing the intrusion of anyone not of the
fourth degree.

A cedar tree is planted at each of the outer corners of the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, and about 6 paces away from the northern, western, and
southern entrances a small brush structure is erected, sufficiently
large to admit the body. These structures are termed bears/ nests,
supposed to be points where the Bear Man/id[-o] rested during the
struggle he passed through while fighting with the malevolent
man/id[-o]s within to gain entrance and receive the fourth-degree
initiation. Immediately within and to either side of the east and west
entrances is planted a short post, 5 feet high and 8 inches thick,
painted red upon the side facing the interior and black upon the
reverse, at the base of each being laid a stone about as large as a
human head. These four posts represent the four limbs and feet of the
Bear Man/id[-o], who made the four entrances and forcibly entered and
expelled the evil beings who had opposed him. The fourth-degree Mid[-e]/
post-- the cross--furthermore symbolizes the four days/ struggle at the
four openings or doors in the north, south, east, and west walls of the
structure.

PREPARATION OF CANDIDATE.

Under ordinary circumstances it requires at least one year before a
Mid[-e]/ of the third grade is considered eligible for promotion, and it
is seldom that a candidate can procure the necessary presents within
that period, so that frequently a number of years elapse before any
intimation by a candidate is made to the chief priest that the necessary
requirements can be complied with. The chief reason of this delay is
attributed to the fact that the fee to the officiating priests alone
must equal in value and quantity four times the amount paid at the first
initiation, and as the success in gathering the robes, skins, blankets,
etc., depends upon the candidate's own exertions it will readily appear
why so few ever attain the distinction sought. Should one be so
fortunate, however, as to possess the required articles, he has only to
make known the fact to the chief and assistant Mid[-e]/ priests, when a
meeting is held at the wig/iwam of one of the members and the merits of
the candidate discussed. For this purpose tobacco is furnished by the
candidate. The more valuable and more numerous the presents the more
rapidly will his application be disposed of, and the more certainly will
favorable consideration on it be had. It becomes necessary, as in former
instances of preparation, for the candidate to procure the service of a
renowned Mid[-e]/, in order to acquire new or specially celebrated
remedies or charms. The candidate may also give evidence of his own
proficiency in magic without revealing the secrets of his success or the
course pursued to attain it. The greater the mystery the higher he is
held in esteem even by his jealous confreres.

There is not much to be gained by preparatory instruction for the fourth
degree, the chief claims being a renewal of the ceremony of "shooting
the m[-i]/gis" into the body of the candidate, and enacting or
dramatizing the traditional efforts of the Bear Man/id[-o] in his
endeavor to receive from the Otter the secrets of this grade. One who
succeeds becomes correspondingly powerful in his profession and
therefore more feared by the credulous. His sources of income are
accordingly increased by the greater number of Indians who require his
assistance. Hunters, warriors, and lovers have occasion to call upon
him, and sometimes antidoting charms are sought, when the evil effects
of an enemy's work are to be counteracted.

The instructor receives the visit of the candidate, and upon coming to a
satisfactory agreement concerning the fee to be paid for the service he
prepares his pupil by prompting him as to the part he is to enact during
the initiation and the reasons therefor. The preparation and the merits
of magic compounds are discussed, and the pupil receives instruction in
making effective charms, compounding love powder, etc. This love powder
is held in high esteem, and its composition is held a profound secret,
to be transmitted only when a great fee is paid. It consists of the
following ingredients: Vermilion; powdered snakeroot (Polygala senega,
L.); exiguam particulam sanguinis a puella effusi, quum in primis
menstruis esset; and a piece of ginseng cut from the bifurcation of the
root, and powdered. These are mixed and put into a small buckskin bag.
The preparation is undertaken only after an offering to Ki/tshi
Man/id[-o] of tobacco and a Mid[-e]/ song with rattle accompaniment. The
manner of using this powder will be described under the caption of
"descriptive notes." It differs entirely from the powder employed in
painting the face by one who wishes to attract or fascinate the object
of his or her devotion. The latter is referred to by the Rev. Peter
Jones[16] as follows:

  There is a particular kind of charm which they use when they wish to
  obtain the object of their affections. It is made of roots and red
  ocher. With this they paint their faces, believing it to possess a
  power so irresistible as to cause the object of their desire to love
  them. But the moment this medicine is taken away and the charm
  withdrawn the person who before was almost frantic with love hates
  with a perfect hatred.

    [Footnote 16: Hist. of the Ojebway Indians. London [1843?], p. 155.]

It is necessary that the candidate take a sweat-bath once each day, for
four successive days, at some time during the autumn months of the year
preceding the year in which the initiation is to occur. This form of
preparation is deemed agreeable to Ki/tshi Man/id[-o], whose favor is
constantly invoked that the candidate may be favored with the powers
supposed to be conferred in the last degree. As spring approaches the
candidate makes occasional presents of tobacco to the chief priest and
his assistants, and when the period of the annual ceremony approaches,
they send out runners to members to solicit their presence, and, if of
the fourth degree, their assistance.

INITIATION OF CANDIDATE.

The candidate removes to the vicinity of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n so as to
be able to go through the ceremony of purgation four times before the
day of initiation. The sudatory having been constructed on the usual
site, east of the large structure, he enters it on the morning of the
fifth day preceding the initiation and after taking a sweat-bath he is
joined by the preceptor, when both proceed to the four entrances of the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n and deposit at each a small offering of tobacco. This
procedure is followed on the second and third days, also, but upon the
fourth the presents are also carried along and deposited at the
entrances, where they are received by assistants and suspended from the
rafters of the interior. On the evening of the last day, the chief and
officiating priests visit the candidate and his preceptor, in the
sweat-lodge, when ceremonial smoking is indulged in followed by the
recitation of Mid[-e]/ chants. The following (Pl. XVI, A) is a
reproduction of the chant taught to and recited by the candidate. The
original was obtained from an old mnemonic chart in use at Mille Lacs,
Minnesota, in the year 1825, which in turn had been copied from a record
in the possession of a Mid[-e]/ priest at La Pointe, Wisconsin. Many of
the words are of an older form than those in use at the present day.
Each line may be repeated ad libitum.

  [Illustration]
  Ni-ka/-ni-na/, ni-ka/-ni-na/, ni-ka/-ni-na/,
  I am the Nika/ni, I am the Nika/ni, I am the Nika/ni,
  man/-i-d[-o] wig/-i-wam win/-di-ge/-un.
  I am going into the sacred lodge.
    [The speaker compares himself to the Bear Man/ido, and as such is
    represented at the entrance of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n.]

  [Illustration]
  Ni-ka/-ni-na/, ni-ka/-ni-na/, ni-ka/-ni-na/,
  I am the Nika/ni, I am the Nika/ni, I am the Nika/ni,
  ni-kan/-gi-nun/-da w['e]-m[)i]-d[)u]k/.
  I "suppose" you hear me.
    [The lines from the ear denotes hearing; the words are addressed to
    his auditors.]

  [Illustration]
  W[^a]/, he-wa/-ke-wa ke-w[^a]/, he-wa/-ke-w[^a]/, w[^a]/.
  He said, he said.
    [Signifies that Ki/tshi Man/id[-o], who is seen with the voice lines
    issuing from the mouth, and who promised the Ani/shin[^a]/b[-e]g
    "life," that they might always live.]

  [Illustration]
  Rest. A ceremonial smoke is now indulged in.

  [Illustration]
  We/-shki-nun/-do-ni-ne/, ke-nosh/-ki-nun/-do-ni-ne/.
  This is the first time you hear it.
    [The lines of hearing are again shown; the words refer to the first
    time this is chanted as it is an intimation that the singer is to be
    advanced to the higher grade of the Mid[-e]/wiwin.]

  [Illustration]
  Hwe/-na-ni-ka he-na/, he-n[-o]/ mi-t[-e]/-wi[n]-wi[n]/
  gi/-ga-wa/-pi-no-d[-o]n/.
  You laugh, you laugh at the "grand medicine."
    [The arms are directed towards Ki/tshi Man/id[-o], the creator of
    the sacred rite; the words refer to those who are ignorant of the
    Mid[-e]/wiwin and its teachings.]

  [Illustration]
  Nun-te/-ma-ne/, h[-e]/, wi/-na-nun/-te-ma-ne/ ki/-pi-nan/.
  I hear, but they hear it not.
    [The speaker intimates that he realizes the importance of the
    Mid[-e]/ rite, but the uninitiated do not.]

  [Illustration]
  Pe/-ne-s[)u]i/-a ke/-ke-kwi/-yan.
  I am sitting like a sparrow-hawk.
    [The singer is sitting upright, and is watchful, like a hawk
    watching for its prey. He is ready to observe, and to acquire,
    everything that may transpire in the Mid[-e]/ structure.]

Upon the conclusion of the chant, the assembled Mid[-e]/ smoke and
review the manner of procedure for the morrow's ceremony, and when these
details have been settled they disperse, to return to their wig/iwams,
or to visit Mid[-e]/ who may have come from distant settlements.

Early on the day of his initiation the candidate returns to the sudatory
to await the coming of his preceptor. The gifts of tobacco are divided
into parcels which may thus be easily distributed at the proper time,
and as soon as the officiating priests have arrived, and seated
themselves, the candidate produces some tobacco of which all present
take a pipeful, when a ceremonial smoke-offering is made to Ki/tshi
Man/id[-o]. The candidate then takes his mid[-e]/ drum and sings a song
of his own composition, or one which he may have purchased from his
preceptor, or some Mid[-e]/ priest. The following is a reproduction of
an old mnemonic song which the owner, Sikas/sig[)e], had received from
his father who in turn had obtained it at La Pointe, Wisconsin, about
the year 1800. The words are archaic to a great extent, and they
furthermore differ from the modern language on account of the manner in
which they are pronounced in chanting, which peculiarity has been
faithfully followed below. The pictographic characters are reproduced in
Pl. XVI, B. As usual, the several lines are sung ad libitum, repetition
depending entirely upon the feelings of the singer.

  [Illustration]
  Hin/-to-n[^a]-ga-ne/ o-sa-ga-tsh[-i]/-w[-e]d o-do/-zhi-t[-o]n/.
  The sun is coming up, that makes my dish.
    [The dish signifies the feast to be made by the singer. The zigzag
    lines across the dish denote the sacred character of the feast. The
    upper lines are the arm holding the vessel.]

  [Illustration]
  Man/-i-d[-o] i/-ya-n[-e]/, ish/-ko-te/-wi-wa/-we-yan/.
  My spirit is on fire.
    [The horizontal lines across the leg signify magic power of
    traversing space. The short lines below the foot denote flames,
    i.e., magic influence obtained by swiftness of communication with
    the man/id[-o]s.]

  [Illustration]
  Ko/tshi-h[^a]-ya-n[-e]/, n[-e]/,
  ish/-ki-to/-ya-ni/, nin-do/-we-h[-e]/, wi/-a-we-yan/.
  I want to try you, I am of fire.
    [The zigzag lines diverging from the mouth signify voice, singing;
    the apex upon the head superior knowledge, by means of which the
    singer wishes to try his Mid[-e]/ sack upon his hearer, to give
    evidence of the power of his influence.]

  [Illustration]
  A pause. Ceremonial smoking is indulged in, after which the chant is
  continued.

  [Illustration]
  Ni-m[-i]/-ga-sim/-ma man/-i-d[-o], sa-ko/-tshi-na/.
  My m[-i]/gis spirit, that is why I am stronger than you.
    [The three spots denote the three times the singer has received the
    m[-i]/gis by being shot; it is because this spirit is within him
    that he is more powerful than those upon the outside of the wigiwam
    who hear him.]

  [Illustration]
  M[-i]/-ga-ye/-nin en/-dy-[^a]n, ya/, h[-o]/, ya/, man/-i-d[-o]/-ya.
  That is the way I feel, spirit.
    [The speaker is filled with joy at his power, the m[-i]/gis within
    him, shown by the spot upon the body, making him confident.]

  [Illustration]
  Ya-g[-o]/-sha-h[-i]/, n[^a]/, ha/, ha/,
  Ya-g[-o]/-sha-hi/, man/-i-d[-o]-w[-i]/-y[)i]n.
  I am stronger than you, spirit that you are.
    [He feels more powerful, from having received three times the
    m[-i]/gis, than the evil spirit who antagonizes his progress in
    advancement.]

Upon the completion of this preliminary by the candidate, the priests
emerge from the wig/iwam and fall in line according to their official
status, when the candidate and preceptor gather up the parcels of
tobacco and place themselves at the head of the column and start toward
the eastern entrance of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n. As they approach the lone
post, or board, the candidate halts, when the priests continue to chant
and drum upon the Mid[-e]/ drum. The chief Mid[-e]/ then advances to the
board and peeps through the orifice near the top to view malevolent
man/id[-o]s occupying the interior, who are antagonistic to the entrance
of a stranger. This spot is assumed to represent the resting place or
"nest," from which the Bear Man/id[-o] viewed the evil spirits during
the time of his initiation by the Otter. The evil spirits within are
crouching upon the floor, one behind the other and facing the east, the
first being Mi-shi/-bi-shi/--the panther; the second, Me-shi/-k[)e]--the
turtle; the third, kwin/-go-[^a]/-g[)i]--the big wolverine; the fourth,
w[^a]/-g[)u]sh--the fox; the fifth, ma-in/-g[)u]n--the wolf; and the
sixth, ma-kwa/--the bear. They are the ones who endeavor to counteract
or destroy the good wrought by the rites of the Mid[-e]/wiwin, and only
by the aid of the good man/id[-o]s can they be driven from the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n so as to permit a candidate to enter and receive the
benefits of the degree. The second Mid[-e]/ then views the group of
malevolent beings, after which the third, and lastly the fourth priest
looks through the orifice. They then advise the presentation by the
candidate of tobacco at that point to invoke the best efforts of the
Mid[-e]/ Man/id[-o]s in his behalf.

It is asserted that all of the malevolent man/id[-o]s who occupied and
surrounded the preceding degree structures have now assembled about this
fourth degree of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n to make a final effort against the
admission and advancement of the candidate: therefore he impersonates
the good Bear Man/id[-o], and is obliged to follow a similar course in
approaching from his present position the entrance of the structure.
Upon hands and knees he slowly crawls toward the main entrance, when a
wailing voice is heard in the east which sounds like the word h[-a][n]/,
prolonged in a monotone. This is ge/-gi-si/-bi-ga/-ne-d[^a]t man/id[-o].
His bones are heard rattling as he approaches; he wields his bow and
arrow; his long hair streaming in the air, and his body, covered with
m[-i]/gis shells from the salt sea, from which he has emerged to aid in
the expulsion of the opposing spirits. This being the information given
to the candidate he assumes and personates the character of the
man/id[-o] referred to, and being given a bow and four arrows, and under
the guidance of his preceptor, he proceeds toward the main entrance of
the structure while the officiating priests enter and station themselves
within the door facing the west. The preceptor carries the remaining
parcels of tobacco, and when the candidate arrives near the door he
makes four movements with his bow and arrow toward the interior, as if
shooting, the last time sending an arrow within, upon which the grinning
spirits are forced to retreat toward the other end of the inclosure. The
candidate then rushes in at the main entrance, and upon emerging at the
south suddenly turns and again employs his bow and arrow four times
toward the crowd of evil man/id[-o]s, who have rushed toward him during
the interval that he was within. At the last gesture of shooting into
the inclosure, he sends forward an arrow, deposits a parcel of tobacco
and crouches to rest at the so-called "bear's nest." During this period
of repose the Mid[-e]/ priests continue to drum and sing. Then the
candidate approaches the southern door again, on all fours, and the
moment he arrives there he rises and is hurried through the inclosure to
emerge at the west, where he turns suddenly, and imitating the manner of
shooting arrows into the group of angry man/id[-o]s within, he at the
fourth movement lets fly an arrow and gets down into the western "bear's
nest." After a short interval he again approaches the door, crawling
forward on his hands and knees until he reaches the entrance, where he
leaves a present of tobacco and is hastened through the inclosure to
emerge at the northern door, where he again turns suddenly upon the
angry spirits, and after making threatening movements toward them, at
the fourth menace he sends an arrow among them. The spirits are now
greatly annoyed by the magic power possessed by the candidate and the
assistance rendered by the Mid[-e]/ Man/id[-o]s, so that they are
compelled to seek safety in flight. The candidate is resting in the
northern "bear's nest," and as he again crawls toward the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, on hands and knees, he deposits another gift of a
parcel of tobacco, then rises and is hurried through the interior to
emerge at the entrance door, where he turns around, and seeing but a few
angry man/id[-o]s remaining, he takes his last arrow and aiming it at
them makes four threatening gestures toward them, at the last sending
the arrow into the structure, which puts to flight all opposition on the
part of this host of man/id[-o]s. The path is now clear, and after he
deposits another gift of tobacco at the door he is led within, and the
preceptor receives the bow and deposits it with the remaining tobacco
upon the pile of blankets and robes that have by this time been removed
from the rafters and laid upon the ground midway between the sacred
Mid[-e]/ stone and the first Mid[-e]/ post.

The chief Mid[-e]/ priest then takes charge of the candidate, saying:

  Mi/-a-shi/-gwa   wi-ka/-we-a/-kwa-m[)u]s-sin/-n[)u]k.
  Now is the time  [to take] the path that has no end

  M[-i]/-a-shi/-gwa  wi-kan/-do-we-[^a]n/
  Now is the time    I shall inform you [of]

  mi/-ga-[-i]/-zhid wen/-  dzhi-bi-m[^a]/-dis.
  that which I was told    the reason I live.

To this the second Mid[-e]/ priest remarks to the candidate,
Wa/-shi-g[^a]n/-do-we-an/ mi-gai/-i-n[)o]k/ wa/-ka-no/-shi-dzin--which
freely translated signifies: "The reason I now advise you is that you
may heed him when he speaks to you." The candidate is then led around
the interior of the inclosure, the assistant Mid[-e]/ fall in line of
march and are followed by all the others present, excepting the
musicians. During the circuit, which is performed slowly, the chief
Mid[-e]/ drums upon the Mid[-e]/ drum and chants. The following,
reproduced from the original, on Pl. XVII, B, consists of a number of
archaic words, some of which are furthermore different from the spoken
language on account of their being chanted, and meaningless syllables
introduced to prolong certain accentuated notes. Each line and stanza
may be repeated ad libitum.

  [Illustration]
  Man/-i-d[-o], h[-e]/, n[-e]/-y[-e]/, man/-i-d[-o], h[-e]/, n[-e]/,
  y[-e]/, [-e]n/-da-na/-bi-y[)e]n wen/-d[-o]-bi/-y[)e]n.
  A spirit, a spirit, you who sit there, who sit there.
    [The singer makes a spirit of the candidate by thus giving him new
    life, by again shooting into his body the sacred m[-i]gis. The disk
    is the dish for feast of spirits in the dzhibai/
    mid[-e]/wig[^a]n--"Ghost Lodge," the arms reaching towards it
    denoting the spirits who take food therefrom. The signification is
    that the candidate will be enabled to invoke and commune with the
    spirits of departed Mid[-e]/, and to learn of hidden powers.]

  [Illustration]
  He/-ha-wa/-ni, y[-e]/, he/-ha-wa/-ni, y[-e]/,
  na/-bi-nesh/-ga-na/-bi, h[-i]/, h[-e]/.
    [These words were chanted, while the following are those as spoken,
    apart from the music.]
  [^A]-wan/-[-o]-de/-no-w[)i]n n[-i]/-bi-d[)e]sh/-ka-w[)i]n
  un/-de-no/-w[)i]n.
  The fog wind goes from place to place whence the wind blows.
    [The reason of the representation of a human form was not
    satisfactorily explained. The preceptor felt confident, however,
    that it signified a man/[-i]d[-o] who controls the fog, one
    different from one of the a-na/-mi-ki/, or Thunderers, who would
    be shown by the figure of an eagle, or a hawk, when it would also
    denote the thunder, and perhaps lightning, neither of which occurs
    in connection with the fog.]

  [Illustration]
  Rest.

  [Illustration]
  Man/-i-d[-o]/-we ni/-mi-nan/ ku-ni/-ne man-to/-ke ni/-mi-ne/.
  I who acknowledge you to be a spirit, and am dying.
    [The figure is an outline of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n with the sacred
    Mid[-e]/ stone indicated within, as also another spot to signify
    the place occupied by a sick person. The waving lines above and
    beneath the oblong square are magic lines, and indicate magic or
    supernatural power. The singer compares the candidate to a sick man
    who is seeking life by having shot into his body the m[-i]/gis.]
