five-and-twenty yards behind, and gaining on them fast.  Two men were
fifty yards away, to right and left; and two more were right behind,
sixty or seventy yards, in full pursuit.

"Forward!" shouted Mark.  "No mercy, Darley; run your fellow through,
and then turn and spit that fellow on your right."

The two men in front heard the words, and redoubled their efforts, but
they were heavy, middle-aged scoundrels, and plodded clumsily over the
stone-strewed ground; while, forgetting their wounds in the excitement,
Mark and Ralph bounded along, leaping blocks that stood in their way,
and gaining so fast upon their flying enemies, that in a few minutes
they were close up: and the retreating pair, in response to the yells of
their companions, and in despair, turned at bay, when Mark, who was
first, leaped straight at his man, turning the fellow's rusty sword
aside, and came upon the lower part of his chest with his knees, like a
stone from a catapult.

Down went the man, with his sword flying out of his hand, and Mark
nearly fell a couple of yards beyond him, but, active as a fallow deer,
he saved himself by a couple of leaps, as his feet touched the ground;
and he turned, to see Ralph's man down and motionless, as his companion
leaped to his side, and faced round to meet the next two, who, urged on
by the shouts from the hill, charged at them, carried on by their legs,
almost involuntarily, their spirit having little to do with it.

The next minute swords were clashing, there were a few quick parries and
thrusts, and one man dropped his weapon, as Ralph's sword passed through
his shoulder, almost simultaneously with a sharp clang, caused by the
shell of Mark's weapon striking against that of his adversary, whose
blade broke short off at the hilt.  Then, without a moment's hesitation,
the lad struck sidewise at the fellow with his fist, catching him in the
ear, and he staggered sidewise, _hors de combat_.

"Now for the others," cried Ralph wildly, his blood up, and ready for
anything; and they were about to dash at them, when, to their utter
astonishment, the last two turned and ran up the slope toward their
captain and the rest of the party, who were coming to their aid.

"No, no, stop, stop!" yelled Mark, half choking the while with a hoarse
hysterical laugh.  "Oh, what a game!  Here, look; that fellow's getting
his sword."

Without another word, the pair dashed at the disarmed man, who had risen
and picked up his weapon, but he turned and fled.

"Who'd have thought of that?" cried Mark wildly.  "Shall we turn and
attack the others as they come on?"

"No," said Ralph, recovering his coolness; "let's trot on now.  It's
madness to try it again."

"Well, I suppose it would be pushing it too far.  They can't say we're
cowards if we retreat now."

"No; but we can say they are," cried Ralph.  "Why, what a set of curs,
to be beaten by us."

"Yes, and they can't fight a bit.  I could parry their thrusts with a
stick.  But here; I can't lose my pony.  Where is he?"

"And I can't lose my rod and creel," cried Ralph.  "There's your pony
yonder ahead."

"And your fish are right back there.  I'll come with you to fetch them."

"No, no; let them have 'em.  We must retreat now.  Two, four, six,
eight-nine of them now; and I don't think those fellows who are down are
much hurt.  Come along."

For Captain Purlrose was now descending the slope, and his men were
approaching menacingly, spurred on by a shower of oaths, threats, and
abuse from their leader.

"Well, I suppose we must; but my blood's up now," said Mark, "and I hate
running from such a set of curs."

"So do I," said Ralph; "it's like being beaten, when we won.  I say,
were you hurt?"

"Only where you jobbed that sword of yours into my leg.  Phew! it's
getting stiffer every moment.  I shan't be able to walk directly.  Were
you?"

"What, hurt?  No, only where you scratched me."

"It was pretty deep, then, for your sleeve's soaked.  Here, let me tie
my handkerchief round it."

"No, no," said Ralph; "they'll overtake us.  Let's make a run for it
now."

"Shall we?" said Mark unwillingly.

"Yes, we must.  I can't use my arm any more."

"Well, I don't think I can run much farther."

"You must," cried Ralph, sharply as he looked over his shoulder.  "We're
not fit to fight."

He thrust his sound arm through Mark's, and they ran on pretty swiftly
for a hundred yards or so, with the enemy in full pursuit, and then Mark
stopped suddenly.

"Can't go--any farther," he said.  "My leg's awful."

Ralph looked round, to find that the men had given up the pursuit, and
were going back.

"Can we catch your pony?" he said.

"I think so.  He's grazing yonder."

"Would he let me catch him?"

"No," said Mark.  "He'd be off directly.  There, I think I can hobble on
now for a bit.  What! are they coming again?"

"No; only watching us," said Ralph rather faintly.  "Would you mind
tying that tightly round my arm?"

For answer, Mark seized the handkerchief Ralph held out, and knotted it
last round his companion's arm.

"Now let me do something to your leg."

"No; it doesn't bleed now," said Mark.  "Let's get on.  If they see us
crippled, they'll come on again, and if they do I'm good for nothing.
It doesn't bleed; it only feels of no use.  There, let's get on.  Are
they watching us?"

"No, I think not.  It's getting so dark there.  I say; I can see they're
lifting one of the men to carry him."

"Wish some one would carry me," groaned Mark.

"I don't think I can," said Ralph.  "Perhaps I could, though, if you
could hold on."

"Bah!" cried Mark sharply.  "Likely.  Come on, and I'll coax that beast
of a pony.  If I can only get hold of him, I'll make him carry us both."

They pressed on in silence, Mark using his sword as a walking-stick with
one hand, and compelled to accept his enemy's arm, till they came up to
where the cob was grazing.

It let them come close up before raising its head, and then, after
contemplating them for a bit, twitching his ears, as Mark uttered a
series of blandishments, and ended by tossing its head, and spinning
round, as upon a pivot, to trot off.  It failed in this, however, for
Ralph thrust his foot through the trailing rein, and brought the animal
up short.

"Well done!" cried Mark.  "There, jump on, and then pull me across like
a sack."

"Nonsense!  Get on yourself.  I'll help you."

"I shan't, it's my pony.  You're wounded, so get on."

"After you," said Ralph, and, after a little more bandying of words,
Mark felt so sick with pain that he had either to lie down on the earth
or mount.

He did the latter, after several groans, for his leg was very stiff and
painful.

"There's a coward for you," he said.  "Now jump up behind."

"There is no need," said Ralph.  "I can walk."

"That's not fair."

"Never mind.--Get on with you."

This last to the pony, who walked quietly along with his burden in the
pleasant evening light.

For some minutes now neither of the lads spoke, being too much engrossed
by pain and the strangeness of their position.

"I say," said Mark at last, "you'd better come up to the Tor, and drop
me, and I'll lend you the pony to carry your wounded arm home."

"No," said Ralph quietly.  "I shall come a bit farther, and then strike
off.  You can get safe home now."

"Yes, I suppose so; but you ought to have the pony, or one of our men,
to see you safe."

"He'd finish me off," said Ralph grimly, and Mark was silent.

"I say," he said at last; "I shan't say we fought."

"Why?" asked Ralph, in surprise.

"Because it's like bragging so, to talk of two fights.  I shall say the
robbers attacked us, and we beat them off; then they'll get the credit
of our wounds."

"But it will not be true."

"I shan't say they wounded us," replied Mark.  "If my father likes to
think they did it, I shall let him."

"I shan't," said Ralph quietly.  "I shall tell my father everything."

"Well, I suppose it will be best," said Mark.  "But, I say, that fight
doesn't count, you know.  We must begin again where we can't be
interrupted."

"When your leg's better."

"Yes, and your arm's all right."

"Of course."

"Queer thing being such enemies, Darley, isn't it?"

"Very," said Ralph quietly.

"But I suppose it comes natural, though, to our families."

"I have always thought so," replied Ralph.

"I say, I'm glad you're not a coward, though.  They say that all the
Darleys have been cowards."

"Yes; and all the Edens too."

"It's a lie--an abominable lie," cried Mark hotly.  "Do you mean to say
I'm a coward?"

"How could I, after the way you helped me to fight those ruffians this
evening?  I thought you very brave," said Ralph gravely.

"Thank ye.  That's what I thought about you.  But I think it's a pity
you are a Darley."

"Don't say that.  I am very proud to be one, but I say--"

"Yes?"

"Don't you think, instead of paying compliments to one another, we ought
to go and get our wounds properly seen to?"

"Yes, it would be more sensible.  You'll turn off, and go round by the
cliff?"

"Yes, where the path comes up from the river," replied Ralph.

"And we'll finish that fight as soon as ever we can," said Mark.

"Very well.  I suppose we must see who's best man."

"Of course.--Hallo! who's this?"

A figure was dimly-seen coming up through the bushes, along the track
just mentioned, and directly after, it became fully visible as Master
Rayburn with his fish-creel on his back, and rod on shoulder; and they
saw the old man stop short and cry:

"Shade of good Queen Bess!  What's the meaning of this?"



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

MASTER RAYBURN BEGINS TO THINK.

Neither of the lads answered, for a feeling of confusion which troubled
them.  They felt abashed at being seen in each other's company; but they
had to stop, for the old man planted himself right in the middle of the
narrow track, where it passed between two blocks of stone, and as soon
as the cob reached him, it began to sniff at his breast and creel, and
stood still.  "The wolf and the lamb together," said the old man drily,
and in the most serious manner; "but which is wolf, and which is lamb?"
Then, without waiting for a reply, he caught sight of something in the
dimming light beneath the trees, and said; "What's this?  Surely, my
dear lads, you two have not been fighting?  You have--and with swords."

Mark's cheeks flushed, and his eyes fell for a moment before the old
man's piercing eyes; but he recovered himself directly, before Ralph
could speak, and said:

"Yes, we've had a desperate fight coming home.  Set upon by about a
dozen ruffians, and if it had not been for young Darley here--"

"You did as much as I did, or more," cried Ralph.

"Oh, never mind who did most.  We don't know.  Had enough to do without.
But we whipped them, Master Rayburn, and made the beggars run."

"Where was this?" cried the old man.

"In the vale at the foot of Ergles.  They came down from the cave
there."

"Were they a set of disbanded soldiers--those who came up to Cliff
Castle, Ralph?"

"Yes, and to the Black Tor, too," cried Mark.

"I thought as much," said the old man eagerly.  "Then this accounts for
the witches seen on the mountain, and the thefts that have taken place."

"Too late, Master Rayburn," cried Mark, laughing.  "We caught that fish
first.--Didn't we, Darley?"

"Yes; we said that was it," replied Ralph.

"Then I am too late; and I had made up my mind to go out that way, after
I had taken home my fish--after dark--and watch.  So you had to run for
it?"

"Well, I don't know about that," said Mark bluntly.  "We retreated at
last, when they got too many for us, but we charged six of 'em.--Didn't
we, Darley?"

"Yes; and upset four, and the other two ran," said Ralph modestly.  "But
we only had to fight two at a time, and of course that made it even."

"Very," said the old man drily; and his eyes sparkled in the gloom at
the frank way in which the two deadly enemies were relating their
adventures.

"Then some more came down from up above," continued Mark, "and two more
got up again, and the odds seemed to be too great, and we retreated."

"And very wisely too," said Master Rayburn.  "But let me look at your
hurt, Mark, lad.--Tut-tut! soaked with blood.--Wound in the thigh."

"Ah!  Don't touch it," shouted the lad.  "You hurt."

"This must be seen to, my dear boy.  I'll come home with you and dress
it."

"Yes do, please.  It makes me wriggle like a worm on a hook; but he's
hurt too."

"Yes, I see.  Roughly-bandaged, but, tut-tut-tut--why, the sword thrust
has gone through.  There is blood on both sides."

"But it's only through the skin, I think," said Ralph.

"Only through the skin, my lad!  It must be worse than that.  But the
other side?  You paid them for this, I hope."

"Oh yes, we gave them as much as we could, but we didn't kill any one."

"But we saw them carrying one away," said Ralph.

"Oh yes: so we did."

"The villains!  And they wounded you both like this."

Mark glanced at Ralph, and Ralph glanced at him.

"No," said Ralph quietly; "they did not wound us."

"Then how came these injuries?" said the old man anxiously.

"Oh, never mind," cried Mark pettishly; "it doesn't matter.  We got
'em--somehow."

"How was it, Ralph Darley?" said the old man sternly.

"He overtook me, and we quarrelled, and fought," said the lad quietly.

"Ah!"

"And just in the middle of it we found that these men had surrounded
us."

"Yes, yes, yes; don't make such a fuss about it, Master Rayburn," cried
Mark hastily.  "And then we had to join and whip the beggars, and we did
whip 'em at last; and my leg hurts horribly, and you stand there
talking, instead of coming home to doctor it."

"Yes," said the old man, looking at the lad curiously, and then at
Ralph.  "Come along, boy.  You, Darley, you had better come up to the
Black Tor, and be attended to there."

"No, thank you, Master Rayburn; I must make haste back.  Come and see to
my arm when you have done his."

Ralph turned upon his heel as he spoke, and hurried away through the
bushes; while, feeling puzzled, and yet pleased and hopeful, Master
Rayburn gave the cob its head, and walked on and up the steep zigzag
beside his young friend, carefully avoiding all allusion to the lads'
duel, and discussing the possibility of an expedition to drive the
marauders out of their stronghold.

