
"Yes, I do; I am just as certain of it as I am of my own existence."

Noddy had hardly uttered these confident words, before a tremendous
shock threw them upon the cabin floor. It was followed by a terrible
crashing sound, as though every timber in the vessel had been rent and
broken; and they could hear the rush of waters, as the torrents poured
in through the broken sides. Noddy, without stopping to think of the
vain prophecy he had made, seized the light form of Mollie, and bore her
to the deck. The sea was running riot there; the great waves swept over
the deck with a force which no human strength could resist, and Noddy
was compelled to retreat to the cabin again.

The lantern still swung from a deck beam, but the water had risen in the
cabin so that his descent was prevented. The Roebuck had run upon a reef
or shoal in such a manner that her bow was projected far out of the
water, while her stern was almost submerged in the waves. Noddy's quick
perception enabled him to comprehend the position of the vessel, and he
placed his charge on the companion ladder, which was protected in a
measure from the force of the sea by the hatch, closed on the top, and
open only on the front.

"My father!" gasped Mollie. "Save him, Noddy!"

"I will try," replied Noddy. "Hold on tight," added he, as a heavy
volume of water rolled down the companion-way.

"Save him, and don't mind me," groaned the poor girl, unselfish to the
last.

The brave boy stepped down to the cabin floor, where the water was up to
his hips. Creeping on the top of the lockers, and holding on to the
front of the berths, he reached the door of the captain's state-room. In
this part of the vessel the water had risen nearly to the top of the
door, and the berth in which the unfortunate inebriate lay was entirely
beneath its surface. He crawled into the room, and put his hand into the
berth. The captain was not there.

The water was still rising, and Noddy had no doubt that the poor man had
already perished. The shock of the collision when the schooner struck,
or the rising waters, had forced him from his position on the bed. The
water was over Noddy's head in the state-room; but the agony of Mollie
induced him to make a desperate effort to save her father. He dropped
down on the floor, and felt about with his feet, till he found the body.
The question was settled. Captain McClintock was dead. He was one of the
first victims of his criminal neglect.

It was not safe to remain longer in the state-room, even if there had
been any motive for doing so, and Noddy worked his way forward again as
he had come. He found Mollie still clinging to the ladder, suffering
everything on account of her father, and nothing for herself.

"My poor father!" said she, when she discovered her friend coming back
without him. "Where is he, Noddy?"

"I couldn't do anything for him, Mollie," replied he.

"Is he lost?"

"He is gone, Mollie; and it was all over with him before I got there.
Don't cry. He is out of trouble now."

"Poor father," sobbed she. "Couldn't you save him? Let me go and help
you."

"No use, Mollie," added Noddy, as he climbed up the ladder, and looked
out through the aperture at the hatch.

"Are you sure we can't do anything for him?" she asked, in trembling
tones.

"Nothing, Mollie. He was dead when I opened the door of his room. I
found him on the floor, and had to go down over my head to find him. He
did not move or struggle, and I'm sure he is dead. I am sorry, but I
can't help it."

"O, dear, dear!" groaned she, in her anguish.

She heeded not the cracking timbers and the roaring sea. Her heart was
with the unfortunate man who lay cold and still beneath the invading
waters. She was ready to go with him to the home in the silent land.

"You hold on tight a little while, and I will go on deck, and see if I
can make out where we are," said Noddy.

"It matters little to me where we are. I shall soon be with my father,"
replied Mollie.

"Don't say that. Your father is at rest now."

"And I shall soon be at rest with him. Do you hear those terrible waves
beat against the vessel? They will break her in pieces in a few moments
more."

"Perhaps they will, and perhaps they won't. You mustn't give up, Mollie.
If I should lose you now, I shouldn't care what became of me."

"You have been very good to me, Noddy; and I hope God will bless you."

"I want to save you if I can."

"You cannot, Noddy, in this terrible storm. We are poor weak children,
and we can do nothing."

"But I am bound to work and win. I shall not give it up yet, Mollie. We
have struck upon a rock or a shoal, and the land can't be a great ways
off."

"Such an awful sea! We could never reach the land."

"We can try--can't we?"

"Where is Mr. Lincoln?"

"I don't know. I have not heard a sound but the noise of the sea since
the vessel struck. I suppose he and the rest of the men were washed
overboard."

"How horrible!"

"I don't know. They may have left in one of the boats."

"I haven't any courage, Noddy. My poor father is gone, and I don't feel
as though it made any difference what became of me."

"Don't talk so, Mollie. Save yourself for my sake, if you don't for your
own."

"What can we do?" asked she, blankly, for the situation seemed utterly
hopeless.

"I don't know; I will see," replied Noddy, as he crawled through the
aperture, and reached the deck.

A huge wave struck him as he rose upon his feet, and bore him down to
the lee side of the vessel; but he grasped the shrouds, and saved
himself from being hurled into the abyss of waters that boiled in the
fury of the storm on both sides of the stranded schooner. He ran up the
shrouds a short distance, and tried to penetrate the gloom of the night.
He could see nothing but the white froth on the waves, which beat on all
sides. There was no land to be seen ahead, as he had expected, and it
was evident that the Roebuck had struck on a shoal, at some distance
from any shore.

It was impossible to walk forward on the deck, for the savage waves that
broke over the vessel would have carried him overboard. The sight
suggested the manner in which the men had so suddenly disappeared. They
had probably been swept away the moment the vessel struck. The rigging
of the schooner was all standing, and Noddy decided to go forward to
ascertain if there was any comfortable position there for Mollie. He
went to the main-mast head, and, by the spring-stay, reached the
fore-mast. Descending by the fore-shrouds, he reached the forecastle of
the schooner.

The bow had been thrown up so high on the shoal that the sea did not
break over this part of the vessel with anything like the force it did
farther aft. The hatch was on the fore-scuttle, and it was possible that
the men had taken refuge in the forecastle. Removing the hatch, he
called the names of Mr. Lincoln and others; but there was no response.
He then went down, and attempted to make his way aft through the hold.
This was impossible, and he was obliged to return by the way he had
come.

"My poor father!" sighed Mollie, as Noddy reached the ladder to which
she was clinging; "I shall never see you again."

"Come, Mollie. I want you to go with me now," said he, taking her by the
arm.

"Did you find any of the crew?" she asked.

"Not a single one."

"Poor men!"

"I am afraid they are all drowned; but we may be saved if we only work.
If we stay here we shall certainly be lost. If the sea should carry off
the companion-hatch, we should be drowned out in spite of all we could
do."

"What can we do?"

"We must go forward."

"That is impossible for me, Noddy."

"No, it isn't."

"Save yourself, Noddy, if you can. I do not feel like doing anything."

"I shall stay by you, and if you are lost I shall be lost with you."

"Then I will go with you, and do anything you say," said she, earnestly;
for when the life of another was at stake, she was willing to put forth
any exertion.

"The vessel holds together first-rate, and if we stick by her till
morning, we may find some way to save ourselves. Don't give it up,
Mollie. Work and win; that's my motto, you know."

"I am ready to work with you, Noddy, whether you win or not."

The persevering boy got a rope, which he made fast around the little
girl's body, and watching his time, at the intervals of the breaking
waves, he bore her to the main shrouds. She went up to the mast head
without much difficulty, though the force of the wind was so great that
Noddy had to hold on to her, to keep her from being blown from the
ropes.

At this point he made a sling for her on the spring-stay, in which she
sat as a child does in a swing. It was adjusted to the big rope so that
it would slip along, and permit her to hold on to the stay with her
hands. The vessel seemed to be so wedged in the rocks or sand, on which
she had struck, that she did not roll, and the only obstacle to a safe
passage from one mast to the other, was the violence of the gale. By
Noddy's careful and skilful management, the transit was made in safety
through the most imminent peril. The descent to the deck, forward, was
more easily accomplished, and the heroic youth soon had the pleasure of
seeing his gentle charge safe, for the present, in the forecastle.

He had worked and won, so far. He was satisfied with the past, and
hopeful of the future. Having conducted Mollie to a safe place, he
turned his attention once more to the situation of the vessel. Looking
over the bow, he discovered the dark, ragged rocks, rising a few feet
above the water, on which she had struck, but he could not see any
land.




CHAPTER XVII.

AFTER THE STORM.


The Roebuck had been built, under the direction of Captain McClintock,
for the voyage around Cape Horn. She was a new vessel, and of extra
strength, and she held together in spite of the hard thumping she
received on the rocks. As she struck, a hole was knocked in her bottom;
but her bow had been forced so far up on the rocks that the water which
she made all settled aft.

With tender care Noddy had wrapped up his frail companion in a pea
jacket he found in the forecastle, and together they waited anxiously
for the morning light. The waves beat fiercely against the side of the
vessel, pounded on the decks as they rolled over the bulwarks; and the
survivors were in continual fear that each moment would witness the
destruction of their ark of safety. Noddy had made the best arrangements
he could for a speedy exit, in case the worst should be realized.

With the first signs of daylight Noddy was on deck endeavoring to obtain
a better knowledge of the location of the wreck. It seemed to him then
that the force of the gale had abated, though the sea was hardly less
savage than it had been during the night. As the day dawned, he
discovered the outline of some dark object, apparently half a mile
distant. He watched this sombre pile till there was light enough to
satisfy him that it was an island.

"Hurrah!" shouted Noddy,--forgetting, in the joy of this discovery, that
death and destruction had reigned on board the Roebuck.

"What is it?" asked Mollie, hardly moved by the gladness of her
companion.

"Land ho!" replied he, as he descended the ladder to the forecastle.

"Where is it?" said she, languidly, as though she did not feel much
interested in the announcement.

"Right over here, about half a mile off."

"It might as well be a thousand miles off; for we can never get there."

"O, yes, we can. We have the boat on deck. I'm afraid you are
discouraged, Mollie."

"I can't help thinking of poor father," said she, bursting into tears
again.

Noddy comforted her as well as he could. He told her she ought not to
repine at the will of God, who had saved her, though he had permitted
her father to be lost; that she ought to be grateful for her own
preservation; and, what seemed to be the strongest argument to him, that
weeping and "taking on" would do no good. He was but a poor comforter,
and only repeated what he had often heard her say in the dark hours of
their former tribulation. Her father was dead, and she could not help
weeping. Whatever were his faults, and however great had been the error
which had brought her to the present extremity, he was her father. In
his sober days he had loved her tenderly and devotedly; and it seemed
like sacrilege to her to dry the tears which so readily and so freely
flowed. They were the natural tribute of affection from a child to a
lost parent.

Noddy did not dare to say all he believed, for he was convinced that the
death of the captain was a blessing to himself and to his daughter. He
was so besotted by the demon that life could henceforth be only a misery
to him, and a stumbling-block to her. It required no great faith for him
to believe, in the present instance, that the good Father doeth all
things well.

The daylight came, and with it the hope of brighter hours. The clouds
were breaking away, and the winds subsided almost as suddenly as they
had risen. Still the waves broke fiercely over the wreck, and it was
impossible to take any steps towards reaching the land, whose green
hills and bright valleys gladdened the heart of the storm-tossed
sailor-boy. With an axe which he found in the forecastle, he knocked
away a couple of the planks of the bulkhead which divided the seamen's
quarters from the hold. He passed through, by moving a portion of the
miscellaneous cargo, to the cabin, where he obtained some water, some
ship bread, and boiled beef.

Poor Mollie had no appetite; but to please her anxious friend, she ate
half a biscuit. They passed the forenoon in the forecastle, talking of
the past and the future; but the thoughts of the bereaved daughter
continually reverted to her father. She talked of him; of what he had
been to her, and of the bright hopes which she had cherished of the
future. She was positive she should never be happy again. After much
persuasion, Noddy induced her to lie down in one of the bunks, and being
thoroughly exhausted by anxiety and the loss of rest, she went to
sleep, which gave her patient friend a great deal of satisfaction.

She slept, and Noddy went on deck again. The waves had now subsided, so
that he could go aft. He found that the jolly-boat was gone from the
stern davits. At first he supposed it had been washed away by the heavy
sea; but a further examination convinced him that it had been lowered by
the men. It was possible, if not probable, the crew had taken to the
