who can feel like them the call to rescue the life they gave from
an untimely end?"  But the parents, distressed though they were
at the thought of losing him, shrunk from the call.  Then
Alcestis, with a generous self-devotion, proffered herself as the
substitute.  Admetus, fond as he was of life, would not have
submitted to receive it at such a cost; but there was no remedy.
The condition imposed by the Fates had been met, and the decree
was irrevocable.  Alcestis sickened as Admetus revived, and she
was rapidly sinking to the grave.

Just at this time Hercules arrived at the palace of Admetus, and
found all the inmates in great distress for the impending loss of
the devoted wife and beloved mistress.  Hercules, to whom no
labor was too arduous, resolved to attempt her rescue.  He went
and lay in wait at the door of the chamber of the dying queen,
and when Death came for his prey, he seized him and forced him to
resign his victim.  Alcestis recovered, and was restored to her
husband.

Milton alludes to the story of Alcestis in his Sonnet on his
deceased wife.

  "Methought I saw my late espoused saint,
  Brought to me like Alcestis from the grave,
  Whom Jove's great son to her glad husband gave,
  Rescued from death by force, though pale and faint."

James Russell Lowell has chosen the "Shepherd of King Admetus"
for the subject of a short poem.  He makes that event the first
introduction of poetry to men.

  "Men called him but a shiftless youth,
  In whom no good they saw,
  And yet unwittingly, in truth,
  They made his careless words their law.
  And day by day more holy grew
  Each spot where he had trod,
  Till after poets only knew
  Their first-born brother was a god."

In The Love of Alcestis, one of the poems in The Earthly
Paradise, Mr. Morris thus tells the story of the taming of the
lions:

  "---- Rising up no more delay he made,
  But took the staff and gained the palace-door
  Where stood the beasts, whose mingled whine and roar
  Had wrought his dream; there two and two they stood,
  Thinking, it might be, of the tangled wood,
  And all the joys of the food-hiding trees.
  But harmless as their painted images
  'Neath some dread spell; then, leaping up, he took
  The reins in hand and the bossed leather shook,
  And no delay the conquered beasts durst make,
  But drew, not silent; and folk just awake,
  When he went by as though a god they saw,
  Fell on their knees, and maidens come to draw
  Fresh water from the fount, sank trembling down,
  And silence held the babbling, wakened town."


ANTIGONE

The poems and histories of legendary Greece often relate, as has
been seen, to women and their lives.  Antigone was as bright an
example of filial and sisterly fidelity as was Alcestis of
connubial devotion.  She was the daughter of OEdipus and Jocasta,
who, with all their descendants, were the victims of an
unrelenting fate, dooming them to destruction.  OEdipus in his
madness had torn out his eyes, and was driven forth from his
kingdom Thebes, dreaded and abandoned by all men, as an object of
divine vengeance.  Antigone, his daughter, alone shared his
wanderings, and remained with him till he died, and then returned
to Thebes.

Her brothers, Eteocles and Polynices, had agreed to share the
kingdom between them, and reign alternately year by year.  The
first year fell to the lot of Eteocles, who, when his time
expired, refused to surrender the kingdom to his brother.
Polynices fled to Adrastus, king of Argos, who gave him his
daughter in marriage, and aided him with an army to enforce his
claim to the kingdom.  This led to the celebrated expedition of
the "Seven against Thebes," which furnished ample materials for
the epic and tragic poets of Greece.

Amphiaraus, the brother-in-law of Adrastus, opposed the
enterprise, for he was a soothsayer, and knew by his art that no
one of the leaders except Adrastus would live to return.  But
Amphiaraus, on his marriage to Eriphyle, the king's sister, had
agreed that whenever he and Adrastus should differ in opinion,
the decision should be left to Eriphyle.  Polynices, knowing
this, gave Eriphyle the collar of Harmonia, and thereby gained
her to his interest.  This collar or necklace was a present which
Vulcan had given to Harmonia on her marriage with Cadmus, and
Polynices had taken it with him on his flight from Thebes.
Eriphyle could not resist so tempting a bribe, and by her
decision the war was resolved on, and Amphiaraus went to his
certain fate.  He bore his part bravely in the contest, but could
not avert his destiny.  Pursued by the enemy he fled along the
river, when a thunderbolt launched by Jupiter opened the ground,
and he, his chariot, and his charioteer, were swallowed up.

It would not be in place here to detail all the acts of heroism
or atrocity which marked the contest; but we must not omit to
record the fidelity of Evadne as an offset to the weakness of
Eriphyle.  Capaneus, the husband of Evadne, in the ardor of the
fight, declared that he would force his way into the city in
spite of Jove himself.  Placing a ladder against the wall, he
mounted, but Jupiter, offended at his impious language, struck
him with a thunderbolt.  When his obsequies were celebrated,
Evadne cast herself on his funeral pile and perished.

Early in the contest Eteocles consulted the soothsayer Tiresias
as to the issue.  Tiresias, in his youth, had by chance seen
Minerva bathing.  The goddess in her wrath deprived him of his
sight, but afterwards relenting gave him in compensation the
knowledge of future events.  When consulted by Eteocles, he
declared that victory should fall to Thebes if Menoeceus, the son
of Creon, gave himself a voluntary victim.  The heroic youth,
learning the response, threw away his life in the first
encounter.

The siege continued long, with various success.  At length both
hosts agreed that the brothers should decide their quarrel by
single combat.  They fought and fell by each other's hands.  The
armies then renewed the fight, and at last the invaders were
forced to yield, and fled, leaving their dead unburied.  Creon,
the uncle of the fallen princes, now become king, caused Eteocles
to be buried with distinguished honor, but suffered the body of
Polynices to lie where it fell, forbidding every one, on pain of
death, to give it burial.

Antigone, the sister of Polynices, heard with indignation the
revolting edict which consigned her brother's body to the dogs
and vultures, depriving it of those rites which were considered
essential to the repose of the dead.  Unmoved by the dissuading
counsel of an affectionate but timid sister, and unable to
procure assistance, she determined to brave the hazard and to
bury the body with her own hands.  She was detected in the act,
and Creon gave orders that she should be buried alive, as having
deliberately set at nought the solemn edict of the city.  Her
love, Haemon, the son of Creon, unable to avert her fate, would
not survive her, and fell by his own hand.

Antigone forms the subject of two fine tragedies of the Grecian
poet Sophocles.  Mrs. Jameson, in her Characteristics of Women,
has compared her character with that of Cordelia, in
Shakespeare's King Lear.  The perusal of her remarks cannot fail
to gratify our readers.

The following is the lamentation of Antigone over OEdipus, when
death has at last relieved him from his sufferings:

  "Alas!  I only wished I might have died
  With my poor father; wherefore should I ask
  For longer life?
  Oh, I was fond of misery with him;
  E'en what was most unlovely grew beloved
  When he was with me.  Oh, my dearest father,
  Beneath the earth now in deep darkness hid,
  Worn as thou wert with age, to me thou still
  Wast dear, and shalt be ever."
  Francklin's Sophocles


PENELOPE

Penelope is another of those mythic heroines whose beauties were
rather those of character and conduct than of person.  She was
the daughter of Icarius, a Spartan prince.  Ulysses, king of
Ithaca, sought her in marriage, and won her over all competitors.
When the moment came for the bride to leave her father's house,
Icarius, unable to bear the thoughts of parting with his
daughter, tried to persuade her to remain with him, and not
accompany her husband to Ithaca.  Ulysses gave Penelope her
choice, to stay or go with him.  Penelope made no reply, but
dropped her veil over her face.  Icarius urged her no further,
but when she was gone erected a statue to Modesty on the spot
where they parted.

Ulysses and Penelope had not enjoyed their union more than a year
when it was interrupted by the events which called Ulysses to the
Trojan war.  During his long absence, and when it was doubtful
whether he still lived, and highly improbable that he would ever
return, Penelope was importuned by numerous suitors, from whom
there seemed no refuge but in choosing one of them for her
husband.  Penelope, however, employed every art to gain time,
still hopping for Ulysses' return.  One of her arts of delay was
engaging in the preparation of a robe for the funeral canopy of
Laertes, her husband's father.  She pledged herself to make her
choice among the suitors when the robe was finished.  During the
day she worked at the robe, but in the night she undid the work
of the day.  This is the famous Penelope's web, which is used as
a proverbial expression for anything which is perpetually doing
but never done.  The rest of Penelope's history will be told when
we give an account of her husband's adventures.



Chapter XVII

Orpheus and Eurydice.  Artistaeus.  Amphion.  Linus.
Thamyris.  Marsyas.  Melampus.  Musaeus

Orpheus was the son of Apollo and the muse Calliope.  He was
presented by his father with a lyre and taught to play upon it,
and he played to such perfection that nothing could withstand the
charm of his music.  Not only his fellow mortals, but wild beasts
were softened by his strains, and gathering round him laid by
their fierceness, and stood entranced with his lay.  Nay, the
very trees and rocks were sensible to the charm.  The former
crowded round him and the latter relaxed somewhat of their
hardness, softened by his notes.

Hymen had been called to bless with his presence the nuptials of
Orpheus with Eurydice; but though he attended, he brought no
happy omens with him.  His very torch smoked and brought tears
into their eyes.  In coincidence with such prognostics Eurydice,
shortly after her marriage, while wandering with the nymphs, her
companions, was seen by the shepherd Aristaeus, who was struck
with her beauty, and made advances to her.  She fled, and in
flying trod upon a snake in the grass, was bitten in the foot and
died.  Orpheus sang his grief to all who breathed the upper air,
both gods and men, and finding it all unavailing resolved to seek
his wife in the regions of the dead.  He descended by a cave
situated on the side of the promontory of Taenarus and arrived at
the Stygian realm.  He passed through crowds of ghosts, and
presented himself before the throne of Pluto and Proserpine.
Accompanying the words with the lyre, he sung, "O deities of the
underworld, to whom all we who live must come, hear my words, for
they are true!  I come not to spy out the secrets of Tartarus,
nor to try my strength against the three-headed dog with snaky
hair who guards the entrance.  I come to seek my wife, whose
opening years the poisonous viper's fang has brought to an
untimely end.  Love had led me here, Love, a god all powerful
with us who dwell on the earth, and, if old traditions say true,
not less so here.  I implore you by these abodes full of terror,
these realms of silence and uncreated things, unite again the
thread of Eurydice's life.  We all are destined to you, and
sooner or later must pass to your domain.  She too, when she
shall have filled her term of life, will rightly be yours. But
till then grant her to me, I beseech you.  If you deny me, I
cannot return alone; you shall triumph in the death of us both."

As he sang these tender strains, the very ghosts shed tears.
Tantalus, in spite of his thirst, stopped for a moment his
efforts for water, Ixion's wheel stood still, the vulture ceased
to tear the giant's liver, the daughters of Danaus rested from
their task of drawing water in a sieve, and Sisyphus sat on his
rock to listen.  Then for the first time, it is said, the cheeks
of the Furies were wet with tears.  Proserpine could not resist,
and Pluto himself gave way.  Eurydice was called.  She came from
among the new-arrived ghosts, limping with her wounded foot.
Orpheus was permitted to take her away with him on one condition,
that he should not turn round to look at her till they should
have reached the upper air.  Under this condition they proceeded
on their way, he leading, she following, through passages dark
and steep, in total silence, till they had nearly reached the
outlet into the cheerful upper world, when Orpheus, in a moment
of forgetfulness, to assure himself that she was still following,
cast a glance behind him, when instantly she was borne away.
Stretching out their arms to embrace one another they grasped
only the air.  Dying now a second time she yet cannot reproach
her husband, for how can she blame his impatience to behold her?
"Farewell," she said, "a last farewell,"   and was hurried away,
so fast that the sound hardly reached his ears.

Orpheus endeavored to follow her, and besought permission to
return and try once more for her release but the stern ferryman
repulsed him and refused passage.  Seven days he lingered about
the brink, without food or sleep; then bitterly accusing of
cruelty the powers of Erebus, he sang his complaints to the rocks
and mountains, melting the hearts of tigers and moving the oaks
from their stations.  He held himself aloof from womankind,
dwelling constantly on the recollection of his sad mischance.
The Thracian maidens tried their best to captivate him, but he
repulsed their advances.  They bore with him as long as they
could; but finding him insensible, one day, one of them, excited
by the rites of Bacchus, exclaimed, "See yonder our despiser!"
and threw at him her javelin.  The weapon, as soon as it came
within the sound of his lyre, fell harmless at his feet.  So did
also the stones that they threw at him.  But the women raised a
scream and drowned the voice of the music, and then the missiles
reached him and soon were stained with his blood.  The maniacs
tore him limb from limb, and threw his head and his lyre into the
river Hebrus, down which they floated, murmuring sad music, to
which the shores responded a plaintive symphony.  The Muses
gathered up the fragments of his body and buried them at
Libethra, where the nightingale is said to sing over his grave
more sweetly than in any other part of Greece.  His lyre was
placed by Jupiter among the stars.  His shade passed a second
time to Tartarus, where he sought out his Eurydice and embraced
her, with eager arms.  They roam through those happy fields
together now, sometimes he leads, sometimes she; and Orpheus
gazes as much as he will upon her, no longer incurring a penalty
for a thoughtless glance.

The story of Orpheus has furnished Pope with an illustration of
the power of music, for his Ode for St. Cecelia's Day.  The
following stanza relates the conclusion of the story:

  "But soon, too soon the lover turns his eyes;
  Again she falls, again she dies, she dies!
  How wilt thou now the fatal sisters move?
  No crime was thine, if 'tis no crime to love.
  Now under hanging mountains,
  Beside the falls of fountains,
  Or where Hebrus wanders,
  Rolling in meanders,
  All alone,
  He makes his moan,
  And calls her ghost,
  Forever, ever, ever lost!
  Now with furies surrounded,
  Despairing, confounded,
  He trembles, he glows,
  Amidst Rhodope's snows.
  See, wild as the winds o'er the desert he flies;
  Hark!  Haemus resounds with the Bacchanals' cries.
  Ah, see, he dies!
  Yet even in death Eurydice he sung,
  Eurydice still trembled on his tongue;
  Eurydice the woods,
  Eurydice the floods,
  Eurydice the rocks and hollow mountains rung."

The superior melody of the nightingale's song over the grave of
Orpheus, is alluded to by Southey in his Thalaba:

  "Then on his ear what sounds
  Of harmony arose!
  Far music and the distance-mellowed song
  From bowers of merriment;
  The waterfall remote;
  The murmuring of the leafy groves;
  The single nightingale
  Perched in the rosier by, so richly toned,
  That never from that most melodious bird
  Singing a love-song to his brooding mate,
  Did Thracian shepherd by the grave
  Of Orpheus hear a sweeter melody,
  Though there the spirit of the sepulchre
  All his own power infuse, to swell
  The incense that he loves."


ARISTAEUS, THE BEE-KEEPER

Man avails himself of the instincts of the inferior animals for
his own advantage.  Hence sprang the art of keeping bees.  Honey
must first have been known as a wild product, the bees building
their structures in hollow trees or holes in the rocks, or any
similar cavity that chance offered.  Thus occasionally the
carcass of a dead animal would be occupied by the bees for that
purpose.  It was no doubt from some such incident that the
superstition arose that the bees were engendered by the decaying
flesh of the animal; and Virgil, in the following story (From the
Georgies, Book IV.1.317), shows how this supposed fact may be
turned to account for renewing the swarm when it has been lost by
disease or accident.

The shepherd Aristaeus, who first taught the management of bees,
was the son of the water-nymph Cyrene.  His bees had perished,
and he resorted for aid to his mother.  He stood at the river
side and thus addressed her: "Oh, mother, the pride of my life is
taken from me!  I have lost my precious bees.  My care and skill
have availed me nothing, and you, my mother, have not warded off
from me the blow of misfortune."  His mother heard these
complaints as she sat in her palace at the bottom of the river
with her attendant nymphs around her.  They were engaged in
female occupations, spinning and weaving, while one told stories
to amuse the rest.  The sad voice of Aristaeus interrupting their
occupation, one of them put her head above the water and seeing
him, returned and gave information to his mother, who ordered
that he should be brought into her presence.  The river at her
command opened itself and let him pass in, while it stood curled
like a mountain on either side.  He descended to the region where
the fountains of the great rivers lie; he saw the enormous
receptacles of waters and was almost deafened with the roar,
while he surveyed them hurrying off in various directions to
water the face of the earth.  Arriving at his mother's apartment
he was hospitably received by Cyrene and her nymphs, who spread
their table with the richest dainties.  They first poured out
libations to Neptune, then regaled themselves with the feast, and
after that Cyrene thus addressed him: "There is an old prophet
named Proteus, who dwells in the sea and is a favorite of
Neptune, whose herd of sea-calves he pastures.  We nymphs hold
him in great respect, for he is a learned sage, and knows all
things, past, present, and to come.  He can tell you, my son, the
cause of the mortality among your bees, and how you may remedy
it.  But he will not do it voluntarily, however you may entreat
him.  You must compel him by force.  If you seize him and chain
him, he will answer your questions in order to get released, for
he cannot, by all his arts, get away if you hold fast the chains.
I will carry you to his cave, where he comes at noon to take his
midday repose.  Then you may easily secure him.  But when he
finds himself captured, his resort is to a power he possesses of
changing himself into various forms.  He will become a wild boar
or a fierce tiger, a scaly dragon, or lion with yellow mane.  Or
he will make a noise like the crackling of flames or the rush of
water, so as to tempt you to let go the chain, when he will make
his escape.  But you have only to keep him fast bound, and at
last when he finds all his arts unavailing, he will return to his
own figure and obey your commands."  So saying she sprinkled her
son with fragrant nectar, the beverage of the gods, and
immediately an unusual vigor filled his frame and courage his
heart, while perfume breathed all around him.

The nymph led her son to the prophet's cave, and concealed him
among the recesses of the rocks, while she herself took her place
behind the clouds.  Then noon came and the hour when men and
herds retreat from the glaring sun to indulge in quiet slumber,
Proteus issued from the water, followed hy his herd of sea-
calves, which spread themselves along the shore.  He sat on the
rock and counted his herd; then stretched himself on the floor of
the cave and went to sleep.  Aristaeus hardly allowed him to get
fairly asleep before he fixed the fetters on him and shouted
aloud.  Proteus, waking and finding himself captured, immediately
resorted to his arts, becoming first a fire, then a flood, then a
horrible wild beast, in rapid succession.  But trying all in
vain, he at last resumed his own form and addressed the youth in
angry accents: "Who are you, bold youth, who thus invade my
abode, and what do you want with me?"  Aristaeus replied,
"Proteus, you know already, for it is needless for any one to
attempt to deceive you.  And do you also cease your efforts to
elude me.  I am led hither by divine assistance, to know from you
the cause of my misfortune and how to remedy it."  At these words
the prophet, fixing on him his gray eyes with a piercing look,
thus spoke: "You received the merited reward of your deeds, by
which Eurydice met her death, for in flying from you she trod
upon a serpent, of whose bite she died.  To avenge her death the
nymphs, her companions, have sent this destruction bo your bees.
You have to appease their anger, and thus it must be done: Select
four bulls of perfect form and size, and four cows of equal
beauty, build four altars to the nymphs, and sacrifice the
animals, leaving their carcasses in the leafy grove.  To Orpheus
and Eurydice you shall pay such funeral honors as may allay their
resentment.  Returning after nine days you will examine the
bodies of the cattle slain and see what will befall."  Aristaeus
faithfully obeyed these directions.  He sacrificed the cattle, he
left their bodies in the grove, he offered funeral honors to the
shades of Orpheus and Eurydice; then returning on the ninth day
he examined the bodies of the animals, and, wonderful to relate!
A swarm of bees had taken possession of one of the carcasses, and
were pursuing their labors there as in a hive.

In the Task, Cowper alludes to the story of Aristaeus, when
speaking of the ice-palace built by the Empress Anne of Russia.
He has been describing the fantastic forms which ice assumes in
connection with waterfalls, etc."

  "Less worthy of applause though more admired,
  Because a novelty, the work of man,
  Imperial mistress of the fur-clad Russ,
  Thy most magnificent and mighty freak,
  The wonder of the north.  No forest fell
  When thou wouldst build, no quarry sent its stores
  T'enrich thy walls; but thou didst hew the floods
  And make thy marble of the glassy wave.
  In such a palace Aristaeus found
  Cyrene, when he bore the plaintive tale
  Of his lost bees to her maternal ear."

Milton also appears to have had Cyrene and her domestic scene in
his mind when he describes to us Sabrina, the nymph of the river
Severn, in the Guardian-spirit's Song in Comus:

  "Sabrina fair!
  Listen when thou art sitting
  Under the glassy, cool, translucent wave
  In twisted braids of lilies knitting
  The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair;
  Listen for dear honor's sake,
  Goddess of the silver lake!
  Listen and save."

The following are other celebrated mythical poets and musicians,
some of whom were hardly inferior to Orpheus himself:


AMPHION

Amphion was the son of Jupiter and Antiope, queen of Thebes.
With his twin brother Zethus he was exposed at birth on Mount
Cithaeron, where they grew up among the shepherds, not knowing
their parentage.  Mercury gave Amphion a lyre, and taught him to
play upon it, and his brother occupied himself in hunting and
tending the flocks.  Meanwhile Antiope, their mother, who had
been treated with great cruelty by Lycus, the usurping king of
Thebes, and by Dirce, his wife, found means to inform her
children of their rights, and to summon them to her assistance.
With a band of their fellow-herdsmen they attacked and slew
Lycus, and tying Dirce by the hair of her head to a bull, let him
drag her till she was dead (the punishment of Dirce is the
subject of a celebrated group of statuary now in the Museum at
Naples).  Amphion, having become king of Thebes fortified the
city with a wall.  It is said that when he played on his lyre the
stones moved of their own accord and took their places in the
wall.

In Tennyson's poem of Amphion is an amusing use of this story:

  "Oh, had I lived when song was great,
  In days of old Amphion,
  And ta'en my fiddle to the gate
  Nor feared for reed or scion!

  And had I lived when song was great,
  And legs of trees were limber,
  And ta'en my fiddle to the gate,
  And fiddled to the timber!

  "'Tis said he had a tuneful tongue,
  Such happy intonation,
  Wherever he sat down and sung
  He left a small plantation;
  Whenever in a lonely grove
  He set up his forlorn pipes,
  The gouty oak began to move
  And flounder into hornpipes."


LINUS

Linus was the instructor of Hercules in music, but having one day
reproved his pupil rather harshly, he roused the anger of
Hercules, who struck him with his lyre and killed him.


THAMYRIS

An ancient Thracian bard, who in his presumption challenged the
Muses to a trial of skill, and being overcome in the contest was
deprived by them of his sight.  Milton alludes to him with other
blind bards, when speaking of his own blindness (Paradise Lost,
Book III.35).


MARSYAS

Minerva invented the flute, and played upon it to the delight of
all the celestial auditors; but the mischievous urchin Cupid
having dared to laugh at the queer face which the goddess made
while playing, Minerva threw the instrument indignantly away, and
it fell down to earth, and was found by Marsyas.  He blew upon
it, and drew from it such ravishing sounds that he was tempted to
challenge Apollo himself to a musical contest.  The god of course
triumphed, and punished Marsyas by flaying him alive.


MELAMPUS

Melampus was the first mortal endowed with prophetic powers.
Before his house there stood an oak tree containing a serpent's
nest.  The old serpents were killed by the servants, but Melampus
took care of the young ones and fed them carefully.  One day when
he was asleep under the oak, the serpents licked his ears with
their tongues.  On awaking he was astonished to find that he now
understood the language of birds and creeping things.  This
knowledge enabled him to foretell future events, and he became a
