The Project Gutenberg EBook of Make Mine Homogenized, by Rick Raphael

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Make Mine Homogenized

Author: Rick Raphael

Illustrator: Freas

Release Date: January 2, 2008 [EBook #24119]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAKE MINE HOMOGENIZED ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note: This e-text was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction, April, 1960. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.



MAKE MINE HOMOGENIZED


By RICK RAPHAEL

Illustrated by Freas


Anyone looking for guaranteed sound science will have to look
elsewhere. But if it's fun you want ... try the world's most potent
eggnog!


"Shoo," Hetty Thompson cried, waving her battered old felt hat at the
clucking cluster of hens eddying around her legs as she plowed through
the flock towards the chicken house. "Scat. You, Solomon," she called
out, directing her words at the bobbing comb of the big rooster
strutting at the edge of the mob. "Don't just stand there like a
satisfied cowhand after a night in Reno. Get these noisy females outta
my way." She batted at the hens and they scattered with angry squawks
of protest.

Hetty paused in the doorway of the chicken house to allow her eyes to
become accustomed to the cool gloom after the bright glare of the ranch
yard. She could feel the first trickles of sweat forming under the
man's shirt she was wearing as the hot, early morning Nevada sun beat
down on her back in the doorway.

Moving carefully but quickly through the nests, she reached and groped
for the eggs she knew would be found in the scattered straw. As she
placed each find carefully in the bucket she carried, her lips moved in
a soundless count. When she had finished, she straightened up and left
the chicken house, her face reflecting minor irritation.

Again the hens swirled about her, hoping for the handfuls of cracked
corn she usually tossed to them. On the other side of the yard Solomon
stepped majestically along the edge of the vegetable garden, never
crossing the hoed line separating garden from yard.

"You'd better stay over there, you no-account Lothario," Hetty growled.
"Five eggs short this morning and all you do is act like you were just
the business agent for this bunch of fugitives from a dumpling pot."
Solomon cocked his head and stared Hetty down. She paused at the foot
of the backporch steps and threw the rooster a final remark. "You don't
do any better than this you're liable to wind up in that pot yourself."
Solomon gave a scornful cluck. "Better still, I'll get me a young
rooster in here and take over your job." Solomon let out a squawk and
took out at a dead run, herding three hens before him towards the
chicken house.

With a satisfied smile of triumph, Hetty climbed the steps and crossed
to the kitchen door. She turned and looked back across the yard towards
the barn and corrals.

"Barneeeeey," Hetty yelled. "Ain't you finished with that milking yet?"

"Comin' now, Miz Thompson," came the reply from the barn. Hetty let the
screen door slam behind her as she walked into the kitchen and placed
the bucket of eggs on the big work table. She had her arm up to wipe
her moist forehead on the sleeve of her shirt when she spotted the
golden egg lying in the middle of the others in the galvanized bucket.

She froze in the arm-lifted position for several seconds, staring at
the dully glowing egg. Then she slowly reached out and picked it up. It
was slightly heavier than a regular egg, but for the dull, gold-bronze
metallic appearance of the shell, looked just like any of the other
twenty-odd eggs in the bucket. She was still holding it in the palm of
her hand when the kitchen door again slammed and the handy man limped
into the room. He carried two pails of milk across the kitchen and set
them down near the sink.

"Whatcha lookin' at, Miz Thompson?" Barney Hatfield asked.

Hetty frowned at the egg in her hand without answering. Barney limped
around the side of the table for a closer look. Sunlight streaming
through the kitchen windows glinted on the shell of the odd egg.
Barney's eyes grew round. "Now ain't that something," he whispered in
awe.

Hetty started as though someone had snapped their fingers in front of
her staring eyes. Her normal look of practical dubiousness returned.

"Huh," she snorted. "Even had me fooled for a second. Something wrong
with this egg but it sure is shootin' ain't gold. One of them fool hens
must of been pecking in the fertilizer storeroom and got herself an
overdose of some of them minerals in that stuff.

"What are you staring at, you old fool," she glared at Barney. "It
ain't gold." Hetty laid the egg at one side of the table. She walked to
the sink and took a clean, two-gallon milk can from the drainboard and
set it in the sink to fill it from the pails of rich, frothy milk
Barney had brought in the pails.

"Sally come fresh this morning, Miz Thompson," he said. "Got herself a
real fine little bull calf."

Hetty looked at the two pails of milk. "Well, where's the rest of the
milk, then?"

"That's Queenie's milk," Barney said. "Sally's is still out on the
porch."

"Well bring it in before the sun clabbers it."

"Can't," Barney said.

Hetty swung around and glared at him. "What do you mean, you can't? You
suddenly come down with the glanders?"

"No'm, it's just that Sally's milk ain't no good," he replied.

                     *      *      *      *      *

A frown spread over Hetty's face as she hoisted one of the milk pails
and began pouring into the can in the sink. "What's wrong with it,
Barney? Sally seem sick or something?" she asked.

Barney scratched his head. "I don't rightly know, Miz Thompson. That
milk looks all right, or at least, almost all right. It's kinda thin
and don't have no foam like you'd expect milk to have. But mostly, it
sure don't smell right and it danged well don't taste right.

"_Phooey._" He made a face at the memory of the taste. "I stuck my
finger in it when it looked kinda queer, and took a taste. It shore
tasted lousy."

"You probably been currying that mangey old horse of yours before you
went to milking," Hetty snorted, "and tasted his cancerous old hide on
your fingers. I've told you for the last time to wash your hands before
you go to milking them cows. I didn't pay no eighteen hundred dollars
for that prize, registered Guernsey just to have you give her bag fever
with your dirty hands."

"That ain't so, Miz Thompson," Barney cried indignantly. "I did too,
wash my hands. Good, too. I wuzn't near my horse this morning. That
milk just weren't no good."

Hetty finished pouring the milk into the cans and after putting the
cans in the refrigerator, wiped her hands on her jeans and went out
onto the porch, Barney trailing behind her. She bent over and sniffed
at the two milk pails setting beside the door. "_Whew_," she
exclaimed, "it sure does smell funny. Hand me that dipper, Barney."

Barney reached for a dipper hanging on a nail beside the kitchen door.
Hetty dipped out a small quantity of the milk, sipped, straightened up
with a jerk and spewed the milk out into the yard. "Yaawwwk," she
spluttered, "that tastes worse 'n Diesel oil."

She stirred distastefully at the swirling, flat-looking liquid in the
pails and then turned back to the kitchen. "I never saw the like of
it," she exclaimed. "Chickens come out with some kind of sorry-looking
egg and now, in the same morning, an eighteen hundred dollar
registered, fresh Guernsey gives out hogwash instead of milk." She
stared thoughtfully across the yard at the distant mountains, now
shimmering in the hot, midmorning sun. "Guess we could swill the hogs
with that milk, rather'n throw it out, Barney. I never seen anything
them Durocs wouldn't eat. When you get ready to put the other swill in
the cooker, toss that milk in with it and cook it up for the hogs."

Hetty went back into her kitchen and Barney turned and limped across
the yard to the tractor shed. He pulled the brim of his sweat-stained
Stetson over his eyes and squinted south over the heat-dancing sage and
sparse grasslands of Circle T range. Dust devils were pirouetting in
the hazy distance towards the mountains forming a corridor leading to
the ranch. A dirt road led out of the yard and crossed an oiled county
road about five miles south of the ranch. The county road was now the
only link the Circle T had to the cattle shipping pens at Carson City.
The dirt road arrowed south across the range but fifteen miles from the
ranch, a six-strand, new, barbed-wire fence cut the road. A white metal
sign with raised letters proclaimed "Road Closed. U.S. Government
Military Reservation. Restricted Area. Danger--Peligre. Keep Out."

The taut bands of wire stretched east and west of the road for more
than twenty miles in each direction, with duplicates of the metal sign
hung on the fence every five hundred yards. Then the wires turned south
for nearly a hundred miles, etching in skin-blistering, sun-heated
strands, the outlines of the Nevada atomic testing grounds at
Frenchman's Flat.

When the wire first went up, Hetty and her ranching neighbors had
screamed to high heaven and high congressmen about the loss of the road
and range. The fence stayed up. Now they had gotten used to the idea
and had even grown blase about the frequent nuclear blasts that rattled
the desert floor sixty miles from ground zero.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Barney built a fire under the big, smoke-blackened cauldron Hetty used
for cooking the hog swill. Dale Hamilton, the county agent, had given
Hetty a long talk on the dangers of feeding the pigs, raw, uncooked and
possibly contaminated, garbage. When Hamilton got graphic about what
happened to people who ate pork from such hogs, Hetty turned politely
green and had Barney set up the cooking cauldron.

After dumping the kitchen slops into the pot, Barney hiked back across
the yard to get the two pails of bad milk.

Hetty was sitting at the kitchen table, putting the eggs into plastic
refrigerator dishes when the hog slop exploded in a whooshing roar,
followed a split second later by an even louder blast that rocked the
ranch buildings. The eggs flew across the room as the lid of the slop
cauldron came whistling through the kitchen window in a blizzard of
flying glass and buried itself, edgewise, in the wall over the stove.
Hetty slammed backwards headfirst into a heap of shattered eggs. A
torrent of broken plaster, and crockery fragments rained on her stunned
figure. Through dazed eyes, she saw a column of purple-reddish fire
rising from the yard.

A woman who has been thrown twenty-three times from a pitching bronco
and kicked five times in the process, doesn't stay dazed long. Pawing
dripping egg yokes and plaster from her face, Hetty Thompson struggled
