                                       from heaven to raise up all
                                       flesh . . . and to adjudge the
                                       impious and unjust . . . to
                                       Eternal fire and to give to
                                       the just and holy immortality
  And the life everlasting.            and eternal life.


The Articles of the Creed rest upon the proper understanding of what
God has revealed to us of Himself.  The Bible is the record of His
Revelation.  The references in Chapter xi. are amongst the vast number
of such passages which might be adduced.

The days mentioned in the rubric as days on which the _Confession of
our Christian Faith, commonly {99} called The Creed of Saint
Athanasius_, is to be _sung or said at Morning Prayer, instead of the
Apostles' Creed_, are 13.  Four of these days are in the Easter and
Ascension groups of days; when the doctrine of our Lord's Divine and
Human Natures is most taught.  The other nine days are chosen so as to
fall, one in each of the nine months, between June and February.  So
the Praise Service ends, with the Highest Thoughts of God and His Being.


The Lord be with you.

_Answer_.  And with thy spirit.]  This may be taken as the mutual
salutation of Minister and People at the close of the Praise Service.
It is therefore to be said before they kneel.  In the Confirmation
Service, the Laying-on of Hands is concluded with the same words.
Compare the close of our Lord's words to the Apostles, S. Matth.
xxviii. 20: S. John xiv. 27: and the close of S. Paul's Epistles
without exception; also, close of the Epistle to the Hebrews, 1 Peter,
3 John, and Rev.  In the Old English Services (Sarum Use), it closed
the Preces.  In 1549 it was entirely omitted there, but replaced as it
now stands, when, in 1552, the Creed was taken out of the Prayers, and
placed immediately after the Canticles.

Let us pray.]  This is the signal for kneeling, and commencing the
prayers.




{100}

CHAPTER XI.

REASON, HISTORY, AND REVELATION.

It may be said with truth that the Bible is a book which reads History,
and the perplexities of Man, in the light of one great postulate, viz.
that there is a God.  The natural sequences, which are now partially
explained by scientific discoveries, are in the Bible attributed to
God's guidance: and of course there is no contradiction between the
two.  Science explains something of the ways of God's working: from it
we learn something of His principles, and also of His methods: when we
are surest of scientific laws, we are then confronted with the
assumption that there is, or that there is not, a God.  The Bible is
the Book of Faith--Faith that there is a God.  But, since it interprets
History, it plainly recognises History, as one of God's Lesson Books.
Also, since it appeals to Reason, and is consistent with Reason, it
recognises Reason, as another of the Lesson Books.  In the present
chapter we indicate some of the Lessons to be learnt in these three
Books of God.

Much has been written, especially in recent times, showing the
marvellous working of what we call, at one time, the Laws of Nature,
and at another time, Laws of God.  There is infinite interest, to a
thoughtful {101} mind, in the reading of Bell _On the Hand_, Argyll's
_Reign of Law_, Maury's _Physical Geography of the Sea_, even when
further discovery has improved upon their explanations.  It must always
be remembered that God has given us Reason and Knowledge, as well as
Faith.  Reason leads us to the threshold of Heaven, and Faith admits us
to the Presence.  History assures us that Jesus Christ lived in Judaea,
founded Christianity as a Kingdom not of this world, and transformed
the Kingdoms of this world: Faith admits us to Personal Communion with
Him through the Holy Spirit.


I. (a) What Reason has to say about God.

The Athanasian Creed distinguishes between the teaching of the
Catholick Religion and the teaching of the Christian Verity.  A
moment's thought shows that many who do not hold the Christian Verity,
i.e. the Truth as revealed in Christ, do nevertheless hold the Truth as
to the Unity of God.  For amongst those who believe in The One God are
Jews, Turks and many Hereticks, besides those Agnostics whose
hesitation, about accepting the Revelation in Christ, is united to a
readiness to believe in God.  The Belief in One God therefore is more
Universal than the Belief in the Holy Trinity.  The word Catholick is
used _within_ the Church of those who hold the doctrine of the Church.
But it may be also used in a more general sense of those who hold the
supreme Truth of Godhead.

In order to illustrate the evidence which has been used concerning this
prime article of the Christian Faith, we might refer to many
interesting books.  The {102} following argument is attributed to
Socrates by Xenophon (Mem. 1. iv.).

"We admire great poets--great dramatists--great sculptors and painters:
which is more worthy of admiration--he who makes images without mind
and motion, or he who makes things which live and move and act?

"The latter, if he makes them of purpose.  Then purpose is shown by the
obvious usefulness of things: men from the beginning have had the
benefit of senses suited to their environment--eyes to see what is
visible, ears to hear what is audible.  Smells are of use because we
have noses; things that we eat are sweet or bitter or agreeable in the
mouth, because we have palates.  Then again the eye is a delicate
organ, but is fitted with an eyelid to keep guard over it, eye-lashes
to strain off small particles, eyebrows to carry the sweat away from
it.  Further, the ear receives sounds but is never overfull of them:
front teeth are adapted to cutting, back teeth to grinding: the mouth
is near the eyes and nose, which watch over what goes in: these and
other arrangements indicate a Maker, who adapts the organs to their
uses, and has a wise and loving design.  Parents love their children
naturally, and naturally people want to live, and dislike death.  Hence
the Maker shows that He has a design, and that His design is that His
Creatures shall live.

"Moreover, we have a certain amount of matter, a certain amount of
moisture, while there is a vast amount of those things elsewhere:
similarly we have a certain amount of intelligence.  Why then should we
suppose that intelligence is the only thing which {103} is an
exception--the only thing of which we have the whole? why suppose that
all these adaptations have been made, so wonderfully, without a
controlling mind?

"You say you would believe it if you could see the controlling Creator?
But you believe in the existence of your own mind without seeing it: on
that principle, you ought to say that all you do yourself is done by
chance.

"The next question is whether God is too great to require our service?
The answer is that God has shown a special kindness to men, as compared
with other animals.  Their upright walk, their possession of hands,
their articulate voices, their superior minds, their powers of
self-protection--and the adaptation of these powers and qualities to
one another, constituting an altogether higher existence--all these
show a special kindness in a wise Creator who has all the qualities and
powers in a far higher degree.  By serving one another we learn to know
our friends; by asking advice we find who are wise: so if we make trial
of God, we shall find that He is All-seeing, All-present, and Watchful
over all."  This argument does not enter upon the question whether
there is one God or more; but it deals with the previous question of
Godhead; and with all that is implied in 'Maker of Heaven and Earth'.

It must also be observed that (assuming the notion of many Gods to be
excluded, and that our Belief is to be either in One God, or in no
God), the argument of Socrates has gone far towards the Bible
conception of God's Being.  Cf. Article 1.

{104}

(_b_) What the Bible Revelation says about God.

Reasoning of the kind which Socrates used comes near to proof.  But it
can never actually prove the existence of God.  The mind of man is so
constituted that it dislikes the notion of Laws without a Lawgiver.
Evolution is a law which is found to hold in many cases, and is often
assumed, with much probability, to hold in other cases.  And it is a
Law which exhibits the most beautiful adjustments in its working.  We
naturally are impelled to ask further back for the maker of this Law.
The Revelation which is written in the Bible, and which has been held
true from distant ages by good men, is a Revelation which appeals to a
higher quality in man than even his intellect.  It appeals to his
_faith_.  The Bible evidence of God's existence is consistent with
reason, and grounded on _faith_.

We should be able to find many texts which state God's existence, His
Unity, His Omnipotence, His Omniscience.  We prefer however to refer
the student to whole Books and long passages: such, for instance, as
the training of Israel to worship God--the awe and reverence which
appear in all the language about God--the consistent Holiness of His
character as presented in all the Books.  From the first words of the
Bible, _In the beginning God created_, to its last chapter (Rev. xxi.
5), _Behold I make all things new_, it is a Revelation of the Creator.

The following may be remembered:

Deut. iv. (35) 39 Know therefore this day, and consider it in thy
heart, that the LORD he is God in {105} heaven above, and upon the
earth beneath: there is none else.  1 Kings viii. (Solomon's Prayer).
Isaiah xl. 12-31, xlv. Job xxxviii-xli.

The argument of Socrates pointed to a Creator who loves men.  The Bible
declares God to be a Loving Father.  Deut. xxxii. 6.  Is not he thy
father that bought thee?  Deut. i. 31.  The LORD thy God bare thee, as
a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went.  Acts xvii.
22-31.  S. Paul at Athens.  _vv._ 24-28.  The God that made the world .
. . made of one every nation . . . that they should seek God . . .: for
in him we live, and move, and have our being; . . . as certain even of
your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring.

Further He is revealed as the Father of Jesus.  S. John xx. 17.  I
ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God.
S. John xiv. 12, 13 . . . I go unto the Father.  And whatsoever ye
shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified
in the Son.  S. Matth. xi. 27.  All things have been delivered unto me
of my Father, and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither
knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
will reveal him.

The Love of the Father towards men is shown by His tenderness towards
them.  Rom. viii. 39, (nothing) shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.  v. 8, God commendeth
his own love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us.  Psalm ciii. describes this tenderness, showing (_v._ 6) that
God's judgments against oppression are a kindness to the weak.  So in
{106} many other places.  Note also that vice and crime are an injury
to the wicked, and a burden to others.  Hence God's hatred of sin is a
sign of His Love.

Thus the first paragraph of this Creed is an Act of Worship, from
children towards their Father, as well as from the creatures of God's
hand towards their God.


II. (_a_) What the outside world said of Christ.

The foundation of Christianity was not laid with outward marks, but in
the hearts of those who, by one, and by two, united themselves together
to serve the Lord Christ.  As He had said, _The Kingdom of God came not
with observation_.  Not with notice from the rulers and the mighty of
this world, but in the quietness of homes, and the darkness of prisons,
the Church became so wide as to take a foremost place, without much
record in the chronicles of kingdoms.  We must therefore look to
Christian books for the history of early Christianity.  At the close of
the first century after the Saviour's Birth there were living three
great writers who were united in close friendship, viz. the younger
Pliny, and the historians Tacitus and Suetonius.  Suetonius wrote lives
of the first twelve Caesars, and, in his history of Nero (A.D. 54-68),
mentions the punishment of Christians, "a set of men of a new and
mischievous superstition."  Tacitus, describing the same reign[1], and
the burning of Rome (A.D. 64), {107} shows that Nero tried to throw the
blame from himself, by accusing and punishing the Christians.  He adds
a few words about them.  "The founder of that name was Christ, who was
put to death, in the reign of Tiberius, under Pontius Pilate: which
temporarily crushed the pernicious superstition, but it broke out
again, not only in Judaea, where the evil originated, but in Rome
also."  Tacitus has the idea that Christians were guilty of many
crimes: but their tortures and Nero's cruelty caused them to be pitied.
Pliny, on the other hand, made careful enquiries; and gives a very
different account of their personal character[2].

Thus we see that almost silently--'without observation'--the Christian
Life grew into its great place in outside history.


(_b_) What the Bible says of Jesus.

S. Matth. i. 21.  Thou shalt call his name Jesus.  xvi. 16 Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God.  S. John i.  14 the only begotten of
the Father, full of grace and truth, 1 Cor. xvi. 23 our Lord Jesus
Christ.  S. Matth. i. 18 his mother Mary was found with child of the
Holy Ghost.  S. Luke i. 35 that holy thing which shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God.  S. Matth. xxvi. 39 O my Father, if it
be possible, let this cup pass from me.  S. Mark xv. 15 Pilate, willing
to content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered
Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified.  25 and they
crucified him.  37 And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up {108}
the ghost.  44 And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead.  45 And
when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.  46 And
he . . . took him down . . . and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn
out of a rock, and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre.  xvi.
1-6 And when the sabbath was past . . . very early in the morning the
first day of the week, they came unto the sepulchre at the rising of
sun . . . the stone was rolled away . . . entering into the sepulchre,
they saw a young man sitting on the right side . . .  And he saith unto
them . . . Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen;
he is not here.  S. John xx. 20 he shewed unto them his hands and his
side.  Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord.  Acts i.
10, 11 And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up,
behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; which also said, Ye men
of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which
is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye
have seen him go into heaven.  1 Pet. iii. 22 (Jesus Christ) is gone
into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and authorities
and powers being made subject unto him.  S. Mark viii. 38 when the Son
of Man cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels, S.
Matth. xxv. 32 before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall
separate them one from another.  Rom. ii. 16 God shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ.  Acts x. 42 it is he which was ordained
of God to be the judge of quick and dead.  Rom. xiv. 10 we shall all
stand before the judgment seat of Christ.

{109}

_Note_ i.  Quick=living.  Cf. S. John vi. 63, it is the spirit that
quickeneth, A.-S. cwic.

Jesus=God the Saviour; or God is my Saviour: the same word as Joshua.
S. Matth. i. 21.

Christ=Anointed.  Ps. ii. 2; cf. Acts iv. 26.

_Note_ ii.  Death is the separation of soul and body: the body returns
to earth as it was (Eccl. xii. 7), and the spirit, or soul, returns to
God who gave it.  Resurrection is when the soul and body are reunited.
While we are alive there is a continual change of particles which form
the body; yet it is the same body.  Similarly after death the particles
decay, but the body of the Resurrection will be in that sense the same
body (1 Cor. xv. 38).  When we say that Christ was buried, we mean that
His Body was buried, and in this Creed we add that He descended into
hell: and we mean that His Soul went to the place of departed spirits,
which are waiting for the Judgment.  The word, Hell, has no meaning
here of punishment.  In Anglo-Saxon, helan=to cover, and hell=a covered
place.  In some parts of England we still _hele_ (=cover) _over_ roots
to keep off the frost.  Thus hell is used to translate Gehenna in S.
Matt. v. 22, and also Hades in Acts ii. 27, 31, which last is the
meaning here.  This Creed should be compared in parallel lines with the
Nicene Creed, in order to see what phrases are here which are omitted
there.  We shall notice the following: conceived, born, dead.  He
descended into hell, from the dead.  It is clear that the Nicene Creed
was framed to express more clearly the _Godhead_ of Jesus, which had
been denied {110} by Arius.  The Apostles' Creed, on the other hand,
expresses more clearly the true human nature of our Lord: His Birth and
Death are more definitely stated--either because His Resurrection from
the dead had been doubted, or because the verity of His human nature
was not well understood.  The words, _He descended into hell_, complete
the statement that he died as truly and completely as other men die.

The passage, 1 Peter iii. 19, 20 has often been quoted as indicating
that, in His death, He had a work to do amongst those who had died
before He came on earth--viz. to carry to the blessed dead the glad
tidings of His Conquest of Sin, whereby they, as well as others after
them, are saved.


_Note_ iii.  Among early heretics were some who thought that Jesus,
being truly God, could not have died except by a substitute--that he
_seemed_ to die.  They were thence called Docetae (from _dokein_ _to
appear_).  In like manner, many people have since attributed His
Perfect Holiness to His Godhead only, and not to His human victory over
real temptations.  This Creed sets forth the Bible doctrine of His
Manhood more particularly.  But it also declares His Godhead--partly
