tried one of the north-bound at 8,000 feet; but the going was awkward.
Then I went to 16,000.

But Grille, the attendant back at the bridge, evidently had his finder
on me, out of plain curiosity. He called me.

"They'll chase you out of there," came his voice. "Nothing doing up
there tonight. That's reserved. Didn't you know it?"

I grinned at him. In the glow of my pitlight I hoped he could see my
face and the grin.

"They'll never catch me," I said. "I'm traveling fast tonight."

"Chase you out," he persisted. "The patrol's keeping them low. General
Orders, an hour ago. Didn't you know it?"

"No."

"Well, you ought to. You ought to know everything in your business.
Besides, the lights are up."

They were indeed; I could see them in all the towers underneath me. I
was flying north-east; and at the moment, with a following wind, I was
doing something over three-fifty.

"But they'll shut off your power," Grille warned. "You'll come down soon
enough then."

Which was also true enough. The evening local-express for Boston and
beyond was overhauling me. And when the green beam of a traffic tower
came up and picked me out, I decided I had better obey. Dutifully I
descended until the beam, satisfied, swung away from me.

At 8,000 feet, I went on. There was too much traffic for decent speed
and the directors in every pilot bag and tower I passed seemed watching
me closely. At the latitude of Boston, I swung out to sea, off the main
arteries of travel. The early night mail for Eurasia,[4] with Great
London its first stop, went by me far overhead. I could make out its
green and purple lights, and the spreading silver beam that preceded it.

[Footnote 4: Now Europe and Asia.]

Alone in my pit, with the dull whir of my propellers alone breaking the
silence of the night, I pondered the startling events of the past few
hours. Above me the stars and planets gleamed in the deep purple of an
almost cloudless sky. Venus had long since dropped below the horizon.
But Mars was up there--approaching the zenith. I wondered what the
Martian helio might be saying. I could have asked Greys back at the
office. But Greys, I knew, would be too busy to bother with me.

What could Dr. Brende want of me? I was glad he had sent for me--there
was nowhere I would rather have gone this particular evening. And it
would give me a chance to see Elza again.

I could tell by the light-numerals below, that I was now over Maine. I
did not need to consult my charts; I had been up this way many times,
for, the Brendes--the doctor, his daughter Elza, and her twin brother
Georg--I counted my best friends.

I was over the sea, with the coast of Maine to my left. The traffic,
since I left the line of Boston, had been far less. The patrols flashed
by me at intervals, but they did not molest me.

I descended presently, and located the small two-mile island which Dr.
Brende owned and upon which he lived.

It was 10:20 when I came down to find them waiting for me on the runway.

The doctor held out both his hands. "Good enough, Jac. I got your
code--we've been waiting for you."

"It's crowded," I said. "Heavy up to Boston. And they wouldn't let me go
high."

He nodded. And then Elza put her cool little hand in mine.

"We're glad to see you, Jac. Very glad."

They took me to the house. Dr. Brende was a small, dark man of
sixty-odd, smooth-shaven, a thin face, with a mop of iron-grey hair
above it, and keen dark eyes beneath bushy white brows. He was usually
kindly and gentle of manner--at times a little abstracted; at other
times he could be more forceful and direct than anyone with whom I had
ever had contact.

At the house we were joined by the doctor's son, Georg. My best friend,
I should say; certainly, for my part, I treasured his friendship very
highly. He and Elza were twins--twenty-three years old at this time. I
am two years older; and I had been a room-mate with Georg at the Common
University of the Potomac.

Our friendship had, if anything, grown closer since my promotion into
the business world. Yet we were as unlike as two individuals could
possibly be. I am dark-haired, slim, and of comparatively slight
muscular strength. Restless--full of nervous energy--and, they tell me,
somewhat short of temper. Georg was a blond, powerful young giant. A
head taller than I--blue-eyed, from his mother, now dead--square-jawed,
and a complexion pink and white. He was slow to anger. He seldom spoke
impulsively; and usually with a slow, quiet drawl. Always he seemed
looking at life and people with a half-humorous smile--looking at the
human pageant with its foibles, follies and frailties--tolerantly. Yet
there was nothing conceited about him. Quite the reverse. He was
generally wholly deprecating in manner, as though he himself were of
least importance. Until aroused. In our days of learning, I saw Georg
once--just once--thoroughly angered.

"... Came up promptly, didn't you?" Georg was saying. He was leading me
to the house doorway, but I stopped him.

"Let's go to the grove," I suggested. We turned down from the small
viaduct, passed the house, and went into the heavy grove of trees
nearby.

"He's hungry," Elza declared. "Jac, did you eat at the office tonight?"

"Yes," I said.

"Did you really?"

"Some," I admitted. In truth the run up here had brought me a thoroughly
hearty appetite, which I just realized.

"I was pretty busy, you know," I added. "Such a night--but don't you
bother."

But she had already scurried away toward the house. Dear little Elza! I
wished then, for the hundredth time, that I was a man of wealth--or at
least, not as poor as a tower timekeeper. True, I made fair money--but
the urge to spend it recklessly dominated me. I decided in that moment,
to reform for good; and lay by enough to justify asking a woman to be my
wife.

We reclined on a mossy bank in the grove of trees, so thick a grove that
it hid the house from our sight.

The doctor extinguished the glowing lights with which the tree-branches
were dotted. We were in the semi-darkness of a beautiful, moonlit night.

"Don't go to sleep, Jac!"

I became aware that Georg and his father were smiling at me.

I sat up, snapping my wits into alertness. "No. Of course not. I guess
I'm tired. You've no idea what the office was like tonight. Roaring."

"I can imagine," Georg said. "You were at Park Sixty when the President
fell, weren't you?"

"Yes. But I wasn't supposed to be. I wasn't assigned to that. How did
you guess?"

"Elza saw you. She had our finder on you--I couldn't push her away from
it." His slow smile was quizzical.

"On me? In all that crowd. She must have searched about very carefully
to----"

I stopped; I could feel my cheeks burning, and was glad of the dimness
there under the trees.

"She did," said Georg.

"I sent for you, Jac," Dr. Brende interjected abstractedly,
"because----"

But Georg checked him. "Not now, father. Someone--anyone--might pick you
up. Your words--or read your lips--there's light enough here to register
on a finder."

The doctor nodded. "He's afraid--you see, Jac, it's these Venus----"

"Father--please. It's a long chance--but why take any? We can insulate
in the house."

The chance that someone who shouldn't be, was tuned to us as we sat
there in that lonely grove! With the doctor's widespread reputation--his
more than national prominence--it did not seem to me to be such a long
chance either, on this, of all nights.

"As you say, no use in putting private things into the public air," I
remarked; and I felt then as though a thousand hostile eyes and ears
were watching and listening. "We can talk of what everybody knows,"
Georg commented. "The Martian Ruler of the Little People was
assassinated an hour ago. You heard that coming up?"

"No," I said; but I had imagined as much. "Did they say--"

"They said nothing," Dr. Brende put in. "The flash of a dozen helioed
words--no more."

"It went dark, like Venus?"

"No. Just discontinued. I judge they're excited up there--the Bureau
disorganized perhaps--I don't know. That was the last we got at the
house, just before you came down. There may be something in there
now--you Inter-Allied people are pretty reliable."

The ruler of the Venus Central State, the leading monarch of Mars, and
our three chief executives of Earth--murdered almost simultaneously! It
was incredible--any one of the murders would have been incredible--yet
it was true.

There had been times--in the Inter-Allied Office, particularly--when I
had been insulated from aerial eavesdropping. But never had I felt the
need of it more than now. A constraint fell over me; I seemed afraid to
say anything. I think we all three felt very much like that; and it was
a relief when Elza arrived with my dainty little meal.

"Any word from Mars, Elza?" her father asked.

She sat down beside me, helping me to the food.

"I did not look," she answered.

She did not look, because she was busy preparing my meal! Dear little
Elza! And because of my accursed extravagance--my poverty--no word of
love had ever passed between us!

I thought I had never seen Elza so beautiful as this moment. A slim
little thing, perfectly formed and matured, and inches shorter than I.
Thick brown hair braided, and hanging below her waist. A face--pretty as
her mother's must have been--yet intellectual as her father's.

I had taken Elza to the great music festivals of the city, and counted
her the best dressed girl in all the vast throng. Tonight she was
dressed simply. A grey-blue, tubular sort of skirt, clinging close to
the lines of her figure and split at the side for walking; a
tight-fitting bodice, light in color (a man knows little of the
technicalities of such things); throat bare, with a flaring rolled
collar behind--a throat like a rose-petal with the moonlight on it; arms
bare, save for the upper, triangular sleeves.

It must suffice; I can only say she was adorable. Almost in silence I
ate my meal, with her beside me.

Georg went into the house once, to consult the news-tape. It was crowded
with Earth events--excitement, confusion everywhere--inconsequential
reports, they seemed, by comparison with what had gone before. But of
helios from Mars, or Venus, there were none reported. Of Venus, the tape
said nothing save that each of our westward stations was vainly calling
in turn, as the planet dropped toward its horizon.

I finished my meal--too leisurely for Georg and the doctor; and then we
all went into the house, to the insulated room where at last we could
talk openly.

As we entered the main corridor, we heard the low voice of the
Inter-Allied news-announcer, coming from the disc in a room nearby.

_"And Venus----"_

The words caught our attention. We hurried in, and stood by the
Inter-Allied equipment. Georg picked up the pile of tape whereon the
announcer's words were being printed. He ran back over it.

"Another helio from Venus!" he exclaimed. "Ten minutes ago."

And then I saw his lips go tight together. He made no move to hide the
tape from Elza, but she was beside him and already reading it. Her
fingers switched off the announcer's droning voice.

_"Pacific Coastal Station,"_ Elza read. In the sudden silence of the
room her voice was low, clear, and steady, though her hands were
trembling. _"P.C.S. 10.42 Venus helio. 'Defeat! Beware Tarrano! Notify
your Dr. Brende in Eurasia, danger.'"_

We men stared at each other. But Elza went on reading.

_"P.C.S. 10.44 Venus helio. 'Lost! No more! Smashing apparatus!' The
Venus sending station went dark at 10.44.30. Hawaiian station will call
later, but have little hope of re-establishing connection. Tokyohama
10.46 Official, via Potomac National Headquarters. Excitement here
continues. Levels crowded----"_

Elza dropped the tape. "That's all of importance. Venus Central Station
warning _you_, father."

A buzz across the room called the doctor to his personal receiver. It
was a message in code from Potomac National Headquarters. We watched the
queer-looking characters printing on the tape. Very softly, in a voice
hardly above a whisper, Georg decoded it.

_"Dr. Brende, see P.C.S. 10.42, warning you, probably of Venus
immigrants now here. Do you need guard? Or will you come to Washington
at once for personal safety?"_

"Father!" cried Elza.

Georg burst out. "Enough of this. We cannot--dare not talk in here.
Father, come----"

We went out into the corridor again, across which was the small room
insulated from all aerial vibrations. In the corridor a figure was
standing--the one other member of the Brende household--the
maid-servant, a girl about Elza's age. I knew her well, of course, but
this evening I had forgotten her existence. She was standing in the
corridor. Did I imagine it, or had she been gazing up at the mechanism
ten feet above the floor--the mechanism controlling the insulated room?

"You wish me, Miss Elza? I thought I heard you call."

"No, Ahla, not 'til later."

With a gesture of respect, the girl withdrew, passing from our sight
down the incline which led to the lower part of the house.

It was a very small incident, but in view of what was transpiring, it
gave me a shock nevertheless.

For Elza's maid was a Venus girl!




CHAPTER III

_Spy in the House_


The insulated room was small, with a dome-shaped ceiling, no windows,
and but one small, heavy door through which we entered, closing it
carefully behind us.

"At last," Dr. Brende exclaimed. "Now we can talk freely."

But I was not satisfied. "That girl, Ahla--can you trust her?"

They all looked at me in surprise. When one is close to danger,
sometimes one recognizes it least; with Ahla in this household for over
a year now, they could not imagine her an enemy.

"I saw her looking up at the insulator," I added swiftly. "Out there in
the corridor. Am I talking wild? Perhaps I am. But she seemed startled;
and she was standing just under the insulator, wasn't she?"

"But--" began Elza.

"Wait," I exclaimed. "When I first saw the President fall, at Park
Sixty, I felt that a Venus man had done it. These other murders--they're
all the same. Done by Venus men of the Cold Country."

"Ahla's country," Elza murmured.

"Yes. Exactly. And the Venus Central State has been attacked and has
fallen. An assassination on Mars, and three here on Earth--all
simultaneously. It's one gigantic plot, I tell you--and the Cold Country
of Venus is at the bottom of it."

Georg jumped to his feet. "I'll see if the room has been tampered with."

He was back presently. "The insulator is intact. I set the alarm bell.
If she touches it--"

"Where is she?"

"In the cookery, where she should be. I told her we would eat in an
hour. That ought to keep her busy."

Dr. Brende made an attempt at a smile. "I think we are all a little
overwrought--though with reason, no doubt. Sit down, Jac. Elza, come
here by me. Don't look so solemn, child."

He drew Elza to him, with his arm about her. I would have spoken, but
his gesture checked me. "I have much to say, Jac. I think I understand
these events, perhaps better than any of you. Let me go back two
years--when I was in the Venus Central State."

I nodded my remembrance; and he went on:

"At that time the authorities there were greatly perturbed. They were
menaced by rebellion in the Cold Country. They would not let the Cold
Country people into the Central State, for it is already overcrowded.
You did not know that, did you?"

"You mean the threatened rebellion?" I asked. "They were trying to keep
it secret, but we heard rumors."

"Just so. And Jac, I will tell you why they kept it secret. The Central
State was encouraging emigration to the Earth. The Venus Cold Country is
a poor place to live in--and on a whole its inhabitants are miserable
people. Villainous, too, I should say. The Central State did not want
them within its borders; and so it kept secret its troubles with
them--and encouraged emigration to the Earth.

"We--as you know--make no distinction between Venus people. We are
friendly with the Central State, and the Cold Country is governed by
it--or was until tonight. Thus, you see, we have been in the position of
having to receive these renegade immigrants. Shut out from all the good
land and decent climate of Venus, they began coming here.

"But we did not want them, and of late we have been holding them off,
cutting the quota allowed very materially. Last week, as you also know,
in Triple Conference, our three races decided to allow at each Inferior
Conjunction of the Earth and Venus, so small a quota that the Central
State protested vigorously.

"The controversy has been hot; but the Central State--trying to foist
off its undesirables on us--knows it is in the wrong. And fundamentally,
it is friendly to us--I think it has proven that in the last two hours."

Again I would have spoken, but he went on at once.

"I know you're familiar with most of this, Jac. But you news-gatherers
sometimes reason in too lurid a fashion. Let me go on. Mars was drawn
into the affair. To extricate ourselves, we offered to admit--under
temporary guard--all Venus immigrants who would pass on at once--at the
first astronomical opportunity--to Mars. This would have been very nice
for us--but not for Mars."

"They are hot-headed, in Mars," Georg commented.

"Quite so," said the doctor. "But very direct and forceful,
nevertheless. They met our suggestion with a law excluding Venus
immigrants entirely. It was this, I think, that precipitated tonight's
events--though of course they must have been brewing for a long time."

"This Tarrano--" I began.

"I heard of him when I was in Venus," said Dr. Brende. "He was at that
time a lower official in the Cold Country. Evidently he has risen in his
world.
