and Spaniards lost 3000 killed and wounded.

It was well for Rupert that Hugh kept so close to him, for nearly
the last shot fired by the enemy struck him, and he fell beneath
the water, when his career would have been ended had not Hugh
seized him and lifted him ashore. So much had the gallantry of the
little cornet attracted the attention and admiration of the Dutch,
that plenty of volunteers were glad to assist Hugh to carry him to
Fort Lille. There during the night a surgeon examined his wound,
and pronounced that the ball had broken two ribs, and had then
glanced out behind, and that if all went well, in a month he would
be about again.

The numbers of wounded were far beyond the resources of Fort Lille
to accommodate, and all were upon the following day put into boats,
and distributed through the various Dutch riverine towns, in order
that they might be well tended and cared for. This was a far better
plan than their accumulation in large military hospitals, where,
even with the greatest care, the air is always impure, and the
deaths far more numerous than when the men are scattered, and can
have good nursing and fresh air.

Rupert, with several other officers, was sent to Dort, at that time
one of the great commercial cities of Holland. Rupert, although
tightly bandaged, and forbidden to make any movement, was able to
take an interest in all that was going on.

"There is quite a crowd on the quay, Hugh."

"Yes, sir; I expect most of these Dutch officers have friends and
acquaintances here. Besides, as yet the people here cannot tell who
have fallen, and must be anxious indeed for news."

The crowd increased greatly by the time the boat touched the quay;
and as the officers stepped or were carried ashore, each was
surrounded by a group of anxious inquirers.

Hugh, standing by his master's stretcher, felt quite alone in the
crowd--as, seeing his British uniform, and the shake of his head at
the first question asked, none tried to question him--and looked
round vaguely at the crowd, until some soldiers should come to lift
the stretcher.

Suddenly he gave a cry of surprise, and to Rupert's astonishment
left his side, and sprang through the crowd. With some difficulty
he made his way to a young lady, who was standing with an elderly
gentleman on some steps a short distance back from the crowd. She
looked surprised at the approach of this British soldier, whose
eyes were eagerly fixed on her; but not till Hugh stepped in front
of her and spoke did she remember him.

"Mistress Von Duyk," he said, "my master is here wounded; and as he
has not a friend in the place, and I saw you, I made bold to speak
to you."

"Oh! I am sorry," the girl said, holding out her hand to Hugh.

"Papa, this is one of the gentlemen who rescued me, as I told you,
when Sir Richard Fulke tried to carry me off."

The gentleman, who had looked on in profound astonishment, seized
Hugh's hand.

"I am indeed glad to have an opportunity of thanking you.

"Hasten home, Maria, and prepare a room. I will go and have this
good friend brought to our house."



Chapter 11: A Death Trap.

Never did a patient receive more unremitting care than that which
was lavished upon Rupert Holliday in the stately old house at Dort.
The old housekeeper, in the stiffest of dresses and starched caps,
and with the rosiest although most wrinkled of faces, waited upon
him; while Maria von Duyk herself was in and out of his room,
brought him flowers, read to him, and told him the news; and her
father frequently came in to see that he lacked nothing. As for
Hugh, he grumbled, and said that there was nothing for him to do
for his master; but he nevertheless got through the days pleasantly
enough, having struck up a flirtation with Maria's plump and pretty
waiting maid, who essayed to improve his Dutch, of which he had by
this time picked up a slight smattering. Then, too, he made himself
useful, and became a great favourite in the servants' hall, went
out marketing, told them stories of the war in broken Dutch, and
made himself generally at home. Greatly astonished was he at the
stories that he heard as to the land around him; how not
infrequently great subsidences, extending over very many square
miles, took place; and where towns and villages stood when the sun
went down, there spread in the morning a sea very many fathoms
deep. Hugh could hardly believe these tales, which he repeated to
Rupert, who in turn questioned Maria von Duyk, who answered him
that the stories were strictly true, and that many such great and
sudden catastrophes had happened.

"I can't understand it," Rupert said. "Of course one could imagine
a sea or river breaking through a dyke and covering low lands, but
that the whole country should sink, and there be deep water over
the spot, appears unaccountable."

"The learned believe," Maria said, "that deep down below the
surface of the land lies a sort of soil like a quicksand, and that
when the river deepens its bed so that its waters do enter this
soil it melts away, leaving a great void, into which the land above
does sink, and is altogether swallowed up."

"It is a marvellously uncomfortable feeling," Rupert said, "to
think that one may any night be awoke with a sudden crash, only to
be swallowed up."

"Such things do not happen often," Maria said; "and the districts
that suffer are after all but small in comparison to Holland. So I
read that in Italy the people do build their towns on the slopes of
Vesuvius, although history says that now and again the mountain
bubbles out in irruption, and the lava destroys many villages, and
even towns. In other countries there are earthquakes, but the
people forget all about them until the shock comes, and the houses
begin to topple over their heads."

"You are right, no doubt," Rupert said. "But to a stranger the
feeling, at first, of living over a great quicksand, is not
altogether pleasant.

"Tomorrow the doctor says I may leave my room. My own idea is that
I need never have been kept there at all."

"If there had been any great occasion for you to have moved about,
no doubt you might have done so," Maria said; "but you might have
thrown back your cure, and instead of your bones knitting well and
soundly, as the leech says they are in a fair way to do, you might
have made but a poor recovery. Dear me, what impatient creatures
boys are!"

"No, indeed I am not impatient," Rupert said. "You have all made me
so comfortable and happy, that I should indeed be ungrateful were I
to be impatient. I only want to be about again that I may spare you
some of the trouble which you bestow upon me."

"Yes, that is all very well and very pretty," Maria said, laughing;
"but I know that you are at heart longing to be off to join your
regiment, and take part in all their marching and fighting. Do you
know, an officer who came here with you after that terrible fight
near Antwerp, told me that you covered yourself with glory there?"

"I covered myself with mud," Rupert laughed. "Next day, when I had
dried a little, I felt as if I had been dipped in dough and then
baked. I am sure I looked like a pie in human shape when you first
saw me, did I not?"

"It would have been difficult to tell the colour of your uniform,
certainly," Maria smiled. "Fortunately, neither cloth nor tailors
are scarce in our good town of Dort, and you will find a fresh suit
in readiness for you to attire yourself in tomorrow."

"Oh, that is good of you," Rupert said, delighted; for he had been
thinking ruefully of the spectacle he should present the next day.

As to Hugh, he had been fitted out in bourgeois clothes since he
came, and had said no word as to uniform.

In another fortnight Rupert was thoroughly restored to health. His
wound had healed, his bones had perfectly set, and he was as fit
for work as ever. Even his host could not but allow that there was
no cause for his further detention. During this time Rupert had
talked much with the Burgomaster, who spoke French fluently, and
had told him frequently and earnestly of the grievous harm that was
done to the prospects of the war by the mischievous interference
with the general's plans by the Dutch deputies, who, knowing
nothing whatever of war, yet took upon themselves continually to
thwart the plans of the greatest general of the age. Van Duyk
listened with great attention, and promised that when he went
shortly to Haarlem he would use all his influence to abbreviate the
powers which the deputies so unwisely used.

Two or three days before the date fixed for Rupert's departure, he
was walking in the town with Mynheer Von Duyk and his daughter,
when he observed a person gazing intently at him from the entrance
to a small bylane. He started, and exclaimed:

"There is that rascal, Sir Richard Fulke!"

"Where?" exclaimed both his companions.

"He has gone now," Rupert said. "But he stood there in shadow, at
the entrance to that lane."

So saying, he hurried forward, but no sign of his enemy was
visible.

"Are you sure it was he?" Mynheer Von Duyk asked. "What can he be
doing in Holland?"

Rupert then in a few words recounted their meeting in Liege, the
subsequent attempt to murder him at the mill, and the disappearance
of Sir Richard Fulke, and his exchange into some other regiment.

Von Duyk was much disturbed.

"This touches me nearly," he said. "It is from your interference on
behalf of my daughter that you have incurred this fellow's enmity,
and it is clear that he will shrink at nothing to gratify it.
Moreover, I cannot consider my daughter to be in safety, as long as
so reckless a man as this is in the town. I will go at once to the
magistrates, and urge that my daughter goes in danger of him, and
so obtain an order to search for and arrest him. In a few hours we
will have him by the heels, and then, after a while in prison, we
will send him packing across the frontier, with a warning that if
he comes back he will not escape so lightly."

The search, however, was not successful; and Mynheer Von Duyk was
beginning to think that Rupert must have been mistaken, when the
officer of the magistracy discovered that a man answering to the
description given had been staying for three days at a small tavern
by the water, but that he had hastily taken a boat and sailed,
within a half hour of being seen by Rupert.

"It is a low resort where he was staying," Von Duyk said, "A tavern
to which all the bad characters of the town--for even Dort has some
bad characters--do resort. If he came here to do you harm, or with
any fresh design upon my daughter, he would find instruments there.
I had intended to have left Maria behind, when I travelled to the
Hague next week; but I will now take her with me, with two or three
stout fellows as an escort.

"As for you, friend Rupert, you have but two more evenings here in
Dort, but I pray you move not out after dusk, for these long wars
have made many men homeless and desperate, and it is not good for
one who has an enemy to trust himself abroad at night, alone."

The next morning Hugh went down to the quay with one of the clerks
of Von Duyk, and struck a bargain with some boatmen to carry Rupert
and himself to Bergen op Zoom. It was a craft of some four or five
tons burden, with a good sized cabin.

The next day Hugh went down early to the boat with the bans
containing Rupert's luggage and his own, and a servant of Von Duyk
accompanied him, bearing some provisions and a few choice bottles
of wine for their use on the way.

"Do you know, Master Rupert," he said on his return, "I don't much
like the look of that boatman chap. When we got down to the quay
this morning, he was talking with two men whose faces I did not
see, for they walked suddenly and hastily away, but who seemed to
me to flavour much of the two men we disturbed that evening when
they were carrying off Miss Von Duyk. I could not swear to them,
for I did not get a fair sight of them before, but they were about
the same size and height, and it was clear that they did not wish
to be recognized."

Rupert made no reply for a while, but thought the matter over.

"Well, Hugh, I wish it had not been so, for I hate quarrels and
brawls, but I do not think that we need be uneasy, especially now
that we are warned. The boat carries but three men, and as we shall
have our pistols and swords, I imagine that we are a match for
these Dutch boatmen. See that the pistols are loaded, and say
naught to our kind friends here as to your suspicions. I would not
make them uncomfortable."

Before taking leave of their friends, Rupert was drawn aside by
Mynheer Von Duyk, who begged to know if he had any necessity for
money, and assured him that then or at any other time he should be
glad to honour any drafts that Rupert might draw upon him.

"I am not a man of many words," he said, "but in saving my daughter
from that ruffian you have laid me under an obligation which I
should be glad to discharge with half my fortune. I am, as you
know, a rich man--I may say a very rich man. Had you been a few
years older, I would gladly have given my daughter to you did your
inclination and hers jump that way. As it is, I can only regard you
as a younger brother of hers, and view you as a sort of son by
adoption. Young men in cavalry regiments require horses and have
many expenses, and you will really pain me much if you refuse to
allow me to act as your banker. I have, believing that you would
not take it wrongly, paid in to your account with the paymaster of
your regiment the sum of two hundred pounds, and have told him that
the same sum would be paid to your account annually so long as the
regiment might be in Flanders, and that he may further cash any
order drawn by you upon my house.

"There now, my daughter is waiting, and the hour for sailing is at
hand. Do not let us say any more about it."

So saying he hurried Rupert out into the hall where Maria Von Duyk
was waiting, before he could have raised any objection, had he
wished to do so. But in truth Rupert felt that he could not refuse
the kind offer without giving pain, and he knew moreover that this
allowance, which to the rich merchant was a mere trifle, would add
greatly to his comfort, and enable him to enter more freely than he
had yet done in the plans and pursuits of his brother officers, who
were for the most part young men of fortune. With a word or two of
sincere thanks therefore, he accompanied the worthy Dutchman, and
twelve minutes later the party were on their way down to the quay.

"A surly looking knave is your captain," Mynheer Von Duyk said as
they stood by the boat while the men prepared for a start. "I see
he belongs not to this town, but to Bergen. However, the voyage is
not a long one, and as you know but little of our language it will
matter but slightly whether his temper be good or bad.

"There, I see he is ready. Goodbye, Master Holliday. Goodbye, my
good Hugh. All fortune attend you, and God keep you both from
harm."

Maria added her affectionate adieux to those of her father, and in
a few minutes the boat was moving down the river under full sail.

"Hugh, you may as well overhaul the cabin at once," Rupert said;
"we have paid for its sole use during the voyage. Cast your eye
carefully round, and see if there is anything that strikes you as
being suspicious. I see no arms on deck; see that none are hidden
below."

Hugh returned on deck in a few minutes.

"It seems all right, Master Rupert. There are some provisions in a
locker, and in another are a cutlass, a couple of old pistols, and
a keg half full of powder; I should say by its weight there are ten
pounds in it. The arms are rusted, and have been there some time, I
should say. There is also a bag of heavy shot, and there is a long
duck gun fastened to the beam; but all these things are natural
enough in a boat like this. No doubt they fire a charge or two of
shot into a passing flight of wildfowl when they get the chance."

"That's all right then, Hugh, especially as they evidently could
not go down into the cabin without our seeing them; and as with our
pistols and swords we could make short work of them even if they
did mean mischief, we need not trouble ourselves any further in the
matter. It's going to be a wet night, I am afraid; not that it
makes much difference, but one would rather have stayed on deck as
long as one could keep awake, for the smells of the cabin of a
Dutch fishing boat are not of the sweetest."

Rupert was not mistaken. As the darkness came on a thick heavy mist
began to fall steadily; and he and Hugh descended through the half
door from the cockpit into the cabin.

"Now let us have supper, Hugh; there are plenty of good things; and
I have a famous appetite."

The thoughtfulness of Mynheer von Duyk's housekeeper had placed two
candles in the basket together with two drinking glasses; and the
former were soon lighted, and by the aid of a drop or two of their
own grease, fixed upright on the rough table. Then a splendid pie
was produced; the neck was knocked off a bottle; the lads drew out
their clasp knives, and set to work.

"Here is a bottle of schnapps," Hugh said, examining the basket
when they had finished a hearty meal.

"You may as well give that to the boatman, Hugh. I expect the good
frau had him in her thoughts when she put it in, for she would
hardly give us credit for such bad taste as to drink that stuff
when we could get good wine."

Hugh handed out the bottle to the boatman, who took it with a surly
grunt of satisfaction. It was raining steadily, and the wind had
almost dropped. An hour later the lads agreed that they were ready
for sleep. Hitherto the door had been slightly open to admit air.

"Shall I shut the door, Master Rupert?"

"Well, perhaps you had better, Hugh. We have got into the way of
sleeping heavily at Dort, without any night guard or disturbance. I
doubt not that these Dutchmen mean us no harm. Still it is well to
be on the safe side."

"There is no fastening to it, Master Rupert."

"Well, take your sword out of its scabbard, Hugh, and put the
scabbard against the door, so that it will fall with a crash if the
door is opened. Then, if we have a pistol close to hand, we can
sleep in security."

Hugh obeyed his instructions; and in a few minutes, wrapped in
their military cloaks, they were fast asleep on the lockers, which
served as benches and beds. How long they slept they knew not; but
both started up into a sitting attitude, with their hands on their
pistols.

"Who's there?" both shouted; but there was no answer.

The darkness was intense; and it was clear that whoever had tried
to open the door had shut it again.

"Have you your tinderbox handy, Hugh? If so, let us have a light.

"Those fellows are moving about overhead, Hugh; but we had better
stay where we are. The scabbard may have shaken down, for the wind
has got up, and the boat is feeling it; and if they mean foul play
they could knock us on the head as we go out from under the low
door.

"Hallo! What's that?"

The "that" was the falling of some heavy substance against the
door.

"Those are the coils of cable, Hugh; they have blocked us in. Go on
striking that light; we can't push the door open now."

Some more weight was thrown against the door, and then all was
still.

Presently Hugh succeeded in striking a light--no easy task in the
days of flint and steel--and the candles being lighted, they sat
down to consider the position.

"We are prisoners, Master Rupert; no doubt about that."
