_Flowers_--Greenish white, small, 5-parted, mostly imperfect, in a
drooping compound raceme of rounded clusters. _Stem:_ 3 to 6 ft. high,
branches spreading. _Roots:_ Large, thick, fragrant. _Leaves:_
Compounded of heart-shaped, sharply tapering, saw-edged leaflets from 2
to 5 in. long, often downy underneath. Lower leaves often enormous.
_Fruit:_ Dark reddish-brown berries.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rich open woods, wayside thickets, light soil.

_Flowering Season_--July-August.

_Distribution_--New Brunswick to Georgia, west to the Mississippi.

A striking, decorative plant, once much sought after for its medicinal
virtues--still another herb with which old women delight to dose their
victims for any malady from a cold to a carbuncle. Quite a different
plant, but a relative, is the one with hairy spike-like shoots from its
fragrant roots, from which the "very precious" ointment poured by Mary
upon the Saviour's head was made. The nard, an Indian product from that
plant, which is still found growing on the distant Himalayas, could then
be imported into Palestine only by the rich.

How certain of the winter birds gormandize on the resinous, spicy little
berries! A flock of juncos will strip the fruit from every spikenard in
the neighborhood the first day it arrives from the North.

It should be understood that the Wild Spikenard, or False Solomon's
Seal, has not the remotest connection with this tribe of plants.

The Wild or False Sarsaparilla (_A. nudicaulis_), so common in woods,
hillsides, and thickets, shelters its three spreading umbels of
greenish-white flowers in May and June beneath a canopy formed by a
large, solitary, compound leaf. The aromatic roots, which run
horizontally sometimes three feet or more through the soil, send up a
very short, smooth proper stem which lifts a tall leafstalk and a
shorter, naked flower-stalk. The single large leaf, of exquisite bronzy
tints when young, is compounded of from three to five oval, toothed
leaflets on each of its three divisions.

While the true sarsaparilla of medicine should come from a quite
different herb that flourishes in Mexico and South America, this one
furnishes a commercial substitute enormously used as a blood purifier
and cooling summer drink. Burrowing rabbits delight to nibble the long,
slender, fragrant roots.




PARSLEY FAMILY (_Umbelliferae_)


Wild or Field Parsnip; Madnep; Tank

_Pastinaca sativa_

_Flowers_--Dull or greenish yellow, small, without involucre or
involucels; borne in 7 to 15 rayed umbels, 2 to 6 in. across. _Stem:_ 2
to 5 ft. tall, stout, smooth, branching, grooved, from a long, conic,
fleshy, strong-scented root. _Leaves:_ Compounded (pinnately), of
several pairs of oval, lobed, or cut sharply toothed leaflets; the
petioled lower leaves often 1-1/2 ft. long.

_Preferred Habitat_--Waste places, roadsides, fields.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--Common throughout nearly all parts of the United States
and Canada. Europe.

Men are not the only creatures who feed upon such of the umbel-bearing
plants as are innocent--parsnips, celery, parsley, carrots, caraway, and
fennel, among others; and even those which contain properties that are
poisonous to highly organized men and beasts, afford harmless food for
insects. Pliny says that parsnips, which were cultivated beyond the
Rhine in the days of Tiberius, were brought to Rome annually to please
the emperor's exacting palate, yet this same plant, which has overrun
two continents, in its wild state (when its leaves are a paler yellowish
green than under cultivation) often proves poisonous. A strongly acrid
juice in the very tough stem causes intelligent cattle to let it
alone--precisely the object desired.


Wild Carrot; Queen Anne's Lace; Bird's-nest

_Daucus Carota_

_Flowers_--Small, of unequal sizes (polygamous), white, rarely pinkish
gray, 5-parted, in a compound, flat, circular, umbel, the central floret
often dark crimson; the umbels very concave in fruit. An involucre of
narrow, pinnately cut bracts. _Stem:_ 1 to 3 ft. high, with stiff hairs;
from a deep, fleshy, conic root. _Leaves:_ Cut into fine, fringy
divisions; upper ones smaller and less dissected.

_Preferred Habitat_--Waste lands, fields, roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--Eastern half of United States and Canada. Europe and
Asia.

A pest to farmers, a joy to the flower-lover, and a welcome signal for
refreshment to hosts of flies, beetles, bees, and wasps, especially to
the paper-nest builders, the sprangly wild carrot lifts its fringy
foliage and exquisite lacy blossoms above the dry soil of three
continents. From Europe it has come to spread its delicate wheels over
our summer landscape, until whole fields are whitened by them east of
the Mississippi. Having proved fittest in the struggle for survival in
the fiercer competition of plants in the over-cultivated Old World, it
takes its course of empire westward year by year, finding most favorable
conditions for colonizing in our vast, uncultivated area; and the less
aggressive, native occupants of our soil are only too readily crowded
out. Would that the advocates of unrestricted immigration of foreign
peasants studied the parallel examples among floral invaders!

Still another fiction is that the cultivated carrot, introduced to
England by the Dutch in Queen Elizabeth's reign, was derived from
this wild species. Miller, the celebrated English botanist and
gardener, among many others, has disproved this statement by utterly
failing again and again to produce an edible vegetable from this wild
root. When cultivation of the garden carrot lapses for a few
generations, it reverts to the ancestral type--a species quite
distinct from _Daucus Carota_.




DOGWOOD FAMILY _(Cornaceae)_


Flowering Dogwood

_Cornus florida_

_Flowers_--(Apparently) large, white or pinkish, the four conspicuous
parts simulating petals, notched at the top, being really bracts of an
involucre below the true flowers, clustered in the centre, which are
very small, greenish yellow, 4-parted, perfect. _Stem:_ A large shrub or
small tree, wood hard, bark rough. _Leaves:_ Opposite oval,
entire-edged, petioled, paler underneath. _Fruit:_ Clusters of
egg-shaped scarlet berries, tipped with the persistent calyx.

_Preferred Habitat_--Woodlands, rocky thickets, wooded roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--April-June.

_Distribution_--Maine to Florida, west to Ontario and Texas.

Has Nature's garden a more decorative ornament than the Flowering
Dogwood, whose spreading flattened branches whiten the woodland borders
in May as if an untimely snowstorm had come down upon them, and in
autumn paint the landscape with glorious crimson, scarlet, and gold,
dulled by comparison only with the clusters of vivid red berries among
the foliage? Little wonder that nurserymen sell enormous numbers of
these small trees to be planted on lawns. The horrors of pompous
monuments, urns, busts, shafts, angels, lambs, and long-drawn-out
eulogies in stone in many a cemetery are mercifully concealed in part by
these boughs, laden with blossoms of heavenly purity.

  "Let dead names be eternized in dead stone,
  But living names by living shafts be known.
  Plant thou a tree whose leaves shall sing
  Thy deeds and thee each fresh, recurrent spring."

When the Massachusetts farmers think they hear the first brown thrasher
in April advising them to plant their Indian corn, reassuringly calling,
"Drop it, drop it--cover it up, cover it up--pull it up, pull it up,
pull it up" (Thoreau), they look to the dogwood flowers to confirm the
thrasher's advice before taking it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Low or Dwarf Cornel, or Bunchberry _(C. canadensis)_, whose scaly
stem does its best to attain a height of nine inches, bears a whorl of
from four to six oval, pointed, smooth leaves at the summit. From the
midst of this whorl comes a cluster of minute greenish florets,
encircled by four to six large, showy, white petal-like bracts, quite
like a small edition of the Flowering Dogwood blossom. Tight clusters
of round berries, that are lifted upward on a gradually lengthened
peduncle after the flowers fade (May-July), brighten with vivid touches
of scarlet, shadowy, mossy places in cool, rich woods, where the dwarf
cornels, with the partridge vine, twin flower, gold thread, and fern,
form the most charming of carpets.

Even more abundant is the Silky Cornel, Kinnikinnick, or Swamp Dogwood
(_C. Amomum_) found in low, wet ground, and beside streams, from
Nebraska to the Atlantic Ocean, south to Florida and north to New
Brunswick. Its dull, reddish twigs, oval or oblong leaves, rounded at
the base, but tapering to a point at the apex, and usually silky-downy
with fine, brownish hairs underneath (to prevent the pores from clogging
with vapors arising from its damp habitat); its rather compact, flat
clusters of white flowers from May to July, and its bluish berries are
its distinguishing features. The Indians loved to smoke its bark for its
alleged tonic effect.




HEATH FAMILY (_Ericaceae_)


Pipsissewa; Prince's Pine

_Chimaphila umbellata_

_Flowers_--Flesh-colored, or pinkish, fragrant, waxy, usually with deep
pink ring around centre, and the anthers colored; about 1/2 in. across;
several flowers in loose, terminal cluster. Calyx 5-cleft; corolla of 5
concave, rounded, spreading petals; 10 stamens, the filaments hairy;
style short, conical, with a round stigma. _Stem:_ Trailing far along
ground, creeping, or partly subterranean, sending up sterile and
flowering branches 3 to 10 in. high. _Leaves:_ Opposite or in whorls,
evergreen, bright, shining, spatulate to lance-shaped, sharply
saw-edged.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry woods, sandy leaf mould.

_Flowering Season_--June-August.

_Distribution_--British Possessions and the United States north of
Georgia from the Atlantic to the Pacific. Also Mexico, Europe, and Asia.

A lover of winter indeed (_cheima_ = winter and _phileo_ = to love) is the
Prince's Pine, whose beautiful dark leaves keep their color and gloss in
spite of snow and intense cold. A few yards of the trailing stem, easily
ripped from the light soil of its woodland home, make a charming indoor
decoration, especially when the little brown seed-cases remain. Few
flowers are more suggestive of the woods than these shy, dainty,
deliciously fragrant little blossoms.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Spotted Wintergreen, or Pipsissewa (_C. maculata_), closely
resembles the Prince's Pine, except that its slightly larger white or
pinkish flowers lack the deep pink ring; and the lance-shaped leaves,
with rather distant saw-teeth, are beautifully mottled with white along
the veins. When we see short-lipped bees and flies about these flowers,
we may be sure their pollen-covered mouths come in contact with the
moist stigma on the summit of the little top-shaped style, and so effect
cross-fertilization.


Indian Pipe; Ice-plant; Ghost-flower; Corpse-plant

_Monotropa uniflora_

_Flowers_--Solitary, smooth, waxy, white (rarely pink), oblong
bell-shaped, nodding from the tip of a fleshy, white, scaly scape 4 to
10 in. tall. Calyx of 2 to 4 early-falling white sepals; 4 or 5 oblong,
scale-like petals; 8 or 10 tawny, hairy stamens; a 5-celled, egg-shaped
ovary, narrowed into the short, thick style. _Leaves:_ None. _Roots:_ A
mass of brittle fibres, from which usually a cluster of several white
scapes arises. _Fruit:_ A 5-valved, many-seeded, erect capsule.

_Preferred Habitat_--Heavily shaded, moist, rich woods, especially under
oak and pine trees.

_Flowering Season_--June-August.

_Distribution_--Almost throughout temperate North America.

Colorless in every part, waxy, cold, and clammy, Indian pipes rise like
a company of wraiths in the dim forest that suits them well. Ghoulish
parasites, uncanny saprophytes, for their matted roots prey either on
the juices of living plants or on the decaying matter of dead ones, how
weirdly beautiful and decorative they are! The strange plant grows also
in Japan, and one can readily imagine how fascinated the native artists
must be by its chaste charms.

Yet to one who can read the faces of flowers, as it were, it stands a
branded sinner. Doubtless its ancestors were industrious, honest
creatures, seeking their food in the soil, and digesting it with the
help of leaves filled with good green matter (chlorophyll) on which
virtuous vegetable life depends; but some ancestral knave elected to
live by piracy, to drain the already digested food of its neighbors; so
the Indian Pipe gradually lost the use of parts for which it has need no
longer, until we find it to-day without color and its leaves degenerated
into mere scaly bracts. Nature had manifold ways of illustrating the
parable of the ten pieces of money. Spiritual law is natural law: "From
him that hath not, even that he hath shall be taken away." Among plants
as among souls, there are all degrees of backsliders. The foxglove,
which is guilty of only sly, petty larceny, wears not the equivalent of
the striped suit and the shaved head; nor does the mistletoe, which
steals crude food from the tree, but still digests it itself, and is
therefore only a dingy yellowish green. Such plants, however, as the
broom-rape, Pine Sap, beech-drops, the Indian Pipe, and the
dodder--which marks the lowest stage of degradation of them all--appear
among their race branded with the mark of crime as surely as was Cain.

No wonder this degenerate hangs its head; no wonder it grows black with
shame on being picked, as if its wickedness were only just then
discovered! To think that a plant related on one side to many of the
loveliest flowers in Nature's garden--the azaleas, laurels,
rhododendrons, and the bonny heather--and on the other side to the
modest but no less charming wintergreen tribe, should have fallen from
grace to such a depth! Its scientific name, meaning a flower once
turned, describes it during only a part of its career. When the minute,
innumerable seeds begin to form, it proudly raises its head erect, as if
conscious that it had performed the one righteous act of its life.


Pine Sap; False Beech-drops; Yellow Bird's-nest

_Monotropa Hypopitis_

_Flowers_--Tawny, yellow, ecru, brownish pink, reddish, or bright
crimson, fragrant, about 1/2 in. long; oblong bell-shaped; borne in a
one-sided, terminal, slightly drooping raceme, becoming erect after
maturity. _Scapes:_ Clustered from a dense mass of fleshy, fibrous
roots; 4 to 12 in. tall, scaly bracted, the bractlets resembling the
sepals. _Leaves:_ None.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry woods, especially under fir, beech, and
oak trees.

_Flowering Season_--June-October.

_Distribution_--Florida and Arizona, far northward into British
Possessions. Europe and Asia.

Branded a sinner, through its loss of leaves and honest green coloring
matter (chlorophyll), the Pine Sap stands among the disreputable gang of
thieves that includes its next of kin the Indian Pipe, the broom-rape,
dodder, coral-root, and beech-drops. Degenerates like these, although
members of highly respectable, industrious, virtuous families, would
appear to be as low in the vegetable kingdom as any fungus, were it not
for the flowers they still bear. Petty larceny, no greater than the
foxglove's at first, then greater and greater thefts, finally lead to
ruin, until the pine-sap parasite either sucks its food from the roots
of the trees under which it takes up its abode, or absorbs, like a
ghoulish saprophyte, the products of vegetable decay. A plant that does
not manufacture its own dinner has no need of chlorophyll and leaves,
for assimilation of crude food can take place only in those cells which
contain the vital green. This substance, universally found in plants
that grub in the soil and literally sweat for their daily bread, acts
also as a moderator of respiration by its absorptive influence on light,
and hence allows the elimination of carbon dioxide to go on in the cells
