your valise."

Andy took it in his hand and followed the landlady up two flights of
stairs. She panted a little, being a stout lady, but Andy would have run
upstairs if he had been alone.

On the upper floor there were three rooms, the doors of all being open.

"That is Mr. Warren's room," said Mrs. Norris, pointing to the front
apartment.

It was a room of about fourteen feet square, and was neatly furnished.
It contained a double bed and the usual chamber furniture.

"It will accommodate two gentlemen nicely," said Mrs. Norris. "Perhaps,
after you get acquainted with Mr. Warren, you may strike up a bargain to
room with him."

"I don't think I should like to room with a sickly gentleman."

"Well, there is something in that. One night Mr. Warren had a fit--I
don't know what kind of one--and rolled onto the floor. I room just
underneath, and I was very much frightened."

"It would have frightened me, too, if I had roomed with him."

"Well, fits ain't very pleasant, I allow."

"Who rooms in the third room, next to mine?"

"A young man of eighteen, named Perkins. I don't rightly know what sort
of a place he is in. I think it's a neckwear store on Spring Street."

Andy was rather glad to learn that there was one boarder somewhere near
his own age.

He did not think he should enjoy the acquaintance of Mr. Warren. He was
prejudiced against him by the knowledge that he was sickly and had fits.

"There are other boarders on my second floor. You will make their
acquaintance at the table."

"What are your hours for meals, Mrs. Norris?"

"We have lunch from twelve to one. Breakfast is from seven to nine, and
we have dinner from six to seven, though in the case of a boarder who
is kept later by business we stretch a point, and try to accommodate
him. I hope that will suit you."

"Oh, I am sure it will."

"Shall you be at lunch to-day?"

"No, I don't think so. I am going to explore the city a little."

"Very few of my boarders are present at lunch. Still there is a bite for
them, if they do come."

"I would like to wash, if you will send up some water and a towel."

"Eva will bring them right up. Have you soap of your own?"

"Yes."

"Gentlemen often prefer providing their own. If you will give me your
name in full, I will enter it on my books."

"My name is Andrew Grant."

"Very well."

"What is your rate of board? Mr. Gale will pay it, but I should like to
know what it is."

"Five dollars a week for your room. Mr. Warren pays seven, but he has a
large room to himself. If you should decide to room with him, I shall
charge you five dollars apiece."

"Thank you; I don't think we shall come to any agreement."

She went downstairs, and Andy surveyed his room with interest.

It was certainly small--quite the narrowest room he had ever seen. There
was one window from which he had a view of the back yard, rather a
forlorn-looking space. There was a cat perched on the high, board fence
separating the yard from that of the adjoining house.

Andy liked cats, and called out "Pussy." The cat looked up, and mewed
her recognition and acknowledgment of the friendly overture. Then Eva
came up with a pitcher of water and a towel.

"Will one do you?" she asked. "The rest are in the wash, and I'll bring
you another this evening."

"One will be sufficient for the present."

"So you're comin' here to live?" she said, sociably.

"Yes, Eva."

"I hope you don't have fits, like Mr. Warren."

"I don't think I ever had one yet," answered Andy, with a smile.

"I'm glad of that. I'm afraid of gentlemen that have fits."

Eva went downstairs, and Andy proceeded to make his ablutions. It was a
dusty day, and the water was refreshing.

After he had washed his face and hands he opened his gripsack and took
out his brush and comb, which he placed on a tiny bureau in one corner
of the room. It contained two drawers, and in one of them he put away
the contents of the valise.

By this time it was half-past ten, and he put on his hat and went
downstairs. He went out into the street, and after a moment of
indecision walked to Broadway. He thought he could not do better than to
walk down this wonderful thoroughfare, of which he had heard so much.

It did occur to him that he might report at the jewelry store, but he
would see enough of that hereafter and he preferred to take a little
walk about the city.

Andy used his eyes to good advantage. He looked in at the shop windows,
and watched the human tide that swept by him.

Finally he found himself accosted by one of the passersby.

"My young friend, could you oblige me with a quarter to take me to
Newark? My pocket has been picked, and--"

All this seemed familiar. Andy looked up and recognized at once the
stranger whom he had relieved in front of the Grand Central Depot.

"When did you get back from Yonkers?" he asked, abruptly.

"I never was in Yonkers."

"I gave you a quarter only an hour or two ago to get to your sick sister
in Yonkers."

Muttering that there was some mistake, the man hurried away, looking
confused.

"I wonder if I shall ever meet him again?" thought Andy.




CHAPTER XV.

ANDY'S OPPOSITE NEIGHBOR.


Andy walked about the city, using his eyes industriously. At one o'clock
he went into a restaurant on Park Row, where he got a fair lunch for
twenty-five cents.

This was more than he intended to pay usually, but on this first day in
the city he did not care to go back to the boarding house.

After lunch he made his way to the entrance of the Brooklyn Bridge, and
got into one of the cars. He enjoyed the prospect visible from the
windows, and felt that this alone would pay him for visiting New York.

Just before they reached the other end there was a cry of alarm from a
stout German woman who sat on the other side of the car.

"I've been robbed!" she exclaimed. "My purse is gone!"

Of course this attracted general attention.

"Was there much in the purse, madam?" asked a kind-looking, elderly man.

"Yes, there was six dollars--it was a great deal to me."

"Are you sure you had it when you entered the car?"

"Yes; I took it out of my pocket when I paid for a ticket."

"I think your pocket must have been picked."

Sitting next to the woman was a man who seemed absorbed in reading a
morning newspaper; even the woman's complaint did not appear to excite
his attention.

This led Andy to move his head to get a nearer view of him. He started
in surprise. It was the adventurer, whom he had already met twice that
morning. He had little doubt that he was the thief.

It was perhaps somewhat rash to hazard a charge without proof, but he
felt indignant and could not resist the impulse.

"I think that man has your purse," he said, pointing to the individual
behind the newspaper.

"This is an outrage!" exclaimed the latter, with assumed anger. "I am a
Boston merchant."

He was respectably dressed, and the charge did not seem very plausible.

"My boy, you should be careful how you make such charges," said his next
neighbor, reprovingly.

But Andy was not abashed.

"I know something of that man," he said, quietly. "I have met him twice
this morning."

"Has he robbed you?"

"No; but he asked me to give him a quarter to take him to his sick
sister in Yonkers. This was at the Grand Central Depot; an hour or two
later I met him on Broadway, and he wanted money to take him to Newark."

"The boy is entirely mistaken," said the adventurer.

At the same instant, under cover of the newspaper, he adroitly let the
stolen purse drop to the floor at his feet.

By this time the cars had reached the Brooklyn end of the bridge.

"Why, there is your purse," exclaimed the adventurer, with a sudden
glance downward. "You must have dropped it."

"Oh, thank you, sir!" said the poor woman, overjoyed.

"I hope you won't suspect a gentleman again," said the thief, in lofty
indignation.

"No, I won't, sir. I was sure you didn't take it."

Andy, who had seen the trick, smiled, but he was satisfied with the
recovery of the purse.

The passengers looked puzzled. They had not made up their minds as to
the guilt or innocence of the man charge with the theft.

"You see, young man," said Andy's neighbor, in a tone of reproof, "you
were mistaken."

Andy smiled again.

"I saw him drop the purse on the floor," he answered, quietly.

"Bless my soul! Are you sure?"

"Yes, sir."

The passengers left the car, Andy and the thief among them.

Andy lost track of his acquaintance till, as they reached Fulton Street,
he heard some one hissing in his ear:

"Boy, you are too fresh! I'll get even with you yet!"

Then the thief, passing him rapidly, got into a Myrtle Avenue car, and
this was the last he saw of him for that day.

Andy walked about the streets of Brooklyn for a while and returned by
Fulton Ferry. Then he went back to his boarding place, arriving there
between three and four o'clock.

As he went up to his room he noticed that the door of the large room
opposite was open. A young man, of about thirty, was sitting in a
rocking-chair, reading.

He was of medium height and sallow complexion. He wore his hair long,
and had a high, narrow forehead.

"I suppose that is the man who has fits," thought Andy.

The young man had noticed Andy's entrance into his own room, and, rising
from the rocking-chair, crossed the hall and knocked lightly at the
door.

"Come in," said Andy.

"I suppose this is Mr. Grant," began the young man, bowing. "I am Mr.
Warren, and live in the room opposite."

"Won't you come in and sit down?" asked Andy, with a glance at the only
chair the room contained.

"Don't let me take your only chair. I'll sit on the bed, if you don't
mind."

"Make yourself at home, Mr. Warren," said Andy, with easy cordiality.

"So you know my name?"

"Mrs. Norris spoke to me of you."

"Did she? What did she say?" asked the young man, showing some
curiosity.

"I think she said you were literary--that you wrote for some of the
magazines."

"Yes; I am very fond of writing. Do you write?"

"Not for publication."

"Ah, yes, I see. You would be rather young for an author."

"Are you connected with any particular magazine?"

"No. I am a free lance. I contribute to several. I have just sent an
