
"But I must go at once, for he may wake up and miss me. Good-by!"

"Good-by!" said Kit.

He had no time to say more, for the child was already hurrying down the
hill.




CHAPTER XXIX.

JANET MEETS THE GIANT.


Janet took her way homewards, hurrying with quick feet, lest her father
should wake up before she arrived. But she had taken so early a start
that she found him still sleeping soundly. She instantly began to make
preparations for breakfast.

By the time it was on the table her father woke up and yawned. With his
waking there came the thought of his young circus captive, and the
vengeance he intended to wreak upon him. This pleasant idea roused him
completely, and he dressed himself briskly.

"Is breakfast ready, Janet?" he asked.

"Yes, father."

"What time is it?"

"Seven o'clock," answered Janet, looking at the clock over the mantel.

"I am expecting Bob Stubbs here this morning. Have you got enough for
him?"

"I think so, father," replied Janet. She did not speak with alacrity,
for Mr. Stubbs was no favorite of hers.

At that moment a step was heard at the door, and the gentleman spoken of
made his appearance.

"You're late, Dick," said Stubbs, rubbing his bristling chin.

"Yes, I got tired out yesterday. When the mine's shut down I like to
take my time. Have you had breakfast, Bob?"

"Ye-es," answered Stubbs hesitating, as he glanced at the neatly spread
table, with the eggs and bacon on the center dish.

"Never mind! You can eat some more. Put a chair for him, Janet."

"This lass of yours is growing pretty," said Stubbs, with a glance of
admiration.

"There's a compliment for you, lass!" said the father.

Janet, however, did not appear to appreciate it, and continued to look
grave.

"Wonder how the kid's getting along," said Bob Stubbs, with his mouth
full of bacon.

"I reckon he's hungry," said Dick Hayden, in a voice of satisfaction.

"Have you left him without anything to eat, father?" asked Janet.

"Yes."

"The poor fellow will be starved."

"And serves him right, too. There ain't no call to pity him."

"Why won't you take him some breakfast if you're going round there? I
will put some up in a tin pail."

"What do you say to that, Bob, hey?" said Hayden.

"It's natural for the gal to pity him. He's a nice lookin' chap enough."

"He's nicer looking than he will be when we get through with him, eh,
Bob?"

"That's so, Dick."

As Janet listened to this conversation, her heart revolted against the
brutality conveyed by the words. She felt dissatisfied to think that her
own father was such a man. She could not well feel an affection for
him, remembering how ill he had treated her gentle mother, who, as she
knew, would be living to-day had she been wedded to a better husband.

The two men did not linger long at the table. They were accustomed to
swallow their food rapidly, in order to get to the scene of their daily
labor on time. So in twenty minutes they rose from the table, and
putting on their hats left the cabin.

As they departed Janet breathed a sigh of relief, and congratulated
herself that she had released the poor boy, and so saved him from the
brutal treatment he was likely to receive at the hands of the two
miners.

"He will have had plenty of time to get away before father and Mr.
Stubbs reach the cabin," she said to herself.

Janet washed the dishes, and then, having an errand at the store, put on
her hat and left the cabin. She did not trouble herself to lock the
door, for there was nothing in the place likely to excite the cupidity
of any dishonest person.

Janet had accomplished a part of the distance when she saw approaching
her a figure that at once attracted her earnest attention.

The reason will be readily understood when I say that it was Achilles
Henderson, the circus giant.

Mr. Henderson had been exploring the neighborhood in the hope of finding
some trace of Kit, but thus far had been unsuccessful. He was very much
perplexed, having absolutely no clew, and was thinking of starting for
Groveton, where the circus was billed to appear that evening. He was
walking in an undecided way, and never thought of noticing the little
girl who stood staring at him. Indeed he was so used to being stared at
that he took it as a matter of course, and did not think of giving the
curious gazer a second glance.

But his attention was called by a low, half frightened voice.

"Mr. Giant!"

"Well, little girl, what do you want?" he asked.

"Are you looking for anybody?" asked Janet, first glancing carefully
around, to make sure that she was not likely to be overheard.

"Yes," answered Achilles, quickly. "I am looking for a boy."

"A circus boy?"

"Yes; do you know where he is?"

"Come nearer! I don't want anybody to hear what I say."

"All right, my little maid! Is the boy alive and well?"

"Yes, he was two hours ago."

"Where is he?"

"I don't know where he is now."

Achilles looked disappointed.

"Tell me all you know," he said.

"My father and Bob Stubbs took him last night, and shut him up in a
lonely cabin on the hill."

"Where is the cabin?"

"He isn't there now. I let him out."

"Good for you, little girl! You're a trump. You're a great deal better
than your father. Do you know where the boy went?"

"I will tell you where I told him to go."

"Where is your father now? Is he at work?"

"No; the mine is shut down."

"How did you know that the boy was in the cabin?"

"I heard father tell where he was last night, when he was at supper. So
I got up very early, and stole out to release him, for I was afraid
father might kill him. He said he meant to punish him for what you did.
He said he would rather get at you."

"He's quite welcome to, if he wants to," answered Achilles, grimly. "On
the whole I wouldn't advise him to tackle me."

"He thought you had gone on with the circus."

"I should have done so if I hadn't missed Kit."

"Yes; he told me his name was Kit."

"Was he tied?"

"Yes; I took a knife with me and cut the ropes."

"The poor fellow must have passed an uncomfortable night."

"Yes, he said so."

"He must have been very glad to see you."

"Yes, he was. I am only afraid of one thing."

"What is that?"

"Father and the other man left the house more than half an hour ago to
go to the cabin. When they find him gone, they will be very angry."

"Like as not."

"And I think they will try to find him."

"Very true; I wish I knew where he was. They wouldn't dare to attack him
in my company."

"No, Mr. Giant. You must be very strong."

"I think I would be a match for them."

Achilles questioned Janet minutely as to the advice she had given Kit.

"I might follow the boy," he said to himself, "at a guess, but there's
only half a chance of my hitting right. Where is the cabin?" he asked,
suddenly.

Janet pointed in the proper direction.

"I know what I'll do," he said, with sudden decision. "I'll follow your
father and the other man. All the danger to Kit is likely to come from
them. If I can get track of them, I can make sure that no mischief will
be done."

Achilles Henderson then stepped over a fence which an ordinary man would
have had to climb, and made his way to the deserted cabin.




CHAPTER XXX.

DICK HAYDEN FINDS THE BIRD FLOWN.


Half an hour previously Dick Hayden and his congenial friend, Bob
Stubbs, reached the cabin. They had much pleasant and jocose
conversation on the way touching their young captive, and how he had
probably passed the night. They had personal injuries to avenge, and
though Achilles was responsible for them, they proposed to wreak
vengeance on the boy whom a luckless fate had thrown into their hands.

"My shoulders are sore yet," said Hayden, "over the fall that big brute
gave me."

"And my head hasn't got over the crack I got when he laid me flat with
his club," responded Stubbs.

"Well, we've got a friend of his, that's one comfort. I'm going to take
it out of the kid's hide."

"You don't mean to--do for him?" said Stubbs, cautiously.

"I don't mean to kill him, if that's what you mean, Stubbs. I have too
much regard for my neck, but I mean to give him a sound flogging. You
ain't afraid, be you?"

"Catch Bob Stubbs afraid of anything, except the hangman's rope! I don't
mind telling you that I have reasons to be afraid of that."

"Why? You've never been hung, have you?"

"No; but an uncle of mine was strung up in England."

"What for?"

"He got into trouble with a fellow workman and stabbed him."

"He was in bad luck. Why didn't he cut it, and come to America?"

"He tried it, but the bobbies caught him in the steerage of an ocean
steamer, and then it was all up with him."

"Well, I hope his nephew will come to a better end. But here we are at
the cabin."

There was nothing in the outward appearance of the hut to indicate that
the bird was flown. Janet bolted the door after releasing the prisoner,
and no one could judge that it had been opened.

"All is safe," said Bob Stubbs.

"Of course it is! Why shouldn't it be?"

"No reason; but some of his friends might have found him."

"All his friends are at Groveton. Then they had no idea what we did with
him."

"They must have found out that he was gone."

"They couldn't find him, so that would do him no good."

Stubbs was about to draw the bolt, but Hayden stayed his hand.

"Wait a minute, Bob," he said; "I'll look in at the window, and see what
he is doing."

Dick Hayden went around to the rear of the building, and flattened his
face against the pane in the effort to see the corner where the captive
had been tied. He could not see very distinctly, but what he did see
startled him.

He could perceive no one.

"Could the boy have loosened the rope?" he asked himself hurriedly.

Even in that case, as the window was nailed so that it could not be
opened, and the door was bolted, there seemed no way of escape. His eyes
eagerly explored other portions of the cabin, but he could not catch a
glimpse of Kit.

He rushed round to the front, and in an excitement which Stubbs could
not understand, pulled the bolt back with a jerk.

"What's the matter, Dick?" asked Stubbs, staring.

Dick Hayden did not answer, but threw open the door.

He strode in, and peeped here and there.

"The boy's gone!" he said hoarsely, to Stubbs, who followed close
behind.

"Gone!" echoed Stubbs, in blank amazement. "How did he get away?"

"That's the question," responded Dick, growling.

"Well, I'm--flabbergasted! There's witchery here!"

Dick Hayden bent over and picked up the pieces of rope which lay in the
corner where the prisoner had been placed. He examined the ends, and
said briefly, turning to Stubbs: "They've been cut!"

"So they have, Dick. Who in natur' could have done it? Perhaps the kid
did it himself. Might have had a knife in his pocket."

"Don't be a fool, Stubbs! Supposin' he'd done it, how was he goin' to
get out?"

"That's what beats me!"

"Somebody must have let him out."

"Do you think it's his circus friends?"

"No; they're all in Groveton. Somebody must have been passin' and heard
the boy holler, and let him out."

"What are you goin' to do about it, Dick?"

"Goin' to sit down and take a smoke. It may give me an idea."

It will be noticed that of these two, Dick Hayden, as the bolder and
stronger spirit, was the leader, and Bob Stubbs the subservient
follower. Stubbs was no less brutal, when occasion served, but he was
not self reliant. He wanted some one to lead the way, and he was willing
to follow.

The two men sat down beside the cabin, and lit their pipes. Nothing was
said for a time. Dick seemed disinclined to conversation, and Stubbs was
always disposed to be silent when enjoying a smoke.

The smoke continued for twenty minutes or more.

Finally Dick withdrew the pipe from his mouth.

"Well, Dick, what do you think about it? What shall we do?" inquired his
friend.

"I am going to foller the kid."

"But you don't know where he's gone," replied Stubbs.

"No; but I may strike his track. Are you with me?"

"Of course I am."

"Then listen to me. The one that let the boy out knows the neighborhood.
The boy would naturally want to go to Groveton, and likely he would be
directed to Stover. If the kid had any money, he would ask Stover to
drive him over, or else he would foot it."

"You're right, Dick. That's what he'd do," said Stubbs, admiring his
companion's penetration.

"Then we must go over to Stover's."

"All right! I'm with you."

"I'm a poor man, Bob, but I'd give a ten dollar bill to have that kid in
my power once more."

"I don't doubt it, Dick."

"I hate to have it said that a kid like that got the advantage of Dick
Hayden."

"So would I, Bob."

"If I get hold of him I'll give him a lesson that he won't soon forget."

"And serve him right too."

The two men rose, and took their way across the fields, following
exactly the same path which our hero had traveled earlier in the
morning.

They walked with brisk steps, having a definite purpose in view. Dick
