broken, but that loss of blood was all he had to suffer from.

Thus slowly and with much difficulty we bore our wounded comrade to the
camp.



CHAPTER NINE.

I DISCOVER A CURIOUS INSECT, AND PETERKIN TAKES A STRANGE FLIGHT.

It happened most fortunately at this time that we were within a short
day's journey of a native village, to which, after mature consideration,
we determined to convey Jack, and remain there until he should be
sufficiently recovered to permit of our resuming our journey.  Hitherto
we had studiously avoided the villages that lay in our route, feeling
indisposed to encounter unnecessarily the risk of being inhospitably
received--perhaps even robbed of our goods, if nothing worse should
befall us.  There was, however, no other alternative now; for Jack's
wounds were very severe, and the amount of blood lost by him was so
great that he was as weak as a child.  Happily, no bones were broken, so
we felt sanguine that by careful nursing for a few weeks we should get
him set firmly upon his legs again.

On the following morning we set forth on our journey, and towards
evening reached the village, which was situated on the banks of a small
stream, in the midst of a beautiful country composed of mingled plain
and woodland.

It chanced that the chief of this village was connected by marriage with
King Jambai--a most fortunate circumstance for us, as it ensured our
being hospitably received.  The chief came out to meet us riding on the
shoulders of a slave, who, although a much smaller man than his master,
seemed to support his load with much case.  Probably habit had
strengthened him for his special work.  A large hut was set apart for
our accommodation; a dish of yams, a roast monkey, and a couple of fowls
were sent to us soon after our arrival, and, in short, we experienced
the kindest possible reception.

None of the natives of this village had ever seen a white face in their
lives, and, as may well be imagined, their curiosity and amazement were
unbounded.  The people came constantly crowding round our hut,
remaining, however, at a respectful distance, and gazed at us until I
began to fear they would never go away.

Here we remained for three weeks, during which time Jack's wounds healed
up, and his strength returned rapidly.  Peterkin and I employed
ourselves in alternately tending our comrade, and in scouring the
neighbouring woods and plains in search of wild animals.

As we were now approaching the country of the gorilla--although, indeed,
it was still far distant--our minds began to run more upon that terrible
creature than used to be the case; and our desire to fall in with it was
increased by the strange accounts of its habits and its tremendous power
that we received from the natives of this village, some of whom had
crossed the desert and actually met with the gorilla face to face.  More
than once, while out hunting, I have been so taken up with this subject
that I have been on the point of shooting a native who appeared
unexpectedly before me, under the impression that he was a specimen of
the animal on which my thoughts had been fixed.

One day about a week after our arrival, as I was sitting at the side of
Jack's couch relating to him the incidents of a hunt after a buffalo
that Makarooroo and I had had the day before, Peterkin entered with a
swaggering gait, and setting his rifle down in a corner, flung himself
on the pile of skins that formed his couch.

"I'll tell you what it is," said he, with the look and tone of a man who
feels that he has been unwarrantably misled--"I don't believe there's
such a beast as a gorilla at all; _now_, that's a fact."

There was something so confident and emphatic in my comrade's manner
that, despite my well-grounded belief on that point, I felt a sinking at
the heart.  The bare possibility that, after all our trouble and toil
and suffering in penetrating thus far towards the land which he is said
to inhabit, we should find that there really existed no such creature as
the gorilla was too terrible to think upon.

"Peterkin," said I anxiously, "what do you mean?"

"I mean," replied he slowly, "that Jack is the only living specimen of
the gorilla in Africa."

"Come, now, I see you are jesting."

"Am I?" cried Peterkin savagely--"jesting, eh?  That means expressing
thoughts and opinions which are not to be understood literally.  Oh, I
would that I were sure that I am jesting!  Ralph, it's my belief, I tell
you, that the gorilla is a regular sell--a great, big, unnatural hairy
_do_!"

"But I saw the skeleton of one in London."

"I don't care for that.  You may have been deceived, humbugged.  Perhaps
it was a compound of the bones of a buffalo and a chimpanzee."

"Nay, that were impossible," said I quickly; "for no one pretending to
have any knowledge of natural history and comparative anatomy could be
so grossly deceived."

"What like was the skeleton, Ralph?" inquired Jack, who seemed to be
rather amused by our conversation.

"It was nearly as tall as that of a medium-sized man--I should think
about five feet seven or eight inches; but the amazing part about it was
the immense size and thickness of its bones.  Its shoulders were much
broader than yours, Jack, and your chest is a mere child's compared with
that of the specimen of the gorilla that I saw.  Its legs were very
short--much shorter than those of a man; but its arms were tremendous--
they were more than a foot longer than yours.  In fact, if the brute's
legs were in the same proportion to its body as are those of a man, it
would be a giant of ten or eleven feet high.  Or, to take another view
of it, if you were to take a robust and properly proportioned giant of
that height, and cut down his legs until he stood about the height of an
ordinary man, _that_ would be a gorilla."

"I don't believe it," cried Peterkin.

"Well, perhaps my simile is not quite so felicitous as--"

"I don't mean that," interrupted Peterkin; "I mean that I don't believe
there's such a brute as a gorilla at all."

"Why, what has made you so sceptical?" inquired Jack.

"The nonsense that these niggers have been telling me, through the
medium of Mak as an interpreter; that is what has made me sceptical.
Only think, they say that a gorilla is so strong that he can lift a man
by the nape of the neck clean off the ground with one of his hind feet!
Yes, they say he is in the habit of sitting on the lower branches of
trees in lonely dark parts of the wood watching for prey, and when a
native chances to pass by close enough he puts down his hind foot,
seizes the wretched man therewith, lifts him up into the tree, and
quietly throttles him.  They don't add whether or not he eats him
afterwards, or whether he prefers him boiled or roasted.  Now, I don't
believe that."

"Neither do I," returned Jack; "nevertheless the fact that these fellows
recount such wonderful stories at all, is, to some extent, evidence in
favour of their existence: for in such a country as this, where so many
wonderful and horrible animals exist, men are not naturally tempted to
invent _new_ creatures; it is sufficient to satisfy their craving for
the marvellous that they should merely exaggerate what does already
exist."

"Go to, you sophist! if what you say be true, and the gorilla turns out
to be only an exaggerated chimpanzee or ring-tailed roarer, does not
that come to the same thing as saying that there is no gorilla at all--
always, of course, excepting yourself?"

"Credit yourself with a punched head," said Jack, "and the account shall
be balanced when I am sufficiently recovered to pay you off.  Meanwhile,
continue your account of what the niggers say about the gorilla."

Peterkin assumed a look of offended dignity as he replied--

"Without deigning any rejoinder to the utterly absurd and totally
irrelevant matter contained in the preliminary sentences of your last
remark, I pass on to observe that the natives of these wilds hold the
opinion that there is one species of the gorilla which is the residence
of the spirits of defunct niggers, and that these fellows are known by
their unusual size and ferocity."

"Hold," cried I, "until I get out my note-book.  Now, Peterkin, no
fibs."

"Honour bright," said he, "I'll give it you just as I got it.  These
_possessed_ brutes are never caught, and can't be killed.  (I only hope
I may get the chance to try whether that be true or not.)  They often
carry off natives into the woods, where they pull out their toe and
finger nails by the roots and then let them go; and they are said to be
uncommonly fond of sugar-cane, which they steal from the fields of the
natives sometimes in a very daring manner."

"Is that all?" said I.

"All!" exclaimed my comrade.  "How much more would you have?  Do you
suppose that the gorilla can do anything it likes--hang by its tail from
the moon, or sit down on its nose and run round on its chin?"

"Massa Jack," said Makarooroo, entering the hut and interrupting our
conversation at this point, "de chief hims tell to me for to tell to you
dat w'en you's be fit for go-hid agin hims gib you cottle for sit upon."

"Cottle, Mak! what's _cottle_?" inquired Jack, with a puzzled look.

"Ho, massa, you know bery well; jist cottle--hoxes, you know."

"Indeed, I don't know," replied Jack, still more puzzled.

"I've no doubt," interposed Peterkin, "that he means cuttle, which is
the short name for cuttle-fish, which, in such an inland place as this,
must of course be hoaxes!  But what do you mean, Mak?  Describe the
thing to us."

Mak scratched his woolly pate, as if he were quite unable to explain
himself.

"O massas, you be most stoopid dis yer day.  Cottle not a ting; hims am
a beast, wid two horn an' one tail.  Dere," said he, pointing with
animation to a herd of cattle that grazed near our hut, "dat's cottle,
or hoxes."

We all laughed at this proposal.

"What!" cried Jack, "does he mean us to ride upon `hoxes' as if they
were horses?"

"Yis, massa, hims say dat.  Hims hear long ago ob one missionary as hab
do dat; so de chief he tink it bery good idea, an' hims try too, an'
like it bery much; only hims fell off ebery tree steps an' a'most broke
all de bones in him's body down to powder.  But hims git up agin and
fell hoff agin.  Oh, hims like it bery much!"

"If we follow the chief's example," said I, laughing, "we shall scarcely
be in a fit state to hunt gorillas at the end of our journey; but now I
come to think of it, the plan seems to me not a bad one.  You know a
great part of our journey now lies over a comparatively desert country,
where we shall be none the worse of a ride now and then on ox-back to
relieve our limbs.  I think the proposal merits consideration."

"Right, Ralph," said Jack.--"Go, Mak, and tell his majesty, or
chieftainship, or his royal highness, with my compliments, that I am
much obliged by the offer, and will consider it.  Also give him this
plug of tobacco; and see you don't curtail its dimensions before it
leaves your hand, you rascal."

Our guide grinned as he left the hut to execute his mission, and we
turned to converse on this new plan, which, the more we thought of it,
seemed the more to grow in our estimation as most feasible.

"Now, lads, leave me," said Jack, with a sigh, after we had chatted for
more than an hour.  "If I am to go through all that our worthy host
seems to have suffered, it behoves me to get my frame into a fit state
to stand it.  I shall therefore try to sleep."

So saying he turned round on his side, and we left him to his slumbers.

As it was still early in the afternoon, we two shouldered our rifles and
strolled away into the woods, partly with the intention of taking a shot
at anything that might chance to come in our way, but chiefly with the
view of having a pleasant chat about our prospect of speedily reaching
that goal of our ambition--the gorilla country.

"It seems to me," observed Peterkin, as we walked side by side over an
open grassy and flower-speckled plain that lay about a couple of miles
distant from the village--"it seems to me that we shall _never_ reach
this far-famed country."

"I have no doubt that we shall," said I; "but tell me, Peterkin, do you
really doubt the existence of the gorilla?"

"Well, since you do put it to me so very seriously, I can scarce tell
what I believe.  The fact is, that I'm such a sceptical wretch by nature
that I find it difficult to believe anything unless I see it."

I endeavoured to combat this very absurd state of mind in my companion
by pointing out to him very clearly that if he were to act upon such a
principle at all times, he would certainly disbelieve many of the
commonest facts in nature, and give full credit, on the other hand, to
the most outrageous absurdities.

"For instance," said I, "you would believe that every conjurer swallows
fire, and smoke, and penknives, and rabbits, because you _see_ him do
it; and you would disbelieve the existence of the pyramids, because you
don't happen to have seen them."

"Ralph," said my companion seriously, "don't go in too deep, else I
shall be drowned!"

I was about to make some reply, when my attention was attracted by a
very singular appearance of moisture at the foot of a fig-tree under
which we were passing.  Going up to it I found that there was a small
puddle of clear water near the trunk.  This occasioned me much surprise,
for no rain had fallen in that district since our arrival, and probably
there had been none for a long period before that.  The ground
everywhere, except in the large rivers and water-courses, was quite dry,
insomuch that, as I have said, this little solitary pool (which was not
much larger than my hand) occasioned us much surprise.

"How comes it there?" said I.

"That's more than I can tell," replied Peterkin.  "Perhaps there's a
small spring at the root of the tree."

"Perhaps there is," said I, searching carefully round the spot in all
directions; but I found nothing to indicate the presence of a spring--
and, indeed, when I came to think of it, if there had been a spring
there would also certainly have been a water-course leading from it.
But such was not the case.  Presently I observed a drop of water fall
into the pool, and looking up, discovered that it fell from a cluster of
insects that clung to a branch close over our heads.

I at once recognised this water-distilling insect as an old
acquaintance.  I had seen it before in England, although of a
considerably smaller size than this African one.  My companion also
seemed to be acquainted with it, for he exclaimed--

"Ho!  I know the fellow.  He's what we used at home to call a
`frog-hopper' after he got his wings, and a `cuckoo-spit' before that
time; but these ones are six times the size of ours."

I was aware that there was some doubt among naturalists as to whence
these insects procured the water they distilled.  My own opinion,
founded on observations made at this time, led me to think the greater
part of the moisture is derived from the atmosphere, though, possibly,
some of it may be procured by suction from the trees.  I afterwards paid
several visits to this tree, and found, by placing a vessel beneath
them, that these insects distilled during a single night as much as
three or four pints of water!

Turning from this interesting discovery, we were about to continue our
walk, when we observed a buffalo bull feeding in the open plain, not
more than five or six hundred yards off from us.

"Ha!  Ralph, my boy," cried Peterkin enthusiastically, "here is metal
more attractive!  Follow me; we must make a detour in order to get to
leeward of him."

We set off at a brisk pace, and I freely confess that, although the
contemplation of the curious processes of the water-distilling insect
afforded me deeper and more lasting enjoyment, the gush of excitement
and eagerness that instantly followed the discovery of the wild buffalo
bull enabled me thoroughly to understand the feeling that leads men--
especially the less contemplative among them--infinitely to prefer the
pleasures of the chase to the calmer joys attendant upon the study of
natural history.

At a later period that evening I had a discussion with my companions on
that subject, when I stood up for the pursuit of scientific knowledge as
being truly elevating and noble, while the pursuit of game was, to say
the least of it, a species of pleasure more suited to the tastes and
condition of the savage than of the civilised man.

To this Peterkin replied--having made a preliminary statement to the
effect that I was a humbug--that a man's pluck was brought out and his
nerves improved by the noble art of hunting, which was beautifully
scientific in its details, and which had the effect of causing a man to
act like a man and look like a man--not like a woman or a nincompoop, as
was too often the case with scientific men.

Hereupon Jack announced it as his opinion that we were both wrong and
both right; which elicited a cry of "Bravo!" from Peterkin.  "For," said
Jack, "what would the naturalist do without the hunter?  His museums
would be almost empty and his knowledge would be extremely limited.  On
the other hand, if there were no naturalists, the hunter--instead of
being the hero who dares every imaginable species of danger, in order to
