The Project Gutenberg EBook of Deaconesses in Europe, by Jane M. Bancroft

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Deaconesses in Europe
       and their Lessons for America

Author: Jane M. Bancroft

Release Date: March 6, 2007 [EBook #20747]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEACONESSES IN EUROPE ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, David Wilson, Bill Tozier and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                 DEACONESSES IN EUROPE

                          AND

               THEIR LESSONS FOR AMERICA



                           BY

                 JANE M. BANCROFT, Ph.D



                  WITH AN INTRODUCTION

                           BY

             EDWARD G. ANDREWS, D.D., LL.D.

       _Bishop of the Methodist Episcopal Church_


                                            "No life
   Can be pure in its purpose and strong in its strife,
   And all life not be purer and stronger thereby."


                _NEW YORK: HUNT & EATON_
             _CINCINNATI: CRANSTON & STOWE_
                          1890




                IN GRATEFUL RECOGNITION,

                           TO

           THE EARNEST AND DEVOTED WOMEN WHO,

      AS MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEACONESS WORK

                           OF

          THE WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY,

  HAVE AIDED IN EXTENDING THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE DIACONATE
                        OF WOMEN,

               THIS BOOK IS RESPECTFULLY

                        Dedicated

                     BY THE AUTHOR.




AUTHOR'S NOTE.


The Author has aimed to present an accurate and concise statement of the
deaconess cause as it exists at the present time.

In all cases where it was possible, original sources of information have
been consulted.

Many friends, both in Europe and America, have given invaluable aid, for
which words of thanks are an inadequate recognition.

The excellent Index at the close of the volume was kindly prepared by
the Rev. J. C. Thomas.

Acknowledgments are also due to Mr. Gillett, Librarian of the Union
Theological Seminary, and to Mr. C. H. A. Bjerregaard, of the Astor
Library, for putting not only the facilities of the library, but their
personal assistance, at the service of the writer.

                                                  JANE M. BANCROFT.
  NEW YORK CITY, _June 5, 1889_.




                             CONTENTS.


                            CHAPTER I.

                          THE DIACONATE.

  Compassion a Christian virtue--Brotherhood of all men in
  Christ--Foreign Missions--Home Missions--Service of
  ministering compassion gives rise to the diaconate--Diaconate
  of women--Its qualities--Field of labor                 Page 9

                            CHAPTER II.

                 DEACONESSES IN THE EARLY CHURCH.

  Little knowledge of early Church--Pliny's letter--Apostolic
  Constitutions--Deaconesses, widows, and virgins--Duties of the
  deaconess--Chrysostom, Olympias--Deaconesses in Western
  Church--Decline in importance--Extinction--Influences that led
  to decay                                                    18

                           CHAPTER III.

     DEACONESSES FROM THE TWELFTH TO THE NINETEENTH CENTURIES.

  Beguines--Characteristics--Duties--Gerhard Groot--Sisters of
  the Common Life--Obligations--Duties--Waldenses--Bohemian
  Brethren--Luther--Calvin--Reformed Church at Wesel--
  Deaconesses in Amsterdam--Damsels of Charity--Mennonites and
  Moravians                                                   34

                            CHAPTER IV.

       FLIEDNER, THE RESTORER OF THE OFFICE OF DEACONESS.

  Efforts for the restoration of the office of deaconess made by
  Kloenne--Amalie Sieveking--Von Stein--Count von der Recke--
  Fliedner--His childhood--Youth--Student life--Pastorate and
  travels--Marriage--First prison society--Founding of refuge--
  Need of training schools--Rhenish-Westphalian Deaconess
  Society                                                     46

                            CHAPTER V.

               THE INSTITUTIONS AT KAISERSWERTH.

  Opening of hospital training-school--Gertrude Reichardt--The
  Home-life--Normal school--Fliedner's wife--Publishing house--
  Orphan asylum--Insane asylum--Dispensary--Farm--"Salem"--House
  of Evening Rest--Extension of work--Berlin--Foreign lands
  Jerusalem--Beirut--Smyrna--Bucharest--Florence--Rome        61

                           CHAPTER VI.

   THE REGULATIONS AT KAISERSWERTH AND THE DUTIES AND SERVICES
                       OF THE DEACONESSES.

  Two classes of deaconesses--Nurses--Teachers--Qualifications--
  Probationers--Duties--Service of consecration--Conferences--
  Table of results--Instances of work--Duisburg--
  Schleswig-Holstein war--Austrian war--Franco Prussian war   79

                           CHAPTER VII.

              OTHER ESTABLISHMENTS ON THE CONTINENT.

  House at Strasburg--Muelhausen--Marthashof at Berlin--
  Neudettelsau--St. Loup--Riehen--Zuerich--Gallneukirchen--
  Characteristics of institutions--Countries where they exist 93

                          CHAPTER VIII.

                 DEACONESSES IN GERMAN METHODISM.

  Origin of Bethany Society--House at Frankfort--Hamburg--
  Berlin--St. Gall--Zuerich--Sister Myrtha--House of Rest--"God's
  Fidelity"--House regulations--Training--Results            110

                           CHAPTER IX.

                      DEACONESSES IN PARIS.

  Deaconess Home on Rue de Reuilly--Situation--School--
  Hospital--House of Correction--Preparatory school--
  Instruction--Prison mission--Mademoiselle Dumas--Expenses of
  house--Its founders--Deaconess house on Rue Bridaine--
  Character of work--Duties of the Sisters--Their consecration--
  Importance of parish deaconesses                           120

                            CHAPTER X.

                     DEACONESSES IN ENGLAND.

  Early beginnings--The Puritans--Cambridge Platform--Southey's
  complaint--Mrs. Fry--Fliedner--Florence Nightingale--Agnes
  Jones--Distinction between "sister" and "deaconess"--
  Institutions in Church of England--Garb--Ceremonies--
  Self-denying lives--Dr. Laseron's institutions and others--
  Prison mission of Mrs. Meredith--The Sisters of the People 142

                           CHAPTER XI.

                      MILDMAY INSTITUTIONS.

  Rev. W. Pennefather--Sketch of his life--Building of hall and
  deaconess home at Mildmay--Conference hall--Nursing hall--
  Mission and hospital at Bethnal Green--The deaconesses--Their
  training--Expense--Expenses of institution                 166

                           CHAPTER XII.

                     DEACONESSES IN SCOTLAND.

  Church of Scotland--Organization of woman's work--Report of
  committees--Scheme--Adoption--Women's Guild--Women-workers'
  Guild--Deaconesses--Training--Syllabus of lectures--
  Presbyterian Church of England and Ireland Page            189

                          CHAPTER XIII.

                 THE DEACONESS CAUSE IN AMERICA.

  German Lutherans--Fliedner visits America--Philadelphia--
  Mother-house of Deaconesses--Deaconesses in the Episcopal
  Church--Among the Presbyterians--The Methodist Episcopal
  Church--Deaconess-home in Chicago--Action of General
  Conference--Fields of work                                 204

                           CHAPTER XIV.

   THE MEANS OF TRAINING AND THE FIELD OF WORK FOR DEACONESSES
                           IN AMERICA.

  Advantages of the Home and Training-school--Field of work--In
  hospitals--Insane asylums--Infant-schools--Teachers--The
  Home-mission deaconess--Her work in London--Similar work
  needed in cities of the United States                      228

                           CHAPTER XV.

             OBJECTIONS MET AND SUGGESTIONS OFFERED.

  Objection that deaconesses resemble Catholic nuns--Their
  influence--Numbers in different orders--Order of Charles--
  Objection to garb--Its advantages--Objection to the life
  answered--Opinion of Bryce concerning American women--Women of
  Methodism--Advice to candidates--Associates--The Church
  commended by its deeds                                     247




INTRODUCTION.


How far, and in what form, ought woman's work in the Church to be
organized? What was the deaconess of St. Paul's epistles? What light on
this subject do the primitive and the mediaeval Churches yield us? Can
"sisterhoods" be established without weakening the sense of personal
responsibility in those Christian women who are not thus wholly set
apart to charitable and spiritual work? Can they be multiplied without
danger of introducing into Protestant communions the evils of the
conventual life? Are there modern instances of safe and successful
organizations? What good have they achieved, and what further good do
they promise? In what relation should such organizations stand to the
authority and fostering care of the Church? What should be their scope,
spirit, methods? What regulations are fundamental and indispensable?
What perils are real and possibly imminent?

To answer these, and other questions associated with them, this book is
written. Its authoress is a gifted daughter of the Church, well known in
literary and educational circles. During a protracted sojourn in Europe
she enjoyed unusual facilities for studying the deaconess work as
carried on in many places, and particularly in the institutions founded
by Pastor Fliedner at Kaiserswerth in Prussia, and in those at Mildmay
in England. She has also made a thorough and discriminating study of the
subject as developed in the early centuries of the Church and in the
Middle Ages.

The book itself will amply reveal these facts, and cannot but contribute
largely to the guidance of the newly revived interest of the American
churches in the far-reaching question how Christian women may best serve
their Lord in serving the humanity which he has redeemed.

It appears at an opportune time. The General Conference of the Methodist
Episcopal Church, at its session in May, 1888, inserted in the law of
the Church a chapter on deaconesses, defining their duties and
providing for the appointment and oversight of them through the Annual
Conferences. This action was the natural outcome of a wide and
increasing appreciation of the service of Christian women in many
departments of Church work; and it was greatly furthered by the advocacy
of Dr. J. M. Thoburn, now the devoted and honored missionary bishop of
India and Malaysia. But it had not been the subject of any considerable
previous discussion in the periodicals of the Church, and there was not
in the Church a widely diffused or an accurate knowledge of the history,
scope, possibilities, or perils of such an organization. The promptness,
however, with which the provision thus made by the General Conference
has been seized upon by the Church in several of our large cities,
indicates that the time was ripe for the movement. But information is
still scanty; ideas concerning the aim and place of the deaconess work
are crude; methods have been very little digested; the foundations of
local homes evidently may come to be very imperfectly laid; and the
movement may easily come to naught.

This book, it is hoped, will do a twofold work. It will awaken a lively
interest in a movement already arrived at large proportions in some
parts of European Protestantism; and it will guide those among us who
are studying how best to organize, against the sin and suffering of the
world, the practically unlimited resources of Christian women. Whenever
any one shall in some good degree apprehend what helpfulness for the
lost as yet lies undeveloped in the hearts and hands of the daughters of
the Church, and what honor may yet come to Christianity by the rightly
directed use of this power, he will welcome a volume which, like the
