whose superb scarlet corolla stains black, is employed by the Chinese
married women, it is said, to discolor their teeth; but in the West
Indies it sinks to even greater ignominy as a dauber for blacking shoes!

Marsh Mallow (_Althaea officinalis_), a name frequently misapplied to
the Swamp Rose-mallow, is properly given to a much smaller pink flower,
measuring only an inch and a half across at the most, and a far rarer
one, being a naturalized immigrant from Europe found only in the salt
marshes from the Massachusetts coast to New York. It is also known as
Wymote. This is a bushy, leafy plant, two to four feet high, and covered
with velvety down as a protection against the clogging of its pores by
the moisture arising from its wet retreats. Plants that live in swamps
must "perspire" freely and keep their pores open. From the Marsh
Mallow's thick roots the mucilage used in confectionery is obtained, a
soothing demulcent long esteemed in medicine.




ST. JOHN'S-WORT FAMILY _(Hypericaceae)_


Common St. John's-wort

_Hypericum perforatum_

_Flowers_--Bright yellow, 1 in. across or less, several or many in
terminal clusters. Calyx of 5 lance-shaped sepals; 5 petals dotted with
black; numerous stamens in 3 sets; 3 styles. _Stem_: 1 to 2 ft. high,
erect, much branched. _Leaves_: Small, opposite, oblong, more or less
black-dotted.

_Preferred Habitat_--Fields, waste lands, roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--Throughout our area, except the extreme North;
Europe and Asia.

"Gathered upon a Friday, in the hour of Jupiter when he comes to his
operation, so gathered, or borne, or hung upon the neck, it mightily
helps to drive away all phantastical spirits." These are the blossoms
which have been hung in the windows of European peasants for ages on St.
John's eve, to avert the evil eye and the spells of the spirits of
darkness. "Devil chaser" its Italian name signifies. To cure demoniacs,
to ward off destruction by lightning, to reveal the presence of witches,
and to expose their nefarious practices, are some of the virtues
ascribed to this plant, which superstitious farmers have spared from the
scythe and encouraged to grow near their houses until it has become,
even in this land of liberty, a troublesome weed at times. "The flower
gets its name," says F. Schuyler Mathews, "from the superstition that on
St. John's day, the 24th of June, the dew which fell on the plant the
evening before was efficacious in preserving the eyes from disease. So
the plant was collected, dipped in oil, and thus transformed into a balm
for every wound." Here it is a naturalized immigrant, not a native. A
blooming plant, usually with many sterile shoots about its base, has an
unkempt, untidy look; the seed capsules and the brown petals of withered
flowers remaining among the bright yellow buds through a long season.

The Shrubby St. John's-wort (_H. prolificum_) bears yellow blossoms,
about half an inch across, which are provided with stamens so numerous,
the many flowered terminal clusters have a soft, feathery effect. In the
axils of the oblong, opposite leaves are tufts of smaller ones, the
stout stems being often concealed under a wealth of foliage. Sandy or
rocky places from New Jersey southward best suit this low, dense,
diffusely branched shrub which blooms prolifically from July to
September.

Farther north, and westward to Iowa, the Great or Giant St. John's-wort
(_H. Ascyron_) brightens the banks of streams at midsummer with large
blossoms, each on a long footstalk in a few-flowered cluster.




ROCKROSE FAMILY _(Cistaceae)_


Long-branched Frost-weed; Frost-flower; Frost-wort; Canadian
Rockrose

_Helianthemum canadense_

_Flowers_--Solitary, or rarely 2; about 1 in. across, 5-parted, with
showy yellow petals; the 5 unequal sepals hairy. Also abundant small
flowers lacking petals, produced from the axils later. _Stem:_ Erect, 3
in. to 2 ft. high; at first simple, later with elongated branches.
_Leaves:_ Alternate, oblong, almost seated on stem.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry fields, sandy or rocky soil.

_Flowering Season_--Petal-bearing flowers, May-July.

_Distribution_--New England to the Carolinas, westward to Wisconsin
and Kentucky.

When the stubble in the dry fields is white some cold November morning,
comparatively few notice the ice crystals, like specks of glistening
quartz, at the base of the stems of this plant. The similar Hoary
Frost-weed (_H. majus_), whose showy flowers appear in clusters at the
hoary stem's summit in June and July, also bears them. Often this ice
formation assumes exquisite feathery, whimsical forms, bursting the
bark asunder where an astonishing quantity of sap gushes forth and
freezes. Indeed, so much sap sometimes goes to the making of this
crystal flower, that it would seem as if an extra reservoir in the soil
must pump some up to supply it with its large fantastic corolla.




VIOLET FAMILY _(Violaceae)_


Blue and Purple Violets

Lacking perfume only to be a perfectly satisfying flower, the Common
Purple, Meadow, or Hooded Blue Violet (_V. cucullata_) has nevertheless
established itself in the hearts of the people from the Arctic to the
Gulf as no sweet-scented, showy, hothouse exotic has ever done. Royal in
color as in lavish profusion, it blossoms everywhere--in woods,
waysides, meadows, and marshes, but always in finer form in cool, shady
dells; with longer flowering scapes in meadow bogs; and with longer
leaves than wide in swampy woodlands. The heart-shaped, saw-edged
leaves, folded toward the centre when newly put forth, and the
five-petalled, bluish-purple, golden-hearted blossom are too familiar
for more detailed description. From the three-cornered stars of the
elastic capsules, the seeds are scattered abroad.

In shale and sandy soil, even in the gravel of hillsides, one finds the
narrowly divided, finely cut leaves and the bicolored beardless blossom
of the Bird's-foot Violet (_V. pedata_), pale bluish purple on the lower
petals, dark purple on one or two upper ones, and with a heart of gold.
The large, velvety, pansy-like blossom and the unusual foliage which
rises in rather dense tufts are sufficient to distinguish the plant from
its numerous kin. This species produces no cleistogamous or blind
flowers. Frequently the Bird's-foot Violet blooms a second time, in
autumn, a delightful eccentricity of this family. The spur of its lower
petal is long and very slender, and, as might be expected, the
longest-tongued bees and butterflies are its most frequent visitors.
These receive the pollen on the base of the proboscis.

In course of time the lovely English, March, or Sweet Violet _(V.
odorata)_, which has escaped from gardens, and which is now rapidly
increasing with the help of seed and runners on the Atlantic and the
Pacific coasts, may be established among our wild flowers. No blossom
figures so prominently in European literature. In France, it has even
entered the political field since Napoleon's day. Yale University has
adopted the violet for its own especial flower, although it is the
corn-flower, or bachelor's button _(Centaurea cyanus)_ that is the true
Yale blue. Sprengel, who made a most elaborate study of the violet,
condensed the result of his research into the following questions and
answers, which are given here because much that he says applies to our
own native species, which have been too little studied in the modern
scientific spirit:

"1. Why is the flower situated on a long stalk which is upright, but
curved downward at the free end? In order that it may hang down; which,
firstly, prevents rain from obtaining access to the nectar; and,
secondly, places the stamens in such a position that the pollen falls
into the open space between the pistil and the free ends of the stamens.
If the flower were upright, the pollen would fall into the space
between the base of the stamen and the base of the pistil, and would not
come in contact with the bee.

"2. Why does the pollen differ from that of most other insect-fertilized
flowers? In most of such flowers the insects themselves remove the
pollen from the anthers, and it is therefore important that the pollen
should not easily be detached and carried away by the wind. In the
present case, on the contrary, it is desirable that it should be looser
and drier, so that it may easily fall into the space between the stamens
and the pistil. If it remained attached to the anther, it would not be
touched by the bee, and the flower would remain unfertilized.

"3. Why is the base of the style so thin? In order that the bee may be
more easily able to bend the style.

"4. Why is the base of the style bent? For the same reason. The result
of the curvature is that the pistil is much more easily bent than would
be the case if the style were straight.

"5. Finally, why does the membranous termination of the upper filament
overlap the corresponding portions of the two middle stamens? Because
this enables the bee to move the pistil and thereby to set free the
pollen more easily than would be the case under the reverse
arrangement."


Yellow Violets

Fine hairs on the erect, leafy, usually single stem of the Downy Yellow
Violet _(V. pubescens)_, whose dark veined, bright yellow petals gleam
in dry woods in April and May, easily distinguish it from the Smooth
Yellow Violet _(V. scabriuscula)_, formerly considered a mere variety in
spite of its being an earlier bloomer, a lover of moisture, and well
equipped with basal leaves at flowering time, which the downy species is
not. Moreover, it bears a paler blossom, more coarsely dentate leaves,
often decidedly taper-pointed, and usually several stems together.

Bryant, whose botanical lore did not always keep step with his Muse,
wrote of the Yellow Violet as the first spring flower, because he
found it "by the snowbank's edges cold," one April day, when the
hepaticas about his home at Roslyn, Long Island, had doubtless been in
bloom a month.

  "Of all her train the hands of Spring
  First plant thee in the watery mould,"

he wrote, regardless of the fact that the round-leaved violet's
preferences are for dry, wooded, or rocky hillsides. Mueller believed
that all violets were originally yellow, not white, after they developed
from the green stage.


White Violets

Three small-flowered, white, purple-veined, and almost beardless species
which prefer to dwell in moist meadows, damp, mossy places, and along
the borders of streams, are the Lance-leaved Violet _(V. lanceolata)_,
the Primrose-leaved Violet _(V. primulifolia)_, and the Sweet White
Violet _(V. blanda)_, whose leaves show successive gradations from the
narrow, tapering, smooth, long-petioled blades of the first to the oval
form of the second and the almost circular, cordate leaf of the
delicately fragrant, little white _blanda_, the dearest violet of all.
Inasmuch as these are short-spurred species, requiring no effort for
bees to drain their nectaries, no footholds in the form of beards on
the side petals are provided for them. The purple veinings show the
stupidest visitor the path to the sweets.




EVENING PRIMROSE FAMILY _(Onagraceae)_


Great or Spiked Willow-herb; Fire-weed

_Epilobium angustifolium (Chamaenerion angustifolium)_

_Flowers_--Magenta or pink, sometimes pale, or rarely white, more or
less than 1 in. across, in an elongated, terminal, spike-like raceme.
Calyx tubular, narrow, in 4 segments; 4 rounded, spreading petals; 8
stamens; 1 pistil, hairy at base; the stigma 4-lobed. _Stem:_ 2 to 8 ft.
high, simple, smooth, leafy. _Leaves:_ Narrow, tapering, willow-like, 2
to 6 in. long. _Fruit:_ A slender, curved, violet-tinted capsule, from 2
to 3 in. long, containing numerous seeds attached to tufts of fluffy,
white, silky threads.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry soil, fields, roadsides, especially in
burnt-over districts.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--From Atlantic to Pacific, with few interruptions;
British Possessions and United States southward to the Carolinas and
Arizona. Also Europe and Asia.

Spikes of these beautiful brilliant flowers towering upward above dry
soil, particularly where the woodsman's axe and forest fires have
devastated the landscape, illustrate Nature's abhorrence of ugliness.
Other kindly plants have earned the name of fireweed, but none so
quickly beautifies the blackened clearings of the pioneer, nor blossoms
over the charred trail in the wake of the locomotive. Whole
mountainsides in Alaska are dyed crimson with it. Beginning at the
bottom of the long spike, the flowers open in slow succession upward
throughout the summer, leaving behind the attractive seed-vessels,
which, splitting lengthwise in September, send adrift white silky tufts
attached to seeds that will one day cover far distant wastes with
beauty. Almost perfect rosettes, made by the young plants, are met with
on one's winter walks.


Evening Primrose; Night Willow-herb

_Oenothera biennis_

_Flowers_--Yellow, fragrant, opening at evening, 1 to 2 in. across,
borne in terminal leafy-bracted spikes. Calyx tube slender, elongated,
gradually enlarged at throat, the 4-pointed lobes bent backward; corolla
of 4 spreading petals; 8 stamens; 1 pistil; the stigma 4-cleft. _Stem:_
Erect, wand-like, or branched, 1 to 5 ft. tall, rarely higher, leafy.
_Leaves:_ Alternate, lance-shaped, mostly seated on stem, entire, or
obscurely toothed.

_Preferred Habitat_--Roadsides, dry fields, thickets, fence-corners.

_Flowering Season_--June-October.

_Distribution_--Labrador to the Gulf of Mexico, west to the Rocky
Mountains.

Like a ball-room beauty, the Evening Primrose has a jaded, bedraggled
appearance by day when we meet it by the dusty roadside, its erect buds,
fading flowers from last night's revelry, wilted ones of previous
dissipations, and hairy oblong capsules, all crowded together among the
willow-like leaves at the top of the rank-growing plant. But at sunset a
bud begins to expand its delicate petals slowly, timidly--not suddenly
and with a pop, as the evening primrose of the garden does.

Now, its fragrance, that has been only faintly perceptible during the
day, becomes increasingly powerful. Why these blandishments at such an
hour? Because at dusk, when sphinx moths, large and small, begin to fly,
the primrose's special benefactors are abroad. All these moths, whose
length of tongue has kept pace with the development of the tubes of
certain white and yellow flowers dependent on their ministrations, find
such glowing like miniature moons for their special benefit, when
blossoms of other hues have melted into the deepening darkness. If such
have fragrance, they prepare to shed it now. Nectar is secreted in tubes
so deep and slender that none but the moths' long tongues can drain the
last drop. An exquisite, little, rose-pink twilight flyer, his wings
bordered with yellow, flutters in ecstasy above the Evening Primrose's
freshly opened flowers, transferring in his rapid flight some of their
abundant, sticky pollen that hangs like a necklace from the outstretched
filaments. By day one may occasionally find a little fellow asleep in a
wilted blossom, which serves him as a tent, under whose flaps the
brightest bird eye rarely detects a dinner. After a single night's
dissipation the corolla wilts, hangs a while, then drops from the
maturing capsule as if severed with a sharp knife. Few flowers,
sometimes only one opens on a spike on a given evening--a plan to
increase the chances of cross-fertilization between distinct plants; but
there is a very long succession of bloom. If a flower has not been
pollenized during the night it remains open a while in the morning.
Bumblebees now hurry in, and an occasional humming bird takes a sip of
nectar. Toward the end of summer, when so much seed has been set that
the flower can afford to be generous, it distinctly changes its habit
and keeps open house all day.




GINSENG FAMILY (_Araliaceae_)


Spikenard; Indian Root; Spignet

_Aralia racemosa_

