  and otherwise known as the Gars, may be found, are hereby
  commanded to give aid and assistance to the _citoyenne_ Marie
  Verneuil and to obey the orders which she may give them at her
  discretion.'

"A worthless hussy takes a noble name to soil it with such treachery,"
added Madame du Gua.

A movement of astonishment ran through the assembly.

"The fight is not even if the Republic employs such pretty women against
us," said the Baron du Guenic gaily.

"Especially women who have nothing to lose," said Madame du Gua.

"Nothing?" cried the Chevalier du Vissard. "Mademoiselle has a property
which probably brings her in a pretty good sum."

"The Republic must like a joke, to send strumpets for ambassadors," said
the Abbe Gudin.

"Unfortunately, Mademoiselle seeks the joys that kill," said Madame du
Gua, with a horrible expression of pleasure at the end she foresaw.

"Then why are you still living?" said her victim, rising to her feet,
after repairing the disorder of her clothes.

This bitter sarcasm excited a sort of respect for so brave a victim, and
silenced the assembly. Madame du Gua saw a satirical smile on the lips
of the men, which infuriated her, and paying no attention to the marquis
and Merle who were entering the room, she called to the Chouan who
followed them. "Pille-Miche!" she said, pointing to Mademoiselle de
Verneuil, "take her; she is my share of the booty, and I turn her over
to you--do what you like with her."

At these words the whole assembly shuddered, for the hideous heads of
Pille-Miche and Marche-a-Terre appeared behind the marquis, and the
punishment was seen in all its horror.

Francine was standing with clasped hands as though paralyzed.
Mademoiselle de Verneuil, who recovered her presence of mind before the
danger that threatened her, cast a look of contempt at the assembled
men, snatched the letter from Madame du Gua's hand, threw up her head
with a flashing eye, and darted towards the door where Merle's sword was
still leaning. There she came upon the marquis, cold and motionless as a
statue. Nothing pleaded for her on his fixed, firm features. Wounded
to the heart, life seemed odious to her. The man who had pledged her so
much love must have heard the odious jests that were cast upon her,
and stood there silently a witness of the infamy she had been made to
endure. She might, perhaps, have forgiven him his contempt, but she
could not forgive his having seen her in so humiliating a position, and
she flung him a look that was full of hatred, feeling in her heart the
birth of an unutterable desire for vengeance. With death beside her,
the sense of impotence almost strangled her. A whirlwind of passion
and madness rose in her head; the blood which boiled in her veins made
everything about her seem like a conflagration. Instead of killing
herself, she seized the sword and thrust it though the marquis. But the
weapon slipped between his arm and side; he caught her by the wrist and
dragged her from the room, aided by Pille-Miche, who had flung himself
upon the furious creature when she attacked his master. Francine
shrieked aloud. "Pierre! Pierre! Pierre!" she cried in heart-rending
tones, as she followed her mistress.

The marquis closed the door on the astonished company. When he reached
the portico he was still holding the woman's wrist, which he clasped
convulsively, while Pille-Miche had almost crushed the bones of her arm
with his iron fingers, but Marie felt only the burning hand of the young
leader.

"You hurt me," she said.

For all answer he looked at her a moment.

"Have you some base revenge to take--like that woman?" she said. Then,
seeing the dead bodies on the heap of straw, she cried out, shuddering:
"The faith of a gentleman! ha! ha! ha!" With a frightful laugh she
added: "Ha! the glorious day!"

"Yes," he said, "a day without a morrow."

He let go her hand and took a long, last look at the beautiful creature
he could scarcely even then renounce. Neither of these proud natures
yielded. The marquis may have looked for a tear, but the eyes of the
girl were dry and scornful. Then he turned quickly, and left the victim
to Pille-Miche.

"God will hear me, marquis," she called. "I will ask Him to give you a
glorious day without a morrow."

Pille-Miche, not a little embarrassed with so rich a prize, dragged
her away with some gentleness and a mixture of respect and scorn. The
marquis, with a sigh, re-entered the dining-room, his face like that of
a dead man whose eyes have not been closed.

Merle's presence was inexplicable to the silent spectators of this
tragedy; they looked at him in astonishment and their eyes questioned
each other. Merle saw their amazement, and, true to his native
character, he said, with a smile: "Gentlemen, you will scarcely refuse a
glass of wine to a man who is about to make his last journey."

It was just as the company had calmed down under the influence of these
words, said with a true French carelessness which pleased the Vendeans,
that Montauran returned, his face pale, his eyes fixed.

"Now you shall see," said Merle, "how death can make men lively."

"Ah!" said the marquis, with a gesture as if suddenly awaking, "here you
are, my dear councillor of war," and he passed him a bottle of _vin de
Grave_.

"Oh, thanks, citizen marquis," replied Merle. "Now I can divert myself."

At this sally Madame du Gua turned to the other guests with a smile,
saying, "Let us spare him the dessert."

"That is a very cruel vengeance, madame," he said. "You forget my
murdered friend who is waiting for me; I never miss an appointment."

"Captain," said the marquis, throwing him his glove, "you are free;
that's your passport. The Chasseurs du Roi know that they must not kill
all the game."

"So much the better for me!" replied Merle, "but you are making a
mistake; we shall come to close quarters before long, and I'll not let
you off. Though your head can never pay for Gerard's, I want it and I
shall have it. Adieu. I could drink with my own assassins, but I cannot
stay with those of my friend"; and he disappeared, leaving the guests
astonished at his coolness.

"Well, gentlemen, what do you think of the lawyers and surgeons and
bailiffs who manage the Republic," said the Gars, coldly.

"God's-death! marquis," replied the Comte de Bauvan; "they have shocking
manners; that fellow presumed to be impertinent, it seems to me."

The captain's hasty retreat had a motive. The despised, humiliated
woman, who was even then, perhaps, being put to death, had so won upon
him during the scene of her degradation that he said to himself, as he
left the room, "If she is a prostitute, she is not an ordinary one, and
I'll marry her." He felt so sure of being able to rescue her from the
savages that his first thought, when his own life was given to him,
was to save hers. Unhappily, when he reached the portico, he found the
courtyard deserted. He looked about him, listened to the silence, and
could hear nothing but the distant shouts and laughter of the Chouans,
who were drinking in the gardens and dividing their booty. He turned the
corner to the fatal wing before which his men had been shot, and from
there he could distinguish, by the feeble light of a few stray lanterns,
the different groups of the Chasseurs du Roi. Neither Pille-Miche, nor
Marche-a-Terre, nor the girl were visible; but he felt himself gently
pulled by the flap of his uniform, and, turning round, saw Francine on
her knees.

"Where is she?" he asked.

"I don't know; Pierre drove me back and told me not to stir from here."

"Which way did they go?"

"That way," she replied, pointing to the causeway.

The captain and Francine then noticed in that direction a line of strong
shadows thrown by the moonlight on the lake, and among them that of a
female figure.

"It is she!" cried Francine.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil seemed to be standing, as if resigned, in the
midst of other figures, whose gestures denoted a debate.

"There are several," said the captain. "Well, no matter, let us go to
them."

"You will get yourself killed uselessly," said Francine.

"I have been killed once before to-day," he said gaily.

They both walked towards the gloomy gateway which led to the causeway;
there Francine suddenly stopped short.

"No," she said, gently, "I'll go no farther; Pierre told me not to
meddle; I believe in him; if we go on we shall spoil all. Do as you
please, officer, but leave me. If Pierre saw us together he would kill
you."

Just then Pille-Miche appeared in the gateway and called to the
postilion who was left in the stable. At the same moment he saw the
captain and covered him with his musket, shouting out, "By Saint Anne of
Auray! the rector was right enough in telling us the Blues had signed a
compact with the devil. I'll bring you to life, I will!"

"Stop! my life is sacred," cried Merle, seeing his danger. "There's the
glove of your Gars," and he held it out.

"Ghosts' lives are not sacred," replied the Chouan, "and I sha'n't give
you yours. Ave Maria!"

He fired, and the ball passed through his victim's head. The captain
fell. When Francine reached him she heard him mutter the words, "I'd
rather die with them than return without them."

The Chouan sprang upon the body to strip it, saying, "There's one
good thing about ghosts, they come to life in their clothes." Then,
recognizing the Gars' glove, that sacred safeguard, in the captain's
hand, he stopped short, terrified. "I wish I wasn't in the skin of
my mother's son!" he exclaimed, as he turned and disappeared with the
rapidity of a bird.

To understand this scene, so fatal to poor Merle, we must follow
Mademoiselle de Verneuil after the marquis, in his fury and despair, had
abandoned her to Pille-Miche. Francine had caught Marche-a-Terre by
the arm and reminded him, with sobs, of the promise he had made her.
Pille-Miche was already dragging away his victim like a heavy bundle.
Marie, her head and hair hanging back, turned her eyes to the lake; but
held as she was in a grasp of iron she was forced to follow the Chouan,
who turned now and then to hasten her steps, and each time that he did
so a jovial thought brought a hideous smile upon his face.

"Isn't she a morsel!" he cried, with a coarse laugh.

Hearing the words, Francine recovered speech.

"Pierre?"

"Well, what?"

"He'll kill her."

"Not at once."

"Then she'll kill herself, she will never submit; and if she dies I
shall die too."

"Then you love her too much, and she shall die," said Marche-a-Terre.

"Pierre! if we are rich and happy we owe it all to her; but, whether or
no, you promised me to save her."

"Well, I'll try; but you must stay here, and don't move."

Francine at once let go his arm, and waited in horrible suspense in
the courtyard where Merle found her. Meantime Marche-a-Terre joined his
comrade at the moment when the latter, after dragging his victim to the
barn, was compelling her to get into the coach. Pille-Miche called to
him to help in pulling out the vehicle.

"What are you going to do with all that?" asked Marche-a-Terre.

"The Grande Garce gave me the woman, and all that belongs to her is
mine."

"The coach will put a sou or two in your pocket; but as for the woman,
she'll scratch your eyes out like a cat."

Pille-Miche burst into a roar of laughter.

"Then I'll tie her up and take her home," he answered.

"Very good; suppose we harness the horses," said Marche-a-Terre.

A few moments later Marche-a-Terre, who had left his comrade mounting
guard over his prey, led the coach from the stable to the causeway,
where Pille-Miche got into it beside Mademoiselle de Verneuil, not
perceiving that she was on the point of making a spring into the lake.

"I say, Pille-Miche!" cried Marche-a-Terre.

"What!"

"I'll buy all your booty."

"Are you joking?" asked the other, catching his prisoner by the
petticoat, as a butcher catches a calf that is trying to escape him.

"Let me see her, and I'll set a price."

The unfortunate creature was made to leave the coach and stand between
the two Chouans, who each held a hand and looked at her as the Elders
must have looked at Susannah.

"Will you take thirty francs in good coin?" said Marche-a-Terre, with a
groan.

"Really?"

"Done?" said Marche-a-Terre, holding out his hand.

"Yes, done; I can get plenty of Breton girls for that, and choice
morsels, too. But the coach; whose is that?" asked Pille-Miche,
beginning to reflect upon his bargain.

"Mine!" cried Marche-a-Terre, in a terrible tone of voice, which showed
the sort of superiority his ferocious character gave him over his
companions.

"But suppose there's money in the coach?"

"Didn't you say, 'Done'?"

"Yes, I said, 'Done.'"

"Very good; then go and fetch the postilion who is gagged in the stable
over there."

"But if there's money in the--"

"Is there any?" asked Marche-a-Terre, roughly, shaking Marie by the arm.

"Yes, about a hundred crowns."

The two Chouans looked at each other.

"Well, well, friend," said Pille-Miche, "we won't quarrel for a female
Blue; let's pitch her into the lake with a stone around her neck, and
divide the money."

"I'll give you that money as my share in d'Orgemont's ransom," said
Marche-a-Terre, smothering a groan, caused by such sacrifice.

Pille-Miche uttered a sort of hoarse cry as he started to find the
postilion, and his glee brought death to Merle, whom he met on his way.

Hearing the shot, Marche-a-Terre rushed in the direction where he had
left Francine, and found her praying on her knees, with clasped hands,
beside the poor captain, whose murder had deeply horrified her.

"Run to your mistress," said the Chouan; "she is saved."

He ran himself to fetch the postilion, returning with all speed, and,
as he repassed Merle's body, he noticed the Gars' glove, which was still
convulsively clasped in the dead hand.

"Oho!" he cried. "Pille-Miche has blundered horribly--he won't live to
spend his crowns."

He snatched up the glove and said to Mademoiselle de Verneuil, who was
already in the coach with Francine: "Here, take this glove. If any of
our men attack you on the road, call out 'Ho, the Gars!' show the glove,
and no harm can happen to you. Francine," he said, turning towards her
and seizing her violently, "you and I are quits with that woman; come
with me and let the devil have her."

"You can't ask me to abandon her just at this moment!" cried Francine,
in distress.

Marche-a-Terre scratched his ear and forehead, then he raised his head,
and his mistress saw the ferocious expression of his eyes. "You are
right," he said; "I leave you with her one week; if at the end of that
time you don't come with me--" he did not finish the sentence, but he
slapped the muzzle of his gun with the flat of his hand. After making
the gesture of taking aim at her, he disappeared, without waiting for
her reply.

No sooner was he gone than a voice, which seemed to issue from the lake,
called, in a muffled tone: "Madame, madame!"

The postilion and the two women shuddered, for several corpses were
floating near them. A Blue, hidden behind a tree, cautiously appeared.

"Let me get up behind the coach, or I'm a dead man. That damned cider
which Clef-des-Coeurs would stop to drink cost more than a pint of
blood. If he had done as I did, and made his round, our poor comrades
there wouldn't be floating dead in the pond."

             *     *     *     *     *

While these events were taking place outside the chateau, the leaders
sent by the Vendeans and those of the Chouans were holding a council
of war, with their glasses in their hands, under the presidency of
the Marquis de Montauran. Frequent libations of Bordeaux animated the
discussion, which, however, became more serious and important at the
end of the meal. After the general plan of military operations had been
decided on, the Royalists drank to the health of the Bourbons. It was at
that moment that the shot which killed Merle was heard, like an echo of
the disastrous war which these gay and noble conspirators were about to
make against the Republic. Madame du Gua quivered with pleasure at the
thought that she was freed from her rival; the guests looked at each
other in silence; the marquis rose from the table and went out.

"He loved her!" said Madame du Gua, sarcastically. "Follow him, Monsieur
de Fontaine, and keep him company; he will be as irritating as a fly if
we let him sulk."

She went to a window which looked on the courtyard to endeavor to see
Marie's body. There, by the last gleams of the sinking moon, she caught
sight of the coach being rapidly driven down the avenue of apple-trees.
Mademoiselle de Verneuil's veil was fluttering in the wind. Madame
du Gua, furious at the sight, left the room hurriedly. The marquis,
standing on the portico absorbed in gloomy thought, was watching about
a hundred and fifty Chouans, who, having divided their booty in the
gardens, were now returning to finish the cider and the rye-bread
provided for the Blues. These soldiers of a new species, on whom the
monarchy was resting its hopes, dispersed into groups. Some drank the
cider; others, on the bank before the portico, amused themselves by
flinging into the lake the dead bodies of the Blues, to which they
fastened stones. This sight, joined to the other aspects of the strange
scene,--the fantastic dress, the savage expressions of the barbarous
and uncouth _gars_,--was so new and so amazing to Monsieur de Fontaine,
accustomed to the nobler and better-regulated appearance of the Vendean
troops, that he seized the occasion to say to the Marquis de Montauran,
"What do you expect to do with such brutes?"

"Not very much, my dear count," replied the Gars.

"Will they ever be fit to manoeuvre before the enemy?"

"Never."

"Can they understand or execute an order?"

"No."

"Then what good will they be to you?"
