that it was hard to believe they were sisters. She was dark and massive,
with black hair, thick, black eyebrows and eyes of the clear, slaty blue
of the gulf water in a north wind. She had a rather stern, forbidding
look, but she was in reality very jolly, with a hearty, gurgling laugh
and a deep, mellow, pleasant voice with a suggestion of masculinity
about it. She had once remarked to Rosemary that she would really like
to have a talk with that Presbyterian minister at the Glen, to see if
he could find a word to say to a woman when he was cornered. She had her
chance now and she tackled him on world politics. Miss Ellen, who was
a great reader, had been devouring a book on the Kaiser of Germany, and
she demanded Mr. Meredith's opinion of him.

"A dangerous man," was his answer.

"I believe you!" Miss Ellen nodded. "Mark my words, Mr. Meredith, that
man is going to fight somebody yet. He's ACHING to. He is going to set
the world on fire."

"If you mean that he will wantonly precipitate a great war I hardly
think so," said Mr. Meredith. "The day has gone by for that sort of
thing."

"Bless you, it hasn't," rumbled Ellen. "The day never goes by for men
and nations to make asses of themselves and take to the fists. The
millenniun isn't THAT near, Mr. Meredith, and YOU don't think it is any
more than I do. As for this Kaiser, mark my words, he is going to make a
heap of trouble"--and Miss Ellen prodded her book emphatically with
her long finger. "Yes, if he isn't nipped in the bud he's going to
make trouble. WE'LL live to see it--you and I will live to see it, Mr.
Meredith. And who is going to nip him? England should, but she won't.
WHO is going to nip him? Tell me that, Mr. Meredith."

Mr. Meredith couldn't tell her, but they plunged into a discussion of
German militarism that lasted long after Rosemary had found the book.
Rosemary said nothing, but sat in a little rocker behind Ellen and
stroked an important black cat meditatively. John Meredith hunted big
game in Europe with Ellen, but he looked oftener at Rosemary than at
Ellen, and Ellen noticed it. After Rosemary had gone to the door with
him and come back Ellen rose and looked at her accusingly.

"Rosemary West, that man has a notion of courting you."

Rosemary quivered. Ellen's speech was like a blow to her. It rubbed all
the bloom off the pleasant evening. But she would not let Ellen see how
it hurt her.

"Nonsense," she said, and laughed, a little too carelessly. "You see
a beau for me in every bush, Ellen. Why he told me all about his wife
to-night--how much she was to him--how empty her death had left the
world."

"Well, that may be HIS way of courting," retorted Ellen. "Men have all
kinds of ways, I understand. But don't forget your promise, Rosemary."

"There is no need of my either forgetting or remembering it," said
Rosemary, a little wearily. "YOU forget that I'm an old maid, Ellen. It
is only your sisterly delusion that I am still young and blooming and
dangerous. Mr. Meredith merely wants to be a friend--if he wants that
much itself. He'll forget us both long before he gets back to the
manse."

"I've no objection to your being friends with him," conceded Ellen,
"but it musn't go beyond friendship, remember. I'm always suspicious of
widowers. They are not given to romantic ideas about friendship. They're
apt to mean business. As for this Presbyterian man, what do they call
him shy for? He's not a bit shy, though he may be absent-minded--so
absent-minded that he forgot to say goodnight to ME when you started to
go to the door with him. He's got brains, too. There's so few men round
here that can talk sense to a body. I've enjoyed the evening. I wouldn't
mind seeing more of him. But no philandering, Rosemary, mind you--no
philandering."

Rosemary was quite used to being warned by Ellen from philandering if
she so much as talked five minutes to any marriageable man under eighty
or over eighteen. She had always laughed at the warning with unfeigned
amusement. This time it did not amuse her--it irritated her a little.
Who wanted to philander?

"Don't be such a goose, Ellen," she said with unaccustomed shortness as
she took her lamp. She went upstairs without saying goodnight.

Ellen shook her head dubiously and looked at the black cat.

"What is she so cross about, St. George?" she asked. "When you howl
you're hit, I've always heard, George. But she promised, Saint--she
promised, and we Wests always keep our word. So it won't matter if he
does want to philander, George. She promised. I won't worry."

Upstairs, in her room, Rosemary sat for a long while looking out of the
window across the moonlit garden to the distant, shining harbour. She
felt vaguely upset and unsettled. She was suddenly tired of outworn
dreams. And in the garden the petals of the last red rose were scattered
by a sudden little wind. Summer was over--it was autumn.



CHAPTER XIV. MRS. ALEC DAVIS MAKES A CALL

John Meredith walked slowly home. At first he thought a little about
Rosemary, but by the time he reached Rainbow Valley he had forgotten all
about her and was meditating on a point regarding German theology which
Ellen had raised. He passed through Rainbow Valley and knew it not. The
charm of Rainbow Valley had no potency against German theology. When he
reached the manse he went to his study and took down a bulky volume in
order to see which had been right, he or Ellen. He remained immersed in
its mazes until dawn, struck a new trail of speculation and pursued it
like a sleuth hound for the next week, utterly lost to the world, his
parish and his family. He read day and night; he forgot to go to his
meals when Una was not there to drag him to them; he never thought about
Rosemary or Ellen again. Old Mrs. Marshall, over-harbour, was very ill
and sent for him, but the message lay unheeded on his desk and gathered
dust. Mrs. Marshall recovered but never forgave him. A young couple came
to the manse to be married and Mr. Meredith, with unbrushed hair, in
carpet slippers and faded dressing gown, married them. To be sure, he
began by reading the funeral service to them and got along as far as
"ashes to ashes and dust to dust" before he vaguely suspected that
something was wrong.

"Dear me," he said absently, "that is strange--very strange."

The bride, who was very nervous, began to cry. The bridegroom, who was
not in the least nervous, giggled.

"Please, sir, I think you're burying us instead of marrying us," he
said.

"Excuse me," said Mr. Meredith, as it it did not matter much. He turned
up the marriage service and got through with it, but the bride never
felt quite properly married for the rest of her life.

He forgot his prayer-meeting again--but that did not matter, for it was
a wet night and nobody came. He might even have forgotten his Sunday
service if it had not been for Mrs. Alec Davis. Aunt Martha came in on
Saturday afternoon and told him that Mrs. Davis was in the parlour and
wanted to see him. Mr. Meredith sighed. Mrs. Davis was the only woman in
Glen St. Mary church whom he positively detested. Unfortunately, she
was also the richest, and his board of managers had warned Mr. Meredith
against offending her. Mr. Meredith seldom thought of such a worldly
matter as his stipend; but the managers were more practical. Also, they
were astute. Without mentioning money, they contrived to instil into
Mr. Meredith's mind a conviction that he should not offend Mrs. Davis.
Otherwise, he would likely have forgotten all about her as soon as Aunt
Martha had gone out. As it was, he turned down his Ewald with a feeling
of annoyance and went across the hall to the parlour.

Mrs. Davis was sitting on the sofa, looking about her with an air of
scornful disapproval.

What a scandalous room! There were no curtains on the window. Mrs. Davis
did not know that Faith and Una had taken them down the day before to
use as court trains in one of their plays and had forgotten to put them
up again, but she could not have accused those windows more fiercely
if she had known. The blinds were cracked and torn. The pictures on the
walls were crooked; the rugs were awry; the vases were full of faded
flowers; the dust lay in heaps--literally in heaps.

"What are we coming to?" Mrs. Davis asked herself, and then primmed up
her unbeautiful mouth.

Jerry and Carl had been whooping and sliding down the banisters as she
came through the hall. They did not see her and continued whooping and
sliding, and Mrs. Davis was convinced they did it on purpose. Faith's
pet rooster ambled through the hall, stood in the parlour doorway and
looked at her. Not liking her looks, he did not venture in. Mrs. Davis
gave a scornful sniff. A pretty manse, indeed, where roosters paraded
the halls and stared people out of countenance.

"Shoo, there," commanded Mrs. Davis, poking her flounced,
changeable-silk parasol at him.

Adam shooed. He was a wise rooster and Mrs. Davis had wrung the necks
of so many roosters with her own fair hands in the course of her fifty
years that an air of the executioner seemed to hang around her. Adam
scuttled through the hall as the minister came in.

Mr. Meredith still wore slippers and dressing gown, and his dark hair
still fell in uncared-for locks over his high brow. But he looked the
gentleman he was; and Mrs. Alec Davis, in her silk dress and beplumed
bonnet, and kid gloves and gold chain looked the vulgar, coarse-souled
woman she was. Each felt the antagonisn of the other's personality. Mr.
Meredith shrank, but Mrs. Davis girded up her loins for the fray. She
had come to the manse to propose a certain thing to the minister and
she meant to lose no time in proposing it. She was going to do him
a favour--a great favour--and the sooner he was made aware of it the
better. She had been thinking about it all summer and had come to a
decision at last. This was all that mattered, Mrs. Davis thought. When
she decided a thing it WAS decided. Nobody else had any say in the
matter. That had always been her attitude. When she had made her mind up
to marry Alec Davis she had married him and that was the end to it. Alec
had never known how it happened, but what odds? So in this case--Mrs.
Davis had arranged everything to her own satisfaction. Now it only
remained to inform Mr. Meredith.

"Will you please shut that door?" said Mrs. Davis, unprimming her
mouth slightly to say it, but speaking with asperity. "I have something
important to say, and I can't say it with that racket in the hall."

Mr. Meredith shut the door meekly. Then he sat down before Mrs. Davis.
He was not wholly aware of her yet. His mind was still wrestling with
Ewald's arguments. Mrs. Davis sensed this detachment and it annoyed her.

"I have come to tell you, Mr. Meredith," she said aggressively, "that I
have decided to adopt Una."

"To--adopt--Una!" Mr. Meredith gazed at her blankly, not understanding
in the least.

"Yes. I've been thinking it over for some time. I have often thought of
adopting a child, since my husband's death. But it seemed so hard to
get a suitable one. It is very few children I would want to take into MY
home. I wouldn't think of taking a home child--some outcast of the slums
in all probability. And there is hardly ever any other child to be got.
One of the fishermen down at the harbour died last fall and left six
youngsters. They tried to get me to take one, but I soon gave them
to understand that I had no idea of adopting trash like that. Their
grandfather stole a horse. Besides, they were all boys and I wanted a
girl--a quiet, obedient girl that I could train up to be a lady. Una
will suit me exactly. She would be a nice little thing if she was
properly looked after--so different from Faith. I would never dream of
adopting Faith. But I'll take Una and I'll give her a good home, and
up-bringing, Mr. Meredith, and if she behaves herself I'll leave her all
my money when I die. Not one of my own relatives shall have a cent of it
in any case, I'm determined on that. It was the idea of aggravating them
that set me to thinking of adopting a child as much as anything in the
first place. Una shall be well dressed and educated and trained, Mr.
Meredith, and I shall give her music and painting lessons and treat her
as if she was my own."

Mr. Meredith was wide enough awake by this time. There was a faint flush
in his pale cheek and a dangerous light in his fine dark eyes. Was this
woman, whose vulgarity and consciousness of money oozed out of her at
every pore, actually asking him to give her Una--his dear little wistful
Una with Cecilia's own dark-blue eyes--the child whom the dying mother
had clasped to her heart after the other children had been led weeping
from the room. Cecilia had clung to her baby until the gates of death
had shut between them. She had looked over the little dark head to her
husband.

"Take good care of her, John," she had entreated. "She is so small--and
sensitive. The others can fight their way--but the world will hurt HER.
Oh, John, I don't know what you and she are going to do. You both need
me so much. But keep her close to you--keep her close to you."

These had been almost her last words except a few unforgettable ones for
him alone. And it was this child whom Mrs. Davis had coolly announced
her intention of taking from him. He sat up straight and looked at Mrs.
Davis. In spite of the worn dressing gown and the frayed slippers there
was something about him that made Mrs. Davis feel a little of the old
reverence for "the cloth" in which she had been brought up. After all,
there WAS a certain divinity hedging a minister, even a poor, unworldly,
abstracted one.

"I thank you for your kind intentions, Mrs. Davis," said Mr. Meredith
with a gentle, final, quite awful courtesy, "but I cannot give you my
child."

Mrs. Davis looked blank. She had never dreamed of his refusing.

"Why, Mr. Meredith," she said in astonishment. "You must be cr--you
can't mean it. You must think it over--think of all the advantages I can
give her."

"There is no need to think it over, Mrs. Davis. It is entirely out of
the question. All the worldly advantages it is in your power to bestow
on her could not compensate for the loss of a father's love and care. I
thank you again--but it is not to be thought of."

Disappointment angered Mrs. Davis beyond the power of old habit to
control. Her broad red face turned purple and her voice trembled.

"I thought you'd be only too glad to let me have her," she sneered.

"Why did you think that?" asked Mr. Meredith quietly.

"Because nobody ever supposed you cared anything about any of your
children," retorted Mrs. Davis contemptuously. "You neglect them
scandalously. It is the talk of the place. They aren't fed and dressed
properly, and they're not trained at all. They have no more manners than
a pack of wild Indians. You never think of doing your duty as a father.
You let a stray child come here among them for a fortnight and never
took any notice of her--a child that swore like a trooper I'm told. YOU
wouldn't have cared if they'd caught small-pox from her. And Faith made
an exhibition of herself getting up in preaching and making that speech!
And she rid a pig down the street--under your very eyes I understand.
The way they act is past belief and you never lift a finger to stop them
or try to teach them anything. And now when I offer one of them a good
home and good prospects you refuse it and insult me. A pretty father
you, to talk of loving and caring for your children!"

"That will do, woman!" said Mr. Meredith. He stood up and looked at Mrs.
Davis with eyes that made her quail. "That will do," he repeated. "I
desire to hear no more, Mrs. Davis. You have said too much. It may be
that I have been remiss in some respects in my duty as a parent, but it
is not for you to remind me of it in such terms as you have used. Let us
say good afternoon."

Mrs. Davis did not say anything half so amiable as good afternoon, but
she took her departure. As she swept past the minister a large, plump
toad, which Carl had secreted under the lounge, hopped out almost under
her feet. Mrs. Davis gave a shriek and in trying to avoid treading on
the awful thing, lost her balance and her parasol. She did not exactly
fall, but she staggered and reeled across the room in a very undignified
fashion and brought up against the door with a thud that jarred her from
head to foot. Mr. Meredith, who had not seen the toad, wondered if she
had been attacked with some kind of apoplectic or paralytic seizure,
and ran in alarm to her assistance. But Mrs. Davis, recovering her feet,
waved him back furiously.

