
'Diable! At least you are frank.'

'I could not go into exile, Sire.'

'And why?'

'Because I should be dead, Sire.'

Napoleon began to laugh.

'And there are some who say that our Berthier is dull-witted,' said he.
'Well, I think I am pretty sure of you, Berthier, for although I am fond
of you for reasons of my own I do not think that you would be of much
value to anyone else.  Now I could not say that of you, Monsieur
Talleyrand.  You would change very quickly to a new master as you have
changed from an old one.  You have a genius, you know, for adapting
yourself.'

There was nothing which the Emperor loved more than to suddenly produce
little scenes of this sort which made everybody very uncomfortable, for
no one could tell what awkward or compromising question he was going to
put to them next.  At present, however, they all forgot their own fears
of what might come in their interest at the reply which the famous
diplomatist might make to a suggestion which everybody knew to be so
true.  He stood, leaning upon his black ebony stick, with his bulky
shoulders stooping forward, and an amused smile upon his face, as if the
most innocent of compliments had been addressed to him.  One of his few
titles to respect is that he always met Napoleon upon equal terms, and
never condescended to fawn upon him or to flatter him.

'You think I should desert you, Sire, if your enemies offered me more
than you have given me?'

'I am perfectly sure that you would.'

'Well, really I cannot answer for myself, Sire, until the offer has been
made.  But it will have to be a very large one.  You see, apart from my
very nice hotel in the Rue St. Florentin, and the two hundred thousand
or so which you are pleased to allow me, there is my position as the
first minister in Europe.  Really, Sire, unless they put me on the
throne I cannot see how I can better my position.'

'No, I think I have you pretty safe,' said Napoleon, looking hard at him
with thoughtful eyes.  'By the way, Talleyrand, you must either marry
Madame Grand or get rid of her, for I cannot have a scandal about the
Court.'

I was astounded to hear so delicate and personal a matter discussed in
this public way, but this also was characteristic of the rule of this
extraordinary man, who proclaimed that he looked upon delicacy and good
taste as two of the fetters with which mediocrity attempted to cripple
genius.  There was no question of private life, from the choosing of a
wife to the discarding of a mistress, that this young conqueror of
thirty-six did not claim the right of discussing and of finally
settling.  Talleyrand broke once more into his benevolent but
inscrutable smile.

'I suppose that it is from early association, Sire,' said he, 'but my
instincts are to avoid marriage.'

Napoleon began to laugh.

'I forget sometimes that it is really the Bishop of Autun to whom I am
speaking,' said he.  'I think that perhaps I have interest enough with
the Pope to ask him, in return for any little attention which we gave
him at the Coronation, to show you some leniency in this matter.  She is
a clever woman, this Madame Grand.  I have observed that she listens
with attention.'

Talleyrand shrugged his rounded shoulders.  'Intellect in a woman is not
always an advantage, Sire.  A clever woman compromises her husband.
A stupid woman only compromises herself.'

'The cleverest woman,' said Napoleon, 'is the woman who is clever enough
to conceal her cleverness.  The women in France have always been a
danger, for they are cleverer than the men.  They cannot understand that
it is their hearts and not their heads that we want.  When they have had
influence upon a monarch, they have invariably ruined his career.  Look
at Henry the Fourth and Louis the Fourteenth.  They are all ideologists,
dreamers, sentimentalists, full of emotion and energy, but without logic
or foresight.  Look at that accursed Madame de Stael!  Look at the
Salons of the Quartier St. Germain!  Their eternal clack, clack, clack
give me more trouble than the fleet of England.  Why cannot they look
after their babies and their needlework?  I suppose you think that these
are very dreadful opinions, Monsieur de Laval?'

It was not an easy question to answer, so I was silent.

'You have not at your age become a practical man,' said the Emperor.
'You will understand then.  I dare say that I thought as you do at the
time when the stupid Parisians were saying what a misalliance the widow
of the famous General de Beauharnais was making by marrying the unknown
Buonaparte.  It was a beautiful dream!  There are nine inns in a single
day's journey between Milan and Mantua, and I wrote a letter to my wife
from each of them.  Nine letters in a day--but one becomes
disillusioned, monsieur.  One learns to accept things as they are.'

I could not but think what a beautiful young man he must have been
before he had learned to accept things as they are.  The glamour, the
romance--what a bald dead thing is life without it!  His own face had
clouded over as if that old life had perhaps had a charm which the
Emperor's crown had never given.  It may be that those nine letters
written in one day at wayside inns had brought him more true joy than
all the treaties by which he had torn provinces from his neighbours.
But the sentiment passed from his face, and he came back in his sudden
concise fashion to my own affairs.

'Eugenie de Choiseul is the niece of the Duc de Choiseul, is she not?'
he asked.

'Yes, Sire.'

'You are affianced!'

'Yes, Sire.'

He shook his head impatiently.

'If you wish to advance yourself in my Court, Monsieur de Laval,' said
he,' you must commit such matters to my care.  Is it likely that I can
look with indifference upon a marriage between emigres--an alliance
between my enemies?'

'But she shares my opinions, Sire.'

'Ta, ta, ta, at her age one has no opinions.  She has the emigre blood
in her veins, and it will come out.  Your marriage shall be my care,
Monsieur de Laval.  And I wish you to come to the Pont de Briques that
you may be presented to the Empress.  What is it, Constant?'

'There is a lady outside who desires to see your Majesty.  Shall I tell
her to come later?'

'A lady!' cried the Emperor smiling.  'We do not see many faces in the
camp which have not a moustache upon them.  Who is she?  What does she
want?'

'Her name, Sire, is Mademoiselle Sibylle Bernac.'

'What!' cried Napoleon.  'It must be the daughter of old Bernac of
Grosbois.  By the way, Monsieur de Laval, he is your uncle upon your
mother's side, is he not?'

I may have flushed with shame as I acknowledged it, for the Emperor read
my feelings.

'Well, well, he has not a very savoury trade, it is true, and yet I can
assure you that it is one which is very necessary to me.  By the way,
this uncle of yours, as I understand, holds the estates which should
have descended to you, does he not?'

'Yes, Sire.'

His blue eyes flashed suspicion at me.

'I trust that you are not joining my service merely in the hope of
having them restored to you.'

'No, Sire.  It is my ambition to make a career for myself.'

'It is a prouder thing,' said the Emperor, 'to found a family than
merely to perpetuate one.  I could not restore your estates, Monsieur de
Laval, for things have come to such a pitch in France that if one once
begins restorations the affair is endless.  It would shake all public
confidence.  I have no more devoted adherents than the men who hold land
which does not belong to them.  As long as they serve me, as your uncle
serves me, the land must remain with them.  But what can this young lady
require of me?  Show her in, Constant!'

An instant later my cousin Sibylle was conducted into the room.
Her face was pale and set, but her large dark eyes were filled with
resolution, and she carried herself like a princess.

'Well, mademoiselle, why do you come here?  What is it that you want?'
asked the Emperor in the brusque manner which he adopted to women, even
if he were wooing them.

Sibylle glanced round, and as our eyes met for an instant I felt that my
presence had renewed her courage.  She looked bravely at the Emperor as
she answered him.

'I come, Sire, to implore a favour of you.'

'Your father's daughter has certainly claims upon me, mademoiselle.
What is it that you wish?'

'I do not ask it in my father's name, but in my own.  I implore you,
Sire, to spare the life of Monsieur Lucien Lesage, who was arrested
yesterday upon a charge of treason.  He is a student, Sire--a mere
dreamer who has lived away from the world and has been made a tool by
designing men.'

'A dreamer!' cried the Emperor harshly.  'They are the most dangerous of
all.'  He took a bundle of notes from his table and glanced them over.
'I presume that he is fortunate enough to be your lover, mademoiselle?'

Sibylle's pale face flushed, and she looked down before the Emperor's
keen sardonic glance.

'I have his examination here.  He does not come well out of it.  I
confess that from what I see of the young man's character I should not
say that he is worthy of your love.'

'I implore you to spare him, Sire.'

'What you ask is impossible, mademoiselle.  I have been conspired
against from two sides--by the Bourbons and by the Jacobins.  Hitherto I
have been too long-suffering, and they have been encouraged by my
patience.  Since Cadoudal and the Due d'Enghien died the Bourbons have
been quiet.  Now I must teach the same lesson to these others.'

I was astonished and am still astonished at the passion with which my
brave and pure cousin loved this cowardly and low-minded man, though it
is but in accordance with that strange law which draws the extremes of
nature together.  As she heard the Emperor's stern reply the last sign
of colour faded from her pale face, and her eyes were dimmed with
despairing tears, which gleamed upon her white cheeks like dew upon the
petals of a lily.

'For God's sake, Sire!  For the love of your mother spare him!' she
cried, falling upon her knees at the Emperor's feet.  'I will answer for
him that he never offends you again.'

'Tut, tut!' cried Napoleon angrily, turning upon his heel and walking
impatiently up and down the room.  'I cannot grant you what you ask,
mademoiselle.  When I say so once it is finished.  I cannot have my
decisions in high matters of State affected by the intrusion of women.
The Jacobins have been dangerous of late, and an example must be made or
we shall have the Faubourg St. Antoine upon our hands once more.'

The Emperors set face and firm manner showed it was hopeless, and yet my
cousin persevered as no one but a woman who pleads for her lover would
have dared to do.

'He is harmless, Sire.'

'His death will frighten others.'

'Spare him and I will answer for his loyalty.'

'What you ask is impossible.'

Constant and I raised her from the ground.

'That is right, Monsieur de Laval,' said the Emperor.  'This interview
can lead to nothing.  Remove your cousin from the room!'

But she had again turned to him with a face which showed that even now
all hope had not been abandoned.

'Sire,' she cried.  'You say that an example must be made.  There is
Toussac--!'

'Ah, if I could lay my hands upon Toussac!'

'He is the dangerous man.  It was he and my father who led Lucien on.
If an example must be made it should be an example of the guilty rather
than of the innocent.'

'They are both guilty.  And, besides, we have our hands upon the one but
not upon the other.'

'But if I could find him?'

Napoleon thought for a moment.

'If you do,' said he, 'Lesage will be forgiven!'

'But I cannot do it in a day.'

'How long do you ask?'

'A week at the least.'

'Then he has a respite of a week.  If you can find Toussac in the time,
Lesage will be pardoned.  If not he will die upon the eighth day.  It is
enough.  Monsieur de Laval, remove your cousin, for I have matters of
more importance to attend to.  I shall expect you one evening at the
Pont de Briques, when you are ready to be presented to the Empress.'



CHAPTER XIII


THE MAN OF DREAMS

When I had escorted my cousin Sibylle from the presence of the Emperor,
I was surprised to find the same young hussar officer waiting outside
who had commanded the guard which had brought me to the camp.

'Well, mademoiselle, what luck?' he asked excitedly, clanking towards
us.

For answer Sibylle shook her head.

'Ah, I feared as much, for the Emperor is a terrible man.  It was brave,
indeed, of you to attempt it.  I had rather charge an unshaken square
upon a spent horse than ask him for anything.  But my heart is heavy,
mademoiselle, that you should have been unsuccessful.'  His boyish blue
eyes filled with tears and his fair moustache drooped in such a
deplorable fashion, that I could have laughed had the matter been less
serious.

'Lieutenant Gerard chanced to meet me, and escorted me through the
camp,' said my cousin.  'He has been kind enough to give me sympathy in
my trouble.'

'And so do I, Sibylle,' I cried; 'you carried yourself like an angel,
and it is a lucky man who is blessed with your love.  I trust that he
may be worthy of it.'

She turned cold and proud in an instant when anyone threw a doubt upon
this wretched lover of hers.

'I know him as neither the Emperor nor you can do,' said she.  'He has
the heart and soul of a poet, and he is too high-minded to suspect the
intrigues to which he has fallen a victim.  But as to Toussac, I should
have no pity upon him, for I know him to be a murderer five times over,
and I know also that there will be no peace in France until he has been
taken.  Cousin Louis, will you help me to do it?'

The lieutenant had been tugging at his moustache and looking me up and
down with a jealous eye.

'Surely, mademoiselle, you will permit me to help you?' he cried in a
piteous voice.

'I may need you both,' said she.  'I will come to you if I do.  Now I
will ask you to ride with me to the edge of the camp and there to leave
me.'

She had a quick imperative way which came charmingly from those sweet
womanly lips.  The grey horse upon which I had come to the camp was
waiting beside that of the hussar, so we were soon in the saddle.
When we were clear of the huts my cousin turned to us.

'I had rather go alone now,' said she.  'It is understood, then, that I
