
'You must kindle some fire too, for hold mich der deyvil, Ich bin ganz
gefrorne!'

'It is a cold place, to be sure,' said Glossin, gathering together some
decayed staves of barrels and pieces of wood, which had perhaps lain in
the cavern since Hatteraick was there last.

'Cold? Snow-wasser and hagel! it's perdition; I could only keep myself
alive by rambling up and down this d--d vault, and thinking about the
merry rouses we have had in it.'

The flame then began to blaze brightly, and Hatteraick hung his bronzed
visage and expanded his hard and sinewy hands over it, with an avidity
resembling that of a famished wretch to whom food is exposed. The light
showed his savage and stern features, and the smoke, which in his agony
of cold he seemed to endure almost to suffocation, after circling round
his head, rose to the dim and rugged roof of the cave, through which it
escaped by some secret rents or clefts in the rock; the same doubtless
that afforded air to the cavern when the tide was in, at which time the
aperture to the sea was filled with water.

'And now I have brought you some breakfast,' said Glossin, producing
some cold meat and a flask of spirits. The latter Hatteraick eagerly
seized upon and applied to his mouth; and, after a hearty draught, he
exclaimed with great rapture, 'Das schmeckt! That is good, that warms
the liver!' Then broke into the fragment of a High-Dutch song,--

     Saufen Bier und Brantewein,
     Schmeissen alle die Fenstern ein;
     Ich bin liederlich,
     Du bist liederlich;
     Sind wir nicht liederlich Leute a?

'Well said, my hearty Captain!' cried Glossin, endeavouring to catch
the tone of revelry,--

     'Gin by pailfuls, wine in rivers,
     Dash the window-glass to shivers!
        For three wild lads were we, brave boys,
        And three wild lads were we;
        Thou on the land, and I on the sand,
        And Jack on the gallows-tree!

That's it, my bully-boy! Why, you're alive again now! And now let us
talk about our business.'

'YOUR business, if you please,' said Hatteraick. 'Hagel and donner!
mine was done when I got out of the bilboes.'

'Have patience, my good friend; I'll convince you our interests are
just the same.'

Hatteraick gave a short dry cough, and Glossin, after a pause,
proceeded.

'How came you to let the boy escape?'

'Why, fluch and blitzen! he was no charge of mine. Lieutenant Brown
gave him to his cousin that's in the Middleburgh house of Vanbeest and
Vanbruggen, and told him some goose's gazette about his being taken in
a skirmish with the land-sharks; he gave him for a footboy. Me let him
escape! the bastard kinchin should have walked the plank ere I troubled
myself about him.'

'Well, and was he bred a foot-boy then?'

'Nein, nein; the kinchin got about the old man's heart, and he gave him
his own name, and bred him up in the office, and then sent him to
India; I believe he would have packed him back here, but his nephew
told him it would do up the free trade for many a day if the youngster
got back to Scotland.'

'Do you think the younker knows much of his own origin now?'

'Deyvil!' replied Hatteraick, 'how should I tell what he knows now? But
he remembered something of it long. When he was but ten years old he
persuaded another Satan's limb of an English bastard like himself to
steal my lugger's khan--boat--what do you call it? to return to his
country, as he called it; fire him! Before we could overtake them they
had the skiff out of channel as far as the Deurloo; the boat might have
been lost.'

'I wish to Heaven she had, with him in her!' ejaculated Glossin.

'Why, I was so angry myself that, sapperment! I did give him a tip over
the side; but split him! the comical little devil swam like a duck; so
I made him swim astern for a mile to teach him manners, and then took
him in when he was sinking. By the knocking Nicholas I he'll plague
you, now he's come over the herring-pond! When he was so high he had
the spirit of thunder and lightning.'

'How did he get back from India?'

'Why, how should I know? The house there was done up; and that gave us
a shake at Middleburgh, I think; so they sent me again to see what
could be done among my old acquaintances here, for we held old stories
were done away and forgotten. So I had got a pretty trade on foot
within the last two trips; but that stupid hounds-foot schelm, Brown,
has knocked it on the head again, I suppose, with getting himself shot
by the colonel-man.'

'Why were not you with them?'

'Why, you see, sapperment! I fear nothing; but it was too far within
land, and I might have been scented.'

'True. But to return to this youngster--'

'Ay, ay, donner and blitzen! HE'S your affair,' said the Captain.

'How do you really know that he is in this country?'

'Why, Gabriel saw him up among the hills.'

'Gabriel! who is he?'

'A fellow from the gipsies, that, about eighteen years since, was
pressed on board that d--d fellow Pritchard's sloop-of-war. It was he
came off and gave us warning that the Shark was coming round upon us
the day Kennedy was done; and he told us how Kennedy had given the
information. The gipsies and Kennedy had some quarrel besides. This Gab
went to the East Indies in the same ship with your younker, and,
sapperment! knew him well, though the other did not remember him. Gab
kept out of his eye though, as he had served the States against
England, and was a deserter to boot; and he sent us word directly, that
we might know of his being here, though it does not concern us a rope's
end.'

'So, then, really, and in sober earnest, he is actually in this
country, Hatteraick, between friend and friend?' asked Glossin,
seriously.

'Wetter and donner, yaw! What do you take me for?'

'For a bloodthirsty, fearless miscreant!' thought Glossin internally;
but said aloud, 'And which of your people was it that shot young
Hazlewood?'

'Sturmwetter!' said the Captain, 'do ye think we were mad? none of US,
man. Gott! the country was too hot for the trade already with that d-d
frolic of Brown's, attacking what you call Woodbourne House.'

'Why, I am told,' said Glossin, 'it was Brown who shot Hazlewood?'

'Not our lieutenant, I promise you; for he was laid six feet deep at
Derncleugh the day before the thing happened. Tausend deyvils, man! do
ye think that he could rise out of the earth to shoot another man?'

A light here began to break upon Glossin's confusion of ideas. 'Did you
not say that the younker, as you call him, goes by the name of Brown?'

'Of Brown? yaw; Vanbeest Brown. Old Vanbeest Brown, of our Vanbeest and
Vanbruggen, gave him his own name, he did.'

'Then,' said Glossin, rubbing his hands, 'it is he, by Heaven, who has
committed this crime!'

'And what have we to do with that?' demanded Hatteraick.

Glossin paused, and, fertile in expedients, hastily ran over his
project in his own mind, and then drew near the smuggler with a
confidential air. 'You know, my dear Hatteraick, it is our principal
business to get rid of this young man?'

'Umph!' answered Dirk Hatteraick.

'Not,' continued Glossin--'not that I would wish any personal harm to
him--if--if--if we can do without. Now, he is liable to be seized upon
by justice, both as bearing the same name with your lieutenant, who was
engaged in that affair at Woodbourne, and for firing at young Hazlewood
with intent to kill or wound.'

'Ay, ay,' said Dirk Hatteraick; 'but what good will that do you? He'll
be loose again as soon as he shows himself to carry other colours.'

'True, my dear Dirk; well noticed, my friend Hatteraick! But there is
ground enough for a temporary imprisonment till he fetch his proofs
from England or elsewhere, my good friend. I understand the law,
Captain Hatteraick, and I'll take it upon me, simple Gilbert Glossin of
Ellangowan, justice of peace for the county of---, to refuse his bail,
if he should offer the best in the country, until he is brought up for
a second examination; now where d'ye think I'll incarcerate him?'

'Hagel and wetter! what do I care?'

'Stay, my friend; you do care a great deal. Do you know your goods that
were seized and carried to Woodbourne are now lying in the custom-house
at Portanferry? (a small fishing-town). Now I will commit this
younker--'

'When you have caught him.'

'Ay, ay, when I have caught him; I shall not be long about that. I will
commit him to the workhouse, or bridewell, which you know is beside the
custom-house.'

'Yaw, the rasp-house; I know it very well.'

'I will take care that the redcoats are dispersed through the country;
you land at night with the crew of your lugger, receive your own goods,
and carry the younker Brown with you back to Flushing. Won't that do?'

'Ay, carry him to Flushing,' said the Captain, 'or--to America?'

'Ay, ay, my friend.'

'Or--to Jericho?'

'Psha! Wherever you have a mind.'

'Ay, or--pitch him overboard?'

'Nay, I advise no violence.'

'Nein, nein; you leave that to me. Sturmwetter! I know you of old. But,
hark ye, what am I, Dirk Hatteraick, to be the better of this?'

'Why, is it not your interest as well as mine?' said Glossin; 'besides,
I set you free this morning.'

'YOU set me free! Donner and deyvil! I set myself free. Besides, it was
all in the way of your profession, and happened a long time ago, ha,
ha, ha!'

'Pshaw! pshaw! don't let us jest; I am not against making a handsome
compliment; but it's your affair as well as mine.'

'What do you talk of my affair? is it not you that keep the younker's
whole estate from him? Dirk Hatteraick never touched a stiver of his
rents.'

'Hush! hush! I tell you it shall be a joint business.'

'Why, will ye give me half the kitt?'

'What, half the estate? D'ye mean we should set up house together at
Ellangowan, and take the barony ridge about?'

'Sturmwetter, no! but you might give me half the value--half the gelt.
Live with you? nein. I would have a lusthaus of mine own on the
Middleburgh dyke, and a blumengarten like a burgomaster's.'

'Ay, and a wooden lion at the door, and a painted sentinel in the
garden, with a pipe in his mouth! But, hark ye, Hatteraick, what will
all the tulips and flower-gardens and pleasure-houses in the
Netherlands do for you if you are hanged here in Scotland?'

Hatteraick's countenance fell. 'Der deyvil! hanged!'

'Ay, hanged, mein Herr Captain. The devil can scarce save Dirk
Hatteraick from being hanged for a murderer and kidnapper if the
younker of Ellangowan should settle in this country, and if the gallant
Captain chances to be caught here reestablishing his fair trade! And I
won't say but, as peace is now so much talked of, their High
Mightinesses may not hand him over to oblige their new allies, even if
he remained in faderland.'

'Poz hagel, blitzen, and donner! I--I doubt you say true.'

'Not,' said Glossin, perceiving he had made the desired impression,
'not that I am against being civil'; and he slid into Hatteraick's
passive hand a bank-note of some value.

'Is this all?' said the smuggler. 'You had the price of half a cargo
for winking at our job, and made us do your business too.'

' But, my good friend, you forget: In this case you will recover all
your own goods.'

'Ay, at the risk of all our own necks; we could do that without you.'

'I doubt that, Captain Hatteraick,' said Glossin, drily;' because you
would probably find a-'dozen'redcoats at the custom-house, whom it must
be my business, if we agree about this matter, to have removed. Come,
come, I will be as liberal as I can, but you should have a conscience.'

'Now strafe mich der deyfel! this provokes me more than all the rest!
You rob and you murder, and you want me to rob and murder, and play the
silver-cooper, or kidnapper, as you call it, a dozen times over, and
then, hagel and windsturm! you speak to me of conscience! Can you think
of no fairer way of getting rid of this unlucky lad?'

'No, mein Herr; but as I commit him to your charge-'

'To my charge! to the charge of steel and gunpowder! and--well, if it
must be, it must; but you have a tolerably good guess what's like to
come of it.'

'O, my dear friend, I trust no degree of severity will be necessary,'
replied Glossin.

'Severity!' said the fellow, with a kind of groan, 'I wish you had had
my dreams when I first came to this dog-hole, and tried to sleep among
the dry seaweed. First, there was that d-d fellow there, with his
broken back, sprawling as he did when I hurled the rock over a-top on
him, ha, ha! You would have sworn he was lying on the floor where you
stand, wriggling like a crushed frog, and then--'

'Nay, my friend,' said Glossin, interrupting him, 'what signifies going
over this nonsense? If you are turned chicken-hearted, why, the game's
up, that's all; the game's up with us both.'

'Chicken-hearted? no. I have not lived so long upon the account to
start at last, neither for devil nor Dutchman.'

'Well, then, take another schnaps; the cold's at your heart still. And
now tell me, are any of your old crew with you?'

'Nein; all dead, shot, hanged, drowned, and damned. Brown was the last.
All dead but Gipsy Gab, and he would go off the country for a spill of
money; or he'll be quiet for his own sake; or old Meg, his aunt, will
keep him quiet for hers.'

'Which Meg?'

'Meg Merrilies, the old devil's limb of a gipsy witch.'

'Is she still alive?'

'Yaw.'

'And in this country?'

'And in this country. She was at the Kaim of Derncleugh, at Vanbeest
Brown's last wake, as they call it, the other night, with two of my
people, and some of her own blasted gipsies.'

'That's another breaker ahead, Captain! Will she not squeak, think ye?'

'Not she! she won't start; she swore by the salmon, [Footnote: The
great and invoidable oath of the strolling tribes.] if we did the
kinchin no harm, she would never tell how the gauger got it. Why, man,
though I gave her a wipe with my hanger in the heat of the matter, and
cut her arm, and though she was so long after in trouble about it up at
your borough-town there, der deyvil! old Meg was as true as steel.'

'Why, that's true, as you say,' replied Glossin. 'And yet if she could
be carried over to Zealand, or Hamburgh, or--or--anywhere else, you
know, it were as well.'

Hatteraick jumped upright upon his feet, and looked at Glossin from
head to heel. 'I don't see the goat's foot,' he said, 'and yet he must
be the very deyvil! But Meg Merrilies is closer yet with the kobold
than you are; ay, and I had never such weather as after having drawn
her blood. Nein, nein, I 'll meddle with her no more; she's a witch of
the fiend, a real deyvil's kind,--but that's her affair. Donner and
wetter! I'll neither make nor meddle; that's her work. But for the
rest--why, if I thought the trade would not suffer, I would soon rid
you of the younker, if you send me word when he's under embargo.'

In brief and under tones the two worthy associates concerted their
enterprise, and agreed at which of his haunts Hatteraick should be
heard of. The stay of his lugger on the coast was not difficult, as
there were no king's vessels there at the time.




CHAPTER XXXV

     You are one of those that will not serve God if the devil
     bids you. Because we come to do you service, you think we are
     ruffians.

          --Othello.


When Glossin returned home he found, among other letters and papers
sent to him, one of considerable importance. It was signed by Mr.
Protocol, an attorney in Edinburgh, and, addressing him as the agent
for Godfrey Bertram, Esq., late of Ellangowan, and his representatives,
acquainted him with the sudden death of Mrs. Margaret Bertram of
Singleside, requesting him to inform his clients thereof, in case they
should judge it proper to have any person present for their interest at
opening the repositories of the deceased. Mr. Glossin perceived at once
that the letter-writer was unacquainted with the breach which had taken
place between him and his late patron. The estate of the deceased lady
should by rights, as he well knew, descend to Lucy Bertram; but it was
a thousand to one that the caprice of the old lady might have altered
its destination. After running over contingencies and probabilities in
his fertile mind, to ascertain what sort of personal advantage might
accrue to him from this incident, he could not perceive any mode of
availing himself of it, except in so far as it might go to assist his
plan of recovering, or rather creating, a character, the want of which
he had already experienced, and was likely to feel yet more deeply. 'I
must place myself,' he thought, 'on strong ground, that, if anything
goes wrong with Dirk Hatteraick's project, I may have prepossessions in
my favour at least.' Besides, to do Glossin justice, bad as he was, he
might feel some desire to compensate to Miss Bertram in a small degree,
and in a case in which his own interest did not interfere with hers,
the infinite mischief which he had occasioned to her family. He
therefore resolved early the next morning to ride over to Woodbourne.

It was not without hesitation that he took this step, having the
natural reluctance to face Colonel Mannering which fraud and villainy
have to encounter honour and probity. But he had great confidence in
his own savoir faire. His talents were naturally acute, and by no means
confined to the line of his profession. He had at different times
resided a good deal in England, and his address was free both from
country rusticity and professional pedantry; so that he had
considerable powers both of address and persuasion, joined to an
unshaken effrontery, which he affected to disguise under plainness of
manner. Confident, therefore, in himself, he appeared at Woodbourne
about ten in the morning, and was admitted as a gentleman come to wait
upon Miss Bertram.

He did not announce himself until he was at the door of the
breakfast-parlour, when the servant, by his desire, said aloud--'Mr.
Glossin, to wait upon Miss Bertram.' Lucy, remembering the last scene
of her father's existence, turned as pale as death, and had well-nigh
fallen from her chair. Julia Mannering flew to her assistance, and they
left the room together. There remained Colonel Mannering, Charles
Hazlewood, with his arm in a sling, and the Dominie, whose gaunt visage
and wall-eyes assumed a most hostile aspect on recognising Glossin.

That honest gentleman, though somewhat abashed by the effect of his
first introduction, advanced with confidence, and hoped he did not
intrude upon the ladies. Colonel Mannering, in a very upright and
stately manner, observed, that he did not know to what he was to impute
the honour of a visit from Mr. Glossin.

'Hem! hem! I took the liberty to wait upon Miss Bertram, Colonel
Mannering, on account of a matter of business.'

'If it can be communicated to Mr. Mac-Morlan, her agent, sir, I believe
it will be more agreeable to Miss Bertram.'

'I beg pardon, Colonel Mannering,' said Glossin, making a wretched
attempt at an easy demeanour; 'you are a man of the world; there are
some cases in which it is most prudent for all parties to treat with
principals.'

'Then,' replied Mannering, with a repulsive air, 'if Mr. Glossin will
take the trouble to state his object in a letter, I will answer that
Miss Bertram pays proper attention to it.'

'Certainly,' stammered Glossin; 'but there are cases in which a viva
voce conference--Hem! I perceive--I know--Colonel Mannering has adopted
some prejudices which may make my visit appear intrusive; but I submit
to his good sense, whether he ought to exclude me from a hearing
without knowing the purpose of my visit, or of how much consequence it
may be to the young lady whom he honours with his protection.'

'Certainly, sir, I have not the least intention to do so,' replied the
Colonel. 'I will learn Miss Bertram's pleasure on the subject, and
acquaint Mr. Glossin, if he can spare time to wait for her answer.' So
saying, he left the room.

Glossin had still remained standing in the midst of the apartment.
Colonel Mannering had made not the slightest motion to invite him to
sit, and indeed had remained standing himself during their short
interview. When he left the room, however, Glossin seized upon a chair,
and threw himself into it with an air between embarrassment and
effrontery. He felt the silence of his companions disconcerting and
oppressive, and resolved to interrupt it.

'A fine day, Mr. Sampson.'

The Dominie answered with something between an acquiescent grunt and an
indignant groan.

'You never come down to see your old acquaintance on the Ellangowan
property, Mr. Sampson. You would find most of the old stagers still
stationary there. I have too much respect for the late family to
disturb old residenters, even under pretence of improvement. Besides,
it's not my way, I don't like it; I believe, Mr. Sampson, Scripture
particularly condemns those who oppress the poor, and remove landmarks.'

'Or who devour the substance of orphans,' subjoined the Dominie.
'Anathema, Maranatha!' So saying, he rose, shouldered the folio which
he had been perusing, faced to the right about, and marched out of the
room with the strides of a grenadier.

Mr. Glossin, no way disconcerted, or at least feeling it necessary not
to appear so, turned to young Hazlewood, who was apparently busy with
the newspaper.--' Any news, sir?' Hazlewood raised his eyes, looked at
him, and pushed the paper towards him, as if to a stranger in a
coffee-house, then rose, and was about to leave the room. 'I beg
pardon, Mr. Hazlewood, but I can't help wishing you joy of getting so
easily over that infernal accident.' This was answered by a sort of
inclination of the head, as slight and stiff as could well be imagined.
Yet it encouraged our man of law to proceed.--' I can promise you, Mr.
Hazlewood, few people have taken the interest in that matter which I
have done, both for the sake of the country and on account of my
particular respect for your family, which has so high a stake in it;
indeed, so very high a stake that, as Mr. Featherhead is 'turning old
now, and as there's a talk, since his last stroke, of his taking the
Chiltern Hundreds, it might be worth your while to look about you. I
speak as a friend, Mr. Hazlewood, and as one who understands the roll;
and if in going over it together--'

'I beg pardon, sir, but I have no views in which your assistance could
be useful.'

'O, very well, perhaps you are right; it's quite time enough, and I
love to see a young gentleman cautious. But I was talking of your
wound. I think I have got a clue to that business--I think I have, and
if I don't bring the fellow to condign punishment--!'

'I beg your pardon, sir, once more; but your zeal outruns my wishes. I
have every reason to think the wound was accidental; certainly it was
not premeditated. Against ingratitude and premeditated treachery,
should you find any one guilty of them, my resentment will be as warm
as your own.' This was Hazlewood's answer.

'Another rebuff,' thought Glossin; 'I must try him upon the other
tack.' 'Right, sir; very nobly said! I would have no more mercy on an
ungrateful man than I would on a woodcock. And now we talk of sport
(this was a sort of diverting of the conversation which Glossin had
learned from his former patron), I see you often carry a gun, and I
hope you will be soon able to take the field again. I observe you
confine yourself always to your own side of the Hazleshaws burn. I
hope, my dear sir, you will make no scruple of following your game to
the Ellangowan bank; I believe it is rather the best exposure of the
two for woodcocks, although both are capital.'

As this offer only excited a cold and constrained bow, Glossin was
obliged to remain silent, and was presently afterwards somewhat
relieved by the entrance of Colonel Mannering.

'I have detained you some time, I fear, sir,' said he, addressing
Glossin; 'I wished to prevail upon Miss Bertram to see you, as, in my
opinion, her objections ought to give way to the necessity of hearing
in her own person what is stated to be of importance that she should
know. But I find that circumstances of recent occurrence, and not
easily to be forgotten, have rendered her so utterly repugnant to a
personal interview with Mr. Glossin that it would be cruelty to insist
upon it; and she has deputed me to receive his commands, or proposal,
or, in short, whatever he may wish to say to her.'

'Hem, hem! I am sorry, sir--I am very sorry, Colonel Mannering, that
Miss Bertram should suppose--that any prejudice, in short--or idea that
anything on my part--'

'Sir,' said the inflexible Colonel, 'where no accusation is made,
excuses or explanations are unnecessary. Have you any objection to
communicate to me, as Miss Bertram's temporary guardian, the
circumstances which you conceive to interest her?'

'None, Colonel Mannering; she could not choose a more respectable
friend, or one with whom I, in particular, would more anxiously wish to
communicate frankly.'

'Have the goodness to speak to the point, sir, if you please.'

'Why, sir, it is not so easy all at once--but Mr. Hazlewood need not
leave the room,--I mean so well to Miss Bertram that I could wish the
whole world to hear my part of the conference.'

'My friend Mr. Charles Hazlewood will not probably be anxious, Mr.
Glossin, to listen to what cannot concern him. And now, when he has
left us alone, let me pray you to be short and explicit in what you
have to say. I am a soldier, sir, somewhat impatient of forms and
introductions.' So saying, he drew himself up in his chair and waited
for Mr. Glossin's communication.

'Be pleased to look at that letter,' said Glossin, putting Protocol's
epistle into Mannering's hand, as the shortest way of stating his
business.

The Colonel read it and returned it, after pencilling the name of the
writer in his memorandum-book. 'This, sir, does not seem to require
much discussion. I will see that Miss Bertram's interest is attended
to.'

'But, sir,--but, Colonel Mannering,' added Glossin, 'there is another
matter which no one can explain but myself. This lady--this Mrs.
Margaret Bertram, to my certain knowledge, made a general settlement of
her affairs in Miss Lucy Bertram's favour while she lived with my old
friend Mr. Bertram at Ellangowan. The Dominie--that was the name by
which my deceased friend always called that very respectable man Mr.
Sampson--he and I witnessed the deed. And she had full power at that
time to make such a settlement, for she was in fee of the estate of
Singleside even then, although it was life rented by an elder sister.
It was a whimsical settlement of old Singleside's, sir; he pitted the
two cats his daughters against each other, ha, ha, ha!'

'Well, sir,' said Mannering, without the slightest smile of sympathy,
'but to the purpose. You say that this lady had power to settle her
estate on Miss Bertram, and that she did so?'

'Even so, Colonel,' replied Glossin. 'I think I should understand the
law, I have followed it for many years; and, though I have given it up
to retire upon a handsome competence, I did not throw away that
knowledge which is pronounced better than house and land, and which I
take to be the knowledge of the law, since, as our common rhyme has it,

     'Tis most excellent,
     To win the land that's gone and spent.

No, no, I love the smack of the whip: I have a little, a very little
law yet, at the service of my friends.'

Glossin ran on in this manner, thinking he had made a favourable
impression on Mannering. The Colonel, indeed, reflected that this might
be a most important crisis for Miss Bertram's interest, and resolved
that his strong inclination to throw Glossin out at window or at door
should not interfere with it. He put a strong curb on his temper, and
resolved to listen with patience at least, if without complacency. He
therefore let Mr. Glossin get to the end of his self-congratulations,
and then asked him if he knew where the deed was.

'I know--that is, I think--I believe I can recover it. In such cases
custodiers have sometimes made a charge.'

'We won't differ as to that, sir,' said the Colonel, taking out his
pocket-book.

'But, my dear sir, you take me so very short. I said SOME PERSONS MIGHT
make such a claim, I mean for payment of the expenses of the deed,
trouble in the affair, etc. But I, for my own part, only wish Miss
Bertram and her friends to be satisfied that I am acting towards her
with honour. There's the paper, sir! It would have been a satisfaction
to me to have delivered it into Miss Bertram's own hands, and to have
wished her joy of the prospects which it opens. But, since her
prejudices on the subject are invincible, it only remains for me to
transmit her my best wishes through you, Colonel Mannering, and to
express that I shall willingly give my testimony in support of that
deed when I shall be called upon. I have the honour to wish you a good
morning, sir.'

This parting speech was so well got up, and had so much the tone of
conscious integrity unjustly suspected, that even Colonel Mannering was
staggered in his bad opinion. He followed him two or three steps, and
took leave of him with more politeness (though still cold and formal)
than he had paid during his visit. Glossin left the house half pleased
with the impression he had made, half mortified by the stern caution
and proud reluctance with which he had been received. 'Colonel
Mannering might have had more politeness,' he said to himself. 'It is
not every man that can bring a good chance of 400 Pounds a year to a
penniless girl. Singleside must be up to 400 Pounds a year now; there's
Reilageganbeg, Gillifidget, Loverless, Liealone, and the Spinster's
Knowe--good 400 Pounds a year. Some people might have made their own of
it in my place; and yet, to own the truth, after much consideration, I
don't see how that is possible.'

Glossin was no sooner mounted and gone than the Colonel despatched a
groom for Mr. Mac-Morlan, and, putting the deed into his hand,
requested to know if it was likely to be available to his friend Lucy
Bertram. Mac-Morlan perused it with eyes that sparkled with delight,
snapped his fingers repeatedly, and at length exclaimed, 'Available!
it's as tight as a glove; naebody could make better wark than Glossin,
when he didna let down a steek on purpose. But (his countenance
falling) the auld b---, that I should say so, might alter at pleasure!'

'Ah! And how shall we know whether she has done so?'
