The Project Gutenberg EBook Serapis, by Georg Ebers, Volume 5.
#66 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: Serapis, Volume 5.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5505]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on June 5, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SERAPIS, BY GEORG EBERS, V5 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





SERAPIS

By Georg Ebers

Volume 5.



CHAPTER XX.

Gorgo, when she had left her grandmother, could not rest.  Her lofty
calmness of demeanor had given way to a restless mood such as she had
always contemned severely in others, since she had ceased to be a
vehement child and grown to be a woman.  She tried to beguile the alarm
that made her pulses beat so quickly, and the heart-sickness that ached
like a wound, by music and singing; but this only added to her torment.
The means by which she could usually recover her equanimity of mind had
lost their efficacy, and Sappho's longing hymn, which she began to sing,
had only served to bring the fervid longing of her own heart to light--
to set it, as it were, in the full glare of the sun.  She had become
aware that every fibre, every nerve of her being yearned for the man she
loved; she would have thrown away her life like a hollow nut for one
single hour of perfect joy with him and in him.  The faith in the old
gods, the heathen world which contained the ideal of her young soul, her
detestation of Christianity, her beautiful art--everything, in short,
that had filled the spiritual side of her life, was cast into the shade
by the one absorbing passion that possessed her soul.  Every feeling,
every instinct, urged her to abandon herself entirely to her lover, and
yet she never for one instant doubted which side she would take in the
approaching conflict of the great powers that ruled the world.  The last
few hours had only confirmed her conviction that the end of all things
was at hand.  The world was on the eve of destruction; she foresaw that
she must perish--perish with Constantine, and that, in her eyes, was a
grace from the gods.

While Damia was vainly struggling to liberate her soul from the bondage
of the flesh, Gorgo had been wandering uneasily about the house; now
going to the slaves, encouraging them with brave words, and giving them
employment to keep them from utter desperation, and then stealing up to
see whether her grandmother might not by this time be in need of her.
As it grew dark she observed that several of the women, and even some of
the men, had made their escape.  These were such as had already shown a
leaning towards the new faith, and who now made off to join their fellow-
Christians, or to seek refuge in the churches under the protection of the
crucified God whose supreme power might, perhaps, even yet, avert the
impending catastrophe.

Twice had Porphyrius sent a messenger to assure his mother and daughter
that all was well with him, that a powerful party was prepared to defend
the Serapeum, and that he should pass the night in the temple.  The
Romans were evidently hesitating to attack it, and if, next morning, the
heathen should succeed in repelling the first onset, reinforcements might
yet be brought up in time.  Gorgo could not share these hopes; a client
of her father's had brought in a rumor that the Biamites, after advancing
as far as Naucratis, had been dispersed by a few of the Imperial
maniples.  Fate was stalking on its way, and no one could give it pause.

The evening brought no coolness, and when it was already quite dark,
as her grandmother had not yet called her, Gorgo could no longer control
her increasing anxiety, so, after knocking in vain at the door of the
observatory, she went in.  Her old nurse preceded her with a lamp, and
the two women stood dumb with consternation, for the old lady lay
senseless on the ground.  Her head was thrown back against the seat of
the chair off which she had slipped, and her pale face was lifeless and
horrible to look at, with its half-closed eyes and dropped jaw.  Wine,
water, and strong essences were all at hand, and they laid the
unconscious woman on a couch intended for the occasional use of the
wearied observer.  In a few minutes they had succeeded in reviving the
old lady; but her eyes rested without recognition on the girl who knelt
by her side, and she murmured to herself: "The ravens--where are they
gone?  Ravens!"

Her glance wandered round the room, to the tablets and rolls which had
been tossed off the couch and the table to make room for her, and for the
lamps and medicaments.  They lay in disorder on the floor, and the sight
of this confusion produced a favorable excitement and reaction; she
succeeded in expressing herself in husky accents and broken, hardly
intelligible sentences, so far as to scold them sharply for their
irreverence for the precious documents, and for the disorder they had
created.  The waiting-woman proceeded to pick them up: but Damia again
became unconscious.  Gorgo bathed her brow and tried to pour some wine
between her teeth, but she clenched them too firmly, till the slave-woman
came to her assistance and they succeeded in making Damia swallow a few
drops.  The old woman opened her eyes, smacking her tongue feebly; but
she took the cup into her own hand to hold it to her lips; and though she
trembled so that half the contents were spilt, she drank eagerly till it
was quite empty.  "More," she gasped with the eagerness of intense
thirst, "more--I want drink !"

Gorgo gave her a second and a third draught which Damia drank with equal
eagerness; then, with a deep breath, she looked up fully conscious, at
her granddaughter.

"Thank you, child," she said.  "Now I shall do very well for a little
while.  The material world and all that belongs to it weighs us down and
clings to us like iron fetters.  We may long and strive to be free, but
it pursues us and holds us fast.  Only those who are content with their
miserable humanity can enjoy it.  They laugh, as you know, at Praxilla,
the poetess, because she makes the dying Adonis lament, when face to face
with death, that he is forced to leave the apples and pears behind him.
But is not that subtly true?  Yes, yes; Praxilla is right!  We fast, we
mortify ourselves--I have felt it all myself--to partake of divinity.  We
almost perish of hunger and thirst, when we might be so happy if only we
would be satisfied with apples and pears!  No man has ever yet succeeded
in the great effort; those who would be truly happy must be content with
small things.  That is what makes children so happy.  Apples and pears!
Well, everything will be at an end for me ere long--even those.  But if
the great First Cause spares himself in the universal crash, there is
still the grand idea of Apples and Pears; and who knows but that it may
please Him, when this world is destroyed, to frame another to come after
it.  Will He then once more embody the ideas of Man--and Apples and
Pears?  It would be plagiarism from himself.  Nay, if He is merciful, He
will never again give substance to that hybrid idea called Man; or, if He
does, He will let the poor wretch be happy with apples and pears--I mean
trivial joys; for all higher joys, be they what they may, are vanity and
vexation....  Give me another draught.  Ah, that is good!  And to-morrow
is the end.  I could find it in my heart to regret the good gifts of
Dionysus myself; it is better than apples and pears; next to that comes
the joy that Eros bestows on mortals, and there must be an end to all
that, too.  That, however, is above the level of apples and pears.  It is
great, very great happiness, and mingled therefor with bitter sorrow.
Rapture and anguish--who can lay down the border line that divides them?
Smiles and tears alike belong to both.  And you are weeping?  Aye, aye--
poor child!  Come here and kiss me."  Damia drew the head of the kneeling
girl close to her bosom and pressed her lips to Gorge's brow.  Presently,
however, she relaxed her embrace and, looking about the room, she
exclaimed:

"How you have mixed and upset the book-rolls!  If only I could show you
how clearly everything agrees and coincides.  We know now exactly how it
will all happen.  By the day after to-morrow there will be no more earth,
no more sky; and I will tell you this, child: If, when Serapis falls, the
universe does not crumble to pieces like a ruinous hovel, then the wisdom
of the Magians is a lie, the course of the stars has nothing to do with
the destinies of the earth and its inhabitants, the planets are mere
lamps, the sun is no more than a luminous furnace, the old gods are
marsh-fires, emanations from the dark bog of men's minds--and the great
Serapis...  But why be angry with him?  There is no doubt--no if nor but
....Give me the diptychon and I will show you our doom.  There--just
here--my sight is so dazzled, I cannot make it out.--And if I could, what
matter?  Who can alter here below what has been decided above?  Leave me
to sleep now, and I will explain it all to you to-morrow if there is
still time.  Poor child, when I think how we have tormented you to learn
what you know, and how industrious you have been!  And now--to what end?
I ask you, to what end?  The great gulf will swallow up one and all."

"So be it, so be it !"  cried Gorgo interrupting her.  "Then, at any
rate, nothing that I love on earth will be lost to me before I die!"

"And the enemy will perish in the same ruin!"  continued Damia, her eyes
sparkling with revived fire.  "But where shall  we  go to--where?  The
soul is divine by nature and cannot be destroyed.  It must return--say,
am I right or wrong?--It will return to its first fount and cause; for
like attracts and absorbs like, and thus our deification, our union with
the god will be accomplished."

"I believe it--I am sure of it!"  replied Gorgo with conviction.

"You are sure of it?"  retorted the old woman.  "But I am not.  For our
clearest knowledge is but guesswork when it is not based on numbers.
Nothing is proved or provable but by numbers, but they are surer than the
