Apidanus; he dwelt at Peiresiae near the Phylleian mount, where mighty
Apidanus and bright Enipeus join their streams, coming together from
afar.

Next to them from Larisa came Polyphemus, son of Eilatus, who aforetime
among the mighty Lapithae, when they were arming themselves against the
Centaurs, fought in his younger days; now his limbs were grown heavy
with age, but his martial spirit still remained, even as of old.

Nor was Iphiclus long left behind in Phylace, the uncle of Aeson's son;
for Aeson had wedded his sister Alcimede, daughter of Phylacus: his
kinship with her bade him be numbered in the host.

Nor did Admetus, the lord of Pherae rich in sheep, stay behind beneath
the peak of the Chalcodonian mount.

Nor at Alope stayed the sons of Hermes, rich in corn-land, well skilled
in craftiness, Erytus and Echion, and with them on their departure their
kinsman Aethalides went as the third; him near the streams of Amphrysus
Eupolemeia bare, the daughter of Myrmidon, from Phthia; the two others
were sprung from Antianeira, daughter of Menetes.

From rich Gyrton came Coronus, son of Caeneus, brave, but not braver
than his father. For bards relate that Caeneus though still living
perished at the hands of the Centaurs, when apart from other chiefs he
routed them; and they, rallying against him, could neither bend nor slay
him; but unconquered and unflinching he passed beneath the earth,
overwhelmed by the downrush of massy pines.

There came too Titaresian Mopsus, whom above all men the son of Leto
taught the augury of birds; and Eurydamas the son of Ctimenus; he dwelt
at Dolopian Ctimene near the Xynian lake.

Moreover Actor sent his son Menoetius from Opus that he might accompany
the chiefs.

Eurytion followed and strong Eribotes, one the son of Teleon, the other
of Irus, Actor's son; the son of Teleon renowned Eribotes, and of Irus
Eurytion. A third with them was Oileus, peerless in courage and well
skilled to attack the flying foe, when they break their ranks.

Now from Euboea came Canthus eager for the quest, whom Canethus son of
Abas sent; but he was not destined to return to Cerinthus. For fate had
ordained that he and Mopsus, skilled in the seer's art, should wander
and perish in the furthest ends of Libya. For no ill is too remote for
mortals to incur, seeing that they buried them in Libya, as far from the
Colchians as is the space that is seen between the setting and the
rising of the sun.

To him Clytius and Iphitus joined themselves, the warders of Oechalia,
sons of Eurytus the ruthless, Eurytus, to whom the Far-shooting god gave
his bow; but he had no joy of the gift; for of his own choice he strove
even with the giver.

After them came the sons of Aeacus, not both together, nor from the same
spot; for they settled far from Aegina in exile, when in their folly
they had slain their brother Phocus. Telamon dwelt in the Attic island;
but Peleus departed and made his home in Phthia.

After them from Cecropia came warlike Butes, son of brave Teleon, and
Phalerus of the ashen spear. Alcon his father sent him forth; yet no
other sons had he to care for his old age and livelihood. But him, his
well-beloved and only son, he sent forth that amid bold heroes he might
shine conspicuous. But Theseus, who surpassed all the sons of
Erechtheus, an unseen bond kept beneath the land of Taenarus, for he had
followed that path with Peirithous; assuredly both would have lightened
for all the fulfilment of their toil.

Tiphys, son of Hagnias, left the Siphaean people of the Thespians, well
skilled to foretell the rising wave on the broad sea, and well skilled
to infer from sun and star the stormy winds and the time for sailing.
Tritonian Athena herself urged him to join the band of chiefs, and he
came among them a welcome comrade. She herself too fashioned the swift
ship; and with her Argus, son of Arestor, wrought it by her counsels.
Wherefore it proved the most excellent of all ships that have made trial
of the sea with oars.

After them came Phlias from Araethyrea, where he dwelt in affluence by
the favour of his father Dionysus, in his home by the springs of Asopus.

From Argos came Talaus and Areius, sons of Bias, and mighty Leodocus,
all of whom Pero daughter of Neleus bare; on her account the Aeolid
Melampus endured sore affliction in the steading of Iphiclus.

Nor do we learn that Heracles of the mighty heart disregarded the eager
summons of Aeson's son. But when he heard a report of the heroes'
gathering and had readied Lyrceian Argos from Arcadia by the road along
which he carried the boar alive that fed in the thickets of Lampeia,
near the vast Erymanthian swamp, the boar bound with chains he put down
from his huge shoulders at the entrance to the market-place of Mycenae;
and himself of his own will set out against the purpose of Eurystheus;
and with him went Hylas, a brave comrade, in the flower of youth, to
bear his arrows and to guard his bow.

Next to him came a scion of the race of divine Danaus, Nauplius. He was
the son of Clytonaeus son of Naubolus; Naubolus was son of Lernus;
Lernus we know was the son of Proetus son of Nauplius; and once Amymone
daughter of Danaus, wedded to Poseidon, bare Nauplius, who surpassed all
men in naval skill.

Idmon came last of all them that dwelt at Argos, though he had learnt
his own fate by augury, he came, that the people might not grudge him
fair renown. He was not in truth the son of Abas, but Leto's son himself
begat him to be numbered among the illustrious Aeolids; and himself
taught him the art of prophecy--to pay heed to birds and to observe the
signs of the burning sacrifice.

Moreover Aetolian Leda sent from Sparta strong Polydeuces and Castor,
skilled to guide swift-footed steeds; these her dearly-loved sons she
bare at one birth in the house of Tyndareus; nor did she forbid their
departure; for she had thoughts worthy of the bride of Zeus.

The sons of Aphareus, Lynceus and proud Idas, came from Arene, both
exulting in their great strength; and Lynceus too excelled in keenest
sight, if the report is true that that hero could easily direct his
sight even beneath the earth.

And with them Neleian Periclymenus set out to come, eldest of all the
sons of godlike Neleus who were born at Pylos; Poseidon had given him
boundless strength and granted him that whatever shape he should crave
during the fight, that he should take in the stress of battle.

Moreover from Arcadia came Amphidamas and Cepheus, who inhabited Tegea
and the allotment of Apheidas, two sons of Aleus; and Ancaeus followed
them as the third, whom his father Lycurgus sent, the brother older than
both. But he was left in the city to care for Aleus now growing old,
while he gave his son to join his brothers. Ancaeus went clad in the
skin of a Maenalian bear, and wielding in his right hand a huge
two-edged battleaxe. For his armour his grandsire had hidden in the
house's innermost recess, to see if he might by some means still stay
his departure.

There came also Augeias, whom fame declared to be the son of Helios; he
reigned over the Eleans, glorying in his wealth; and greatly he desired
to behold the Colchian land and Aeetes himself the ruler of the
Colchians.

Asterius and Amphion, sons of Hyperasius, came from Achaean Pellene,
which once Pelles their grandsire founded on the brows of Aegialus.

After them from Taenarus came Euphemus whom, most swift-footed of men,
Europe, daughter of mighty Tityos, bare to Poseidon. He was wont to skim
the swell of the grey sea, and wetted not his swift feet, but just
dipping the tips of his toes was borne on the watery path.

Yea, and two other sons of Poseidon came; one Erginus, who left the
citadel of glorious Miletus, the other proud Ancaeus, who left
Parthenia, the seat of Imbrasion Hera; both boasted their skill in
sea-craft and in war.

After them from Calydon came the son of Oeneus, strong Meleagrus, and
Laocoon--Laocoon the brother of Oeneus, though not by the same mother,
for a serving-woman bare him; him, now growing old, Oeneus sent to guard
his son: thus Meleagrus, still a youth, entered the bold band of heroes.
No other had come superior to him, I ween, except Heracles, if for one
year more he had tarried and been nurtured among the Aetolians. Yea, and
his uncle, well skilled to fight whether with the javelin or hand to
hand, Iphiclus son of Thestius, bare him company on his way.

With him came Palaemonius, son of Olenian Lernus, of Lernus by repute,
but his birth was from Hephaestus; and so he was crippled in his feet,
but his bodily frame and his valour no one would dare to scorn.
Wherefore he was numbered among all the chiefs, winning fame for Jason.

From the Phocians came Iphitus sprung from Naubolus son of Ornytus; once
he had been his host when Jason went to Pytho to ask for a response
concerning his voyage; for there he welcomed him in his own halls.

Next came Zetes and Calais, sons of Boreas, whom once Oreithyia,
daughter of Erechtheus, bare to Boreas on the verge of wintry Thrace;
thither it was that Thracian Boreas snatched her away from Cecropia as
she was whirling in the dance, hard by Ilissus' stream. And, carrying
her far off, to the spot that men called the rock of Sarpedon, near the
river Erginus, he wrapped her in dark clouds and forced her to his will.
There they were making their dusky wings quiver upon their ankles on
both sides as they rose, a great wonder to behold, wings that gleamed
with golden scales: and round their backs from the top of the head and
neck, hither and thither, their dark tresses were being shaken by the
wind.

No, nor had Acastus son of mighty Pelias himself any will to stay behind
in the palace of his brave sire, nor Argus, helper of the goddess
Athena; but they too were ready to be numbered in the host.

So many then were the helpers who assembled to join the son of Aeson.
All the chiefs the dwellers thereabout called Minyae, for the most and
the bravest avowed that they were sprung from the blood of the daughters
of Minyas; thus Jason himself was the son of Alcimede who was born of
Clymene the daughter of Minyas.

Now when all things had been made ready by the thralls, all things that
fully-equipped ships are furnished withal when men's business leads them
to voyage across the sea, then the heroes took their way through the
city to the ship where it lay on the strand that men call Magnesian
Pagasae; and a crowd of people hastening rushed together; but the heroes
shone like gleaming stars among the clouds; and each man as he saw them
speeding along with their armour would say:

"King Zeus, what is the purpose of Pelias? Whither is he driving forth
from the Panachaean land so great a host of heroes? On one day they
would waste the palace of Aeetes with baleful fire, should he not yield
them the fleece of his own goodwill. But the path is not to be shunned,
the toil is hard for those who venture."

Thus they spake here and there throughout the city; but the women often
raised their hands to the sky in prayer to the immortals to grant a
return, their hearts' desire. And one with tears thus lamented to her
fellow:

"Wretched Alcimede, evil has come to thee at last though late, thou hast
not ended with splendour of life. Aeson too, ill-fated man! Surely
better had it been for him, if he were lying beneath the earth enveloped
in his shroud, still unconscious of bitter toils. Would that the dark
wave, when the maiden Helle perished, had overwhelmed Phrixus too with
the ram: but the dire portent even sent forth a human voice, that it
might cause to Alcimede sorrows and countless pains hereafter."

Thus the women spake at the departure of the heroes. And now many
thralls, men and women, were gathered together, and his mother, smitten
with grief for Jason. And a bitter pang seized every woman's heart; and
with them groaned the father in baleful old age, lying on his bed,
closely wrapped round. But the hero straightway soothed their pain,
encouraging them, and bade the thralls take up his weapons for war; and
they in silence with downcast looks took them up. And even as the mother
had thrown her arms about her son, so she clung, weeping without stint,
as a maiden all alone weeps, falling fondly on the neck of her hoary
nurse, a maid who has now no others to care for her, but she drags on a
weary life under a stepmother, who maltreats her continually with ever
fresh insults, and as she weeps, her heart within her is bound fast with
misery, nor can she sob forth all the groans that struggle for
utterance; so without stint wept Alcimede straining her son in her arms,
and in her yearning grief spake as follows:

"Would that on that day when, wretched woman that I am, I heard King
Pelias proclaim his evil behest, I had straightway given up my life and
forgotten my cares, so that thou thyself, my son, with thine own hands,
mightest have buried me; for that was the only wish left me still to be
fulfilled by thee, all the other rewards for thy nurture have I long
enjoyed. Now I, once so admired among Achaean women, shall be left
behind like a bondwoman in my empty halls, pining away, ill-fated one,
for love of thee, thee on whose account I had aforetime so much splendour
and renown, my only son for whom I loosed my virgin zone first and last.
For to me beyond others the goddess Eileithyia grudged abundant
offspring. Alas for my folly! Not once, not even in my dreams did I
forebode this, that the flight of Phrixus would bring me woe."

Thus with moaning she wept, and her handmaidens, standing by, lamented;
but Jason spake gently to her with comforting words:

"Do not, I pray thee, mother, store up bitter sorrows overmuch, for thou
wilt not redeem me from evil by tears, but wilt still add grief to
grief. For unseen are the woes that the gods mete out to mortals; be
strong to endure thy share of them though with grief in thy heart; take
courage from the promises of Athena, and from the answers of the gods
(for very favourable oracles has Phoebus given), and then from the help
of the chieftains. But do thou remain here, quiet among thy handmaids,
and be not a bird of ill omen to the ship; and thither my clansmen and
thralls will follow me."

He spake, and started forth to leave the house. And as Apollo goes forth
from some fragrant shrine to divine Delos or Claros or Pytho or to broad
Lycia near the stream of Xanthus, in such beauty moved Jason through the
throng of people; and a cry arose as they shouted together. And there
met him aged Iphias, priestess of Artemis guardian of the city, and
kissed his right hand, but she had not strength to say a word, for all
her eagerness, as the crowd rushed on, but she was left there by the
wayside, as the old are left by the young, and he passed on and was gone
afar.

Now when he had left the well-built streets of the city he came to the
beach of Pagasae, where his comrades greeted him as they stayed together
near the ship Argo. And he stood at the entering in, and they were
gathered to meet him. And they perceived Acastus and Argus coming from
the city, and they marvelled when they saw them hasting with all speed,
despite the will of Pelias. The one, Argus, son of Arestor, had cast
round his shoulders the hide of a bull reaching to his feet, with the
black hair upon it, the other, a fair mantle of double fold, which his
sister Pelopeia had given him. Still Jason forebore from asking them
about each point but bade all be seated for an assembly. And there, upon
the folded sails and the mast as it lay on the ground, they all took
their seats in order. And among them with goodwill spake Aeson's son:

"All the equipment that a ship needs--for all is in due order--lies
ready for our departure. Therefore we will make no long delay in our
sailing for these things' sake, when the breezes but blow fair. But,
friends,--for common to all is our return to Hellas hereafter, and
common to all is our path to the land of Aeetes--now therefore with
ungrudging heart choose the bravest to be our leader, who shall be
careful for everything, to take upon him our quarrels and covenants with
strangers."

Thus he spake; and the young heroes turned their eves towards bold
Heracles sitting in their midst, and with one shout they all enjoined
upon him to be their leader; but he, from the place where he sat,
stretched forth his right hand and said:

"Let no one offer this honour to me. For I will not consent, and I will
forbid any other to stand up. Let the hero who brought us together,
himself be the leader of the host."

Thus he spake with high thoughts, and they assented, as Heracles bade;
and warlike Jason himself rose up, glad at heart, and thus addressed the
eager throng:

"If ye entrust your glory to my care, no longer as before let our path
be hindered. Now at last let us propitiate Phoebus with sacrifice and
straightway prepare a feast. And until my thralls come, the overseers of
my steading, whose care it is to choose out oxen from the herd and drive
them hither, we will drag down the ship to the sea, and do ye place all
the tackling within, and draw lots for the benches for rowing. Meantime
let us build upon the beach an altar to Apollo Embasius[1] who by an
oracle promised to point out and show me the paths of the sea, if by
sacrifice to him I should begin my venture for King Pelias."

[Footnote 1: i.e. God of embarcation.]

He spake, and was the first to turn to the work, and they stood up in
obedience to him; and they heaped their garments, one upon the other, on
a smooth stone, which the sea did not strike with its waves, but the
stormy surge had cleansed it long before. First of all, by the command
of Argus, they strongly girded the ship with a rope well twisted
within,[1] stretching it tight on each side, in order that the planks
might be well compacted by the bolts and might withstand the opposing
force of the surge. And they quickly dug a trench as wide as the space
the ship covered, and at the prow as far into the sea as it would run
when drawn down by their hands. And they ever dug deeper in front of the
stem, and in the furrow laid polished rollers; and inclined the ship
down upon the first rollers, that so she might glide and be borne on by
them. And above, on both sides, reversing the oars, they fastened them
round the thole-pins, so as to project a cubit's space. And the heroes
themselves stood on both sides at the oars in a row, and pushed forward
with chest and hand at once. And then Tiphys leapt on board to urge the
youths to push at the right moment; and calling on them he shouted
loudly; and they at once, leaning with all their strength, with one push
started the ship from her place, and strained with their feet, forcing
her onward; and Pelian Argo followed swiftly; and they on each side
shouted as they rushed on. And then the rollers groaned under the sturdy
keel as they were chafed, and round them rose up a dark smoke owing to
the weight, and she glided into the sea; but the heroes stood there and
kept dragging her back as she sped onward. And round the thole-pins they
fitted the oars, and in the ship they placed the mast and the well-made
sails and the stores.

[Footnote 1: Or, reading [Greek: ektothen], "they strongly girded the
ship outside with a well-twisted rope." In either case there is probably
no allusion to [Greek: hupozomata] (ropes for undergirding) which-were
carried loose and only used in stormy weather.]

Now when they had carefully paid heed to everything, first they
distributed the benches by lot, two men occupying one seat; but the
middle bench they chose for Heracles and Ancaeus apart from the other
heroes, Ancaeus who dwelt in Tegea. For them alone they left the middle
bench just as it was and not by lot; and with one consent they entrusted
Tiphys with guarding the helm of the well-stemmed ship.

Next, piling up shingle near the sea, they raised there an altar on the
shore to Apollo, under the name of Actius[1] and Embasius, and quickly
spread above it logs of dried olive-wood. Meantime the herdsmen of
Aeson's son had driven before them from the herd two steers. These the
younger comrades dragged near the altars, and the others brought lustral
water and barley meal, and Jason prayed, calling on Apollo the god of
his fathers:

[Footnote 1: i.e. God of the shore.]

"Hear, O King, that dwellest in Pagasae and the city Aesonis, the city
called by my father's name, thou who didst promise me, when I sought thy
oracle at Pytho, to show the fulfilment and goal of my journey, for thou
thyself hast been the cause of my venture; now do thou thyself guide the
ship with my comrades safe and sound, thither and back again to Hellas.
Then in thy honour hereafter we will lay again on thy altar the bright
offerings of bulls--all of us who return; and other gifts in countless
numbers I will bring to Pytho and Ortygia. And now, come, Far-darter,
accept this sacrifice at our hands, which first of all we have offered
thee for this ship on our embarcation; and grant, O King, that with a
prosperous weird I may loose the hawsers, relying on thy counsel, and
may the breeze blow softly with which we shall sail over the sea in fair
weather."

He spake, and with his prayer cast the barley meal. And they two girded
themselves to slay the steers, proud Ancaeus and Heracles. The latter
with his club smote one steer mid-head on the brow, and falling in a
heap on the spot, it sank to the ground; and Ancaeus struck the broad
neck of the other with his axe of bronze, and shore through the mighty
