on life itself; now she is showing him its graver side, she is inviting
him to reflect; and if he only finds a friend to give him the counsel
which my father left in a letter for me, his only child, as a youth--and
if he is ready to listen, I regard him as saved."

"And that word of counsel--what is it?" asked Paula with interest.

"To put it briefly, it is this: Life is not a banquet spread by fate for
our enjoyment, but a duty which we are bound to fulfil to the best of
our power. Each one must test his nature and gifts, and the better he
uses them for the weal and benefit of the body of which he was born a
member, the higher will his inmost gladness be, the more certainly will
he attain to a beautiful peace of mind, the less terrors will Death have
for him. In the consciousness of having sown seed for eternity he will
close his eyes like a faithful steward at the end of each day, and of
the last hour vouchsafed to him on earth. If Orion recognizes this,
if he submits to accept the duties imposed on him by existence, if
he devotes himself to them now for the first time to the best of his
powers, a day may come when I shall look up to him with respect--nay,
with admiration. The shipwreck of which the Arab spoke has overtaken
him. Let us see how he will save himself from the waves, and behave when
he is cast on shore."

"Let us see!" repeated Paula, "and wish that he may find such an
adviser! As you were speaking it struck me that it was my part.--But
no, no! He has placed himself beyond the pale of the compassion which
I might have felt even for an enemy after such a frightful blow. He! He
can and shall never be anything to me till the end of time. I have to
thank you for having found me this haven of rest. Help me now to keep
out everything that can intrude itself here to disturb my peace. If
Orion should ever dare, for whatever purpose, to force or steal a way
into this house, I trust to you, my friend and deliverer!"

She held out her hand to Philippus, and as he took it the blood seethed
in his veins with tender emotion.

"My strength, like my heart, is wholly yours!" he exclaimed ardently.
"Command them, and if the devoted love of a faithful, plain-spoken
man--"

"Say no more, no, no!" Paula broke in with anxious vehemence. "Let us
remain closely bound together by friendship-as brother and sister."

"As brother and sister?" he dully echoed with a melancholy smile. "Aye,
friendship too is a beautiful, beautiful thing. But yet--let me speak--I
have dreamed of love, the tossing sea of passion; I have felt its surges
here--in here; I feel them still.... But man, man," and he struck his
forehead with his fist, "have you forgotten, like a fool, what your
image is in the mirror; have you forgotten that you are an ugly, clumsy
fellow, and that the gorgeous flower you long for...."

Paula had shrunk back, startled by her friend's vehemence; but she
now went up to him, and taking his hand with frank spirit, she said
impressively:

"It is not so, Philippus, my dear, kind, only friend. The gorgeous
flower you desire I can no longer give you--or any one. It is mine no
longer; for when it had opened, once for all, cruel feet trod it down.
Do not abuse your mirrored image; do not call yourself a clumsy fellow.
The best and fairest might be proud of your love, just as you are. Am I
not proud, shall I not always be proud of your friendship?"

"Friendship, friendship!" he retorted, snatching away his hand. "This
burning, longing heart thirsts for other feelings! Oh, woman! I know the
wretch who has trodden down the flower of flowers in your heart, and I,
madman that I am, can sing his praises, can take his part; and cost what
it may, I will still do so as long as you.... But perhaps the glorious
flower may strike new roots in the soil of hatred and I, the hapless
wretch who water it, may see it."

At this, Paula again took both his hands, and exclaimed in deep and
painful agitation of mind:

"Say no more, I beg and entreat you. How can I live in peace here, under
your protection and in constant intercourse with you, without knowing
myself guilty of a breach of propriety such as the most sacred feelings
of a young girl bid her avoid, if you persist in overstepping the limits
which bound true and faithful friendship? I am a lonely girl and should
give myself up to despair, as lost, if I could not take refuge in the
belief that I can rely upon myself. Be satisfied with what I have to
offer you, my friend, and may God reward you! Let us both remain worthy
of the esteem which, thank Heaven! we are fully justified in feeling for
each other."

The physician, deeply moved, bent his head; scarcely able to control
himself, he pressed her firm white hand to his lips, while, just at this
moment, Perpetua and the treasurer came into the room.

This worthy official--a perfectly commonplace man, neither tall nor
short, neither old nor young, with a pale, anxious face, furrowed by
work and responsibility, but shrewd and finely cut-glanced keenly at the
pair, and then proceeded to lay a considerable sum in gold pieces
before Paula. His young master had sent it, in obedience to his deceased
father's wishes, for her immediate needs; the rest, the larger part of
her fortune, with a full account, would be given over to her after the
Mukaukas was buried. Nilus could, however, give her an approximate idea
of the sum, and it was so considerable that Paula could not believe her
ears. She now saw herself secure against external anxiety, nay, in such
ease that she was justified in living at some expense.

Philippus was present throughout the interview, and it cut him to the
heart. It had made him so happy to think that he was all in all to the
poor orphan, and could shelter her against pressing want. He had been
prepared to take upon himself the care of providing Paula with the home
she had found and everything she could need; and now, as it turned out,
his protege was not merely higher in rank than himself, but much richer.

He felt as though Orion's envoy had robbed him of the best joy in life.
After introducing Paula to her worthy host and his family, he quitted
the house of Rufinus with a very crushed aspect.

When night came Perpetua once more enjoyed the privilege of assisting
her young mistress to undress; but Paula could not sleep, and when
she joined her new friends next morning she told herself that here, if
anywhere, was the place where she might recover her lost peace, but that
she must still have a hard struggle and a long pilgrimage before she
could achieve this.




CHAPTER XVII.

During all these hours Orion had been in the solitude of his own rooms.
Next to them was little Mary's sleeping-room; he had not seen the child
again since leaving his father's death-bed. He knew that she was lying
there in a very feverish state, but he could not so far command himself
as to enquire for her. When, now and again, he could not help thinking
of her, he involuntarily clenched his fists. His soul was shaken to the
foundations; desperate, beside himself, incapable of any thought but
that he was the most miserable man on earth--that his father's curse had
blighted him--that nothing could undo what had happened--that some cruel
and inexorable power had turned his truest friend into a foe and had
sundered them so completely that there was no possibility of atonement
or of moving him to a word of pardon or a kindly glance--he paced the
long room from end to end, flinging himself on his knees at intervals
before the divan, and burying his burning face in the soft pillows. From
time to time he could pray, but each time he broke off; for what Power
in Heaven or on earth could unseal those closed eyes and stir that
heart to beat again, that tongue to speak--could vouchsafe to him, the
outcast, the one thing for which his soul thirsted and without which he
thought he must die: Pardon, pardon, his father's pardon! Now and then
he struck his forehead and heart like a man demented, with cries of
anguish, curses and lamentations.

About midnight--it was but just twelve hours since that fearful scene,
and to him it seemed like as many days--he threw himself on the couch,
dressed as he was in the dark mourning garments, which he had half torn
off in his rage and despair, and broke out into such loud groans that
he himself was almost frightened in the silence of the night. Full of
self-pity and horror at his own deep grief, he turned his face to the
wall to screen his eyes from the clear, full moon, which only showed him
things he did not want to see, while it hurt him.

His torture was beginning to be quite unbearable; he fancied his soul
was actually wounded, riven, and torn; it had even occurred to him to
seize his sharpest sword and throw himself upon it like Ajax in his
fury--and like Cato--and so put a sudden end to this intolerable and
overwhelming misery.

He started up for--surely it was no illusion, no mistake-the door of
his room was softly opened and a white figure came in with noiseless,
ghostly steps. He was a brave man, but his blood ran cold; however, in
a moment he recognized his nocturnal visitor as little Mary. She came
across the moonlight without speaking, but he exclaimed in a sharp tone:

"What is the meaning of this? What do you want?"

The child started and stood still in alarm, stretching out imploring
hands and whispering timidly:

"I heard you lamenting. Poor, poor Orion! And it was I who brought it
all on you, and so I could not stay in bed any longer--I must--I could
not help...." But she could say no more for sobs. Orion exclaimed:

"Very well, very well: go back to your own room and sleep. I will try
not to groan so loud."

He ended his speech in a less rough tone, for he observed that the child
had come to see him, though she was ill, with bare feet and only in her
night-shift, and was trembling with cold, excitement, and grief. Mary,
however, stood still, shook her head, and replied, still weeping though
less violently:

"No, no. I shall stop here and not go away till you tell me that
you--Oh, God, you never can forgive me, but still I must say it, I
must."

With a sudden impulse she ran straight up to him, threw her arms round
his neck, laid her head against his, and then, as he did not immediately
push her away, kissed his cheeks and brow.

At this a strange feeling came over him; he himself did not know what it
was, but it was as though something within him yielded and gave way, and
the moisture which felt warm in his eyes and on his cheeks was not
from the child's tears but his own. This lasted through many minutes of
silence; but at last he took the little one's arms from about his neck,
saying:

"How hot your hands and your cheeks are, poor thing! You are feverish,
and the night air blows in chill--you will catch fresh cold by this mad
behavior."

He had controlled his tears with difficulty, and as he spoke, in broken
accents, he carefully wrapped her in the black robe he had thrown off
and said kindly:

"Now, be calm, and I will try to compose myself. You did not mean any
harm, and I owe you no grudge. Now go; you will not feel the draught in
the anteroom with that wrap on. Go; be quick."

"No, no," she eagerly replied. "You must let me say what I have to say
or I cannot sleep. You see I never thought of hurting you so
dreadfully, so horribly--never, never! I was angry with you, to be sure,
because--but when I spoke I really and truly did not think of you, but
only of poor Paula. You do not know how good she is, and grandfather was
so fond of her before you came home; and he was lying there and going to
die so soon, and I knew that he believed Paula to be a thief and a liar,
and it seemed to me so horrible, so unbearable to see him close his eyes
with such a mistake in his mind, such an injustice!--Not for his sake,
oh no! but for Paula's; so then I--Oh Orion! the Merciful Saviour is
my witness, I could not help it; if I had had to die for it I could not
have helped it! I should have died, if I had not spoken!"

"And perhaps it was well that you spoke," interrupted the young man,
with a deep sigh. "You see, child, your lost father's miserable brother
is a ruined man and it matters little about him; but Paula, who is a
thousand times better than I am, has at least had justice done her; and
as I love her far more dearly than your little heart can conceive of, I
will gladly be friends with you again: nay, I shall be more fond of you
than ever. That is nothing great or noble, for I need love--much love to
make life tolerable. The best love a man may have I have forfeited,
fool that I am! and now dear, good little soul, I could not bear to lose
yours! So there is my hand upon it; now, give me another kiss and then
go to bed and sleep."

But still Mary would not do his bidding, but only thanked him vehemently
and then asked with sparkling eyes:

"Really, truly? Do you love Paula so dearly?" At this point however she
suddenly checked herself. "And little Katharina..."

"Never mind about that," he replied with a sigh. "And learn a lesson
from all this. I, you see, in an hour of recklessness did a wrong thing;
to hide it I had to do further wrong, till it grew to a mountain which
fell on me and crushed me. Now, I am the most miserable of men and I
might perhaps have been the happiest. I have spoilt my own life by my
own folly, weakness, and guilt; and I have lost Paula, who is dearer to
me than all the other creatures on earth put together. Yes, Mary, if she
had been mine, your poor uncle would have been the most enviable fellow
in the world, and he might have been a fine fellow, too, a man of great
achievements. But as it is!--Well, what is done cannot be undone! Now go
to bed child; you cannot understand it all till you are older."

"Oh I understand it already and much better perhaps than you suppose,"
cried the ten years' old child. "And if you love Paula so much why
should not she love you? You are so handsome, you can do so many things,
every one likes you, and Paula would have loved you, too, if only....
Will you promise not to be angry with me, and may I say it?"

"Speak out, little simpleton."

"She cannot owe you any grudge when she knows how dreadfully you are
suffering on her account and that you are good at heart, and only that
once ever did--you know what. Before you came home, grandfather said a
hundred times over what a joy you had been to him all your life through,
and now, now.... Well, you are my uncle, and I am only a stupid little
girl; still, I know that it will be just the same with you as it was
with the prodigal son in the Bible. You and grandfather parted in
anger...."

"He cursed me," Orion put in gloomily.

"No, no! For I heard every word he said. He only spoke of your evil deed
in those dreadful words and bid you go out of his sight."

"And what is the difference--Cursed or outcast?"

"Oh! a very great difference! He had good reason to be angry with you;
but the prodigal son in the Bible became his father's best beloved, and
he had the fatted calf slain for him and forgave him all; and so will
grandfather in heaven forgive, if you are good again, as you used to be
to him and to all of us. Paula will forgive you, too; I know her--you
will see. Katharina loved you of course; but she, dear Heaven! She is
almost as much a child as I am; and if only you are kind to her and make
her some pretty present she will soon be comforted. She really deserves
to be punished for bearing false witness, and her punishment cannot, at
any rate, be so heavy as yours."

These words from the lips of an innocent child could not but fall like
seed corn on the harrowed field of the young man's tortured soul and
refresh it as with morning dew. Long after Mary had gone to rest he lay
thinking them over.




CHAPTER XVIII.

The funeral rites over the body of the deceased Mukaukas were performed
on the day after the morrow. Since the priesthood had forbidden the old
heathen practice of mummifying the dead, and even cremation had been
forbidden by the Antonines, the dead had to be interred soon after
decease; only those of high rank were hastily embalmed and lay in state
in some church or chapel to which they had contributed an endowment.
Mukaukas George was, by his own desire, to be conveyed to Alexandria
and there buried in the church of St. John by his father's side; but the
carrier pigeon, by which the news of the governor's death had been sent
to the Patriarch, had returned with instructions to deposit the body in
the family tomb at Memphis, as there were difficulties in the way of the
fulfillment of his wishes.

Such a funeral procession had not been seen there within the memory of
man. Even the Moslem viceroy, the great general Amru, came over from the
other side of the Nile, with his chief military and civil officers,
to pay the last honors to the just and revered governor. Their brown,
sinewy figures, and handsome calm faces, their golden helmets and shirts
of mail, set with precious stones--trophies of the war of destruction in
Persia and Syria--their magnificent horses with splendid trappings, and
the authoritative dignity of their bearing made a great impression
on the crowd. They arrived with slow and impressive solemnity; they
returned like a cloud driven before the storm, galloping homewards from
the burial-ground along the quay, and then thundering and clattering
over the bridge of boats. Vivid and dazzling lightnings had flashed
through the wreaths of white dust that shrouded them, as their gold
armor reflected the sun. Verily, these horsemen, each of them worthy to
be a prince in his pride, could find it no very hard task to subdue the
mightiest realms on earth.

Men and women alike had gazed at them with trembling admiration: most of
all at the heroic stature and noble dusky face of Amru, and at the son
of the deceased Mukaukas, who, by the Moslem's desire, rode at his side
in mourning garb on a fiery black horse.

The handsome youth, and the lordly, powerful man were a pair from whom
the women were loth to turn their eyes; for both alike were of noble
demeanor, both of splendid stature, both equally skilled in controlling
the impatience of their steeds, both born to command. Many a Memphite
was more deeply impressed by the head of the famous warrior, erect on
a long and massive throat, with its sharply-chiselled aquiline nose
and flashing black eyes, than by the more regular features and fine,
slightly-waving locks of the governor's son--the last representative of
the oldest and proudest race in all Egypt.

The Arab looked straight before him with a steady, commanding gaze;
the youth, too, looked up and forwards, but turned from time to time
to survey the crowd of mourners. As he caught sight of Paula, among the
group of women who had joined the procession, a gleam of joy passed over
his pale face, and a faint flush tinged his cheeks; his fixed outlook
had knit his brows and had given his features an expression of such
ominous sternness that one and another of the bystanders whispered:

"Our gay and affable young lord will make a severe ruler."

The cause of his indignation had not escaped the notice either of his
noble companion or of the crowd. He alone knew as yet that the Patriarch
had prohibited the removal of his father's remains to Alexandria; but
every one could see that the larger portion of the priesthood of Memphis
were absent from this unprecedented following. The Bishop alone marched
in front of the six horses drawing the catafalque on which the costly
sarcophagus was conveyed to the burying-place, in accordance with
ancient custom:--Bishop Plotinus, with John, a learned and courageous
priest, and a few choristers bearing a crucifix and chanting psalms.

On arriving at the Necropolis they all dismounted, and the barefooted
runners in attendance on the Arabs came forward to hold the horses. By
the tomb the Bishop pronounced a few warm words of eulogy, after which
the thin chant of the choristers sounded trivial and meagre enough;
but scarcely had they ceased when the crowd uplifted its many thousand
voices, and a hymn of mourning rang out so loud and grand that this
burial ground had scarcely ever heard the like. The remaining ceremonies
were hasty and incomplete, since the priests who were indispensable to
their performance had not made their appearance.

Amru, whose falcon eye nothing could escape, at once noted the omission
and exclaimed, in so loud and inconsiderate a voice that it could be
heard even at some distance.

"The dead is made to atone for what the living, in his wisdom, did for
his country's good, hand-in-hand with us Moslems."

"By the Patriarch's orders," replied Orion, and his voice quavered,
while the veins in his forehead swelled with rage. "But I swear, by my
father's soul, that as surely as there is a just God, it shall be an
evil day for Benjamin when he closes the gate of Heaven against this
noblest of noble souls."

"We carry the key of ours under our own belt," replied the general,
striking his deep chest, while he smiled consciously and with a kindly
eye on the young man. "Come and see me on Saturday, my young friend; I
have something to say to you! I shall expect you at sundown at my house
over there. If I am not at home by dusk, you must wait for me."

As he spoke he twisted his hand in his horse's mane and Orion prepared
to assist him to mount; but the Arab, though a man of fifty, was too
quick for him. He flung himself into the saddle as lightly as a youth,
and gave his followers the signal for departure.

Paula had been standing close to the entrance of the tomb with Dame
Neforis, and she had heard every word of the dialogue between the two
men. Pale, as she beheld him, in costly but simple, flowing, mourning
robes, stricken by solemn and manly indignation, it was impossible
that she should not confess that the events of the last days had had a
powerful effect on the misguided youth.

When Paula had led the grief-worn but tearless widow to her chariot,
and had then returned home with Perpetua, the image of the handsome and
wrathful youth as he lifted his powerful arm and tightly-clenched fist
and shook them in the air, still constantly haunted her. She had not
failed to observe that he had seen her standing opposite to him by the
open tomb and she had been able to avoid meeting his eye; but her heart
had throbbed so violently that she still felt it quivering, she had not
succeeded in thinking of the beloved dead with due devotion.

Orion, as yet, had neither come near her in her peaceful retreat, nor
sent any messenger to deliver her belongings, and this she thought very
natural; for she needed no one to tell her how many claims there must be
on his time.

But though, before the funeral, she had firmly resolved to refuse to see
him if he came, and had given her nurse fall powers to receive from his
hand the whole of her property, after the ceremony this line of conduct
no longer struck her as seemly; indeed, she considered it no more than
her duty to the departed not to repel Orion if he should crave her
forgiveness.

And there was another thing which she owed to her uncle. She desired to
be the first to point out to Orion, from Philip's point of view, that
life was a post, a duty; and then, if his heart seemed opened to this
admonition, then--but no, this must be all that could pass between
them--then all must be at an end, extinct, dead, like the fires in a
sunken raft, like a soap-bubble that the wind has burst, like an echo
that has died away--all over and utterly gone.

And as to the counsel she thought of offering to the man she had once
looked up to? What right had she to give it? Did he not look like a man
quite capable of planning and living his own life in his own strength?
Her heart thirsted for him, every fibre of her being yearned to see him
again, to hear his voice, and it was this longing, this craving to which
she gave the name of duty, connecting it with the gratitude she owed to
the dead.

She was so much absorbed in these reflections and doubts that she
scarcely heard all the garrulous old nurse was saying as she walked by
her side.

Perpetua could not be easy over such a funeral ceremony as this; so
different to anything that Memphis had been wont to see. No priests, a
procession on horseback, mourners riding, and among them the son even
of the dead--while of old the survivors had always followed the body on
foot, as was everywhere the custom! And then a mere chirping of crickets
at the tomb of such illustrious dead, followed by the disorderly
squalling of an immense mob--it had nearly cracked her ears! However,
the citizens might be forgiven for that, since it was all in honor of
their departed governor!--this thought touched even her resolute heart
and brought the tears to her eyes; but it roused her wrath, too, for had
she not seen quite humble folk buried in a more solemn manner and with
worthier ceremonial than the great and good Mukaukas George, who had
made such a magnificent gift to the Church. Oh those Jacobites! They
only were capable of such ingratitude, only their heretical prelate
could commit such a crime. Every one in the Convent of St. Cecilia, from
the abbess down to the youngest novice, knew that the Patriarch had sent
word by a carrier pigeon forbidding the Bishop to allow the priests to
take part in the ceremony. Plotinus was a worthy man, and he had been
highly indignant at these instructions; it was not in his power to
contravene them; but at any rate he had led the procession in person,
and had not forbidden John's accompanying him. Orion, however, had not
looked as though he meant to brook such an insult to his father or
let it pass unpunished. And whose arm was long enough to reach the
Patriarch's throne if not.... But no, it was impossible! the mere
thought of such a thing made her blood run cold. Still, still.... And
how graciously the Moslem leader had talked with him!--Merciful Heaven!
If he were to turn apostate from the holy Christian faith, like so
many reprobate Egyptians, and subscribe to the wicked doctrines of
the Arabian false prophet! It was a tempting creed for shameless men,
allowing them to have half a dozen wives or more without regarding it
as a sin. A man like Orion could afford to keep them, of course; for the
abbess had said that every one knew that the great Mukaukas was a very
rich man, though even the chief magistrate of the city could not fully
satisfy himself concerning the enormous amount of property left. Well,
well; God's ways were past finding out. Why should He smother one under
heaps of gold, while He gave thousands of poor creatures too little to
satisfy their hunger!

By the end of this torrent of words the two women had reached the house;
and not till then was Paula clear in her own mind: Away, away with the
passion which still strove for the mastery, whether it were in deed
hatred or love! For she felt that she could not rightly enjoy her
recovered freedom, her new and quiet happiness in the pretty home she
owed to the physician's thoughtful care, till she had finally given up
Orion and broken the last tie that had bound her to his house.

Could she desire anything more than what the present had to offer her?
She had found a true haven of rest where she lacked for nothing that she
could desire for herself after listening to the admonitions of
Philip pus. Round her were good souls who felt with and for her, many
occupations for which she was well-fitted, and which suited her tastes,
with ample opportunities of bestowing and winning love. Then, a few
steps through pleasant shades took her to the convent where she could
every day attend divine service among pious companions of her own creed,
as she had done in her childhood. She had longed intensely for such food
for the spirit, and the abbess--who was the widow of a distinguished
patrician of Constantinople and had known Paula's parents--could supply
it in abundance. How gladly she talked to the girl of the goodness and
the beauty of those to whom she owed her being and whom she had so early
lost! She could pour out to this motherly soul all that weighed on her
own, and was received by her as a beloved daughter of her old age.

And her hosts--what kind-hearted though singular folks! nay, in their
way, remarkable. She had never dreamed that there could be on earth any
beings at once so odd and so lovable.

First there was old Rufinus, the head of the house, a vigorous, hale
old man, who, with his long silky, snow-white hair and beard, looked
something like the aged St. John and something like a warrior grown
grey in service. What an amiable spirit of childlike meekness he had,
in spite of the rough ways he sometimes fell into. Though inclined to be
contradictory in his intercourse with his fellow-men, he was merry and
jocose when his views were opposed to theirs. She had never met a more
contented soul or a franker disposition, and she could well understand
how much it must fret and gall such a man to live on,--day after day,
appearing, in one respect at any rate, different from what he really
was. For he, too, belonged to her confession; but, though he sent his
wife and daughter to worship in the convent chapel, he himself was
compelled to profess himself a Coptic Christian, and submit to the
necessity of attending a Jacobite church with all his family on certain
holy days, averse as he was to its unattractive form of worship.

Rufinus possessed a sufficient fortune to secure him a comfortable
maintenance; and yet he was hard at work, in his own way, from morning
till night. Not that his labors brought him any revenues; on the
contrary, they led to claims on his resources; every one knew that he
was a man of good means, and this would have certainly involved him
in persecution if the Patriarch's spies had discovered him to be a
Melchite, resulting in exile and probably the confiscation of his goods.
Hence it was necessary to exercise caution, and if the old man could
have found a purchaser for his house and garden, in a city where there
were ten times as many houses empty as occupied, he would long since
have set out with all his household to seek a new home.

Most aged people of vehement spirit and not too keen intellect, adopt
a saying as a stop-gap or resting-place, and he was fond of using two
phrases one of which ran: "As sure as man is the standard of all things"
and the other--referring to his house--"As sure as I long to be quit of
this lumber." But the lumber consisted of a well-built and very spacious
dwellinghouse, with a garden which had commanded a high price in
earlier times on account of its situation near the river. He himself
had acquired it at very small cost shortly before the Arab incursion,
and--so quickly do times change--he had actually bought it from a
Jacobite Christian who had been forced by the Melchite Patriarch Cyrus,
then in power, to fly in haste because he had found means to convert his
orthodox slaves to his confession.

It was Philippus who had persuaded his accomplished and experienced
friend to come to Memphis; he had clung to him faithfully, and they
assisted each other in their works.

Rufinus' wife, a frail, ailing little woman, with a small face and
rather hollow cheeks, who must once have been very attractive and
engaging, might have passed for his daughter; she was, in fact, twenty
years younger than her husband. It was evident that she had suffered
much in the course of her life, but had taken it patiently and all for
the best. Her restless husband had caused her the greatest trouble
and alarms, and yet she exerted herself to the utmost to make his life
pleasant. She had the art of keeping every obstacle and discomfort out
of his way, and guessed with wonderful instinct what would help him,
comfort him, and bring him joy. The physician declared that her stooping
attitude, her bent head, and the enquiring expression of her bright,
black eyes were the result of her constant efforts to discover even a
straw that might bring harm to Rufinus if his callous and restless foot
should tread on it.

Their daughter Pulcheria, was commonly called "Pul" for short, to save
time, excepting when the old man spoke of her by preference as "the poor
child." There was at all times something compassionate in his attitude
towards his daughter; for he rarely looked at her without asking himself
what could become of this beloved child when he, who was so much older,
should have closed his eyes in death and his Joanna perhaps should soon
have followed him; while Pulcheria, seeing her mother take such care of
her father that nothing was left for her to do, regarded herself as the
most superfluous creature on earth and would have been ready at any time
to lay down her life for her parents, for the abbess, for her faith, for
the leech; nay, and though she had known her for no more than two days,
even for Paula. However, she was a very pretty, well-grown girl, with
great open blue eyes and a dreamy expression, and magnificent red-gold
hair which could hardly be matched in all Egypt. Her father had long
known of her desire to enter the convent as a novice and become a
nursing sister; but though he had devoted his whole life to a similar
impulse, he had more than once positively refused to accede to her
wishes, for he must ere long be gathered to his fathers and then her
mother, while she survived him, would want some one else to wear herself
out for.

Just now "Pul" was longing less than usual to take the veil; for she had
found in Paula a being before whom she felt small indeed, and to whom
her unenvious soul, yearning and striving for the highest, could look up
in satisfied and rapturous admiration. In addition to this, there were
under her own roof two sufferers needing her care: Rustem, the wounded
Masdakite, and the Persian girl. Neforis, who since the fearful hour of
her husband's death had seemed stunned and indifferent to all the claims
of daily life, living only in her memories of the departed, had been
more than willing to leave to the physician the disposal of these two
and their removal from her house.

In the evening after Paula's arrival Philippus had consulted with his
friends as to the reception of these new guests, and the old man
had interrupted him, as soon as he raised the question of pecuniary
indemnification, exclaiming:

"They are all very welcome. If they have wounds, we will make them heal;
if their heads are turned, we will screw them the right way round; if
their souls are dark, we will light up a flame in them. If the fair
Paula takes a fancy to us, she and her old woman may stay as long as it
suits her and us. We made her welcome with all our hearts; but, on
the other hand, you must understand that we must be free to bid her
farewell--as free as she is to depart. It is impossible ever to know
exactly how such grand folks will get on with humble ones, and as sure
as I long to be quit of this piece of lumber I might one day take it
into my head to leave it to the owls and jackals and fare forth, staff
in hand.--You know me. As to indemnification--we understand each other.
A full purse hangs behind the sick, and the sound one has ten times more
than she needs, so they may pay. You must decide how much; only--for the
women's sake, and I mean it seriously--be liberal. You know what I need
Mammon for; and it would be well for Joanna if she had less need to
turn over every silver piece before she spends it in the housekeeping.
Besides, the lady herself will be more comfortable if she contributes to
pay for the food and drink. It would ill beseem the daughter of Thomas
to be down every evening under the roof of such birds of passage as we
are with thanks for favors received. When each one pays his share
we stand on a footing of give and take; and if either one feels any
particular affection to another it is not strangled by 'thanks' or 'take
it;' it is love for love's sake and a joy to both parties."

"Amen," said the leech; and Paula had been quite satisfied by her
friend's arrangements.

By the next day she felt herself one of the household, though she every
hour found something that could not fail to strike her as strange.




CHAPTER XIX.

When Paula had eaten with Rufinus and his family after the funeral
ceremonies, she went into the garden with Pul and the old man--it had
been impossible to induce Perpetua to sit at the same table with her
mistress. The sun was now low, and its level beams gave added lustre
to the colors of the flowers and to the sheen of the thick, metallic
foliage of the south, which the drought and scorching heat had still
spared. A bright-hued humped ox and an ass were turning the wheel which
raised cooling waters from the Nile and poured them into a large tank
from which they flowed through narrow rivulets to irrigate the beds.
This toil was now very laborious, for the river had fallen to so low a
level as to give cause for anxiety, even at this season of extreme ebb.
Numbers of birds with ruffled feathers, with little splints on their
legs, or with sadly drooping heads, were going to roost in small cages
hung from the branches to protect them from cats and other beasts of
prey; to each, as he went by, Rufinus spoke a kindly word, or chirruped
to encourage and cheer it. Aromatic odors filled the garden, and rural
silence; every object shone in golden glory, even the black back of the
negro working at the water-wheel, and the white and yellow skin of the
ox; while the clear voices of the choir of nuns thrilled through the
convent-grove. Pul listened, turning her face to meet it, and crossing
her arms over her heart. Her father pointed to her as he said to Paula:

"That is where her heart is. May she ever have her God before her eyes!
That cannot but be the best thing for a woman. Still, among such as we
are, we must hold to the rule: Every man for his fellowman on earth, in
the name of the merciful Lord!--Can our wise and reasonable Father in
Heaven desire that brother should neglect brother, or--as in our case--a
child forsake its parents?"

"Certainly not," replied Paula. "For my own part, nothing keeps me from
taking the veil but my hope of finding my long-lost father; I, like your
Pulcheria, have often longed for the peace of the cloister. How piously
rapt your daughter stands there! What a sweet and touching sight!--In my
heart all was dark and desolate; but here, among you all, it is already
beginning to feel lighter, and here, if anywhere, I shall recover what I
lost in my other home.--Happy child! Could you not fancy, as she stands
there in the evening light, that the pure devotion which fills her soul,
radiated from her? If I were not afraid of disturbing her, and if I were
worthy, how gladly would I join my prayers to hers!"

"You have a part in them as it is," replied the old man with a smile.
"At this moment St. Cecilia appears to her under the guise of your
features. We will ask her--you will see."

"No, leave her alone!" entreated Paula with a blush, and she led Rufinus
away to the other end of the garden.

They soon reached a spot where a high hedge of thorny shrubs parted the
old man's plot from that of Susannah. Rufinus here pricked up his ears
and then angrily exclaimed:

"As sure as I long to be quit of this lumber, they are cutting my hedge
again! Only last evening I caught one of the slaves just as he was going
to work on the branches; but how could I get at the black rascal through
the thorns? It was to make a peep-hole for curious eyes, or for spies,
for the Patriarch knows how to make use of a petticoat; but I will
be even with them! Do you go on, pray, as if you had seen and heard
nothing; I will fetch my whip."

The old man hurried away, and Paula was about to obey him; but scarcely
had he disappeared when she heard herself called in a shrill girl's
voice through a gap in the hedge, and looking round, she spied a pretty
face between the boughs which had yesterday been forced asunder by a
man's hands--like a picture wreathed with greenery.

Even in the twilight she recognized it at once, and when Katharina
put her curly head forward, and said in a beseeching tone: "May I get
through, and will you listen to me?" she gladly signified her consent.

The water-wagtail, heedless of Paula's hand held out to help her,
slipped through the gap so nimbly that it was evident that she had not
long ceased surmounting such obstacles in her games with Mary. As swift
as the wind she came down on her feet, holding out her arms to rush at
Paula; but she suddenly let them fall in visible hesitancy, and drew
back a step. Paula, however, saw her embarrassment; she drew the girl to
her, kissed her forehead, and gaily exclaimed:

"Trespassing! And why could you not come in by the gate? Here comes my
host with his hippopotamus thong.--Stop, stop, good Rufinus, for the
breach effected in your flowery wall was intended against me and not
against you. There stands the hostile power, and I should be greatly
surprised if you did not recognize her as a neighbor?"

"Recognize her?" said the old man, whose wrath was quickly appeased. "Do
we know each other, fair damsel--yes or no? It is an open question."

"Of course!" cried Katharina, "I have seen you a hundred times from the
gnat-tower."

"You have had less pleasure than I should have had, if I had been so
happy as to see you.--We came across each other about a year ago. I was
then so happy as to find you in my large peach-tree, which to this day
takes the liberty of growing over your garden-plot."

"I was but a child then," laughed Katharina, who very well remembered
how the old man, whose handsome white head she had always particularly
admired, had spied her out among the boughs of his peach-tree and had
advised her, with a good-natured nod, to enjoy herself there.

"A child!" repeated Rufinus. "And now we are quite grown up and do not
care to climb so high, but creep humbly through our neighbor's hedge."

"Then you really are strangers?" cried Paula in surprise. "And have you
never met Pulcheria, Katharina?"

"Pul?--oh, how glad I should have been to call her!" said Katharina. "I
have been on the point of it a hundred times; for her mere appearance
makes one fall in love with her,--but my mother...."

"Well, and what has your mother got to say against her neighbors?" asked
Rufinus. "I believe we are peaceable folks who do no one any harm."

"No, no, God forbid! But my mother has her own way of viewing things;
