The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Devil's Asteroid, by Manly Wade Wellman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Devil's Asteroid

Author: Manly Wade Wellman

Release Date: September 8, 2007 [EBook #22538]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEVIL'S ASTEROID ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Graeme Mackreth and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







Transcriber's note.
This etext was produced from Comet July 1941. Extensive research did
not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication
was renewed.


DEVIL'S ASTEROID


by MANLY WADE
WELLMAN

[Illustration: _The Rock Bred Evolution in Reverse_]


It was not very large, as asteroids go, but about it clung a silvery
mist of atmosphere. Deeper flashes through the mist betokened water, and
green patches hinted of rich vegetation. The space-patroller circled the
little world knowledgeably, like a wasp buzzing around an apple. In the
control room, by the forward ports, the Martian skipper addressed his
Terrestrial companion.

"I wissh you joy of yourr new home," he purred. Like many Martians, he
was braced upright on his lower tentacles by hoops and buckles around
his bladdery body, so that he had roughly a human form, over which lay a
strange loose armor of light plates. In the breathing hole of his
petal-tufted skull was lodged an artificial voice-box that achieved
words. "I rregrret--"

Fitzhugh Parr glowered back. He was tall, even for a man of Earth, and
his long-jawed young face darkened with wrath. "Regret nothing," he
snapped. "You're jolly glad to drop me on this little hell."

"Hell?" repeated the Martian reproachfully. "But it iss a ssplendid
miniaturre worrld--nineteen of yourr miless in diameterr, with
arrtificial grravity centerr to hold airr and waterr; ssown, too, with
Terresstrrial plantss. And companionss of yourr own rrace."

[Illustration: _"You! They drive you out?" A thick, unsure voice
accosted him._]

"There's a catch," rejoined Parr. "Something you Martian swine think is
a heap big joke. I can see that, captain."

The tufted head wagged. "Underr trreaty between Marrs and Earrth,
judgess of one planet cannot ssentence to death crriminalss frrom the
otherr, not even forr murrderr--"

"It wasn't for murder!" exploded Parr. "I struck in self-defense!"

"I cannot arrgue the point. Yourr victim wass a high official perrhapss
inssolent, but you Earrth folk forrget how eassy ourr crraniumss crrack
underr yourr blowss. Anyway, you do not die--you arre exiled. Prreparre
to dissembarrk."

Behind them three Martian space-hands, sprawling like squids near the
control-board, made flutelike comments to each other. The tentacle of
each twiddled an electro-automatic pistol.

"Rremove tunic and bootss," directed the skipper. "You will not need
them. Quickly, ssirr!"

Parr glared at the levelled weapons of the space-hands, then shucked his
upper garment and kicked off his boots. He stood up straight and
lean-muscled, in a pair of duck shorts. His fists clenched at his sides.

"Now we grround," the skipper continued, and even as he spoke there came
the shock of the landfall. The inner panel opened, then the outer
hatch. Sunlight beat into the chamber. "Goodbye," said the skipper
formally. "You have thirrty ssecondss, Earrth time, to walk clearr of
our blasstss beforre we take off. Marrch."

Parr strode out upon dark, rich soil. He sensed behind him the silent
quiver of Martian laughter, and felt a new ecstasy of hate for his late
guards, their race, and the red planet that spawned them. Not until he
heard the rumble and swish of the ship's departure did he take note of
the little world that was now his prison home.

At first view it wasn't really bad. At second, it wasn't really strange.
The sky, by virtue of an Earth-type atmosphere, shone blue with wispy
clouds, and around the small plain on which he stood sprouted clumps and
thickets of green tropical trees. Heathery ferns, with white and yellow
edges to their leaves, grew under his bare feet. The sun, hovering at
zenith, gave a July warmth to the air. The narrow horizon was very near,
of course, but the variety of thickets and the broken nature of the land
beyond kept it from seeming too different from the skyline of Earth.
Parr decided that he might learn to endure, even to enjoy. Meanwhile,
what about the other Terrestrials exiled here? And, as Parr wondered, he
heard their sudden, excited voices.

Threats and oaths rent the balmy air. Through the turmoil resounded
solid blows. Parr broke into a run, shoved through some broad-leafed
bushes, and found himself in the midst of the excitement.

       *       *       *       *       *

A dozen men, with scraggly beards and skimpy rags of clothing, were
setting upon an unclassifiable creature that snarled and fought back. It
was erect and coarsely hairy--Parr saw that much before the enigma gave
up the unequal fight and ran clumsily away into a mass of
bright-flowered scrub. Execrations and a volley of sticks and stones
speeded its flight.

Then the mob was aware of Parr. Every man--they were all male
Terrestrials--turned toward him, with something like respect. One of
them, tall and thin, spoke diffidently:

"You just arrived?"

"I was just booted out, ten minutes ago," Parr informed him. "Why?"

"Because you're our new chief," responded the thin man, bowing. "The
latest comer always commands here."

Parr must have goggled, for the thin one smiled through tawny stubble.
"The latest comer is always highest and wisest," he elaborated. "He is
healthiest. Best. The longer you stay on this asteroid, the lower you
fall."

Parr thought he was being joked with, and scowled. But his informant
smiled the broader. "My name's Sadau--here under sentence for theft of
Martian government property."

"I'm Fitzhugh Parr. They said I was a murderer. It's a lie."

One or two chuckled at that, and the one who called himself Sadau said:
"We all feel unjustly condemned. Meet the others--Jeffords, Wain,
Haldocott...." Each man, as named, bowed to Parr. The final introduction
was of a sallow, frowning lump of a fellow called Shanklin.

"I was boss until you came," volunteered this last man. "Now you take
over." He waved toward a little cluster of grass huts, half hidden among
ferny palms. "This is our capital city. You get the largest house--until
somebody new shows up. Then you step down, like me."

