so, though Tom plied him pretty hard, he did not receive much
satisfaction.

"You see, Tom," said he, when he found that his companion insisted upon
knowing the cost of the books, "this is a publisher's secret; and I
dare say they would not wish every one to know the cost of books.  We
sell them for a dollar apiece."

"Humph!  You needn't be so close about it.  I'll bet I can find out."

"I have no doubt you can; only, you see, I don't want to tell what I am
not sure they would be willing I should tell."

Tom took a slate pencil from his pocket, and commenced ciphering on the
smooth rock upon which he sat.

"You say you sold fifty books?"

"Yes."

"Well; if you made fifteen dollars out of fifty, that is thirty cents
apiece."

Bobby was a little mortified when he perceived that he had unwittingly
exposed the momentous secret.  He had not given Tom credit for so much
sagacity as he had displayed in his inquiries; and as he had fairly
reached his conclusion, he was willing he should have the benefit of it.

"You sold them at a dollar apiece.  Thirty from a hundred leaves
seventy.  They cost you seventy cents each--didn't they?"

"Sixty-seven," replied Bobby, yielding the point.

"Enough said, Bob; I am going into that business, any how."

"I am willing."

"Of course you are; suppose we go together," suggested Tom, who had not
used all this conciliation without having a purpose in view.

"We could do nothing together."

"I should like to get out with you just once, only to see how it is
done."

"You can find out for yourself, as I did."

"Don't be mean, Bob."

"Mean?  I am not mean."

"I don't say you are.  We have always been good friends, you know."

Bobby did not know it; so he looked at the other with a smile which
expressed all he meant to say.

"You hit me a smart dig the other day, I know; but I don't mind that.
I was in the wrong then, and I am willing to own it," continued Tom,
with an appearance of humility.

This was an immense concession for Tom to make, and Bobby was duly
affected by it.  Probably it was the first time the bully had ever
owned he was in the wrong.

"The fact is, Bob, I always liked you; and you know I licked Ben Dowse
for you."

"That was two for yourself and one for me; besides, I didn't want Ben
thrashed."

"But he deserved it.  Didn't he tell the master you were whispering in
school?"

"I was whispering; so he told the truth."

"It was mean to blow on a fellow, though."

"The master asked him if I whispered to him; of course he ought not to
lie about it.  But he told of you at the same time."

"I know it; but I wouldn't have licked him on my own account."

"_Perhaps_ you wouldn't."

"I know I wouldn't.  But, I say, Bobby, where do you buy your books?"

"At Mr. Bayard's, in Washington Street."

"He will sell them to me at the same price, won't he?"

"I don't know."

"When are you going again?"

"Monday."

"Won't you let me go with you, Bob?"

"Let you?  Of course you can go where you please; it is none of my
business."

Bobby did not like the idea of having such a co-partner as Tom Spicer,
and he did not like to tell him so.  If he did, he would have to give
his reasons for declining the proposition, and that would make Tom mad,
and perhaps provoke him to quarrel.

The fish bit well, and in an hour's time Bobby had a mess.  As he took
his basket and walked home, the young ruffian followed him.  He could
not get rid of him till he reached the gate in front of the little
black house; and even there Tom begged him to stop a few moments.  Our
hero was in a hurry, and in the easiest manner possible got rid of this
aspirant for mercantile honors.

We have no doubt a journal of Bobby's daily life would be very
interesting to our young readers; but the fact that some of his most
stirring adventures are yet to be related admonishes us to hasten
forward more rapidly.

On Monday morning Bobby bade adieu to his mother again, and started for
Boston.  He fully expected to encounter Tom on the way, who, he was
afraid, would persist in accompanying him on his tour.  As before, he
stopped at Squire Lee's to bid him and Annie good by.

The little maiden had read "The Wayfarer" more than half through, and
was very enthusiastic in her expression of the pleasure she derived
from it.  She promised to send it over to his house when she had
finished it, and hoped he would bring his stock to Riverdale, so that
she might again replenish her library.  Bobby thought of something just
then, and the thought brought forth a harvest on the following
Saturday, when he returned.

"When he had shaken bands with the squire and was about to depart, he
received a piece of news which gave him food for an hour's serious
reflection.

"Did you hear about Tom Spicer?" asked Squire Lee.

"No, sir; what about him?"

"Broken his arm."

"Broken his arm!  Gracious!  How did it happen?" exclaimed Bobby, the
more astonished because he had been thinking of Tom since he had left
home.

"He was out in the woods yesterday, where boys should not be on
Sundays, and, in climbing a tree after a bird's nest, he fell to the
ground."

"I am sorry for him," replied Bobby, musing.

"So am I; but if he had been at home, or at church, where he should
have been, it would not have happened.  If I had any boys, I would lock
them up in their chambers if I could not keep them at home Sundays."

"Poor Tom!" mused Bobby, recalling the conversation he had had with him
on Saturday, and then wishing that he had been a little more pliant
with him.

"It is too bad; but I must say I am more sorry for his poor mother than
I am for him," added the squire.  "However, I hope it will do him good,
and be a lesson he will remember as long as he lives."

Bobby bade the squire and Annie adieu again, and resumed his journey
towards the railroad station.  His thoughts were busy with Tom Spicer's
case.  The reason why he had not joined him, as he expected and feared
he would, was now apparent.  He pitied him, for he realized that he
must endure a great deal of pain before he could again go out; but he
finally dismissed the matter with the squire's sage reflection, that he
hoped the calamity would be a good lesson to him.

The young merchant did not walk to Boston this time, for he had come to
the conclusion that, in the six hours it would take him to travel to
the city on foot, the profit on the books he could sell would be more
than enough to pay his fare, to say nothing of the fatigue and the
expense of shoe leather.

Before noon he was at B---- again, as busy as ever in driving his
business.  The experience of the former week was of great value to him.
He visited people belonging to all spheres in society, and, though he
was occasionally repulsed or treated with incivility, he was not
conscious in a single instance of offending any person's sense of
propriety.

He was not as fortunate as during the previous week, and it was
Saturday noon before he had sold out the sixty books he carried with
him.  The net profit for this week was fourteen dollars, with which he
was abundantly pleased.

Mr. Bayard again commended him in the warmest terms for his zeal and
promptness.  Mr. Timmins was even more civil than the last time, and
when Bobby asked the price of Moore's Poems, he actually offered to
sell it to him for thirty-three per cent. less than the retail price.
The little merchant, was on the point of purchasing it, when Mr. Bayard
inquired what he wanted.

"I am going to buy this book," replied Bobby.

"Moore's Poems?"

"Yes, sir."

Mr. Bayard took from a glass case an elegantly bound copy of the same
work--morocco, full gilt--and handed it to our hero.

"I shall make you a present of this.  Are you an admirer of Moore?"

"No, sir; not exactly--that is, I don't know much about it; but Annie
Lee does, and I want to get the book for her."

Bobby's checks reddened as he turned the leaves of the beautiful
volume, putting his head down to the page to hide his confusion.

"Annie Lee?" said Mr. Bayard with a quizzing smile.  "I see how it is.
Rather young, Bobby."

"Her father has been very good to me and to my mother; and so has
Annie, for that matter.  Squire Lee would be a great deal more pleased
if I should make Annie a present than if I made him one.  I feel
grateful to him, and I want to let it out some how."

"That's right, Bobby; always remember your friends.  Timmins, wrap up
this book."

Bobby protested with all his might; but the bookseller insisted that he
should give Annie this beautiful edition, and he was obliged to yield
the point.

That evening he was at the little black house again, and his mother
examined his ledger with a great deal of pride and satisfaction.  That
evening, too, another ten dollars was indorsed on the note, and Annie
received that elegant copy of Moore's Poems.




CHAPTER XIV.

IN WHICH BOBBY'S AIR CASTLE IS UPSET AND TOM SPICER TAKES TO THE WOODS.

During the next four weeks Bobby visited various places in the vicinity
of Boston; and at the end of that time he had paid the whole of the
debt he owed Squire Lee.  He had the note in his memorandum book, and
the fact that he had achieved his first great purpose afforded him much
satisfaction.  Now he owed no man any thing, and he felt as though he
could hold up his head among the best people in the world.

The little black house was paid for, and Bobby was proud that his own
exertions had released his mother from her obligation to her hard
creditor.  Mr. Hardhand could no longer insult and abuse her.

The apparent results which Bobby had accomplished; however, were as
nothing compared with the real results.  He had developed those
energies of character which were to make him, not only a great business
man, but a useful member of society.  Besides, there was a moral
grandeur in his humble achievements which was more worthy of
consideration than the mere worldly success he had obtained.  Motives
determine the character of deeds.  That a boy of thirteen should
display so much enterprise and energy was a great thing; but that it
should be displayed from pure, unselfish devotion to his mother was a
vastly greater thing.  Many great achievements are morally
insignificant, while many of which the world never hears mark the true
hero.

Our hero was not satisfied with what he had done, and far from
relinquishing his interesting and profitable employment, his ambition
suggested new and wider fields of success.  As one ideal, brilliant and
glorious in its time, was reached, another more brilliant and more
glorious presented itself, and demanded to be achieved.  The little
black house began to appear rusty and inconvenient; a coat of white
paint would marvellously improve its appearance; a set of nice
Paris-green blinds would make a palace of it, and a neat fence around
it would positively transform the place into a paradise.  Yet Bobby was
audacious enough to think of these things, and even to promise himself
that they should be obtained.

In conversation with Mr. Bayard a few days before, that gentleman had
suggested a new field of labor; and it had been arranged that Bobby
should visit the State of Maine the following week.  On the banks of
the Kennebec were many wealthy and important towns, where the
intelligence of the people created a demand for books.  This time the
little merchant was to take two hundred books, and be absent until they
were all sold.

On Monday morning he started bright and early for the railroad station.
As usual, he called upon Squire Lee, and informed Annie that he should
probably be absent three or four weeks.  She hoped no accident would
happen to him, and that his journey would be crowned with success.
Without being sentimental, she was a little sad, for Bobby was a great
friend of hers.  That elegant copy of Moore's Poems had been gratefully
received, and she was so fond of the bard's beautiful and touching
melodies that she could never read any of them without thinking of the
brave little fellow who had given her the volume; which no one will
consider very remarkable, even in a little miss of twelve.

After he had bidden her and her father adieu, he resumed his journey.
Of course he was thinking with all his might; but no one need suppose
he was wondering how wide the Kennebec River was, or how many books he
should sell in the towns upon its banks.  Nothing of the kind; though
it is enough even for the inquisitive to know that he was thinking of
something, and that his thoughts were very interesting, not to say
romantic.

"Hallo, Bob!" shouted some one from the road side.

Bobby was provoked; for it is sometimes very uncomfortable to have a
pleasant train of thought interrupted.  The imagination is buoyant,
ethereal, and elevates poor mortals up to the stars sometimes.  It was
so with Bobby.  He was building up some kind of an air castle, and had
got up in the clouds amidst the fog and moonshine, and that aggravating
voice brought him down, _slap_, upon terra firma.

He looked up and saw Tom Spicer seated upon the fence.  In his hand he
held a bundle, and had evidently been waiting some time for Bobby's
coming.

He had recovered from the illness caused by his broken arm, and people
said it had been a good lesson for him, as the squire hoped it would
be.  Bobby had called upon him two or three times during his
confinement to the house; and Tom, either truly repentant for his past
errors, or lacking the opportunity at that time to manifest his evil
