for any one to openly avow himself in favor of the excise. At a meeting
held in Pittsburg, on the seventh of September, 1791, resolutions were
adopted denouncing the tax as "operating on a domestic manufacture--a
manufacture not equal through the States. It is insulting to the feelings
of the people to have their vessels marked, houses painted and ransacked,
to be subject to informers gaining by the occasional delinquency of
others. It is a bad precedent, tending to introduce the excise laws of
Great Britain and of countries where the liberty, property and even the
morals of the people are sported with to gratify particular men in their
ambitious and interested measures." The duties were likewise denounced as
injurious to agricultural interests.

So far as refusal to obey the excise law, and defiance of the Federal
officers empowered to enforce it, constituted rebellion, the western
counties of Pennsylvania were in a condition of rebellion for over three
years. President Washington was patient; the Congress was conciliatory;
the State authorities were more than tolerant. General John Neville, a
man of great wealth and well-deserved popularity, accepted the office of
Inspector of the Revenue. Had he been discovered guilty of a monstrous
crime, his popularity could not have more rapidly waned. Albert Gallatin,
Brackenridge and other men, respected not only in Pennsylvania, but
wherever known in the country at large, took counsel, and appeared to
take sides with the multitude in their opposition to the national law.
Their motives have been variously interpreted, according to prejudice or
favor, but Marshall, in his "Life of Washington," gave the fair and
reasonable view of their position when he said that "men of property and
intelligence who had contributed to kindle the flame, under the common
error of being able to regulate its heat, trembled at the extent of the
conflagration. But it had passed the limits assigned to it, and was no
longer subject to their control."

The crowning outrage was the burning of Inspector Neville's house, in
July, 1794. The inspector made his escape to Pittsburg. He and the United
States Marshal were compelled to flee from the town, and on the first of
August following, seven thousand armed men assembled at Braddock's Field
and marched from thence into Pittsburg. All these men were not hostile to
the laws and authority of the United States; many were compelled by
threats of violence to go with the majority; not a few were present to
restrain the reckless from breaking into open insurrection.

President Washington deemed that the time for action had come. He called
upon the States of New Jersey and Pennsylvania for a force of militia
sufficient to crush the insurrection, while at the same time he
proclaimed amnesty to all who should certify by their signatures their
readiness to sustain the government. The insurgents suddenly awakened to
the knowledge that they had now the whole power of the United States
against them, directed by that arm invulnerable alike to Indian,
Frenchman and Briton. Multitudes came to their senses, and signed the
pledge that saved them from punishment. Among these were many who had
committed the gravest disorders. The United States forces, however,
marched into the western counties, and the disturbed region was prostrate
under military law.

Old residents of Pittsburg have not yet forgotten the traditions of "The
Dreadful Night"--the thirteenth of November, 1794. Without a moment's
warning hundreds of citizens were arrested in Allegheny and the adjoining
counties, dragged from their beds, and hurried away, half naked, from
their frantic wives and weeping children. The arrests, in numerous
instances, were attended with every circumstance of barbarity short of
death. Prisoners were goaded, with shoeless and bleeding feet, on the
road to Pittsburg; numbers of them were tied back to back, and thrown
into a wet cellar as a place of detention. One man, whose child was
dying, came forward voluntarily when the arrests were being made, hoping
that humanity would prompt his release on a statement of his condition.
He, too, was tied, and thrown in with the rest. When he obtained his
liberty his child was dead. Among the prisoners was George Robinson,
chief burgess of Pittsburg, a peaceable law-abiding man, who had never
taken any share in the agitation against the excise. Brigadier-General
White appears to have been chiefly responsible for the brutal treatment
of the captives. When one of them, a veteran of the Revolution, lagged
behind, owing to physical infirmity, White ordered him fastened to a
horse's tail, and dragged along. The cruel command was not obeyed. On the
following day, of about three hundred prisoners, all but ten were
discharged, there being no evidence against the others. Of eighteen
alleged offenders who were sent to Philadelphia, and marched through the
streets, with the label "Insurgent" on their hats, but two were found
guilty of crime. One was convicted of arson, another of robbing the
United States mail, when the mail was intercepted with a view of
capturing letters from the Federal officers in the western counties to
the authorities at the capital. In both instances President Washington
granted first a reprieve, then a pardon.

Alexander Hamilton held an inquisitorial investigation to ascertain
whether a blow had been meditated at the republic, and its form of
government, under the guise of opposition to the revenue. He was
evidently satisfied that there was no deeper plot than appeared on the
surface, and that, apart from their whiskey-stills, the hearts of the
West Pennsylvanians beat true to the Union.




Independence Vindicated.




CHAPTER XXII.

Arrogance of France--Americans and Louis XVI--Genet Defies Washington--
The People Support the President--War With the Indians--Defeat of St.
Clair--Indians State Their Case--General Wayne Defeats the Savages--Jay's
Treaty--Retirement of Washington--His Character--His Military Genius--
Washington as a Statesman--His Views on Slavery--His Figure in History.


The American nation had yet to win something besides independence,
something without which independence would be a burden and a mockery--the
respect of other nations; and in dealings between nations fear and
respect are closely akin. The English still occupied posts within
territory claimed by the United States, the Indians denied the right of
the Americans to lands beyond the Ohio, and republican France, having
beheaded her king, regarded the United States as a vassal on account of
the debt of gratitude which America owed to that king. War with England
had given place to jealous and intolerant rivalry, and friendship with
France had been succeeded by an arrogant assumption of patronage and
almost of suzerainty menacing to our national independence. Such were the
clouds that rose above the ocean horizon, while the western sky was
darkened by the shadow of Indian hostility as yet far from contemptible,
and directed by able chieftains, like Little Turtle, more than a match in
the field and in diplomacy for most of their white antagonists. These
were the circumstances which made it apparent to Americans that the
Federal Constitution had come not a day too soon, which welded the nation
together like an armor-plate of steel against foes on every hand, and
taught the need of union as it never could have been taught amid
surroundings of prosperity and peace.

The French Revolution acquitted the American people of all obligations to
France. It was not to the French people, but to the French king that
Americans owed the assistance without which the war for independence
might have ended in calamity, and with the exception of the Marquis de
Lafayette the Frenchmen who were conspicuous as servants of the king in
aiding the American cause, were foes, not friends of the Revolution. The
French nation, as such, had no more to do with casting the power of
France into the scales on the side of America than the people of Russia
had to do with their czar's championship of Bulgaria. Had it been in the
power of Americans to have saved Louis XVI. from the scaffold, they would
have shown cruel ingratitude not to have interfered in his behalf. It was
a most arrogant and baseless assumption on the part of the French
democracy to claim credit for what the Bourbon king had done in sending
his army and navy to these shores and supplying funds to equip and
maintain our troops. It is true that the men he sent here were Frenchmen,
and that the money came from the pockets of the people of France, but his
will directed the troops, and diverted to American use the funds of which
France was sorely in need. To Louis XVI., to his great minister,
Vergennes, to Rochambeau and Lafayette, American independence was due, so
far as it was due to any human source outside of America. Rochambeau and
Lafayette both narrowly escaped the fate of their king, and Vergennes
died before the Revolution which would have made him either a victim or
an emigre.[1] So much for the claims of the first French republic that
America was ungrateful in not arraying its forces against embattled
Europe in defence of the men who slew Louis XVI. for crimes which others
committed.

      [1] During the reign of terror Rochambeau was arrested at his estate
      near Vendome, conducted to Paris, thrown into the Conciergerie and
      condemned to death. When the car came to convey a number of victims
      to the guillotine, he was about to mount it, but the official in
      charge seeing it full thrust him back. "Stand back, old marshal,"
      cried he, roughly, "your turn will come by and by." A sudden change
      in political affairs saved his life, and enabled him to return to
      his home near Vendome. Rochambeau survived the Revolution, and
      received the grand cross of the Legion of Honor and a marshal's
      pension from the great Napoleon.--_From Irving's Life of
      Washington._

It is probable that none save Washington could have guided the nation
through the perilous excitement aroused by the efforts of the French
minister Genet to involve the United States in war with England and other
powers. For a time many cool-headed and able men were carried away by the
popular enthusiasm in favor of France, but Genet presumed too far, when
he deliberately insulted and defied that national authority which the
nation itself had created, and the American people rallied at length,
irrespective of party, to the support of the President. France for the
time, abandoned her menacing attitude, only to resume it a few years
later, with results disastrous to herself.

                        *          *          *

However American in feeling, it is impossible not to have some sympathy
with the Indians in their struggle to retain their hunting-grounds beyond
the Ohio. Savages as they were, natural right was on their side, and many
of the whites opposed to them were more savage and inhuman than the worst
of the redskinned barbarians. The massacre of the Christian Indians at
Gnadenhutten by a party of frontiersmen was a deed not surpassed in
atrocity in the annals of any country, and far surpassing in deliberate
cruelty anything charged against the Indian race. It was a pity that the
actual perpetrators of that dark crime did not fall into the hands of
warlike Indians, instead of the unfortunate William Crawford, the leader
of a subsequent expedition, whose awful death by fire was the Indian
penalty for the Moravian massacre. The masterly ability of Little Turtle
proved for years a barrier against pioneer progress, and the defeat of
St. Clair and his army in 1791, left the frontiers at the mercy of the
red men. This defeat was one of the most terrible ever suffered at the
hands of the Indians, and aroused on the part of Washington a display of
temper which showed how deeply he felt the wound inflicted on his
country.

General Anthony Wayne took the place of St. Clair as commander, and
further hostilities were preceded by an attempt at negotiation. It must
be confessed by any impartial reader that the Indians stated their case
calmly, clearly and with impressive reasoning. They demanded that
Americans be removed from the northern side of the Ohio, and they averred
that treaties previously signed by them to the contrary effect had been
signed under misapprehension. "Brothers," said the Indians, "you have
talked to as about concessions. It appears strange that you should expect
any from us, who have only been defending our just rights against your
invasions. We want peace. Restore to us our country, and we shall be
enemies no longer." "Your answer." said the American commissioners,
"amounts to a declaration that you will agree to no other boundary than
the Ohio. The negotiation is, therefore, at an end." This decision was
arrived at in August, 1793. Meantime the United States escaped the danger
which would have been brought upon them had Genet succeeded in his
schemes, and involved America in war with England and Spain, both of
which countries were prepared to assist the Indians, had the Americans
taken the side of France. Active hostilities were not resumed in the
Northwest, however, until the summer of 1794, when General Wayne, at the
head of his troops, again attempted to secure a peaceful settlement of
the Indian troubles, and failing in that attacked and defeated the
Indians near the rapids of the Maumee, a few miles from the Miam. Fort,
which the English had established within the American territory. Little
Turtle, who led the Indians, had been in favor of peace, but was
overborne by more impetuous warriors. Peace soon followed, and the
settlement of the Northwest proceeded for a time without interruption.
Those who regard the Indians as a lazy and thriftless race should read
what General Wayne says about them: "The very extensive and highly
cultivated fields and gardens show the work of many hands. The margins of
these beautiful rivers appear like a continued village for a number of
miles. Nor have I ever before beheld such immense fields of corn in any
part of America, from Canada to Florida."

                        *          *          *

Jay's Treaty, so-called from John Jay, who acted on behalf of the United
States in negotiating the measure, secured a temporary and unsatisfactory
adjustment of the differences between the United States and Great
Britain. The fact that Washington was willing to approve the treaty,
although dissatisfied with it, is its sufficient vindication, and the
agreement on the part of England to surrender the western posts was no
small advantage for the United States, especially in the impression which
it produced on the Indians of the decline of British and the growth of
American power. The worst features of the treaty were that it restricted
the commerce of the United States, so far as concerned molasses, sugar,
coffee, cocoa and cotton, the last-mentioned article being already a
product of the United States, and that it failed to protect the seamen on
American vessels against seizure and impressment by the British. It was,
taken as a whole, a humiliating compact, and in its commercial provisions
an abandonment of the principle which inspired the Boston Tea Party, and
for which Americans had fought in the war of independence. The mutual
freedom of intercourse and internal trading, including common navigation
of the Mississippi, was advantageous only to Great Britain, which
country, as subsequent events showed, had not given up hope of
reconquering the trans-Ohio region, and carrying British dominion from
the Lakes to Mobile.

The United States had to do something, however, to show that the American
Republic was not either secretly or openly an ally of the French Republic
against the remainder of Europe, and while the Jay Treaty was not what
Washington and the American people desired, it was all that England would
agree to. As a _modus vivendi_ with our only dangerous neighbor it enabled
the American people to devote to domestic development the energies which
would otherwise have been expended in war, and to grasp the neutral
carrying trade upon which war would have placed an embargo. England would
doubtless have been gratified with any plausible excuse that would have
enabled her to destroy American commerce, and to be without a rival on the
Atlantic. Jay's Treaty prevented this, and England had to leave to her
friends, the Barbary pirates, the work of preying on the American carrying
trade in European waters.[2] These depredations were already so serious in
1794 that a bill was introduced in Congress, passed after some opposition,
and cordially approved by President Washington, providing for a force of
six frigates to protect American commerce from the corsairs. These
frigates did splendid service later on, not only against the pirates, but
also against the French and British.

      [2] As early as 1784 Lord Sheffield said in Parliament: "It is not
      probable that the American States will have a very free trade in the
      Mediterranean. It will not be to the interest of any of the great
      maritime powers to protect them from the Barbary States. If they
      know their interests they will not encourage American carriers."

                        *          *          *

The scenes which attended the close of Washington's public career were
some compensation to that ever-illustrious man for the wounds inflicted
during his administration by reckless and venomous partisanship. No
President of the United States was ever more fiercely and bitterly
assailed than Washington. His enemies even went so far as to doom him in
caricature to the fate of Louis XVI. He was accused of monarchical
designs, and had to confront treachery in his Cabinet and scurrilous
slanders in the public press. Yet throughout all he bore himself with
patience, and never swerved from the course which he deemed best for the
public weal. It should not be supposed that he was indifferent to the
arrows of malice and of falsehood. On the contrary, he was extremely
sensitive to them; but he never permitted himself, in public at least, to
be carried away by his feelings, and no matter how strong his sentiments
on any subject, his sense of justice was always supreme. In his agony
upon the news of St. Clair's defeat, he denounced that general as worse
than a murderer for having suffered his army to be taken by surprise; but
when the burst of passion was over he added: "General St. Clair shall
have justice. I will receive him without displeasure; I will hear him
without prejudice." And Washington kept his word.

Far abler pens than mine have dealt with the character of the Father of
our Republic, but a few plain and original expressions on a subject never
wearisome to Americans may not be out of place. Washington's chief
characteristics were fortitude, the sense of justice of which I have
spoken, and the ability to grasp conditions and seize upon opportunities.
He was a thoroughly practical man, a strategist by instinct, fearless but
not rash, possessing an impetuous temper kept within careful control, and
unleashed only when, as at the battle of Monmouth, there was prudence in
its vehemence. He was an excellent judge of men. The officers who owed
their advancement to Washington seldom disappointed and often exceeded
expectations. He was above the petty jealousy, so conspicuous in our late
civil war, that would permit another general to be defeated in order to
shine by contrast. He was devoted to the cause more than to winning
personal reputation, and the effect of his unselfishness was that the
cause triumphed with his name fixed in history as that of its leader and
champion.

It is difficult to compare the military achievements of Washington with
those of Old World commanders. Marlborough, Wellington and Napoleon had
troops thoroughly organized, under complete military control, and held to
service by iron rules which made the general always sure that his
military machine would be ready for use, barring the chances of war.
Washington's forces were largely composed of militia, enlisted for short
periods, many of them induced to serve by bounties, and anxious to go
home and attend to their farms.[3] The soldiers, too, were shamefully
neglected by Congress and by their States, and it seems wonderful that
Washington should have kept them together as he did, or maintained an
army at all. In this respect Washington showed genius as a military
manager without parallel in history. It should not be forgotten, also,
that to Washington is largely due credit for victories at which he was
not present. His was the master mind which scanned the entire field,
directed all operations and made the triumphs of others possible. His
closing campaign, which ended in the surrender of Cornwallis, exhibited
military talent of the highest order. In conception and execution it was
equal to any of Napoleon's campaigns. It embraced an extent of territory,
from New York to North Carolina inclusive, as extensive as the present
