
"Let's be off," Rashid said.

The door lock snapped as they went out the window. Two men with
rifles plunged into the gas; sighing, they fell to the floor in a
catatonic trance.

A little car skimmed across the lawn. Bearing the Scourge of
Africa, Rashid struggled toward it. Read walked backward,
covering their retreat.

The car stopped, whirling blades holding it a few inches off the
lawn. They climbed in.

"How did it go?" The driver and another inspector occupied the
front seat.

"They'll be after us in half a minute."

The other inspector carried a light machine gun and a box of
grenades. "I better cover," he said.

"Thanks," Rashid said.

The inspector slid out of the car and ran to a clump of bushes.
The driver pushed in the accelerator. As they swerved toward the
south, Read saw a dozen armed men run out of the house. A grenade
arced from the bushes and the pursuers recoiled from the cloud
that rose before them.

"Is he all right?" the driver asked.

"I don't think I hurt him." Rashid took a syrette from his vest
pocket. "Well, Read, it looks like we're in for a fight. In a few
minutes Miaka Station will know we're coming. And God knows what
will happen at the Game Preserve."

Read wanted to jump out of the car. He could die any minute. But
he had set his life on a well-oiled track and he couldn't get off
until they reached Geneva.

"They don't know who's coming," he said. "They don't make them
tough enough to stop this boy."

Staring straight ahead, he didn't see the sergeant smile.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two types of recruits are accepted by the UN Inspector Corps:
those with a fanatic loyalty to the ideals of peace and world
order, and those who are loyal to nothing but themselves. Read
was the second type.

A tall, lanky Negro he had spent his school days in one of the
drab suburbs that ring every prosperous American city. It was the
home of factory workers, clerks, semiskilled technicians, all who
do the drudge work of civilization and know they will never do
more. The adults spent their days with television, alcohol and
drugs; the young spent their days with gangs, sex, television and
alcohol. What else was there? Those who could have told him
neither studied nor taught at his schools. What he saw on the
concrete fields between the tall apartment houses marked the
limits of life's possibilities.

He had belonged to a gang called The Golden Spacemen. "Nobody
fools with me," he bragged. "When Harry Read's out, there's a
tiger running loose." No one knew how many times he nearly ran
from other clubs, how carefully he picked the safest spot on the
battle line.

"A man ought to be a man," he once told a girl. "He ought to do a
man's work. Did you ever notice how our fathers look, how they
sleep so much? I don't want to be like that. I want to be
something proud."

He joined the UN Inspector Corps at eighteen, in 1978. The
international cops wore green berets, high buttonless boots, bush
jackets. They were very special men.

For the first time in his life, his father said something about
his ambitions.

"Don't you like America, Harry? Do you _want_ to be without a
country? This is the best country in the world. All my life I've
made a good living. Haven't you had everything you ever wanted?
I've been a king compared to people overseas. Why, you stay here
and go to trade school and in two years you'll be living just
like me."

"I don't want that," Read said.

"What do you mean, you don't want that?"

"You could join the American Army," his mother said. "That's as
good as a trade school. If you have to be a soldier."

"I want to be a UN man. I've already enlisted. I'm in! What do
you care what I do?"

The UN Inspector Corps had been founded to enforce the Nuclear
Disarmament Treaty of 1966. Through the years it had acquired
other jobs. UN men no longer went unarmed. Trained to use small
arms and gas weapons, they guarded certain borders, bodyguarded
diplomats and UN officials, even put down riots that threatened
international peace. As the UN evolved into a strong world
government, the UN Inspector Corps steadily acquired new powers.

Read went through six months training on Madagascar.

Twice he nearly got expelled for picking fights with smaller men.
Rather than resign, he accepted punishment which assigned him to
weeks of dull, filthy extra labor. He hated the restrictions and
the iron fence of regulations. He hated boredom, loneliness and
