Creator, 'that while the Earth remaineth seed-time and harvest, and cold
and heat, and summer and winter shall not cease.'




CHAPTER VI

THE STARRY HEAVENS


The celestial vault, that, like a circling canopy of sapphire hue,
stretches overhead from horizon to horizon, resplendent by night with
myriad stars of different magnitudes and varied brilliancy, forming
clusterings and configurations of fantastic shape and beauty, arrests
the attention of the most casual observer. But to one who has studied
the heavens, and followed the efforts of human genius in unravelling the
mysteries associated with those bright orbs, the impression created on
his mind as he gazes upon them in the still hours of the night, when the
turmoil of life is hushed in repose, is one of wonder and longing to
know more of their being and the hidden causes which brought them forth.
Here, we have poetry written in letters of gold on the sable vestment of
night; music in the gliding motion of the spheres; and harmony in the
orbital sweep of sun, planet, and satellite.

Milton was not only familiar with 'the face of the sky,' as it is
popularly called, but also knew the structure of the celestial sphere,
and the great circles by which it is circumscribed. Two of those--the
colures--he alludes to in the following lines, when he describes the
manner in which Satan, to avoid detection, compassed the Earth, after
his discovery by Gabriel in Paradise, and his flight thence:--

    The space of seven continued nights he rode
    With darkness--thrice the equinoctial line
    He circled, four times crossed the car of night
    From pole to pole, traversing each colure.--ix. 63-66.

Aristarchus of Samos believed the stars were golden studs, that
illumined the crystal dome of heaven; but modern research has
transformed this conception of the ancient astronomer's into a universe
of blazing suns rushing through regions of illimitable space. In
Milton's time astronomers had arrived at no definite conclusion with
regard to the nature of the stars. They were known to be self-luminous
bodies, situated at a remote distance in space, but it had not been
ascertained with any degree of certainty that they were suns, resembling
in magnitude and brilliancy our Sun. Indeed, little was known of those
orbs until within the past hundred years, when the exploration of the
heavens by the aid of greatly increased telescopic power, was the means
of creating a new branch of astronomical science, called sidereal
astronomy.

We are indebted to Sir William Herschel, more than to any other
astronomer, for our knowledge of the stellar universe. It was he who
ascertained the vastness of its dimensions, and attempted to delineate
its structural configuration. He also explored the star depths, which
occupy the infinitude of space by which we are surrounded, and made
many wonderful discoveries, which testify to his ability as an observer,
and to his greatness as an astronomer.

William Herschel was born at Hanover, November 15, 1738. His father was
a musician in the band of the Hanoverian Guard, and trained his son in
his own profession. After four years of military service, young Herschel
arrived in England when nineteen years of age, and maintained himself by
giving lessons in music. We hear of him first at Leeds, where he
followed his profession, and instructed the band of the Durham Militia.
From Leeds he went to Halifax, and was appointed organist there; on the
expiration of twelve months he removed to Bath, and was elected to a
similar post at the Octagon Chapel in that city. Here, fortune smiled
upon him, and he became a busy and prosperous man. Besides attending to
his numerous private engagements, he organised concerts, oratorios, and
other public musical entertainments, which gained him much popularity
among the cultivated classes which frequented this fashionable resort.
Notwithstanding his numerous professional engagements, Herschel was able
to devote a portion of his time to acquiring knowledge on other
subjects. He became proficient in Italian and Greek, studied
mathematics, and read books on astronomy. In 1773 he borrowed a small
telescope, which he used for observational purposes, and was so
captivated with the appearances presented by the celestial bodies, that
he resolved to dedicate his life to acquiring 'a knowledge of the
construction of the heavens.' This resolution he nobly adhered to, and
became one of the most distinguished of astronomers. Like many other
astronomers, Herschel possessed the requisite skill which enabled him to
construct his own telescopes. Being desirous of possessing a more
powerful instrument, and not having the means to purchase one, he
commenced the manufacture of specula, the grinding and polishing of
which had to be done by hand, entailing the necessity of tedious labour
and the exercise of much patience. After repeated failures he at length
completed a 5-1/2-foot Gregorian reflector, and with this instrument
made his first survey of the heavens. Having perceived the desirability
of possessing a more powerful telescope, he equipped himself with a
reflector of twenty feet focal length, and it was with this instrument
that he made those wonderful discoveries which established his
reputation as a great astronomer.

On March 31, 1781, when examining the stars in the constellation Gemini,
Herschel observed a star which presented an appearance slightly
different to that of the other stars by which it was surrounded; it
looked larger, had a perceptible disc, and its light became fainter when
viewed with a higher magnifying power. After having carefully examined
this object, Herschel arrived at the conclusion that he had discovered a
comet. He communicated intelligence of his discovery to the Royal
Society, and, a notification of it having been sent to the Continental
observatories, this celestial visitor was subjected to a close scrutiny;
its progressive motion among the stars was carefully observed, and an
orbit was assigned to it. After it had been under observation for some
time, doubts were expressed as to its being a comet, these were
increased on further examination, and eventually it was discovered that
this interesting object was a new planet. This important discovery at
once raised Herschel to a position of eminence and distinction, and from
a star-gazing musician he became a famous astronomer. A new planet named
Uranus was added to our system, which completes a revolution round the
Sun in a little over eighty-four years, and at a distance of near 1,000
millions of miles beyond the orbit of Saturn. Herschel's name became a
household word. George III. invited him to Court in order that he might
obtain from his own lips an account of his discovery of the new planet;
and so favourable was the impression made by Herschel upon the King,
that he proposed to create him Royal Astronomer at Windsor, and bestow
upon him a salary of 200_l._ a year. Herschel decided to accept the
proffered appointment, and, with his sister Caroline, removed from Bath
to Datchet, near Windsor, in 1782, and from there to Slough in 1786. In
1788 he married the wealthy widow of a London merchant, by whom he had
one son, who worthily sustained his father's high reputation as an
astronomer. Herschel was created a Knight in 1816, and in 1821 was
elected first President of the Royal Astronomical Society. He died at
Slough on August 25, 1822, when in the eighty-fourth year of his age,
and was buried in Upton Churchyard.

It is inscribed on his tomb, that 'he burst the barriers of heaven;' the
lofty praise conveyed by this expression is not greater than what
Herschel merited when we consider with what unwearied assiduity and
patience he laboured to accomplish the results described in the words
which have been quoted. By a method called 'star-gauging' he
accomplished an entire survey of the heavens and examined minutely all
the stars in their groups and aggregations as they passed before his eye
in the field of the telescope. He sounded the depths of the Milky Way,
and explored the wondrous regions of that shining zone, peopled with
myriads of suns so closely aggregated in some of its tracts as to
suggest the appearance of a mosaic of stars. He resolved numerous nebulae
into clusters of stars, and penetrated with his great telescope depth
after depth of space crowded with 'island universes of stars,' beyond
which he was able to discern luminous haze and filmy streaks of light,
the evidence of the existence of other universes plunged in depths still
more profound, where space verges on infinity. In his exploration of the
starry heavens Herschel's labours were truly amazing. On four different
occasions he completed a survey of the firmament, and counted the stars
in several thousand gauge-fields; he discovered 2,400 nebulae, 800
double stars, and attempted to ascertain the approximate distances of
the stars by a comparison of their relative brightness.

It had long been surmised, though no actual proof was forthcoming, that
the law of gravitation by which the order and stability of our system
are maintained exercises its potent influence over other material bodies
existing in space, and that other systems, though differing in many
respects from that of ours, and presenting a more complex arrangement in
their structure, perform their motions subject to the guidance of this
universal law. The uncertainty with regard to the controlling influence
of gravity was removed by Herschel when he made his important discovery
of binary star systems. The components of a binary star are usually in
such close proximity that, to the naked eye, they appear as one star,
and sometimes, even with telescopic aid, it is impossible to distinguish
them individually; but when observed with sufficient magnifying power
they can be easily perceived as two lucid points. Double stars were for
a long time believed to be a purely optical phenomenon--an effect
created by two stars projected on the sphere so as to appear nearly in
the same line of vision, and, although apparently almost in contact,
situated at great distances apart. At one time Herschel entertained a
similar opinion with regard to those stars. In 1779 he undertook an
extensive exploration of the heavens with the object of discovering
double stars. As a result of his labours he presented to the Royal
Society in 1782 a list of 269 newly discovered double stars, and in
three years after he supplemented this list with another which contained
434 more new stars. He carefully measured the distances by which the
component stars were separated, and determined their position angles, in
order that he might be able to detect the existence of any sensible
parallax. On repeating his observations twenty years after, he
discovered that the relative positions of many of the stars had changed,
and in 1802 he made the important announcement of his discovery that the
components of many double stars form independent systems, held together
in a mutual bond of union and revolving round one common centre of
gravity.

The importance of this discovery, which we owe to Herschel's sagacity
and accuracy of observation, cannot be over-estimated; what was
previously conjecture and surmise, now became precise knowledge
established upon a sure and accurate basis. It was ascertained that the
law of gravity exerts its power in regulating and controlling the
motions of all celestial bodies within the range of telescopic vision,
and that the order and harmony which pervade our system are equally
present among other systems of suns and worlds distributed throughout
the regions of space. The spectacle of two or more suns revolving round
each other, forming systems of greater magnitude and importance than
that of ours, conveyed to the minds of astronomers a knowledge of the
mechanism of the heavens which had hitherto been unknown to them.

During the many years which Herschel devoted to the exploration of the
starry heavens, and when engaged night after night in examining and
enumerating the various groups and clusters of stars which passed before
his eye in the field of his powerful telescope, he did not fail to
remember the sublime object of his life, and to which he made all his
other investigations subordinate, viz., the delineation of the
structural configuration of the heavens, and the inclusion of all
aggregations, groups, clusters, and galaxies of stars which are
apparently scattered promiscuously throughout the regions of space into
one grand harmonious design of celestial architecture.

Having this object in view, he explored the wondrous zone of the Milky
Way, gauged its depths, measured its dimensions, and, in attempting to
unravel the intricacies of its structure, penetrated its recesses far
beyond the limit attained by any other observer. Acting on the
assumption that the stars are uniformly distributed throughout space,
Herschel, by his method of star-gauging, concluded that the sidereal
system consists of an irregular stratum of evenly distributed suns,
resembling in form a cloven flat disc, and that the apparent richness of
some regions as compared with that of others could be accounted for by
the position from which it was viewed by an observer. The stars would
appear least numerous where the visual line was shortest, and, as it
became lengthened, they would increase in number until, by crowding
behind each other as a greater depth of stratum was penetrated, they
would, when very remote, present the appearance of a luminous cloud or
zone of light. After further observation Herschel was compelled to
relinquish his theory of equal star distribution, and found, as he
approached the Galaxy, that the stars became much more numerous, and
that in the Milky Way itself there was evidence of the gravitation of
stars towards certain regions forming aggregations and clusters which
would ultimately lead to its breaking up into numerous separate sidereal
systems. As he extended his survey of the heavens and examined with
greater minuteness the stellar regions in the Galactic tract, he
discovered that by his method of star-gauging he was unable to define
the complexity of structure and variety of arrangement which came under
his observation; he also perceived that the star-depths are
unfathomable, and discerned that beyond the reach of his telescope there
existed systems and galaxies of stars situated at an appalling distance
in the abysmal depths of space. Though the magnitude of that portion of
the sidereal heavens which came under his observation was inconceivable
as regards its dimensions, Herschel was able to perceive that it formed
but a part--and most probably a small part--of the stellar universe, and
that without a more extended knowledge of this universe, which at
present is unattainable, it would be impossible to determine its
structural configuration or discover the relationships that exist among
the sidereal systems and Galactic concourses of stars distributed
throughout space. Herschel ultimately abandoned his star-gauging method
of observation and confined his attention to exploring the star depths
and investigating the laws and theories associated with the bodies
occupying those distant regions.

Since all the planets if viewed from the Sun would be seen to move
harmoniously and in regular order round that body, so there may be
somewhere in the universe a central point, or, as some persons imagine,
a great central sun, round which all the systems of stars perform their
majestic revolutions with the same beautiful regularity; having their
motions controlled by the same law of gravitation, and possessing the
same dynamical stability which characterises the mechanism of the solar
system.

The extent of the distance which intervenes between our system and the
fixed stars constituted a problem which exercised the minds of
astronomers from an early period until the middle of the present
century.

Tycho Brahe, who repudiated the Copernican theory, asserted as one of
his reasons against it that the distances by which the heavenly bodies
are separated from each other were greater than even the upholders of
this theory believed them to be. Although the distance of the Sun from
the Earth was unknown, Tycho was aware that the diameter of the Earth's
orbit must be measured by millions of miles, and yet there was no
perceptible motion or change of position of the stars when viewed from
any point of the vast circumference which she traverses. Consequently,
the Earth, if viewed from the neighbourhood of a star, would also appear
motionless, and the dimensions of her orbit would be reduced to that of
a point. This seemed incredible to Tycho, and he therefore concluded
that the Copernican theory was incorrect.

The conclusion that the stars are orbs resembling our Sun in magnitude
and brilliancy was one which, Tycho urged, should not be hastily
adopted; and yet, if it were conceded that the Earth is a body which
revolves round the Sun, it would be necessary to admit that the stars
are suns also. If the Earth's orbit, as seen from a star, were reduced
to a point, then the Sun, which occupies its centre, would be reduced to
a point of light also, and, when observed from a star of equal
brilliancy and magnitude, would have the same resemblance that the star
has when viewed from the Earth, which may be regarded as being in
proximity to the Sun. Tycho Brahe would not admit the accuracy of these
conclusions, which were too bewildering and overwhelming for his mental
conception.

But the investigations of later astronomers disclosed the fact that the
heavenly bodies are situated at distances more remote from each other
than had been previously imagined, and that the reasons which led Tycho
to reject the Copernican theory were based upon erroneous conclusions,
and could, with greater aptitude, be employed in its support. It was
ascertained that the distance of the Sun from the Earth, which at
different periods was surmised to be ten, twenty, and forty millions of
miles, was much greater than had been previously estimated. Later
calculations determined it to be not less than eighty millions of miles,
and, according to the most recent observations, the distance of the Sun
from the Earth is believed to be about ninety-three millions of miles.

Having once ascertained the distance between the Earth and the Sun,
astronomers were enabled to determine with greater facility the
distances of other heavenly bodies.

It was now known that the diameter of the Earth's orbit exceeded 183
millions of miles, and yet, with a base line of such enormous length,
and with instruments of the most perfect construction, astronomers were
only able to perceive the minutest appreciable alteration in the
