in and looked at us. There were other tanks filled with different kinds
of fishes all round the walls of the big room. And the crowds would go
from tank to tank, looking in at us through the glass--with their mouths
open, like half-witted flounders. We got so sick of it that we used
to open our mouths back at them; and this they seemed to think highly
comical.

"One day my sister said to me, 'Think you, Brother, that these strange
creatures who have captured us can talk?'

"'Surely,' said I, 'have you not noticed that some talk with the lips
only, some with the whole face, and yet others discourse with the hands?
When they come quite close to the glass you can hear them. Listen!'

"At that moment a female, larger than the rest, pressed her nose up
against the glass, pointed at me and said to her young behind her, 'Oh,
look, here's a queer one!'

"And then we noticed that they nearly always said this when they looked
in. And for a long time we thought that such was the whole extent of the
language, this being a people of but few ideas. To help pass away the
weary hours we learned it by heart, 'Oh, look, here's a queer one!' But
we never got to know what it meant. Other phrases, however, we did get
the meaning of; and we even learned to read a little in man-talk. Many
big signs there were, set up upon the walls; and when we saw that the
keepers stopped the people from spitting and smoking, pointed to these
signs angrily and read them out loud, we knew then that these writings
signified, 'No Smoking and Don't Spit.' Then in the evenings, after the
crowd had gone, the same aged male with one leg of wood, swept up the
peanut-shells with a broom every night. And while he was so doing he
always whistled the same tune to himself. This melody we rather liked;
and we learned that too by heart--thinking it was part of the language.

"Thus a whole year went by in this dismal place. Some days new fishes
were brought in to the other tanks; and other days old fishes were taken
out. At first we had hoped we would only be kept here for a while, and
that after we had been looked at sufficiently we would be returned to
freedom and the sea. But as month after month went by, and we were left
undisturbed, our hearts grew heavy within our prison-walls of glass and
we spoke to one another less and less.

"One day, when the crowd was thickest in the big room, a woman with a
red face fainted from the heat. I watched through the glass and saw that
the rest of the people got highly excited--though to me it did not seem
to be a matter of very great importance. They threw cold water on her
and carried her out into the open air.

"This made me think mightily; and presently a great idea burst upon me.

"'Sister,' I said, turning to poor Clippa who was sulking at the bottom
of our prison trying to hide behind a stone from the stupid gaze of the
children who thronged about our tank, 'supposing that we pretended we
were sick: do you think they would take us also from this stuffy house?'

"'Brother,' said she wearily, 'that they might do. But most likely they
would throw us on a rubbish-heap, where we would die in the hot sun.'

"'But,' said I, 'why should they go abroad to seek a rubbish-heap,
when the harbor is so close? While we were being brought here I saw men
throwing their rubbish into the water. If they would only throw us also
there, we could quickly reach the sea.'

"'The Sea!' murmured poor Clippa with a faraway look in her eyes (she
had fine eyes, had my sister, Clippa). 'How like a dream it sounds--the
Sea! Oh brother, will we ever swim in it again, think you? Every night
as I lie awake on the floor of this evil-smelling dungeon I hear its
hearty voice ringing in my ears. How I have longed for it! Just to feel
it once again, the nice, big, wholesome homeliness of it all! To jump,
just to jump from the crest of an Atlantic wave, laughing in the trade
wind's spindrift, down into the blue-green swirling trough! To chase
the shrimps on a summer evening, when the sky is red and the light's all
pink within the foam! To lie on the top, in the doldrums' noonday calm,
and warm your tummy in the tropic sun! To wander hand in hand once
more through the giant seaweed forests of the Indian Ocean, seeking the
delicious eggs of the pop-pop! To play hide-and-seek among the castles
of the coral towns with their pearl and jasper windows spangling the
floor of the Spanish Main! To picnic in the anemone-meadows, dim blue
and lilac-gray, that lie in the lowlands beyond the South Sea Garden!
To throw somersaults on the springy sponge-beds of the Mexican Gulf! To
poke about among the dead ships and see what wonders and adventures lie
inside!--And then, on winter nights when the Northeaster whips the water
into froth, to swoop down and down to get away from the cold, down to
where the water's warm and dark, down and still down, till we spy the
twinkle of the fire-eels far below where our friends and cousins sit
chatting round the Council Grotto--chatting, Brother, over the news and
gossip of THE SEA!... Oh--'

"And then she broke down completely, sniffling.

"'Stop it!' I said. 'You make me homesick. Look here: let's pretend
we're sick--or better still, let's pretend we're dead; and see what
happens. If they throw us on a rubbish-heap and we fry in the sun, we'll
not be much worse off than we are here in this smelly prison. What do
you say? Will you risk it?'

"'I will,' she said--'and gladly.'

"So next morning two fidgits were found by the keeper floating on the
top of the water in their tank, stiff and dead. We gave a mighty good
imitation of dead fish--although I say it myself. The keeper ran and
got the old gentlemen with spectacles and whiskers. They threw up their
hands in horror when they saw us. Lifting us carefully out of the water
they laid us on wet cloths. That was the hardest part of all. If you're
a fish and get taken out of the water you have to keep opening and
shutting your mouth to breathe at all--and even that you can't keep up
for long. And all this time we had to stay stiff as sticks and breathe
silently through half-closed lips.

"Well, the old fellows poked us and felt us and pinched us till I
thought they'd never be done. Then, when their backs were turned a
moment, a wretched cat got up on the table and nearly ate us. Luckily
the old men turned round in time and shooed her away. You may be sure
though that we took a couple of good gulps of air while they weren't
looking; and that was the only thing that saved us from choking. I
wanted to whisper to Clippa to be brave and stick it out. But I couldn't
even do that; because, as you know, most kinds of fish-talk cannot be
heard--not even a shout--unless you're under water.

"Then, just as we were about to give it up and let on that we were
alive, one of the old men shook his head sadly, lifted us up and carried
us out of the building.

"'Now for it!' I thought to myself. 'We'll soon know our fate: liberty
or the garbage-can.'

"Outside, to our unspeakable horror, he made straight for a large
ash-barrel which stood against the wall on the other side of a yard.
Most happily for us, however, while he was crossing this yard a very
dirty man with a wagon and horses drove up and took the ash-barrel away.
I suppose it was his property.

"Then the old man looked around for some other place to throw us. He
seemed about to cast us upon the ground. But he evidently thought
that this would make the yard untidy and he desisted. The suspense was
terrible. He moved outside the yard-gate and my heart sank once more as
I saw that he now intended to throw us in the gutter of the roadway. But
(fortune was indeed with us that day), a large man in, blue clothes and
silver buttons stopped him in the nick of time. Evidently, from the way
the large man lectured and waved a short thick stick, it was against the
rules of the town to throw dead fish in the streets.

"At last, to our unutterable joy, the old man turned and moved off with
us towards the harbor. He walked so slowly, muttering to himself all the
way and watching the man in blue out of the corner of his eye, that I
wanted to bite his finger to make him hurry up. Both Clippa and I were
actually at our last gasp.

"Finally he reached the sea-wall and giving us one last sad look he
dropped us into the waters of the harbor.

"Never had we realized anything like the thrill of that moment, as we
felt the salt wetness close over our heads. With one flick of our tails
we came to life again. The old man was so surprised that he fell right
into the water, almost on top of us. From this he was rescued by a
sailor with a boat-hook; and the last we saw of him, the man in blue was
dragging him away by the coat-collar, lecturing him again. Apparently
it was also against the rules of the town to throw dead fish into the
harbor.

"But we?--What time or thought had we for his troubles? WE WERE FREE!
In lightning leaps, in curving spurts, in crazy zig-zags--whooping,
shrieking with delight, we sped for home and the open sea!

"That is all of my story and I will now, as I promised last night, try
to answer any questions you may ask about the sea, on condition that I
am set at liberty as soon as you have done."


The Doctor: "Is there any part of the sea deeper than that known as the
Nero Deep--I mean the one near the Island of Guam?"

The Fidgit: "Why, certainly. There's one much deeper than that near the
mouth of the Amazon River. But it's small and hard to find. We call it
'The Deep Hole.' And there's another in the Antarctic Sea."

The Doctor: "Can you talk any shellfish language yourself?"

The Fidgit: "No, not a word. We regular fishes don't have anything to do
with the shellfish. We consider them a low class."

The Doctor: "But when you're near them, can you hear the sound they make
talking--I mean without necessarily understanding what they say?"

The Fidgit: "Only with the very largest ones. Shellfish have such weak
small voices it is almost impossible for any but their own kind to hear
them. But with the bigger ones it is different. They make a sad, booming
noise, rather like an iron pipe being knocked with a stone--only not
nearly so loud of course."

The Doctor: "I am most anxious to get down to the bottom of the sea--to
study many things. But we land animals, as you no doubt know, are unable
to breathe under water. Have you any ideas that might help me?"

The Fidgit: "I think that for both your difficulties the best thing for
you to do would be to try and get hold of the Great Glass Sea Snail."

The Doctor: "Er--who, or what, is the Great Glass Sea Snail?"

The Fidgit: "He is an enormous salt-water snail, one of the winkle
family, but as large as a big house. He talks quite loudly--when he
speaks, but this is not often. He can go to any part of the ocean, at
all depths because he doesn't have to be afraid of any creature in the
sea. His shell is made of transparent mother-o'-pearl so that you can
see through it; but it's thick and strong. When he is out of his shell
and he carries it empty on his back, there is room in it for a wagon
and a pair of horses. He has been seen carrying his food in it when
traveling."

The Doctor: "I feel that that is just the creature I have been looking
for. He could take me and my assistant inside his shell and we could
explore the deepest depths in safety. Do you think you could get him for
me?"

The Fidgit: "Alas! no. I would willingly if I could; but he is hardly
ever seen by ordinary fish. He lives at the bottom of the Deep Hole, and
seldom comes out--And into the Deep Hole, the lower waters of which are
muddy, fishes such as we are afraid to go."

The Doctor: "Dear me! That's a terrible disappointment. Are there many
of this kind of snail in the sea?"

The Fidgit: "Oh no. He is the only one in existence, since his second
wife died long, long ago. He is the last of the Giant Shellfish. He
belongs to past ages when the whales were land-animals and all that.
They say he is over seventy thousand years old."

The Doctor: "Good Gracious, what wonderful things he could tell me! I do
wish I could meet him."

The Fidgit: "Were there any more questions you wished to ask me? This
water in your tank is getting quite warm and sickly. I'd like to be put
back into the sea as soon as you can spare me."

The Doctor: "Just one more thing: when Christopher Columbus crossed the
Atlantic in 1492, he threw overboard two copies of his diary sealed up
in barrels. One of them was never found. It must have sunk. I would like
to get it for my library. Do you happen to know where it is?"

The Fidgit: "Yes, I do. That too is in the Deep Hole. When the barrel
sank the currents drifted it northwards down what we call the Orinoco
Slope, till it finally disappeared into the Deep Hole. If it was any
other part of the sea I'd try and get it for you; but not there."

The Doctor: "Well, that is all, I think. I hate to put you back into the
sea, because I know that as soon as I do, I'll think of a hundred other
questions I wanted to ask you. But I must keep my promise. Would
you care for anything before you go?--it seems a cold day--some
cracker-crumbs or something?"

The Fidgit: "No, I won't stop. All I want just at present is fresh
sea-water."

The Doctor: "I cannot thank you enough for all the information you have
given me. You have been very helpful and patient."

The Fidgit: "Pray do not mention it. It has been a real pleasure to
be of assistance to the great John Dolittle. You are, as of course
you know, already quite famous among the better class of fishes.
Goodbye!--and good luck to you, to your ship and to all your plans!"


The Doctor carried the listening-tank to a porthole, opened it and
emptied the tank into the sea. "Good-bye!" he murmured as a faint splash
reached us from without.

I dropped my pencil on the table and leaned back with a sigh. My fingers
were so stiff with writers' cramp that I felt as though I should never
be able to open my hand again. But I, at least, had had a night's sleep.
As for the poor Doctor, he was so weary that he had hardly put the tank
back upon the table and dropped into a chair, when his eyes closed and
he began to snore.

In the passage outside Polynesia scratched angrily at the door. I rose
and let her in.

"A nice state of affairs!" she stormed. "What sort of a ship is this?
There's that colored man upstairs asleep under the wheel; the Doctor
asleep down here; and you making pot-hooks in a copy-book with a pencil!
Expect the ship to steer herself to Brazil? We're just drifting around
the sea like an empty bottle--and a week behind time as it is. What's
happened to you all?"

She was so angry that her voice rose to a scream. But it would have
taken more than that to wake the Doctor.

I put the note-book carefully in a drawer and went on deck to take the
wheel.




THE THIRD CHAPTER. BAD WEATHER

AS soon as I had the Curlew swung round upon her course again I noticed
something peculiar: we were not going as fast as we had been. Our
favorable wind had almost entirely disappeared.

This, at first, we did not worry about, thinking that at any moment it
might spring up again. But the whole day went by; then two days; then a
week,--ten days, and the wind grew no stronger. The Curlew just dawdled
along at the speed of a toddling babe.

I now saw that the Doctor was becoming uneasy. He kept getting out his
sextant (an instrument which tells you what part of the ocean you are
in) and making calculations. He was forever looking at his maps and
measuring distances on them. The far edge of the sea, all around us, he
examined with his telescope a hundred times a day.

"But Doctor," I said when I found him one afternoon mumbling to himself
about the misty appearance of the sky, "it wouldn't matter so much would
it, if we did take a little longer over the trip? We've got plenty to
eat on board now; and the Purple Bird-of-Paradise will know that we have
been delayed by something that we couldn't help."

"Yes, I suppose so," he said thoughtfully. "But I hate to keep her
waiting. At this season of the year she generally goes to the Peruvian
mountains--for her health. And besides, the good weather she prophesied
is likely to end any day now and delay us still further. If we could
only keep moving at even a fair speed, I wouldn't mind. It's this
hanging around, almost dead still, that gets me restless--Ah, here comes
a wind--Not very strong--but maybe it'll grow."

A gentle breeze from the Northeast came singing through the ropes; and
we smiled up hopefully at the Curlew's leaning masts.

"We've only got another hundred and fifty miles to make, to sight the
coast of Brazil," said the Doctor. "If that wind would just stay with
us, steady, for a full day we'd see land."

But suddenly the wind changed, swung to the East, then back to the
Northeast--then to the North. It came in fitful gusts, as though it
hadn't made up its mind which way to blow; and I was kept busy at the
wheel, swinging the Curlew this way and that to keep the right side of
it.

Presently we heard Polynesia, who was in the rigging keeping a look-out
for land or passing ships, screech down to us,

"Bad weather coming. That jumpy wind is an ugly sign. And look!--over
there in the East--see that black line, low down? If that isn't a
storm I'm a land-lubber. The gales round here are fierce, when they do
blow--tear your canvas out like paper. You take the wheel, Doctor:
it'll need a strong arm if it's a real storm. I'll go wake Bumpo and
Chee-Chee. This looks bad to me. We'd best get all the sail down right
away, till we see how strong she's going to blow."

Indeed the whole sky was now beginning to take on a very threatening
look. The black line to the eastward grew blacker as it came nearer and
nearer. A low, rumbly, whispering noise went moaning over the sea. The
water which had been so blue and smiling turned to a ruffled ugly
gray. And across the darkening sky, shreds of cloud swept like tattered
witches flying from the storm.

I must confess I was frightened. You see I had only so far seen the
sea in friendly moods: sometimes quiet and lazy; sometimes laughing,
venturesome and reckless; sometimes brooding and poetic, when moonbeams
turned her ripples into silver threads and dreaming snowy night-clouds
piled up fairy-castles in the sky. But as yet I had not known, or even
guessed at, the terrible strength of the Sea's wild anger.

When that storm finally struck us we leaned right over flatly on our
side, as though some in-visible giant had slapped the poor Curlew on the
cheek.

After that things happened so thick and so fast that what with the wind
that stopped your breath, the driving, blinding water, the deafening
noise and the rest, I haven't a very clear idea of how our shipwreck
came about.

I remember seeing the sails, which we were now trying to roll up upon
the deck, torn out of our hands by the wind and go overboard like a
penny balloon--very nearly carrying Chee-Chee with them. And I have a
dim recollection of Polynesia screeching somewhere for one of us to go
downstairs and close the port-holes.

In spite of our masts being bare of sail we were now scudding along to
the southward at a great pace. But every once in a while huge gray-black
waves would arise from under the ship's side like nightmare monsters,
swell and climb, then crash down upon us, pressing us into the sea; and
the poor Curlew would come to a standstill, half under water, like a
gasping, drowning pig.

While I was clambering along towards the wheel to see the Doctor,
clinging like a leech with hands and legs to the rails lest I be blown
overboard, one of these tremendous seas tore loose my hold, filled my
throat with water and swept me like a cork the full length of the deck.
My head struck a door with an awful bang. And then I fainted.




THE FOURTH CHAPTER. WRECKED!

WHEN I awoke I was very hazy in my head. The sky was blue and the sea
was calm. At first I thought that I must have fallen asleep in the sun
on the deck of the Curlew. And thinking that I would be late for my turn
at the wheel, I tried to rise to my feet. I found I couldn't; my arms
were tied to something behind me with a piece of rope. By twisting my
neck around I found this to be a mast, broken off short. Then I realized
that I wasn't sitting on a ship at all; I was only sitting on a piece
of one. I began to feel uncomfortably scared. Screwing up my eyes, I
searched the rim of the sea North, East, South and West: no land: no
ships; nothing was in sight. I was alone in the ocean!

At last, little by little, my bruised head began to remember what had
happened: first, the coming of the storm; the sails going overboard;
then the big wave which had banged me against the door. But what had
become of the Doctor and the others? What day was this, to-morrow or the
day after?--And why was I sitting on only part of a ship?

Working my hand into my pocket, I found my penknife and cut the rope
that tied me. This reminded me of a shipwreck story which Joe had once
told me, of a captain who had tied his son to a mast in order that he
shouldn't be washed overboard by the gale. So of course it must have
been the Doctor who had done the same to me.

But where was he?

The awful thought came to me that the Doctor and the rest of them
must be drowned, since there was no other wreckage to be seen
upon the waters. I got to my feet and stared around the sea
again--Nothing--nothing but water and sky!

Presently a long way off I saw the small dark shape of a bird skimming
low down over the swell. When it came quite close I saw it was a Stormy
Petrel. I tried to talk to it, to see if it could give me news. But
unluckily I hadn't learned much sea-bird language and I couldn't even
attract its attention, much less make it understand what I wanted.

Twice it circled round my raft, lazily, with hardly a flip of the wing.
And I could not help wondering, in spite of the distress I was in,
where it had spent last night--how it, or any other living thing,
had weathered such a smashing storm. It made me realize the great big
difference between different creatures; and that size and strength are
not everything. To this petrel, a frail little thing of feathers, much
smaller and weaker than I, the Sea could do anything she liked, it
seemed; and his only answer was a lazy, saucy flip of the wing! HE was
the one who should be called the ABLE SEAMAN. For, come raging gale,
