solution of calcium acid carbonate is heated, completes itself.

12. How could you distinguish between carbonates and sulphites?

13. How could you distinguish between oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen,
nitrous oxide, and carbon dioxide?

14. Could a solution of sodium hydroxide be substituted for the solution
of calcium hydroxide in testing for carbon dioxide?

15. What weight of sodium hydroxide is necessary to neutralize the
carbonic acid formed by the action of hydrochloric acid on 100 g. of
calcium carbonate?

16. What weight of calcium carbonate would be necessary to prepare
sufficient carbon dioxide to saturate 10 l. of water at 15 deg. and under
ordinary pressure?

17. On the supposition that calcium carbide costs 12 cents a kilogram,
what would be the cost of an amount sufficient to generate 100 l. of
acetylene measured at 20 deg. and 740 mm.?

18. How would the volume of a definite amount of carbon monoxide compare
with the volume of carbon dioxide formed by its combustion, the
measurements being made under the same conditions?




CHAPTER XVIII

FLAMES,--ILLUMINANTS


~Conditions necessary for flames.~ It has been seen that when two
substances unite chemically, with the production of light and heat, the
act of union is called combustion. When one of the substances undergoing
combustion remains solid at the temperature occasioned by the
combustion, light may be given off, but there is no flame. Thus iron
wire burning in oxygen throws off a shower of sparks and is brilliantly
incandescent, but no flame is seen. When, however, both of the
substances are gases or vapors at the temperature reached in the
combustion, the act of union is accompanied by a flame.

~Flames from burning liquids or solids.~ Many substances which are liquids
or solids at ordinary temperatures burn with a flame because the heat of
combustion vaporizes them slowly, and the flame is due to the union of
this vapor with the gas supporting the combustion.

~Supporter of combustion.~ That gas which surrounds the flame and
constitutes the atmosphere in which the combustion occurs is said to
support the combustion. The other gas which issues into this atmosphere
is said to be the combustible gas. Thus, in the ordinary combustion of
coal gas in the air the coal gas is said to be combustible, while the
air is regarded as the supporter of combustion. These terms are entirely
relative, however, for a jet of air issuing into an atmosphere of coal
gas will burn when ignited, the coal gas supporting the combustion.
Ordinarily, when we say that a gas is combustible we mean that it is
combustible in an atmosphere of air.

[Illustration: Fig. 62]

~Either gas may be the supporter of combustion.~ That the terms
_combustible_ and _supporter of combustion_ are merely relative may be
shown in the following way: A lamp chimney A is fitted with a cork and
glass tubes, as shown in Fig. 62. The tube C should have a diameter of
from 12 to 15 mm. A thin sheet of asbestos in which is cut a circular
opening about 2 cm. in diameter is placed over the top of the chimney.
The opening in the asbestos is closed with the palm of the hand, and gas
is admitted to the chimney through the tube B. The air in the chimney
is soon expelled through the tube C, and the gas itself is then
lighted at the lower end of this tube. The hand is now removed from the
opening in the asbestos, when the flame at the end of the tube at once
rises and appears at the end within the chimney, as shown in the figure.
The excess of coal gas now escapes from the opening in the asbestos and
may be lighted. The flame at the top of the asbestos board is due to the
combustion of coal gas in air, while the flame within the chimney is due
to the combustion of air in coal gas, the air being drawn up through the
tube by the escaping gas.

~Appearance of flames.~ The flame caused by the union of hydrogen and
oxygen is almost colorless and invisible. Chlorine and hydrogen combine
with a pale violet flame, carbon monoxide burns in oxygen with a blue
flame, while ammonia burns with a deep yellow flame. The color and
appearance of flames are therefore often quite characteristic of the
particular combustion which occasions them.

~Structure of flames.~ When the gas undergoing combustion issues from a
round opening into an atmosphere of the gas supporting combustion, as is
the case with the burning Bunsen burner (Fig. 63), the flame is
generally conical in outline. It consists of several distinct cones,
one within the other, the boundary between them being marked by
differences of color or luminosity. In the simplest flame, of which
hydrogen burning in oxygen is a good example, these cones are two in
number,--an inner one, formed by unburned gas, and an outer one, usually
more or less luminous, consisting of the combining gases. This outer one
is in turn surrounded by a third envelope of the products of combustion;
this envelope is sometimes invisible, as in the present case, but is
sometimes faintly luminous. The lower part of the inner cone of the
flame is quite cool and consists of unburned gas. Toward the top of the
inner cone the gas has become heated to a high temperature by the
burning envelope surrounding it. On reaching the supporter of combustion
on the outside it is far above its kindling temperature, and combustion
follows with the evolution of much heat. The region of combustion just
outside the inner cone is therefore the hottest part of the flame.

[Illustration: Fig. 63]

~Oxidizing and reducing flames.~ Since the tip of the outside cone
consists of very hot products of combustion mixed with oxygen from the
air, a substance capable of oxidation placed in this part of the flame
becomes very hot and is easily oxidized. The oxygen with which it
combines comes, of course, from the atmosphere, and not from the
products of combustion. This outer tip of the flame is called the
_oxidizing flame_.

At the tip of the inner cone the conditions are quite different. This
region consists of a highly heated combustible gas, which has not yet
reached a supply of oxygen.

If a substance rich in oxygen, such as a metallic oxide, is placed in
this region of the flame, the heated gases combine with its oxygen and
the substance is reduced. This part of the flame is called the _reducing
flame_. These flames are used in testing certain substances, especially
minerals. For this purpose they are produced by blowing into a small
luminous Bunsen flame from one side through a blowpipe. This is a tube
of the shape shown in Fig. 64. The flame is directed in any desired way
and has the oxidizing and reducing regions very clearly marked (Fig.
65). It is non-luminous from the same causes which render the open
Bunsen burner flame non-luminous, the gases from the lungs serving to
furnish oxygen and to dilute the combustible gas.

[Illustration: Fig. 64]

[Illustration: Fig. 65]

~Luminosity of flames.~ The luminosity of flames is due to a number of
distinct causes, and may therefore be increased or diminished in several
ways.

1. _Presence of solid matter._ The most obvious of these causes is the
presence in the flame of incandescent solid matter. Thus chalk dust
sifted into a non-luminous flame renders it luminous. When hydrocarbons
form a part of the combustible gas, as they do in nearly all
illuminating gases and oils, some carbon is usually set free in the
process of combustion. This is made very hot by the flame and becomes
incandescent, giving out light. In a well-regulated flame it is
afterward burned up, but when the supply of oxygen is insufficient it
escapes from the flame as lampblack or soot. That it is temporarily
present in a well-burning luminous flame may be demonstrated by holding
a cold object, such as a small evaporating dish, in the flame for a few
seconds. This cold object cools the carbon below its kindling
temperature, and it is deposited on the object as soot.

2. _Pressure._ A second factor in the luminosity of flames is the
pressure under which the gases are burning. Under increased pressure
there is more matter in a given volume of a gas, and the chemical action
is more energetic than when the gases are rarefied. Consequently there
is more heat and light. A candle burning on a high mountain gives less
light than when it burns at the sea level.

If the gas is diluted with a non-combustible gas, the effect is the same
as if it is rarefied, for under these conditions there is less
combustible gas in a given volume.

3. _Temperature._ The luminosity also depends upon the temperature
attained in the combustion. In general the hotter the flame the greater
the luminosity; hence cooling the gases before combustion diminishes the
luminosity of the flame they will make, because it diminishes the
temperature attained in the combustion. Thus the luminosity of the
Bunsen flame is largely diminished by the air drawn up with the gas.
This is due in part to the fact that the burning gas is diluted and
cooled by the air drawn in. The oxygen thus introduced into the flame
also causes the combustion of the hot particles of carbon which would
otherwise tend to make the flame luminous.

~Illuminating and fuel gases.~ A number of mixtures of combustible gases,
consisting largely of carbon compounds and hydrogen, find extensive use
for the production of light and heat. The three chief varieties are coal
gas, water gas, and natural gas. The use of acetylene gas has already
been referred to.

~Coal gas.~ Coal gas is made by heating bituminous coal in large retorts
out of contact with the air. Soft or bituminous coal contains, in
addition to large amounts of carbon, considerable quantities of
compounds of hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulphur. When distilled the
nitrogen is liberated partly in the form of ammonia and cyanides and
partly as free nitrogen gas; the sulphur is converted into hydrogen
sulphide, carbon disulphide, and oxides of sulphur; the oxygen into
water and oxides of carbon. The remaining hydrogen is set free partly
as hydrogen and partly in combination with carbon in the form of
hydrocarbons. The most important of these is methane, with smaller
quantities of many others, some of which are liquids or solids at
ordinary temperatures. The great bulk of the carbon remains behind as
coke and retort carbon.

~The manufacture of coal gas.~ In the manufacture of coal gas it is
necessary to separate from the volatile constituents formed by the
heating of the coal all those substances which are either solid or
liquid at ordinary temperature, since these would clog the gas pipes.
Certain gaseous constituents, such as hydrogen sulphide and ammonia,
must also be removed. The method used to accomplish this is shown in
Fig. 66. The coal is heated in air-tight retorts illustrated by A. The
volatile products escape through the pipe X and bubble into the tarry
liquid in the large pipe B, known as the _hydraulic main_, which runs
at right angles to the retorts. Here is deposited the greater portion of
the solid and liquid products, forming a tarry mass known as _coal tar_.
Much of the ammonia also remains dissolved in this liquid. The partially
purified gas then passes into the pipes C, which serve to cool it and
further remove the solid and liquid matter. The gas then passes into
D, which is filled with coke over which a jet of water is sprayed. The
water still further cools the gas and at the same time partially removes
such gaseous products as hydrogen sulphide and ammonia, which are
soluble in water. In E the gas passes over some material such as lime,
which removes the last portions of the sulphur compounds as well as much
of the carbon dioxide present. From E the gas passes into the large
gas holder F, from which it is distributed through pipes to the places
where it is burned.

[Illustration: Fig. 66]

     One ton of good gas coal yields approximately 10,000 cu. ft. of
     gas, 1400 lb. of coke, 120 lb. of tar, and 20 gal. of
     ammoniacal liquor.

     Not only is the ammonia obtained in the manufacture of the gas
     of great importance, but the coal tar also serves as the source
     of many very useful substances, as will be explained in Chapter
     XXXII.

~Water gas.~ Water gas is essentially a mixture of carbon monoxide and
hydrogen. It is made by passing steam over very hot anthracite coal,
when the reaction shown in the following equation takes place:

    C + H_{2}O = CO + 2H.

When required merely to produce heat the gas is at once ready for use.
When made for illuminating purposes it must be enriched, that is,
illuminants must be added, since both carbon monoxide and hydrogen burn
with non-luminous flames. This is accomplished by passing it into
heaters containing highly heated petroleum oils. The gas takes up
hydrocarbon gases formed in the decomposition of the petroleum oils,
which make it burn with a luminous flame.

Water gas is very effective as a fuel, since both carbon monoxide and
hydrogen burn with very hot flames. It has little odor and is very
poisonous. Its use is therefore attended with some risk, since leaks in
pipes are very likely to escape notice.

~Natural gas.~ This substance, so abundant in many localities, varies much
in composition, but is composed principally of methane. When used for
lighting purposes it is usually burned in a burner resembling an open
Bunsen, the illumination being furnished by an incandescent mantle. This
is the case in the familiar Welsbach burner. Contrary to statements
frequently made, natural gas contains no free hydrogen.


TABLE SHOWING COMPOSITION OF GASES

=====================+================+========+========+==========
                     |  PENNSYLVANIA  |  COAL  | WATER  | ENRICHED
                     |    NATURAL     |   GAS  |  GAS   |  WATER
                     |      GAS       |        |        |   GAS
---------------------+----------------+--------+--------+----------
Hydrogen             |                |  41.3  | 52.88  |  30.00
Methane              |    90.64       |  43.6  |  2.16  |  24.00
Illuminants          |                |   3.9  |        |  12.05
Carbon monoxide      |                |   6.4  | 36.80  |  29.00
Carbon dioxide       |     0.30       |   2.0  |  3.47  |   0.30
Nitrogen             |     9.06       |   1.2  |  4.69  |   2.50
Oxygen               |                |   0.3  |        |   1.50
Hydrocarbon vapors   |                |   1.5  |        |   1.50
=====================+================+========+========+==========

     These are analyses of actual samples, and may be taken as about
     the average for the various kinds of gases. Any one of these
     may vary considerably. The nitrogen and oxygen in most cases is
     due to a slight admixture of air which is difficult to exclude
     entirely in the manufacture and handling of gases.

~Fuels.~ A variety of substances are used as fuels, the most important of
them being wood, coal, and the various gases mentioned above. Wood
consists mainly of compounds of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. The
composition of coal and the fuel gases has been given. Since these fuels
are composed principally of carbon and hydrogen or their compounds, the
chief products of combustion are carbon dioxide and water. The practice
of heating rooms with portable gas or oil stoves with no provision for
removing the products of combustion is to be condemned, since the carbon
dioxide is generated in sufficient quantities to render the air unfit
for breathing. Rooms so heated also become very damp from the large
amount of water vapor formed in the combustion, and which in cold
weather condenses on the window glass, causing the glass to "sweat."
Both coal and wood contain a certain amount of mineral substances which
constitute the ashes.

~The electric furnace.~ In recent years electric furnaces have come into
wide use in operations requiring a very high temperature. Temperatures
as high as 3500 deg. can be easily reached, whereas the hottest oxyhydrogen
flame is not much above 2000 deg.. These furnaces are constructed on one of
two general principles.

[Illustration: Fig. 67]

1. _Arc furnaces._ In the one type the source of heat is an electric arc
formed between carbon electrodes separated a little from each other, as
shown in Fig. 67. The substance to be heated is placed in a vessel,
usually a graphite crucible, just below the arc. The electrodes and
crucible are surrounded by materials which fuse with great difficulty,
such as magnesium oxide, the walls of the furnace being so shaped as to
reflect the heat downwards upon the contents of the crucible.

[Illustration: Fig. 68]

2. _Resistance furnaces._ In the other type of furnace the heat is
generated by the resistance offered to the current in its passage
through the furnace. In its simplest form it may be represented by Fig.
68. The furnace is merely a rectangular box built up of loose bricks.
The electrodes E, each consisting of a bundle of carbon rods, are
introduced through the sides of the furnace. The materials to be heated,
C, are filled into the furnace up to the electrodes, and a layer of
broken coke is arranged so as to extend from one electrode to the other.
More of the charge is then placed on top of the coke. In passing through
the broken coke the electrical current encounters great resistance. This
generates great heat, and the charge surrounding the coke is brought to
a very high temperature. The advantage of this type of furnace is that
the temperature can be regulated to any desired intensity.


EXERCISES

1. Why does charcoal usually burn with no flame? How do you account for
the flame sometimes observed when it burns?

2. How do you account for the fact that a candle burns with a flame?

3. What two properties must the mantle used in the Welsbach lamp
possess?

4. (a) In what respects does the use of the Welsbach mantle resemble
that of lime in the calcium light? (b) If the mantle were made of
carbon, would it serve the same purpose?

5. Would anthracite coal be suitable for the manufacture of coal gas?

6. How could you prove the formation of carbon dioxide and water in the
combustion of illuminating gases?

7. Suggest a probable way in which natural gas has been formed.

8. Coal frequently contains a sulphide of iron. (a) What two sulphur
compounds are likely to be formed when gas is made from such coal? (b)
Suggest some suitable method for the removal of these compounds.

9. Why does the use of the bellows on the blacksmith's forge cause a
more intense heat?

10. What volume of oxygen is necessary to burn 100 l. of marsh gas and
what volume of carbon dioxide would be formed, all of the gases being
measured under standard conditions?

11. Suppose a cubic meter of Pennsylvania natural gas, measured under
standard conditions, were to be burned. How much water by weight would
result?




CHAPTER XIX

MOLECULAR WEIGHTS, ATOMIC WEIGHTS, FORMULAS


~Introduction.~ In the chapter on The Atomic Theory, it was shown that if
it were true that two elements uniting to form a compound always
combined in the ratio of one atom of one element to one atom of the
other element, it would be a very easy matter to decide upon figures
which would represent the relative weights of the different atoms. It
would only be necessary to select some one element as a standard and
determine the weight of every element which combines with a definite
weight (say 1 g.) of the standard element. The figures so obtained would
evidently represent the relative weights of the atoms.

But the law of multiple proportion at once reminds us that two elements
may unite in several proportions; and there is no simple way to
determine the number of atoms present in the molecule of any compound.
Consequently the problem of deciding upon the relative atomic weights is
not an easy one. To the solution of this problem we must now turn.

~Dalton's method of determining atomic weights.~ When Dalton first
advanced the atomic theory he attempted to solve this problem by very
simple methods. He thought that when only one compound of two elements
is known it is reasonable to suppose that it contains one atom of each
element. He therefore gave the formula HO to water, and HN to ammonia.
When more than two compounds were known he assumed that the most
familiar or the most stable one had the simple formula. He then
determined the atomic weight as explained above. The results he
obtained were contradictory and very far from satisfactory, and it was
soon seen that some other method, resting on much more scientific
grounds, must be found to decide what compounds, if any, have a single
atom of each element present.

~Determination of atomic weights.~ Three distinct steps are involved in
the determination of the atomic weight of an element: (1) determination
of the equivalent, (2) determination of molecular weights of its
compounds, and (3) deduction of the exact atomic weight from the
equivalent and molecular weights.

~1. Determination of the equivalent.~ By the equivalent of an element is
meant the weight of the element which will combine with a fixed weight
of some other element chosen as a standard. It has already been
explained that oxygen has been selected as the standard element for
atomic weights, with a weight of 16. This same standard will serve very
well as a standard for equivalents. _The equivalent of an element is the
weight of the element which will combine with 16 g. of oxygen._ Thus 16
g. of oxygen combines with 16.03 g. of sulphur, 65.4 g. of zinc, 215.86
g. of silver, 70.9 g. of chlorine. These figures, therefore, represent
the equivalent weights of these elements.

~Relation of atomic weights to equivalents.~ According to the atomic
theory combination always takes place between whole numbers of atoms.
Thus one atom unites with one other, or with two or three; or two atoms
may unite with three, or three with five, and so on.

When oxygen combines with zinc the combination must be between definite
numbers of the two kinds of atoms. Experiment shows that these two
elements combine in the ratio of 16 g. of oxygen to 65.4 g. of zinc. If
one atom of oxygen combines with one atom of zinc, then this ratio must
be the ratio between the weights of the two atoms. If one atom of oxygen
combines with two atoms of zinc, then the ratio between the weights of
the two atoms will be 16: 32.7. If two atoms of oxygen combine with one
atom of zinc, the ratio by weight between the two atoms will be 8: 65.4.
It is evident, therefore, that the real atomic weight of an element must
be some multiple or submultiple of the equivalent; in other words, the
equivalent multiplied by 1/2, 1, 2, or 3 will give the atomic weight.

~Combining weights.~ A very interesting relation holds good between the
equivalents of the various elements. We have just seen that the figures
16.03, 65.4, 215.86, and 70.9 are the equivalents respectively of
sulphur, zinc, silver, and chlorine. These same figures represent the
ratios by weight in which these elements combine among themselves. Thus
215.86 g. of silver combine with 70.9 g. of chlorine and with 2 x 16.03
g. of sulphur. 65.4 g. of zinc combine with 70.9 g. of chlorine and 2 x
16.03 g. of sulphur.

By taking the equivalent or some multiple of it a value can be obtained
for each element which will represent its combining value, and for this
reason is called its _combining weight_. It is important to notice that
the fact that a combining weight can be obtained for each element is not
a part of a theory, but is the direct result of experiment.

~Elements with more than one equivalent.~ It will be remembered that
oxygen combines with hydrogen in two ratios. In one case 16 g. of oxygen
combine with 2.016 g. of hydrogen to form water; in the other 16 g. of
oxygen combine with 1.008 g. of hydrogen to form hydrogen dioxide. The
equivalents of hydrogen are therefore 2.016 and 1.008. Barium combines
with oxygen in two proportions: in barium oxide the proportion is 16 g.
of oxygen to 137.4 g. of barium; in barium dioxide the proportion is 16
g. of oxygen to 68.7 g. of barium.

In each case one equivalent is a simple multiple of the other, so the
fact that there may be two equivalents does not add to the uncertainty.
All we knew before was that the true atomic weight is some multiple of
the equivalent.

~2. The determination of molecular weights.~ To decide the question as to
which multiple of the equivalent correctly represents the atomic weight
of an element, it has been found necessary to devise a method of
determining the molecular weights of compounds containing the element in
question. Since the molecular weight of a compound is merely the sum of
the weights of all the atoms present in it, it would seem to be
impossible to determine the molecular weight of a compound without first
knowing the atomic weights of the constituent atoms, and how many atoms
of each element are present in the molecule. But certain facts have been
discovered which suggest a way in which this can be done.

~Avogadro's hypothesis.~ We have seen that the laws of Boyle, Charles, and
Gay-Lussac apply to all gases irrespective of their chemical character.
This would lead to the inference that the structure of gases must be
quite simple, and that it is much the same in all gases.

In 1811 Avogadro, an Italian physicist, suggested that if we assume all
gases under the same conditions of temperature and pressure to have the
same number of molecules in a given volume, we shall have a probable
explanation of the simplicity of the gas laws. It is difficult to prove
the truth of this hypothesis by a simple experiment, but there are so
many facts known which are in complete harmony with this suggestion that
there is little doubt that it expresses the truth. Avogadro's hypothesis
may be stated thus: _Equal volumes of all gases under the same
conditions of temperature and pressure contain the same number of
molecules._

~Avogadro's hypothesis and molecular weights.~ Assuming that Avogadro's
hypothesis is correct, we have a very simple means for deciding upon the
relative weights of molecules; for if equal volumes of two gases contain
the same number of molecules, the weights of the two volumes must be in
the same ratio as the weights of the individual molecules which they
contain. If we adopt some one gas as a standard, we can express the
weights of all other gases as compared with this one, and the same
figures will express the relative weights of the molecules of which the
gases are composed.

~Oxygen as the standard.~ It is important that the same standard should be
adopted for the determination of molecular weights as has been decided
upon for atomic weights and equivalents, so that the three values may be
in harmony with each other. Accordingly it is best to adopt oxygen as
the standard element with which to compare the molecular weights of
other gases, being careful to keep the oxygen atom equal to 16.

~The oxygen molecule contains two atoms.~ One point must not be
overlooked, however. We desire to have our unit, the oxygen _atom_,
equal to 16. The method of comparing the weights of gases just suggested
compares the molecules of the gases with the _molecule_ of oxygen. Is
the molecule and the atom of oxygen the same thing? This question is
answered by the following considerations.

We have seen that when steam is formed by the union of oxygen and
hydrogen, two volumes of hydrogen combine with one volume of oxygen to
form two volumes of steam. Let us suppose that the one volume of oxygen
contains 100 molecules; then the two volumes of steam must, according
to Avogadro's hypothesis, contain 200 molecules. But each of these 200
molecules must contain at least one atom of oxygen, or 200 in all, and
these 200 atoms came from 100 molecules of oxygen. It follows that each
molecule of oxygen must contain at least two atoms of oxygen.

Evidently this reasoning merely shows that there are _at least_ two
atoms in the oxygen molecule. There may be more than that, but as there
is no evidence to this effect, we assume that the molecule contains two
atoms only.

It is evident that if we wish to retain the value 16 for the atom of
oxygen we must take twice this value, or 32, for the value of the oxygen
molecule, when using it as a standard for molecular weights.

~Determination of the molecular weights of gases from their weights
compared with oxygen.~ Assuming the molecular weight of oxygen to be 32,
Avogadro's hypothesis gives us a ready means for determining the
molecular weight of any other gas, for all that is required is to know
its weight compared with that of an equal volume of oxygen. For example,
1 l. of chlorine is found by experiment to weigh 2.216 times as much as
1 l. of oxygen. The molecular weight of chlorine must therefore be 2.216
x 32, or 70.91.

If, instead of comparing the relative weights of 1 l. of the two gases,
we select such a volume of oxygen as will weigh 32 g., or the weight in
grams corresponding to the molecular weight of the gas, the calculation
is much simplified. It has been found that 32 g. of oxygen, under
standard conditions, measure 22.4 l. This same volume of hydrogen weighs
2.019 g.; of chlorine 70.9 g.; of hydrochloric acid 36.458 g. The
weights of these equal volumes must be proportional to their molecular
weights, and since the weight of the oxygen is the same as the value of
its molecular weight, so too will the weights of the 22.4 l. of the
other gases be equal to the value of their molecular weights.

As a summary we can then make the following statement: _The molecular
weight of any gas may be determined by calculating the weight of 22.4 l.
of the gas, measured under standard conditions._

~Determination of molecular weights from density of gases.~ In an actual
experiment it is easier to determine the density of a gas than the
weight of a definite volume of it. The density of a gas is usually
defined as its weight compared with that of an equal volume of air.
Having determined the density of a gas, its weight compared with oxygen
may be determined by multiplying its density by the ratio between the
weights of air and oxygen. This ratio is 0.9046. To compare it with our
standard for atomic weights we must further multiply it by 32, since the
standard is 1/32 the weight of oxygen molecules. The steps then are
these:

1. Determine the density of the gas (its weight compared with air).

2. Multiply by 0.9046 to make the comparison with oxygen molecules.

3. Multiply by 32 to make the comparison with the unit for atomic
weights.

We have, then, the formula:
