near-sightedly at the crowding Zeudians.

Their reaction to his simple move was remarkable! Hisses of
consternation came from their lipless mouths. They faced each other
uneasily, waving their stubby arms and covering their own eyes as
though suddenly afraid they would lose them.

Taking advantage of their indecision, Joyce and Wichter walked boldly
toward them. They moved aside, forming a reluctant lane. Some of the
Zeudians in the rear shoved to close in on them, but the ones in front
held them back. It wasn't until the two were nearly through that the
lane began to straggle into a threatening circle around them again.
The Zeudians were evidently becoming reassured by the fact that
Wichter continued to see all right in spite of the little strange
creature's alarming act of removing his eyes.

"Do it again," breathed Joyce, perspiration beading his forehead as
the giants moved closed, their fangs tentatively bared for the numbing
poison stroke.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wichter popped his glasses on, then jerked them off with a cry, as
though he were suffering intensely. Once more the Zeudians faltered
and drew back, feeling at their own eyes.

"Run!" cried Joyce. And they raced for the haven of the shell.

The Zeudians swarmed after them, snarling and hissing. Barely ahead of
the nearest, Joyce and Wichter dove into the open panel. They slammed
it closed just as a powerful, stubby arm reached after them. There was
a screaming hiss, and a cold, cartilagenous lump of flesh dropped to
the floor of the shell--half the monster's hand, sheared off between
the sharp edge of the door and the metal hull.

Joyce threw in the generator switch. With a soft roar the water-motor
exploded into action, sending the shell far into the sky.

"When we return," said Joyce, adding a final thousand miles an hour to
their speed before they should fly free of the atmosphere of Zeud, "I
think we'd better come at the head of an army, equipped with air-guns
and explosive bombs."

"And with glasses," added the professor, taking off his spectacles and
gazing at them as though seeing them for the first time.




Four Miles Within

A COMPLETE NOVELETTE

_By Anthony Gilmore_

CHAPTER I

_The Monster of Metal_

[Illustration: The man hurled the empty gun at the monster.]

[Sidenote: Far down into the earth goes a gleaming metal sphere whose
passengers are deadly enemies.]


A strange spherical monster stood in the moonlight on the silent
Mojave Desert. In the ghostly gray of the sand and sage and joshua
trees its metal hide glimmered dully--an amazing object to be found on
that lonely spot. But there was only pride and anticipation in the
eyes of the three people who stood a little way off, looking at it.
For they had constructed the strange sphere, and were soon going to
entrust their lives to it.

"Professor," said one of them, a young man with a cheerful face and a
likable grin, "let's go down now! There's no use waiting till
to-morrow. It's always dark down there, whether it's day or night up
here. Everything is ready."

The white-haired Professor David Guinness smiled tolerantly at the
speaker, his partner, Phil Holmes. "I'm kind of eager to be off,
myself," he admitted. He turned to the third person in the little
group, a dark-haired girl. "What do you say, Sue?"

"Oh, let's, Father!" came the quick reply. "We'd never be able to
sleep to-night, anyway. As Phil says, everything is ready."

"Well, I guess that settles it," Professor Guinness said to the eager
young man.

Phil Holmes' face went aglow with anticipation. "Good!" he cried.
"Good! I'll skip over and get some water. It's barely possible that
it'll be hot down there, in spite of your eloquent logic to the
contrary!" And with the words he caught up a large jug standing
nearby, waved his hand, said: "I'll be right back!" and set out for
the water-hole, situated nearly a mile away from their little camp.
The heavy hush of the desert night settled down once more after he
left.

       *       *       *       *       *

As his figure merged with the shadows in the distance, the elderly
scientist murmured aloud to his daughter:

"You know, it's good to realize that my dream is about to become a
reality. If it hadn't been for Phil.... Or no--I really ought to thank
you, Sue. You're the one responsible for his participation!" And he
smiled fondly at the slender girl by his side.

"Phil joined us just for the scientific interest, and for the thrill
of going four miles down into the earth," she retorted at once, in
spite of the blush her father saw on her face. But he did not insist.
Once more he turned, as to a magnet, to the machine that was his
handiwork.

The fifteen-foot sphere was an earth-borer--Guinness's own invention.
In it he had utilized for the first time for boring purposes the newly
developed atomic disintegrators. Many holes equally spaced over the
sphere were the outlets for the dissolving ray--most of them on the
bottom and alternating with them on the bottom and sides were the
outlets of powerful rocket propulsion tubes, which would enable it to
rise easily from the hole it would presently blast into the earth. A
small, tight-fitting door gave entrance to the double-walled interior,
where, in spite of the space taken up by batteries and mechanisms and
an enclosed gyroscope for keeping the borer on an even keel, there was
room for several people.

The earth-borer had been designed not so much for scientific
investigation as the specific purpose of reaching a rich store of
radium ore buried four miles below the Guinness desert camp. Many
geologists and mining engineers knew that the radium was there, for
their instruments had proven it often; but no one up to then knew how
to get to it. David Guinness did--first. The borer had been
constructed in his laboratory in San Francisco, then dismantled and
freighted to the little desert town of Palmdale, from whence Holmes
had brought the parts to their isolated camp by truck. Strict secrecy
had been kept. Rather than risk assistants they had done all the work
themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fifteen minutes passed by, while the slight figure of the inventor
puttered about the interior of the sphere, brightly lit by a
detachable searchlight, inspecting all mechanisms in preparation for
their descent. Sue stood by the door watching him, now and then
turning to scan the desert for the returning Phil.

It was then, startlingly sudden, that there cracked through the velvet
night the faint, distant sound of a gun. And it came from the
direction of the water-hole.

Sue's face went white, and she trembled. Without a word her father
stepped out of the borer and looked at her.

"That was a gun!" he said. "Phil didn't have one with him, did he?"

"No," Sue whispered. "And--why, there's nobody within miles of here!"

The two looked at each other with alarm and wonder. Then, from one of
the broken patches of scrub that ringed the space in which the borer
stood, came a mocking voice.

"Ah, you're mistaken, Sue," it affirmed. "But that was a gun."

David Guinness jerked around, as did his daughter. The man who had
spoken stood only ten yards away, clearly outlined in the bright
moonlight--a tall, well-built man, standing quite at ease, surveying
them pleasantly. His smile did not change when old Guinness cried:

"Quade! James Quade!"

The man nodded and came slowly forward. He might have been considered
handsome, had it not been for his thin, mocking lips and a swarthy
complexion.

"What are you doing here?" demanded Guinness angrily. "And what do you
mean--'it was a gun?' Have you--"

"Easy, easy--one thing at a time," said Quade, still smiling. "About
the gun--well, your young friend Holmes said, he'd be right back, but
I--I'm afraid he won't be."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sue Guinness's lips formed a frightened word:

"Why?"

Quade made a short movement with his left hand, as is brushing the
query aside. "Let's talk about something more pleasant," he said, and
looked back at the professor. "The radium, and your borer, for
instance. I hear you're all ready to go down."

David Guinness gasped. "How did you know--?" he began, but a surge of
anger choked him, and his fists clenched. He stepped forward. But
something came to life in James Quade's right hand and pointed
menacingly at him. It was the stubby black shape of an automatic.

"Keep back, you old fool!" Quade said harshly. "I don't want to have
to shoot you!"

Unwillingly, Guinness came to a stop. "What have you done with young
Holmes?" he demanded.

"Never mind about him now," said Quade, smiling again. "Perhaps I'll
explain later. At the moment there's something much more interesting
to do. Possibly you'll be surprised to hear it, but we're all going to
take a little ride in this machine of yours, Professor. Down. About
four miles. I'll have to ask you to do the driving. You will, won't
you--without making a fuss?"

Guinness's face worked furiously. "Why, you're crazy, Quade!" he
sputtered. "I certainly won't!"

"No?" asked Quade softly. The automatic he held veered around, till it
was pointing directly at the girl. "I wouldn't want to have to shoot
Sue--say--through the hand...." His finger tightened perceptibly on
the trigger.

"You're mad, man!" Guinness burst out. "You're crazy! What's the
idea--"

"In due time I'll tell you. But now I'll ask you just once more,"
Quade persisted. "Will you enter that borer, or must I--" He broke off
with an expressive shrug.

David Guinness was powerless. He had not the slightest idea what Quade
might be about; the one thought that broke through his fear and anger
was that the man was mad, and had better be humored. He trembled, and
a tight sensation came to his throat at sight of the steady gun
trained on his daughter. He dared not trifle.

"I'll do it," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

James Quade laughed. "That's better. You always were essentially
reasonable, though somewhat impulsive for a man of your age. The rash
way you severed our partnership, for instance.... But enough of that.
I think we'd better leave immediately. Into the sphere, please. You
first, Miss Guinness."

"Must she come?"

"I'm afraid so. I can't very well leave her here all unprotected, can
I?"

Quade's voice was soft and suave, but an undercurrent of sarcasm ran
through it. Guinness winced under it; his whole body was trembling
with suppressed rage and indignation. As he stepped to the door of the
earth-borer he turned and asked:

"How did you know our plans? About the radium?--the borer?"

Quade told him. "Have you forgotten," he said, "that you talked the
matter over with me before we split last year? I simply had the
laboratory watched, and when you got new financial backing from young
Holmes, and came here. I followed you. Simple, eh?... Well, enough of
this. Get inside. You first, Sue."

Trembling, the girl obeyed, and when her father hesitated Quade jammed
his gun viciously into his ribs and pushed him to the door. "Inside!"
he hissed, and reluctantly, hatred in his eyes, the professor stepped
into the control compartment after Sue. Quade gave a last quick glance
around and, with gun ever wary, passed inside. The door slammed shut:
there was a click as its lock shot over. The sphere was a sealed ball
of metal.

Inside, David Guinness obeyed the automatic's imperious gesture and
pulled a shiny-handled lever slowly back, and the hush that rested
over the Mojave was shattered by a tremendous bellow, a roar that
shook the very earth. It was the disintegrating blast, hurled out of
the bottom in many fan-shaped rays. The coarse gray sand beneath the
machine stirred and flew wildly; the sphere vibrated madly; and then
the thunder lowered in tone to a mighty humming and the earth-borer
began to drop. Slowly it fell, at first, then more rapidly. The shiny
top came level with the ground: disappeared; and in a moment there was
nothing left but a gaping hole where a short while before a round
monster of metal had stood. The hole was hot and dark, and from it
came a steadily diminishing thunder....

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long time no one in the earth-borer spoke--didn't even try
to--for though the thunder of the disintegrators was muted, inside, to
a steady drone, conversation was almost impossible. The three were
crowded quite close in the spherical inner control compartment. Sue
sat on a little collapsible stool by the bowed, but by no means
subdued, figure of Professor David Guinness, while Quade sat on the
wire guard of the gyroscope, which was in the exact center of the
floor.

The depth gauge showed two hundred feet. Already the three people were
numb from the vibration; they hardly felt any sensation at all, save
one of great weight pressing inwards. The compartment was fairly cool
and the air good--kept so by the automatic air rectifiers and the
insulation, which shut out the heat born of their passage.

Quade had been carefully watching Guinness's manipulation of the
controls, when he was struck by a thought. At once he stood up, and
shouted in the elderly inventor's ear: "Try the rockets! I want to be
sure this thing will go back up!"

Without a word Guinness shoved back the lever controlling the
disintegrators, at the same time whirling a small wheel full over. The
thudding drone died away to a whisper, and was replaced by sharper
thundering, as the stream of the propulsion rockets beneath the sphere
was released. A delicate needle trembled on a gauge, danced at the
figure two hundred, then crept back to one-ninety ... one-sixty ...
one-forty.... Quade's eyes took in everything.

"Excellent, Guinness!" he yelled. "Now--down once more!"

The rockets were slowly cut; the borer jarred at the bottom of its
hole; again the disintegrators droned out. The sphere dug rapidly into
the warm ground, biting lower and lower. At ten miles an hour it
blasted a path to depths hitherto unattainable to man, sweeping away
rock and gravel and sand--everything that stood in its way. The depth
gauge rose to two thousand, then steadily to three and four. So it
went on for nearly half an hour.

At the end of that time, at a depth of nearly four miles, Quade got
stiffly to his feet and once more shouted into the professor's ear.

"We ought to be close to that radium, now," he said. "I think--"

But his words stopped short. The floor of the sphere suddenly fell
away from their feet, and they felt themselves tumbled into a wild
plunge. The drone of the disintegrators, hitherto muffled by the earth
they bit into, rose to a hollow scream. Before the professor quite
knew what was happening, there was a stunning crash, a shriek of
tortured metal--and the earth-borer rocked and lay still....

       *       *       *       *       *

The whole world seemed to be filled with thunder when David Guinness
came back to consciousness. He opened his eyes and stared up into a
darkness to which it took him some time to accustom himself. When he
did, he made out hazily that he was lying on the floor of a vast dark
cavern. He could dimly see its jagged roof, perhaps fifty feet above.
There was the strong smell of damp earth in his nostrils; his head was
splitting from the steady drone in his ear-drums. Suddenly he
remembered what had happened. He groaned slightly and tried to sit up.

But he could not. His arms and legs were tied. Someone had removed him
from the earth-borer and bound him on the floor of the cavern they had
plunged into.

David Guinness strained at the rope. It was futile, but in doing so he
twisted his head around and saw another form, similarly tied, lying
close to him. He gave a little cry of relief. It was Sue. And she was
conscious, her eyes on his face.

She spoke to him, but he could not understand her for the drone in his
ears, and when he spoke to her it was the same. But the professor did
not just then continue his effort to converse with her. His attention
was drawn to the borer, now dimly illuminated by its portable light,
which had been secured to the door. It was right side up, and appeared
to be undamaged. The broad ray of the searchlight fell far away on one
of the cavern's rough walls. He could just make out James Quade
standing there, his back towards them.

