represent a rose, and--granted a little stretch of imagination--it was
really as much like it as anything else!

This first item of the programme over, the dancers grouped themselves in
attitudes of studied grace, while little green-robed heralds led the way
to what, for want of a more high-flown name, was termed "The Rose
Bower," where various sports and competitions had been organised.  Roses
were, indeed, conspicuous by their absence; but there was an archery
ground, an amateur Aunt Sally (clad, one regrets to state, in the garb
of a University Examiner!) and many original and amusing "trials of
skill."  Tom came off victorious in an obstacle race, in the course of
which the competitors had to pick up and set in order a prostrate deck
chair, correctly add up a column of figures, unravel a knotted rope, and
skip with it for fifteen or twenty yards, thread a needle, and hop over
the remaining portion of the course; while Dorothy, who held a stick
poised in her hand, called out in threatening tones, "You _would_ pluck
me in arithmetic, would you?  Take _that_!" and let fly with such energy
that the "Examiner" fell in fragments to the ground.

It was a scene of wild hilarity, for even the teachers threw off their
wonted airs of decorum, and entered into the spirit of the occasion, and
to see severe Miss Mott throwing for cocoa-nuts, and fat little Fraulein
hopping across the lawn, were by no means the least entertaining items
in the programme.

Rhoda sat enthroned on her rose-wreathed chair, looking on at the
revels, well content with idleness since it was the badge of
superiority.  The pleasantest part of her duties was still to come, and
the girls realised for what purpose the sixpence-a-head contribution had
been levied by the Games Captains, as they saw the prizes which were
awarded the successful competitors.  No one-and-eleven-penny frames this
time; no trashy little sixpence-three-farthing ornaments; nor shilling
boxes supplied with splinty pencils and spluttering pens; but handsome,
valuable prizes, which any girl might be proud to possess.  Dorothy was
presented with an umbrella with a silver handle; another lucky winner
received the most elegant of green leather purses, with what she
rapturously described as "scriggles of gold" in the corners; Tom won a
handsome writing-case, and a successful "Red" the daintiest little gold
bangle, with six seed pearls encircling a green stone, concerning the
proper name of which it was possible to indulge in endless disputations.

Rhoda was in her element distributing these gifts, and afterwards in
leading the way towards the pavilion, which had been transformed into a
veritable bower by the hands of willing workers, and in which were
displayed a supply of the most luxurious refreshments.  Miss Bruce had
contributed generously towards the afternoon's entertainment, and as the
girls sat about upon the grass, and were waited upon by the "Rose
Maidens," no one had need to sigh in vain for "something nice."  The
choice of good things was quite bewildering, and little Hilary Jervis
was reported to have reverted twice over from coffee to lemonade, and to
have eaten an ice-cream and a ham sandwich in alternate bites.  She was
blissfully happy, however, and so was everyone else, and when at last
Mistress June returned to her Barque, and the singers started the first
notes of "Good Night," two hundred voices took up the strain with a
strength and precision which made the unrehearsed effect one of the most
striking in the programme.

And so ended "Revels"--the happiest day which many of the students were
to know for long weeks to come.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

DRAWING NEAR.

A week after "Revels" had taken place the very remembrance seemed to
have floated away to an immeasurable distance, and only wonder remained
that any interest could have been felt on so trivial a subject.  From
morning to night, and from night till morning, the same incessant grind
went on, for of what rest was sleep when it opened the door for fresh
torture, as, for instance, when a Cambridge Examiner condescended to the
unfair expedient of kidnapping a candidate's wardrobe, leaving her to
decide between the alternative of staying at home or attending the
examination room attired in a _robe de nuit_?  On other occasions it
appeared that by some unaccountable freak of memory one had forgotten
about the examinations until the very hour had arrived, and was running,
running--trying to overtake a train that would _not_ stop, not though
one leapt rivers and scaled mountain heights in the vain attempt to
attract attention!  It was really more restful to lie awake and study
textbooks by the morning light, which came so early in these summer
days; or so thought Rhoda, as she sat up in bed and bent her aching head
over her task.  Her head was always aching nowadays, while occasionally
there came a sharp, stabbing pain in the eyes, which seemed to say that
they, too, were inclined to rebel.  It was tiresome, but she had no time
to attend to them now.  It was not likely that she was going to draw
back because of a little pain and physical weakness.

She never complained, but amidst all the bustle of preparation the
teachers kept a keen eye on their pupils, and Rhoda found more than one
task mysteriously lightened.  No remark was made, but Miss Mott reduced
the amount of preparation; Miss Bruce sent an invitation to tea, which
involved an idle hour, and shortcomings were passed over with wonderful
forbearance.  Only Miss Everett "croaked," and, dearly as she loved her,
Rhoda was glad to keep out of Miss Everett's way just now.  It was
unpleasant to be stared at by "eyes like gimlets," to be asked if one's
head ached, and warned gravely of the dangers of overwork.

"When I went up for the Cambridge Senior," began Miss Everett, and the
girl straightened herself defiantly, on the outlook for "sermons."

"When I went up for the Cambridge Senior I was not at school like you,
but studying at home with a tutor.  My sister was delicate, so an old
college friend of my father's came to us for three hours a day.  He was
delightful--a very prince of teachers--and we had such happy times, for
he entered into all our interests, and treated our opinions with as much
respect as if we had been men like himself.  I remember disputing the
axioms of political economy, and arguing that a demand for commodities
_must_ be a demand for labour, and the delight with which he threw back
his head and laughed whenever I seemed to score a point.  Instead of
snubbing me, and thinking it ridiculous that I should presume to dispute
accepted truths, he welcomed every sign of independent thought; and
there we would sit, arguing away, two girls of fifteen and sixteen and
the grey-headed man, as seriously as if history depended on our
decision.  Later on, when I was going in for the examination, I joined
some of his afternoon classes at a school near by, so that I could work
up the subjects with other candidates.  There was one girl in the class
called Mary Macgregor, a plain, unassuming little creature, who seemed
most ordinary in every way.  When I first saw her I remember pitying her
because she looked so dull and commonplace.  My dear, she had a brain
like an encyclopaedia!--simply crammed with knowledge, and what went in
at one ear stayed there for good, and never by any chance got mislaid.
You may think how clever she was when I tell you that she passed first
in all England, with distinction in every single subject that she took.
She won scholarships and honours and went up to Girton, and had posts
offered to her right and left, and practically established herself for
life.  Well, to go back a long way, to the week before the Cambridge.
We had preliminary examinations at school, and had worked so hard that
we were perfectly dazed and muddled.  Then one day `Magister,' as we
called him, marched into the room to read the result of the arithmetic
paper.  I can see him now, standing up with the list in his hands, and
all the girls' faces turned towards him.  Then he began to read: `Total
number of marks, one hundred.  Kate Evans, eighty-nine; Sybil Bruce,
eighty-two; Hilda Green, seventy-one;' so on and so on--down, and down
and down until it came to thirties and twenties, and still no mention of
Mary or of me!  The girls' faces were a study to behold.  As for the
`Magister' he put on the most exaggerated expression of horror, and just
hissed out the last few words--`Laura Everett, _twelve_!  Ma-ry Mac-gre-
gor, _ten_!'  We sat dumb, petrified, frozen with dismay, and then
suddenly he banged his book on the table and called out, `No more
lessons!  No more work!  I forbid any girl to open a book again before
Monday morning.  Off you go, and give your brains a rest, if you don't
wish to disgrace yourselves and me.  Give my compliments to your
mothers, and say I wish you _all_ to be taken to the Circus this
evening.'  He nodded at us quite cheerfully, and marched out of the room
there and then, leaving us to pack up our books and go home, Mary and I
cried a little, I remember, in a feeble, helpless sort of way; but we
were too tired to care very much.  I slept like a log all the afternoon,
and went to the Circus at night, and the next day I skated, and on
Saturday spent the day in town, buying Christmas presents, and by Monday
I was quite brisk again, and my mind as clear as ever.  I have often
thought how differently that examination might have turned out for Mary
and for me if we had had a less wise teacher, who had worked himself
into a panic of alarm, and made us work harder than ever, instead of
stopping altogether!  I am convinced that it was only those few days of
rest which saved me."

"There!" cried Rhoda, irritably; "I knew it!  I _knew_ there was a
moral.  I knew perfectly well the moment you began, that it was a
roundabout way of preaching to me.  If I am to have a sermon, I would
rather have it straight out, not wrapped up in jam like a powder.  I
suppose you think my brain is getting muddled, but it would go
altogether if I tried to do nothing but laze about.  I should go stark,
staring mad.  I must say, Evie, you talk in a very strange way for a
teacher, and are not at all encouraging.  I don't think you care a bit
whether I get the scholarship or not."

"Yes, I do!  I hope very much that you will _not_!  Wait a moment now; I
am very fond of you, Rhoda; and I hope with all my heart that you will
pass, and pass well--I shall be bitterly disappointed if you don't; but
I want Kathleen to get the scholarship.  She _needs_ it, and you don't;
it means far, far more to her than you can even understand."

"In one way, perhaps--not another!  She wants the money, which she could
have in any case; but she is not half so keen as I am for the honour
itself--and, after all, that's the first thing.  I can't do anything in
a half-and-half way, and now that I have taken up examinations I am just
burning to distinguish myself.  It would be a perfect bliss, the height
of my ambition, to come out first here, and go up to Oxford, and take
honours, and have letters after one's name, and be a distinguished
scholar, written about in the papers and magazines like--like--"

"Yes!  Like Miss Mott, for instance.  What then?"  Rhoda stood still in
the middle of her tirade, and stared at the speaker with startled eyes.
_Miss Mott_!  No, indeed, she had meant nobody in the least like Miss
Mott.  The very mention of the name was like a cold douche on her
enthusiasm.  The creature of her dream was gowned and capped, and moved
radiant through an atmosphere of applause.  Miss Mott was a commonplace,
hard-working teacher, with an air of chronic exhaustion.  When one
looked across the dining-room, and saw her face among those of the
girls, it looked bleached and grey, the face of a tired, worn woman.
"The idea of working and slaving all one's youth to be like--Miss Mott!"
Rhoda exclaimed contemptuously, but Miss Everett insisted on her
position.

"Miss Mott is a capital example.  You could not have a better.  She was
the first student of her year, and carried everything before her.  Her
position here is one of the best of its kind, for she is practically
headmistress.  She would tell you herself that she never expected to do
so well."

"I think it's very mean of you, Evie, to squash me so!  It's most
discouraging.  I don't want to be the _least_ like Miss Mott, and you
know it perfectly well.  It's no use talking, for we can't agree; and
really and truly you are the most unsympathetic to me just now."

Miss Everett looked at her steadily, with a long, tender gaze.

"I _seem_ so, Rhoda, I know I do, but it is only seeming.  In reality
I'm just longing to help you, but, as you say, you think one thing and I
think another, so we are at cross purposes.  Come and spend Sunday
afternoon with me in my den, dear, and I'll promise not to preach.  I'll
make you so comfy, and show you all my photographs and pretty things,
and lay in a stock of fruit and cakes.  Do; it will do you good!"

But Rhoda hesitated, longing, yet fearing.

"I'd love it; it would be splendid, but--there's my Scripture!  I want
to cram it up a little more, and Sunday afternoon is the only chance.
I'm afraid I can't until after the exam., Evie, dear.  I need the time."

"A wilful lass must have her way!" quoted Miss Everett with a sigh, and
that was the last attempt which she made to rescue Rhoda from the result
of her own rash folly.  Henceforth to the end the girl worked
unmolested, drawing the invariable "list" from her pocket at every odd
moment, and gabbling in ceaseless repetition, nerved to more feverish
energy by the discovery that her brain moved so slowly that it took
twice as long as of yore to master the simplest details.  She felt
irritable and peevish, disposed to tears on the slightest provocation,
and tired all over, back and limbs, aching head, smarting eyes, weary,
dissatisfied heart.  Did every ambition of life end like this?  Did it
always happen that when the loins were girded to run a race, depression
fell like a fetter, and the question tortured: "Is it worth while?  Is
it worth while?"  What was the "right motive" of which Evie had spoken?
What was the Vicar's meaning of "success"?  They, at least, seemed to
have found contentment as a result of their struggles.  Rhoda groped in
the dark, but found no light, for the door was barred by the giant of
Self-Will.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

THE EXAMINATION.

Four o'clock on the morning of Examination Monday.  The clock on the
wall chimed the hour, and Rhoda awoke with a start, and sat up wearily
in bed.  The pale, grey light already filled the room, and the birds
clamoured tumultuously in the trees outside.  Three hours before the
gong rang--the last, the very last chance of preparing for the fray!

She slipped noiselessly out of bed, sponged her face with cold water,
seized the eau-de-Cologne in one hand and a pile of books in the other,
and settled herself against a background of cushions.  There was silence
in the room, broken only by fitful cries from Dorothy, who was given to
discoursing in her sleep, and more than once in the course of the first
half-hour Rhoda's own eyes glazed over, and the lids fell.  Nature was
pleading for her rights, but each lapse was sternly overcome, and
presently nerves and brain were fully awake, and battling with their
task.  She learned by heart passages marked as likely to be useful,
searched to and fro for answers still unknown, and worked out imaginary
calculations.  One thing was no sooner begun than she recalled another
which needed attention, and so on it went from arithmetic to
Shakespeare, from Shakespeare to history, from history to Latin, back
and forward, back and forward, until her head was in a whirl.

The clock struck six, the girl in the next cubicle murmured sleepily,
"Such a noise!  Something rustling!" and Rhoda held her breath in
dismay.  Her haste in turning over the leaves had nearly brought about
discovery, but henceforth she moved with caution, turning from place to
place with wary fingers.  Her back ached despite the supporting
cushions, and her head swam, but she struggled on until at last the roll
of the gong sounded through the house, and the girls awoke with yawns
and groans of remembrance.

"Black Monday!  Oh!  Oh!  I wish I'd never been born!"

"Misery me, and I was having such a lovely dream, all about holidays and
picnics, and walks on the sands--"

"I've had the most awful night, doing sums all the time, with the
Examiner looking over my shoulder.  My head is like a jelly!"

Then Tom's voice arose in derisive accents.  Happy Tom! who was well
through her June Matric, and could afford to chaff the poor victims.

"Would any young lady like to explain to me how to find the resultant of
a system of parallel forces?"

"Tom, you are brutal!  Be quiet this moment, or we'll come and make
you--"

"Ha!  Ha!  Ha!  Rhoda, love, just give me the Substance of King
Richard's speech to Northumberland, when the latter announced that he
was to be removed to Pomfret!"

Rhoda began to reply, but stopped abruptly, for on rising from bed she
was attacked by a strange giddiness, and lay back against the pillows
trembling with cold and nausea.  Her hands shook as she uncorked the
eau-de-Cologne, and the scent, so far from being reviving, made her
shudder afresh.  She dressed with difficulty, sitting down at frequent
intervals, and growing colder and colder with each exertion, so that
when she emerged from her cubicle her pallid face roused Tom's instant
attention.

"Rhoda, you are ill!" she cried, her chaffing manner changing at once,
as she realised the seriousness of the occasion.  "What's the matter?
Didn't you sleep?  Let me feel your hand--.  Goodness, what a frog!  You
had better lie down, and let me send for nurse."

"No, thank you, Tom, _please_!  It's only excitement.  I shall be better
after breakfast.  Please, please, don't make a fuss!"

"Humph!" said Tom shortly, "just as you like.  If you feel yourself
going, stoop down and pretend to fasten your shoe, and give a scrub to
your cheeks before passing Miss Bruce.  She'll spot you in a moment if
you go in with a face like that."

Thus adjured, Rhoda "scrubbed her cheeks" all the way downstairs, and
looked so rosy as she passed the Principal that the good lady felt much
relieved.  She had had some anxious thoughts about Rhoda Chester of
late, and was only too glad to feel that her anxiety had been needless;
but, alas! three times over during breakfast did Rhoda stoop down to
button her shoe, and in vain did her companions press food upon her.  A
sumptuous breakfast had been served in honour of the occasion, but ham
and eggs seemed just the last things in the world that she wanted to
eat, while the sight of fried fish took away the last remnant of
appetite.  She drank her tea, trying to laugh with the rest, and to take
no notice of the swaying movement with which the walls whirled round
from time to time, or of the extraordinary distance from which the
girls' voices sounded in her ears.

"She's game!  She's real game!" said Tom to herself, watching the set
face with her sharp little eyes, "but she's uncommon bad all the same.
I'll put Evie on her track!"  So Miss Everett's attention was duly
called to the condition of her pupil, and Rhoda was dosed with sal-
volatile, and provided with smelling salts to keep in her pocket.  Not a
word of reproach was spoken, and Evie indeed appeared to treat the
indisposition as quite an orthodox thing under the circumstances.  So
affectionate was she, so kind and cheery, and so thoughtful were the
girls in giving up the best seats in omnibus and train, and in offering
supporting arms along platforms, that Rhoda felt inclined to cry with
mingled gratitude and remorse.

When the hall was reached in which the examination was to be held, she
had yet another dose of sal-volatile as a preparation for the ordeal of
the arithmetical paper, and then, gathering up pens and pencils, marched
slowly into the dreaded room.  It was shaped like an amphitheatre, with
a railed-in platform at one side, and sloping seats descending all
round.

"It's like the operating theatre at a hospital!  Oh my! and don't I feel
as if I were going to be cut up too!" groaned Dorothy, as she filed
along in front of a seat, looking for her place.  At a distance of every
two or three yards the desks were marked with a number, in front of
which was a supply of blotting and writing paper.  Some of the
candidates made out their own number at once, others went roaming
helplessly about, and Rhoda found herself perched in the furthest
corner, far from her companions.  She looked across and received
Dorothy's smiling nod, but Kathleen's face was set in stern anxiety, and
the others were too busy arranging papers to remember her existence.
The Examiner, in cap and gown, stood on the platform, talking to the
lady secretary of the Centre.  She made a remark, and he smiled, and
said something in reply at which they both laughed audibly.  It shocked
