The Project Gutenberg EBook of Security, by Poul William Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Security

Author: Poul William Anderson

Release Date: August 4, 2007 [EBook #22239]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECURITY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]




SECURITY

BY POUL ANDERSON

ILLUSTRATED BY EBEL




          In a world where Security is all-important, nothing
            can ever be secure. A mountain-climbing vacation
            may wind up in deep Space. Or loyalty may prove
              to be high treason. But it has its rewards.


It had been a tough day at the lab, one of those days when nothing seems
able to go right. And, of course, it had been precisely the day Hammond,
the Efficiency inspector, would choose to stick his nose in. Another
mark in his little notebook--and enough marks like that meant a
derating, and Control had a habit of sending derated labmen to Venus.
That wasn't a criminal punishment, but it amounted to the same thing.
Allen Lancaster had no fear of it for himself; the sector chief of a
Project was under direct Control jurisdiction rather than Efficiency,
and Control was friendly to him. But he'd hate to see young Rogers get
it--the boy had been married only a week now.

To top the day off, a report had come to Lancaster's desk from Sector
Seven of the Project. Security had finally cleared it for general
transmission to sector chiefs--and it was the complete design of an
electronic valve on which some of the best men in Lancaster's own
division, Sector Thirteen, had been sweating for six months. There went
half a year's work down the drain, all for nothing, and Lancaster would
have that much less to show at the next Project reckoning.

He had cursed for several minutes straight, drawing the admiring glances
of his assistants. It was safe enough for a high-ranking labman to gripe
about Security--in fact, it was more or less expected. Scientists had
their privileges.

One of these was a private three-room apartment. Another was an extra
liquor ration. Tonight, as he came home, Lancaster decided to make a
dent in the latter. He'd eaten at the commissary, as usual, but hadn't
stayed to talk. All the way home in the tube, he'd been thinking of that
whiskey and soda.

Now it sparkled gently in his glass and he sighed, letting a smile
crease his lean homely face. He was a tall man, a little stooped, his
clothes--uniform and mufti alike--perpetually rumpled. Solitary by
nature, he was still unmarried in spite of the bachelor tax and had only
one son. The boy was ten years old now, must be in the Youth Guard;
Lancaster wasn't sure, never having seen him.

It was dark outside his windows, but a glow above the walls across the
skyway told of the city pulsing and murmuring beyond. He liked the quiet
of his evenings alone and had withstood a good deal of personal and
official pressure to serve in various patriotic organizations. "Damn
it," he had explained, "I'm not doing routine work. I'm on a Project,
and I need relaxation of my own choosing."

He selected a tape from his library. _Eine Kleine Nachtmusik_ lilted
joyously about him as he found a chair and sat down. Control hadn't
gotten around to making approved lists of music yet, though you'd
surely never hear Mozart in a public place. Lancaster got a cigar from
the humidor and collapsed his long gaunt body across chair and hassock.
Smoke, whiskey, good music--they washed his mind clean of worry and
frustration; he drifted off in a mist of unformed dreams. Yes, it wasn't
such a bad world.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mail-tube went _ping!_ and he opened his eyes, swearing. For a
moment he was tempted to let the pneumo-roll lie where it fell, but
habit was too strong. He grumbled his way over to the basket and took it
out.

The stamp across it jerked his mind to wakefulness. _OfiSal, sEkret, fOr
adresE OnlE_--and a Security seal!

After a moment he swallowed his thumping heart. It couldn't be serious,
not as far as he personally was concerned anyway. If that had been the
case, a squad of monitors would have been at the door. Not this message
tube.... He broke the seal and unfolded the flimsy with elaborate care.
Slowly, he scanned it. Underneath the official letterhead, the words
were curt. "_Dis iz A matr uv urjensE and iz top sEkret. destrY Dis letr
and Du tUb kontAniN it._ tUmOrO, 15 jUn, at 2130 ourz, U wil gO tU Du
obzurvatOrE, A nIt klub at 5730 viktOrE strEt, and ask Du hedwAtr fOr A
mistr Berg. U wil asUm Dat hE iz an Old frend uv yOrz and Dat Dis iz A
sOSal EveniN. Du UZUal penaltEz ar invOkt fOr fAlUr tU komplI."

There was no signature. Lancaster stood for a moment, trying to imagine
what this might be. There was a brief chill of sweat on his skin. Then
he suppressed his emotions. He had nothing to fear. His record was clean
and he wasn't being arrested.

His mind wandered rebelliously off on something that had occurred to him
before. Admittedly the new phonetic orthography was more efficient than
the old, if less esthetic; but since little of the earlier literature
was being re-issued in modern spelling not too many books had actually
been condemned as subversive--only a few works on history, politics,
philosophy, and the like, together with some scientific texts restricted
for security reasons; but one by one, the great old writings were sent
to forgetfulness.

Well, these were critical times. There wasn't material and energy to
spare for irrelevant details. No doubt when complete peace was achieved
there would be a renaissance. Meanwhile he, Lancaster, had his
Euripides and Goethe and whatever else he liked, or knew where to borrow
it.

As for this message, they must want him for something big, maybe
something really interesting.

Nevertheless, his evening was ruined.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Observatory was like most approved recreation spots--large and
raucous, selling unrationed food and drink and amusement at uncontrolled
prices of which the government took its usual lion's share. The angle in
this place was astronomy. The ceiling was a blue haze a-glitter with
slowly wheeling constellations, and the strippers began with
make-believe spacesuits. There were some rather good murals on the walls
depicting various stages of the conquest of space. Lancaster was amused
at one of them. When he'd been here three years ago, the first landing
on Ganymede had shown a group of men unfurling a German flag. It had
stuck in his mind, because he happened to know that the first expedition
there had actually been Russian. That was all right then, seeing that
Germany was an ally at the time. But now that Europe was growing
increasingly cold to the idea of an American-dominated world, the
Ganymedean pioneers were holding a good safe Stars and Stripes.

Oh, well. You had to keep the masses happy. They couldn't see that their
sacrifices and the occasional short wars were necessary to prevent
another real smashup like the one seventy-five years ago. Lancaster's
annoyance was directed at the sullen foreign powers and the traitors
within his own land. It was because of them that science had to be
strait-jacketed by Security regulations.

The headwaiter bowed before him. "I'm looking for a friend," said
Lancaster. "A Mr. Berg."

"Yes, sir. This way, please."

Lancaster slouched after him. He'd worn the dress uniform of a Project
officer, but he felt that all eyes were on its deplorable sloppiness.
The headwaiter conducted him between tables of half-crocked
customers--burly black-uniformed Space Guardsmen, army and air officers,
richly clad industrialists and union bosses, civilian leaders, their
wives and mistresses. The waiters were all Martian slaves, he noticed,
their phosphorescent owl-eyes smoldering in the dim blue light.

