carbonic acid and water are returned to the lungs in the dark-colored
blood, and evolved from the system.

565. Sir Benjamin Brodie and some others have maintained, that the
heat of the system is generated exclusively by the influence of the
brain and nerves. This theory is discarded by most physiologists; yet
it is true that the nervous system exercises a great influence over
the action of the capillary vessels in the process of nutrition,
secretion, and absorption. When these operations are most active, the
change among the particles of matter of which the body is composed, is
then greatest, and the generation of heat is increased in a
corresponding degree.

566. The necessity of pure, red blood in the production of animal
heat, is shown when the vessels that carry blood to a limb are
ligated, or tied; the part immediately becomes colder. The necessity
of nervous influence is seen in the diminished temperature of a
paralytic limb.

567. Our next inquiry is, By what means is the uniformity of
temperature in the body maintained? As there is a constant generation
of heat in the system, there would be an undue accumulation,--so much
so as to cause disagreeable sensations,--if there were no means by
which it could be evolved from the body, or its production lessened.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

564. Where does it unite with the carbon and hydrogen contained in the
body, and how is heat generated? 565. What was the theory of Sir
Benjamin Brodie? Is this theory in general discarded? What is true of
this theory? 566. How is the necessity of pure, red blood and nervous
action shown in the production of animal heat?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

568. It has been ascertained that the principal means by which the
system is kept at a uniform temperature, is the immense evaporation
from the skin and lungs. These membranes, in an ordinary state, are
constantly giving out water, which is converted into vapor, and
carried off by the surrounding air. The quantity of heat abstracted
from the system to effect this, depends on the rapidity of the change
of air, its temperature, and the amount of water it contains in a
state of vapor. The quantity removed is greatest when the air is warm
and dry, and the change, or current, rapid.

_Observations._ 1st. The first discovery of the use of free
evaporation of the perspiration from the skin in reducing the heat of
the body, and the analogy subsisting between this process and that of
the evaporation of water from a rough porous surface, so constantly
resorted to in warm countries, as an efficacious means of reducing the
temperature of the air in rooms, and of wine and other drinks, much
below that of the surrounding atmosphere, was made by Franklin.

2d. In all ages and climes, it has been observed that the increased
temperature of the skin and system in fevers, is abated as soon as
free perspiration is restored. In damp, close weather, as during the
sultry days of August, although the temperature is lower, we feel a
disagreeable sensation of heat, because the saturation of the air with
moisture lessens evaporation, and thus prevents the escape of heat
through the lungs and skin.

3d. It is on the principle of the evaporation of fluids that warm
vinegar and water, applied to the burning, aching head, cools it, and
imparts to it a comfortable feeling. The same results follow if warm
liquids are applied to the skin in the hot stage of fever; and this
evaporation can be increased by constant fanning.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

568. What are the principal means by which a uniform temperature of
the body is maintained? On what does the quantity of heat abstracted
from the system depend? What discovery relative to animal heat is due
to Franklin? What is said of free perspiration in fevers? What
occasions the disagreeable sensation of heat in damp, close weather?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

4th. It is frequently noticed, in very warm weather, that dogs and
other domestic animals are seen with their tongues out of their
mouths, and covered with frothy secretions. This is merely another
mode of reducing animal heat, as the skin of such animals does not
perspire as much as that of man.

569. Under some circumstances, a portion of the heat of the system is
removed by radiation. When cold air comes in contact with the skin and
mucous membrane of the lungs, heat is removed from the body, as from a
stove, to restore an equilibrium of temperature. The removal of heat
from the body is greatest when we are in a current of cold air, or
when a brisk, cold wind is blowing upon us.

570. As the primary object of the different processes of nutrition is
to supply animal heat, so the action of the different nutritive organs
is modified by the demands of the system for heat. When heat is
rapidly removed from the body, the functional activity of the organs
of nutrition is increased. When the system is warmed by foreign
influence, the activity of the nutritive organs is diminished. This
leads to the natural, and, we may add, instinctive change in the
quality and quantity of food at different seasons of the year.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

569. When is heat radiated from the body? When is it greatest? 570.
What is the primary object of the different processes of nutrition?
When is the activity of the nutritive organs increased? When
diminished? To what does this lead?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XXVIII.

HYGIENE OF ANIMAL HEAT.


571. The amount of heat generated in man and inferior animals depends
upon the quantity and quality of the food, age, exercise, the amount
and character of the respired air, condition of the brain, skin, and
general system.

572. _Animal heat is modified by the proportion of digestible carbon
which the food contains, and by the quantity consumed._ As the kind of
fuel that contains the greatest amount of combustible material evolves
the most caloric when burned, so those articles of food that contain
the greatest quantity of carbon produce the most heat when converted
into blood. The inhabitants of the frigid zones, and individuals in
temperate climates during the cold season, consume with impunity
stimulating animal food, that contains a large proportion of carbon,
while the inhabitants of the tropical regions, and persons in
temperate climates during the warm season, are more healthy with a
less stimulating or vegetable diet.

_Observation._ When we ride or labor in cold weather, an adequate
amount of nutritious food will sustain the warmth of the system better
than intoxicating drinks.

573. _Age is another influence that modifies the generation of animal
heat._ The vital forces of the child being feeble, less heat is
generated in its system than in that of an adult. The experiments
of Dr. Milne Edwards show that the power of producing heat in
warm-blooded animals, is at its minimum at birth, and increases
successively to adult age; and that young children part with their
heat more readily than adults, and, instead of being warmer, are
generally a degree or two colder. After adult age, as the vital powers
decline, the generation of heat is diminished, as the energies of
the system are lessened. Hence the young child, and the debilitated
aged person, need more clothing than the vigorous individual of
middle age.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

571-585. _Give the hygiene of animal heat._ 571. State some of the
influences that modify the generation of animal heat. 572. What
element of the food influences the generation of heat? When and
where can animal food be eaten with impunity? Give the practical
observation.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

574. _Exercise is an influence that modifies the generation of animal
heat._ As carbon and hydrogen enter into the composition of the organs
of the body, whatever increases the flow of blood in the system,
increases also the deposition of new material, and the removal of the
waste particles. This change among the particles of matter is attended
with an elevation of temperature, from the union of oxygen with the
carbon and hydrogen of the waste atoms. For this reason, a person in
action is warmer than in a quiescent state. Consequently, the amount
of clothing should be increased, when exercise or labor is diminished
or suspended.

575. On the other hand, whatever impedes the circulation and the
interchange of the atoms of matter, diminishes animal heat. Common
observation shows, that the extremities are not as warm when tight
gloves or boots are worn as when they are loose. One reason is, the
circulation of blood is impeded, which is attended with less frequent
change of the particles of matter.

576. _The quantity of air which is inhaled modifies the heat of the
system._ In the generation of heat in a stove, air, or oxygen, is as
essential as the wood or coal. It is equally so in the production of
animal heat. The oxygen of the inspired air should be in proportion to
the carbon and hydrogen to be consumed. This requires voluminous
lungs, together with free movements of the ribs and diaphragm. A
person whose chest is small, and whose apparel is worn tight over the
ribs, suffers more from the cold, and complains more frequently of
chilliness and cold extremities, than the broad-chested and loosely
dressed.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What do the experiments of Dr. Milne Edwards show? 574. Why does
exercise influence animal heat? 575. What is the effect when the
circulation of blood is impeded? Give examples. 576. Why do those
persons that have broad chests and voluminous lungs suffer less from
cold than the narrow-chested with small lungs?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ Fishes that breathe by means of gills, as the cod,
pike, &c., depend solely on the small quantity of oxygen that is
contained in the air mixed with the water. Their temperature is not
much greater than the medium in which they live. Whales, dolphins,
&c., breathe by means of lungs, and the inhalation of atmospheric air
makes their temperature about 100 deg., independent of the heat of the
element in which they live.

577. _The quality of respired air influences the generation of animal
heat._ In vestries, and other public rooms, when crowded with an
audience, where the ventilation is inadequate, the lamps will emit but
a faint light, because the oxygen is soon expended, and there is not
enough of the vivifying principle to unite with the oil and disengage
light. In the human body, when the respired air has lost some of its
life-giving properties, the combustion that takes place in different
parts of the system is not so complete as when it contains a proper
proportion of oxygen; and hence less heat is disengaged. For this
reason, those persons that breathe impure air, either in the daytime
or night, require more clothing, than those that work and sleep in
well-ventilated rooms.

578. _The condition of the brain and nervous system affects the
generation of animal heat._ If the brain is diseased, or the mind is
absorbed in thought, depressed by sorrow, or aroused from fear, the
breathing becomes slow and scarcely perceptible, and a chilliness
pervades the body, particularly the extremities; while, on the
contrary, if the mind and nervous system are excited by joyous and
agreeable emotions, the circulation of blood is quicker, and the
system more powerfully resists external cold. During sleep, when the
brain is partially inactive, less heat is generated than when awake.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What is said of those fishes that breathe by means of gills? Of those
that breathe by means of lungs? 577. Why do lamps give but a faint
light in crowded, unventilated rooms? What effect on animal heat has
impure air? 578. Mention the effects of some of the mental emotions on
animal heat.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ The preceding remark explains why an individual who
sleeps in the same clothing that was adequate to prevent chills while
awake, contracts a cold, unless he throws over him an additional
covering.

579. _The state of the skin exercises much influence in the generation
of heat._ If the functions of this membrane are not interrupted, more
heat will be generated than when it is pallid and inactive. The action
of the capillaries is most energetic when the skin is clean; on this
account, before taking a walk or a ride, in cold weather, remove all
impurities from the skin, by thorough ablution and vigorous friction.

580. _The amount and kind of clothing modify the temperature of the
system._ Those persons that are well clothed have greater power to
resist cold than the thinly apparelled, because both the evaporation
and the radiation from the skin are impeded, and less heat, in
consequence, is abstracted from the body. If the articles of apparel
possess the property of retaining air in their meshes, as flannel, the
removal of heat is not as rapid as when linen is worn.

_Observation._ In winter, although more heat is generated in the
system than in summer, yet we require more clothing, and also those
articles that are poor conductors of heat, because caloric is more
rapidly extracted in clear, cold weather, than in a warm day.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What does the preceding remark explain? 579. What suggestion
respecting the condition of the skin before taking a walk or ride in a
cold day? Why? 580. Do the amount and kind of clothing affect animal
heat? What is said of well-clothed persons? When does the system
generate the most heat?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

581. _The health and constitution influence the generation of heat._
When the health is firm, and the constitution vigorous, less clothing
is needed, for the change among the particles of matter is more rapid,
and more heat is generated, than when the opposite condition obtains.
Persons of a feeble constitution, particularly, if any of the vital
organs[18] are diseased, need more clothing and require rooms of a
warmer temperature, than individuals who are free from disease and
have a vigorous constitution.

  [18] The brain, lungs, heart, and digestive organs, are called _vital_
       organs.

_Observation._ Persons who are infirm, and whose vital powers are
feeble, in general, accustom themselves to an undue amount of clothing
and warm rooms. A more judicious practice would be, to exercise more
and use a moderate amount of clothing, together with a more nutritious
diet.

582. _The surplus heat should be removed equally from all parts of the
system._ The rapid evaporation of fluids, as in free perspiration, or
from radiation, as in a cold atmosphere, is attended with a removal of
heat from the system. This modifies the action of the circulatory
vessels. Consequently, if heat is suddenly and rapidly abstracted from
one part of the system, the equilibrium of the circulation is
destroyed, which will produce disease.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Why do we, then, require more clothing in winter than in summer? 581.
Why do persons of firm health and vigorous constitutions need less
clothing than those who are feeble? What is a general practice among
infirm persons? What would be more judicious? 582. Why should the
surplus heat be removed equally from all parts of the system? What is
said respecting currents of air from small apertures?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

_Observation._ Currents of air that impinge upon small portions of the
body, as from small apertures, or from a window slightly raised,
should be avoided. They are more dangerous than to expose the whole
person to a brisk wind, because the current of air removes the heat
from the part exposed, which disturbs the circulation of blood and
causes disease, usually in the form of "colds." For the same reason,
it is not judicious to stand in an open door, or the opening of a
street.

583. _The system suffers less when the change of temperature is
gradual._ The change in the production of heat, as well as in the
evaporation of fluids from the system, is gradual when not influenced
by foreign causes. This gradual change is known under the name
_acclimation_. By this means the body is enabled to endure tropical
heat and polar cold. Owing to this gradual adaptation of the system to
different temperatures, we can bear a greater degree of heat in the
summer between the tropics, than in the winter under the polar
circles. On the other hand, we can endure a greater degree of cold in
winter and in the arctic region, than in the summer and in equatorial
countries.

584. The sensation of heat which would be oppressive in a mild, warm
day of January, would only be grateful in July, and a degree of cold
which could scarcely be endured in August, would not be uncomfortable
in December. The changes of season in our latitude prevent the
disagreeable and perhaps fatal consequence that would follow, if no
spring or autumn intervened between the severity of winter's cold and
the intensity of summer's heat. During the transition periods, the
constitution is gradually changed, and adapted to bear the extremes of
temperature without suffering. The amount of heat generated in the
nutrient capillary vessels, is likewise diminished or increased as the
temperature of the season becomes greater or less.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

583. In what manner should change of temperature take place, to be
adapted to the body? How is the body enabled to endure tropical heat
and polar cold? State some of the effects of the gradual adaptation of
the system to different temperatures. 584. What is said relative to a
warm day in winter? To a cold day in summer? What is said of the
changes of seasons in our latitude? What effect on the constitution
during spring and autumn? What change in the amount of heat
generated?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

585. But, on the contrary, we cannot suddenly pass from one extreme of
temperature to the other with impunity. Let an inhabitant of Quebec
suddenly arrive in Cuba in February, and he would suffer from languor
and exhaustion; after becoming acclimated to this tropical climate,
let him suddenly return to Quebec in January, and the severity of the
weather would be almost insupportable.

_Observations._ 1st. Experience shows that heated rooms, as well as
tropical climates, lessen the generation of heat in the body, and
likewise the power of resisting cold. It would be idle for the
merchant from his warehouse, or the mechanic from his heated shop, to
attempt to sit on the box with a coachman, with the same amount of
clothing as his companion, who is daily exposed to the inclemency of
the weather.

2d. "It is the power of endurance of cold at one period, and the
absence of its necessity at another, that enables animals, in
their wild and unprotected state, to bear the vicissitudes of the
seasons with so little preparation in clothing, and so little real
inconvenience."

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

585. What effect on the system has a sudden transition from a cold to
a warm climate? What does experience show? Why do wild animals bear
the vicissitudes of the seasons with so little preparation in
clothing?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XXIX.

THE VOICE.


586. The beautiful mechanism of the vocal instrument, which produces
every variety of sound, from a harsh, unmelodious tone, to a soft,
sweet, flute-like sound, has, as yet, been imperfectly imitated by
art. It has been compared, by many physiologists, to a wind, reed, and
stringed instrument. This inimitable, yet simple instrument, is the
_Lar'ynx_.

587. Incidentally, the different parts of the respiratory organs, as
well as the larynx, are subservient to speaking and singing. The
tongue, nasal passages, muscles of the fauces and face, are agents
which aid in the intonation of the voice.


ANATOMY OF THE VOCAL ORGANS.

588. The LARYNX is a kind of cartilaginous tube, which, taken as a
whole, has the general form of a hollow, reversed cone, with its base
upward toward the tongue, in the shape of an expanded triangle. It
opens into the pharynx, at its superior extremity, and communicates,
by its inferior opening with the trachea. It is formed by the union of
five cartilages, namely, the _Thy'roid_, the _Cri'coid_, the two
_A-ryt-e'noid_, and the _Ep-i-glot'tis_. These are bound together by
ligaments, and moved by muscles.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

586. What is said of the structure of the vocal instrument? With what
instrument have physiologists compared it? What is the vocal
instrument called? 587. What organs are called into action in speaking
beside the larynx? 588-596. _Give the anatomy of the vocal organs._
588. Describe the larynx. Name the cartilages that form the larynx.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

589. The THYROID CARTILAGE is the largest of the five, and forms the
prominence in the front of the neck, called _Po'mum A-da'mi_, (Adam's
apple.) It is composed of two parts, and is connected with the bone of
the tongue above, and with the cricoid cartilage below.

590. The CRICOID CARTILAGE takes its name from its resemblance to a
ring. It is situated below the thyroid cartilage, it is narrow in
front, broader at the sides, and still broader behind, where it is
connected with the thyroid cartilage. Below, it connects with the
first ring of the trachea.

[Illustration: Fig. 102. A side view of the cartilages of the larynx. *
The front side of the thyroid cartilage. 1, The os hyoides, (bone at the
base of the tongue.) 2, The ligament that connects the hyoid bone and
thyroid cartilage. 3, 4, 5, The thyroid cartilage. 6, The cricoid
cartilage. 7, The trachea.]

[Illustration: Fig. 103. A posterior view of the cartilages and ligaments
of the larynx. 1, The posterior face of the epiglottis. 3, 3, The os
hyoides. 4, 4, The lateral ligaments which connect the os hyoides and
thyroid cartilage. 5, 5, The posterior face of the thyroid cartilage. 6,
6, The arytenoid cartilages. 7, The cricoid cartilage. 8, 8, The junction
of the cricoid and the arytenoid cartilages. 12, The first ring of the
trachea.]

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

589. Describe the thyroid cartilage. 590. From what does the cricoid
cartilage derive its name? Where is it situated? Explain fig. 102.
Fig. 103.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

591. The ARYTENOID CARTILAGES are small triangular bodies placed upon
the back part of the cricoid cartilage. They are connected with the
thyroid cartilages, by four ligaments, called _Vo'cal Cords_.

592. The EPIGLOTTIS is fibro-cartilaginous, and is placed behind the
base of the tongue. In shape it resembles a leaf of parsley.

593. The VOCAL CORDS, or ligaments, are formed of elastic and parallel
fibres, enclosed in a fold of mucous membrane. They are about two
lines in width, and pass from the anterior angle of the thyroid
cartilage, to the two arytenoid cartilages. The one is called the
superior, and the other the inferior vocal ligament. The cavity, or
depression between the superior and inferior ligament, is called the
_ventricle_ of the larynx. The aperture, or opening between these
ligaments, is called the _glot'tis_, or _chink of the glottis_. It is
about three fourths of an inch in length, and one fourth of an inch in
width, the opening being widest at the posterior part. This opening is
enlarged and contracted by the agency of the muscles appropriated to
the larynx.

[Illustration: Fig. 104. An ideal, lateral section of the larynx. 1, 1,
The upper vocal cords. 2, 2, The lower vocal cords. 3, 3, The glottis. 4,
4, The ventricles of the larynx.]

[Illustration: Fig. 105. A vertical section of the larynx. 2, The os
hyoides. 4, The apex of the epiglottis. 7, The superior vocal ligament.
9, The ventricle of the larynx. 10. The lower vocal ligament. 11, The
arytenoid cartilage. 12, 13, The cricoid cartilage. 14, The trachea. 18,
The oesophagus.]

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

591. Describe the arytenoid cartilages. 592. What is said of the
epiglottis? 593. Give the structure of the vocal cords. Where is the
ventricle of the larynx? Where is the glottis situated? What is
represented by fig. 104? Explain fig. 105.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

[Illustration: Fig. 106. A view of the larynx from above, showing the
vocal ligaments. 1, The anterior edge of the larynx. 4, The posterior
face of the thyroid cartilage. 5, 5, The arytenoid cartilages. 6, 6, The
vocal ligaments. 7, Their origin, within the angle of the thyroid
cartilage. 9, Their termination, at the base of the arytenoid cartilages.
8, 10, The glottis.]

594. The larynx is connected by muscles with the sternum, oesophagus,
base of the skull, hyoid bone, lower jaw, and tongue. This organ is
supplied with a large number of blood-vessels, and it likewise
receives nerves from the sympathetic system, and two large nerves from
the tenth pair. The number and size of the nervous filaments
distributed to the mucous membrane of the larynx, render it more
sensitive than any other portion of the respiratory organs.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

How is the glottis enlarged or contracted? Explain fig. 106. 594. By
what means and to what organs is the larynx connected? Why is the
larynx more sensitive than other parts of the respiratory organs?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

595. The larynx is much more developed and prominent in man than in
woman. In the former, the anterior angle of the thyroid cartilage is
acute, while in the latter it is rounded, and the central slope of the
superior border of the same cartilage is less deep, and the epiglottis
smaller and less prominent, than in man.

596. The difference in the formation of the larynx in infancy is less
striking; but at a later period, it is more developed in the male than
in the female. It is very remarkable that this increase is not
progressive, like that of other organs, but, on the contrary, develops
itself at once at the period of puberty.


PHYSIOLOGY OF THE VOCAL ORGANS.

597. In the formation of the voice, each part already described
performs an important office. The cricoid and thyroid cartilages give
form and stability to the larynx; the arytenoid cartilages, by their
movement, vary the width of the glottis. The epiglottis is flexible
and elastic. When it is erect, the chink of the glottis is open, as in
inspiration; when depressed, as in swallowing food and drink, it
covers and closes this aperture. It prevents the introduction of
articles of food into the trachea, and probably modifies sound as it
issues from the glottis.

598. The muscles of the neck elevate and depress the larynx; the
muscles of the larynx increase or diminish the width of the glottis;
at the same time, the vocal cords are relaxed or tightened, while the
muscles of the face open and close the mouth.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

595. What difference between the formation of the larynx of the female
and that of the male? 596. Does this difference exist in childhood? Is
its development progressive? 597-600. _Give the physiology of the
vocal organs._ 597. Which cartilages give stability and form to the
larynx? Which vary the width of the glottis? What is the function of
the epiglottis? 598. What effect have the muscles of the neck upon the
larynx? The use of the muscles of the larynx?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

599. The elasticity of the ribs and the contraction of the abdominal
muscles diminish the cavity of the chest, and the air, in consequence,
is pressed from the air-cells into the bronchial tubes and trachea. It
then rushes by the vocal cords, and causes a peculiar vibration, which
produces _sound_.

_Observations._ 1st. Experiments have satisfactorily shown that the
vocal cords are the principal agents in the formation of the voice.
The tongue, which many have supposed to be the most important organ in
speaking, is not essential to sound. In several instances it has been
removed, and the persons thus mutilated could speak with fluency.

2d. When the vocal cords are ulcerated, or inflamed, however slightly,
as in sore throat produced by a cold, the voice will be changed. The
loss of speech among public speakers is generally produced by a
relaxation of the vocal ligaments. Hence, bronchitis is a misnomer for
this affection.

600. Sound is varied by the velocity of the expelled current of air,
and the tension of the vocal ligaments. The size of the larynx, the
volume and health of the lungs, the condition of the fauces and nasal
passages, the elevation and depression of the chin, the development
and freedom of action of the muscles which are attached to the larynx,
the opening of the mouth, the state of the mind, and general health of
the system, influence the modulations of sound.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

What effect has the combined action of these muscles? 599. How is
sound produced? What have experiments shown? What effect has disease
of the vocal ligaments upon the voice? 600. How is sound varied?
Mention other conditions that contribute to the modulation of sound.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




CHAPTER XXX.

HYGIENE OF THE VOCAL ORGANS.


601. _The voice can be changed and modified by habit._ Sailors,
smiths, and others, who are engaged in noisy occupations, exert their
vocal organs more strongly than those of more quiet pursuits. This not
only affects the structure of the vocal organs, but varies the
intonation of the voice.

602. _The voice is strong in proportion to the development of the
larynx, and the capacity of the chest._ Singing and reading aloud
improve and strengthen the vocal organs, and give a healthy expansion
to the chest. The enunciation of the elementary sounds of the English
language, aids in developing the vocal organs, as well as preventing
disease of the throat and lungs. This exercise also conduces to the
acquisition of musical sounds.

603. _The attitude affects the modulation of the voice._ When an
individual stands erect, the movements of the whole respiratory
apparatus are most free and effective. The larynx is brought forward
by the erect position of the head and the elevation of the chin. The
muscles of the arytenoid cartilages are then brought to a proper
relation for action, by which a tension of the vocal cords is
produced, that favors clear and harmonious enunciation.

_Experiment._ Read with the head bowed forward and the chin depressed;
then read with the head erect and the chin elevated, and the
difference in the movement of the vocal organs, together with the
difference in the voice, will be manifest.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

601-616. _Give the hygiene of the vocal organs._ 602. How may the
voice be strengthened? 603. What effect has the erect attitude upon
the modulations of the voice? Give the experiment.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

[Illustration: Fig. 107. An improper position; but one not unfrequently
seen in some of our common schools, and in some of our public speakers.]

[Illustration: Fig. 108. The proper position for reading, speaking, and
singing.]

604. If an individual or class read or sing when sitting, let the
position represented by fig. 109 be adopted, and not the one
represented by fig. 110; for the erect position in sitting conduces to
the free and effective action of the respiratory and vocal organs, and
is as important as the erect attitude in standing.

