raised it all present, including Ague, bowed and bent the knee.

Agne felt, knew, that this stately man was the Bishop whom she sought,
but she did not point him out to her little brother, for his aspect was
that of some proud sovereign rather than of "the good, kind man" of whom
she had dreamed. She could never dare to force her way into the presence
of this great lord! How should the ruler over a million souls find time
or patience for her and her trivial griefs?

However, there must be within his dwelling sundry presbyters and
deacons, and she would address herself to one of them, as soon as the
crowd had dispersed enough for her to make her way to the door beneath
the cross. Twenty times at least did she renew her efforts, but she made
very small progress; most of the monks, as she tried to squeeze past
them, roughly pushed her back; one, on whose arm she ventured to lay her
hand, begging him to make way for her, broke out into shrieks as though
a serpent had stung him, and when the crush brought her into contact
with the crown-bearer he thrust her away exclaiming:

"Away woman! Do not touch me, spawn of Satan tool of the evil one! or I
will tread you under foot!"

Retreat had been as impossible as progress, and long hours went by
which to her seemed like days; still she felt no fatigue, only alarm
and disgust, and, more than anything else, an ardent desire to reach the
Bishop's palace and take counsel of a priest. It was long past noon when
a diversion took place which served at any rate to interest and amuse
the crying child.

On the platform above the doorway Cynegius came forth--Cynegius, the
Emperor's delegate; a stout man of middle height, with a shrewd round
head and a lawyer's face. State dignitaries, Consuls and Prefects had,
at this date, ceased to wear the costume that had marked the patricians
of old Rome--a woollen toga that fell in broad and dignified folds from
the shoulders; a long, close-fitting robe had taken its place, of purple
silk brocade with gold flowers. On the envoy's shoulder blazed the badge
of the highest officials, a cruciform ornament of a peculiarly thick and
costly tissue. He greeted the crowd with a condescending bow, a herald
blew three blasts on the tuba, and then Cynegius, with a wave of his
hand introduced his private secretary who stood by his side, and who at
once opened a roll he held and shouted at the top of a ringing voice:

"Silence in Caesar's name!"

The trumpet then sounded for the fourth time, and silence so complete
fell on the crowded square that the horses of the mounted guard in front
of the Prefect's house could be heard snorting and champing.

"In Caesar's name," repeated the official, who had been selected for the
duty of reading the Imperial message. Cynegius himself bent his head,
again waved his hand towards his secretary, and then towards the statues
of the Emperor and Empress which, mounted on gilt standards, were
displayed to the populace on each side of the balcony; then the reading
began:

"Theodosius Caesar greets the inhabitants of the great and noble city of
Alexandria, by Cynegius, his faithful ambassador and servant. He knows
that its true and honest citizens confess the Holy Faith in all piety
and steadfastness, as delivered to believers in the beginning by Peter,
the prince of the Apostles; he knows that they hold the true Christian
faith, and abide by the doctrine delivered by the Holy Ghost to the
Fathers of the Church in council at Nicaea.

"Theodosius Caesar who, in all humility and pride, claims to be the
sword and shield, the champion and the rampart of the one true faith,
congratulates his subjects of the great and noble city of Alexandria
inasmuch as that most of them have turned from the devilish heresy of
Arius, and have confessed the true Nicaean creed; and he announces to
them, by his faithful and noble servant Cynegius, that this faith and no
other shall be recognized in Alexandria, as throughout his dominions.

"In Egypt, as in all his lands and provinces, every doctrine opposed to
this precious creed shall be persecuted, and all who confess, preach or
diffuse any other doctrine shall be considered heretics and treated as
such."

The secretary paused, for loud and repeated shouts of joy broke from the
multitude. Not a dissentient word was heard-indeed, the man who should
have dared to utter one would certainly not have escaped unpunished. It
was not till the herald had several times blown a warning blast that the
reader could proceed, as follows:

"It has come to the ears of your Caesar, to the deep grieving of his
Christian soul, that the ancient idolatry, which so long smote mankind
with blindness and kept them wandering far from the gates of Paradise,
still, through the power of the devil, has some temples and altars in
your great and noble city. But because it is grievous to the Christian
and clement heart of the Emperor to avenge the persecutions and death
which so many holy martyrs have endured at the hands of the
bloodthirsty and cruel heathen on their posterity, or on the miscreant
and--misbelieving enemies of our holy faith--and because the Lord
hath said 'vengeance is mine'--Theodosius Caesar only decrees that the
temples of the heathen idols in this great and noble city of Alexandria
shall be closed, their images destroyed and their altars overthrown.
Whosoever shall defile himself with blood, or slay an innocent beast for
sacrifice, or enter a heathen temple, or perform any religious ceremony
therein, or worship any image of a god made by hands-nay, or pray in any
temple in the country or in the city, shall be at once required to pay a
fine of fifteen pounds of gold; and whosoever shall know of such a crime
being committed without giving information of it, shall be fined to the
same amount."--[Codex Theodosianus XVI, 10, 10.]

The last words were spoken to the winds, for a shout of triumph,
louder and wilder than had ever before been heard even on this favorite
meeting-place of the populace, rent the very skies. Nor did it cease,
nor yield to any trumpet-blast, but rolled on in spreading waves down
every street and alley; it reached the ships in the port, and rang
through the halls of the rich and the hovels of the poor; it even
found a dull echo in the light-house at the point of Pharos, where the
watchman was trimming the lamp for the night; and in an incredibly
short time all Alexandria knew that Caesar had dealt a death-blow to the
worship of the heathen gods.

The great and fateful rumor was heard, too, in the Museum and the
Serapeum; once more the youth who had grown up in the high schools of
the city, studying the wisdom of the heathen, gathered together; men
who had refined and purified their intellect at the spring of Greek
philosophy and fired their spirit with enthusiasm for all that was good
and lovely in the teaching of ancient Greece--these obeyed the summons
of their master, Olympius, or flew to arms under the leadership of
Orestes, the Governor, for the High-Priest himself had to see to the
defences of the Serapeum.--Olympius had weapons ready in abundance, and
the youths rapidly collected round the standards he had prepared, and
rushed into the square before the Prefect's house to drive away the
monks and to insist that Cynegius should return forthwith to Rome with
the Emperor's edict.

Young and noble lads were they who marched forth to the struggle,
equipped like the Helleman soldiers of the palmy days of Athens; and as
they went they sang a battle-song of Callinus which some one--who, no
one could tell--had slightly altered for the occasion:

       "Come, rouse ye Greeks; what, sleeping still!
        Is courage dead, is shame unknown?
        Start up, rush forth with zealous will,
        And smite the mocking Christians down!"

Everything that opposed their progress was overthrown. Two maniples of
foot-soldiers who held the high-road across the Bruchium attempted
to turn them, but the advance of the inflamed young warriors was
irresistible and they reached the street of the Caesareum and the square
in front of the Prefect's residence. Here they paused to sing the last
lines of their battlesong:

       "Fate seeks the coward out at home,
        He dies unwept, unknown to fame,
        While by the hero's honored tomb
        Our grandsons' grandsons shall proclaim:
       'In the great conflict's fiercest hour
        He stood unmoved, our shield and tower.'"

It was here, at the wide opening into the square, that the collision
took place: on one side the handsome youths, crowned with garlands, with
their noble Greek type of heads, thoughtful brows, perfumed curls, and
anointed limbs exercised in the gymnasium--on the other the sinister
fanatics in sheep-skin, ascetic visionaries grown grey in fasting,
scourging, and self-denial.

The monks now prepared to meet the onset of the young enthusiasts who
were fighting for freedom of thought and enquiry, for Art and Beauty.
Each side was defending what it felt to be the highest Good, each was
equally in earnest as to its convictions, both fought for something
dearer and more precious than this earthly span of existence. But the
philosophers' party had swords; the monks' sole weapon was the scourge,
and they were accustomed to ply that, not on each other but on their own
rebellious flesh. A wild and disorderly struggle began with swingeing
blows on both sides; prayers and psalms mingling with the battle-song of
the heathen. Here a monk fell wounded, there one lay dead, there again
lay a fine and delicate-looking youth, felled by the heavy fist of a
recluse. A hermit wrestled hand to hand with a young philosopher who,
only yesterday had delivered his first lecture on the Neo-Platonism of
Plotinus to an interested audience.

And in the midst of this mad struggle stood Agne with her little
brother, who clung closely to her skirts and was too terrified to shed
a tear or utter a cry. The girl was resolutely calm, but she was too
utterly terror-stricken even to pray. Fear, absorbing fear had stunned
her thoughts; it overmastered her like some acute physical pain which
began in her heart and penetrated every fibre of her frame.

Even while the Imperial message was being read she had been too
frightened to take it all in; and now she simply shut her eyes tight and
hardly understood what was going on around her, till a new and different
noise sounded close in her ears: the clatter of hoofs, blare of trumpets
and shouts and screams. At last the tumult died away and, when she
ventured to open her eyes and look about her, the place all round her
was as clear as though it had been swept by invisible hands; here and
there lay a dead body and there still was a dense crowd in the street
leading to the Caesareum, but even that was dispersing and retreating
before the advance of a mounted force.

She breathed freely once more, and released the child's head from the
skirt of her dress in which he had wrapped and buried it. The end of her
alarms was not yet come, however, for a troop of the young heathen came
flying across the square in wild retreat before a division of the heavy
cavalry, which had intervened to part the combatants.

The fugitives came straight towards her; again she closed her eyes
tightly, expecting every instant to find herself under the horses' feet.
Then one of the runaways knocked down Papias, and she could bear no
more; her senses deserted her, her knees failed under her, she lost
consciousness, and with a dull groan she fell on the dusty pavement.
Close to her, as she lay, rushed the pursued and the pursuers--and at
last, how long after she knew not, when she recovered her senses she
felt as if she were floating in the air, and presently perceived that a
soldier had her in his arms and was carrying her like a child.

Fresh alarms and fresh shame overwhelmed the poor girl; she tried to
free herself and found him quite ready to set her down. When she was
once more on her feet and felt that she could stand she glanced wildly
round her with sudden recollection, and then uttered a hoarse cry, for
her mouth and tongue were parched:

"Christ Jesus! Where is my brother?" She pushed back her hair with a
desperate gesture, pressing her hands to her temples and peering all
round her with a look of fevered misery.

She was still in the square and close to the door of the Prefect's
house; a man on horseback, in all probability her preserver's servant,
was following them, leading his master's horse. On the pavement lay
wounded men groaning with pain; the street of the Caesareum was lined
with a double row of footsoldiers of Papias no sign!

Again she called him, and with such deep anguish in her voice, which was
harsh and shrill with terror, that the young officer looked at her with
extreme compassion.

"Papias, Papias--my little brother! O God my Saviour!--where, where is
the child?"

"We will have him sought for," said the soldier whose voice was gentle
and kind. "You are too young and pretty--what brought you into this
crowd and amid such an uproar?"

She colored deeply and looking down answered low and hurriedly: "I was
going to see the Bishop."

"You chose an evil hour," replied Constantine, for it was he who had
found her lying on the pavement and who had thought it only an act of
mercy not to trust so young and fair a girl to the protection of his
followers. "You may thank God that you have got off so cheaply. Now, I
must return to my men. You know where the Bishop lives? Yes, here. And
with regard to your little brother.... Stay; do you live in Alexandria?"
"No, my lord."

"But you have some relation or friend whom you lodge with?"

"No, my lord. I am... I have... I told you, I only want to see my lord
the Bishop."

"Very strange! Well, take care of yourself. My time is not my own; but
by-and-bye, in a very short time, I will speak to the city watchmen; how
old is the boy?"

"Nearly six."

"And with black hair like yours?"

"No, my lord--fair hair," and as she spoke the tears started to her
eyes. "He has light curly hair and a sweet, pretty little face."

The prefect smiled and nodded. "And if they find him," he went on,
"Papias, you say, is his name where is he to be taken?"

"I do not know, my lord, for--and yet! Oh! my head aches, I cannot
think--if only I knew.... If they find him he must come here--here to my
lord the Bishop."

"To Theophilus?" said Constantine in surprise. "Yes, yes--to him," she
said hastily. "Or--stay--to the gate-keeper at the Bishop's palace."

"Well, that is less aristocratic, but perhaps it is more to the
purpose," said the officer; and with a sign to his servant, he twisted
his hand in his horse's mane, leaped into the saddle, waved her a
farewell, and rejoined his men without paying any heed to her thanks.




CHAPTER XIV.

There was much bustle and stir in the hall of the Episcopal palace.
Priests and monks were crowding in and out; widows, who, as deaconesses,
were entrusted with the care of the sick, were waiting, bandages in
hand, and discussing their work and cases, while acolytes lifted the
wounded on to the litters to carry them to the hospitals.

The deacon Eusebius, whom we have met as the spiritual adviser of
Marcus, was superintending the good work, and he took particular care
that as much attention should be shown to the wounded heathen as to the
Christians.

In front of the building veterans of the twenty-first legion paced up
and down in the place of the ordinary gate-keepers, who were sufficient
protection in times of peace.

Agne looked in vain for any but soldiers, but at last she slipped in
unobserved among the men and women who were tending the wounded. She
was terribly thirsty, and seeing one of the widows mixing some wine and
water and offer it to one of the wounded men who pushed it away, she
took courage and begged the deaconess to give her a drink. The woman
handed her the cup at once, asking to whom she belonged that she was
here.

"I want to see my lord, the Bishop," replied Agne, but then correcting
herself, she added hastily: "If I could see the Bishop's gate-keeper, I
might speak to him."

"There he is," said the deaconess, pointing to an enormously tall man
standing in the darkest and remotest corner of the hall. The darkness
reminded her for the first time that it was now evening. Night was
drawing on, and then where could she take refuge and find shelter? She
shuddered and simply saying: "Thank you," she went to the man who had
been pointed out to her and begged that if her little brother should be
found and brought to him, he would take charge of him.

"To be sure," said the big man good-naturedly. "He can be taken to the
orphanage of the 'Good Samaritan' if they bring him here, and you can
enquire for him there."

She then made so bold as to ask if she could see a priest; but for this
she was directed to go to the church, as all those who were immediately
attached to the Bishop were to-day fully occupied, and had no time
for trifles. Agne, however, persisted in her request till the man lost
patience altogether and told her to be off at once; but at this instant
three ecclesiastics came in at the door by which her friend was on
guard, and Agne, collecting all her courage, went up to one of them, a
priest of advanced age, and besought him urgently:

"Oh! reverend Father, I beg of you to hear me. I must speak to a priest,
and that man drives me away and says you none of you have time to attend
to me!"

"Did he say that!" asked the priest, and he turned angrily on the
culprit saying: "The Church and her ministers never lack time to attend
to the needs of any faithful soul--I will follow you, brothers.--Now, my
child, what is it that you need?"

"It lies so heavily on my soul," replied Agne, raising her eyes and
hands in humble supplication. "I love my Saviour, but I cannot always do
exactly as I should wish, and I do not know how I ought to act so as not
to fall into sin."

"Come with me," said the priest, and leading the way across a small
garden, he took her into a wide open court and from thence in at a side
door and up a flight of stairs which led to the upper floor. As
she followed him her heart beat high with painful and yet hopeful
excitement. She kept her hands tightly clasped and tried to pray, but
she could hardly control her thoughts of her brother and of all she
wanted to say to the presbyter.

They presently entered a lofty room where the window-shutters were
closed, and where a number of lamps, already lighted, were hanging over
the cushioned divans on which sat rows of busy scribes of all ages.

"Here we are," said the priest kindly, as he seated himself in an
easy-chair at some little distance from the writers. "Now, tell me fully
what troubles you; but as briefly as you can, for I am sparing you these
minutes from important business."

"My lord," she began, "my parents were freeborn, natives of Augusta
Trevirorum. My father was a collector of tribute in the Emperor's
service ..."

"Very good--but has this anything to do with the matter?"

"Yes, yes, it has. My father and mother were good Christians and in
the riots at Antioch--you remember, my lord, three years ago--they were
killed and I and my brother--Papias is his name..."

"Yes, yes--go on."

"We were sold. My master paid for us--I saw the money; but he did not
treat us as slaves. But now he wants me--he, Sir, is wholly devoted to
the heathen gods-and he wants me..."

"To serve his idols?"

"Yes, reverend Father, and so we ran away."

"Quite right, my child."

"But the scriptures say that the slave shall obey his master?"

