'Well?'

'He is my father!'

'Well?'

'You must save him! You shall, I say!' And she seized Raphael's arm in
the imperiousness of her passion.

He shrugged his shoulders: but felt, he knew not why, marvellously
inclined to obey her.

'I may as well do this as anything else, having nothing else to do.
Whither now, sir?'

'Whither you will. Our troops are disgraced, our eagles taken. We are
your prisoners by right of war. We follow you.'

'Oh, my fortune! A new responsibility! Why cannot I stir, without live
animals, from fleas upward, attaching themselves to me? Is it not
enough to have nine blind puppies at my back, and an old brute at my
heels, who will persist in saving my life, that I must be burdened over
and above with a respectable elderly rebel and his daughter? Why am I
not allowed by fate to care for nobody but myself? Sir, I give you
both your freedom. The world is wide enough for us all. I really ask no
ransom.'

'You seem philosophically disposed, my friend.'

'I? Heaven forbid! I have gone right through that slough, and come out
sheer on the other side. For sweeping the last lingering taint of it out
of me, I have to thank, not sulphur and exorcisms, but your soldiers and
their morning's work. Philosophy is superfluous in a world where all are
fools.'

'Do you include yourself under that title?'

'Most certainly, my best sir. Don't fancy that I make any exceptions. If
I can in any way prove my folly to you, I will do it.'

'Then help me and my daughter to Ostia.'

'A very fair instance. Well--my dog happens to be going that way; and
after all, you seem to have a sufficient share of human imbecility to
be a very fit companion for me. I hope, though, you do not set up for a
wise man!'

'God knows--no! Am I not of Heraclian's army?'

'True; and the young lady here made herself so great a fool about you,
that she actually infected the very dog.'

'So we three fools will forth together.'

'And the greatest one, as usual, must help the rest. But I have nine
puppies in my family already. How am I to carry you and them?'

'I will take them,' said the girl; and Bran, after looking on at the
transfer with a somewhat dubious face, seemed to satisfy herself that
all was right, and put her head contentedly under the girl's hand.

'Eh? You trust her, Bran?' said Raphael, in an undertone. 'I must
really emancipate myself from your instructions if you require a similar
simplicity in me. Stay! there wanders a mule without a rider; we may as
well press into the service.'

He caught the mule, lifted the wounded man into the saddle, and the
cavalcade set forth, turning out of the highroad into a by-lane, which
the officer, who seemed to know the country thoroughly, assured would
lead them to Ostia by an unfrequented route.

'If we arrive there before sundown, we are saved,' said he.

'And in the meantime,' answered Raphael, 'between the dog and this
dagger, which, as I take care to inform all comers, is delicately
poisoned, we may keep ourselves clear of marauders. And yet, what a
meddling fool I am!' he went on to himself. 'What possible interest can
I have in this uncircumcised rebel! The least evil is, that if we are
taken, which we most probably shall be, I shall be crucified for helping
to escape. But even if we get safe off--here is a fresh tie between me
and those very brother fleas, to be rid of whom I have chosen beggary
and starvation. Who knows where it may end? Pooh! The man is like other
men. He is certain, before the day is over, to prove ungrateful, or
attempt the mountebank-heroic, or give me some other excuse for bidding
good-evening. And in the meantime there is something quaint in the fact
of finding so sober a respectability, with a young daughter too, abroad
on this fool's errand, which really makes me curious to discover with
what variety of flea I am to class him.'

But while Aben-Ezra was talking to himself about the father, he could
not help, somehow, thinking about the daughter. Again and again he
found himself looking at her. She was, undeniably, most beautiful. Her
features were not as regularly perfect as Hypatia's, nor her stature so
commanding; but her face shone with a clear and joyful determination,
and with a tender and modest thoughtfulness, such as he had never beheld
before united in one countenance; and as she stepped along, firmly and
lightly, by her father's side, looping up her scattered tresses as she
went, laughing at the struggles of her noisy burden, and looking up with
rapture at her father's gradually brightening face, Raphael could
not help stealing glance after glance, and was surprised to find them
returned with a bright, honest, smiling gratitude, which met full-eyed,
as free from prudery as it was from coquetry.... 'A lady she is,' said
he to himself; 'but evidently no city one. There is nature--or something
else, there, pure and unadulterated, without any of man's additions or
beautifications.' And as he looked, he began to feel it a pleasure
such as his weary heart had not known for many a year, simply to watch
her....

'Positively there is a foolish enjoyment after all in making other fleas
smile.... Ass that I am! As if I had not drunk all that ditch-water cup
to the dregs years ago!'

They went on for some time in silence, till the officer, turning to
him--

'And may I ask you, my quaint preserver, whom I would have thanked
before but for this foolish faintness, which is now going off, what and
who you are?'

'A flea, sir--a flea--nothing more.'

'But a patrician flea, surely, to judge by your language and manners?'

'Not that exactly. True, I have been rich, as the saying is; I may be
rich again, they tell me, when I am fool enough to choose.'

'Oh if we were but rich!' sighed the girl.

'You would be very unhappy, my dear young lady. Believe a flea who has
tried the experiment thoroughly.'

'Ah! but we could ransom my brother! and now we can find no money till
we get back to Africa.'

'And none then,' said the officer, in a low voice. 'You forget, my poor
child, that I mortgaged the whole estate to raise my legion. We must not
shrink from looking at things as they are.'

'Ah! and he is prisoner! he will be sold for a slave--perhaps--ah!
perhaps crucified, for he is not a Roman! Oh, he will be crucified!' and
she burst into an agony of weeping....Suddenly she dashed away her tears
and looked up clear and bright once more.

'No! forgive me, father! God will protect His own!'

'My dear young lady,' said Raphael, 'if you really dislike such
a prospect for your brother, and are in want of a few dirty coins
wherewith to prevent it, perhaps I may be able to find you them in
Ostia.'

She looked at incredulously, as her eye glanced over his rags, and then,
blushing, begged his pardon for her unspoken thoughts.

'Well, as you choose to suppose. But my dog has been so civil to you
already, that perhaps she may have no objection to make you a present
of that necklace of hers. I will go to the Rabbis, and we will make all
right; so don't cry. I hate crying; and the puppies are quite chorus
enough for the present tragedy.'

'The Rabbis? Are you a Jew?' asked the officer.

'Yes, sir, a Jew. And you, I presume, a Christian: perhaps you may
have scruples about receiving--your sect has generally none about
taking--from one of our stubborn and unbelieving race. Don't be
frightened, though, for your conscience; I assure you I am no more a Jew
at heart than I am a Christian.'

'God help you then!'

'Some one, or something, has helped me a great deal too much, for
three-and-thirty years of pampering. But, pardon me, that was a strange
speech for a Christian.'

'You must be a good Jew, sir, before you can be a good Christian.'

'Possibly. I intend to be neither--nor a good Pagan either. My dear sir,
let us drop the subject. It is beyond me. If I can be as good a brute
animal as my dog there--it being first demonstrated that it is good to
be good--I shall be very well content.'

The officer looked down on with a stately, loving sorrow. Raphael caught
his eye, and felt that he was in the presence of no common man.

'I must take care what I say here, I suspect, or I shall be entangled
shortly in a regular Socratic dialogue.... And now, sir, may I return
your question, and ask who and what are you? I really have no intention
of giving you up to any Caesar, Antiochus, Tiglath-Pileser, or other
flea-devouring flea.... They will fatten well enough without your blood.
So I only ask as a student of the great nothing-in-general, which men
call the universe.'

'I was prefect of a legion this morning. What I am now, you know as well
as I.'

'Just what I do not. I am in deep wonder at seeing your hilarity, when,
by all flea-analogies, you ought to be either be howling your fate like
Achilles on the shores of Styx, or pretending to grin and bear it, as
I was taught to do when I played at Stoicism. You are not of that sect
certainly, for you confessed yourself a fool just now.'

'And it would be long, would it not, before you made one of them do as
much? Well, be it so. A fool I am; yet, if God helps us as far as Ostia,
why should I not be cheerful?'

'Why should you?'

'What better thing can happen to a fool, than that God should teach that
he is one, when he fancied himself the wisest of the wise? Listen to
me, sir. Four mouths ago I was blessed with health, honour, lands,
friends--all for which the heart of man could wish. And if, for an
insane ambition, I have chosen to risk all those, against the solemn
warnings of the truest friend, and the wisest saint who treads this
earth of God's--should I not rejoice to have it proved to me, even by
such a lesson as this, that the friend who never deceived me before was
right in this case too; and that the God who has checked and turned me
for forty years of wild toil and warfare, whenever I dared to do what
was right in the sight of my own eyes, has not forgotten me yet, or
given up the thankless task of my education?'

'And who, pray, is this peerless friend?'

'Augustine of Hippo.'

'Humph! It had been better for the world in general, if the great
dialectician had exerted his powers of persuasion on Heraclian himself.'

'He did so, but in vain.'

'I don't doubt it. I know the sleek Count well enough to judge what
effect a sermon would have upon that smooth vulpine determination of
his.... "An instrument in the hands of God, my dear brother.... We
must obey His call, even to the death," etc. etc.' And Raphael laughed
bitterly.

'You know the Count?'

'As well, sir, as I care to know any man.'

'I am sorry for your eyesight, then, sir,' said the Prefect severely,
'if it has been able to discern no more than that in so august a
character.'

'My dear sir, I do not doubt his excellence--nay, his inspiration. How
well he divined the perfectly fit moment for stabbing his old comrade
Stilicho! But really, as two men of the world, we must be aware by this
time that every man has his price.'....

'Oh, hush! hush!' whispered the girl. 'You cannot guess how you pain
him. He worships the Count. It was not ambition, as he pretends, but
merely loyalty to him, which brought here against his will.'

'My dear madam, forgive me. For your sake I am silent.'....

'For her sake! A pretty speech for me! What next?' said he to himself.
'Ah, Bran, Bran, this is all your fault!'

'For my sake! Oh, why not for your own sake? How sad to hear one--one
like you, only sneering and speaking evil!'

'Why then? If fools are fools, and one can safely call them so, why not
do it?'

'Ah,--if God was merciful enough to send down His own Son to die for
them, should we not be merciful enough not to judge their failings
harshly!'

'My dear young lady, spare a worn-out philosopher any new anthropologic
theories. We really must push on a little faster, if we intend to reach
Ostia to-night.'

But, for some reason or other, Raphael sneered no more for a full
half-hour.

Long, however, ere they reached Ostia, the night had fallen; and their
situation began to be more than questionably safe. Now and then a wolf,
slinking across the road towards his ghastly feast, glided like a lank
ghost out of the darkness, and into it again, answering Bran's growl by
a gleam of his white teeth. Then the voices of some marauding party rang
coarse and loud through the still night, and made them hesitate and stop
a while. And at last, worst of all, the measured tramp of an imperial
column began to roll like distant thunder along the plain below. They
were advancing upon Ostia! What if they arrived there before the routed
army could rally, and defend themselves long enough to re-embark!....
What if--a thousand ugly possibilities began to crowd up.

'Suppose we found the gates of Ostia shut, and the Imperialists
bivouacked outside?' said Raphael half to himself.

'God would protect His own,' answered the girl; and Raphael had no heart
to rob her of her hope, though he looked upon their chances of escape as
growing smaller and smaller every moment. The poor girl was weary; the
mule weary also; and as they crawled along, at a pace which made it
certain that the fast passing column would be at Ostia an hour before
them, to join the vanguard of the pursuers, and aid them in investing
the town, she had to lean again and again on Raphael's arm. Her shoes,
unfitted for so rough a journey, bad been long since torn off, and her
tender feet were marking every step with blood. Raphael knew it by her
faltering gait; and remarked, too, that neither sigh nor murmur passed
her lips. But as for helping her, he could not; and began to curse
the fancy which had led to eschew even sandals as unworthy the
self-dependence of a Cynic.

And so they crawled along, while Raphael and the Prefect, each guessing
the terrible thoughts of the other, were thankful for the darkness which
hid their despairing countenances from the young girl; she, on the other
hand, chatting cheerfully, almost laughingly, to her silent father.

At last the poor girl stepped on some stone more sharp than usual--and,
with a sudden writhe and shriek, sank to the ground. Raphael lifted her
up, and she tried to proceed, but sank down again.... What was to be
done?

'I expected this,' said the Prefect, in a slow stately voice. 'Hear me,
sir! Jew, Christian, or philosopher, God seems to have bestowed on you a
heart which I can trust. To your care I commit this girl--your property,
like me, by right of war. Mount her upon this mule. Hasten with
her--where you will--for God will be there also. And may He so deal with
you as you deal with her henceforth. An old and disgraced soldier can do
no more than die.'

And he made an effort to dismount; but fainting from his wounds, sank
upon the neck of the mule. Raphael and his daughter caught in their
arms.

'Father! Father! Impossible! Cruel! Oh--do you think that I would have
followed you hither from Africa, against your own entreaties, to desert
you now?'

'My daughter, I command!'

The girl remained firm and sound.

'How long have you learned to disobey me? Lift the old disgraced man
down, sir, and leave to die in the right place--on the battlefield where
his general sent him.'

The girl sank down on the road in an agony of weeping. 'I must help
myself, I see,' said her father, dropping to the ground. 'Authority
vanishes before old age and humiliation. Victoria! has your father no
sins to answer for already, that you will send before his God with your
blood too upon his head?'

Still the girl sat weeping on the ground; while Raphael, utterly at his
wits end, tried hard to persuade himself that it was no concern of his.

'I am at the service of either or of both, for life or death; only be so
good as to settle it quickly.... Hell! here it is settled for us, with a
vengeance!'

And as he spoke, the tramp and jingle of horsemen rang along the lane,
approaching rapidly.

In an instant Victoria had sprung to her feet--weakness and pain had
vanished.

'There is one chance--one chance for him! Lift over the bank, sir! Lift
over, while I run forward and meet them. My death will delay them long
enough for you to save him!'

'Death?' cried Raphael, seizing her by the arm. 'If that were all--'

'God will protect His own,' answered she calmly, laying her finger
on her lips; and then breaking from his grasp in the strength of her
heroism, vanished into the night.

Her father tried to follow her, but fell on his face, groaning. Raphael
lifted him, strove to drag up the steep bank: but his knees knocked
together; a faint sweat seemed to melt every limb.... There was a pause,
which secured ages long.... Nearer and nearer came the trampling.... A
sudden gleam of the moon revealed Victoria standing with outspread arms,
right before the horses' heads. A heavenly glory seemed to bathe her
from head to foot.... or was it tears sparkling in his own eyes?....
Then the grate and jar of the horse-hoofs on the road, as they pulled up
suddenly.... He turned his face away and shut his eyes....

'What are you?' thundered a voice.

'Victoria, the daughter of Majoricus the Prefect.'

The voice was low, but yet so clear and calm, that every syllable rang
through Aben-Ezra's tingling ears....

A shout--a shriek--the confused murmur of many voices.... He looked up,
in spite of himself-a horseman had sprung to the ground, and clasped
Victoria in his arms. The human heart of flesh, asleep for many a year,
leaped into mad life within his breast, and drawing his dagger, he
rushed into the throng--

'Villains! Hellhounds! I will balk you! She shall die first!'

And the bright blade gleamed over Victoria's head.... He was struck
down--blinded--half-stunned--but rose again with the energy of
madness.... What was this? Soft arms around him.... Victoria's!

'Save him! spare him! He saved us! Sir! It is my brother! We are safe!
Oh, spare the dog! It saved my father!'

'We have mistaken each other, indeed, sir!' said a gay young Tribune, in
a voice trembling with joy. 'Where is my father?'

'Fifty yards behind. Down, Bran! Quiet! O Solomon, mine ancestor, why
did you not prevent me making such an egregious fool of myself? Why, I
shall be forced, in self-justification, to carry through the farce!'

There is no use telling what followed during the next five minutes,
at the end of which time Raphael found himself astride of a goodly
war-horse, by the side of the young Tribune, who carried Victoria before
him. Two soldiers in the meantime were supporting the Prefect on his
mule, and convincing that stubborn bearer of burdens that it was not
quite so unable to trot as it had fancied, by the combined arguments of
a drench of wine and two sword-points, while they heaped their general
with blessings, and kissed his hands and feet.

'Your father's soldiers seem to consider themselves in debt to him: not,
surely, for taking them where they could best run away?'

'Ah, poor fellows!' said the Tribune; 'we have had as real a panic among
us as I ever read of in Arrian or Polybius. But he has been a father
rather than a general to them. It is not often that, out of a routed
army, twenty gallant men will volunteer to ride back into the enemy's
ranks, on the chance of an old man's breathing still.'

'Then you knew where to find us?' said Victoria.

'Some of them knew. And he himself showed us this very by-road
yesterday, when we took up our ground, and told us it might be of
service on occasion--and so it has been.'

'But they told me that you were taken prisoner. Oh, the torture I have
suffered for you!'

'Silly child! Did you fancy my father's son would be taken alive? I and
the first troop got away over the garden walls, and cut our way out into
the plain, three hours ago.'

'Did I not tell you,' said Victoria, leaning toward Raphael, 'that God
would protect His own?'

'You did,' answered he; and fell into a long and silent meditation.



CHAPTER XIV: THE ROCKS OF THE SIRENS


THESE four months had been busy and eventful enough to Hypatia and
to Philammon; yet the events and the business were of so gradual and
uniform a tenor, that it is as well to pass quickly over them, and show
what had happened principally by its effects.

The robust and fiery desert-lad was now metamorphosed into the pale and
thoughtful student, oppressed with the weight of careful thought and
weary memory. But those remembrances were all recent ones. With his
entrance into Hypatia's lecture-room, and into the fairy realms of Greek
thought, a new life had begun for him; and the Laura, and Pambo, and
Arsenius, seemed dim phantoms from some antenatal existence, which faded
day by day before the inrush of new and startling knowledge.

But though the friends and scenes of his childhood had fallen back
so swiftly into the far horizon, he was not lonely. His heart found a
lovelier, if not a healthier home, than it had ever known before. For
during those four peaceful and busy months of study there had sprung
up between Hypatia and the beautiful boy one of those pure and yet
passionate friendships--call them rather, with St. Augustine, by the
sacred name of love--which, fair and holy as they are when they link
youth to youth, or girl to girl, reach their full perfection only
between man and woman. The unselfish adoration with which a maiden
may bow down before some strong and holy priest, or with which an
enthusiastic boy may cling to the wise and tender matron, who, amid
the turmoil of the world, and the pride of beauty, and the cares of
wifehood, bends down to with counsel and encouragement--earth knows
no fairer bonds than these, save wedded love itself. And that second
relation, motherly rather than sisterly, had bound Philammon with a
golden chain to the wondrous maid of Alexandria.

From the commencement of his attendance in her lecture-room she had
suited her discourses to what she fancied were his especial spiritual
needs; and many a glance of the eye towards him, on any peculiarly
important sentence, set the poor boy's heart beating at that sign that
the words were meant for him. But before a month was past, won by the
intense attention with which he watched for every utterance of hers, she
had persuaded her father to give a place in the library as one of his
pupils, among the youths who were employed there daily in transcribing,
as well as in studying, the authors then in fashion.

She saw him at first but seldom--more seldom than she would have wished;
but she dreaded the tongue of scandal, heathen as well as Christian,
and contented herself with inquiring daily from her father about the
progress of the boy. And when at times she entered for a moment the
library, where he sat writing, or passed him on her way to the Museum, a
look was interchanged, on her part of most gracious approval, and on his
of adoring gratitude, which was enough for both. Her spell was working
surely; and she was too confident in her own cause and her own powers to
wish to hurry that transformation for which she so fondly hoped.

'He must begin at the beginning,' thought she to herself. 'Mathematics
and the Parmenides are enough for him as yet. Without a training in the
liberal sciences be cannot gain a faith worthy of those gods to whom
some day I shall present him; and I should find his Christian ignorance
and fanaticism transferred, whole and rude, to the service of those gods
whose shrine is unapproachable save to the spiritual man, who has passed
through the successive vestibules of science and philosophy.'

But soon, attracted herself, as much as wishing to attract him, she
employed him in copying manuscripts for her own use. She sent back his
themes and declamations, corrected with her own hand; and Philammon laid
them by in his little garret at Eudaimon's house as precious badges of
honour, after exhibiting them to the reverential and envious gaze of the
little porter. So he toiled on, early and late, counting himself
well paid for a week's intense exertion by a single smile or word of
approbation, and went home to pour out his soul to his host on the
one inexhaustible theme which they had in common--Hypatia and her
perfections. He would have raved often enough on the same subject to
his fellow-pupils, but he shrank not only from their artificial city
manners, but also from their morality, for suspecting which he saw but
too good cause. He longed to go out into the streets, to proclaim to the
whole world the treasure which he had found, and call on all to come and
share it with him. For there was no jealousy in that pure love of his.
Could he have seen her lavishing on thousands far greater favours than
she had conferred on him, he would have rejoiced in the thought that
there were so many more blest beings upon earth, and have loved them
all and every one as brothers, for having deserved her notice. Her
very beauty, when his first flush of wonder was past, he ceased to
mention--ceased even to think of it. Of course she must be beautiful. It
was her right; the natural complement of her other graces but it was to
him only what the mother's smile is to the infant, the sunlight to the
skylark, the mountain-breeze to the hunter--an inspiring element, on
which he fed unconsciously. Only when he doubted for a moment some
especially startling or fanciful assertion, did he become really aware
of the great loveliness of her who made it; and then his heart silenced
his judgment with the thought--Could any but true words come out of
those perfect lips?--any but royal thoughts take shape within that
queenly head?.... Poor fool! Yet was it not natural enough?

Then, gradually, as she passed the boy, poring over his book, in some
alcove of the Museum Gardens, she would invite him by a glance to join
the knot of loungers and questioners who dangled about her and her
father, and fancied themselves to be reproducing the days of the
Athenian sages amid the groves of another Academus. Sometimes, even, she
had beckoned him to her side as she sat in some retired arbour, attended
only by her father; and there some passing observation, earnest and
personal, however lofty and measured, made him aware, as it was intended
to do, that she had a deeper interest in him, a livelier sympathy for
him, than for the many; that he was in her eyes not merely a pupil to be
instructed, but a soul whom she desired to educate. And those delicious
gleams of sunlight grew more frequent and more protracted; for by each
she satisfied herself more and more that she had not mistaken either
his powers or his susceptibilities: and in each, whether in public or
private, Philammon seemed to bear himself more worthily. For over and
above the natural ease and dignity which accompanies physical beauty,
and the modesty, self-restraint, and deep earnestness which he had
acquired under the discipline of the Laura, his Greek character was
developing itself in all its quickness, subtlety, and versatility, until
he seemed to Hypatia some young Titan, by the side of the flippant,
hasty, and insincere talkers who made up her chosen circle.

But man can no more live upon Platonic love than on the more prolific
species of that common ailment; and for the first month Philammon would
have gone hungry to his couch full many a night, to lie awake from baser
causes than philosophic meditation, had it not been for his magnanimous
host, who never lost heart for a moment, either about himself, or any
other human being. As for Philammon's going out with him to earn his
bread, he would not hear of it. Did he suppose that he could meet any
of those monkish rascals in the street, without being knocked down and
carried off by main force? And besides there was a sort of impiety in
allowing so hopeful a student to neglect the 'Divine Ineffable' in order
to supply the base necessities of the teeth. So he should pay no rent
for his lodgings--positively none; and as for eatables--why, he must
himself work a little harder in order to cater for both. Had not all his
neighbours their litters of children to provide for, while he, thanks
to the immortals, had been far too wise to burden the earth with animals
who would add to the ugliness of their father the Tartarean hue of their
mother? And after all, Philammon could pay him back when he became a
great sophist, and made money, as of course he would some day or other;
and in the meantime, something might turn up--things were always
turning up for those whom the gods favoured; and besides, he had fully
ascertained that on the day on which he first met Philammon, the planets
were favourable, the Mercury being in something or other, he forgot
what, with Helios, which portended for Philammon, in his opinion, a
similar career with that of the glorious and devout Emperor Julian.

Philammon winced somewhat at the hint; which seemed to have an ugly
verisimilitude in it: but still, philosophy he must learn, and bread he
must eat; so he submitted.

But one evening, a few days after he had been admitted as Theon's pupil,
he found, much to his astonishment, lying on the table in his garret, an
undeniable glittering gold piece. He took it down to the porter the
next morning, and begged him to discover the owner of the lost coin,
and return it duly. But what was his surprise, when the little man, amid
endless capers and gesticulations, informed him with an air of mystery,
that it was anything but lost; that his arrears of rent had been paid
for him; and that by the bounty of the upper powers, a fresh piece of
coin would be forthcoming every month! In vain Philammon demanded to
know who was his benefactor. Eudaimon resolutely kept the secret and
imprecated a whole Tartarus of unnecessary curses on his wife if she
allowed her female garrulity--though the poor creature seemed never to
open her lips from morning till night--to betray so great a mystery.

Who was the unknown friend? There was but one person who could have done
it.... And yet he dared not--the thought was too delightful--think it
was she. It must have been her father. The old man had asked him more
than once about the state of his purse. True, he had always returned
evasive answers; but the kind old man must have divined the truth. Ought
he not--must he not--go and thank him? No; perhaps it was more courteous
to say nothing. If he--she--for of course she had permitted, perhaps
advised, the gift--had intended him to thank them, would they have so
carefully concealed their own generosity?.... Be it so, then. But how
would he not repay them for it! How delightful to be in her debt for
anything--for everything! Would that he could have the enjoyment of
owing her existence itself!

So he took the coin, bought unto himself a cloak of the most philosophic
fashion, and went his way, such as it was, rejoicing.

But his faith in Christianity? What had become of that?

What usually happens in such cases. It was not dead; but nevertheless it
had fallen fast asleep for the time being. He did not disbelieve it;
he would have been shocked to hear such a thing asserted of him: but he
happened to be busy believing something else--geometry, conic sections,
cosmogonies, psychologies, and what not. And so it befell that he had
not just then time to believe in Christianity. He recollected at times
its existence; but even then he neither affirmed nor denied it. When
