"Shut the mosquito nettin' door tight behind you, so's to keep the
flies out; it ain't fly time yet, but I want you to start right; take
your parcel along with you and then you won't have to come down for it;
always make your head save your heels. Rub your feet on that braided
rug; hang your hat and cape in the entry as you go past."

"It's my best hat," said Rebecca.

"Take it upstairs then and put it in the clothes-press; but I shouldn't
'a' thought you'd 'a' worn your best hat on the stage."

"It's my only hat," explained Rebecca. "My every-day hat was n't good
enough to bring. Sister Fanny's going to finish it."

"Lay your parasol in the entry closet."

"Do you mind if I keep it in my room, please? It always seems safer."

"There ain't any thieves hereabouts, and if there was, I guess they
wouldn't make for your sunshade; but come along. Remember to always go
up the back way; we don't use the front stairs on account o' the
carpet; take care o' the turn and don't ketch your foot; look to your
right and go in. When you've washed your face and hands and brushed
your hair you can come down, and by and by we'll unpack your trunk and
get you settled before supper. Ain't you got your dress on hind side
foremost?"

Rebecca drew her chin down and looked at the row of smoked pearl
buttons running up and down the middle of her flat little chest. "Hind
side foremost?  Oh, I see! No, that's all right. If you have seven
children you can't keep buttonin' and unbuttonin' 'em all the
time--they have to do themselves. We're always buttoned up in front at
our house. Mira's only three, but she's buttoned up in front, too."

Miranda said nothing as she closed the door, but her looks were more
eloquent than words.

Rebecca stood perfectly still in the centre of the floor and looked
about her. There was a square of oilcloth in front of each article of
furniture and a drawn-in rug beside the single four poster, which was
covered with a fringed white dimity counterpane.

Everything was as neat as wax, but the ceilings were much higher than
Rebecca was accustomed to. It was a north room, and the window, which
was long and narrow, looked out on the back buildings and the barn.

It was not the room, which was far more comfortable than Rebecca's own
at Sunnybrook Farm, nor the lack of view, nor yet the long journey, for
she was not conscious of weariness; it was not the fear of a strange
place, for she adored new places and new sensations; it was because of
some curious blending of uncomprehended emotions that Rebecca stood her
beloved pink sunshade in the corner, tore off her best hat, flung it on
the bureau with the porcupine quills on the under side, and stripping
down the dimity spread, precipitated herself into the middle of the bed
and pulled the counterpane over her head.

In a moment the door opened with a clatter of the latch.

Knocking was a refinement quite unknown in Riverboro, and if it had
been heard of, it would never have been wasted on a child. Miss Miranda
entered, and as her eye wandered about the vacant room, it fell upon a
white and tempestuous ocean of counterpane, an ocean breaking into
strange movements of wave and crest and billow.

"Rebecca!"

The tone in which the word was voiced gave it all the effect of having
been shouted from the housetops.

A dark ruffled head and two frightened eyes appeared above the dimity
spread.

"What are you layin' on your good bed in the daytime for, messin' up
the feathers, and dirtyin' the comforter with your dusty boots?"

Rebecca rose guiltily. There seemed no excuse to make. Her offense was
beyond explanation or apology.

"I'm sorry, Aunt Mirandy-something came over me; I don't know what."

"Well, if it comes over you very soon again we'll have to find out what
't is. Spread your bed up smooth this minute, for 'Bijah Flagg's
bringin' your trunk upstairs, and I wouldn't let him see such a
cluttered-up room for anything; he'd tell it all over town."

When Mr. Cobb had put up his horses that night he carried a kitchen
chair to the side of his wife, who was sitting on the back porch.

"I brought a little Randall girl down on the stage from Maplewood
to-day, mother. She's related to the Sawyer girls an' is goin' to live
with 'em," he said, as he sat down and began to whittle. "She's
Aurelia's child, the sister that ran away with Susan Randall's son just
before we come here to live."

"How old a child?"

"Bout ten, or somewhere along there, an' small for her age; but land!
she might be a hundred to hear her talk! She kept me jumpin' tryin' to
answer her! Of all the queer children I ever come across she's the
queerest. She ain't no beauty--her face is all eyes; but if she ever
grows up to them eyes an' fills out a little she'll make folks stare.
Land, mother! I wish 't you could 'a' heard her talk."

"I don't see what she had to talk about, a child like that, to a
stranger," replied Mrs. Cobb.

"Stranger or no stranger, 't would n't make no difference to her. She'd
talk to a pump or a grindstone; she'd talk to herself ruther 'n keep
still."

"What did she talk about?

"Blamed if I can repeat any of it. She kept me so surprised I didn't
have my wits about me. She had a little pink sunshade--it kind o'
looked like a doll's umberella, 'n' she clung to it like a burr to a
woolen stockin'. I advised her to open it up--the sun was so hot; but
she said no, 't would fade, an' she tucked it under her dress.  'It's
the dearest thing in life to me,' says she, 'but it's a dreadful care.'
Them's the very words, an' it's all the words I remember.  'It's the
dearest thing in life to me, but it's an awful care!'"--here Mr. Cobb
laughed aloud as he tipped his chair back against the side of the
house. "There was another thing, but I can't get it right exactly. She
was talkin' 'bout the circus parade an' the snake charmer in a gold
chariot, an' says she, 'She was so beautiful beyond compare, Mr. Cobb,
that it made you have lumps in your throat to look at her.' She'll be
comin' over to see you, mother, an' you can size her up for yourself, I
don' know how she'll git on with Mirandy Sawyer--poor little soul!"

This doubt was more or less openly expressed in Riverboro, which,
however, had two opinions on the subject; one that it was a most
generous thing in the Sawyer girls to take one of Aurelia's children to
educate, the other that the education would be bought at a price wholly
out of proportion to its real value.

Rebecca's first letters to her mother would seem to indicate that she
cordially coincided with the latter view of the situation.



II

REBECCA'S POINT OF VIEW

DEAR MOTHER,--I am safely here. My dress was not much tumbled and Aunt
Jane helped me press it out. I like Mr. Cobb very much. He chews
tobacco but throws newspapers straight up to the doors of the houses. I
rode outside with him a little while, but got inside before I got to
Aunt Miranda's house. I did not want to, but thought you would like it
better. Miranda is such a long word that I think I will say Aunt M. and
Aunt J. in my Sunday letters. Aunt J. has given me a dictionary to look
up all the hard words in. It takes a good deal of time and I am glad
people can talk without stoping to spell. It is much eesier to talk
than write and much more fun. The brick house looks just the same as
you have told us. The parler is splendid and gives YOU creeps and
chills when you look in the door. The furnature is ellergant too, and
all the rooms but there are no good sitting-down places exsept in the
kitchen. The same cat is here but they never save the kittens and the
cat is too old to play with. Hannah told me once you ran away to be
married to father and I can see it would be nice. If Aunt M. would run
away I think I should like to live with Aunt J. She does not hate me as
bad as Aunt M. does.  Tell Mark he can have my paint box, but I should
like him to keep the red cake in case I come home again. I hope Hannah
and John do mot get tired doing my work.

Your afectionate friend

REBECCA.

P. S. Please give the piece of poetry to John because he likes my
poetry even when it is not very good. This piece is not very good but
it is true but I hope you won't mind what is in it as you ran away.

  This house is dark and dull and dreer
  No light doth shine from far or near
  Its like the tomb.

  And those of us who live herein
  Are almost as dead as serrafim
  Though not as good.

  My guardian angel is asleep
  At leest he doth not virgil keep
  Ah! Woe is me!

  Then give me back my lonely farm
  Where none alive did wish me harm
  Dear home of youth!

P.S. again. I made the poetry like a piece in a book but could not get
it right at first. You see "tomb" and "good" do not sound well together
but I wanted to say "tomb" dreadfully and as serrafim are always good I
could n't take that out. I have made it over now. It does not say my
thoughts as well but think it is more right. Give the best one to John
as he keeps them in a box with his bird's eggs. This is the best one.

SUNDAY THOUGHTS

BY

REBECCA ROWENA RANDALL

  This house is dark and dull and drear
  No light doth shine from far or near
  Nor ever could.

  And those of us who live herein
  Are most as dead as seraphim
  Though not as good.

  My guardian angel is asleep
  At least he doth no vigil keep
  But far doth roam.

  Then give me back my lonely farm
  Where none alive did wish me harm,
  Dear childhood home!

DEAR MOTHER,--I am thrilling with unhappyness this morning. I got that
out of a book called Cora The Doctor's Wife. Cora's husband's mother
was very cross and unfeeling to her like Aunt M. to me. I wish Hannah
had come instead of me for it was Hannah that Aunt M. wanted and she is
better than I am and does not answer back so quick. Are there any
