Farther down the wall, clad in pants and a bra, was a shapely blonde.
When he was not watching Nedra, Ed paid attention to her. His actions
seemed to irritate the lieutenant. Lifting his rifle, he fired a single
shot through the head of the bantam.

Ed collapsed, dead before he hit the floor. Two Asian soldiers carried
the body away.

"That lieutenant is hell on lovers," Zen whispered.

Nedra did not answer him. Her face was pale and her breathing was
shallow. A film of sweat glistened on her forehead. Glancing at her,
Zen had the impression that she was listening.

For what? he wondered. The only thing that was left for any of them
was the sounding of the trump of doom. Zen had no illusions that Cuso
would keep his promises for any longer than was expedient. First,
West and all the others must be pumped dry of information, the whole
interior of the mountain must be thoroughly explored, then--more bodies
for the deep hole.

Zen had no illusions that either West or the new people would long
survive the information they could be forced to divulge. As to Cuso's
talk of West being given a commission as a marshal of the Asian
Federation, for protection, the colonel knew that Asian field marshals
had been listed among the missing before now. A field marshal who fell
from grace vanished.

Across the gallery the fat youth also vanished.

One second he was there, the next second he was--gone!




XII


Neither the lieutenant nor any of the Asians noticed that a man had
vanished. Cal and Jake, with the memory of Ed's death still very fresh
in their minds, were engaged in making themselves inconspicuous. As far
as Zen could tell, none of these clean, tall kids knew anything out of
the ordinary had happened.

Beside the colonel, Nedra seemed slightly more composed. Her eyes were
blank as if she were not seeing. The thin film of moisture was still
visible on her forehead. Zen started to whisper to her, to ask her if
she had noticed anything different, then changed his mind. There was no
point in taking such a risk at such a time.

A sound was in the room, a thin, high note that was close to the upper
limits of hearing. It passed beyond the range of hearing, or diminished
in volume, then came again with the frequency of the ears, moving like
a microscopically small but very powerful honey bee. Had the sound been
present all the time? Or had it come into existence just before the fat
youth vanished? Zen did not know about the sound.

A face appeared in the middle of the room. About ten feet above the
floor, it looked around briefly, then vanished.

Cal seemed to see it too. A startled expression appeared on the face of
the ragged man. His eyes opened wide. He blinked them hastily when the
face vanished, then looked furtively around the room.

Jake said, very loudly, to the face, "Hi, bud. Long time no see. Where
you been?"

"Shut up your crazy head!" Cal snarled at him.

"But I just saw an old buddy," Jake tried to explain.

"You saw nothing."

"What are you two talking about?" the lieutenant demanded.

"Nothing," Cal answered. He pointed his finger at his forehead and made
circling motions in the air, then nodded toward Jake. "You know he's a
looney, lieutenant."

"Oh, yes," the Asian officer said, as if he had just remembered
something. Again he lifted the rifle to his shoulder. Jake fell dead.

The lieutenant slid another cartridge into his rifle.

"As long as you needed us--" Cal began.

"But I no longer need you to help me find the hidden ones," the
lieutenant answered. "That makes things different, doesn't it?"

"It sure does," Cal agreed. "But why did you shoot him?"

"I made up my mind months ago to shoot him as soon as I no longer
needed him," the Asian officer answered. "He was too crazy to trust."

"But he found this place for you and he got you past those hell
generators," Cal said.

"That is true. But the place is now found and we are past the odd
devices that make weaklings afraid." His tone said that this also made
the situation different and that the ragged man had better understand
this and guide himself accordingly. Cal started to speak, then changed
his mind.

"What were you two talking about?" the Asian asked.

"He said he saw a face in the air," the ragged man answered. "I told
him that he was nuts and to shut up."

"Was there a face?"

"I didn't see nothing," Cal answered.

While the two were talking, Zen was watching a youth in a loin cloth
across the room. Standing erect against the wall, looking as if he were
being crucified there, but without making any sound, the youth was
slowly vanishing.

While the youth was sliding away, the violin note throbbed softly in
the air. As he vanished, it went into silence, ending on a note of
triumph.

The lieutenant became suspicious. He scanned the people against the
wall.

"I thought there were more--" he muttered. Slowly he counted them.
"Thirty-eight," he said. As if to engrave the number on his memory, he
repeated it.

Simultaneously, one of the Asian soldiers spoke to him in a swift flow
of sound.

Zen could not understand what was being said, but he guessed from the
way the soldier pointed to the spot where the fat youth had stood that
he was reporting what he had seen happen.

While they were talking the face appeared again in the air high in
the middle of the room. The face was that of a man. He was wearing a
mustache and he looked around the room with alert brown eyes. Nodding
to himself with apparent satisfaction, he vanished.

Down the wall from Zen, a young woman vanished.

She went rapidly, in the flicker of an eye.

A youth standing next in line to her, followed suit.

Turning, the lieutenant saw that something had happened. Hastily he
counted those standing against the wall.

"Thirty-six! Who slipped out while my back was turned?"

As he asked the question, three of the new people vanished behind him.
No one answered him. He turned again, and realized that more blank
places had appeared while he was not looking.

Again, keeping behind him, another one of the new people vanished.

Watching, Zen was treated to the spectacle of seeing an Asian officer
grow crazy. While the lieutenant was watching one particular person,
nothing happened to the one under his scrutiny. But directly behind him
a person flicked out of existence.

For a time, the lieutenant almost had Zen's sympathy. The colonel knew
what would happen to this officer when Cuso returned and found his prey
had been permitted to escape. The Asians were not known for leniency to
their own men who failed an assigned duty.

The lieutenant knew as well as Zen what would happen to him. But he was
helpless. No matter which way he looked, his back was always turned to
someone. The person he was not watching--vanished.

Unnoticed by the lieutenant, the face that seemed to be directing the
vanishing operation appeared and disappeared in the center of the room.
It kept directly above the lieutenant's head, moving as he moved,
vanishing as he looked up.

The note of the violin came into hearing and went out again, repeating
this action time and time again.

Sweat dripped off Zen's chin and formed a puddle on the floor under
him. He did not know what was happening. Terror that was close to panic
was in him but he did not move a muscle. For all he knew, the face
might look at him and he might be the next one to vanish.

Where would he find himself if he vanished? _Would_ he find himself
again? Or did these people slide forever into nothingness, into some
dimensional interspace where there was no Earth, no moon, and no stars?

Only he and Nedra were left along the walls.

The others had vanished.

The lieutenant had gone completely crazy. Sputtering a mixture of
Chinese and English, he was jabbing his rifle against Nedra's stomach
and was yelling at her.

"_Tze!_ Go away. I will kill you if you do. _N-oten._ Where did they
go? I demand an answer. Speak!"

"I do not know," the girl answered.

"Speak! I command it. Cuso will have my throat slit if I let all of you
get away!"

"I have already--"

The lieutenant jabbed the muzzle of his rifle against her stomach.

"If you go away, I will kill you."

He meant what he said.

Smiling at him, the girl vanished.

He pulled the trigger of the weapon. The bullets howled madly through
the gallery. Zen dropped hastily to the floor. Death was too close for
him to be amazed at the sight of an Asian officer shooting at nothing.

The lieutenant stopped shooting when the magazine was empty. As he
clicked another clip into place, some measure of sanity seemed to
return to him. He did not shoot the colonel.

Instead Zen found himself being prodded with the muzzle of the still
hot and smoking rifle.

"If you go away--"

Zen got to his feet.

"If I knew how to do it, I'd be gone," he said.

"Where did they go? How did they do it?" Fine flecks of spittle were
blown from the lieutenant's lips.

The sound of hot lead was still strong in Zen's ears. At any moment,
the lieutenant might start shooting again, for any reason. Or for no
reason.

"I don't know," Zen said.

"But you've got to know. You're one of them."

"Would I stand around here and let you shoot me if I was one of them?"
Zen answered.

Some of the logic of the question must have penetrated to the officer's
mad mind. "No. No, you wouldn't. That is, I guess you wouldn't. But you
might be trying to trick me." The thought of being tricked seemed to
bring all his fury to the surface. "You did it once before, you and the
girl."

"How?" Zen demanded.

"You put us all to sleep, you and that girl? Don't tell me you didn't.
I was there."

"I was there but I didn't have a damned thing to do with it. And
neither did the girl."

"Then who did?"

"West. He was outside with some kind of a sleep generator that operated
electronically."

Doubt came over the lieutenant's face. How was he to know if this tall,
thin yankee was telling the truth. In his book, all Americans were
liars. Why trust this one?

"If you lie to me--"

"I know. You'll shoot me. And I'll return from the other world and
strangle you some night, while you sleep."

The shot went home. Like most Asians, this officer was superstitious.
Watching the reaction, Zen wondered if this man would ever again dare
to go to sleep at night. The deadly _dugphas_, the devil souls of the
departed, might strangle him in a spirit noose the instant he closed
his eyes.

On the other hand, there was Cuso. The lieutenant _knew_ what the Asian
leader would do to him. Zen could see him making up his mind that
it was better to take a chance on the deadly devils that roam the
darkness than on Cuso. The night devils might miss.

"You lie!" The lieutenant lifted the rifle.

At the same instant, Cuso and West entered. The lieutenant lowered the
rifle. Hastily he approached his chief and saluted. Then, taking as few
chances as possible, he prostrated himself on the floor. Reaching for
Cuso's foot, he tried to place it on his neck as a token of submission.

Cuso kicked him in the face. The Asian leader's eyes ranged the room.
He saw instantly that his prisoners were missing. His eyes turned
green. He kicked the lieutenant in the face again and demanded to know
what had happened.

The luckless officer broke into a stream of tight, sing-song language.
Now and then he waved his hand as if to say that they had been here but
had gone away. "The _dugphas_ took them," he screamed in English.

Cuso kicked him in the throat this time. He had no belief in night
devils, he did not think they could spirit live people away, and he was
not afraid of them.

Another burst of broken, impassioned speech came from the lieutenant's
lips. Listening to the sound, watching the contortions in the officer's
