steps and out of the little door, followed by Lina, and closed it
behind them.

Through the hole in it he could see a little, and hear all.  He could
see how the light of many candles filled the place, and could hear how
some two dozen feet ran hither and thither through the echoing cellar;
he could hear the clash of iron, probably spits and pokers, now and
then; and at last heard how, finding nothing remarkable except the best
wine running to waste, they all turned on the butler and accused him of
having fooled them with a drunken dream.  He did his best to defend
himself, appealing to the evidence of their own senses that he was as
sober as they were. They replied that a fright was no less a fright
that the cause was imaginary, and a dream no less a dream that the
fright had waked him from it.

When he discovered, and triumphantly adduced as corroboration, that the
key was gone from the door, they said it merely showed how drunk he had
been--either that or how frightened, for he had certainly dropped it.
In vain he protested that he had never taken it out of the lock--that
he never did when he went in, and certainly had not this time stopped
to do so when he came out; they asked him why he had to go to the
cellar at such a time of the day, and said it was because he had
already drunk all the wine that was left from dinner.  He said if he
had dropped the key, the key was to be found, and they must help him to
find it.  They told him they wouldn't move a peg for him.  He declared,
with much language, he would have them all turned out of the king's
service.  They said they would swear he was drunk.

And so positive were they about it, that at last the butler himself
began to think whether it was possible they could be in the right. For
he knew that sometimes when he had been drunk he fancied things had
taken place which he found afterward could not have happened. Certain
of his fellow servants, however, had all the time a doubt whether the
cellar goblin had not appeared to him, or at least roared at him, to
protect the wine.  In any case nobody wanted to find the key for him;
nothing could please them better than that the door of the wine cellar
should never more be locked.  By degrees the hubbub died away, and they
departed, not even pulling to the door, for there was neither handle
nor latch to it.

As soon as they were gone, Curdie returned, knowing now that they were
in the wine cellar of the palace, as indeed, he had suspected. Finding
a pool of wine in a hollow of the floor, Lina lapped it up eagerly: she
had had no breakfast, and was now very thirsty as well as hungry.  Her
master was in a similar plight, for he had but just begun to eat when
the magistrate arrived with the soldiers.  If only they were all in
bed, he thought, that he might find his way to the larder!  For he said
to himself that, as he was sent there by the young princess's
great-great-grandmother to serve her or her father in some way, surely
he must have a right to his food in the Palace, without which he could
do nothing.  He would go at once and reconnoitre.

So he crept up the stair that led from the cellar.  At the top was a
door, opening on a long passage dimly lighted by a lamp.  He told Lina
to lie down upon the stair while he went on.  At the end of the passage
he found a door ajar, and, peering through, saw right into a great
stone hall, where a huge fire was blazing, and through which men in the
king's livery were constantly coming and going. Some also in the same
livery were lounging about the fire.  He noted that their colours were
the same as those he himself, as king's miner, wore; but from what he
had seen and heard of the habits of the place, he could not hope they
would treat him the better for that.

The one interesting thing at the moment, however, was the plentiful
supper with which the table was spread.  It was something at least to
stand in sight of food, and he was unwilling to turn his back on the
prospect so long as a share in it was not absolutely hopeless. Peeping
thus, he soon made UP his mind that if at any moment the hall should be
empty, he would at that moment rush in and attempt to carry off a dish.
That he might lose no time by indecision, he selected a large pie upon
which to pounce instantaneously.  But after he had watched for some
minutes, it did not seem at all likely the chance would arrive before
suppertime, and he was just about to turn away and rejoin Lina, when he
saw that there was not a person in the place.  Curdie never made up his
mind and then hesitated.  He darted in, seized the pie, and bore it
swiftly and noiselessly to the cellar stair.



CHAPTER 18

The King's Kitchen

Back to the cellar Curdie and Lina sped with their booty, where, seated
on the steps, Curdie lighted his bit of candle for a moment. A very
little bit it was now, but they did not waste much of it in examination
of the pie; that they effected by a more summary process.  Curdie
thought it the nicest food he had ever tasted, and between them they
soon ate it up.  Then Curdie would have thrown the dish along with the
bones into the water, that there might be no traces of them; but he
thought of his mother, and hid it instead; and the very next minute
they wanted it to draw some wine into.  He was careful it should be
from the cask of which he had seen the butler drink.

Then they sat down again upon the steps, and waited until the house
should be quiet.  For he was there to do something, and if it did not
come to him in the cellar, he must go to meet it in other places.
Therefore, lest he should fall asleep, he set the end of the helve of
his mattock on the ground, and seated himself on the cross part,
leaning against the wall, so that as long as he kept awake he should
rest, but the moment he began to fall asleep he must fall awake
instead.  He quite expected some of the servants would visit the cellar
again that night, but whether it was that they were afraid of each
other, or believed more of the butler's story than they had chosen to
allow, not one of them appeared.

When at length he thought he might venture, he shouldered his mattock
and crept up the stair.  The lamp was out in the passage, but he could
not miss his way to the servants' hall.  Trusting to Lina's quickness
in concealing herself, he took her with him.

When they reached the hall they found it quiet and nearly dark. The
last of the great fire was glowing red, but giving little light.
Curdie stood and warmed himself for a few moments: miner as he was, he
had found the cellar cold to sit in doing nothing; and standing thus he
thought of looking if there were any bits of candle about.  There were
many candlesticks on the supper table, but to his disappointment and
indignation their candles seemed to have been all left to burn out, and
some of them, indeed, he found still hot in the neck.

Presently, one after another, he came upon seven men fast asleep, most
of them upon tables, one in a chair, and one on the floor. They seemed,
from their shape and colour, to have eaten and drunk so much that they
might be burned alive without wakening.  He grasped the hand of each in
succession, and found two ox hoofs, three pig hoofs, one concerning
which he could not be sure whether it was the hoof of a donkey or a
pony, and one dog's paw.  'A nice set of people to be about a king!'
thought Curdie to himself, and turned again to his candle hunt.  He did
at last find two or three little pieces, and stowed them away in his
pockets.  They now left the hall by another door, and entered a short
passage, which led them to the huge kitchen, vaulted and black with
smoke.  There, too, the fire was still burning, so that he was able to
see a little of the state of things in this quarter also.

The place was dirty and disorderly.  In a recess, on a heap of
brushwood, lay a kitchen-maid, with a table cover around her, and a
skillet in her hand: evidently she too had been drinking.  In another
corner lay a page, and Curdie noted how like his dress was to his own.
In the cinders before the hearth were huddled three dogs and five cats,
all fast asleep, while the rats were running about the floor.  Curdie's
heart ached to think of the lovely child-princess living over such a
sty.  The mine was a paradise to a palace with such servants in it.

Leaving the kitchen, he got into the region of the sculleries. There
horrible smells were wandering about, like evil spirits that come forth
with the darkness.  He lighted a candle--but only to see ugly sights.
Everywhere was filth and disorder.  Mangy turnspit dogs were lying
about, and grey rats were gnawing at refuse in the sinks.  It was like
a hideous dream.  He felt as if he should never get out of it, and
longed for one glimpse of his mother's poor little kitchen, so clean
and bright and airy. Turning from it at last in miserable disgust, he
almost ran back through the kitchen, re-entered the hall, and crossed
it to another door.

It opened upon a wider passage leading to an arch in a stately
corridor, all its length lighted by lamps in niches.  At the end of it
was a large and beautiful hall, with great pillars.  There sat three
men in the royal livery, fast asleep, each in a great armchair, with
his feet on a huge footstool.  They looked like fools dreaming
themselves kings; and Lina looked as if she longed to throttle them.
At one side of the hall was the grand staircase, and they went up.

Everything that now met Curdie's eyes was rich--not glorious like the
splendours of the mountain cavern, but rich and soft--except where, now
and then, some rough old rib of the ancient fortress came through, hard
and discoloured.  Now some dark bare arch of stone, now some rugged and
blackened pillar, now some huge beam, brown with the smoke and dust of
centuries, looked like a thistle in the midst of daisies, or a rock in
a smooth lawn.

They wandered about a good while, again and again finding themselves
where they had been before.  Gradually, however, Curdie was gaining
some idea of the place.  By and by Lina began to look frightened, and
as they went on Curdie saw that she looked more and more frightened.
Now, by this time he had come to understand that what made her look
frightened was always the fear of frightening, and he therefore
concluded they must be drawing nigh to somebody.

At last, in a gorgeously painted gallery, he saw a curtain of crimson,
and on the curtain a royal crown wrought in silks and stones.  He felt
sure this must be the king's chamber, and it was here he was wanted;
or, if it was not the place he was bound for, something would meet him
and turn him aside; for he had come to think that so long as a man
wants to do right he may go where he can: when he can go no farther,
then it is not the way.  'Only,' said his father, in assenting to the
theory, 'he must really want to do right, and not merely fancy he does.
He must want it with his heart and will, and not with his rag of a
tongue.'

So he gently lifted the corner of the curtain, and there behind it was
a half-open door.  He entered, and the moment he was in, Lina stretched
herself along the threshold between the curtain and the door.



CHAPTER 19

The King's Chamber

He found himself in a large room, dimly lighted by a silver lamp that
hung from the ceiling.  Far at the other end was a great bed,
surrounded with dark heavy curtains.  He went softly toward it, his
heart beating fast.  It was a dreadful thing to be alone in the king's
chamber at the dead of night.  To gain courage he had to remind himself
of the beautiful princess who had sent him.

But when he was about halfway to the bed, a figure appeared from the
farther side of it, and came towards him, with a hand raised warningly.
He stood still.  The light was dim, and he could distinguish little
more than the outline of a young girl.  But though the form he saw was
much taller than the princess he remembered, he never doubted it was
she.  For one thing, he knew that most girls would have been frightened
to see him there in the dead of the night, but like a true princess,
and the princess he used to know, she walked straight on to meet him.
As she came she lowered the hand she had lifted, and laid the
forefinger of it upon her lips.  Nearer and nearer, quite near, close
up to him she came, then stopped, and stood a moment looking at him.

'You are Curdie,' she said.

'And you are the Princess Irene,' he returned.

'Then we know each other still,' she said, with a sad smile of
pleasure.  'You will help me.'

'That I will,' answered Curdie.  He did not say, 'If I can'; for he
knew that what he was sent to do, that he could do.  'May I kiss your
hand, little Princess?'

She was only between nine and ten, though indeed she looked several
years older, and her eyes almost those of a grown woman, for she had
had terrible trouble of late.

She held out her hand.

'I am not the little princess any more.  I have grown up since I saw
you last, Mr Miner.'

The smile which accompanied the words had in it a strange mixture of
playfulness and sadness.

'So I see, Miss Princess,' returned Curdie; 'and therefore, being more
of a princess, you are the more my princess.  Here I am, sent by your
great-great-grandmother, to be your servant.  May I ask why you are up
so late, Princess?'

'Because my father wakes so frightened, and I don't know what he would
do if he didn't find me by his bedside.  There! he's waking now.'

She darted off to the side of the bed she had come from.

Curdie stood where he was.

A voice altogether unlike what he remembered of the mighty, noble king
on his white horse came from the bed, thin, feeble, hollow, and husky,
and in tone like that of a petulant child:

'I will not, I will not.  I am a king, and I will be a king.  I hate
you and despise you, and you shall not torture me!'

'Never mind them, Father dear,' said the princess.  'I am here, and
they shan't touch you.  They dare not, you know, so long as you defy
them.'

'They want my crown, darling; and I can't give them my crown, can I?
For what is a king without his crown?'

'They shall never have your crown, my king,' said Irene.  'Here it
is--all safe.  I am watching it for you.'

Curdie drew near the bed on the other side.  There lay the grand old
king--he looked grand still, and twenty years older.  His body was
pillowed high; his beard descended long and white over the crimson
coverlid; and his crown, its diamonds and emeralds gleaming in the
twilight of the curtains, lay in front of him, his long thin old hands
folded round it, and the ends of his beard straying among the lovely
stones.  His face was like that of a man who had died fighting nobly;
but one thing made it dreadful: his eyes, while they moved about as if
searching in this direction and in that, looked more dead than his
face.  He saw neither his daughter nor his crown: it was the voice of
the one and the touch of the other that comforted him.  He kept
murmuring what seemed words, but was unintelligible to Curdie,
although, to judge from the look of Irene's face, she learned and
concluded from it.

By degrees his voice sank away and the murmuring ceased, although still
his lips moved.  Thus lay the old king on his bed, slumbering with his
crown between his hands; on one side of him stood a lovely little
maiden, with blue eyes, and brown hair going a little back from her
temples, as if blown by a wind that no one felt but herself; and on the
other a stalwart young miner, with his mattock over his shoulder.
Stranger sight still was Lina lying along the threshold--only nobody
saw her just then.

A moment more and the king's lips ceased to move.  His breathing had
grown regular and quiet.  The princess gave a sigh of relief, and came
round to Curdie.

'We can talk a little now,' she said, leading him toward the middle of
the room.  'My father will sleep now till the doctor wakes him to give
him his medicine.  It is not really medicine, though, but wine.
Nothing but that, the doctor says, could have kept him so long alive.
He always comes in the middle of the night to give it him with his own
hands.  But it makes me cry to see him wake up when so nicely asleep.'

'What sort of man is your doctor?' asked Curdie.

'Oh, such a dear, good, kind gentleman!' replied the princess.  'He
speaks so softly, and is so sorry for his dear king!  He will be here
presently, and you shall see for yourself.  You will like him very
much.'

'Has your king-father been long ill?' asked Curdie.

'A whole year now,' she replied.  'Did you not know?  That's how your
mother never got the red petticoat my father promised her. The lord
chancellor told me that not only Gwyntystorm but the whole land was
mourning over the illness of the good man.'

