situated within the zodiac are divided into twelve groups or
constellations, which correspond with the twelve signs, and each is
named after an animal or some figure which it is supposed to resemble.
The zodiac is of great antiquity; the ancient Egyptians and Hindoos made
use of it, and there are allusions to it in the earliest astronomical
records. The twelve constellations of the zodiac bear the following
names:--

Aries the Ram
Taurus the Bull
Gemini the Twins
Cancer the Crab
Leo the Lion
Virgo the Virgin
Libra the Balance
Scorpio the Scorpion
Sagittarius the Archer
Capricornus the Goat
Aquarius the Water-bearer
Pisces the Fishes

In close association with the Sun's annual journey are the seasons, upon
the regular sequence of which mankind depend for the various products of
the soil essential for the maintenance and enjoyment of life. The
revolution of the Earth in her orbit, and the inclination of her axis to
her annual path, causing the plane of the equator to be inclined 23-1/2 deg.
to that of the ecliptic, are the reasons which account for the
succession of the seasons--Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. Owing to
the position of the Earth's axis with regard to her orbit, the Sun
appears to travel 23-1/2 deg. north and 23-1/2 deg. south of the equator. When,
on June 21, the orb attains his highest northern altitude, we have the
summer solstice and the longest days; when, by retracing his steps, he
declines 23-1/2 deg. below the equator, at which point he arrives on
December 21, we have the winter solstice and the shortest days.
Intermediate between those two seasons are spring and autumn. When the
Sun, on his journey northward, reaches the equator, we have the vernal
equinox, and at this period of the year the days and nights are of equal
length all over the globe. In a similar manner, when, on his return
journey, the Sun is again on the equator, the autumnal equinox occurs.
In summer the North Pole is inclined towards the Sun, consequently his
rays fall more direct and impart much more heat to the northern
hemisphere than in winter, when the Pole is turned away from the Sun.
This difference in the incidence of the solar rays upon the surface of
the globe, along with the increased length of the day, mainly accounts
for the high temperature of summer as compared with that of winter.

Astronomically, the seasons commence at the periods of the equinoxes and
solstices. Spring begins on March 21, the time of the vernal equinox;
summer on June 21, at the summer solstice; autumn on September 22, at
the autumnal equinox; and winter on December 21, at the winter solstice.
This conventional division of the year is not equally applicable to all
parts of the globe. In the arctic and antarctic regions spring and
autumn are very brief, the summer is short and the winter of long
duration. In the tropics, owing to the comparatively slight difference
in the obliquity of the Sun's rays, one season is, as regards
temperature, not much different from the other; but in the temperate
regions of the Earth the vicissitudes of the seasons are more
perceptible and can be best distinguished by the growth of vegetation,
and the changes observable in the foliage of shrubs and trees. In spring
there is the budding, in summer the blossom, in autumn the
fruit-bearing, and in winter the leafless condition of deciduous trees,
and the repose of vegetable life.

The legendary belief that before the Fall there reigned on the Earth a
perpetual spring, is introduced by Milton in his poem when he describes
the pleasant surroundings associated with the happy conditions of life
that existed in Paradise:--

                                Thus was this place,
    A happy rural seat of various view:
    Groves whose rich trees wept odorous gums and balm;
    Others whose fruit, burnished with golden rind,
    Hung amiable--Hesperian fables true,
    If true here only--and of delicious taste.
    Betwixt them lawns, or level downs, and flocks
    Grazing the tender herb, were interposed,
    Or palmy hillock; or the flowery lap
    Of some irriguous valley spread her store,
    Flowers of all hue, and without thorn the rose.
    Another side, umbrageous grots and caves
    Of cool recess, o'er which the mantling vine
    Lays forth her purple grape, and gently creeps
    Luxuriant; meanwhile murmuring waters fall
    Down the slope hill dispersed, or in a lake
    That to the fringed bank with myrtle crowned
    Her crystal mirror holds, unite their streams.
    The birds their quire apply; airs, vernal airs,
    Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune
    The trembling leaves, while universal Pan,
    Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance,
    Led on the eternal Spring.--iv. 246-68.

In sad contrast with this charming sylvan scene, we turn to the unhappy
consequences which ensued as a result of the first act of transgression.
Milton describes a change of climate characterised by extremes of heat
and cold which succeeded the perpetual spring. The Sun was made to shine
so that the Earth should be exposed to torrid heat and icy cold
unpleasant to endure. The pale Moon and the planets were given power to
combine with noxious effect, and the fixed stars to shed their malignant
influences:--

                                            The Sun
    Had first his precept so to move, so shine,
    As might affect the Earth with cold and heat
    Scarce tolerable, and from the north to call
    Decrepit winter, from the south to bring
    Solstitial summer's heat. To the blanc Moon
    Her office they prescribed; to the other five
    Their planetary motions and aspects,
    In sextile, square, and trine, and opposite,
    Of noxious efficacy, and when to join
    In synod unbenign; and taught the fixed
    Their influence malignant when to shower--
    Which of them rising with the Sun or falling,
    Should prove tempestuous. To the winds they set
    Their corners, when with bluster to confound
    Sea, air, and shore; the thunder when to roll
    With terror through the dark aerial hall.--x. 651-67.

We are here afforded an opportunity of learning that Milton possessed
some knowledge of astrology, to which he makes allusion in other parts
of his poem besides. In his time, astrology was believed in by many
persons, and there were few learned men but who knew something of that
occult science. Milton may be included among those who devoted some
attention to astrology. Of this there is ample evidence, by the manner
in which he expresses himself in words and phrases in common use among
astrologers.

The professors of this art recognised five planetary aspects, viz.,
opposition, conjunction, sextile, square, and trine, each possessing its
peculiar kind of influence on events. The Moon, the planets, and the
constellations in their conjunctions and configurations, were believed
to reveal to those who could understand the significance of their
aspects, the destiny of individuals and the occurrence of future events.
The inauspicious influences of the heavenly bodies are described by
Milton as contributing to the general disarrangement of the happy
condition of things that existed before the Fall.

After having described the adverse physical changes which occurred in
Nature as a consequence of the Fall, Milton makes use of his
astronomical knowledge in explaining how they were brought about, and
suggests two hypotheses: (1) a change of position of the Earth's axis;
(2) an alteration of the Sun's path from the equinoctial road:--

    Some say he bid his Angels turn askance
    The poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more
    From the Sun's axle; they with labour pushed
    Oblique the centric globe: some say the Sun
    Was bid turn reins from the equinoctial road
    Like distant breadth--to Taurus with the seven
    Atlantic Sisters, and the Spartan Twins,
    Up to the Tropic Crab; thence down amain
    By Leo, and the Virgin, and the Scales,
    As deep as Capricorn; to bring in change
    Of seasons to each clime. Else had the spring
    Perpetual smiled on Earth with vernant flowers.--x. 668-79.

In support of the theory of a perpetual spring, Milton assumes that the
Earth's axis was directed at right angles to her orbit, and that the
plane of the equator coincided with that of the ecliptic. Consequently,
the Sun's path remained always on the equator, where his rays were
vertical, and north and south of this line each locality on the Earth
enjoyed one constant season, the character of which depended upon its
geographical position. In what are now the temperate regions of the
globe there was one continuous season, similar in climate and length of
day to what is experienced at the vernal equinox, when the Sun is for a
few days on the equator. There was then no winter, no summer, nor
autumn; and, consequently, the growth of vegetation must have taken
place under conditions of climate entirely different to what exist on
the Earth at the present time.

The change of position of the Earth's axis, 'twice ten degrees and more
from the Sun's axle,' is described by Milton as having been
accomplished by the might of angels, who 'with labour pushed oblique the
centric globe.'

(2) According to the Ptolemaic belief, the Sun revolved round the Earth,
but his course was altered from the equinoctial road to the path that he
now pursues, which is the ecliptic. Instead of remaining on the equator,
he travels an equal distance from this line upwards and downwards in
each hemisphere.

The path of the Sun in the heavens is described by Milton with marked
precision, and he mentions in regular order the names of the zodiacal
constellations through which the orb travels. Passing through Taurus
with the seven Atlantic Sisters (the Pleiades) and the Spartan Twins
(Gemini), he enters the Tropic Crab (Cancer), in which constellation he
attains his highest northern altitude; thence downwards he travels
through Leo, Virgo, and the Scales (Libra), as deep as Capricornus,
reaching his lowest point of declination at the winter solstice; and
were it not for this alteration of the Sun's path, the poet informs us
that perpetual spring would have reigned upon the Earth.

Milton was evidently well acquainted with the astronomical reasons (the
revolution of the Earth in her orbit and the obliquity of the ecliptic)
by which the occurrence and regular sequence of the seasons can be
explained.

The path of the Sun in the heavens; his upward and downward course from
the equator; the names of the constellations through which the orb
travels, and the periods of the year at which he enters them, were also
familiar to him.

The grateful change of the seasons, and the varied aspects of nature
peculiar to each, which give a charm and freshness to the rolling year,
must have been to Milton a source of pleasure and delight, and have
stimulated his poetic fancy.

His observation of natural phenomena, and his keen perception of the
pleasing changes which accompany them, are described in the following
lines:--

    As, when from mountain-tops the dusky clouds
    Ascending, while the north wind sleeps, o'erspread
    Heaven's cheerful face, the louring element
    Scowls o'er the darkened landskip snow or shower,
    If chance the radiant Sun, with farewell sweet,
    Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
    The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
    Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.--ii. 488-95.

The ancient poets Virgil and Ovid describe the Earth as having been
created in the spring; and associated with this season, which

                    to the heart inspires
    Vernal delight and joy--iv. 154-55,

were the Graces and the Hours, which danced hand in hand as they led on
the eternal Spring.

Milton alludes to the seasons on several occasions throughout his poem,
and to the natural phenomena associated with them:--

                                        As bees
    In springtime when the Sun with Taurus rides,
    Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
    In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers
    Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank
    The suburb of their straw-built citadel
    New rubbed with balm, expatiate and confer
    Their state affairs.--i. 768-75.

The Sun is in the constellation Taurus in April, when the warmth of his
rays begins to impart new life and activity to the insect world after
their long winter's sleep.

In his description of the repast partaken by the Angel Raphael with Adam
and Eve in Paradise, Milton writes:--

                              Raised of grassy turf
    Their table was, and mossy seats had round,
    And on her ample square, from side to side,
    All Autumn piled, though Spring and Autumn here
    Danced hand in hand.--v. 391-95.

In describing Beelzebub when about to address the Stygian Council, he
says:--

                                          His look
    Drew audience and attention still as night
    Or summer's noontide air, while thus he spake.--ii. 307-309.

The failing vision from which Milton suffered in his declining years was
succeeded by total blindness. This sad affliction he alludes to in the
following lines:--

                              Thus with the year
    Seasons return; but not to me returns
    Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn,
    Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer's rose.--iii. 40-43.

We are able to perceive how much Milton was impressed with the beautiful
seasons, and the varying aspects of the year which accompany them, and
how his poetic imagination luxuriated in the changing variety of nature
observable in earth and sky that from day to day afforded him exquisite
delight; and, although his poem was written when blindness had overtaken
him, yet those glad remembrances remained as fresh in his memory as when
in his youth he roamed among the flowery meadows, the vocal woodlands,
and the winding lanes of Buckinghamshire.

The idea expressed by Milton that the primitive earth enjoyed a
perpetual spring, though pleasing to the imagination, and well adapted
for poetic description, is not sustained by any astronomical testimony.
Indeed, the position of the Earth, with her axis at right angles to her
orbit, is one which may be regarded as being ill adapted for the support
and maintenance of life on her surface, just as her present position is
the best that can be imagined for fulfilling this purpose.

Astronomy teaches us to rely with certainty upon the permanence and
regular sequence of the seasons. The position of the Earth's axis as she
speeds along in her orbit through the unresisting ether remains
unchanged, and her rapid rotation has the effect of increasing its
stability. Yet, the Earth performs none of her motions with rigid
precision, and there is a very slow alteration of the position of her
axis occurring, which, if unchecked, would eventually produce a
coincidence of the equator and the ecliptic. Instead of a succession of
the seasons, there would then be perpetual spring upon the Earth, and,
although it would require a great epoch of time to bring about such a
change, there would result a condition of things entirely different to
what now exists on the globe. But, before the ecliptic can have
approached sufficiently near the equator to produce any appreciable
effect upon the climate of the Earth, its motion must cease, and after
remaining stationary for a time, it will begin to recede to its former
position. The seasons must therefore follow each other in regular
sequence, and throughout all time, reminding us of the promise of the
