stop.

He also realized that the Asian had stopped. There was a sound in the
gallery. Filling the air, it seemed to emerge from the very walls of
the mountain itself.

The note of a violin!

High and sweet and compelling, the sound came from nowhere. Every atom
in the solid stone walls seemed to pick it up and to rebroadcast it.
The molecules of the air seemed to dance in resonance with it.

Simultaneously, about ten feet above the floor, the face appeared again.

The lieutenant's rifle blasted at it. He fired shot after shot at point
blank range. Red-hot slugs howled from the walls of the big gallery in
a cacophony of death.

The face smiled at the lieutenant. The lips moved. "Keep shooting, old
fellow," the lips seemed to say.

The officer emptied his gun. In a desperate burst of fear, he threw it
at the mocking face.

The weapon passed through the face without harming it.

"You fool! That's a projection, not a real person!" Cuso shouted. He
grabbed the officer by the shoulder and spun him backward to the floor.
"Who are you?" he demanded of the face.

It smiled at him.

Zen repressed the impulse to shout. He knew what was going to happen
next.

"I said, _Who are you?_" Cuso shouted again.

The crash of something in the gallery jerked his attention away.
Twisting his head around, he saw that one of the soldiers engaged in
carrying the loot of this cavern out to the plane waiting to hurry it
to Asia, had collapsed on the floor.

Under ordinary circumstances, Cuso would have had the man summarily
executed. But with that face smiling at him out of nothing, these
circumstances were not ordinary.

Zen, knowing what was going to happen, forgot the pain of his burned
fingers and toes. He could feel it creeping over him in waves. This
time he did not resist it: He let his eyes close.

When he opened them, the torturer was snoring beside him. Every Asian
in the big gallery was sound asleep.

People were crowding around him. The new people. In a sweeping glance,
he recognized every person he had met here, except Nedra, and he did
not see her at first because she was busy bandaging his hands. West was
smiling down at him with an expression that was somehow grandfatherly.
But back of West's smile was perturbation.

Zen started to get to his feet and discovered they had not as yet
removed the ropes from his legs. As one did this, Nedra clucked
reprovingly at him and tried to tell him that he was wounded. He said
this did not matter. Faces were here that he did not recognize. This
did not matter either.

"You did this?" he said to West.

"Yes. I designed and built the equipment. Others were operating it in
this instance." West had something else on his mind.

"Thanks," Zen said. "Why didn't you take me with you when you
went--wherever it was you went?"

"We couldn't," West answered. "You haven't had the training."

"Why did you come back?"

"To rescue you. Kurt--" West had something that he wanted to say.

"Nedra, will you stop fussing with me? I'm all right."

"But your poor hands and feet."

"I don't even feel them. I won't have them to feel at all unless action
is taken. Don't you understand. Somewhere in Asia they're getting ready
to launch a super bomb. Or maybe it's already on its way."

"I didn't know," the girl said. "The big one?"

"Yes."

A flicker of pain crossed her face and she shook her head. "I always
wondered what it would be like to live on a mud flat. I wonder if we
will be oysters, or eels. Or maybe crabs."

"What the hell are you talking about?" Zen demanded.

"After the bomb goes off," the girl said.

"What then?"

"The race mind will have to start over again," she explained. Her
manner indicated that she was explaining something that she clearly
understood. She seemed to wonder why he did not understand it. "Maybe
we will be turtles? That will be funny! A turtle that can remember when
it was a man! That's the way it will be. Except--"

"I know all about that."

"Except that the turtle won't be able to do anything about its
memories," the girl continued as if she had not heard him. "It will
have flippers and a beak but what it will need will be hands. It won't
have them until it grows them itself. A turtle with the memories that
it was once a man, knowing that if it had hands, it could rebuild human
culture!" A bemused expression appeared on her face. "I wonder how the
race mind will solve that problem." Again she seemed to muse. "It would
be worse to be crabs. Or would it?"

"Shut up!" Zen snarled. "We're not turtles yet. Or crabs. And we're not
back on the mud flats."

"But we're on the edge of them," the girl insisted. "One more teeter
and we will go totter."

Zen turned to West. "What the hell has happened to Nedra?"

"Nothing," the craggy man answered. "She has some degree of
clairvoyance and it is coming to consciousness. Unfortunately, she has
not yet had time to develop her talents in that direction."

"Maybe the turtle wouldn't want to rebuild human culture," the girl
interrupted. "Maybe it wouldn't want to go back down that blind alley
again. Perhaps it would decide to go into another channel, to develop
into something totally different. In that case, it might not need
hands."

Zen deliberately ignored her. He turned to West. "A bomb will be going
off," he said.

"That is what I've been trying to talk to you about," the craggy man
answered. "This is another reason why we came back for you--so we could
talk to you about that bomb."

"To me?" Zen said startled.

"Yes, to you."

"Why?"

"Because you are a colonel of intelligence and have experience in such
matters. Also because you are something that none of us are--a fighting
man."

"I--I don't understand you," Zen answered.

"I can get you there. But once there, my knowledge fails. I, to my
regret, know nothing of fighting." West spread his hands in a helpless
gesture.

"Get me where?" Zen asked.

"To Asia. To the underground cavern where they are getting ready to
launch that bomb," West explained. The tone of his voice said this was
easy. The hard part came in knowing what to do, and being able to do
it, after they were there.

"To Asia?" Zen parroted the words. He had the dazed impression that
this whole scene was unreal, that the snoring Asians on the floor, Cal
huddled by the wall, and the new people crowding into the room, would
shortly all vanish in puffs of green smoke. "How in the hell will you
get us to Asia?"

"How did we get out of this gallery?" West responded. "How did we
vanish? How did the men in the reports you read get into the planes
that were about to crash? Who landed Colonel Grant's space satellite?
Who steered it? Who provided the power to energize the motion? Who--"

"Did you know I knew about Grant?"

"It was obvious that you must know."

"And you can get me to Asia?"

"You and as many others as you choose to take with you!"

Walking over to the sleeping lieutenant, he picked up the man's rifle,
then turned to the group.

"Who will go with me to Asia?" he asked.

The group stepped forward as one man.

A knot formed in Kurt Zen's throat at the sight and he gulped to force
it down. He knew how much this decision meant to them. They had been
trained in the ways of peace, they were searching for the road to the
future. Fighting meant turning backward on the path that led to growth,
it was the last thing they wanted to do. Yet do it they would, if it
was necessary. In an instant they were scrambling for weapons from the
sleeping Asians, then they were trying to salute and tell him their
names and say they would follow him at the same time.

One man saluted well. "Red-Dog Jimmie Thurman," he said. Pride was in
the man's voice.

Zen caught the man's arm. "Red-Dog Jimmie Thurman? But I know you."

"Maybe you do, suh." Thurman spoke with the soft drawl of the old south.

"One of the new people appeared in your plane and saved your life!" Zen
burst out.

"Yes, suh. That's right, suh."

"But you deserted!"

"Put it another way, suh, let's say I joined the right side."

"How did you find this place?"

"I just kept thinking and kept trying. Eventually we found each other.
The psychos tried to make me believe I was nuts. But I knew better. I
knew what had happened. And I knew there had to be a reason for it. I
kept hunting until I found that reason. The big part of the battle,
where I had an advantage over most everybody else, was that I knew from
experience that something was going on. Knowing this much, all I had to
do was keep looking." The man's voice drawled the explanation. His eyes
smiled. "At your service, suh."

"Do you know that going with me may mean death?"

"What's death, suh?" Red-Dog Jimmie Thurman grinned. "I died over the
North Pole, suh."

"Spike Larson," another man said.

"You were in a sub," Zen challenged. A glow was coming up inside of him
like nothing he had ever experienced before. He was getting fighting
men to stand beside him.

"Yes," Larson answered. "And I will consider it a privilege to stand
beside you."

Like soldiers, they passed in review before him, the fat boy, the
tall, lean, brown-skinned youths. Somehow he thought there ought to be
another one. He looked around for him. Grant was talking to West.

Grant was the man whose face had looked out of thin air in the middle
of the room.

Seeing that Zen was staring at him, he left off his talk with the
craggy man and came over and saluted.

"How was it up in that satellite?" Zen asked.

"Lonely, as hell, colonel," Grant answered.

"Do you want to go with me to Asia?"

"There's no place on Earth I'd rather go. And, the way things stand now
I don't have much choice. If they get that bomb into the air--" He left
the sentence unfinished.

Then Nedra was standing in front of Zen. At the sight of her, it seemed
to him that the world stood still. He shook his head.

"Why?" she challenged.

"Because I love you," he answered.

"Then that is the real reason why you should take me with you," she
answered.

"I don't follow," he said.

"If you fail, there will be no tomorrow," she answered. To her, the
statement had no answer. "Besides, I am a nurse," she continued. "If
there are wounded, I can help with them."

"But--"

"The fact that you love me does not enter into this situation. It is
a thing apart. It is a very wonderful thing," she added hastily, the
star light shining in her eyes. "And I wish we could bring it to fruit
the ways it used to be. But those days are gone. And I am going to Asia
with you."

Watching, West smiled. Zen spread his hands in a gesture of defeat. He
turned to the craggy man. "This sleep thing: I don't know how you do
it and don't much care, but you obviously have a portable generator of
some kind that you used to put the lieutenant out in the ghost town."

"Yes," West agreed.

"I'd like to borrow the unit," Zen said.

"Gladly, colonel. I wish we had other weapons."

"We'll make do with what we have," Zen answered.




XIV


"Zero minus one hour," the loudspeaker droned, in a Chinese dialect.
