The Project Gutenberg EBook Homo Sum, by Georg Ebers, Volume 4.
#59 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: Homo Sum, Volume 4.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5497]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on June 2, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOMO SUM, BY GEORG EBERS, V4 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





HOMO SUM

By Georg Ebers

Volume 4.



CHAPTER XIII.

The light in the town, which had attracted Paulus, was in Petrus' house,
and burnt in Polykarp's room, which formed the whole of a small upper-
story, which the senator had constructed for his son over the northern
portion of the spacious flat roof of the main building.  The young man
had arrived about noon with the slaves he had just procured, had learned
all that had happened in his absence, and had silently withdrawn into his
own room after supper was ended.  Here he still lingered over his work.

A bed, a table on and under which lay a multitude of wax-tablets,
papyrus-rolls, metal-points, and writing-reeds, with a small bench, on
which stood a water-jar and basin, composed the furniture of this room;
on its whitewashed walls hung several admirable carvings in relief, and
figures of men and animals stood near them in long rows.  In one corner,
near a stone water-jar, lay a large, damp, shining mass of clay.

Three lamps fastened to stands abundantly lighted this work-room, but
chiefly a figure standing on a high trestle, which Polykarp's fingers
were industriously moulding.

Phoebicius had called the young sculptor a fop, and not altogether
unjustly, for he loved to be well dressed and was choice as to the cut
and color of his simple garments, and he rarely neglected to arrange his
abundant hair with care, and to anoint it well; and yet it was almost
indifferent to him, whether his appearance pleased other people or no,
but he knew nothing nobler than the human form, and an instinct, which he
did not attempt to check, impelled him to keep his own person as nice as
he liked to see that of his neighbor.

Now at this hour of the night, he wore only a shirt of white woollen
stuff, with a deep red border.  His locks, usually so well-kept, seemed
to stand out from his head separately, and instead of smoothing and
confining them, he added to their wild disorder, for, as be worked, he
frequently passed his hand through them with a hasty movement.  A bat,
attracted by the bright light, flew in at the open window--which was
screened only at the bottom by a dark curtain--and fluttered round the
ceiling; but he did not observe it, for his work absorbed his whole soul
and mind.  In this eager and passionate occupation, in which every nerve
and vein in his being seemed to bear a part, no cry for help would have
struck his ear--even a flame breaking out close to him would not have
caught his eye.  His cheeks glowed, a fine dew of glistening sweat
covered his brow, and his very gaze seemed to become more and more firmly
riveted to the sculpture as it took form under his hand.  Now and again
he stepped back from it, and leaned backwards from his hips, raising his
hands to the level of his temples, as if to narrow the field of vision;
then he went up to the model, and clutched the plastic mass of clay, as
though it were the flesh of his enemy.

He was now at work on the flowing hair of the figure before him, which
had already taken the outline of a female head, and he flung the bits of
clay, which he removed from the back of it, to the ground, as violently
as though he were casting them at an antagonist at his feet.  Again his
finger-tips and modelling-tool were busy with the mouth, nose, cheeks,
and eyes, and his own eyes took a softer expression, which gradually grew
to be a gaze of ecstatic delight, as the features he was moulding began
to agree more and more with the image, which at this time excluded every
other from his imagination.

At last, with glowing cheeks, he had finished rounding the soft form of
the shoulders, and drew back once more to contemplate the effect of the
completed work; a cold shiver seized him, and he felt himself impelled
to lift it up, and dash it to the ground with all his force.  But he soon
mastered this stormy excitement, he pushed his hand through his hair
again and again, and posted himself, with a melancholy smile and with
folded hands, in front of his creation; sunk deeper and deeper in his
contemplation of it, he did not observe that the door behind him was
opened, although the flame of his lamps flickered in the draught, and
that his mother had entered the work-room, and by no means endeavored to
approach him unheard, or to surprise him.  In her anxiety for her
darling, who had gone through so many bitter experiences during the past
day, she had not been able to sleep.  Polykarp's room lay above her
bedroom, and when his steps over head betrayed that, though it was now
near morning, he had not yet gone to rest, she had risen from her bed
without waking Petrus, who seemed to be sleeping.  She obeyed her
motherly impulse to encourage Polykarp with some loving words, and
climbing up the narrow stair that led to the roof, she went into his
room.  Surprised, irresolute, and speechless she stood for some time
behind the young man, and looked at the strongly illuminated and
beautiful features of the newly-formed bust, which was only too like its
well-known prototype.  At last she laid her hand on her son's shoulder,
and spoke his name.  Polykarp stepped back, and looked at his mother in
bewilderment, like a man roused from sleep; but she interrupted the
stammering speech with which he tried to greet her, by saying, gravely
and not without severity, as she pointed to the statue, "What does this
mean?"

"What should it mean, mother?"  answered Polykarp in a low tone, and
shaking his head sadly.  "Ask me no more at present, for if you gave me
no rest, and even if I tried to explain to you how to-day--this very day
--I have felt impelled and driven to make this woman's image, still you
could not understand me--no, nor any one else."

"God forbid that I should ever understand it!"  cried Dorothea.  "'Thou
shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife,' was the commandment of the Lord on
this mountain.  And you?  You think I could not understand you?  Who
should understand you then, if not your mother?  This I certainly do not
comprehend, that a son of Petrus and of mine should have thrown all the
teaching and the example of his parents so utterly to the wind.  But what
you are aiming at with this statue, it seems to me is not hard to guess.
As the forbidden-fruit hangs too high for you, you degrade your art, and
make to yourself an image that resembles her according to your taste.
Simply and plainly it comes to this; as you can no longer see the Gaul's
wife in her own person, and yet cannot exist without the sweet presence
of the fair one, you make a portrait of clay to make love to, and you
will carry on idolatry before it, as once the Jews did before the golden
calf and the brazen serpent."

Polykarp submitted to his mother's angry blame in silence, but in painful
emotion.  Dorothea had never before spoken to him thus, and to hear such
words from the very lips which were used to address him with such heart-
felt tenderness, gave him unspeakable pain.  Hitherto she had always been
inclined to make excuses for his weaknesses and little faults, nay, the
zeal with which she had observed and pointed out his merits and
performances before strangers as well as before their own family, had
often seemed to him embarrassing.  And now?  She had indeed reason to
blame him, for Sirona was the wife of another, she had never even noticed
his admiration, and now, they all said, had committed a crime for the
sake of a stranger.  It must seem both a mad and a sinful thing in the
eyes of men that he of all others should sacrifice the best he had--his
Art--and how little could Dorothea, who usually endeavored to understand
him, comprehend the overpowering impulse which had driven him to his
task.

He loved and honored his mother with his whole heart, and feeling that
she was doing herself an injustice by her false and low estimate of his
proceedings, he interrupted her eager discourse, raising his hands
imploringly to her.

"No, mother, no!"  he exclaimed.  "As truly as God is my helper, it is
not so.  It is true that I have moulded this head, but not to keep it,
and commit the sin of worshipping it, but rather to free myself from the
image that stands before my mind's eye by day and by night, in the city
and in the desert, whose beauty distracts my mind when I think, and my
devotions when I try to pray.  To whom is it given to read the soul of
man?  And is not Sirona's form and face the loveliest image of the Most
