The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Argonautica, by Apollonius Rhodius

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Argonautica

Author: Apollonius Rhodius

Posting Date: July 21, 2008 [EBook #830]
Release Date: February, 1997

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ARGONAUTICA ***




Produced by Douglas B. Killings





THE ARGONAUTICA

by Apollonius Rhodius

(fl. 3rd Century B.C.)


Originally written in Ancient Greek sometime in the 3rd Century B.C.
by the Alexandrian poet Apollonius Rhodius ("Apollonius the Rhodian").
Translation by R.C. Seaton, 1912.


PREPARER'S NOTE: Words in CAPITALS are Greek words transliterated into
modern characters.


*****


SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY:

ORIGINAL TEXT--

Seaton, R.C. (Ed. & Trans.): "Apollonius Rhodius: Argonautica" (Harvard
University Press, Cambridge MA, 1912). Original Greek text with
side-by-side English translation.


OTHER TRANSLATIONS--

Rieu, E.V. (Trans.): "Apollonius of Rhodes: The Voyage of the Argo"
(Penguin Classics, London, 1959, 1971).


RECOMMENDED READING--

Euripides: "Medea", "Hecabe", "Electra", and "Heracles", translated by
Philip Vellacott (Penguin Classics, London, 1963). Contains four plays
by Euripides, two of which concern characters from "The Argonautica".


*****




INTRODUCTION

Much has been written about the chronology of Alexandrian literature and
the famous Library, founded by Ptolemy Soter, but the dates of the chief
writers are still matters of conjecture. The birth of Apollonius Rhodius
is placed by scholars at various times between 296 and 260 B.C., while
the year of his death is equally uncertain. In fact, we have very little
information on the subject. There are two "lives" of Apollonius in the
Scholia, both derived from an earlier one which is lost. From these we
learn that he was of Alexandria by birth, [1001] that he lived in the
time of the Ptolemies, and was a pupil of Callimachus; that while still
a youth he composed and recited in public his "Argonautica", and that
the poem was condemned, in consequence of which he retired to Rhodes;
that there he revised his poem, recited it with great applause, and
hence called himself a Rhodian. The second "life" adds: "Some say that
he returned to Alexandria and again recited his poem with the utmost
success, so that he was honoured with the libraries of the Museum and
was buried with Callimachus." The last sentence may be interpreted by
the notice of Suidas, who informs us that Apollonius was a contemporary
of Eratosthenes, Euphorion and Timarchus, in the time of Ptolemy
Euergetes, and that he succeeded Eratosthenes in the headship of the
Alexandrian Library. Suidas also informs us elsewhere that Aristophanes
at the age of sixty-two succeeded Apollonius in this office. Many modern
scholars deny the "bibliothecariate" of Apollonius for chronological
reasons, and there is considerable difficulty about it. The date of
Callimachus' "Hymn to Apollo", which closes with some lines (105-113)
that are admittedly an allusion to Apollonius, may be put with much
probability at 248 or 247 B.C. Apollonius must at that date have been at
least twenty years old. Eratosthenes died 196-193 B.C. This would make
Apollonius seventy-two to seventy-five when he succeeded Eratosthenes.
This is not impossible, it is true, but it is difficult. But the
difficulty is taken away if we assume with Ritschl that Eratosthenes
resigned his office some years before his death, which allows us to
put the birth of Apollonius at about 280, and would solve other
difficulties. For instance, if the Librarians were buried within
the precincts, it would account for the burial of Apollonius next to
Callimachus--Eratosthenes being still alive. However that may be, it
is rather arbitrary to take away the "bibliothecariate" of Apollonius,
which is clearly asserted by Suidas, on account of chronological
calculations which are themselves uncertain. Moreover, it is more
probable that the words following "some say" in the second "life" are
a remnant of the original life than a conjectural addition, because the
first "life" is evidently incomplete, nothing being said about the end
of Apollonius' career.

The principal event in his life, so far as we know, was the quarrel
with his master Callimachus, which was most probably the cause of his
condemnation at Alexandria and departure to Rhodes. This quarrel appears
to have arisen from differences of literary aims and taste, but, as
literary differences often do, degenerated into the bitterest personal
strife. There are references to the quarrel in the writings of both.
Callimachus attacks Apollonius in the passage at the end of the "Hymn to
Apollo", already mentioned, also probably in some epigrams, but most of
all in his "Ibis", of which we have an imitation, or perhaps nearly a
translation, in Ovid's poem of the same name. On the part of Apollonius
there is a passage in the third book of the "Argonautica" (11. 927-947)
which is of a polemical nature and stands out from the context, and the
well-known savage epigram upon Callimachus. [1002] Various combinations
have been attempted by scholars, notably by Couat, in his "Poesie
Alexandrine", to give a connected account of the quarrel, but we have
not data sufficient to determine the order of the attacks, and replies,
and counter-attacks. The "Ibis" has been thought to mark the termination
of the feud on the curious ground that it was impossible for abuse to go
further. It was an age when literary men were more inclined to comment
on writings of the past than to produce original work. Literature was
engaged in taking stock of itself. Homer was, of course, professedly
admired by all, but more admired than imitated. Epic poetry was out
of fashion and we find many epigrams of this period--some by
Callimachus--directed against the "cyclic" poets, by whom were meant at
that time those who were always dragging in conventional and commonplace
epithets and phrases peculiar to epic poetry. Callimachus was in
accordance with the spirit of the age when he proclaimed "a great book"
to be "a great evil", and sought to confine poetical activity within the
narrowest limits both of subject and space. Theocritus agreed with
him, both in principle and practice. The chief characteristics of
Alexandrianism are well summarized by Professor Robinson Ellis as
follows: "Precision in form and metre, refinement in diction, a learning
often degenerating into pedantry and obscurity, a resolute avoidance of
everything commonplace in subject, sentiment or allusion." These traits
are more prominent in Callimachus than in Apollonius, but they are
certainly to be seen in the latter. He seems to have written the
"Argonautica" out of bravado, to show that he could write an epic poem.
But the influence of the age was too strong. Instead of the unity of an
Epic we have merely a series of episodes, and it is the great beauty
and power of one of these episodes that gives the poem its permanent
value--the episode of the love of Jason and Medea. This occupies the
greater part of the third book. The first and second books are taken
up with the history of the voyage to Colchis, while the fourth book
describes the return voyage. These portions constitute a metrical guide
book, filled no doubt with many pleasing episodes, such as the rape
of Hylas, the boxing match between Pollux and Amyeus, the account of
Cyzicus, the account of the Amazons, the legend of Talos, but there is
no unity running through the poem beyond that of the voyage itself.

The Tale of the Argonauts had been told often before in verse and prose,
and many authors' names are given in the Scholia to Apollonius, but
their works have perished. The best known earlier account that we have
is that in Pindar's fourth Pythian ode, from which Apollonius has taken
many details. The subject was one for an epic poem, for its unity might
have been found in the working out of the expiation due for the crime of
Athamas; but this motive is barely mentioned by our author.

As we have it, the motive of the voyage is the command of Pelias to
bring back the golden fleece, and this command is based on Pelias'
desire to destroy Jason, while the divine aid given to Jason results
from the intention of Hera to punish Pelias for his neglect of the
honour due to her. The learning of Apollonius is not deep but it is
curious; his general sentiments are not according to the Alexandrian
standard, for they are simple and obvious. In the mass of material from
which he had to choose the difficulty was to know what to omit, and much
skill is shown in fusing into a tolerably harmonious whole conflicting
mythological and historical details. He interweaves with his narrative
local legends and the founding of cities, accounts of strange customs,
descriptions of works of art, such as that of Ganymede and Eros playing
with knucklebones, [1003] but prosaically calls himself back to the
point from these pleasing digressions by such an expression as "but this
would take me too far from my song." His business is the straightforward
tale and nothing else. The astonishing geography of the fourth book
reminds us of the interest of the age in that subject, stimulated no
doubt by the researches of Eratosthenes and others.

The language is that of the conventional epic. Apollonius seems to have
carefully studied Homeric glosses, and gives many examples of isolated
uses, but his choice of words is by no means limited to Homer. He freely
avails himself of Alexandrian words and late uses of Homeric words.
Among his contemporaries Apollonius suffers from a comparison with
Theocritus, who was a little his senior, but he was much admired by
Roman writers who derived inspiration from the great classical writers
of Greece by way of Alexandria. In fact Alexandria was a useful bridge
between Athens and Rome. The "Argonautica" was translated by Varro
Atacinus, copied by Ovid and Virgil, and minutely studied by Valerius
Flaccus in his poem of the same name. Some of his finest passages have
been appropriated and improved upon by Virgil by the divine right of
superior genius. [1004] The subject of love had been treated in the
romantic spirit before the time of Apollonius in writings that have
perished, for instance, in those of Antimachus of Colophon, but the
"Argonautica" is perhaps the first poem still extant in which the
expression of this spirit is developed with elaboration. The Medea of
Apollonius is the direct precursor of the Dido of Virgil, and it is the
pathos and passion of the fourth book of the "Aeneid" that keep alive
many a passage of Apollonius.




THE ARGONAUTICA




BOOK I

(ll. 1-4) Beginning with thee, O Phoebus, I will recount the famous
deeds of men of old, who, at the behest of King Pelias, down through the
mouth of Pontus and between the Cyanean rocks, sped well-benched Argo in
quest of the golden fleece.

(ll. 5-17) Such was the oracle that Pelias heard, that a hateful doom
awaited him to be slain at the prompting of the man whom he should
see coming forth from the people with but one sandal. And no long time
after, in accordance with that true report, Jason crossed the stream
of wintry Anaurus on foot, and saved one sandal from the mire, but the
other he left in the depths held back by the flood. And straightway he
came to Pelias to share the banquet which the king was offering to his
father Poseidon and the rest of the gods, though he paid no honour to
Pelasgian Hera. Quickly the king saw him and pondered, and devised for
him the toil of a troublous voyage, in order that on the sea or among
strangers he might lose his home-return.

(ll. 18-22) The ship, as former bards relate, Argus wrought by the
guidance of Athena. But now I will tell the lineage and the names of the
heroes, and of the long sea-paths and the deeds they wrought in their
wanderings; may the Muses be the inspirers of my song!

(ll. 23-34) First then let us name Orpheus whom once Calliope bare, it
is said, wedded to Thracian Oeagrus, near the Pimpleian height. Men say
that he by the music of his songs charmed the stubborn rocks upon the
mountains and the course of rivers. And the wild oak-trees to this day,
tokens of that magic strain, that grow at Zone on the Thracian shore,
stand in ordered ranks close together, the same which under the charm of
his lyre he led down from Pieria. Such then was Orpheus whom Aeson's
son welcomed to share his toils, in obedience to the behest of Cheiron,
Orpheus ruler of Bistonian Pieria.

(ll. 35-39) Straightway came Asterion, whom Cometes begat by the waters
of eddying Apidanus; he dwelt at Peiresiae near the Phylleian mount,
where mighty Apidanus and bright Enipeus join their streams, coming
together from afar.

(ll. 40-44) Next to them from Larisa came Polyphemus, son of Eilatus,
who aforetime among the mighty Lapithae, when they were arming
themselves against the Centaurs, fought in his younger days; now his
limbs were grown heavy with age, but his martial spirit still remained,
even as of old.

(ll. 45-48) Nor was Iphiclus long left behind in Phylace, the uncle
of Aeson's son; for Aeson had wedded his sister Alcimede, daughter of
Phylacus: his kinship with her bade him be numbered in the host.

(ll. 49-50) Nor did Admetus, the lord of Pherae rich in sheep, stay
behind beneath the peak of the Chalcodonian mount.

(ll. 51-56) Nor at Alope stayed the sons of Hermes, rich in corn-land,
well skilled in craftiness, Erytus and Echion, and with them on their
departure their kinsman Aethalides went as the third; him near the
streams of Amphrysus Eupolemeia bare, the daughter of Myrmidon, from
Phthia; the two others were sprung from Antianeira, daughter of Menetes.

(ll. 57-64) From rich Gyrton came Coronus, son of Caeneus, brave, but
not braver than his father. For bards relate that Caeneus though still
living perished at the hands of the Centaurs, when apart from other
chiefs he routed them; and they, rallying against him, could neither
bend nor slay him; but unconquered and unflinching he passed beneath the
earth, overwhelmed by the downrush of massy pines.

(ll. 65-68) There came too Titaresian Mopsus, whom above all men the son
of Leto taught the augury of birds; and Eurydamas the son of Ctimenus;
he dwelt at Dolopian Ctimene near the Xynian lake.

(ll. 69-70) Moreover Actor sent his son Menoetius from Opus that he
might accompany the chiefs.

(ll. 71-76) Eurytion followed and strong Eribotes, one the son of
Teleon, the other of Irus, Actor's son; the son of Teleon renowned
Eribotes, and of Irus Eurytion. A third with them was Oileus, peerless
in courage and well skilled to attack the flying foe, when they break
their ranks.

(ll. 77-85) Now from Euboea came Canthus eager for the quest, whom
Canethus son of Abas sent; but he was not destined to return to
Cerinthus. For fate had ordained that he and Mopsus, skilled in the
seer's art, should wander and perish in the furthest ends of Libya. For
no ill is too remote for mortals to incur, seeing that they buried them
in Libya, as far from the Colchians as is the space that is seen between
the setting and the rising of the sun.

(ll. 86-89) To him Clytius and Iphitus joined themselves, the warders
of Oechalia, sons of Eurytus the ruthless, Eurytus, to whom the
Far-shooting god gave his bow; but he had no joy of the gift; for of his
own choice he strove even with the giver.

(ll. 90-94) After them came the sons of Aeacus, not both together, nor
from the same spot; for they settled far from Aegina in exile, when in
their folly they had slain their brother Phoeus. Telamon dwelt in the
Attic island; but Peleus departed and made his home in Phthia.

(ll. 95-104) After them from Cecropia came warlike Butes, son of brave
Teleon, and Phalerus of the ashen spear. Alcon his father sent him
forth; yet no other sons had he to care for his old age and livelihood.
But him, his well-beloved and only son, he sent forth that amid bold
heroes he might shine conspicuous. But Theseus, who surpassed all the
sons of Erechtheus, an unseen bond kept beneath the land of Taenarus,
for he had followed that path with Peirithous; assuredly both would have
lightened for all the fulfilment of their toil.

(ll. 105-114) Tiphys, son of Hagnias, left the Siphaean people of the
Thespians, well skilled to foretell the rising wave on the broad sea,
and well skilled to infer from sun and star the stormy winds and the
time for sailing. Tritonian Athena herself urged him to join the band
of chiefs, and he came among them a welcome comrade. She herself too
fashioned the swift ship; and with her Argus, son of Arestor, wrought
it by her counsels. Wherefore it proved the most excellent of all ships
that have made trial of the sea with oars.

(ll. 115-117) After them came Phlias from Araethyrea, where he dwelt
in affluence by the favour of his father Dionysus, in his home by the
springs of Asopus.

(ll. 118-121) From Argos came Talaus and Areius, sons of Bias, and
mighty Leodocus, all of whom Pero daughter of Neleus bare; on her
account the Aeolid Melampus endured sore affliction in the steading of
Iphiclus.

(ll. 122-132) Nor do we learn that Heracles of the mighty heart
disregarded the eager summons of Aeson's son. But when he heard a report
of the heroes' gathering and had reached Lyrceian Argos from Arcadia by
the road along which he carried the boar alive that fed in the thickets
of Lampeia, near the vast Erymanthian swamp, the boar bound with chains
he put down from his huge shoulders at the entrance to the market-place
of Mycenae; and himself of his own will set out against the purpose of
Eurystheus; and with him went Hylas, a brave comrade, in the flower of
youth, to bear his arrows and to guard his bow.

(ll. 133-138) Next to him came a scion of the race of divine Danaus,
Nauplius. He was the son of Clytonaeus son of Naubolus; Naubolus was son
of Lernus; Lernus we know was the son of Proetus son of Nauplius; and
once Amymone daughter of Danaus, wedded to Poseidon, bare Nauplius, who
surpassed all men in naval skill.

(ll. 139-145) Idmon came last of all them that dwelt at Argos, for
though he had learnt his own fate by augury, he came, that the people
might not grudge him fair renown. He was not in truth the son of Abas,
but Leto's son himself begat him to be numbered among the illustrious
Aeolids; and himself taught him the art of prophecy--to pay heed to
birds and to observe the signs of the burning sacrifice.

(ll. 146-150) Moreover Aetolian Leda sent from Sparta strong Polydeuces
and Castor, skilled to guide swift-footed steeds; these her dearly-loved
sons she bare at one birth in the house of Tyndareus; nor did she forbid
their departure; for she had thoughts worthy of the bride of Zeus.

(ll. 151-155) The sons of Aphareus, Lynceus and proud Idas, came from
Arene, both exulting in their great strength; and Lynceus too excelled
in keenest sight, if the report is true that that hero could easily
direct his sight even beneath the earth.

(ll. 156-160) And with them Neleian Periclymenus set out to come, eldest
of all the sons of godlike Neleus who were born at Pylos; Poseidon had
given him boundless strength and granted him that whatever shape he
should crave during the fight, that he should take in the stress of
battle.

(ll. 161-171) Moreover from Arcadia came Amphidamas and Cepheus, who
inhabited Tegea and the allotment of Apheidas, two sons of Aldus; and
Ancaeus followed them as the third, whom his father Lycurgus sent, the
brother older than both. But he was left in the city to care for Aleus
now growing old, while he gave his son to join his brothers. Antaeus
went clad in the skin of a Maenalian bear, and wielding in his right
hand a huge two-edged battleaxe. For his armour his grandsire had hidden
in the house's innermost recess, to see if he might by some means still
stay his departure.

(ll. 172-175) There came also Augeias, whom fame declared to be the
son of Helios; he reigned over the Eleans, glorying in his wealth; and
greatly he desired to behold the Colchian land and Aeetes himself the
ruler of the Colchians.

(ll. 176-178) Asterius and Amphion, sons of Hyperasius, came from
Achaean Pellene, which once Pelles their grandsire founded on the brows
of Aegialus.

(ll. 179-184) After them from Taenarus came Euphemus whom, most
swift-footed of men, Europe, daughter of mighty Tityos, bare to
Poseidon. He was wont to skim the swell of the grey sea, and wetted not
his swift feet, but just dipping the tips of his toes was borne on the
watery path.

(ll. 185-189) Yea, and two other sons of Poseidon came; one Erginus, who
left the citadel of glorious Miletus, the other proud Ancaeus, who
left Parthenia, the seat of Imbrasion Hera; both boasted their skill in
seacraft and in war.

(ll. 190-201) After them from Calydon came the son of Oeneus, strong
Meleagrus, and Laocoon--Laocoon the brother of Oeneus, though not by the
same mother, for a serving-woman bare him; him, now growing old, Oeneus
sent to guard his son: thus Meleagrus, still a youth, entered the
bold band of heroes. No other had come superior to him, I ween, except
Heracles, if for one year more he had tarried and been nurtured among
the Aetolians. Yea, and his uncle, well skilled to fight whether with
the javelin or hand to hand, Iphiclus son of Thestius, bare him company
on his way.

(ll. 202-206) With him came Palaemonius, son of Olenian Lernus, of
Lernus by repute, but his birth was from Hephaestus; and so he was
crippled in his feet, but his bodily frame and his valour no one would
dare to scorn. Wherefore he was numbered among all the chiefs, winning
fame for Jason.

(ll. 207-210) From the Phocians came Iphitus sprung from Naubolus son of
Ornytus; once he had been his host when Jason went to Pytho to ask for
a response concerning his voyage; for there he welcomed him in his own
hails.

(ll. 211-223) Next came Zetes and Calais, sons of Boreas, whom once
Oreithyia, daughter of Erechtheus, bare to Boreas on the verge of wintry
Thrace; thither it was that Thracian Boreas snatched her away from
Cecropia as she was whirling in the dance, hard by Hissus' stream. And,
carrying her far off, to the spot that men called the rock of Sarpedon,
near the river Erginus, he wrapped her in dark clouds and forced her
to his will. There they were making their dusky wings quiver upon their
ankles on both sides as they rose, a great wonder to behold, wings that
gleamed with golden scales: and round their backs from the top of the
head and neck, hither and thither, their dark tresses were being shaken
by the wind.

(ll. 224-227) No, nor had Acastus son of mighty Pelias himself any will
to stay behind in the palace of his brave sire, nor Argus, helper of the
goddess Athena; but they too were ready to be numbered in the host.

(ll. 228-233) So many then were the helpers who assembled to join the
son of Aeson. All the chiefs the dwellers thereabout called Minyae, for
the most and the bravest avowed that they were sprung from the blood of
the daughters of Minyas; thus Jason himself was the son of Alcimede who
was born of Clymene the daughter of Minyas.

(ll. 234-241) Now when all things had been made ready by the thralls,
all things that fully-equipped ships are furnished withal when men's
business leads them to voyage across the sea, then the heroes took their
way through the city to the ship where it lay on the strand that men
call Magnesian Pagasae; and a crowd of people hastening rushed together;
but the heroes shone like gleaming stars among the clouds; and each man
as he saw them speeding along with their armour would say:

(ll. 242-246) "King Zeus, what is the purpose of Pelias? Whither is he
driving forth from the Panachaean land so great a host of heroes? On one
day they would waste the palace of Aeetes with baleful fire, should he
not yield them the fleece of his own goodwill. But the path is not to be
shunned, the toil is hard for those who venture."

(ll. 247-250) Thus they spake here and there throughout the city; but
the women often raised their hands to the sky in prayer to the immortals
to grant a return, their hearts' desire. And one with tears thus
lamented to her fellow:

(ll. 251-260) "Wretched Alcimede, evil has come to thee at last though
late, thou hast not ended with splendour of life. Aeson too, ill-fated
man! Surely better had it been for him, if he were lying beneath the
earth, enveloped in his shroud, still unconscious of bitter toils. Would
that the dark wave, when the maiden Helle perished, had overwhelmed
Phrixus too with the ram; but the dire portent even sent forth a human
voice, that it might cause to Alcimede sorrows and countless pains
hereafter."

(ll. 261-277) Thus the women spake at the departure of the heroes. And
now many thralls, men and women, were gathered together, and his mother,
smitten with grief for Jason. And a bitter pang seized every woman's
heart; and with them groaned the father in baleful old age, lying on his
bed, closely wrapped round. But the hero straightway soothed their pain,
encouraging them, and bade the thralls take up his weapons for war; and
they in silence with downcast looks took them up. And even as the mother
had thrown her arms about her son, so she clung, weeping without stint,
as a maiden all alone weeps, falling fondly on the neck of her hoary
nurse, a maid who has now no others to care for her, but she drags on a
weary life under a stepmother, who maltreats her continually with ever
fresh insults, and as she weeps, her heart within her is bound fast
with misery, nor can she sob forth all the groans that struggle for
utterance; so without stint wept Alcimede straining her son in her arms,
and in her yearning grief spake as follows:

(ll. 278-291) "Would that on that day when, wretched woman that I am, I
heard King Pelias proclaim his evil behest, I had straightway given up
my life and forgotten my cares, so that thou thyself, my son, with thine
own hands, mightest have buried me; for that was the only wish left me
still to be fulfilled by time, all the other rewards for thy nurture
have I long enjoyed. Now I, once so admired among Achaean women,
shall be left behind like a bondwoman in my empty halls, pining away,
ill-fated one, for love of thee, thee on whose account I had aforetime
so much splendour and renown, my only son for whom I loosed my virgin
zone first and last. For to me beyond others the goddess Eileithyia
grudged abundant offspring. Alas for my folly! Not once, not even in nay
dreams did I forebode this, that the flight of Phrixus would bring me
woe."

(ll. 292-294) Thus with moaning she wept, and her handmaidens, standing
by, lamented; but Jason spake gently to her with comforting words:

(ll. 295-305) "Do not, I pray thee, mother, store up bitter sorrows
overmuch, for thou wilt not redeem me from evil by tears, but wilt still
add grief to grief. For unseen are the woes that the gods mete out to
mortals; be strong to endure thy share of them though with grief in thy
heart; take courage from the promises of Athena, and from the answers of
the gods (for very favourable oracles has Phoebus given), and then from
the help of the chieftains. But do thou remain here, quiet among thy
handmaids, and be not a bird of ill omen to the ship; and thither my
clansmen and thralls will follow me."

(ll. 306-316) He spake, and started forth to leave the house. And as
Apollo goes forth from some fragrant shrine to divine Delos or Claros or
Pytho or to broad Lyeia near the stream of Xanthus, in such beauty moved
Jason through the throng of people; and a cry arose as they shouted
together. And there met him aged Iphias, priestess of Artemis guardian
of the city, and kissed his right hand, but she had not strength to say
a word, for all her eagerness, as the crowd rushed on, but she was left
there by the wayside, as the old are left by the young, and he passed on
and was gone afar.

(ll. 317-331) Now when he had left the well-built streets of the city,
he came to the beach of Pagasae, where his comrades greeted him as they
stayed together near the ship Argo. And he stood at the entering in,
and they were gathered to meet him. And they perceived Aeastus and Argus
coming from the city, and they marvelled when they saw them hasting with
all speed, despite the will of Pelias. The one, Argus, son of Arestor,
had cast round his shoulders the hide of a bull reaching to his feet,
with the black hair upon it, the other, a fair mantle of double fold,
which his sister Pelopeia had given him. Still Jason forebore from
asking them about each point but bade all be seated for an assembly. And
there, upon the folded sails and the mast as it lay on the ground,
they all took their seats in order. And among them with goodwill spake
Aeson's son:

(ll. 332-340) "All the equipment that a ship needs for all is in due
order--lies ready for our departure. Therefore we will make no long
delay in our sailing for these things' sake, when the breezes but
blow fair. But, friends,--for common to all is our return to Hellas
hereafter, and common to all is our path to the land of Aeetes--now
therefore with ungrudging heart choose the bravest to be our leader,
who shall be careful for everything, to take upon him our quarrels and
covenants with strangers."

(ll. 341-344) Thus he spake; and the young heroes turned their eyes
towards bold Heracles sitting in their midst, and with one shout they
all enjoined upon him to be their leader; but he, from the place where
he sat, stretched forth his right hand and said:

(ll. 345-347) "Let no one offer this honour to me. For I will not
consent, and I will forbid any other to stand up. Let the hero who
brought us together, himself be the leader of the host."

(ll. 348-350) Thus he spake with high thoughts, and they assented, as
Heracles bade; and warlike Jason himself rose up, glad at heart, and
thus addressed the eager throng:

(ll. 351-362) "If ye entrust your glory to my care, no longer as before
let our path be hindered. Now at last let us propitiate Phoebus with
sacrifice and straightway prepare a feast. And until my thralls come,
the overseers of my steading, whose care it is to choose out oxen from
the herd and drive them hither, we will drag down the ship to the sea,
and do ye place all the tackling within, and draw lots for the benches
for rowing. Meantime let us build upon the beach an altar to Apollo
Embasius [1101] who by an oracle promised to point out and show me the
paths of the sea, if by sacrifice to him I should begin my venture for
King Pelias."

(ll. 363-393) He spake, and was the first to turn to the work, and they
stood up in obedience to him; and they heaped their garments, one upon
the other, on a smooth stone, which the sea did not strike with its
waves, but the stormy surge had cleansed it long before. First of all,
by the command of Argus, they strongly girded the ship with a rope well
twisted within, [1102] stretching it tight on each side, in order that
the planks might be well compacted by the bolts and might withstand the
opposing force of the surge. And they quickly dug a trench as wide as
