two thirds of the interior, lying all mixed together without any order.

Shann concentrated on recalling the ceremony the Warlockian had used
before the first toss. She had offered the bowl to the skulls in turn.
The skulls! But he was no consulter of skulls. Still holding the bowl
close to his chest, Shann looked up over the roofless walls at the star
map on the roof of the cavern. There, that was Rama; and to its left,
just a little above, was Tyr's system where swung the stark world of his
birth, and of which he had only few good memories, but of which he was a
part. The Terran raised the bowl to that spot of light which marked
Tyr's pale sun.

Smiling with a wry twist, he lowered the bowl, and on impulse of pure
defiance he offered it to the skull that had chattered. Immediately he
realized that the move had had an electric effect upon the aliens.
Slowly at first, and then faster, he began to swing the bowl from side
to side, the needles slipping, mixing within. And as he swung it, Shann
held it out over the expanse of the table.

The Warlockian who had given him the bowl was the one who struck it on
the bottom, causing a rain of splinters. To Shann's astonishment, mixed
as they had been in the container, they once more formed a pattern, and
not the same pattern the Warlockians had consulted earlier. The
dampening curtain between them vanished; he was in touch mind to mind
once again.

"So be it." The center Warlockian spread out her four-fingered thumbless
hands above the scattered needles. "What is read, is read."

Again a formula. He caught a chorus of answer from the others.

"What is read, is read. To the dreamer the dream. Let the dream be known
for what it is, and there is life. Let the dream encompass the dreamer
falsely, and all is lost."

"Who can question the wisdom of the Old Ones?" asked their leader. "We
are those who read the messages they send, out of their mercy. This is a
strange thing they bid us do, man--open for you our own initiates' road
to the veil of illusion. That way has never been for males, who dream
without set purpose and have not the ability to know true from false,
have not the courage to face their dreams to the truth. Do so--if you
can!" There was a flash of mockery in that, combined with something
else--stronger than distaste, not as strong as hatred, but certainly not
friendly.

She held out her hands and Shann saw now, lying on a slowly closing
palm, a disk such as the one Thorvald had shown him. The Terran had only
one moment of fear and then came blackness, more absolute than the dark
of any night he had ever known.

Light once more, green light with an odd shimmering quality to it. The
skull-lined walls were gone; there were no walls, no building held him.
Shann strode forward, and his boots sank in sand, that smooth, satin
sand which had ringed the island in the cavern. But he was certain he
was no longer on that island, even within that cavern, though far above
him there was still a dome of roof.

The source of the green shimmer lay to his left. Somehow he found
himself reluctant to turn and face it. That would commit him to action.
But Shann turned.

A veil, a veil of rippling green. Material? No, rather mist or light. A
veil depending from some source so far over his head that its origin was
hidden in the upper gloom, a veil which was a barrier he must cross.

With every nerve protesting, Shann walked forward, unable to keep back.
He flung up his arm to protect his face as he marched into that stuff.
It was warm, and the gas--if gas it was--left no slick of moisture on
his skin in spite of its foggy consistency. And it was no veil or
curtain, for although he was already well into the murk, he saw no end
to it. Blindly he trudged on, unable to sight anything but the rolling
billows of green, pausing now and again to go down on one knee and pat
the sand underfoot, reassured at the reality of that footing.

And when he met nothing menacing, Shann began to relax. His heart no
longer labored; he made no move to draw the stunner or knife. Where he
was and for what purpose, he had no idea. But there _was_ a purpose in
this and that the Warlockians were behind it, he did not doubt. The
"initiates' road," the leader had said, and the conviction was steady in
his mind that he faced some test of alien devising.

A cavern with a green veil--his memory awoke. Thorvald's dream! Shann
paused, trying to remember how the other had described this place. So he
was enacting Thorvald's dream! And could the Survey officer now be
caught in Shann's dream in turn, climbing up somewhere into the nose
slit of a skull-shaped mountain?

Green fog without end, and Shann lost in it. How long had he been here?
Shann tried to reckon time, the time since his coming into the
water-world of the starred cavern. He realized that he had not eaten,
nor drank, nor desired to do so either--nor did he now. Yet he was not
weak; in fact, he had never felt such tireless energy as possessed his
spare body.

Was this _all_ a dream? His threatened drowning in the underground
stream a nightmare? Yet there was a pattern in this, just as there had
been a pattern in the needles he had spilled across the table. One even
led to another with discernible logic; because he had tossed that
particular pattern he had come here.

According to the ambiguous instructions or warnings of the Warlockian
witch, his safety in this place would depend upon his ability to tell
true dreams from false. But how ... why? So far he had done nothing
except walk through a green fog, and for all he knew, he might well be
traveling in circles.

Because there was nothing else to do, Shann walked on, his boots
pressing sand, rising from each step with a small sucking sound. Then,
as he stooped to search for some indication of a path or road which
might guide him, his ears caught the slightest of noises--other small
sucking whispers. He was not the only wayfarer in this place!




13. HE WHO DREAMS....


The mist was not a quiet thing; it billowed and curled until it appeared
to half-conceal darker shadows, any one of which could be an enemy.
Shann remained hunkered on the sand, every sense abnormally alert,
watching the fog. He was still sure he could hear sounds which marked
the progress of another. What other? One of the Warlockians tracking him
to spy? Or was there some prisoner like himself lost out there in the
murk? Could it be Thorvald?

Now the sound had ceased. He was not even sure from what direction it
had first come. Perhaps that other was listening now, as intent upon
locating him. Shann ran his tongue over dry lips. The impulse to call
out, to try and contact any fellow traveler here, was strong. Only
hard-learned caution kept him silent. He got to his hands and knees,
uncertain as to his previous direction.

Shann crept. Someone expecting a man walking erect might be suitably
distracted by the arrival of a half-seen figure on all fours. He halted
again to listen.

He had been right! The sound of a very muffled footfall or footfalls,
carried to his ears. He was sure that the sound was louder, that the
unknown was approaching. Shann stood, his hand close to his stunner. He
was almost tempted to spray that beam blindly before him, hoping to hit
the unseen by chance.

A shadow--something more swift than a shadow, more than one of the
tricks the curling fog played on eyes--was moving with purpose and
straight for him. Still, prudence restrained Shann from calling out.

The figure grew clearer. A Terran! It could be Thorvald! But remembering
how they had last parted, Shann did not hurry to meet him.

That shadow-shape stretched out a long arm in a sweep as if to pull
aside some of the vapor concealing them from each other. Then Shann
shivered as if that fog had suddenly turned into the drive of frigid
snow. For the mist did roll back so that the two of them stood in an
irregular clearing in its midst.

And he did not front Thorvald.

Shann was caught up in the ice grip of an old fear, frozen by it, but
somehow clinging to a hope that he did not see the unbelievable.

Those hands drawing the lash of a whip back into striking readiness ...
a brutal nose broken askew, a blaster burn puckering across cheek to
misshapen ear ... that, evil, gloating grin of anticipation. Flick,
flick, the slight dance of the lash in a master's hand as those thick
fingers tightened about the stock of the whip. In a moment it would
whirl up to lay a ribbon of fire about Shann's defenceless shoulders.
Then Logally would laugh and laugh, his sadistic mirth echoed by those
other men who played jackals to his rogue lion.

Other men.... Shann shook his head dazedly. But he did not stand again
in the Dump-size bar of the Big Strike. And he was no longer a
terrorized youngster, fit meat for Logally's amusement. Only the whip
rose, the lash curled out, catching Shann just as it had that time years
ago, delivering a red slash of pure agony. But Logally was dead, Shann's
mind screamed, fighting frantically against the evidence of his eyes, of
that pain in his chest and shoulder. The Dump bully had been spaced by
off-world miners, now also dead, whose claims he had tried to jump out
in the Ajax system.

Logally drew back the lash, preparing to strike again. Shann faced a man
five years dead who walked and fought. Or, Shann bit hard upon his lower
lip, holding desperately to sane reasoning--did he indeed face anything?
Logally was the ancient devil of his boyhood produced anew by the
witchery of Warlock. Or had Shann himself been led to recreate both the
man and the circumstances of their first meeting with fear as a weapon
to pull the creator down? Dream true or false. Logally _was_ dead;
therefore, this dream was false, it had to be.

The Terran began to walk toward that grinning ogre rising out of his old
nightmares. His hand was no longer on the butt of his stunner, but swung
loosely at his side. He saw the coming lash, the wicked promise in those
small narrowed eyes. This was Logally at the acme of his strength, when
he was most to be feared, as he had continued to exist over the years in
the depths of a boy-child's memory. But Logally was _not_ alive; only in
a dream could he be.

For the second time the lash bit at Shann, curling about his body, to
dissolve. There was no alteration in Logally's grin, His muscular arm
drew back as he aimed a third blow. Shann continued to walk forward,
bringing up one hand, not to strike at that sweating, bristly jaw, but
as if to push the other out of his path. And in his mind he held one
thought: this was not Logally; it could not be. Ten years had passed
since they had met. And for five of those years Logally had been dead.
Here was Warlockian witchery, to be met by sane Terran reasoning.

Shann was alone. The mist, which had formed walls, enclosed him again.
But still there was a smarting brand across his shoulder. Shann drew
aside the rags of his uniform blouse to discover a welt, raw and red.
And seeing that, his unbelief was shaken.

When he had believed in Logally and in Logally's weapon, the other had
had reality enough to strike that blow, make the lash cut deep. But when
the Terran had faced the phantom with the truth, then neither Logally
nor his lash existed, Shann shivered, trying not to think what might lie
before him. Visions out of nightmares which could put on substance! He
had dreamed of Logally in the past, many times. And he had had other
dreams, just as frightening. Must he front those nightmares, all of
them----? Why? To amuse his captors, or to prove their contention that he
was a fool to challenge the powers of such mistresses of illusion?

How did they know just what dreams to use in order to break him? Or did
he himself furnish the actors and the action, projecting old terrors in
this mist as a tri-dee tape projected a story in three dimensions for
the amusement of the viewer?

Dream true--was this progress through the mist also a dream? Dreams
within dreams.... Shann put his hand to his head, uncertain, badly
shaken. But that stubborn core of determination within him was still
holding. Next time he would be prepared at once to face down any
resurrected memory.

Walking slowly, pausing to listen for the slightest sound which might
herald the coming of a new illusion, Shann tried to guess which of his
nightmares might come to face him. But he was to learn that there was
more than one kind of dream. Steeled against old fears, he was met by
another emotion altogether.

There was a fluttering in the air, a little crooning cry which pulled at
his heart. Without any conscious thought, Shann held out his hands,
whistling on two notes a call which his lips appeared to remember more
quickly than his mind. The shape which winged through the fog came
straight to his waiting hold, tore at long-walled-away hurt with its
once familiar beauty. It flew with a list; one of the delicately tinted
wings was injured, had never healed straight. But the seraph nestled
into the hollow of Shann's two palms and looked up at him with all the
old liquid trust.

"Trav! Trav!" He cradled the tiny creature carefully, regarded with joy
its feathered body, the curled plumes on its proudly held head, felt the
silken patting of those infinitesimal claws against his protecting
fingers.

Shann sat down in the sand, hardly daring to breathe. Trav--again! The
wonder of this never-to-be-hoped-for return filled him with a surge of
happiness almost too great to bear, which hurt in its way with as great
a pain as Logally's lash; it was a pain rooted in love, not fear and
hate.

Logally's lash....

Shann trembled. Trav raised one of those small claws toward the Terran's
face, crooning a soft caressing cry for recognition, for protection,
trying to be a part of Shann's life once more.

Trav! How could he bear to will Trav into nothingness, to bear to summon
up another harsh memory which would sweep Trav away? Trav was the only
thing Shann had ever known which he could love wholeheartedly, that had
answered his love with a return gift of affection so much greater than
the light body he now held.

"Trav!" he whispered softly. Then he made his great effort against this
second and far more subtle attack. With the same agony which he had
known years earlier, he resolutely summoned a bitter memory, sat nursing
once more a broken thing which died in pain he could not ease, aware
himself of every moment of that pain. And what was worse, this time
there clung that nagging little doubt. What if he had not forced the
memory? Perhaps he could have taken Trav with him unhurt, alive, at
least for a while.

Shann covered his face with his now empty hands. To see a nightmare
flicker out after facing squarely up to its terror, that was no great
task. To give up a dream which was part of a lost heaven, that cut
cruelly deep. The Terran dragged himself to his feet, drained and weary,
stumbling on.

Was there no end to this aimless circling through a world of green
smoke? He shambled ahead, moving his feet leadenly. How long had he been
here? There was no division in time, just the unchanging light which was
a part of the fog through which he plodded.

Then he heard more than any shuffle of foot across sand, any crooning of
a long dead seraph, the rising and falling of a voice: a human
voice--not quite singing or reciting, but something between the two.
Shann paused, searching his memory, a memory which seemed bruised, for
the proper answer to match that sound.

But, though he recalled scene after scene out of the years, that voice
did not trigger any return from his past. He turned toward its source,
dully determined to get over quickly the meeting which lay behind that
signal. Only, though he walked on and on, Shann did not appear any
closer to the man behind the voice, nor was he able to make out separate
words composing that chant, a chant broken now and then by pauses, so
that the Terran grew aware of the distress of his fellow prisoner. For
the impression that he sought another captive came out of nowhere and
grew as he cast wider and wider in his quest.

Then he might have turned some invisible corner in the mist, for the
chant broke out anew in stronger volume, and now he was able to
distinguish words he knew.

    "... where blow the winds between the worlds,
    And hang the suns in dark of space.
    For Power is given a man to use.
    Let him do so well before the last accounting--"

The voice was hoarse, cracked, the words spaced with uneven catches of
breath, as if they had been repeated many, many times to provide an
anchor against madness, form a tie to reality. And hearing that note,
Shann slowed his pace. This was out of no memory of his; he was sure of
that.

    "... blow the winds between the worlds,
    And hang the suns in ... dark--of--of--"

That harsh croak of voice was running down, as a clock runs down for
lack of winding. Shann sped on, reacting to a plea which did not lay in
the words themselves.

Once more the mist curled back, provided him with an open space. A man
sat on the sand, his fists buried wrist deep in the smooth grains on
either side of his body, his eyes set, red-rimmed, glazed, his body
rocking back and forth in time to his labored chant.

    "... the dark of space--"

"Thorvald!" Shann skidded in the sand, went down on his knees. The
manner of their last parting was forgotten as he took in the officer's
condition.

The other did not stop his swaying, but his head turned with a stiff
jerk, the gray eyes making a visible effort to focus on Shann. Then some
of the strain smoothed out of the gaunt features and Thorvald laughed
softly.

"Garth!"

Shann stiffened but had no chance to protest that mistaken
identification as the other continued: "So you made class one status,
boy! I always knew you could if you'd work for it. A couple of black
marks on your record, sure. But those can be rubbed out, boy, when
you're willing to try. Thorvalds always have been Survey. Our father
would have been proud."

Thorvald's voice flattened, his smile faded, there was a growing spark
of some emotion in those gray eyes. Unexpectedly, he hurled himself
forward, his hands clawing for Shann's throat. He bore the younger man
down under him to the sand where Lantee found himself fighting
desperately for his life against a man who could only be mad.

Shann used a trick learned on the Dumps, and his opponent doubled up
with a gasp of agony to let the younger man break free. He planted a
knee on the small of Thorvald's back, digging the officer into the sand,
pinning down his arms in spite of the other's struggles. Regaining his
own breath in gulps, Shann tried to appeal to some spark of reason in
the other.
