



CHAPTER XI

THE REST OF THE STORY


"I should think," commented Laurie one day, when Ted and Mr. Hazen were
sitting in his room, "that Mr. Bell's landlady would have fussed no end
to have his telephone ringing all the time."

"My dear boy, you do not for an instant suppose that the telephones of
that period had bells, do you?" replied Mr. Hazen with amusement. "No,
indeed! There was no method for signaling. Unless two persons agreed to
talk at a specified hour of the day or night and timed their
conversation by the clock, or else had recourse to the Morse code,
there was no satisfactory way they could call one another. This did not
greatly matter when you recollect how few telephones there were in
existence. Mr. Williams used to summon a listener by tapping on the
metal diaphragm of the instrument with his pencil, a practice none too
beneficial to the transmitter; nor was the resulting sound powerful
enough to reach any one who was not close at hand. Furthermore, persons
could not stand and hold their telephones and wait until they could
arouse the party at the other end of the line for a telephone weighed
almost ten pounds and----"

"Ten pounds!" repeated Ted in consternation.

Mr. Hazen nodded.

"Yes," answered he, "the early telephones were heavy, cumbersome
objects and not at all like the trim, compact instruments we have
to-day. In fact, they were quite similar to the top of a sewing-machine
box, only, perhaps, they were a trifle smaller. You can understand that
one would not care to carry on a very long conversation if he must in
the meantime stand and hold in his arms a ten-pound object about ten
inches long, six inches wide, and six inches high."

"I should say not!" Laurie returned. "It must have acted as a fine
check, though, on people who just wanted to gabble."

Both Ted and the tutor laughed.

"Of course telephone owners could not go on that way," Ted said, after
the merriment had subsided. "What did Mr. Bell do about it?"

"The initial step for betterment was not taken by Mr. Bell but by Mr.
Watson," Mr. Hazen responded. "He rigged a little hammer inside the box
and afterwards put a button on the outside. This _thumper_ was the
first calling device ever in use. Later on, however, the assistant felt
he could improve on this method and he adapted the buzzer of the
harmonic telegraph to the telephone; this proved to be a distinct
advance over the more primitive _thumper_ but nevertheless he was
not satisfied with it as a signaling apparatus. So he searched farther
still, and with the aid of one of the shabby little books on
electricity that he had purchased for a quarter from Williams's tiny
showcase, he evolved the magneto-electric call bell such as we use
to-day. This answered every purpose and nothing has ever been found
that has supplanted it. It is something of a pity that Watson did not
think to affix his name to this invention; but he was too deeply
interested in what he was doing and probably too busy to consider its
value. His one idea was to help Mr. Bell to improve the telephone in
every way possible and measuring what he was going to get out of it was
apparently very far from his thought. Of course, the first of these
call bells were not perfect, any more than were the first telephones;
by and by, however, their defects were remedied until they became
entirely satisfactory."

"So they now had telephones, transmitters, and call bells," reflected
Ted. "I should say they were pretty well ready for business."

"You forget the switchboard," was Mr. Hazen's retort. "A one-party line
was a luxury and a thing practically beyond the reach of the public. At
best there were very few of them. No, some method for connecting
parties who wished to speak to one another had to be found and it is at
this juncture of the telephone's career that a new contributor to the
invention's success comes upon the scene.

"Doing business at Number 342 Washington Street was a young New Yorker
by the name of Edwin T. Holmes, who had charge of his father's
burglar-alarm office. As all the electrical equipment he used was made
at Williams's shop, he used frequently to go there and one day, when he
entered, he came upon Charles Williams, the proprietor of the store,
standing before a little box that rested on a shelf and shouting into
it. Hearing Mr. Holmes's step, he glanced over his shoulder, met his
visitor's astonished gaze, and laughed.

"'For Heaven's sake, Williams, what have you got in that box?' demanded
Mr. Holmes.

"'Oh, this is what that fellow out there by Watson's bench, Mr. Bell,
calls a telephone,' replied Mr. Williams.

"'So that's the thing I have seen squibs in the paper about!' observed
the burglar-alarm man with curiosity.

"'Yes, he and Watson have been working at it for some time.'

"Now Mr. Holmes knew Tom Watson well for the young electrician had done
a great deal of work for him in the past; moreover, the New York man
was a person who kept well abreast of the times and was always alert
for novel ideas. Therefore quite naturally he became interested in the
embryo enterprise and dropped into Williams's shop almost every day to
see how the infant invention was progressing. In this way he met both
Mr. Gardiner Hubbard and Mr. Thomas Saunders, who were Mr. Bell's
financial sponsors. After Mr. Holmes had been a spectator of the
telephone for some time, he remarked to Mr. Hubbard:

"'If you succeed in getting two or three of those things to work and
will lend them to me, I will show them to Boston.'

"'Show them to Boston,' repeated Mr. Hubbard. 'How will you do that?'

"'Well,' said Mr. Holmes, 'I have a Central Office down at Number 342
Washington Street from which I have individual wires running to most of
the banks, many jeweler's shops, and other stores. I can ring a bell in
a bank from my office and the bank can ring one to me in return. By
using switches and giving a prearranged signal to the Exchange Bank,
both of us could throw a switch which would put the telephones in
circuit and we could talk together.'

"After looking at Mr. Holmes for a moment with great surprise, Mr.
Hubbard slapped him on the back and said, 'I will do it! Get your
switches and other things ready.'

"Of course Mr. Holmes was greatly elated to be the first one to show on
his wires this wonderful new instrument and connect two or more parties
through a Central Office. He immediately had a switchboard made (its
actual size was five by thirty-six inches) through which he ran a few
of his burglar-alarm circuits and by means of plugs he arranged so that
he could throw the circuit from the burglar-alarm instruments to the
telephone. He also had a shelf made to rest the telephones on and had
others like it built at the Exchange National and the Hide and Leather
banks. In a few days the telephones, numbered 6, 7, and 8, arrived and
were quickly installed, and the marvellous exhibition opened. Soon two
more instruments were added, one of which was placed in the banking
house of Brewster, Bassett and Company and the other in the Shoe and
Leather Bank. When the Williams shop was connected, it gave Mr. Holmes
a working exchange of five connections, the first telephone exchange in
history."

"I'll bet they had some queer times with it," asserted Ted.

"They did, indeed!" smiled Mr. Hazen. "The papers announced the event,
although in very retiring type, and persons of every walk in life
flocked to the Holmes office to see the wonder with their own eyes. So
many came that Mr. Holmes had a long bench made so that visitors could
sit down and watch the show. One day a cornetist played from the Holmes
building so that the members of the Boston Stock Exchange, assembled at
the office of Brewster, Bassett and Company, could hear the
performance. Considering the innovation a great boon, the New York man
secured another instrument and after meditating some time on whom he
would bestow it he decided to install it in the Revere Bank, thinking
the bank people would be delighted to be recipients of the favor. His
burglar-alarm department had pass-keys to all the banks and therefore,
when banking hours were over, he and one of his men obtained entrance
and put the telephone in place. The following morning he had word that
the president of the bank wished to see him and expecting to receive
thanks for the happy little surprise he had given the official, he
hurried to the bank. Instead of expressing gratitude, however, the
president of the institution said in an injured tone:

"'Mr. Holmes, what is that play toy you have taken the liberty of
putting up out there in the banking room?'

"'Why, that is what they are going to call a telephone,' explained Mr.
Holmes.

"'A telephone! What's a telephone?' inquired the president.

"With enthusiasm the New Yorker carefully sketched in the new invention
and told what could be done with it.

"After he had finished he was greatly astonished to have the head of
the bank reply with scorn:

"'Mr. Holmes, you take that plaything out of my bank and don't ever
take such liberties again.'

"You may be sure the _plaything_ was quickly removed and the Revere
Bank went on record as having the first telephone disconnection in the
country.

"Having exhibited the telephones for a couple of weeks, Mr. Holmes went
to Mr. Hubbard and suggested that he would like to continue to carry on
the exchange but he should like it put on a business basis.

"'Have you any money?' asked Mr. Hubbard.

"'Mighty little,' was the frank answer.

"'Well, that's more than we have got,' Mr. Hubbard responded. 'However,
if you have got enough money to do the business and build the exchange,
we will rent you the telephones.'

"By August, 1877, when Bell's patent was sixteen months' old, Casson's
History tells us there were seven hundred and seventy-eight telephones
in use and the Bell Telephone Association was formed. The organization
was held together by an extremely simple agreement which gave Bell,
Hubbard, and Saunders a three-tenths' interest apiece in the patents
and Watson one-tenth. The business possessed no capital, as there was
none to be had; and these four men at that time had an absolute
monopoly of the telephone business,--and everybody else was quite
willing they should have.

"In addition to these four associates was Charles Williams, who had
from the first been a believer in the venture, and Mr. Holmes who built
the first telephone exchange with his own money, and had about seven
hundred of the seven hundred and seventy-eight instruments on his
wires. Mr. Robert W. Devonshire joined the others in August, 1877, as
bookkeeper and general secretary and has since become an official in
the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.

"Mr. Holmes rented the telephones for ten dollars a year and through
his exchange was the first practical man who had the temerity to offer
telephone service for sale. It was the arrival of a new idea in the
business world.

"Now the business world is not a tranquil place and as soon as the new
invention began to prosper, every sort of difficulty beset its path.

"There were those who denied that Mr. Bell had been first in the field
with the telephone idea, and they began to contest his right to the
patents. Other telephone companies sprang up and began to compete with
the rugged-hearted pioneers who had launched the industry. Lawsuits
followed and for years Mr. Bell's days were one continual fight to
maintain his claims and keep others from wresting his hard-earned
prosperity from him. But in time smoother waters were reached and now
Alexander Graham Bell has been universally conceded to be the inventor
of this marvel without which we of the present should scarcely know how
to get on."

"I don't believe we could live without telephones now, do you?"
remarked Laurie thoughtfully.

"Oh, I suppose we could keep alive," laughed Mr. Hazen, "but I am
afraid our present order of civilization would have to be changed a
good deal. We scarcely realize what a part the telephone plays in
almost everything we attempt to do. Certainly the invention helps to
speed up our existence; and, convenient as it is, I sometimes am
ungrateful enough to wonder whether we should not be a less highly
strung and nervous nation without it. However that may be, the
telephone is here, and here to stay, and you now have a pretty clear
idea of its early history. How from these slender beginnings the
industry spread until it spanned continents and circled the globe, you
can easily read elsewhere. Yet mighty as this factor has become in the
business world, it is not from this angle of its greatness that I like
best to view it. I would rather think of the lives it has saved; the
good news it has often borne; the misunderstandings it has prevented;
the better unity it has promoted among all peoples. Just as the
railroad was a gigantic agent in bringing North, South, East, and West
closer together, so the telephone has helped to make our vast country,
with its many diverse elements, 'one nation, indivisible.'"




CHAPTER XII

CONSPIRATORS


With September a tint of scarlet crept into the foliage bordering the
little creeks that stole from the river into the Aldercliffe meadows;
tangles of goldenrod and purple asters breathed of autumn, and the
mornings were now too chilly for a swim. Had it not been for the great
fireplace the shack would not have been livable. For the first time
both Ted and Laurie realized that the summer they had each enjoyed so
heartily was at an end and they were face to face with a different
phase of life.

The harvest, with its horde of vegetables and fruit, had been gathered
into the yawning barns and cellars and the earth that had given so
patiently of its increase had earned the right to lay fallow until the
planting of another spring. Ted's work was done. He had helped deposit
the last barrel of ruddy apples, the last golden pumpkins within doors,
and now he had nothing more to do but to pack up his possessions
preparatory to returning to Freeman's Falls, there to rejoin his family
and continue his studies.

Once the thought that the drudgery of summer was over would have been a
delightful one. Why, he could remember the exultation with which he had
burned the last cornstalks at the end of the season when at home in
Vermont. The ceremony had been a rite of hilarious rejoicing. But this
year, strange to say, a dull sadness stole over him whenever he looked
upon the devastated gardens and the reaches of bare brown earth. There
was nothing to keep him longer either at Aldercliffe or Pine Lea. His
work henceforth lay at school.

It was strange that a little sigh accompanied the thought for had he
not always looked forward to this very prospect? What was the matter
now? Was not studying the thing he had longed to be free to do? Why
this regret and depression? And why was his own vague sadness reflected
in Laurie's eyes and in those of Mr. Hazen? Summer could not last
forever; it was childish to ask that it should. They all had known from
the beginning that these days of companionship must slip away and come
to an end. And yet the end had come so quickly. Why, it had scarcely
been midsummer before the twilight had deepened and the days mellowed
into autumn.

