The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Beast of Space, by F.E. Hardart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Beast of Space

Author: F.E. Hardart

Release Date: November 16, 2007 [EBook #23509]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEAST OF SPACE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Alexander Bauer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        The BEAST of SPACE

     _A tale of the prospectors of the starways--of dangers--_

                         by F. E. HARDART

[Illustration: He staggered back from the lapping pool--the gas--the
weight of the girl's body--the dog--]


Here the dark cave, along which Nat Starrett had been creeping,
broadened into what his powerful searchlight revealed to be a low,
wide, smoothly circular room. At his feet lapped black, thick-looking
waves of an underground lake, a pool of viscous substance that gave off
a penetrating, poignant odor of acid, sweetish and intoxicating, unlike
any acid he knew. The smell rolled up in a sickening, sultry cloud that
penetrated his helmet, made him cough and choke. Near its center
projected from the sticky stuff what appeared to be the nose of a
spaceship.

He looked down near his feet at the edge of the pool where thick,
slowly-moving tongues of the liquid appeared to reach up toward him, as
if intent on pulling him into its depths. As each hungry wave fell
back, it left a slimy, snake-like trail behind.

Now came a wave of strange music, music such as he had never heard
before. Faintly it had begun some time back, so faintly he was barely
aware of it. Now it swelled into a smooth, impelling wail lulling him
into drowsiness. He did not wonder why he could hear through the
soundproof space helmet he wore; he ceased to wonder about anything.
There was only the strange sweetness of acid and the throbbing music.

Abruptly the spell was broken by something shrilling in his brain,
sending little chills racing up and down his spine. Digger! A small,
oddly canine-like creature with telepathic powers, a space-dweller
which men found when first they came to the asteroids. The relationship
between spacehounds and men was much the same as between man and dog in
the old, earthbound days. Appropriate name for the beast, Digger. With
those large, incredibly hard claws, designed for rooting in the metal
make-up of the asteroids for vital elements, the spacehound could
easily have shredded the man's spacesuit and helmet, could, at any time,
tear huge chunks out of men's fine ships.

The half-conscious man jerked his thin form erect. His mouth, which had
gaped loosely, closed with a snap into firm lines.

"She isn't in this hell hole, Digger. You wouldn't expect her to be
where we could find her easily."

Scooping the small beast up under his good arm, he quickly climbed the
steep, slimy slope of the cave. The other arm in his suit hung empty.
That empty arm in the spacesuit told the story of an earthman become
voluntary exile, choosing the desolation of space to the companionship
of other humans who would deluge him with unwonted sympathy. The
spacehound was friendly in its own fashion; fortunately, such complex
things as sympathy were apparently outside its abilities. The two could
interchange impressions of danger, comfort, pleasure, discomfort, fear,
