or sat in this elegant home a lonely and unsympathized-with prisoner.
She was furnished with books, magazines and papers, and every physical
comfort. Sympathy for her lot was never offered her. Childhood is
regarded by my people as the only period of life that is capable of
knowing perfect happiness, and among us it is a crime greater than the
heinousness of murder in your country, to deprive a human being of its
childhood--in which cluster the only unalloyed sweets of life.

"A human being who remembers only pain, rebukes treatment in childhood,
has lost the very flavor of existence, and the person who destroyed it
is a criminal indeed."




CHAPTER VI.


There was one peculiarity about Mizora that I noticed soon after my
arrival, but for various reasons have refrained from speaking of before
now. It was the absence of houses devoted to religious worship.

In architecture Mizora displayed the highest perfection. Their colleges,
art galleries, public libraries, opera houses, and all their public
buildings were grand and beautiful. Never in any country, had I beheld
such splendor in design and execution. Their superior skill in this
respect, led me to believe that their temples of worship must be on a
scale of magnificence beyond all my conceiving. I was eager to behold
them. I looked often upon my first journeyings about their cities to
discover them, but whenever I noticed an unusually imposing building,
and asked what it was, it was always something else. I was frequently on
the point of asking them to conduct me to some church that resembled my
own in worship, (for I was brought up in strict compliance with the
creeds, dogmas, and regulations of the Russo Greek Church) but I
refrained, hoping that in time, I should be introduced to their
religious ceremonies.

When time passed on, and no invitation was extended me, and I saw no
house nor preparation for religious worship, nor even heard mention of
any, I asked Wauna for an explanation. She appeared not to comprehend
me, and I asked the question:

"Where do you perform your religious rites and ceremonies?"

She looked at me with surprise.

"You ask me such strange questions that sometimes I am tempted to
believe you a relic of ancient mythology that has drifted down the
centuries and landed on our civilized shores, or else have been gifted
with a marvelous prolongation of life, and have emerged upon us from
some cavern where you have lived, or slept for ages in unchanged
possession of your ancient superstition."

"Have you, then," I asked in astonishment, "no religious temples
devoted to worship?"

"Oh, yes, we have temples where we worship daily. Do you see that
building?" nodding toward the majestic granite walls of the National
College. "That is one of our most renowned temples, where the highest
and the noblest in the land meet and mingle familiarly with the humblest
in daily worship."

"I understand all that you wish to imply by that," I replied. "But have
you no building devoted to divine worship; no temple that belongs
specially to your Deity; to the Being that created you, and to whom you
owe eternal gratitude and homage?"

"We have;" she answered grandly, with a majestic wave of her hand, and
in that mellow, musical voice that was sweeter than the chanting of
birds, she exclaimed:


     "This vast cathedral, boundless as our wonder;
       Whose shining lamps yon brilliant mists[A] supply;
     Its choir the winds, and waves; its organ thunder;
       Its dome the sky."

[Footnote A: Aurora Borealis]

"Do you worship Nature?" I asked.

"If we did, we should worship ourselves, for we are a part of Nature."

"But do you not recognize an invisible and incomprehensible Being that
created you, and who will give your spirit an abode of eternal bliss, or
consign it to eternal torments according as you have glorified and
served him?"

"I am an atom of Nature;" said Wauna, gravely. "If you want me to answer
your superstitious notions of religion, I will, in one sentence,
explain, that the only religious idea in Mizora is: Nature is God, and
God is Nature. She is the Great Mother who gathers the centuries in her
arms, and rocks their children into eternal sleep upon her bosom."

"But how," I asked in bewildered astonishment, "how can you think of
living without creeds, and confessionals? How can you prosper without
prayer? How can you be upright, and honest, and true to yourselves and
your friends without praying for divine grace and strength to sustain
you? How can you be noble, and keep from envying your neighbors,
without a prayer for divine grace to assist you to resist such
temptation?"

"Oh, daughter of the dark ages," said Wauna, sadly, "turn to the
benevolent and ever-willing Science. She is the goddess who has led us
out of ignorance and superstition; out of degradation and disease, and
every other wretchedness that superstitious, degraded humanity has
known. She has lifted us above the low and the little, the narrow and
mean in human thought and action, and has placed us in a broad, free,
independent, noble, useful and grandly happy life."

"You have been favored by divine grace," I reiterated, "although you
refuse to acknowledge it."

She smiled compassionately as she answered:

"She is the divinity who never turned a deaf ear to earnest and
persistent effort in a sensible direction. But prayers to her must be
_work_, resolute and conscientious _work_. She teaches that success in
this world can only come to those who work for it. In your superstitious
belief you pray for benefits you have never earned, possibly do not
deserve, but expect to get simply because you pray for them. Science
never betrays such partiality. The favors she bestows are conferred only
upon the industrious."

"And you deny absolutely the efficacy of prayer?" I asked.

"If I could obtain anything by prayer alone, I would pray that my
inventive faculty should be enlarged so that I might conceive and
construct an air-ship that could cleave its way through that chaos of
winds that is formed when two storms meet from opposite directions. It
would rend to atoms one of our present make. But prayer will never
produce an improved air-ship. We must dig into science for it. Our
ancestors did not pray for us to become a race of symmetrically-shaped
and universally healthy people, and expect that to effect a result. They
went to work on scientific principles to root out disease and crime and
want and wretchedness, and every degrading and retarding influence."

"Prayer never saved one of my ancestors from premature death," she
continued, with a resolution that seemed determined to tear from my mind
every fabric of faith in the consolations of divine interposition that
had been a special part of my education, and had become rooted into my
nature. "Disease, when it fastened upon the vitals of the young and
beautiful and dearly-loved was stronger and more powerful than all the
agonized prayers that could be poured from breaking hearts. But science,
when solicited by careful study and experiment and investigation,
offered the remedy. And _now_, we defy disease and have no fear of death
until our natural time comes, and _then_ it will be the welcome rest
that the worn-out body meets with gratitude."

"But when you die," I exclaimed, "do you not believe you have an after
life?"

"When I die," replied Wauna, "my body will return to the elements from
whence it came. Thought will return to the force which gave it. The
power of the brain is the one mystery that surrounds life. We know that
the brain is a mechanical structure and acted upon by force; but how to
analyze that force is still beyond our reach. You see that huge engine?
We made it. It is a fine piece of mechanism. We know what it was made to
do. We turn on the motive power, and it moves at the rate of a mile a
minute if we desire it. Why should it move? Why might it not stand
still? You say because of a law of nature that under the circumstances
compels it to move. Our brain is like that engine--a wonderful piece of
mechanism, and when the blood drives it, it displays the effects of
force which we call Thought. We can see the engine move and we know what
law of nature it obeys in moving. But the brain is a more mysterious
structure, for the force which compels it to action we cannot analyze.
The superstitious ancients called this mystery the soul."

"And do you discard that belief?" I asked, trembling and excited to hear
such sacrilegious talk from youth so beautiful and pure.

"What our future is to be after dissolution no one knows," replied
Wauna, with the greatest calmness and unconcern. "A thousand theories
and systems of religion have risen and fallen in the history of the
human family, and become the superstitions of the past. The elements
that compose this body may construct the delicate beauty of a flower, or
the green robe that covers the bosom of Mother Earth, but we cannot
know."

"But that beautiful belief in a soul," I cried, in real anguish, "How
can you discard it? How sever the hope that after death, we are again
united to part no more? Those who have left us in the spring time of
life, the bloom on their young cheeks suddenly paled by the cold touch
of death, stand waiting to welcome us to an endless reunion."

"Alas, for your anguish, my friend," said Wauna, with pityng tenderness.
"Centuries ago _my_ people passed through that season of mental pain.
That beautiful visionary idea of a soul must fade, as youth and beauty
fade, never to return; for Nature nowhere teaches the existence of such
a thing. It was a belief born of that agony of longing for happiness
without alloy, which the children of earth in the long-ago ages hoped
for, but never knew. Their lot was so barren of beauty and happiness,
and the desire for it is, now and always has been, a strong trait of
human character. The conditions of society in those earlier ages
rendered it impossible to enjoy this life perfectly, and hope and
longing pictured an imaginary one for an imaginary part of the body
called the Soul. Progress and civilization have brought to us the ideal
heaven of the ancients, and we receive from Nature no evidence of any
other."

"But I do believe there is another," I declared. "And we ought to be
prepared for it."

Wauna smiled. "What better preparation could you desire, then, than good
works in this?" she asked.

"You should pray, and do penance for your sins," was my reply.

"Then," said Wauna, "we are doing the wisest penance every day. We are
studying, investigating, experimenting in order that those who come
after us may be happier than we. Every day Science is yielding us some
new knowledge that will make living in the future still easier than
now."

"I cannot conceive," I said, "how you are to be improved upon."

"When we manufacture fruit and vegetables from the elements, can you not
perceive how much is to be gained? Old age and death will come later,
and the labor of cultivation will be done away. Such an advantage will
not be enjoyed during my lifetime. But we will labor to effect it for
future generations."

"Your whole aim in life, then, is to work for the future of your race,
instead of the eternal welfare of your own soul?" I questioned, in
surprise.

"If Nature," said Wauna, "has provided us a future life, if that
mysterious something that we call Thought is to be clothed in an
etherealized body, and live in a world where decay is unknown, I have no
fear of my reception there. Live _this_ life usefully and nobly, and no
matter if a prayer has never crossed your lips your happiness will be
assured. A just and kind action will help you farther on the road to
heaven than all the prayers that you can utter, and all the pains and
sufferings that you can inflict upon the flesh, for it will be that much
added to the happiness of this world. The grandest epitaph that could be
written is engraved upon a tombstone in yonder cemetery. The subject was
one of the pioneers of progress in a long-ago century, when progress
fought its way with difficulty through ignorance and superstition. She
suffered through life for the boldness of her opinions, and two
centuries after, when they had become popular, a monument was erected to
her memory, and has been preserved through thousands of years as a motto
for humanity. The epitaph is simply this: 'The world is better for her
having lived in it.'"




CHAPTER VII.


Not long after my conversation with Wauna, mentioned in the previous
chapter, an event happened in Mizora of so singular and unexpected a
character for that country that it requires a particular description. I
refer to the death of a young girl, the daughter of the Professor of
Natural History in the National College, whose impressive inaugural
ceremonies I had witnessed with so much gratification. The girl was of a
venturesome disposition, and, with a number of others, had gone out
rowing. The boats they used in Mizora for that purpose were mere cockle
shells. A sudden squall arose from which all could have escaped, but the
reckless daring of this young girl cost her her life. Her boat was
capsized, and despite the exertions made by her companions, she was
drowned.

Her body was recovered before the news was conveyed to the mother. As
the young companions surrounded it in the abandon of grief that tender
and artless youth alone feels, had I not known that not a tie of
consanguinity existed between them, I might have thought them a band of
sisters mourning their broken number. It was a scene I never expect and
sincerely hope never to witness again. It made the deeper impression
upon me because I knew the expressions of grief were all genuine.

I asked Wauna if any of the dead girl's companions feared that her
mother might censure them for not making sufficient effort to save her
when her boat capsized. She looked at me with astonishment.

"Such a thought," she said, "will never occur to her nor to any one else
in Mizora. I have not asked the particulars, but I know that everything
was done that could have been done to save her. There must have been
something extraordinarily unusual about the affair for all Mizora girls
are expert swimmers, and there is not one but would put forth any
exertion to save a companion."

I afterward learned that such had really been the case.

It developed upon the Preceptress to break the news to the afflicted
mother. It was done in the seclusion of her own home. There was no
manifestation of morbid curiosity among acquaintances, neighbors and
friends. The Preceptress and one or two others of her nearest and most
intimate friends called at the house during the first shock of her
bereavement.

After permission had been given to view the remains, Wauna and I called
at the house, but only entered the drawing-room. On a low cot, in an
attitude of peaceful repose, lay the breathless sleeper. Her mother and
sisters had performed for her the last sad offices of loving duty, and
lovely indeed had they made the last view we should have of their dear
one.

There was to be no ceremony at the house, and Wauna and I were in the
cemetery when the procession entered. As we passed through the city, I
noticed that every business house was closed. The whole city was
sympathizing with sorrow. I never before saw so vast a concourse of
people. The procession was very long and headed by the mother, dressed
and veiled in black. Behind her were the sisters carrying the body. It
rested upon a litter composed entirely of white rosebuds. The sisters
wore white, their faces concealed by white veils. Each wore a white
rosebud pinned upon her bosom. They were followed by a long procession
of young girls, schoolmates and friends of the dead. They were all
dressed in white, but were not veiled. Each one carried a white rosebud.
