
"They may have destroyed the will," she said at last; "but if not I
will find it, if it takes me all my life to do so."

A week later two letters arrived. The one was from Mrs. Withers. The
will had not been found. Mr. Tallboys had searched in vain. Every
cabinet and drawer in the house had been ransacked. No signs whatever
had been found of the will.

"Mr. Tallboys is perfectly convinced that it must be hidden in some
altogether exceptional place. The will was not a bulky document, and
might have been stowed away in a comparatively small hiding-place,
such as a secret drawer in a cabinet; but the leases that are also
missing are bulky, and would take up so large a space that he is
convinced that had a secret hiding-place sufficiently large to hold
them existed in any of the articles of furniture he has searched he
should have discovered it.

"Of course, my dear Mrs. Conway, we feel this matter personally, as
our Mabel was as you know made joint-heiress with your Ralph of
Herbert's property. We cannot but feel, however, that the loss is
greater in your case than in ours. Mabel was never informed of
Herbert's intentions toward her, and although we should of course have
been glad to know that our child had such brilliant prospects, the
loss of them will not we may hope in any way affect her happiness. In
the case of your son it is different, and his prospects in life will
of course be seriously affected by the loss, and my husband begs me to
express to you his very deep regret at this.

"We have talked over your letter together, and while fully sharing
your indignation at the conduct of the Misses Penfold, hardly see that
anything can be done to discover the will. However, should you be able
to point out any manner in which a search for it can be carried on, we
shall be happy to do what we can to aid in the matter, as it is
clearly our duty to endeavor to obtain for Mabel the fortune Herbert
Penfold willed to her. Mr. Tallboys tells us that it is clear the
Misses Penfold have quite determined upon their line of conduct.
Whatever they may know they have declined altogether to aid him in
his search for the will, Miss Penfold saying, in reply to his request
that they would do so, that they had every reason to believe from what
their brother had let fall that the will was an unjust and iniquitous
one; that if Providence intended it should see the light it would see
it; but they at least would do nothing in the matter.

"He asked them plainly if they were aware of the existence of any
place in which it was likely that their brother had placed it. To this
Miss Penfold, who is, as she has always been, the spokesman of the two
sisters, said shortly, that she had never seen the will, that she
didn't want to see it, and that she did not know where her brother had
placed it; indeed, for aught she knew, he might have torn it up. As to
hiding-places, she knew of no hiding-place whose existence she could,
in accordance with the dictates of her conscience divulge. So that is
where we are at present, Mrs. Conway. I believe that Mr. Tallboys is
going to try and get a copy of the will that he has in his possession
admitted under the circumstances as proof of Herbert Penfold's
intentions. But he owned to us that he thought it was very doubtful
whether he should be able to do so, especially as Herbert had stated
to him that he intended to make alterations; and it would be quite
possible that a court might take the view that in the first place the
alterations might have been so extensive as to affect the whole
purport of the will, and in the second place that he might have come
to the conclusion that it would be easier to make the whole will
afresh, and so had destroyed the one he had by him."

Mrs. Conway laid down the letter, and after thinking for a time opened
the other, which was in a handwriting unknown to her. It began:

    "DEAR MADAM: Mrs. Withers tells me that she has informed you of
    the singular disappearance of the will of my late client, Mr.
    Herbert Penfold. I beg to inform you that we shall not let this
    matter rest, but shall apply to the court to allow the copy of
    the will to be put in for probate; if that is refused, for
    authorization to make a closer search of the Hall than we have
    hitherto been able to do, supporting our demand with affidavits
    made by the Rev. Mr. Withers and ourselves of our knowledge that,
    the late Mr. Penfold was accustomed to keep documents in some
    secret receptacle. In the second place, we are glad to inform you
    that the annual sum paid by us into the Kentish bank to your
    credit will not be affected by the loss of the will; for at the
    time when that payment first commenced, Mr. Penfold signed a deed
    making this payment a first charge on the rents of two of his
    farms during your lifetime. This assignment was of a binding
    character, and of course continues to hold good. We shall consider
    it our duty to acquaint you from time to time with the course of
    proceedings in the matter of the late Mr. Penfold's will."

Little as Mrs. Conway had thought of herself from the time when she
first heard that the will was missing, the news that her income would
remain unchanged delighted her. She had formed no plans for herself,
but had vaguely contemplated the necessity of giving up her house as
soon as it was decided that the will could not be found, selling her
furniture, and for the present taking a small lodging. She was glad
that there would be no occasion for this; but very much more glad that
she should be able now to make Ralph an allowance of seventy or eighty
pounds a year, which would make all the difference between his living
comfortably and being obliged to pinch himself in every way to subsist
upon his pay. It would also enable her to carry out without difficulty
any plans she might determine upon.

Upon the receipt of the letter announcing Mr. Penfold's death, she had
written to Ralph telling him of it, but saying nothing about Mr.
Tallboys' visit to the Withers, or his report that he was unable to
find the will. She now wrote to him relating the whole circumstances.
He had not previously known Mr. Penfold's intention to make him his
heir, being only told that he intended to push his way in life, and
had considered that the promise was carried out by his obtaining him a
commission and arranging some allowance. His mother was glad of this
now.

"Of course the loss of Mr. Penfold's will, my boy, will make a
difference to you, as there can be no doubt that he had made some
provisions in it for the regular payment of the allowance he had so
kindly promised you. This, unless the will is found, you will of
course lose. Having been a soldier's daughter, I know that to live
comfortably in the army it is necessary to have something beyond your
pay; but fortunately I can assist you a little. I have now one less to
feed and clothe, and no schooling expenses; and I have been
calculating things up, and find that I can allow you seventy-five
pounds a year without making any difference in the manner of my
living. You will be able to see that for yourself. You need,
therefore, feel no hesitation in accepting this allowance.

"It is not a large one; but I know it will make a very great
difference in your comfort, and it will be a great pleasure to me to
know that you will be able to enter into what amusements are going on
and not to look at every penny. It makes all the difference in the
world whether one has four and sixpence or nine shillings a day to
live upon. You wrote and told me of the handsome present Mr. Penfold
made you at parting. This, my boy, I should keep if I were you as a
reserve, only to be touched in case of unexpected difficulties or
needs. No one can ever say when such needs may occur. I hope you will
not pain me by writing to say you don't want this allowance, because
nothing you can say will alter my determination to pay that allowance
regularly every quarter into your agent's hands; and it will be, of
course, very much more pleasant to me to know that it is as much a
pleasure to you to be helped by me as it is to me to help you. I have
heard several times from Mrs. Withers; they are all well, and she
asked me to send their remembrances to you when I write. I do not give
up all hope that the will may be found one of these days, but it is
just as well that we should not build in the slightest upon it."

Ralph's reply came in due time, that is in about a fortnight
afterward; for Mrs. Conway's letter had first to go by coach to
London, and then a two days' journey by the mail to Liverpool, then by
the sailing packet across to Dublin, and then down to Cork by coach.
He had already written expressing his regret at the news of Mr.
Penfold's death.

"My dear mother," he began. "It is awfully good of you to talk about
making an allowance to me. After what you say, of course I cannot
think of refusing it, though I would do so if I thought the payment
would in the slightest way inconvenience you. But as you say that now
I am away it will make something like that sum difference in your
expenses, I must of course let you do as you like, and can only thank
you very heartily for it. But I could really have got on very well
without it. I fancy that a good many men in the regiment have nothing
but their pay, and as they manage very well there is no reason I could
not manage too.

"Of course in war times things are not kept up so expensively as they
were before, and lots of men get commissions who would not have done
so when the army was only half its present size, and was considered as
a gentlemanly profession instead of a real fighting machine. However,
as you say, it is a great deal more pleasant having nine shilling a
day to live on instead of four and sixpence.

"I am getting on capitally here. Of course there is a lot of drill,
and it is as much as I can do not to laugh sometimes, the sergeant,
who is a fierce little man, gets into such wild rages over our
blunders.

"I say our blunders, for of course Stapleton and I are drilled with
the recruits. However, I think that in another week I shall be over
that, and shall then begin to learn my work as an officer. They are a
jolly set of fellows here, always up to some fun or other. I always
thought when fellows got to be men they were rather serious, but it
seems to me that there is ever so much more fun here among them than
there was at school. Of course newcomers get worried a little just as
they do at school. I got off very well; because, you see, what with
school and the privateer I have learned to take things good
temperedly, and when fellows see that you are as ready for fun as they
are they soon give up bothering you.

"Stapleton has had a lot more trouble; because, you see, he will look
at things seriously. I think he is getting a little better now; but he
used to get quite mad at first, and of course that made fellows ever
so much worse. He would find his door screwed up when he went back
after mess; and as soon as they found that he was awfully particular
about his boots, they filled them all full of water one night. Then
some one got a ladder and threw a lot of crackers into his bedroom in
the middle of the night, and Stapleton came rushing down in his
night-shirt with his sword drawn, swearing he would kill somebody.

"Of course I have done all I can to get them to leave him alone, for
he is really a good fellow, and explained to them that he had never
been to school, or had a chance of learning to keep his temper. But he
is getting on now, and will, I think, soon be left alone. This has
been an awfully long letter, and there is only just enough candle left
for me to get into bed by. Anyhow mother, I am not a bit upset about
losing Mr. Penfold's allowance; so don't you worry yourself at all
about that."

Some weeks passed on. Mr. Tallboys wrote that he had failed to induce
the court to accept the copy of the will, the admission he was forced
to make that Mr. Penfold had intended to make an alteration in it
being fatal. He had, however, obtained an order authorizing him
thoroughly to search the house, and to take down any wainscotting, and
to pull up any floors that might appear likely to conceal a
hiding-place. A fortnight later he wrote again to announce his
failure.

"The Miss Penfolds," he said, "were so indignant that they left the
house altogether, and you may believe that we ransacked it from top to
bottom. I had four carpenters and two masons with me, and I think we
tapped every square foot of wall in the house, took down the
wainscotting wherever there was the slightest hollow sound, lifted
lots of the flooring, and even wrenched up several of the
hearthstones, but could find nothing whatever, except that there was a
staircase leading from behind the wainscotting in Mr. Penfold's room
to a door covered with ivy, and concealed from view by bushes to the
left of the house; but the ivy had evidently been undisturbed for
fifty years or so, this passage, even if known to Mr. Penfold, had
certainly not been used in his time.

"I truly regret, my dear madam, that the search should have been so
unsuccessful, and can only say, that all that could be done has been
done. That the will is concealed somewhere I have not a shadow of
doubt, unless, of course, it has been torn up before this. As to that
I give no opinion; and, indeed, as it is a matter in which women are
concerned, your judgment as to the probabilities is much more likely
to be correct than mine. As I expected, my business connection with
the family has come to an end. The Miss Penfolds have appointed
another agent, who has written to me requesting me to hand over all
papers connected with the property. This, of course, I shall do. I
need hardly say that in no case could I have consented to act for
those whom I consider to be unlawful possessors of the property. In
conclusion, I can only say that my services will at all times be at
your disposal."

Mrs. Conway was scarcely disappointed at the receipt of this letter,
for she had quite made up her mind that the will would not be found.
These women had clearly made up their minds to deprive Ralph and Mabel
of their rights, and unless they had felt perfectly satisfied that no
search would discover the hiding-place of the will, they would not
improbably have taken it, and either destroyed it or concealed it in
some fresh place where the searchers would never be likely to look for
it. She did not think it likely, therefore, that the hiding-place
would be discovered, and she felt assured that were it discovered it
would be found empty.

"Very well," she said, in a quiet, determined voice, as she laid down
the letter. "Mr. Tallboys has failed. Now, I shall take up the matter.
I dare say you think that you have won, Miss Penfold; that you are now
mistress beyond dispute of Herbert's property. You will see the battle
has only just begun. It will last, I can tell you, all your lives or
mine."

A week later an altogether unexpected event took place. When Mr. and
Mrs. Withers were at breakfast a letter arrived from Mr. Littleton,
now solicitor to the Miss Penfolds. Upon opening it it was found to
contain an offer upon the part of the Miss Penfolds to settle the sum
of a hundred a year for life upon Mabel, upon the condition only that
the allowance would be stopped upon her marriage, unless that marriage
received the approval, in writing, of the Miss Penfolds. The letter
was addressed to Mr. Withers, and after reading it through he passed
it to his wife without a word. She was too surprised to say anything
for a moment, especially as Mabel was in the room, and she laid the
letter beside her until breakfast was over and Mabel had gone out.

"Well, James, what do you think of it?" she asked.

"What do you think of it yourself?" he replied.

Mrs. Withers hesitated, and then said: "Well, James, it is a sort of
thing that requires so much thinking about that I have scarcely had
time to turn it over in my mind yet, especially with Mabel there
eating her breakfast opposite, and having no idea that this letter
contained anything of such importance to her. I would really rather
hear what you think about it." Mr. Withers remained silent, and she
went on: "Of course it would be a very nice thing for Mabel to have
such a provision for life."

A slight smile passed across Mr. Withers' face, and his wife saw that
that was not at all the way in which he looked at it.

"That is just like you men, James," she said a little pettishly. "You
ask us what we think about things when you have perfectly made up your
minds what you mean to do, whether we agree with you or not."

"I don't think that's often the case with us. Still I did want to see
whether the matter would have struck you at once in the same light in
which I see it, and I perceive that it has not."

"Well, James, let me hear your view of the matter. I dare say I shall
agree with you when you tell me what it is."

"Well, then, Amy," Mr. Withers said seriously, "it appears to me that
we cannot accept this offer for Mabel."

Mrs. Withers looked a little blank. The living was not a rich one, and
assured as they had been by Mr. Penfold that he intended to provide
for Mabel, they had not endeavored to lay by anything for her, and had
freely dispensed their surplus income among the sick and needy of the
parish. The disappearance of the will had disappointed their hopes,
and raised many anxious thoughts in Mrs. Withers' mind respecting
Mabel's future, and the offer contained in the letter had therefore
filled her with pleasure. But she greatly valued her husband's
judgment, and therefore only replied:

"Why, dear?"

"Well, you see, wife, we are both thoroughly agreed that these ladies
are depriving Mabel of the fortune Herbert Penfold left her. They are
concealing or have destroyed his will, and are at present in what we
may call fraudulent possession of his property. Now, I do not think
that under these circumstances we can accept a favor at their hands.
To do so would be practically to acquiesce in what we consider the
robbery of our child, and the acceptance would of course involve a
renewal of friendly relations with them; a thing which, believing as
we do that they are acting wickedly would be distasteful in the
extreme, not to say impossible."

"Of course you are right, dear," Mrs. Withers said, rising from her
seat and going over and kissing her husband tenderly. "I had not
thought of it in that light at all. In fact I had hardly thought about
it at all, except that it would be nice to see Mabel provided for."

"It would be nice, my dear. But we surely need not be anxious about
her. We may hope that she will make a happy marriage. We may hope too
that we may be spared long enough to make some provision for her, for,
of course, we must now curtail our expenses and lay by as much as we
can for her. Lastly, dear, we need not be anxious; because we trust
that God will provide for her should we not be enabled to do so. But
even were I sure that we should both be taken together, I would rather
leave her in His hands than accept money wrongfully obtained and
condone an abominable action. There is, too, another point from which
the matter should be looked at. You see this curious condition that
they propose, that the annuity shall be forfeited unless she marry
with their sanction. Why should they propose such a condition?"

"I am sure I don't know, James; for of course, we should never give
our sanction to her marriage unless we approved of her choice, and
surely the Miss Penfolds would not disapprove of a choice that we
approved of?"

"Well, they might, my dear. You know how bitterly they disliked Ralph
Conway, and how they resented his being at the Hall. It is quite
possible they may have had some idea of Herbert's views about him and
Mabel, and are determined that he shall not benefit through Mabel by
one penny of their brother's property; and this clause is specially
designed so that in case the two young people ever should come
together they may be able if not to stop it--at any rate to stop the
annuity. That is the only interpretation I can give to this
condition."

"Very likely that is so James. Really these women seem to get more
detestable every day."

Mr. Withers smiled at his wife's vehemence. "There is still another
reason why we cannot take the money. Ralph Conway has been as much
defrauded as Mabel, and his mother, as you see by her letters, is
determined not to sit down quietly under the wrong. What she means to
do I have not the slightest idea, nor do I think that there is the
most remote probability she will ever succeed in finding the will.
Tallboys appears to have made a most thorough search of the house, and
do what she will she cannot have any opportunity of searching as he
has done. Still she clearly has something on her mind. She intends to
make some attempt or other to discover the will, which, if found, will
benefit Mabel equally with her son. Therefore we cannot but regard her
as our friend and ally. Now, were we to accept the money for Mabel we
should in fact be acquiescing, not only in the wrong done to her but
in that done to Ralph. We should, in fact, be going over to the enemy.
We could not take their money and even tacitly connive in her efforts
to find the will."

"I agree with you entirely, James. It would be impossible; only I do
wish you had said all this before letting me be so foolish as to say
that I thought we ought to take it."

"You didn't say so, dear," Mr. Withers said smiling. "You only gave
expression to the first natural thought of a mother that it would be a
nice thing for Mabel. You had given the matter no further
consideration than that, and I was quite sure that as soon as you
thought the matter over you would see it in the same light that I do.
But I think that before we send off our reply we should put the matter
before Mabel herself. I have no doubt whatever what her answer will
be, but at the same time she ought to know of the offer which has been
made to her."




CHAPTER IX.

MR. TALLBOYS' VISITOR.


Mr. Withers was fully justified in his conviction that there need be
no doubt as to the view Mabel would take of the Miss Penfold's offer.
The girl had hitherto been in entire ignorance both as to the will
being missing, and of the interest she had in it. She was now called
in from the garden, and was much surprised when her father told her to
sit down, as he and her mother wished to have a serious talk with her.

"Do you know, my little Mabel," he began, "that you have had a narrow
escape of being an heiress?"

"An heiress, papa! Do you mean of having a lot of money?"

"Yes, of coming in some day to a fortune. Mr. Penfold some time ago
confided to your mother and me his intention of dividing his property
equally between Ralph Conway and yourself."

"What! all the Penfold estates, papa, and the house and everything?"

"Yes, my dear. Everything, including the large sum of money that has
accumulated during the years Mr. Penfold has not been spending a third
of his income."

"Then if he meant that, papa, how is it that I am not going to be an
heiress?"

"Simply, my dear, because the will by which Mr. Penfold left the
property to you and Ralph is missing."

Mr. Withers then told the whole story of the loss of the will, the
search that had been made for it, and the strong grounds there were
for believing in the existence of some secret place in the Hall, and
that this place of concealment was known to Mr. Penfold's sisters.
