changing color as Shelton tuned the transmitted wave. Then suddenly it
was gone. The entire upper portion of the mechanism had vanished; had
just snuffed out like the flame of a candle. He could see down into
the tops of the thing's hollow legs. Shelton laughed at him as he
stretched forth his hand and hesitatingly felt for the invisible
mid-section and upper body. It was there all right, unyielding and
cold, that metal body. But no trace of it was visible to the eye. He
drew back his fingers as if they had touched a hot stove. The thing
was positively uncanny.

"Dad! Turn it off--please," Lina begged. "It's getting on my nerves.
Please!"

Obligingly, Shelton pulled the switch. "Now you'll see," he said to
Eddie, "whether the same thing happens. Watch."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mistily at first, the outlines of the monster's torso and arms came
into view, semi-transparent but clouding rapidly to opacity. Then it
glinted with the barely visible violet, a solid once more, rigid and
motionless. It was a lifeless mechanism, for the source of its energy
had been cut off. Eddie had an almost irresistible impulse to pinch
himself.

Then he gasped audibly, as did Shelton, for the thing snuffed out of
sight again without warning, and the hum of its many motors resumed.
There came a terrific clanking as it waved arms and tentacles and
violently threshed with its upper body. But the visible portion, its
legs, remained rooted to the floor of the laboratory. Lucky it was
that the scientist had disconnected those wires; lucky too that the
machine guns were empty of ammunition.

"There now--see?" Shelton's voice rose excitedly. "It's been no fault
of mine. The power is off but it moves--it moves. What on earth do you
suppose--"

Eddie's shout interrupted him. He had seen something at the window: a
face pressed against the pane and contorted with unutterable malice.
Then it was gone. With the shout of warning still in his throat, Eddie
bounded through the door in pursuit of the intruder. Lina's cry of
recognition followed him into the twilight. "Carlos!" she had called.

He saw a stocky figure slink around the corner of the laboratory and
make for the underbrush beyond. In a flash he was after him. No, he
thought grimly, Shelton hadn't any enemy clever enough to duplicate
his transmitter! The hell he didn't! Who the devil was this fellow
Carlos anyway? He tore savagely at the impeding branches as he plunged
deeper and deeper into the thicket.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a fruitless chase and Eddie soon retraced his steps to the
laboratory. Swell mess he'd gotten himself into! His car was gone:
probably wrapped around a tree by this time. And here was a situation
that spelled real danger, a thing with which Shelton was utterly
unable to cope. As a matter of fact, he was so impractical--such a
visionary cuss, after the fashion of all geniuses--that he'd never be
convinced of the seriousness of the matter until it was too late. What
to do? The girl was a corker, though, and game as they made 'em. Just
the sort a fellow could tie to....

Lina's firm clear voice came to him through the open door of the
laboratory. "Dad," she was saying, "why don't you give it up? Let's go
back to New York where it is safe for you and for me. Let the things
go and forget about them. What do they amount to, after all? We've
plenty of money and you already have earned enough fame to last the
rest of your life. Come on now--please--for me."

"What do they amount to?" Shelton reiterated, his voice rising
querulously. "Lina, it's the most tremendous thing I've ever done.
Think for a moment of what my robots could accomplish in the next war.
And there'll be a next war as sure as you're alive. Think of it! No
sending of our young manhood into the bloody fields of battle; no
manning of our air fleets with the cream of our youth; no bloodshed on
our side whatsoever. Instead, these robots will fight the war. They'll
fight other robots too, no doubt, but the property of invisibility
will be an invincible weapon. It will be a war that will end war once
and for all. You can't--"

"Nonsense, Father," the girl returned sharply. "You've let your
enthusiasm run away with your judgment. See what's happened
already?--someone's figured it out before you've even perfected the
thing. An enemy of our country could do the same in wartime. Maybe
it's a foreign spy who has done what's been done to-day."

       *       *       *       *       *

Eddie walked into the laboratory. "Couldn't find him," he announced
briefly.

"No difference," said Shelton. "He doesn't count in this. We called to
you when you rushed out, but couldn't make you hear."

"Who is he?" Eddie asked shortly. What he had overheard made him more
than ever impatient with the older man. So clever and yet so dense,
Shelton was.

Lina avoided his gaze.

"Only Carlos--Carlos Savarino," said Shelton, carelessly, "a Chilean,
I think. He worked for me for two months during the summer and I fired
him for getting fresh with Lina. Good mechanic, but dumb as an ox. Had
to tell him every little detail when he was doing something in the
shop. I'd have saved time if I'd done it myself."

The girl looked at Eddie squarely now. She was flushing hotly. "And I
horsewhipped him," she added.

"Yes," Shelton laughed; "it was rich. He sneaked away like a whipped
puppy, and this is the first time we've seen him since."

Eddie whistled. "And you think he doesn't count in this?" he asked.

"Of course not. Too dumb, I tell you. Doesn't know the first
principles of science. He thinks the only wave motion is that of the
ocean." Shelton chuckled over his own jest.

"I wouldn't be too sure," Eddie snapped. "And I want to tell you
something, Mr. Shelton. Through no fault of my own, I heard some of
your conversation with Li--with your daughter, before I returned here.
I was puzzled over your reasons for working so absorbedly on this
thing, but now I know them and I think you're wasting your time and
keeping your daughter in needless danger."

"You dare talk to me like this!" Shelton roared.

"I do, sir, and you'll thank me later." Eddie returned the older man's
glare with one equally savage.

Lina's gurgle of laughter broke the tension. "He's right, Dad, and you
know it," she interposed. "Let him finish."

Eddie needed no such encouragement, though it warmed his heart. And
Shelton listened respectfully when he continued, "I'm into this now,
sir, and I intend to see it through to the end. I'll keep your secret,
too, though I doubt if it'll ever be of much value to you. Know what I
think? I think this Carlos is a damn clever fellow instead of the ass
you took him to be. He probably just pretended he was ignorant of
science. Why shouldn't he? That way he got a liberal education from
you in the very things he wanted to find out. Since you tied the can
to him he's had plenty of chances to build a duplicate of your control
apparatus--with the aid of some foreign government, no doubt--and now
they've stolen two of your machines to complete the job. Your secret
already is out and in the very hands you've tried to keep it from."

       *       *       *       *       *

Shelton paled visibly as Eddie talked. "But--but how--" he stammered.

"How should I know how they did it?" the younger man countered.
"Here--let's take a look around. I'll bet they've left their trail
right here in this room."

He walked from one end of the laboratory to the other, peering into
corners and under work benches as he passed. Shelton trailed him like
a shadow, squinting through the square lenses of his spectacles.

They carefully avoided the partially invisible robot, for the humming
of its upper motors continued and clanking sounds occasionally issued
from the unseen upper portion. The enemies of David Shelton were still
at work on their hidden controls.

"Here--what's this?" Eddie exclaimed suddenly, pointing out a glinting
object in a dark corner of the laboratory.

Shelton examined it closely, looking over his shoulder. The object he
had located seemed to be a mounted and hooded lens, a highly polished
glass of about two inches diameter with its mounting attached rigidly
to the wall.

"Never saw that before," Shelton stated with conviction. "And--why--it
looks like an objective such as those used in the latest automatic
television transmitters."

"Just what it is," Eddie grunted. He picked up a pinch bar from a
nearby tool rack and drove its end through the glass as he spoke the
words.

A violent wrench tore the thing loose and broke away a section of the
thin plastered wall. There, in the cleverly concealed cavity behind,
was revealed the mechanism of the radio "eye." Somewhere, someone bad
been watching their every move. And abruptly the thrashings of the
robot ceased and its upper portion again became visible.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well," said David Shelton. "Well! Looks as if you're right, young
man. I'm astonished." His watery eyes looked sheepishly over the rims
of his glasses.

Lina watched their every move. She seemed to sense the seriousness of
the situation far more than did her father.

Then the lights went out. It had darkened to night outside and the
blackness and silence in the laboratory was like that of a tomb.

"They've cut the wires," Eddie whispered hoarsely. "Got any weapons
here, Shelton?"

"Yes. A couple of automatics. I'll get them." The scientist was no
coward, anyway. His whispered words came calmly through the silence.

Eddie heard him shuffle a few steps and fumble with a drawer of the
desk. In a moment the cold hard butt of a pistol was thrust into his
hand. It had a comforting feel.

"Stay here with Lina," he commanded. "I'll go out and see if I can
find them. This looks nasty to me."

"No," came the girl's voice, "I'm going too."

"You are not," Eddie hissed. "You'll stay here or I'll know the
reason. It's dark as a pocket outside and my eyes are as good as
theirs. I'll get 'em if they're around here. You hear me?"

"Yes," she whispered meekly.

Edward Vail, only that morning headed for rest and quiet, was now out
in the night, stalking an unknown and vicious enemy. And--for what? As
he asked himself the question, the smile of Lina seemed to answer him
from the blackness. Cherchez la femme! He was getting dotty as he
neared his thirties. Maybe it was the hard work that had affected his
mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

The black hulk of the old house loomed against the scarcely less dark
sky. There was no moon, and in only one tiny portion of the heavens
were the stars visible. Mighty few of them at that. The swish-swish of
the surf came to his ears faintly. Or was it someone creeping along
the wall of the house? He held his breath and waited.

They wouldn't use the robots at night. Couldn't follow their movements
in the teleview, if such an attachment had been built into their
control transmitter. No, the devils would be here in person.

A muttered Teutonic curse sounded close at hand. That wouldn't be
Carlos. God! Were the heinies mixed up in this thing? Just like 'em to
be swiping a new war machine; but hadn't they gotten enough in 1944?
Without warning he was catapulted from his feet by the impact of a
heavy body. He struck the ground so violently that the pistol was
jarred from his hand. Disarmed before the fight had started!

Then he was rolling over and over, battling desperately with an
assailant who was much larger and heavier than himself. He was dazed
and weakened from his initial dive to the hard ground. All rules of
boxing and wrestling were forgotten. Biting, kicking, gouging, all
were the same to this silent and powerful antagonist. It was
catch-as-catch-can in the darkness, and mostly the other fellow could
and did. He had a grip like the clamp of a robot. Trying to dig out
one of his eyes? Eddie saw stars--and lashed out with all his might,
his flying fists playing a tattoo on the others ribs. Short arm jabs
that brought grunts of agony from his big assailant. Try to blind him,
would he?

Eddie somehow managed to get on top; his clutching fingers found the
other's collar. Then he let loose with terrific rights and lefts that
smacked home to head and face. Those outlanders don't like the good
old American fist, and Eddie had room to bring them in from way back,
now. The fellow had ceased struggling and Eddie's hands were getting
slippery. Blood! Must be, for the stuff was warm and sticky. He rested
for a moment, breathing heavily. The other was quiet beneath
him--knocked cold. He staggered to his feet triumphantly; wondered how
many more of them there were.

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked around in the darkness, straining his eyes in vain to pierce
its thick veil. There was a glimmer of light over there, through a
window. The laboratory! The light flickered a second and vanished. A
cold fear gripped him and he stumbled through the grounds blindly,
finally colliding painfully with the brick wall. He felt his way
toward the door, or where he thought it should be.

He dared not call out for fear the others would hear. Where was that
damned door? He rested again and listened. Not a sound was to be
heard from within or without. He clawed his way frantically along the
unsympathetic wall. It was a mile wide, that laboratory of Shelton's.
Ah--at last! Weakly, he staggered within.

"Lina!" he whispered, "Lina! Shelton!"

There was no reply. He fumbled for a match. Funny how slowly his mind
worked ... thoughts coming jerkily like a sound film running at quarter
speed ... fingers shaking so he could scarcely strike a light. The flare
showed the laboratory empty of human beings ... Lina gone ... that crazy
robot ... quiet now, and visible ... but grinning at him ... then
darkness....

       *       *       *       *       *

What a headache! Eddie rolled over and groaned. Astounded by the
hardness of his bed and the stiffness of his joints, he roused to
instant wakefulness; sat up and stared. Where the devil was he? The
laboratory--Shelton's--Lina. He jumped to his feet. Dawn was breaking
and its first faint radiance lighted the robot with eery shifting
colors. He berated himself: he'd passed out.

He dashed through the door and made a wild circuit of the grounds.
Empty! No--there was his automatic, where it had fallen. Blood stains
on the grass showed where the encounter had taken place last night.
Must have smashed the Dutchman's nose. But he was gone. Everybody was
gone. He rushed into the house and from room to room, upstairs and
down. The place was deserted.

This was something to think about. Not an automobile around, no
neighbors, not even a telephone. When Shelton went into seclusion, he
did it thoroughly. Eddie returned to the laboratory and hunched
himself in the scientist's chair. Maybe he could think better here.

They had Shelton and his daughter, all right. Kidnapped them. There
was probably some detail of his discovery they couldn't dope out, and
had decided to force him into telling them. The devils would use
Lina's safety as a threat to force him into anything. Horrible, that
thought. And Carlos already had made advances to her.

Startled by a sharp click, he turned around. The robot was whirring
into life. Fast workers, whoever Shelton's enemies were, and up early!
He found the pinch bar with which he had wrecked the television
apparatus and, with a few mighty blows, destroyed the antenna and
headpiece of the mechanical man. They'd not pull off any devilment
with this one, anyway.

A wave meter on one of the benches attracted his attention and he
twirled its knob. It gave strong indication at one and a half meters.
The wave length of their control transmitter! If only he could
find--but there it was: a direction finder. Hastily, he lighted its
tubes and tuned to the frequency shown by the meter. He rotated the
loop over the compass dial and carefully noted maximum and minimum
signals. He had a line on the transmitter! And it must be close by,
for the intensity of the carrier wave was tremendous.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slipping the automatic into his pocket, he left the laboratory and
struck out through the underbrush in the direction Carlos had taken
the day before. Fighting his way through the tangled shrubbery, he
kept his eyes constantly on the needle of the magnetic compass he had
wrenched from the direction finder. It was tough going through the
thicket, and just as bad across a swampy clearing where he was mired
to the knees before he got across. Up the hill and into the woods he
forged, keeping doggedly to the direction he had determined. This was
rough country, less than a hundred miles from New York but
uncultivated and unsettled excepting for the few summer places along
the shore. He'd heard that these backwoods were infested with
rum-runners and hijackers, a cutthroat gang.

There was a cabin off there through the trees, almost on the line he
was following. Must be what he was looking for. He advanced
cautiously, creeping stealthily from tree to tree.

Voices came to his ears, and the throb of a motor-generator. It was
the place, all right. He crept closer, and, circling the house, saw
that an almost impassable road led to it from the rear. A heavy
limousine was parked there in the trees, and another car, a yellow
roadster--his own. A feeling of grim satisfaction was quickly
dispelled by the sound of a familiar humming. Within a foot of his
ear, it seemed to be, and instinctively he ducked.

Click! A powerful clamp had fastened itself to his wrist. One of
Shelton's invisible robots! He struck blindly at the unseen monster
and was rewarded by a shooting pain up his wrist as one of his
