and then proceeded to grind them as near as he could to those figures.
But the images did not please him; they were always blurred and rather
indistinct.

At length, it struck him that perhaps it was not the lenses but the
light which was at fault. Perhaps light was so composed that it _could_
not be focused accurately to a sharp and definite point. Perhaps the law
of refraction was not quite accurate, but only an approximation. So he
bought a prism to try the law. He let in sunlight through a small round
hole in a window shutter, inserted the prism in the light, and received
the deflected beam on a white screen; turning the prism about till it
was deviated as little as possible. The patch on the screen was not a
round disk, as it would have been without the prism, but was an
elongated oval and was coloured at its extremities. Evidently
refraction was not a simple geometrical deflection of a ray, there was a
spreading out as well.

[Illustration: FIG. 63.--A prism not only _deviates_ a beam of sunlight,
but also spreads it out or _disperses_ it.]

Why did the image thus spread out? If it were due to irregularities in
the glass a second prism should rather increase them, but a second prism
when held in appropriate position was able to neutralise the dispersion
and to reproduce the simple round white spot without deviation.
Evidently the spreading out of the beam was connected in some definite
way with its refraction. Could it be that the light particles after
passing through the prism travelled in variously curved lines, as
spinning racquet balls do? To examine this he measured the length of the
oval patch when the screen was at different distances from the prism,
and found that the two things were directly proportional to each other.
Doubling the distance of the screen doubled the length of the patch.
Hence the rays travelled in straight lines from the prism, and the
spreading out was due to something that occurred within its substance.
Could it be that white light was compound, was a mixture of several
constituents, and that its different constituents were differently bent?
No sooner thought than tried. Pierce the screen to let one of the
constituents through and interpose a second prism in its path. If the
spreading out depended on the prism only it should spread out just as
much as before, but if it depended on the complex character of white
light, this isolated simple constituent should be able to spread out no
more. It did not spread out any more: a prism had no more dispersive
power over it; it was deflected by the appropriate amount, but it was
not analysed into constituents. It differed from sunlight in being
simple. With many ingenious and beautifully simple experiments, which
are quoted in full in several books on optics, he clinched the argument
and established his discovery. White light was not simple but compound.
It could be sorted out by a prism into an infinite number of constituent
parts which were differently refracted, and the most striking of which
Newton named violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, and red.

[Illustration: FIG. 64.--A single constituent of white light, obtained
by the use of perforated screens is capable of no more dispersion.]

At once the true nature of colour became manifest. Colour resided not in
the coloured object as had till now been thought, but in the light which
illuminated it. Red glass for instance adds nothing to sunlight. The
light does not get dyed red by passing through the glass; all that the
red glass does is to stop and absorb a large part of the sunlight; it is
opaque to the larger portion, but it is transparent to that particular
portion which affects our eyes with the sensation of red. The prism acts
like a sieve sorting out the different kinds of light. Coloured media
act like filters, stopping certain kinds but allowing the rest to go
through. Leonardo's and all the ancient doctrines of colour had been
singularly wrong; colour is not in the object but in the light.

Goethe, in his _Farbenlehre_, endeavoured to controvert Newton, and to
reinstate something more like the old views; but his failure was
complete.

Refraction analysed out the various constituents of white light and
displayed them in the form of a series of overlapping images of the
aperture, each of a different colour; this series of images we call a
spectrum, and the operation we now call spectrum analysis. The reason of
the defect of lenses was now plain: it was not so much a defect of the
lens as a defect of light. A lens acts by refraction and brings rays to
a focus. If light be simple it acts well, but if ordinary white light
fall upon a lens, its different constituents have different foci; every
bright object is fringed with colour, and nothing like a clear image can
be obtained.

[Illustration: FIG. 65.--Showing the boundary rays of a parallel beam
passing through a lens.]

A parallel beam passing through a lens becomes conical; but instead of a
single cone it is a sheaf or nest of cones, all having the edge of the
lens as base, but each having a different vertex. The violet cone is
innermost, near the lens, the red cone outermost, while the others lie
between. Beyond the crossing point or focus the order of cones is
reversed, as the above figure shows. Only the two marginal rays of the
beam are depicted.

If a screen be held anywhere nearer the lens than the place marked 1
there will be a whitish centre to the patch of light and a red and
orange fringe or border. Held anywhere beyond the region 2, the border
of the patch will be blue and violet. Held about 3 the colour will be
less marked than elsewhere, but nowhere can it be got rid of. Each point
of an object will be represented in the image not by a point but by a
coloured patch: a fact which amply explains the observed blurring and
indistinctness.

Newton measured and calculated the distance between the violet and red
foci--VR in the diagram--and showed that it was 1/50th the diameter of
the lens. To overcome this difficulty (called chromatic aberration)
telescope glasses were made small and of very long focus: some of them
so long that they had no tube, all of them egregiously cumbrous. Yet it
was with such instruments that all the early discoveries were made. With
such an instrument, for instance, Huyghens discovered the real shape of
Saturn's ring.

The defects of refractors seemed irremediable, being founded in the
nature of light itself. So he gave up his "glass works"; and proceeded
to think of reflexion from metal specula. A concave mirror forms an
image just as a lens does, but since it does so without refraction or
transmission through any substance, there is no accompanying dispersion
or chromatic aberration.

The first reflecting telescope he made was 1 in. diameter and 6 in.
long, and magnified forty times. It acted as well as a three or four
feet refractor of that day, and showed Jupiter's moons. So he made a
larger one, now in the library of the Royal Society, London, with an
inscription:

"The first reflecting telescope, invented by Sir Isaac Newton, and made
with his own hands."

This has been the parent of most of the gigantic telescopes of the
present day. Fifty years elapsed before it was much improved on, and
then, first by Hadley and afterwards by Herschel and others, large and
good reflectors were constructed.

The largest telescope ever made, that of Lord Rosse, is a Newtonian
reflector, fifty feet long, six feet diameter, with a mirror weighing
four tons. The sextant, as used by navigators, was also invented by
Newton.

The year after the plague, in 1667, Newton returned to Trinity College,
and there continued his experiments on optics. It is specially to be
noted that at this time, at the age of twenty-four, Newton had laid the
foundations of all his greatest discoveries:--

[Illustration: FIG. 66.--Newton's telescope.]

The Theory of Fluxions; or, the Differential Calculus.

The Law of Gravitation; or, the complete theory of astronomy.

The compound nature of white light; or, the beginning of Spectrum
Analysis.

[Illustration: FIG. 67.--The sextant, as now made.]

His later life was to be occupied in working these incipient discoveries
out. But the most remarkable thing is that no one knew about any one of
them. However, he was known as an accomplished young mathematician, and
was made a fellow of his college. You remember that he had a friend
there in the person of Dr. Isaac Barrow, first Lucasian Professor of
Mathematics in the University. It happened, about 1669, that a
mathematical discovery of some interest was being much discussed, and
Dr. Barrow happened to mention it to Newton, who said yes, he had worked
out that and a few other similar things some time ago. He accordingly
went and fetched some papers to Dr. Barrow, who forwarded them to other
distinguished mathematicians, and it thus appeared that Newton had
discovered theorems much more general than this special case that was
exciting so much interest. Dr. Barrow, being anxious to devote his time
more particularly to theology, resigned his chair the same year in
favour of Newton, who was accordingly elected to the Lucasian
Professorship, which he held for thirty years. This chair is now the
most famous in the University, and it is commonly referred to as the
chair of Newton.

Still, however, his method of fluxions was unknown, and still he did not
publish it. He lectured first on optics, giving an account of his
experiments. His lectures were afterwards published both in Latin and
English, and are highly valued to this day.

The fame of his mathematical genius came to the ears of the Royal
Society, and a motion was made to get him elected a fellow of that body.
The Royal Society, the oldest and most famous of all scientific
societies with a continuous existence, took its origin in some private
meetings, got up in London by the Hon. Robert Boyle and a few scientific
friends, during all the trouble of the Commonwealth.

After the restoration, Charles II. in 1662 incorporated it under Royal
Charter; among the original members being Boyle, Hooke, Christopher
Wren, and other less famous names. Boyle was a great experimenter, a
worthy follower of Dr. Gilbert. Hooke began as his assistant, but being
of a most extraordinary ingenuity he rapidly rose so as to exceed his
master in importance. Fate has been a little unkind to Hooke in placing
him so near to Newton; had he lived in an ordinary age he would
undoubtedly have shone as a star of the first magnitude. With great
ingenuity, remarkable scientific insight, and consummate experimental
skill, he stands in many respects almost on a level with Galileo. But it
is difficult to see stars even of the first magnitude when the sun is
up, and thus it happens that the name and fame of this brilliant man are
almost lost in the blaze of Newton. Of Christopher Wren I need not say
much. He is well known as an architect, but he was a most accomplished
all-round man, and had a considerable taste and faculty for science.

These then were the luminaries of the Royal Society at the time we are
speaking of, and to them Newton's first scientific publication was
submitted. He communicated to them an account of his reflecting
telescope, and presented them with the instrument.

Their reception of it surprised him; they were greatly delighted with
it, and wrote specially thanking him for the communication, and assuring
him that all right should be done him in the matter of the invention.
The Bishop of Salisbury (Bishop Burnet) proposed him for election as a
fellow, and elected he was.

In reply, he expressed his surprise at the value they set on the
telescope, and offered, if they cared for it, to send them an account of
a discovery which he doubts not will prove much more grateful than the
communication of that instrument, "being in my judgment the oddest, if
not the most considerable detection that has recently been made into the
operations of Nature."

So he tells them about his optical researches and his discovery of the
nature of white light, writing them a series of papers which were long
afterwards incorporated and published as his _Optics_. A magnificent
work, which of itself suffices to place its author in the first rank of
the world's men of science.

The nature of white light, the true doctrine of colour, and the
differential calculus! besides a good number of minor results--binomial
theorem, reflecting telescope, sextant, and the like; one would think it
enough for one man's life-work, but the masterpiece remains still to be
mentioned. It is as when one is considering Shakspeare: _King Lear_,
_Macbeth_, _Othello_,--surely a sufficient achievement,--but the
masterpiece remains.

Comparisons in different departments are but little help perhaps,
nevertheless it seems to me that in his own department, and considered
simply as a man of science, Newton towers head and shoulders over, not
only his contemporaries--that is a small matter--but over every other
scientific man who has ever lived, in a way that we can find no parallel
for in other departments. Other nations admit his scientific
pre-eminence with as much alacrity as we do.

Well, we have arrived at the year 1672 and his election to the Royal
Society. During the first year of his membership there was read at one
of the meetings a paper giving an account of a very careful
determination of the length of a degree (_i.e._ of the size of the
earth), which had been made by Picard near Paris. The length of the
degree turned out to be not sixty miles, but nearly seventy miles. How
soon Newton heard of this we do not learn--probably not for some
years,--Cambridge was not so near London then as it is now, but
ultimately it was brought to his notice. Armed with this new datum, his
old speculation concerning gravity occurred to him. He had worked out
the mechanics of the solar system on a certain hypothesis, but it had
remained a hypothesis somewhat out of harmony with apparent fact. What
if it should turn out to be true after all!

He took out his old papers and began again the calculation. If gravity
were the force keeping the moon in its orbit, it would fall toward the
earth sixteen feet every minute. How far did it fall? The newly known
size of the earth would modify the figures: with intense excitement he
runs through the working, his mind leaps before his hand, and as he
perceives the answer to be coming out right, all the infinite meaning
and scope of his mighty discovery flashes upon him, and he can no longer
see the paper. He throws down the pen; and the secret of the universe
is, to one man, known.

But of course it had to be worked out. The meaning might flash upon him,
but its full detail required years of elaboration; and deeper and deeper
consequences revealed themselves to him as he proceeded.

For two years he devoted himself solely to this one object. During
those years he lived but to calculate and think, and the most ludicrous
stories are told concerning his entire absorption and inattention to
ordinary affairs of life. Thus, for instance, when getting up in a
morning he would sit on the side of the bed half-dressed, and remain
like that till dinner time. Often he would stay at home for days
together, eating what was taken to him, but without apparently noticing
what he was doing.

One day an intimate friend, Dr. Stukely, called on him and found on the
table a cover laid for his solitary dinner. After waiting a long time,
Dr. Stukely removed the cover and ate the chicken underneath it,
replacing and covering up the bones again. At length Newton appeared,
and after greeting his friend, sat down to dinner, but on lifting the
cover he said in surprise, "Dear me, I thought I had not dined, but I
see I have."

It was by this continuous application that the _Principia_ was
accomplished. Probably nothing of the first magnitude can be
accomplished without something of the same absorbed unconsciousness and
freedom from interruption. But though desirable and essential for the
_work_, it was a severe tax upon the powers of the _man_. There is, in
fact, no doubt that Newton's brain suffered temporary aberration after
this effort for a short time. The attack was slight, and it has been
denied; but there are letters extant which are inexplicable otherwise,
and moreover after a year or two he writes to his friends apologizing
for strange and disjointed epistles, which he believed he had written
without understanding clearly what he wrote. The derangement was,
however, both slight and temporary: and it is only instructive to us as
showing at what cost such a work as the _Principia_ must be produced,
even by so mighty a mind as that of Newton.

The first part of the work having been done, any ordinary mortal would
have proceeded to publish it; but the fact is that after he had sent to
the Royal Society his papers on optics, there had arisen controversies
and objections; most of them rather paltry, to which he felt compelled
to find answers. Many men would have enjoyed this part of the work, and
taken it as evidence of interest and success. But to Newton's shy and
retiring disposition these discussions were merely painful. He writes,
indeed, his answers with great patience and ability, and ultimately
converts the more reasonable of his opponents, but he relieves his mind
in the following letter to the secretary of the Royal Society: "I see I
have made myself a slave to philosophy, but if I get free of this
present business I will resolutely bid adieu to it eternally, except
what I do for my private satisfaction or leave to come out after me; for
I see a man must either resolve to put out nothing new, or to become a
slave to defend it." And again in a letter to Leibnitz: "I have been so
persecuted with discussions arising out of my theory of light that I
blamed my own imprudence for parting with so substantial a blessing as
my quiet to run after a shadow." This shows how much he cared for
contemporary fame.

So he locked up the first part of the _Principia_ in his desk, doubtless
intending it to be published after his death. But fortunately this was
not so to be.

In 1683, among the leading lights of the Royal Society, the same sort of
notions about gravity and the solar system began independently to be
bruited. The theory of gravitation seemed to be in the air, and Wren,
Hooke, and Halley had many a talk about it.

Hooke showed an experiment with a pendulum, which he likened to a planet
going round the sun. The analogy is more superficial than real. It does
not obey Kepler's laws; still it was a striking experiment. They had
guessed at a law of inverse squares, and their difficulty was to prove
what curve a body subject to it would describe. They knew it ought to be
an ellipse if it was to serve to explain the planetary motion, and Hooke
said he could prove that an ellipse it was; but he was nothing of a
mathematician, and the others scarcely believed him. Undoubtedly he had
shrewd inklings of the truth, though his guesses were based on little
else than a most sagacious intuition. He surmised also that gravity was
the force concerned, and asserted that the path of an ordinary
projectile was an ellipse, like the path of a planet--which is quite
right. In fact the beginnings of the discovery were beginning to dawn
upon him in the well-known way in which things do dawn upon ordinary men
of genius: and had Newton not lived we should doubtless, by the labours
of a long chain of distinguished men, beginning with Hooke, Wren, and
Halley, have been now in possession of all the truths revealed by the
_Principia_. We should never have had them stated in the same form, nor
proved with the same marvellous lucidity and simplicity, but the facts
themselves we should by this time have arrived at. Their developments
and completions, due to such men as Clairaut, Euler, D'Alembert,
Lagrange, Laplace, Airy, Leverrier, Adams, we should of course not have
had to the same extent; because the lives and energies of these great
men would have been partially consumed in obtaining the main facts
themselves.

The youngest of the three questioners at the time we are speaking of was
Edmund Halley, an able and remarkable man. He had been at Cambridge,
doubtless had heard Newton lecture, and had acquired a great veneration
for him.

In January, 1684, we find Wren offering Hooke and Halley a prize, in the
shape of a book worth forty shillings, if they would either of them
bring him within two months a demonstration that the path of a planet
subject to an inverse square law would be an ellipse. Not in two months,
nor yet in seven, was there any proof forthcoming. So at last, in
August, Halley went over to Cambridge to speak to Newton about the
difficult problem and secure his aid. Arriving at his rooms he went
straight to the point. He said, "What path will a body describe if it
be attracted by a centre with a force varying as the inverse square of
the distance." To which Newton at once replied, "An ellipse." "How on
earth do you know?" said Halley in amazement. "Why, I have calculated
it," and began hunting about for the paper. He actually couldn't find it
just then, but sent it him shortly by post, and with it much more--in
fact, what appeared to be a complete treatise on motion in general.

With his valuable burden Halley hastened to the Royal Society and told
them what he had discovered. The Society at his representation wrote to
Mr. Newton asking leave that it might be printed. To this he consented;
but the Royal Society wisely appointed Mr. Halley to see after him and
jog his memory, in case he forgot about it. However, he set to work to
polish it up and finish it, and added to it a great number of later
developments and embellishments, especially the part concerning the
lunar theory, which gave him a deal of trouble--and no wonder; for in
the way he has put it there never was a man yet living who could have
done the same thing. Mathematicians regard the achievement now as men
might stare at the work of some demigod of a bygone age, wondering what
manner of man this was, able to wield such ponderous implements with
such apparent ease.

To Halley the world owes a great debt of gratitude--first, for
discovering the _Principia_; second, for seeing it through the press;
and third, for defraying the cost of its publication out of his own
scanty purse. For though he ultimately suffered no pecuniary loss,
rather the contrary, yet there was considerable risk in bringing out a
book which not a dozen men living could at the time comprehend. It is no
small part of the merit of Halley that he recognized the transcendent
value of the yet unfinished work, that he brought it to light, and
assisted in its becoming understood to the best of his ability.

Though Halley afterwards became Astronomer-Royal, lived to the ripe old
age of eighty-six, and made many striking observations, yet he would be
the first to admit that nothing he ever did was at all comparable in
importance with his discovery of the _Principia_; and he always used to
regard his part in it with peculiar pride and pleasure.

And how was the _Principia_ received? Considering the abstruse nature of
its subject, it was received with great interest and enthusiasm. In less
than twenty years the edition was sold out, and copies fetched large
sums. We hear of poor students copying out the whole in manuscript in
order to possess a copy--not by any means a bad thing to do, however
many copies one may possess. The only useful way really to read a book
like that is to pore over every sentence: it is no book to be skimmed.

While the _Principia_ was preparing for the press a curious incident of
contact between English history and the University occurred. It seems
that James II., in his policy of Catholicising the country, ordered both
Universities to elect certain priests to degrees without the ordinary
oaths. Oxford had given way, and the Dean of Christ Church was a
creature of James's choosing. Cambridge rebelled, and sent eight of its
members, among them Mr. Newton, to plead their cause before the Court of
High Commission. Judge Jeffreys presided over the Court, and threatened
and bullied with his usual insolence. The Vice-Chancellor of Cambridge
was deprived of office, the other deputies were silenced and ordered
away. From the precincts of this court of justice Newton returned to
Trinity College to complete the _Principia_.

By this time Newton was only forty-five years old, but his main work was
