The Project Gutenberg EBook Uarda by Georg Ebers, Volume 6.
#6 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: Uarda, Volume 6.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5444]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on April 29, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UARDA BY GEORG EBERS, V6 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





UARDA

By Georg Ebers

Volume 6.



CHAPTER XXIV.

This eventful day had brought much that was unexpected to our friends in
Thebes, as well as to those who lived in the Necropolis.

The Lady Katuti had risen early after a sleepless night.  Nefert had come
in late, had excused her delay by shortly explaining to her mother that
she had been detained by Bent-Anat, and had then affectionately offered
her brow for a kiss of "good-night."

When the widow was about to withdraw to her sleeping-room, and Nemu had
lighted her lamp, she remembered the secret which was to deliver Paaker
into Ani's hands.  She ordered the dwarf to impart to her what he knew,
and the little man told her at last, after sincere efforts at resistance
--for he feared for his mother's safety--that Paaker had administered
half of a love-philter to Nefert, and that the remainder was still in his
hands.

A few hours since this information would have filled Katuti with
indignation and disgust; now, though she blamed the Mohar, she asked
eagerly whether such a drink could be proved to have any actual effect.

"Not a doubt of it," said the dwarf, "if the whole were taken, but Nefert
only had half of it."

At a late hour Katuti was still pacing her bedroom, thinking of Paaker's
insane devotion, of Mena's faithlessness, and of Nefert's altered
demeanor; and when she went to bed, a thousand conjectures, fears, and
anxieties tormented her, while she was distressed at the change which had
come over Nefert's love to her mother, a sentiment which of all others
should be the most sacred, and the most secure against all shock.

Soon after sunrise she went into the little temple attached to the house,
and made an offering to the statue, which, under the form of Osiris,
represented her lost husband; then she went to the temple of Anion, where
she also prayed a while, and nevertheless, on her return home, found that
her daughter had not yet made her appearance in the hall where they
usually breakfasted together.

Katuti preferred to be undisturbed during the early morning hours, and
therefore did not interfere with her daughter's disposition to sleep far
into the day in her carefully-darkened room.

When the widow went to the temple Nefert was accustomed to take a cup of
milk in bed, then she would let herself be dressed, and when her mother
returned, she would find her in the veranda or hall, which is so well
known to the reader.

To-day however Katuti had to breakfast alone; but when she had eaten a
few mouthfuls she prepared Nefert's breakfast--a white cake and a little
wine in a small silver beaker, carefully guarded from dust and insects by
a napkin thrown over it--and went into her daughter's room.

She was startled at finding it empty, but she was informed that Nefert
had gone earlier than was her wont to the temple, in her litter.

With a heavy sigh she returned to the veranda, and there received her
nephew Paaker, who had come to enquire after the health of his relatives,
followed by a slave, who carried two magnificent bunches of flowers, and
by the great dog which had formerly belonged to his father.  One bouquet
he said had been cut for Nefert, and the other for her mother.

     [Pictures on the monuments show that in ancient Egypt, as at the
     present time, bouquets of flowers were bestowed as tokens of
     friendly feeling.]

Katuti had taken quite a new interest in Paaker since she had heard of
his procuring the philter.

No other young man of the rank to which they belonged, would have allowed
himself to be so mastered by his passion for a woman as this Paaker was,
who went straight to his aim with stubborn determination, and shunned no
means that might lead to it.  The pioneer, who had grown up under her
eyes, whose weaknesses she knew, and whom she was accustomed to look down
upon, suddenly appeared to her as a different man--almost a stranger--as
the deliverer of his friends, and the merciless antagonist of his
enemies.

These reflections had passed rapidly through her mind.  Now her eyes
rested on the sturdy, strongly-knit figure of her nephew, and it struck
her that he bore no resemblance to his tall, handsome father.  Often had
she admired her brother-in-law's slender hand, that nevertheless could so
effectually wield a sword, but that of his son was broad and ignoble in
form.

While Paaker was telling her that he must shortly leave for Syria, she
involuntarily observed the action of this hand, which often went
cautiously to his girdle as if he had something concealed there; this was
the oval phial with the rest of the philter.  Katuti observed it, and her
cheeks flushed when it occurred to her to guess what he had there.

The pioneer could not but observe Katuti's agitation, and he said in a
tone of sympathy:

"I perceive that you are in pain, or in trouble.  The master of Mena's
stud at Hermonthis has no doubt been with you--No?  He came to me
yesterday, and asked me to allow him to join my troops.  He is very angry
with you, because he has been obliged to sell some of Mena's gold-bays.
I have bought the finest of them.  They are splendid creatures!  Now he
wants to go to his master 'to open his eyes,' as he says.  Lie down a
little while, aunt, you are very pale."

Katuti did not follow this prescription; on the contrary she smiled, and
said in a voice half of anger and half of pity:

"The old fool firmly believes that the weal or woe of the family depends
on the gold-bays.  He would like to go with you?  To open Mena's eyes?
No one has yet tried to bind them!"

Katuti spoke the last words in a low tone, and her glance fell.  Paaker
also looked down, and was silent; but he soon recovered his presence of
mind, and said:

"If Nefert is to be long absent, I will go."

"No--no, stay," cried the widow.  "She wished to see you, and must soon
come in.  There are her cake and her wine waiting for her."

With these words she took the napkin off the breakfast-table, held up the
beaker in her hand, and then said, with the cloth still in her hand:

"I will leave you a moment, and see if Nefert is not yet come home."

Hardly had she left the veranda when Paaker, having convinced himself
that no one could see him, snatched the flask from his girdle, and, with
a short invocation to his father in Osiris, poured its whole contents
into the beaker, which thus was filled to the very brim.  A few minutes
later Nefert and her mother entered the hall.

Paaker took up the nosegay, which his slave had laid down on a seat, and
timidly approached the young woman, who walked in with such an aspect of
decision and self-confidence, that her mother looked at her in
astonishment, while Paaker felt as if she had never before appeared so
beautiful and brilliant.  Was it possible that she should love her
husband, when his breach of faith troubled her so little?  Did her heart
still belong to another?  Or had the love-philter set him in the place of
Mena?  Yes! yes! for how warmly she greeted him.  She put out her hand to
him while he was still quite far off, let it rest in his, thanked him
with feeling, and praised his fidelity and generosity.

Then she went up to the table, begged Paaker to sit down with her, broke
her cake, and enquired for her aunt Setchern, Paaker's mother.

Katuti and Paaker watched all her movements with beating hearts.

Now she took up the beaker, and lifted it to her lips, but set it down
again to answer Paaker's remark that she was breakfasting late.

"I have hitherto been a real lazy-bones," she said with a blush.  But
this morning I got up early, to go and pray in the temple in the fresh
dawn.  You know what has happened to the sacred ram of Amion.  It is a
frightful occurrence.  The priests were all in the greatest agitation,
but the venerable Bek el Chunsu received me himself, and interpreted my
dream, and now my spirit is light and contented."

"And you did all this without me?"  said Katuti in gentle reproof.

"I would not disturb you," replied Nefert.  "Besides," she added
coloring, "you never take me to the city and the temple in the morning."

Again she took up the wine-cup and looked into it, but without drinking
any, went on:

"Would you like to hear what I dreamed, Paaker?  It was a strange
vision."

The pioneer could hardly breathe for expectation, still he begged her to
tell her dream.

"Only think," said Nefert, pushing the beaker on the smooth table, which
was wet with a few drops which she had spilt, "I dreamed of the Neha-
tree, down there in the great tub, which your father brought me from
Punt, when I was a little child, and which since then has grown quite a
tall tree.  There is no tree in the garden I love so much, for it always
reminds me of your father, who was so kind to me, and whom I can never
forget!"

Paaker bowed assent.

Nefert looked at him, and interrupted her story when she observed his
crimson cheeks.

"It is very hot!  Would you like some wine to drink---or some water?"

With these words she raised the wine-cup, and drank about half of the
contents; then she shuddered, and while her pretty face took a comical
expression, she turned to her mother, who was seated behind her and held
the beaker towards her.

"The wine is quite sour to-day!"  she said.  "Taste it, mother."

Katuti took the little silver-cup in her hand, and gravely put it to her
lips, but without wetting them.  A smile passed over her face, and her
eyes met those of the pioneer, who stared at her in horror.  The picture
flashed before her mind of herself languishing for the pioneer, and of
his terror at her affection for him!  Her selfish and intriguing spirit
was free from coarseness, and yet she could have laughed with all her
heart even while engaged in the most shameful deed of her whole life.
She gave the wine back to her daughter, saying good-humoredly:

"I have tasted sweeter, but acid is refreshing in this heat."

"That is true," said the wife of Mena; she emptied the cup to the bottom,
and then went on, as if refreshed, "But I will tell you the rest of my
dream.  I saw the Neha-tree, which your father gave me, quite plainly;
