The enemy's cavalry--between them and safety, only a hundred yards
distant--had unslung their carbines, and opened fire. The infantry
were nearly two hundred yards behind but, fortunately, dared not
fire for fear of hitting their own cavalry.

At a rapid pace--for they were running for life--the little knot of
franc tireurs dashed forward. One or two fell from the fire of the
cavalry and, as they were fifty yards distant from the wood, there
was a cry and Philippe Duburg fell to the ground. In an instant Tim
Doyle--who was his next man--stopped, caught him up as if he had
been a feather and, with a desperate effort, again joined the
others, just as they were within twenty yards of the cavalry.

"Fire!" Major Tempe cried; and from the front, and from each side
of the little square--which was but six deep, either way--the
rifles flashed out.

"Level bayonets; charge!"

There was a short struggle. The second ranks poured their fire into
the cavalry line. There was a clashing of bayonets against swords,
and then the band ran through the broken line of cavalry. There was
a rush into the brushwood; and then, from behind the shelter of the
trees, the fire opened again; and the cavalry fell sullenly back,
having lost upwards of thirty men in that short five minutes since
they had left the village.

The German infantry halted, at a distance of two hundred yards; but
they would have lost too many men, in crossing the open, to make it
worth while to attack the sheltered foe--who could pick them off,
to the last moment, only to withdraw deeper into the forest when
they approached its edge. Accordingly they too fell back,
exchanging fire with the franc tireurs until they gained the
shelter of the village.

The conflict over. The men sank, exhausted, upon the ground where
they stood. Major Tempe went round to each; saying a word of
praise, and giving a little of the brandy--with which he had filled
his canteen, before starting--with some water from their own kegs.
Then he gave a sharp whistle, and the men again gathered round him.

"Once more, lads, I must thank you for your conduct," he said. "You
have defended yourselves against forces, altogether, four times
your own. You fairly kept at bay an infantry force of twice your
own number. You have withstood a charge of cavalry, also double
your own strength; and have performed the unusual feat of
successfully charging cavalry. You have inflicted a very heavy loss
upon the enemy. Not less than forty of the infantry must have been
placed hors de combat; and fifteen or twenty of the cavalry, at the
lowest estimate. Altogether, although forced to fall back, the
affair is more creditable than many a brilliant victory.

"Our own loss has been heavy--as heavy, in proportion to our
numbers, as that of the enemy--though, owing to an advantage of
position, while engaged with the infantry, it is actually far less
than theirs. Still, lads, it is very, very heavy," and the major
looked round, with a saddened face, on the diminished band.

"Our only consolation is that our friends have died doing their
duty, and setting a noble example. If all Frenchmen were but
animated with a spirit like that which, I am proud to say, animates
the franc tireurs of Dijon, there are few of the invaders who would
ever recross the Rhine.

"Lieutenant Ribouville, go through the muster roll of the two
companies. Our brave friend De Maupas has, alas! fallen. He was at
my side when a rifle ball struck him, in the temple."

The list was now called over, and the result was a sad one. The two
companies, including officers, had gone into the fight fifty-five
strong. Only thirty-one answered to their names. Besides these,
eight had been removed farther into the forest, severely wounded;
and Philippe Duburg lay a short distance off--the surgeon being
employed bandaging his leg, which a rifle ball had entered, above
the knee. Fifteen, therefore, were dead or missing--which, as the
Germans bayoneted all wounded franc tireurs, was the same thing. Of
the thirty-one who answered to their names, nine had wounds more or
less severe; and the surgeon, with his assistants, had work on his
hands which would take him far into the night.

The instant that they were dismissed from parade, the boys hurried
to their cousin. He was very pale from loss of blood, but was
perfectly sensible. His brother sat on a bench beside him, holding
his head on his knee.

Philippe smiled faintly as the boys came up.

"I am so glad you have escaped," he said, in a low voice.

They clasped his hand.

"Does it hurt you much, Philippe?"

"Not very much; not so much as I should have thought."

"Did the doctor say anything about it, Philippe?"

"Yes, he said that it had just missed the great arteries; and that
he thinks it struck the bone, and has glanced up somewhere; but he
can't say till he probes it, when--"

"Then your leg is not broken?"

"No, he says it is certainly not broken, but it may be splintered."

"Thank God for that, anyhow," the boys said.

"We owe his life to Tim Doyle," Louis said. "I was not next to him;
and did not see him fall, or know he was hit till I saw Tim come
up, with him on his shoulders--and even if I had, I could not have
lifted him, and carried him off. Tim saved his life. There is no
doubt about that."

As it was evident that Philippe was too weak to talk, and would be
better for being quiet awhile, the boys now left him with his
brother.

Looking through the trees towards the village, a dense smoke could
now be seen rising in several places and, in a few minutes, the
whole village was in a blaze. Moved by the sight, the unfortunate
inhabitants came out from their hiding places in the forest;
wringing their hands, crying, and cursing the invaders. In spite of
the advice of Major Tempe, several of the women went off towards
the scene of conflagration, to endeavor to save some little
household treasure from the flames. In a short time one of them
returned to fetch her husband, saying that the enemy had all left
before they reached the village, and were already far down the
hillside. Major Tempe at once sent forward the unwounded men; to
assist the villagers to put out the fire, and to save property.
Their efforts were, however, altogether unavailing; the Germans had
scattered large quantities of petroleum, before leaving, upon the
beds and such other furniture as they could not carry away, or
destroy.

It was a pitiable sight to see the poor homeless people sitting
about, looking at the ruins of their houses. Some cried piteously;
others gazed with listless faces, but with a cold despair even more
painful to see. Fortunately, they had saved all their animals but,
at present, they were too much absorbed in the thoughts of what
they had lost, to bestow even a thought of satisfaction on what
they had saved.

Major Tempe, grieved and touched at the painful scene of which he
and his men had been the cause, called the franc tireurs together;
and made a proposition to them, which was at once heartily agreed
to. He then called together the cure and schoolmaster and--after a
few well-chosen words of regret, at the ills which he and his had
involuntarily brought upon the village--he handed over to them, in
the name of the whole corps, the hundred pounds in thaler notes
which had been found upon the schoolmaster whom they had executed
for treachery; to be distributed among the inhabitants, according
to their necessities.

The offer was gratefully received, and the priest and schoolmaster
at once went round and told the poor people, whose gratitude and
delight were unbounded. To so poor a population, the sum seemed
immense; and although it would not replace what was destroyed, it
would go far towards making their abodes habitable. The village
only contained about twenty houses. The walls were still standing.
Timber for the roofs and floors was to be had for cutting, in the
forest. Bushes for thatching could be found in abundance. The
principal portion of the houses, therefore, would cost only labor,
and this money would suffice to keep them alive, while engaged upon
it; and enough would remain to get at least a few blankets to lay
upon the straw--which would, for the time, serve for beds--together
with a few other simple necessaries. The sale of a portion of the
animals would do the rest and, in their gratitude to the franc
tireurs, for having thus relieved their first and most pressing
difficulties, the inhabitants altogether forgot the ill-feeling
which they had before felt against them, as the authors of their
disaster.

After burying their dead, the men set to work to assist the
villagers in building temporary huts--or rather bowers--to the edge
of the forest; in which, before nightfall, they had the
satisfaction of seeing them installed. The few articles of bedding,
blankets, etc. saved at the approach of the Prussians were spread
on heaps of freshly-cut grass; and one of the oxen of the franc
tireurs, which had arrived the day before, was killed and divided.
Great fires were lighted and--had it not been for the bandages on
the heads, and the arms in slings of several of the franc
tireurs--no one coming upon the scene would have guessed how
desperate a skirmish had raged here.

The next day the carts which had been sent for arrived; and the
wounded were placed in them, upon heaps of straw, and sent off with
one of the surgeons; with instructions to travel among the hills,
until they reached a point where it would be quite safe to descend
into the valley, and take the train to Dijon, at the first station
at which it was open. Among them was Philippe Duburg, who was
accompanied by his brother. Louis had obtained a week's leave of
absence, for the purpose; and was the bearer of letters, and
innumerable messages, from the boys to their parents and sisters. A
few hours later, the remnants of the first and second companies
marched to join their comrades.



Chapter 10: The Bridge Of The Vesouze.


The very day after the fight, news arrived which induced a sudden
change of position. Upon the Sixteenth of September the Baden
troops occupied Mulhouse, having entered Colmar on the preceding
day. It was evident that the railway was so strongly guarded,
between Strasburg and Nancy, that it was hopeless to expect to be
able to interrupt it, seriously, with so small a force as that at
Major Tempe's command; still less possible was it to render any
assistance, whatever, to the doomed city of Strasburg. After taking
counsel, therefore, with his officers, Major Tempe decided to march
more to the south; so as to assist to oppose the passage of the
enemy west from Colmar, or Mulhouse, through the passes of the
Vosges.

The alarm was, however, but temporary for, having made requisitions
as usual, the Prussians retired; and the corps returned to their
old quarters. There another ten days passed; spent not in ease, but
in constant marchings and counter-marchings. Whenever news arrived
that any parties of Uhlans were approaching the mountains, with the
object of making requisitions, the corps were instantly set in
motion. Sometimes severe skirmishes were the result. Sometimes the
news turned out to be untrue and, after a long day's march, and a
night spent watching, the men had nothing to do but to march back
again.

Upon the 28th came the news of the surrender of Strasburg, upon the
preceding day, after one of the most heroic defenses in history.
There was now no doubt that the Germans would, ere long, advance
seriously. By this time, the total of the French forces among the
Vosges mountains was considerable. Scarce a day passed without the
arrival of a corps of franc tireurs and--had all these corps been
animated with a spirit such as that evinced by the franc tireurs of
Dijon; and had they acted in unity, with discipline and
intelligence--they might have rendered immense services to France.

Unfortunately, this was very far from being the case. Very many of
the men had entered the ranks only to avoid being called upon to go
out with the Mobiles--or mobilized national guard. Others had only
entered from the impulse of the moment. Very many were altogether
unwilling to submit to any steady discipline while, in a great
number of cases, the corps were completely paralyzed from the utter
incapacity of their officers. Owing to these various causes, the
corps of franc tireurs distinguished themselves, in a great number
of cases, only by the extreme ingenuity and foresight which they
displayed in keeping at a prudent distance from the enemy. Some,
too, earned a bad name not only for themselves, but for the whole
body of franc tireurs, by their conduct towards the villagers;
helping themselves freely to what they required, and making
themselves almost as much dreaded by the peasantry as even the
Germans, themselves.

At the same time the villagers had, in very many cases, only
themselves to blame for the rough measures adopted by the franc
tireurs; for often, instead of doing all in their power for the men
who had taken up arms in the cause of France, the villagers looked
upon them only as strangers, out of whom the richest possible
harvest was to be obtained; and charged the most exorbitant prices
for all articles of necessity supplied to them. In fact, they
sometimes did not hesitate to say that they would not provide them,
at any price, with the provisions required; as these would be
wanted to satisfy the requisition of the Germans, upon their
arrival.

Perhaps in the whole world there is no class of people so
completely engrossed by the thought of gain as are the French
bourgeois, and rustic population. Every change of Government, every
political alteration, every law passed, is regarded by them simply,
and solely, from the view of how it will affect their own pockets.
Thus, instead of driving away their flocks and herds, at the
approach of the invaders; the people remained quietly in their
houses, and shamelessly trafficked with the invaders. This apathy,
faint heartedness, and want of patriotism, upon the part of the
inhabitants of the small towns and villages, caused innumerable
difficulties to the franc tireurs; and Major Tempe was sometimes
obliged to take the law into his own hands, when the villagers
absolutely refused to sell provisions, or to give quarters to his
men.

In these cases he summoned the priest, the schoolmaster, and two
other head men of the place, and formed a committee with them and
his own officers. These fixed a fair price upon the articles
required, and Major Tempe then sent round a notice to the effect
that, if these articles were furnished in two hours, they would be
paid for at the agreed rates; but that if not furnished, he should
quarter his men upon the inhabitants, in accordance with the size
of their houses, and should remain there at least a week--a threat
that never failed in producing the required effect.

It was but seldom, however, that the major encountered any
difficulties of this sort. The corps was, for the most part,
composed of men with some money. They had now, too, sold the sheep
and cattle which they had captured at Blamont; finding the
inconvenience of sending for them, whenever meat was required. The
proceeds of these, and of the horses captured at the same time, had
given them a good sum in their regimental chest; and they were,
therefore, able and willing to pay a fair price for such articles
as they required. Besides this, the report of the actions of
Blamont and Still had now widely circulated and--as a general
thing--the people were glad to do all in their power, for a corps
composed of men who really meant work, and had given good proofs of
their courage and energy.

By this time, the boys had received several letters from home; and
it may be readily imagined the pleasure these letters afforded
them. Major Tempe's official report of the doings of his corps had
been published in the Dijon papers and, from these, had been copied
far and wide through France; and the people of Dijon were not a
little proud of their corps. The names of the two Barclays had
appeared, in the report, as specially distinguishing themselves;
and their father had written, saying how pleased and gratified he
was at their conduct. Mrs. Barclay and Milly had also written; but
their expressions of pleasure were mingled with many hopes that the
boys would not expose themselves, unnecessarily.

The band had dwindled much, in the month since they left Dijon.
Upwards of thirty had been killed, or disabled, in the fights of
Blamont and Still. Half as many more had been killed or wounded in
smaller skirmishes; and ten or twelve had gone home, or into
hospital, completely knocked up with the hard work and exposure.
Only about sixty men, therefore, remained.

Schlestadt and Neu Brisach were now invested by the Germans and,
after waiting for a few days, to ascertain the course that they
were likely to take, Major Tempe determined (as General Cambriels
was forming an army, down by Besancon) to defend the upper passes
of the Vosges and--as it was rumored that a second German army was
likely to advance south, from Nancy--that he would recross the
Vosges, and aid in the defense against this second army of
invaders.

Three days' fatiguing marches brought them to Epinal; where the
boys, in accordance with their promise, went straight to the house
of the gentleman who had so hospitably served them, at their last
visit. Their friends were delighted to see them, and expressed
great regret that one of the party was missing. The boys were,
however, able to say that their last letter from Dijon had given
good accounts of Philippe Duburg, who was now considered out of
danger. There was, however, no hope of his being able to rejoin
them; as the surgeon considered it probable that his leg would be a
very long time, before it would be sufficiently healed to allow him
to use it.

Their host had read the account in the papers of the doings of the
franc tireurs; and his wife laughingly made a further apology to
the Barclays, and their cousin, for her remark at their first visit
about boys.

"My girls have talked about nothing else but your doings, ever
since we had the news of your attack upon the Uhlans, near
Blamont," she said. "One would think, from the interest they take
in the corps, that the whole future of France depended upon the
franc tireurs of Dijon."

The young Barclays laughed, and Percy muttered something under his
breath; while Louis Duburg replied, seriously, that he hoped the
franc tireurs of Dijon would always do their best to deserve the
kind thoughts of mademoiselles--at which piece of politeness Percy
muttered, "Bosh!"

Epinal had, as yet, escaped; but it was feared that, ere long, the
enemy would advance. The town looked deserted, for all the young
men had left with the Mobiles--or mobilized national guard--and all
men under forty were drilling, in readiness to march at a moment's
notice. No serious movement of the enemy, south of Luneville, was
as yet signalized.

After two days' rest, the corps again marched north; their
destination being kept a profound secret, even from the men. So
anxious, apparently, was Major Tempe that, this time, their object
should not be foiled by treachery; that after the first day's march
he left the main road and, having secured the services of a
peasant, as a guide, he made two long days' marches through
forests, and over mountains--avoiding even small villages. Four led
horses accompanied the march; one laden with the gun cotton, and
the other three carrying provisions, so that they might be
independent of the local supply. Each night they bivouacked in the
forests but, as the weather was now fine--although the nights were
cold--this was no hardship, whatever.

Upon the morning of the fourth day from their leaving Epinal, Major
Tempe told his men that he had learned, at Epinal, that the line
was no longer so closely guarded as before--the Germans being
confident, now, of the impotence of the French to harm them--and
that they were now in the forest of Moudan, within three miles of
the railway between Luneville and Rechicourt, on the line to
Strasburg. His intention was to reconnoiter that day and--if
success should be found possible--to attempt, at daybreak next
morning, to blow up the railway bridge over the Vesouze.

The news was received with great satisfaction, as the corps were
burning to distinguish themselves; and in no way could they do such
service as to cut the line of communication--although, as the
Germans were no longer dependent upon a single line, the advantage
would not be of so signal a nature as it would have been, could
they have cut it at the time when they first made the attempt. The
Barclays were naturally selected to reconnoiter and, as their
change of clothes had been always--by Major Tempe's orders--carried
on the baggage horse, they had no difficulty upon that score.

Their expedition was uneventful. At the village nearest to the
bridge, they went in and bought some cheese and other articles
and--after gaining all the information they were able, without
exciting attention--they made their way, through broken ground, to
a point near enough to the bridge to enable them to reconnoiter it,
undiscovered.

A sentry was posted at each end. At a cottage hard by were ten
others, while there were twenty in the village they had just left.
There were also sentries down the line; but these were far enough
apart to render it certain that they could not muster in time to
interfere, seriously, with the enterprise. With this information,
they returned to the forest.

A council of war was held; and it was decided that the news was
satisfactory, and that the attack should take place at daybreak.
Each man was instructed in the work he would have to perform.
Lieutenant Houdin, with thirty men, was to surprise the German
party in the village. The rest--having made a detour to avoid the
village--were to be in readiness to attack the posts near the
bridge, immediately a gun was fired in the village. The attack was
to be made at daybreak. From the bridge, to the nearest point where
the forest was thick enough to afford a safe shelter, was a
distance of about two miles.

