Brown was not quick-witted. He did not see that his confederate was
trying cunningly to avert suspicion from himself, and taking the only
course that remained to him. Of course, he thought he was betrayed, and
was, as a natural consequence, exasperated.

He released his hold on the horses, but, fixing his eyes on the colonel
fiercely, muttered:

"Wait till I get a chance at you! I'll pay you for this."

"What an idiot!" thought Warner, shrugging his shoulders. "Why can't he
see that I am forced to do as I am doing? I must make things plain to
him."

He spoke a few words rapidly in Spanish, which Brown evidently
understood. His face showed a dawning comprehension of the state of
affairs, and he stood aside while the stage drove on.

"What did you say?" asked Conrad Stiefel, suspiciously.

"You heard me, sir," said the colonel, loftily. "You owe your rescue
from this ruffian to me. Now, you can understand how much you have
misjudged me."

Conrad Stiefel was not so easily satisfied of this.

"I heard what you said in Mexican, or whatever lingo it is, but I didn't
understand it."

"Nor I," said Benson.

"Very well, gentlemen; I am ready to explain. I told this man that if he
ever attempted to molest me I should shoot him in his track."

"Why didn't you speak to him in English?" asked Stiefel.

"Because I had a suspicion that the fellow was the same I met once in
Mexico, and I spoke to him in Spanish to make sure. As he understood, I
am convinced I was right."

"Who is it, then?" asked Benson.

"His name, sir, is Manuel de Cordova, a well-known Mexican bandit,
who seems to have found his way to this neighborhood. He is a reckless
desperado, and, though I addressed him boldly, I should be very sorry to
meet him in a dark night."

This explanation was very fluently spoken, but probably no one present
believed what the colonel said, or exonerated him from the charge which
George Melville had made against him.

Five miles further on Col. Warner left the stage.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I am sorry to leave this pleasant company, but I
have a mining claim in this neighborhood, and must bid you farewell.
I trust that when you think of me hereafter, you will acquit me of the
injurious charges which have been made against me. I take no credit to
myself for driving away the ruffian who stopped us, but hope you won't
forget it."

"No one interfered with the colonel when he proposed to leave the stage.
Indeed, the passengers were unanimous in accepting his departure as a
relief. In spite of his plausible representations, he was regarded with
general suspicion.

"I wish I knew the meaning of that Spanish lingo," said the German,
Conrad Stiefel.

"I can interpret it for you, Mr. Stiefel," said George Melville,
quietly. "I have some knowledge of Spanish."

"What did he say?" asked more than one, eagerly.

"He said: 'You fool! Don't you see the plot has been discovered? It
wasn't my fault. I will soon join you and explain.'"

This revelation made a sensation.

"Then he was in league with the road agent, after all?" said Parker.

"Certainly he was. Did you for a moment doubt it?" said Melville.

"I was staggered when I saw him order the rascal away."

"He is a shrewd villain!" said Benson. "I hope we shan't encounter him
again."




CHAPTER XXVIII. THE CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL.



It is needless to say that Col. Warner's intention in leaving the stage
was to join his fellow conspirator. There was no advantage in remaining
longer with his fellow travelers, since the opportunity of plundering
them had passed, and for the present was not likely to return. He
had been a little apprehensive that they would try to detain him on
suspicion, which would have been awkward, since they had numbers on
their side, and all were armed. But in that unsettled country he would
have been an elephant on their hands, and if the idea entered the minds
of any one of the stage passengers, it was instantly dismissed.

When the stage was fairly on the way, Col. Warner went to a house where
he was known, and asked for a horse.

"Any news, colonel?" asked the farmer, as he called himself. Really he
was in league with the band of which Warner was the chief.

"No," answered the Colonel, gloomily. "No, worse luck! There might have
been, but for an unfortunate circumstance."

"What's that?"

"There's plenty of good money in that stage coach and Brown and I meant
to have it, but some sharp-eared rascal heard us arranging the details
of the plan, and that spoiled it."

"Is it too late now?" asked the farmer, eagerly. "We can follow them,
and overtake them yet, if you say so."

"And be shot for our pains. No, thank you. They are all on the alert,
and all have their six-shooters in readiness. No, we must postpone
our plan. There's one of the fellows that I mean to be revenged upon
yet--the one that ferreted out our secret plan. I must bide my time, but
I shall keep track of him."

Soon the Colonel, well-mounted, was on his way back to the rude inn
where he had slept the night before.

Dismounting he entered without ceremony, and his eyes fell upon the
landlord's wife, engaged in some household employment.

"Where's Brown?" he asked, abruptly.

"Somewheres round," was the reply.

"How long has he been home?"

"A matter of two hours. He came home awfully riled, but he wouldn't tell
me what it was about. What's happened?"

"We've met with a disappointment--that's what's the matter."

"Did the passengers get the better of you?" asked the woman, for she was
in her husband's guilty secrets, and knew quite well what manner of man
she had married.

"They found out our little game," answered Warner, shortly, for he did
not see any advantage in wasting words on his confederate's wife. "Which
way did Brown go?"

"Yonder," answered Mrs. Brown, pointing in a particular direction.

Col. Warner tied his horse to a small sapling, and walked in the
direction indicated.

He found the landlord sullenly reclining beneath a large tree.

"So you're back?" he said, surveying Warner with a lowering brow.

"Yes."

"And a pretty mess you've made of the job!" said the landlord, bitterly.

"It's as much your fault--nay, more!" said his superior, coolly.

"What do you mean?" demanded Brown, not over cordially.

"You would persist in discussing our plan last night in my room, though
I warned you we might be overheard."

"Well?"

"We were overheard."

"What spy listened to our talk?"

"The young man, Melville--the one traveling with a boy. He kept it to
himself till the stage was well on its way, and then he blabbed the
whole thing to all in the stage."

"Did he mention you?"

"Yes, and you."

"Why didn't you tell him he lied, and shoot him on the spot?"

"Because I shouldn't have survived him five minutes," answered the
colonel, coolly, "or, if I had, his companions would have lynched me."

Brown didn't look as if he would have been inconsolable had this
occurred. In fact, he was ambitious to succeed to the place held by the
colonel, as chief of a desperate gang of outlaws.

"I might have been dangling from a branch of a tree at this moment, had
I followed your plan, my good friend Brown, and that would have been
particularly uncomfortable."

"They might have shot me," said Brown, sullenly.

"I prevented that, and gave you timely warning. Of course it's a
disappointment, but we shall have better luck next time."

"They've got away."

"Yes, but I propose to keep track of Melville and the boy, and have my
revenge upon them in time. I don't care so much about the money, but
they have foiled me, and they must suffer for it. Meanwhile, I want your
help in another plan."

The two conferred together, and mutual confidence was re-established.




CHAPTER XXIX. A NEW HOME IN THE WOODS.



George Melville had no definite destination. He was traveling, not for
pleasure, but for health, and his purpose was to select a residence
in some high location, where the dry air would be favorable for his
pulmonary difficulties.

A week later he had found a temporary home. One afternoon Herbert and
he, each on horseback, for at that time public lines of travel were
fewer than at present, came suddenly upon a neat, one-story cottage in
the edge of the forest. It stood alone, but it was evidently the home
of one who aimed to add something of the graces of civilization to the
rudeness of frontier life.

They reined up simultaneously, and Melville, turning to Herbert, said:
"There, Herbert, is my ideal of a residence. I should not be satisfied
with a rude cabin. There I should find something of the comfort which we
enjoy in New England."

"The situation is fine, too," said Herbert, looking about him
admiringly.

The cottage stood on a knoll. On either side were tall and stately
trees. A purling brook at the left rolled its silvery current down a
gentle declivity, and in front, for half a mile, was open country.

"I have a great mind to call and inquire who lives here." said Melville.
"Perhaps we can arrange to stay here all night."

"That is a good plan, Mr. Melville."

George Melville dismounted from his horse, and, approaching, tapped with
the handle of his whip on the door.

"Who's there?" inquired a smothered voice, as of one rousing himself
from sleep.

"A stranger, but a friend," answered Melville.

There was a sound as of some one moving, and a tall man, clad in a rough
suit, came to the door, and looked inquiringly at Melville and his boy
companion.

Though his attire was rude, his face was refined, and had the
indefinable air of one who would be more at home in the city than in the
country.

"Delighted to see you both," he said, cordially, offering his hand. "I
don't live in a palace, and my servants are all absent, but if you will
deign to become my guests I will do what I can for your comfort."

"You have anticipated my request," said Melville. "Let me introduce
myself as George Melville, an invalid by profession, just come from New
England in search of health. My young friend here is Herbert Carr, my
private secretary and faithful companion, who has not yet found out what
it is to be in poor-health. Without him I should hardly have dared to
come so far alone."

"You are very welcome, Herbert," said the host, with pleasant
familiarity. "Come in, both of you, and make yourselves at home."

The cottage contained two rooms. One was used as a bedchamber, the other
as a sitting room. On the walls were a few pictures, and on a small
bookcase against one side of the room were some twenty-five books.
There was an easel and an unfinished picture in one corner, and a small
collection of ordinary furniture.

"You are probably an artist," suggested Melville.

"Yes, you have hit it. I use both pen and pencil," and he mentioned a
name known to Melville as that of a popular magazine writer.

I do not propose to give his real name, but we will know him as Robert
Falkland.

"I am familiar with your name, Mr. Falkland," said Melville, "but I did
not expect to find you here."

"Probably not," answered Falkland. "I left the haunts of civilization
unexpectedly, some months ago, and even my publishers don't know where I
am."

"In search of health?" queried Melville.

"Not exactly. I did, however, feel in need of a change. I had been
running in a rut, and wanted to get out of it, so I left my lodgings in
New York and bought a ticket to St. Louis; arrived there, I determined
to come farther. So here I have been, living in communion with nature,
seeing scarcely anybody, enjoying myself, on the whole, but sometimes
longing to see a new face."

"And you have built this cottage?"

"No; I bought it of its former occupant, but have done something
towards furnishing it; so that it has become characteristic of me and my
tastes."

"How long have you lived here?"

"Three months; but my stay is drawing to a close."

"How is that?"

"Business that will not be put off calls me back to New York. In fact, I
had appointed to-morrow for my departure."

Melville and Herbert exchanged a glance. It was evident that the same
thought was in the mind of each.

"Mr. Falkland," said George Melville, "I have a proposal to make to
you."

The artist eyed him in some surprise.

"Go on," he said.

"I will buy this cottage of you, if you are willing."

Falkland smiled.

"This seems providential," he said. "We artists and men of letters
are apt to be short of money, and I confess I was pondering whether my
credit was good with anybody for a hundred dollars to pay my expenses
East. Once arrived there, there are plenty of publishers who will make
me advances on future work."

"Then we can probably make a bargain," said Mr. Melville. "Please name
your price."

Now, I do not propose to show my ignorance of real estate values in
Colorado by naming the price which George Melville paid for his home
in the wilderness. In fact, I do not know. I can only say that he gave
Falkland a check for the amount on a Boston bank, and a hundred in cash
besides.

"You are liberal, Mr. Melville," said Falkland, gratified. "I am afraid
you are not a business man. I have not found that business men overpay."

"You are right, I am not a business man," answered Melville, "though
I wish my health would admit of my being so. As to the extra hundred
dollars, I think it worth that much to come upon so comfortable a home
ready to my hand. It will really be a home, such as the log cabin I
looked forward to could not be."

"Thank you," said Falkland; "I won't pretend that I am indifferent
to money, for I can't afford to be. I earn considerable sums, but,
unfortunately, I never could keep money, or provide for the future."

"I don't know how it would be with me," said Melville, "for I am one
of those, fortunate or otherwise, who are born to a fortune. I have
sometimes been sorry that I had not the incentive of poverty to induce
me to work."

"Then, suppose we exchange lots," said the artist, lightly. "I shouldn't
object to being wealthy."

"With all my heart," answered Melville. "Give me your health, your
literary and artistic talent, and it is a bargain."

"I am afraid they are not transferable," said the artist, "but we won't
prolong the discussion now. I am neglecting the rites of hospitality;
I must prepare supper for my guests. You must know that here in the
wilderness I am my own cook and dishwasher."

"Let me help you?" said Melville.

"No, Mr. Melville," said Herbert, "it is more in my line. I have often
helped mother at home, and I don't believe you have had any experience."

"I confess I am a green hand," said Melville, laughing, "but, as Irish
girls just imported say, 'I am very willing.'"

"On the whole, I think the boy can assist me better," said Falkland.
"So, Mr. Melville, consider yourself an aristocratic visitor, while
Herbert and myself, sons of toil, will minister to your necessities."

"By the way, where do you get your supplies?" asked Melville.

