woman, in his harem as a gift. If she was inspiring Molock to put on
his act, then maybe he was battling for her sake. I had the impression
that if Wilkerson had thought that she was inspiring Molock to this
act, the captain would have drowned her in the nearest mudhole,
publicity department or no publicity department. And I would have
helped him.

Shad Brisbee puffed himself up until he looked as if he weighed 400
pounds. He fingered his knives in his belt, shifted his weight on his
bare splayed feet. He extended two of his eyes and looked backward at
the jungle behind him as if he was desperately hoping that some of his
tribe would turn up to help him dispose of this brash human. The other
four eyes continued to glare at Molock.

"There's none of your tribe around to help you," Molock stated, waving
his fists. "It's just you and me."

Shad Brisbee shifted uncomfortably. He didn't know quite what to make
of us. We were humans. Since he was a "tame" Venusian, he knew quite
a lot about humans. We had landed right in the middle of the huge
cleared space that his tribe used as a dancing ground. This in itself
was sufficient reason for him to destroy us utterly. Each of his six
eyes revealed quite clearly that he longed to destroy us and that only
Molock was keeping him from doing it.

"Well?" Molock said, waving his fists. "If you're ready to start
getting that square meal, I'm ready to start eating my lunch."

Shad Brisbee took a deep breath. Somewhere inside of him he made up his
mind.

"It is all right for you to land on our dancing ground," he said. The
way he spoke, the words hurt him.

Wilkerson, Rita, Molock, and I all beamed.

"But you must be gone in one zonar!" Shad Brisbee snarled. "Or I will
tear you all to pieces with my own bare hands." Saying these words
didn't hurt him. He enjoyed every one of them. Judging from the way
his hands worked as he spoke, he would enjoy even more translating his
words into action. "Be gone in one zonar--or else!" Turning, he stalked
into the jungle.

I quit breathing again. The smile went from Wilkerson's face. Rita
looked a little perturbed. Only Molock was unconcerned even though he
knew that a zonar was less than an hour and he wouldn't be gone from
this place in two weeks, and then only if we were lucky.

"Did you see me out-bluff him?" Molock said, grinning. "Did you see me
run a sandy on that six-eyed idiot?"

"You were marvelous, simply marvelous," Rita murmured.

"Oh, hell!" Wilkerson shouted. If there had been a stone wall handy for
him to butt his head against, I'm sure he would have felt much better.
"Yaas, you bluffed him. You bluffed him so goddamned good that we'll
all be dead before we get out of this place. Remember, this is his
country, this is his tribal dancing ground--"

"Captain, I'm sure you are taking much too negative a view," Rita
interrupted.

Since she was a woman, Wilkerson couldn't slug her. But woman or not,
he looked as if he was about to do it.

"I'm not taking nearly as negative a view as Shad Brisbee will take
when he comes back and wants his dancing ground," Wilkerson said,
bitterly.

For a moment, Molock looked worried.

"You were yelling for a light lunch," Wilkerson said. "You may find you
have bitten off more than you can chew. Now I'm going into that ship
and get headquarters on the radio and see if I can get some help out
here in time to save our necks. In the meantime, by thunder, you get
ready to take care of Shad Brisbee."

Turning, Wilkerson stalked toward the ship. Indignation bristled in
every step he took. We followed him with reluctance.

Beneath my breath I cursed Trans-Space, Inc., its publicity department,
and George Cooper. Cooper was head of the publicity department. It was
his brilliant idea that had landed us here in the middle of Venus,
where Shad Brisbee was giving us one zonar to get off of his dancing
ground--or else.

Of course, you know that Trans-Space, Inc., has a monopoly on carrying
passengers and freight to and from Venus, but what you probably don't
know is that from the financial end, things have been a little tough
for the company. Now don't go getting your sympathy aroused about this
poor suffering corporation being down to its last billion credits. Let
Trans-Space sympathize with itself, it's quite capable of doing the job
very competently. It is also capable of hiring boys like George Cooper
to help it sympathize with itself. Cooper had dreamed up the idea
that the way to help the financial situation was to encourage human
colonizing on Venus. If they could get several thriving human colonies
settled on the Veiled Planet, the line would not only pick up revenue
from transporting the colonists to Venus but it would also pick up some
profitable freight business. In the long run, they foresaw a very happy
increase in traffic.

One joker they ran into right from the start was that nobody but a
damned fool wanted to go to Venus and argue with six-eyed apes like
Shad Brisbee over the rights to their dancing grounds. Also, nobody
wanted to put up with the fog flies and the flying snakes and the
what-nots.

Cooper knew how to change all that. "We'll make films, write books,
publish pamphlets--all of them emphasizing the good points of Venus.
We'll make this planet look and sound like a seed catalogue. We'll soon
have thousands, maybe millions of people, coming here. Build Venus up.
