
"Not if I can help it," I said sourly. "I'm in no mood to get married.
Mostly I want to give you some advice. O.K.?"

She made cow eyes at me. "You know you can, Billy Joe," she said.

"Well," I snarled, "my first suggestion is that you cut out this
'Billy Joe' stuff. My name is Wally Bupp. You can call me Lefty if you
want to. I'm not your darlin' Billy."

"I tole the truth and you hate me for it!" she said hotly. "I was
afeered of that."

"'Afeered!'" I sneered. "All that corn pone and chitterlin's dialect!
You can cut that out, too, can't you? Wasn't that just part of your
local color?"

"Sort of," she admitted, switching to the neutral American dialect.
"Yes, I can cut that out, too, Lefty."

"Good. I'm willing to take a couple of chances with that old goat,
because I believe in you. I saw you in action in Nevada, and you sold
me that you have some Psi powers. We'll work on your healing, as
Maragon suggested. But I want to have your precognition tested. Just
keep your mouth shut about it here in the Lodge, do you hear?"

She nodded.

"All right," I said. "I'll have to make some arrangements, or Maragon
will have my scalp. In the meantime, why don't you fix up so we can go
out to dinner?"

She gave me a look of adoration that would have curdled fresh milk.
"Oh, Lefty, I'd love that." And then her face fell. "But I don't have
a thing to wear!"

I don't think she was exactly a moocher. She _didn't_ have anything to
wear, when I thought of it. "Sure," I said more mildly. "Well, that's
the good part of getting some training here. The Lodge will take care
of your needs. Just call the girl on the desk and say you need some
clothes. She'll send somebody over from one of the department stores."

Pheola's eyes grew round. Ordinarily she squinted when she wanted to
see anything. "What should I get?"

"Start from the skin and work out," I told her. "Tell the department
store you'll be working in an office, and that you'll need a couple of
cocktail dresses and wraps for evening, too. Get lots of shoes. O.K.?"

Was it ever!

I had an idea that clothes would be quite a change for Pheola. I had
met her only three days before, in a Nevada gambling house. She'd made
for me like a lode-star, called me her Billy Joe and announced that I
would be her next husband. I'll tell you, that was a shocker. I'm not
about to marry anybody. She was as tall as I was, which isn't so very
much for a man, skinny to the point of emaciation, wearing a
"borrowed" dress that didn't fit, and had that unmistakable slatternly
look that you associate with white trash. On top of that, she was vain
enough about her bucktoothed and pointed-nose features to keep her
glasses in her purse, and as a result she went around peering at you
from a distance of eight inches to make sure you were the right guy.

But she had Psi powers. She had been hot as a firecracker predicting
the roll of dice on the gambling tables, the very dice that I was
tipping with telekinesis. Much more important to me personally, she
had announced that she was a healer, and on my dare had "laid hands"
on me, and brought my dead right arm to life.

My obligation as a Lodge official was to bring her to the Manhattan
Chapter for measurement and training, no matter what the Grand Master
felt about the reality of her powers of precognition. Maragon had been
about as obstreperous as I had figured. We have a lot of trouble
working together, probably because he resents my TK powers. He's good
at it, but I'm a good deal better. That's why I'm a Thirty-third
Degree member of the Lodge.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leaving Pheola's new home, I went next door to my own apartment and
checked in by phone with Memorial Hospital. Fortunately, I was not on
call, and could take a few steps to find out how much PC Pheola really
had. I went down to the forty-third floor, where we have our
laboratories, and let myself into the data-processing center.

They don't like me to do that. That place is under full temperature
and humidity control, and every time an outsider barges in the whole
system does nip-ups.

Norty Baskins came scurrying away from a card sorter. "What's this!"
he exclaimed. "Oh, it's you, Lefty." His face went solemn with his
effort, and I felt a twinge in my ear lobe. I returned the grip,
tweaking his ear the same way. He began to smile, realizing that I had
felt his lift and was returning it.

"You shouldn't be in here, Lefty," he said. "You know the rules."

"And I know this is the time to break them, Norty," I said. "I've got
something really rare for you."

"Rare?"

"This time I've really got one," I insisted. "A precog who can call
things with pin-point accuracy."

"Not again, Lefty," he said, disgusted. "Aren't you getting a little
tired of striking out on that prediction? You've brought half a dozen
flops in here in the last year."

"Not Pheola," I said. "Listen, Norty, I want this girl measured."

"I thought you said she was pin-point accurate," he sneered. "And what
does Maragon say?"

I waved a hand at him and walked over to sit on one of the lab stools.
He went to the sorter and pulled cards from the bins, joggling them up
into one solid stack that he put back in the hopper. But he did not
press the "start" button.

"You know, Maragon," I told him. "This girl is hot, and then she's
cold. But there is so much accuracy when she's right that I think
there's some future to training her. What I want out of you is a
measurement of how great her accuracy is."

Norty snorted. "When Maragon doesn't believe it?" he said. "No
thanks." He started the card sorter, filling the room with its
clatter.

I drew a pair of dice from my pocket. I'm never without the ivories.
They are the original instruments of my TK skill. That's how Maragon
found me, unconsciously tipping dice in an alley crap game. I threw
them out on the table next to the sorter, when the cards had gone
through and it fell silent. They came up with a four-three natural.

"Maragon!" I snapped. "You know he doesn't think enough of _your_ TK
to have your training extended. Well, you and I both know we have done
wonders for your grip. Just because he's Grand Master doesn't make him
right all the time. I want you to test this girl, and I think she has
as much right to the facts as you have to the training I've been
giving you under the table all these months!"

"Blackmail," he said sadly. "Extortion!"

"So I'm extorting some work out of you," I agreed. "The only question
is whether you will pay."

"What do you want?" Baskins asked glumly.

"I want you to make this woman predict a series, a number of series,
and I want you to use your computers here to tell me on what basis her
accuracy varies. You can do that, can't you?"

He nodded, staring at the dice on the table. "If I wasn't so sure you
can help me develop my TK, Lefty," he said, "I'd never do this. All
right, sneak her down here and I'll get her to PC some weather
information for a month or so."

"Weather?" I said. "Why the weather?"

"You'll see when I show the results," he said. "Roll those dice again.
I swear I felt your lift that last time."

       *       *       *       *       *

I made a few other calls around the building to catch up on what had
been going on while I was in Nevada. Our formal organization is lousy,
because Maragon is a one-man show. You just have to rely on gossip,
what the CV's pick up and what leaks by telepathy, to know all the
internal politics of the Lodge. I wouldn't want you to think that
Psi's are more devious or Machiavellian than normals, but sometimes
they act it.

By the time I reached up to tap on Pheola's door, it opened in front
of me, and a stylishly dressed young lady came out, smiling, with
Pheola standing in the doorway behind her.

"Lefty!" Pheola said happily.

"Is this your fiance?" the girl said to Pheola.

"No!" I said. "I'm her chiropractor, and I'm about to straighten out
some vertebrae in her neck!"

Something about the way I said it made the girl from the department
store scuttle down the corridor. I glared at her back, went into
Pheola's apartment and shut the door.

"What were you telling her?" I started, and then I knew there was no
point to it. I waved an irritated hand and kept on talking.

"When will your clothes be here?"

"Some things for tonight in about an hour," she said meekly. "I got
quite a lot. Was that all right?"

"If you keep shooting off your puss about our getting married, you
won't last long enough to wear them all," I threatened. "Can you find
Room 4307, or will I have to take you down?"

"I can find it if you want me to, Lefty," she said.
