3 And Eve sat crying; for she believed he was dead.

4 Then she got up, spread her hands toward God, appealing to Him for
mercy and pity, and said, "O God, forgive me my sin, the sin which I
committed, and don't remember it against me.

5 For I alone caused Your servant to fall from the garden into this
condemned land; from light into this darkness; and from the house of
joy into this prison.

6 O God, look at this Your servant fallen in this manner, and bring him
back to life, that he may cry and repent of his transgression which he
committed through me.

7 Don't take away his soul right now; but let him live that he may
stand after the measure of his repentance, and do Your will, as before
his death.

8 But if You do not bring him back to life, then, O God, take away my
own soul, that I be like him, and leave me not in this dungeon, one and
alone; for I could not stand alone in this world, but with him only.

9 For You, O God, caused him to fall asleep, and took a bone from his
side, and restored the flesh  in the place of it, by Your divine power.

10 And You took me, the bone, and make me a woman, bright like him,
with heart, reason, and speech; and in flesh, like to his own; and You
made me after the likeness of his looks, by Your mercy and power.

11 O Lord, I and he are one, and You, O God, are our Creator, You are
He who made us both in one day.

12 Therefore, O God, give him life, that he may be with me in this
strange land, while we live in it on account of our transgression.

13 But if You will not give him life, then take me, even me, like him;
that we both may die the same day."

14 And Eve cried bitterly, and fell on our father Adam; from her great
sorrow.




Chapter VI - God's reprimand to Adam and Eve in which he points out how
and why they sinned.

1 But God looked at them; for they had killed themselves through great
grief.

2 But He decided to raise them and comfort them.

3 He, therefore, sent His Word to them; that they should stand and be
raised immediately.

4 And the Lord said to Adam and Eve, "You transgressed of your own free
will, until you came out of the garden in which I had placed you.

5 Of your own free will have you transgressed through your desire for
divinity, greatness, and an exalted state, such as I have; so that I
deprived you of the bright nature in which you then were, and I made
you come out of the garden to this land, rough and full of trouble.

6 If only you had not transgressed My commandment and had kept My law,
and had not eaten of the fruit of the tree which I told you not to come
near!  And there were fruit trees in the garden better than that one.

7 But the wicked Satan did not keep his faith and had no good intent
towards Me, that although I had created him, he considered Me to be
useless, and sought the Godhead for himself; for this I hurled him down
from heaven so that he could not remain in his first estate--it was he
who made the tree appear pleasant in your eyes, until you ate of it, by
believing his words.

8 Thus have you transgressed My commandment, and therefore I have
brought on you all these sorrows.

9 For I am God the Creator, who, when I created My creatures, did not
intend to destroy them.  But after they had sorely roused My anger, I
punished them with grievous plagues, until they repent.

10 But, if on the contrary, they still continue hardened in their
transgression, they shall be under a curse forever."




Chapter VII - The beasts are appeased.

1 When Adam and Eve heard these words from God, they cried and sobbed
yet more; but they strengthened their hearts in God, because they now
felt that the Lord was to them like a father and a mother; and for this
very reason, they cried before Him, and sought mercy from Him.

2 Then God had pity on them, and said: "O Adam, I have made My covenant
with you, and I will not turn from it; neither will I let you return to
the garden, until My covenant of the great five and a half days is
fulfilled."

3 Then Adam said to God, "O Lord, You created us, and made us fit to be
in the garden; and before I transgressed, You made all beasts come to
me, that I should name them.

4 Your grace was then on me; and I named every one according to Your
mind; and you made them all subject to me.

5 But now, O Lord God, that I have transgressed Your commandment, all
beasts will rise against me and will devour me, and Eve Your handmaid;
and will cut off our life from the face of the earth.

6 I therefore beg you, O God, that since You have made us come out of
the garden, and have made us be in a strange land, You will not let the
beasts hurt us."

7 When the Lord heard these words from Adam, He had pity on him, and
felt that he had truly said that the beasts of the field would rise and
devour him and Eve, because He, the Lord, was angry with the two of
them on account of their transgressions.

8 Then God commanded the beasts, and the birds, and all that moves on
the earth, to come to Adam and to be familiar with him, and not to
trouble him and Eve; nor yet any of the good and righteous among their
offspring.

9 Then all the beasts paid homage to Adam, according to the commandment
of God; except the serpent, against which God was angry.  It did not
come to Adam, with the beasts.




Chapter VIII - The "Bright Nature" of man is taken away.

1 Then Adam cried and said, "O God, when we lived in the garden, and
our hearts were lifted up, we saw the angels that sang praises in
heaven, but now we can't see like we used to; no, when we entered the
cave, all creation became hidden from us."

2 Then God the Lord said to Adam, "When you were under subjection to
Me, you had a bright nature within you, and for that reason could you
see things far away.  But after your transgression your bright nature
was withdrawn from you; and it was not left to you to see things far
away, but only near at hand; after the ability of the flesh; for it is
brutish."

3 When Adam and Eve had heard these words from God, they went their
way; praising and worshipping Him with a sorrowful heart.

4 And God ceased to commune with them.




Chapter IX - Water from the Tree of Life.  Adam and Eve near drowning.

1 Then Adam and Eve came out of the Cave of Treasures, and went near to
the garden gate, and there they stood to look at it, and cried for
having come away from it.

2 And Adam and Eve went from before the gate of the garden to the
southern side of it, and found there the water that watered the garden,
from the root of the Tree of Life, and that split itself from there
into four rivers over the earth.

3 Then they came and went near to that water, and looked at it; and saw
that it was the water that came forth from under the root of the Tree
of Life in the garden.

4 And Adam cried and wailed, and beat his chest, for being severed from
the garden; and said to Eve:--

5 "Why have you brought on me, on yourself, and on our descendants, so
many of these plagues and punishments?"

6 And Eve said to him, "What is it you have seen that has caused you to
cry and to speak to me in this manner?"

7 And he said to Eve, "Do you not see this water that was with us in
the garden, that watered the trees of the garden, and flowed out from
there?

8 And we, when we were in the garden, did not care about it; but since
we came to this strange land, we love it, and turn it to use for our
body."

9 But when Eve heard these words from him, she cried; and from the
soreness of their crying, they fell into that water; and would have put
an end to themselves in it, so as never again to return and behold the
creation; for when they looked at the work of creation, they felt they
must put an end to themselves.




Chapter X - Their bodies need water after they leave the garden.

1 Then God, merciful and gracious, looked at them thus lying in the
water, and close to death, and sent an angel, who brought them out of
the water, and laid them on the seashore as dead.

2 Then the angel went up to God, was welcome, and said, "O God, Your
creatures have breathed their last."

3 Then God sent His Word to Adam and Eve, who raised them from their
death.

4 And Adam said, after he was raised, "O God, while we were in the
garden we did not require, or care for this water; but since we came to
this land we cannot do without it."

5 Then God said to Adam, "While you were under My command and were a
bright angel, you knew not this water.

6 But now that you have transgressed My commandment, you can not do
without water, wherein to wash your body and make it grow; for it is
now like that of beasts, and is in want of water."

7 When Adam and Eve heard these words from God, they cried a bitter
cry; and Adam entreated God to let him return into the garden, and look
at it a second time.

8 But God said to Adam, "I have made you a promise; when that promise
is fulfilled, I will bring you back into the garden, you and your
righteous descendants."

9 And God ceased to commune with Adam.




Chapter XI - A recollection of the glorious days in the Garden.

1 Then Adam and Eve felt themselves burning with thirst, and heat, and
sorrow.

2 And Adam said to Eve, "We shall not drink of this water, even if we
were to die.  O Eve, when this water comes into our inner parts, it
will increase our punishments and that of our descendants."

3 Both Adam and Eve then went away from the water, and drank none of it
at all; but came and entered the Cave of Treasures.

4 But when in it Adam could not see Eve; he only heard the noise she
made.  Neither could she see Adam, but heard the noise he made.

5 Then Adam cried, in deep affliction, and beat his chest; and he got
up and said to Eve, "Where are you?"

6 And she said to him, "Look, I am standing in this darkness."

7 He then said to her, "Remember the bright nature in which we lived,
when we lived in the garden!

8 O Eve!  Remember the glory that rested on us in the garden.  O Eve!
Remember the trees that overshadowed us in the garden while we moved
among them.

9 O Eve!  Remember that while we were in the garden, we knew neither
night nor day.  Think of the Tree of Life, from below which flowed the
water, and that shed lustre over us!  Remember, O Eve, the garden land,
and the brightness thereof!

10 Think, oh think of that garden in which was no darkness, while we
lived in it.

11 Whereas no sooner did we come into this Cave of Treasures than
darkness surrounded us all around; until we can no longer see each
other; and all the pleasure of this life has come to an end."




Chapter XII - How darkness came between Adam and Eve.

1 Then Adam beat his chest, he and Eve, and they mourned the whole
night until the crack of dawn, and they sighed over the length of the
night in Miyazia.

2 And Adam beat himself, and threw himself on the ground in the cave,
from bitter grief, and because of the darkness, and lay there as dead.

3 But Eve heard the noise he made in falling on the ground.  And she
felt about for him with her hands, and found him like a corpse.

4 Then she was afraid, speechless, and remained by him.

5 But the merciful Lord looked on the death of Adam, and on Eve's
silence from fear of the darkness.

6 And the Word of God came to Adam and raised him from his death, and
opened Eve's mouth that she might speak.

7 Then Adam stood up in the cave and said, "O God, why has light
departed from us, and darkness covered us?  Why did you leave us in
this long darkness?  Why do you plague us like this?

8 And this darkness, O Lord, where was it before it covered us?  It is
because of this that we cannot see each other.

9 For so long as we were in the garden, we neither saw nor even knew
what darkness is.  I was not hidden from Eve, neither was she hidden
from me, until now that she cannot see me; and no darkness came over us
to separate us from each other.

10 But she and I were both in one bright light.  I saw her and she saw
me.  Yet now since we came into this cave, darkness has covered us, and
separated us from each other, so that I do not see her, and she does
not see me.

11 O Lord, will You then plague us with this darkness?"




Chapter XIII - The fall of Adam.  Why night and day were created.

1 Then when God, who is merciful and full of pity, heard Adam's voice,
He said to him:--

2 "O Adam, so long as the good angel was obedient to Me, a bright light
rested on him and on his hosts.

3 But when he transgressed My commandment, I deprived him of that
bright nature, and he became dark.

4 And when he was in the heavens, in the realms of light, he knew
nothing of darkness.

5 But he transgressed, and I made him fall from the heaven onto the
earth; and it was this darkness that came over him.

6 And on you, O Adam, while in My garden and obedient to Me, did that
bright light rest also.

7 But when I heard of your transgression, I deprived you of that bright
light.  Yet, of My mercy, I did not turn you into darkness, but I made
you your body of flesh, over which I spread this skin, in order that it
may bear cold and heat.

8 If I had let My wrath fall heavily on you, I should have destroyed
you; and had I turned you into darkness, it would have been as if I had
killed you.

9 But in My mercy, I have made you as you are; when you transgressed My
commandment, O Adam, I drove you from the garden, and made you come
forth into this land; and commanded you to live in this cave; and
darkness covered you, as it did over him who transgressed My
commandment.

10 Thus, O Adam, has this night deceived you.  It is not to last
forever; but is only of twelve hours; when it is over, daylight will
return.

11 Sigh not, therefore, neither be moved; and say not in your heart
that this darkness is long and drags on wearily; and say not in your
heart that I plague you with it.

12 Strengthen your heart, and be not afraid.  This darkness is not a
punishment.  But, O Adam, I have made the day, and have placed the sun
in it to give light; in order that you and your children should do your
work.

13 For I knew you would sin and transgress, and come out into this
land.  Yet I wouldn't force you, nor be heard over you, nor shut up;
nor doom you through your fall; nor through your coming out from light
into darkness; nor yet through your coming from the garden into this
land.

14 For I made you of the light; and I willed to bring out children of
light from you and like to you.

15 But you did not keep My commandment one day; until I had finished
the creation and blessed everything in it.

16 Then, concerning the tree, I commanded you not to eat of it.  Yet I
knew that Satan, who deceived himself, would also deceive you.

17 So I made known to you by means of the tree, not to come near him.
And I told you not to eat of the fruit thereof, nor to taste of it, nor
yet to sit under it, nor to yield to it.

18 Had I not been and spoken to you, O Adam, concerning the tree, and
had I left you without a commandment, and you had sinned--it would have
been an offence on My part, for not having given you any order; you
would turn around and blame Me for it.

19 But I commanded you, and warned you, and you fell.  So that My
creatures cannot blame Me; but the blame rests on them alone.

20 And, O Adam, I have made the day so that you and your descendants
can work and toil in it.  And I have made the night for them to rest in
it from their work; and for the beasts of the field to go forth by
night and look for their food.

21 But little of darkness now remains, O Adam, and daylight will soon
appear."




Chapter XIV - The earliest prophesy of the coming of Christ.

1 Then Adam said to God: "O Lord, take You my soul, and let me not see
this gloom any more; or remove me to some place where there is no
darkness."

2 But God the Lord said to Adam, "Indeed I say to you, this darkness
will pass from you, every day I have determined for you, until the
fulfillment of My covenant; when I will save you and bring you back
again into the garden, into the house of light you long for, in which
there is no darkness*.  I will bring you to it--in the kingdom of
heaven."

3 Again said God to Adam, "All this misery that you have been made to
take on yourself because of your transgression, will not free you from
the hand of Satan, and will not save you.

4 But I will.  When I shall come down from heaven, and shall become
flesh of your descendants, and take on Myself the infirmity from which
you suffer, then the darkness that covered you in this cave shall cover
Me in the grave, when I am in the flesh of your descendants.

5 And I, who am without years, shall be subject to the reckoning of
years, of times, of months, and of days, and I shall be reckoned as one
of the sons of men, in order to save you."

6 And God ceased to commune with Adam.


* Reference: John 12:46




Chapter XV - Adam and Eve grieve over the suffering of God to save them
from their sins.

1 Then Adam and Eve cried and sorrowed by reason of God's word to them,
that they should not return to the garden until the fulfillment of the
days decreed on them; but mostly because God had told them that He
should suffer for their salvation.




Chapter XVI - The first sunrise.  Adam and Eve think it is a fire
coming to burn them.

1 After this, Adam and Eve continued to stand in the cave, praying and
crying, until the morning dawned on them.

2 And when they saw the light returned to them, they retrained from
fear, and strengthened their hearts.

3 Then Adam began to come out of the cave.  And when he came to the
mouth of it, and stood and turned his face towards the east, and saw
the sunrise in glowing rays, and felt the heat thereof on his body, he
was afraid of it, and thought in his heart that this flame came forth
to plague him.

4 He then cried and beat his chest, then he fell on the ground on his
face and made his request, saying:--

5 "O Lord, plague me not, neither consume me, nor yet take away my life
from the earth."

6 For he thought the sun was God.

7 Because while he was in the garden and heard the voice of God and the
sound He made in the garden, and feared Him, Adam never saw the
brilliant light of the sun, neither did its flaming heat touch his body.

8 Therefore he was afraid of the sun when flaming rays of it reached
him.  He thought God meant to plague him therewith all the days He had
decreed for him.

9 For Adam also said in his thoughts, as God did not plague us with
