
"Be mindful now of a return to the hollow ships, O son of magnanimous
Tydeus, lest thou reach them, having been put to flight; or lest some
other god perchance arouse the Trojans."

   [Footnote 358: Understand [Greek: kata rymou].]

Thus she spoke; and he understood the voice of the goddess speaking, and
he quickly ascended the chariot. And Ulysses lashed on [the horses] with
his bow, and they fled to the swift ships of the Greeks.

Nor did silver-bowed Apollo keep a vain watch. When he beheld Minerva
accompanying the son of Tydeus, enraged with her, he descended into the
vast army of the Trojans, and roused Hippocooen, a counsellor of the
Thracians, the gallant cousin of Rhesus. And he, leaping up from sleep,
when he beheld the place empty where the fleet horses had stood, and the
men panting amidst the dreadful slaughter, immediately then wept aloud,
and called upon his dear companion by name. A clamour and immeasurable
tumult of the Trojans running together arose, and they looked with
wonder at the marvellous deeds, which men having perpetrated, had
returned to the hollow ships.

But when now they came where they had slain the spy of Hector, there
Ulysses, dear to Jove, reined in his fleet steeds. But the son of
Tydeus, leaping to the ground, placed the bloody spoils in the hands of
Ulysses, and then ascended the chariot. And he lashed on the steeds, and
both, not unwilling, fled towards the hollow ships, for thither it was
agreeable to their minds [to go]. But Nestor first heard the sound, and
said:

"O friends, leaders and rulers over the Greeks, shall I speak falsely,
or say the truth? Still my mind impels me. The noise of swift-footed
steeds strikes upon my ears. O that now Ulysses and gallant Diomede
would immediately drive some solid-hoofed steeds from the Trojans! But
greatly do I fear in mind lest these bravest of the Greeks suffer aught
from the rude host of Trojans."

Not yet was the whole speech uttered, when they themselves arrived. Then
indeed they descended to the ground, and [their friends] rejoicing,
saluted them with the right hand and kind expressions. But [first] the
Gerenian knight Nestor asked them:

"Come, tell me, most excellent Ulysses, great glory of the Greeks, how
took ye these horses? [Whether] penetrating the camp of the Trojans; or
did some god, meeting, supply you with them? They are very like unto the
rays of the sun. I indeed always mingle with the Trojans, nor can I say
that I remain at the ships, although being an old warrior: yet have I
never beheld nor remarked such horses, but I think that some god,
meeting you, hath given them. For cloud-compelling Jove loves you both,
and the daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, azure-eyed Minerva."

But him crafty Ulysses answering addressed: "O Nestor, offspring of
Neleus, great glory of the Greeks, a god indeed, if willing, could
easily have given better horses even than these, since they (the gods)
are much more powerful. But those steeds about which thou inquirest, old
man, are Thracian, lately arrived, and valiant Diomede slew their lord,
and beside him twelve companions, all of the bravest. The thirteenth, a
spy, we killed, near the ships, whom Hector sent forth, and the other
illustrious Trojans, to be a spy, forsooth, [of our army]."

Thus saying, he drove the solid-hoofed steeds across the ditch,
exulting, and with him went the other Greeks rejoicing. But when they
came to the well-constructed tent of Diomede, they tied the steeds by
the skilfully-cut reins to the horses' stall, where stood the
swift-footed steeds of Diomede, eating sweet corn. In the stern of his
vessel Ulysses laid the bloody spoils of Dolon, until they could present
them as a sacred gift to Minerva. Then having gone into the sea, they
washed off the abundant sweat from around their legs, their neck, and
thighs. But when the wave of the sea had washed away the abundant sweat
from their bodies, and they were refreshed in their dear heart, entering
the well-polished baths, they bathed. But having bathed and anointed
themselves with rich oil, they sat down to a repast; and drawing forth
sweet wine from a full bowl, they poured it out in libation to Minerva.




                           BOOK THE ELEVENTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

Agamemnon distinguishes himself, but, being wounded, retires from the
field. Diomede is wounded by Paris: Ulysses by Socus. Ajax and Menelaus
then go to the relief of Ajax, and Eurypylus, who had joined them, is
shot in the thigh by Paris, who also wounds Machaon. Nestor conveys
Machaon from the field. Achilles sends Patroclus to the tent of Nestor,
who exhorts Patroclus to engage in battle, assuming the armour of
Achilles.


But Aurora was rising from her couch, from beside glorious Tithonus,
that she might bear light to immortals and to mortals, when Jove sent
forth fell Discord to the swift ships of the Greeks, bearing in her
hands the portent of war. And she stood upon the huge[359] black ship of
Ulysses, which was in the centre, to shout to both sides, as well to the
tents of Telamonian Ajax, as to those of Achilles; who had both drawn up
their equal ships at the very extremities, relying on their valour and
strength of hands. There standing, the goddess shouted both loudly and
terribly, in Orthian strain,[360] to the Greeks, and implanted mighty
strength in the heart of each, to war and fight incessantly. And
immediately war became more sweet to them, than to return in the hollow
ships to their dear fatherland. Then the son of Atreus shouted aloud,
and ordered the Greeks to be girded; and arrayed himself, putting on his
shining armour. First he put upon his legs his beautiful greaves, fitted
with silver clasps; next he placed around his breast a corslet which
Cinyras once gave him, to be a pledge of hospitality. For a great rumour
was heard at Cyprus, that the Greeks were about to sail to Troy in
ships: wherefore he gave him this, gratifying the king. Ten bars indeed
[of the corslet] were of dark cyanus[361], twelve of gold, and twenty of
tin; and three serpents of cyanus stretched towards the neck on each
side, like unto rainbows, which the son of Saturn hath fixed in a
cloud[362], a sign to articulate-speaking men. Then around his shoulders
he hung his sword, on which glittered golden studs; and a silver
scabbard enclosed it, fitted with golden rings. Next he took up his
shield, mortal-covering[363], variously wrought, strong, beautiful,
around which were ten brazen orbs. Upon it were twenty white bosses of
tin, and in the midst was [one] of dark cyanus. On it a grim-visaged
Gorgon was placed as an ornament, looking horribly, and around [were]
Terror and Flight. The belt was of silver, but round it a snake of
cyanus was twisted, and there were three heads entwined, springing from
one neck. Upon his head also he placed his helmet, adorned with studs on
all sides, having four bosses, crested with horse-hair, and dreadfully
nodded the tuft from above. He then took two strong spears, tipped with
brass, sharp; and the brass of them glittered afar, even to heaven: and
Minerva and Juno thundered above, honouring the king of Mycenae, rich in
gold.

Then indeed each gave orders to his own charioteer to hold there his
horses in good order by the fosse; whilst they themselves on foot[364],
arrayed with their armour, rushed forth; and an inextinguishable clamour
arose before morning. And they[365] were marshalled in the foreground
with the cavalry at the trench; the cavalry followed at a little
interval; but the son of Saturn aroused a dreadful tumult, and sent down
dew-drops, moist with blood, from the air above, because he was about to
hurl many brave souls on to Hades.

On the other side, on the contrary, the Trojans [drew up] on a hill in
the plain around both mighty Hector, blameless Polydamas, and AEneas,
who, among the Trojans, was honoured by the people as a god; and the
three sons of Antenor, Polybus, noble Agenor, and youthful Acamas, like
unto the immortals. And Hector in the van carried his shield, equal on
all sides. And as when a pernicious star makes its appearance from the
clouds, at one time shining, and dark again hath entered the clouds; so
Hector, giving orders, appeared now among the first, and now among the
last; and he glittered all over with brass, like the lightning of
aegis-bearing Jove.

   [Footnote 359: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 378, sqq.]

   [Footnote 360: _I. e._ shrill, at the full pitch of the voice.
   Cf. AEsch. Pers. [Greek: Molpedon nyphemesen, orthion d' ama
   Antelalaxe].]

   [Footnote 361: I have retained this word, as we cannot ascertain
   what precise metal is meant.]

   [Footnote 362: Cf. Genes. ix. 13.]

   [Footnote 363: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 33.]

   [Footnote 364: Cf. Hesych. t. i. p. 1065, with Alberti's note.]

   [Footnote 365: I. e. the chiefs.]

And they,--as when reapers opposite to each other form swathes of wheat
or barley along the field of a rich man, and the frequent handfuls
fall,--so the Trojans and Greeks, rushing against one another, kept
slaughtering: and neither thought of pernicious flight. And they held
their heads equal in combat, and rushed on like wolves; whilst
lamentable Discord, looking on, exulted: for she alone of the gods was
present with them contending. But the other gods were not present with
them, but sat quiet in their palaces, where beautiful mansions were
built for each, along the summits of Olympus. All however blamed the
Saturnian collector of dark clouds, because he wished to afford glory to
the Trojans. But the sire did not regard them, but retiring by himself,
sat down apart from the others, exulting in glory, looking both upon the
city of the Trojans, and the ships of the Greeks, and the brightness of
armour, and the slaying, and slain.

Whilst it was morn, and the sacred day was increasing, so long the
weapons reached both sides, and the people fell. But at the time when
the wood-cutter[366] has prepared his repast in the dells of a mountain,
when he has wearied his hands hewing down lofty trees, and satiety comes
upon his mind, and the desire of sweet food seizes his breast; then the
Greeks, by their valour, broke the phalanxes, cheering their companions
along the ranks. But Agamemnon first leaped forth, and slew the hero
Bianor, the shepherd of the people, and then also his companion, Oileus,
the goader of steeds. For he then, leaping from the chariot, stood
against him; but he (Agamemnon) smote him, as he was rushing straight
forward, with his sharp spear, in the forehead; nor did the visor, heavy
with brass, retard the weapon, but it penetrated both it and the bone,
and all the brain within was stained with gore. Him then he subdued
while eagerly rushing on. And Agamemnon, king of men, left them there
with their bosoms all bare, for he had stripped off their tunics. Next
he went against Isus and Anthipus, two sons of Priam, [the one]
illegitimate, and [the other] legitimate, being both in one chariot, in
order to slay them. The spurious [son] guided the chariot, whilst
illustrious Antiphus fought. Them Achilles had once bound with tender
osiers on the summits of Ida, taking them while pasturing their sheep;
and had liberated them for a ransom. Then however the son of Atreus,
wide-ruling Agamemnon, struck one upon the breast above the pap with his
spear; and again he smote Antiphus beside the ear with his sword, and
hurled him from his chariot. Hastening up, he despoiled them of their
beautiful armour, recognizing them; for he had formerly seen them at the
swift ships, when swift-footed Achilles brought them from Ida. And as a
lion, returning to his lair, easily crushes the little fawns of the
fleet hind, seizing them in his strong teeth, and deprives them of their
tender life, whilst she, although she happen [to be] very near, cannot
aid them; for a dreadful tremor comes upon herself; but hastening, she
immediately flies through the thick oak groves and the forest, sweating,
through the attack of the wild beast. Thus no one of the Trojans was
then able to avert destruction from these, but they themselves were put
to flight by the Greeks. Next [he attacked] Pisander and Hippolochus,
brave in battle, the sons of warlike Antimachus, who having accepted
gold from Paris, rich gifts, would not suffer them to restore Helen to
yellow-haired Menelaus. His two sons, then, Agamemnon, king of men,
seized, being in one chariot, for they drove their fleet horses
together; for the splendid reins had fallen from their hands, and they
were confounded. But the son of Atreus rushed against them like a lion,
and they, on the contrary, supplicated [him] from the chariot:

"Take us alive, O son of Atreus, and thou shalt receive worthy ransoms.
For many treasures lie in the houses of Antimachus, brass, gold, and
variously-wrought iron. From these would our father give infinite
ransoms, if he should hear that we were alive at the ships of the
Greeks."

   [Footnote 366: Compare the similar allusion to rustic pursuits in
   xvi. 779, with Buttm. Lexil. p. 89.]

Thus both weeping addressed the king with soothing words; but heard an
unsoothing reply: "If indeed ye be the sons of warlike Antimachus, who
once in an assembly of the Trojans, ordered that they should there put
to death Menelaus, coming as an ambassador along with godlike Ulysses,
and not send him back to the Greeks--now surely shall ye pay the penalty
of the unmerited insolence of your father."

He said, and hurled Pisander from his horses to the ground, striking him
on the breast with his spear; and he was stretched supine upon the soil.
But Hippolochus leaped down, whom next he slew upon the ground, having
lopped off his hands with his sword, and cut off his neck; and it (the
head) like a cylinder, he hurled forward, to be rolled through the
crowd. These then he left there; and where very many phalanxes were
thrown into confusion, there he rushed, and at the same time other
well-greaved Greeks. Infantry slew infantry, flying from necessity, and
horse [slew] horse, slaughtering with the brass (whilst the dust was
raised by them from the plain, which the loud-sounding feet of the
horses excited); but king Agamemnon, constantly slaying, pursued,
cheering on the Greeks. And as when a destructive fire falls upon a
woody forest, and the wind whirling carries it on all sides, whilst the
branches fall with the roots, overwhelmed by the violence of the flame;
so fell the heads of the flying Trojans, at the hand of Agamemnon, son
of Atreus, and many lofty-necked steeds rattled their empty chariots
through the ranks[367] of the battle, longing for their faultless
charioteers; but they lay upon the earth, far more agreeable to the
vultures than to their wives.

   [Footnote 367: Literally, "the bridges," _i. e._ the open spaces
   between the lines.]

But Jove withdrew Hector out of the reach of weapons, of dust, of
slaughter, blood and tumult, whilst Atrides pursued, loudly cheering on
the Danai. [The Trojans] meanwhile rushed through the middle of the
plain towards the wild fig-tree, near the tomb of Ilus, the descendant
of ancient Dardanus, eager to reach the city; but Atrides still followed
shouting, and stained his invincible hands with dusty gore. But when now
they reached the Scaean gates and the beech-tree, there at length they
halted, and awaited each other. Others, however, still fled through the
middle of the plain, like oxen which a lion, coming at the depth of
night, hath put tremblingly to flight--all, but to some one dreadful
destruction is apparent; whose neck he first completely breaks, seizing
it in his strong teeth; and then laps up both the blood and all the
entrails: thus did the son of Atreus, king Agamemnon, follow them,
always killing the hindermost; and they kept flying. Many fell prone and
supine from their chariots, by the hands of the son of Atreus; for
before [all others] he raged exceedingly with the spear. But when now he
was about soon to reach the city and the lofty wall, then indeed the
father both of men and gods, descending from heaven, seated himself upon
the tops of Ida, of many rills. And he held the lightning in his hands,
and aroused golden-winged Iris to bear his message:

"Come, swift Iris, deliver this message to Hector. As long as he may
behold Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people, raging in the van, [and]
destroying the ranks of men, so long let[368] him retreat, and let him
exhort the rest of the army to fight with the enemy during the violent
contest. But when he (Agamemnon) shall have mounted his steeds, either
smitten by a spear, or wounded by an arrow, then will I supply him with
strength to slay,[369] until he reach the well-benched ships, and the
sun set, and sacred darkness come on."

   [Footnote 368: Cf. ver. 204.]

   [Footnote 369: The Greeks.]

Thus he spake; nor did rapid Iris, swift as the wind on her feet,
disobey. But she descended from the mountains of Ida, towards sacred
Ilium. She found noble Hector, son of warlike Priam, standing in the
midst of the horses and well-joined chariots: and having approached,
swift-footed Iris addressed him:

"Hector, son of Priam, equal in counsel to Jove, Jove hath sent me
forward to deliver to thee this message: As long as thou seest
Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people, raging amongst the van, [and]
destroying the ranks of men, so long do thou abstain from combat, but
exhort the rest of the army to fight with the enemy during the violent
contest. But when he shall have mounted his steeds, either smitten with
a spear, or wounded by an arrow, then will he supply thee with strength
to slay, until thou reach the well-benched ships, and the sun set, and
sacred darkness come on."

Thus having spoken, swift-footed Iris departed. But Hector with his
armour sprang from his chariot to the ground, and brandishing sharp
spears, ranged through the army on every side, inciting them to fight,
and stirred up the dreadful battle. They indeed rallied, and stood
opposite to the Greeks; but the Greeks, on the other hand, strengthened
their phalanxes. And the battle was renewed, and they stood front to
front. But Agamemnon first rushed on, for he wished to fight far before
all.

Tell me now, ye muses, possessing Olympian dwellings, who first, either
of the Trojans or illustrious allies, now came against Agamemnon?
Iphidamas, son of Antenor, both valiant and great, who was nurtured in
fertile Thrace, the mother of flocks. Cisseus, his maternal grandfather,
who begat fair-cheeked Theano, reared him in his house whilst yet a
little boy: but when he had attained the measure of glorious youth, he
there detained him, and gave him his own daughter. And having married
her, he came from the bridal chamber, on the rumour of the Greeks, with
twelve curved vessels which followed him. The equal ships indeed he
afterwards left at Percote, but he, proceeding on foot, had arrived at
Troy; and he it was who then came against Agamemnon, the son of Atreus.
When these, advancing against each other, were now near, the son of
Atreus on his part missed, and his spear was turned aside. But Iphidamas
smote him upon the belt, under the corslet; and he put his strength to
it, relying on his strong hand. Yet he pierced not the flexible belt,
but meeting with the silver long before, the point was turned like lead.
Then indeed wide-ruling Agamemnon, seeing it in his hand, pulled it
towards him, exasperated, like a lion, and plucked it from his hand; and
he smote him on the neck with his sword, and relaxed his limbs. Thus he,
unhappy, while aiding his citizens, falling there, slept a brazen sleep,
away from his lawful virgin wife, whose charms he had not yet known,
although he had given many presents [for her].[370] First he gave a
hundred oxen, and then he promised a thousand goats and sheep together,
which were pastured for him in countless numbers. Him Agamemnon, son of
Atreus, at that time stripped [of his arms], and went through the army
of the Greeks, bearing his rich armour. Whom when Coon,[371] the eldest
born of Antenor, conspicuous amongst men, then beheld, violent grief
darkened his eyes, for his brother having fallen, and he stood aside
with his spear, escaping the notice of noble Agamemnon. And he wounded
him in the middle of the arm, below the elbow, and the point of the
shining spear passed right through to the other side. Then indeed
Agamemnon, the king of men, shuddered; but not even thus did he abstain
from battle or from war, but he rushed upon Coon, holding his
wind-nurtured spear.[372] He on his part was eagerly dragging by the
foot Iphidamas his brother, and begotten by the same father, and was
calling upon every brave man, when [Agamemnon] wounded him with his
polished brazen spear below the bossy shield, whilst dragging him
through the crowd, and relaxed his limbs; and, standing beside him, cut
off his head over Iphidamas. There the sons of Antenor, fulfilling their
destiny at the hands of the king, the son of Atreus, descended to the
abode of Hades. But he was ranging about through the ranks of other men,
with his spear, his sword, and huge stones, whilst the warm blood yet
oozed from his wound. When, however, the wound grew dry, and the blood
ceased [to flow], sharp pains possessed the strength of Atreus's son.
And as when the sharp pang seizes a woman in travail, piercing, which
the Ilithyiae, daughters of Juno, who preside over childbirth, send
forth, keeping bitter pangs in their possession; so did sharp anguish
enter the strength of the son of Atreus. And he sprang into his chariot,
and ordered his charioteer to drive on to the hollow ships; for he was
tortured at heart. And vociferating, he shouted aloud to the Greeks:

"O friends, leaders, and rulers over the Argives, repel ye now the
severe battle from the sea-traversing barks, since provident Jove does
not permit me to combat all day with the Trojans."

   [Footnote 370: On this custom, cf. ix. 146, xviii. 593.]

   [Footnote 371: The name and fate of this hero unclassically
   remind us of the "gone coon" of American celebrity, immortalized
   in the "at homes" of the late Charles Matthews.]

   [Footnote 372: "The Scholiasts and Eustathius explain this
   epithet by the received opinion that trees in exposed situations
   are usually the strongest and most vigorous from their frequent
   agitation by the wind."--Kennedy.]

Thus he spoke; and the charioteer lashed on the fair-maned steeds
towards the hollow ships; and they, not unwilling, flew. They were
covered with foam as to their breasts, and were sprinkled beneath with
dust, as they bore the afflicted king apart from the battle. But Hector,
when he observed Agamemnon going apart, exhorted both the Trojans and
Lycians, shouting aloud:

"Ye Trojans, Lycians, and close-fighting Dardanians, be men, my friends,
and be mindful of impetuous might. The bravest hero has departed, and
Saturnian Jove has given great glory to me. But straightway urge your
solid-hoofed horses against the gallant Greeks, that ye may bear off
higher glory."

Thus saying, he aroused the courage and spirit of each. As when
perchance some huntsman should urge his white-toothed dogs against a
rustic wild boar or lion; so Hector, the son of Priam, equal to
man-slaughtering Mars, urged the magnanimous Trojans against the Greeks.
He himself, having mighty courage, advanced among the first, and rushed
into the battle, like unto a storm blowing from above, and which rushing
down, stirs up the purple deep.

Then whom first and whom last, did Hector, son of Priam, slay, when Jove
gave him glory? Assaeus indeed first, and Autonoues, and Opites, and
Dolops, son of Clytis, and Opheltius, and Agelaus, and AEsymnus, and
Orus, and Hipponoues, persevering in fight. These leaders of the Greeks
he then slew, and afterwards the common crowd; as when the west wind
drives to and fro the clouds of the impetuous[373] south, lashing them
with an impetuous blast, and many a swollen[374] billow is rolled along,
whilst the foam is scattered on high by the far-straying blast of the
wind; thus were many heads of the people subdued by Hector. Then indeed
would there have been ruin; and inevitable deeds had been done, and the
flying Greeks had fallen in flight into their ships, had not Ulysses
encouraged Diomede, the son of Tydeus:

"Son of Tydeus, through what cause are we forgetful of impetuous might?
But come hither, my friend, stand by me; for surely it will be a
disgrace if indeed crest-tossing Hector take the ships."

Him then valiant Diomede, answering, addressed: "I indeed will remain,
and be courageous; although there will be little use[375] for us, since
cloud-compelling Jove chooses to give glory to the Trojans rather than
to us."

   [Footnote 373: Or "serenizing, causing a clear sky." Heyne
   compares "albus notus," in Horace. But see Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 374: Neuter of the Ionic adjective [Greek: trophis=megas,
   eytraphes].]

   [Footnote 375: Hesychius: [Greek: Edos' edone, ka ophelos].]

He said, and hurled Thymbraeus from his chariot to the ground, striking
him with his spear upon the left pap; but Ulysses [slew] Molion, the
godlike attendant of the king. These then they left, since they caused
them to cease from war. Then both, advancing through the multitude,
excited confusion; as when two boars, full of courage, rush upon the
hounds; so they returning to the fight, cut down the Trojans; and the
Greeks joyfully gained a respite, avoiding noble Hector. Next they took
a chariot and two warriors, the bravest of the people, the two sons of
Percosian Merops, who above all was skilled in augury, nor would permit
his sons to march to the man-destroying war: yet did they not obey him,
because the destinies of black death led them on. Them spear-renowned
Diomede, the son of Tydeus, depriving of life and breath, despoiled of
their splendid armour. And Ulysses slew Hippodamus and Hyperochus.

Then the son of Saturn, looking down from Ida, stretched for them the
contest with equal tension, and they slaughtered one another. The son of
Tydeus indeed wounded on the hip, with his spear, the hero Agastrophus,
son of Paeon; for his horses were not at hand for him to take flight; but
he had erred greatly in his mind, for his attendant kept them apart,
whilst he rushed on foot through the foremost combatants, till he lost
his life. But Hector quickly perceived it along the ranks, and hastened
towards them, shouting; and with him followed the phalanxes of the
Trojans. Diomede, brave in the din of battle, beholding him, shuddered,
and immediately addressed Ulysses, who was near:

"Towards us is this great destruction, dreadful Hector, now rolled. But
come, let us stand firm, and awaiting, repulse [him]."

He said, and brandishing his long-shadowed spear, hurled it, and smote
him on the summit of the helmet on his head; nor, aiming did he miss.
But brass wandered from brass, nor did it reach the white skin; for the
threefold oblong helmet stopped it, which Phoebus Apollo had given him.
Hector hastily retired to a distance, and was mingled with the crowd.
And he (Hector) falling upon his knee, remained so, and supported
himself with his strong hand against the earth, whilst dark night
overshadowed his eyes. But whilst the son of Tydeus was following after
the impulse of the spear far through the foremost combatants, where it
was fixed in the earth, Hector, in the meantime, breathed again, and
springing again into his chariot, drove into the crowd, and avoided
black death. And valiant Diomede, rushing upon him with his spear,
addressed him:

"Dog, thou hast escaped indeed death at present, although destruction
approached near thee. Now again has Phoebus Apollo rescued thee, to whom
thou art wont to offer prayers, advancing into the clash of spears. But
I will assuredly make an end of thee, meeting thee again, if perchance
any one of the gods be an ally to me. Now, however, I will go against
others, whomsoever I can find."

He said, and slew the spear-renowned son of Paeon. But Paris, the husband
of fair-haired Helen, leaning against a pillar, at the tomb of the
deceased hero, Dardanian Ilus, the aged leader of the people, bent his
bow against the son of Tydeus, the shepherd of the people. Whilst he was
removing the variegated corslet from the breast of gallant Agastrophus,
the shield from his shoulders, and his heavy casque, he (Paris) in the
meantime was drawing back the horn of his bow, and struck him on the
broad part of the right foot, nor did the weapon escape in vain from his
hand; and the arrow went entirely into the ground. And he, laughing very
joyfully, sprang from his ambuscade, and boasting, spoke:

"Thou art struck, nor has the weapon escaped me in vain. Would that,
striking thee in the lower part of the groin, I had deprived thee of
life. Thus, indeed, would the Trojans have respired from destruction,
who now are thrilled with horror at thee, as bleating goats at the
lion."

But him valiant Diomede, undismayed, addressed:

"Archer, reviler, decked out with curls, woman's man, if now in arms
thou wouldst make trial of me, hand to hand, thy bow should not avail
thee, and numerous arrows[376] whereas now, having grazed the broad part
of my foot, thou boastest thus. I regard it not, as though a woman had
wounded me, or a silly boy: for idle is the weapon of an unwarlike,
good-for-nothing man. From me, indeed, it is otherwise; for if one be
touched but slightly, the weapon is piercing, and forthwith renders him
lifeless; and the cheeks of his wife are furrowed on both sides, and his
children are orphans; but crimsoning the earth with his blood, he
putrefies, and the birds around him are more numerous than the women."

   [Footnote 376: Cf. iii. 39, sqq.; Hor. Od. i. 15, 13.]

Thus he spoke; but spear-renowned Ulysses coming near, stood before him,
and he (Diomede) sitting down behind him, drew the swift shaft out of
his foot, and severe agony darted through his body. Then he leaped into
his chariot, and commanded his charioteer to drive to the hollow ships;
for he was grieved at heart. But spear-renowned Ulysses was left alone,
nor did any of the Greeks remain beside him, as fear had seized upon
all. Wherefore, groaning inwardly, he addressed his own mighty soul:

"Alas! what will become of me? Great would be the disgrace if I fly,
alarmed at the multitude; but worse would it be if I were taken alone:
but the son of Saturn hath struck the rest of the Greeks with terror.
But wherefore does my spirit discuss these things with me? for I know
that cowards indeed retire from the battle; but whosoever should be
brave in combat, it is altogether necessary that he stand firmly,
whether he be wounded, or wound another."

Whilst he revolved these things within his mind and soul, the ranks of
the shielded Trojans in the meantime came upon him, and enclosed him in
the midst, placing [their] bane in the midst of them. As when dogs and
vigorous youths rush against a boar on all sides, but he comes out from
a deep thicket, sharpening his white tusk within his crooked jaws; on
all sides they rush upon him, and a gnashing of teeth arises: but they
remain at a distance from him, terrible as he is: so the Trojans did
rush round Ulysses, dear to Jove. But he wounded above the shoulder
blameless Deiopites, springing upon him with his sharp spear; and
afterwards he slew Thooen and Ennomous. With his spear he next wounded
Chersidamas, when leaping from his chariot, in the navel, below his
bossed shield; but he, falling amid the dust, grasped the earth with the
hollow of his hand. These indeed he left, and next wounded with his
spear Charops, son of Hippasus, and brother of noble Socus. But Socus,
godlike hero, hastened to give him aid; and approaching very near, he
stood, and addressed him in these words:

"O illustrious Ulysses, insatiable in crafts and toil, to-day shalt
thou either boast over the two sons of Hippasus, having slain such
heroes, and stripped them of their arms, or else stricken by my spear,
thou shalt lose thy life."

Thus saying, he smote him upon the shield equal on all sides. The rapid
weapon penetrated the shining shield, and was fixed through the
curiously-wrought corslet, and tore off all the skin from his sides. But
Pallas Minerva suffered it not to be mingled with the entrails of the
hero. And Ulysses perceived that the weapon had not come upon him
mortally, and retiring, he addressed [this] speech to Socus:

"Ah! wretch; very soon indeed will dreadful destruction overtake thee.
Without doubt thou hast caused me to cease from fighting with the
Trojans, but I declare that death and black fate shall be thine this
day; and that, subdued beneath my spear, thou shalt give glory to me,
and thy soul to steed-famed Pluto." [377]

   [Footnote 377: Probably so called from the steeds ("inferni
   raptoris equos," Claud. de Rapt. Pros. i. 1) by which he stole
   away Proserpine. See the Scholiast.]

He said, and the other, turning again to flight, had begun to retreat,
but whilst he was turning, he (Ulysses) fixed his spear in his back
between the shoulders, and drove it through his breast. Falling, he made
a crash, and noble Ulysses boasted over him:

"O Socus, son of warlike, horse-breaking Hippasus, the end of death has
anticipated thee, nor hast thou escaped. Ah! wretch, neither thy father
nor venerable mother shall close thine eyes for thee, dead as thou art,
but ravenous birds shall tear thee, flapping about thee with dense
wings: but when I die, the noble Greeks will pay me funeral honours."

So saying, he plucked the strong spear of warlike Socus out of his flesh
and bossy shield; and his blood gushed forth as he drew it out, and
tortured his mind. But the magnanimous Trojans, when they beheld the
blood of Ulysses, encouraging one another through the crowd, all rushed
on against him; whilst he kept retreating backwards, and called to his
companions. Thrice did he then shout as much as the head of mortal could
contain, and thrice warlike Menelaus heard him exclaiming, and instantly
addressed Ajax, being near:

"Most noble Ajax, son of Telamon, chieftain of the people, the cry of
invincible Ulysses has come upon me, like to that, as if the Trojans
were greatly pressing upon him, being alone, having cut him off in the
sharp fight. Wherefore let us go through the crowd, as it is better to
aid him. I fear lest being left alone amidst the Trojans, he suffer
aught, although being brave, and there be great want [of him] to the
Greeks."

Thus speaking, he led the way, and the godlike hero followed along with
him. Then they found Ulysses, dear to Jove; and around him followed the
Trojans, like tawny jackals round an antlered stag when wounded in the
mountains, which a man hath stricken with an arrow from the bowstring.
Him indeed, flying, it escapes on its feet, as long as the blood is
warm, and its knees have the power of motion. But when the swift arrow
hath subdued it, the raw-devouring jackals destroy it in a shady grove
among the mountains. Chance, however, brings thither the destructive
lion: the jackals then fly in terror, and he devours. So at that time
followed the Trojans, numerous and brave, round warlike, crafty Ulysses;
but the hero, rushing on with his spear, warded off the merciless day.
Then Ajax came near, bearing his shield, like a tower, and stood beside
him; and the Trojans fled, terrified, different ways. In the meantime
warlike Menelaus, taking him by the hand, withdrew [him] from the
throng, till his attendant drove his horses near. But Ajax, springing
upon the Trojans, slew Doryclus, son of Priam, an illegitimate son; and
next wounded Pandocus. Lysander he wounded, and Pyrasus, and Pylartes.
And as when an overflowing river comes down on the plain, a torrent from
the mountains, accompanied by the shower of Jove, and bears along with
it many dry oaks and many pines, and casts forth the swollen torrent
into the sea; so illustrious Ajax, routing [them], pursued [them] along
the plain, slaughtering both horses and men. Nor as yet had Hector heard
it; for he was fighting on the left of the battle, on the banks of the
river Scamander; for there chiefly fell the heads of men, and an
inextinguishable clamour had arisen around mighty Nestor, and warlike
Idomeneus. Among these did Hector mingle, performing arduous deeds with
his spear and equestrian skill, and he was laying waste the phalanxes of
youths. Nevertheless the noble Greeks would not have retired from the
way, had not Paris, the husband of fair-haired Helen, disabled Machaon,
the shepherd of the people, performing prodigies of valour, wounding him
on the right shoulder with a triple-barbed arrow. For him then the
valour-breathing Greeks trembled, lest perchance they should slay him,
the battle giving way, and immediately Idomeneus addressed noble Nestor:

"O Neleian Nestor, great glory of the Greeks, come, ascend thy chariot,
and let Machaon mount beside thee; and direct thy solid-hoofed horses
with all speed towards the ships, for a medical man is equivalent to
many others, both to cut out arrows, and to apply mild remedies." [378]

