Jacob Clark told his young assistant, Bill Towney.

"They'll be battering at the door any minute now, sir," Towney said
nervously.

"But why? Why are they doing it? My inventions have advanced the world a
hundred years. I've always been a benefactor of man, not a destroyer."

"It's the robots. People are in a rage because they say the robots cause
unemployment by replacing workers."

"It's utter nonsense, you know," Clark said impatiently. "Why can't they
see that my intelligent, self-controlled robots are the greatest boon
the human race has ever received from one man?"

"I don't know, sir, but they don't." Towney paused as the shouting and
pounding outside became more intense. "They demanded that you take the
robots out of the labor market and order your factories to stop making
them. This is the result of your refusal."

"DOWN WITH CLARK! DOWN WITH THE TIN MEN! DEATH TO THE ROBOT LOVERS!"
The furious mob was battering at the door now.

"Really, sir," Towney said, "you should leave here. They'll kill you if
you don't!"

"Leave here? I should say not. I'll defy the fools. I'll tell them what
I've done for them and make them understand." He glanced nervously at
the door. "Besides there's only one door. I couldn't get away now."

"There's the time machine, sir."

"But isn't there some other way? Perhaps if you went out and talked to
them...."

"You know there's no other way. Those people believe you've brought
disaster to the human race and they mean to kill you. And if you don't
hurry they will," Towney said urgently. "The time machine is set for
twenty years in the future. Please hurry, sir!"

The door was beginning to give. Clark looked around unhappily and then
walked to the time machine. "All right, I'll go. In the future I know
the results of my work will be appreciated. I'll be a hero and
benefactor of mankind."

Towney heard the door crash and roughly pushed his employer into the
time machine as the mob burst through. "Push the starting button, push
the starting button. Quick!" he screamed as the first of the mob reached
him.

Clark's hand leaped to the control lever just as a brick crashed into
his head. His hand completed its motion with more force than he had
