tiny and solitary dolls under the vast frosty cupola of the midnight; the
rooms decked, the moon burnished, the least of the stars lighted, the
floor swept and waxed, and nothing wanting but for the band to strike up
and the dancing to begin.  In the exhilaration of my heart I took the
music on myself--

    'Merrily danced the Quaker's wife,
    And merrily danced the Quaker.'

I broke into that animated and appropriate air, clapped my arm about
Dudgeon's waist, and away down the hill at a dancing step!  He hung back
a little at the start, but the impulse of the tune, the night, and my
example, were not to be resisted.  A man made of putty must have danced,
and even Dudgeon showed himself to be a human being.  Higher and higher
were the capers that we cut; the moon repeated in shadow our antic
footsteps and gestures; and it came over my mind of a sudden--really like
balm--what appearance of man I was dancing with, what a long bilious
countenance he had shown under his shaven pate, and what a world of
trouble the rascal had given me in the immediate past.

Presently we began to see the lights of Bedford.  My Puritanic companion
stopped and disengaged himself.

'This is a trifle _infra dig._, sir, is it not?' said he.  'A party might
suppose we had been drinking.'

'And so you shall be, Dudgeon,' said I.  'You shall not only be drinking,
you old hypocrite, but you shall be drunk--dead drunk, sir--and the boots
shall put you to bed!  We'll warn him when we go in.  Never neglect a
precaution; never put off till to-morrow what you can do to-day!'

But he had no more frivolity to complain of.  We finished our stage and
came to the inn-door with decorum, to find the house still alight and in
a bustle with many late arrivals; to give our orders with a prompt
severity which ensured obedience, and to be served soon after at a
side-table, close to the fire and in a blaze of candle-light, with such a
meal as I had been dreaming of for days past.  For days, you are to
remember, I had been skulking in the covered cart, a prey to cold,
hunger, and an accumulation of discomforts that might have daunted the
most brave; and the white table napery, the bright crystal, the
reverberation of the fire, the red curtains, the Turkey carpet, the
portraits on the coffee-room wall, the placid faces of the two or three
late guests who were silently prolonging the pleasures of digestion, and
(last, but not by any means least) a glass of an excellent light dry
port, put me in a humour only to be described as heavenly.  The thought
of the Colonel, of how he would have enjoyed this snug room and roaring
fire, and of his cold grave in the wood by Market Bosworth, lingered on
my palate, _amari aliquid_, like an after-taste, but was not able--I say
it with shame--entirely to dispel my self-complacency.  After all, in
this world every dog hangs by its own tail.  I was a free adventurer, who
had just brought to a successful end--or, at least, within view of it--an
adventure very difficult and alarming; and I looked across at Mr.
Dudgeon, as the port rose to his cheeks, and a smile, that was
semi-confidential and a trifle foolish, began to play upon his leathery
features, not only with composure, but with a suspicion of kindness.  The
rascal had been brave, a quality for which I would value the devil; and
if he had been pertinacious in the beginning, he had more than made up
for it before the end.

'And now, Dudgeon, to explain,' I began.  'I know your master, he knows
me, and he knows and approves of my errand.  So much I may tell you, that
I am on my way to Amersham Place.'

'Oho!' quoth Dudgeon, 'I begin to see.'

'I am heartily glad of it,' said I, passing the bottle, 'because that is
about all I can tell you.  You must take my word for the remainder.
Either believe me or don't.  If you don't, let's take a chaise; you can
carry me to-morrow to High Holborn, and confront me with Mr. Romaine; the
result of which will be to set your mind at rest--and to make the holiest
disorder in your master's plans.  If I judge you aright (for I find you a
shrewd fellow), this will not be at all to your mind.  You know what a
subordinate gets by officiousness; if I can trust my memory, old Romaine
has not at all the face that I should care to see in anger; and I venture
to predict surprising results upon your weekly salary--if you are paid by
the week, that is.  In short, let me go free, and 'tis an end of the
matter; take me to London, and 'tis only a beginning--and, by my opinion,
a beginning of troubles.  You can take your choice.'

'And that is soon taken,' said he.  'Go to Amersham tomorrow, or go to
the devil if you prefer--I wash my hands of you and the whole
transaction.  No, you don't find me putting my head in between Romaine
and a client!  A good man of business, sir, but hard as millstone grit.
I might get the sack, and I shouldn't wonder!  But, it's a pity, too,' he
added, and sighed, shook his head, and took his glass off sadly.

'That reminds me,' said I.  'I have a great curiosity, and you can
satisfy it.  Why were you so forward to meddle with poor Mr. Dubois?  Why
did you transfer your attentions to me?  And generally, what induced you
to make yourself such a nuisance?'

He blushed deeply.

'Why, sir,' says he, 'there is such a thing as patriotism, I hope.'




CHAPTER XVI--THE HOME-COMING OF MR. ROWLEY'S VISCOUNT


By eight the next morning Dudgeon and I had made our parting.  By that
time we had grown to be extremely familiar; and I would very willingly
have kept him by me, and even carried him to Amersham Place.  But it
appeared he was due at the public-house where we had met, on some affairs
of my great-uncle the Count, who had an outlying estate in that part of
the shire.  If Dudgeon had had his way the night before, I should have
been arrested on my uncle's land and by my uncle's agent, a culmination
of ill-luck.

A little after noon I started, in a hired chaise, by way of Dunstable.
The mere mention of the name Amersham Place made every one supple and
smiling.  It was plainly a great house, and my uncle lived there in
style.  The fame of it rose as we approached, like a chain of mountains;
at Bedford they touched their caps, but in Dunstable they crawled upon
their bellies.  I thought the landlady would have kissed me; such a
flutter of cordiality, such smiles, such affectionate attentions were
called forth, and the good lady bustled on my service in such a pother of
ringlets and with such a jingling of keys.  'You're probably expected,
sir, at the Place?  I do trust you may 'ave better accounts of his
lordship's 'elth, sir.  We understood that his lordship, Mosha de
Carwell, was main bad.  Ha, sir, we shall all feel his loss, poor, dear,
noble gentleman; and I'm sure nobody more polite!  They do say, sir, his
wealth is enormous, and before the Revolution, quite a prince in his own
country!  But I beg your pardon, sir; 'ow I do run on, to be sure; and
doubtless all beknown to you already!  For you do resemble the family,
sir.  I should have known you anywheres by the likeness to the dear
viscount.  Ha, poor gentleman, he must 'ave a 'eavy 'eart these days.'

In the same place I saw out of the inn-windows a man-servant passing in
the livery of my house, which you are to think I had never before seen
worn, or not that I could remember.  I had often enough, indeed, pictured
myself advanced to be a Marshal, a Duke of the Empire, a Grand Cross of
the Legion of Honour, and some other kickshaws of the kind, with a
perfect rout of flunkeys correctly dressed in my own colours.  But it is
one thing to imagine, and another to see; it would be one thing to have
these liveries in a house of my own in Paris--it was quite another to
find them flaunting in the heart of hostile England; and I fear I should
have made a fool of myself, if the man had not been on the other side of
the street, and I at a one-pane window.  There was something illusory in
this transplantation of the wealth and honours of a family, a thing by
its nature so deeply rooted in the soil; something ghostly in this sense
of home-coming so far from home.

From Dunstable I rolled away into a crescendo of similar impressions.
There are certainly few things to be compared with these castles, or
rather country seats, of the English nobility and gentry; nor anything at
all to equal the servility of the population that dwells in their
neighbourhood.  Though I was but driving in a hired chaise, word of my
destination seemed to have gone abroad, and the women curtseyed and the
men louted to me by the wayside.  As I came near, I began to appreciate
the roots of this widespread respect.  The look of my uncle's park wall,
even from the outside, had something of a princely character; and when I
came in view of the house itself, a sort of madness of vicarious
vain-glory struck me dumb and kept me staring.  It was about the size of
the Tuileries.  It faced due north; and the last rays of the sun, that
was setting like a red-hot shot amidst a tumultuous gathering of snow
clouds, were reflected on the endless rows of windows.  A portico of
Doric columns adorned the front, and would have done honour to a temple.
The servant who received me at the door was civil to a fault--I had
almost said, to offence; and the hall to which he admitted me through a
pair of glass doors was warmed and already partly lighted by a liberal
chimney heaped with the roots of beeches.

'Vicomte Anne de St. Yves,' said I, in answer to the man's question;
whereupon he bowed before me lower still, and stepping upon one side
introduced me to the truly awful presence of the major-domo.  I have seen
many dignitaries in my time, but none who quite equalled this eminent
being; who was good enough to answer to the unassuming name of Dawson.
From him I learned that my uncle was extremely low, a doctor in close
attendance, Mr. Romaine expected at any moment, and that my cousin, the
Vicomte de St. Yves, had been sent for the same morning.

'It was a sudden seizure, then?' I asked.

Well, he would scarcely go as far as that.  It was a decline, a fading
away, sir; but he was certainly took bad the day before, had sent for Mr.
Romaine, and the major-domo had taken it on himself a little later to
send word to the Viscount.  'It seemed to me, my lord,' said he, 'as if
this was a time when all the fambly should be called together.'

I approved him with my lips, but not in my heart.  Dawson was plainly in
the interests of my cousin.

'And when can I expect to see my great-uncle, the Count?' said I.

In the evening, I was told; in the meantime he would show me to my room,
which had been long prepared for me, and I should be expected to dine in
about an hour with the doctor, if my lordship had no objections.

My lordship had not the faintest.

'At the same time,' I said, 'I have had an accident: I have unhappily
lost my baggage, and am here in what I stand in.  I don't know if the
doctor be a formalist, but it is quite impossible I should appear at
table as I ought.'

He begged me to be under no anxiety.  'We have been long expecting you,'
said he.  'All is ready.'

Such I found to be the truth.  A great room had been prepared for me;
through the mullioned windows the last flicker of the winter sunset
interchanged with the reverberation of a royal fire; the bed was open, a
suit of evening clothes was airing before the blaze, and from the far
corner a boy came forward with deprecatory smiles.  The dream in which I
had been moving seemed to have reached its pitch.  I might have quitted
this house and room only the night before; it was my own place that I had
come to; and for the first time in my life I understood the force of the
words home and welcome.

'This will be all as you would want, sir?' said Mr. Dawson.  'This 'ere
boy, Rowley, we place entirely at your disposition.  'E's not exactly a
trained vallet, but Mossho Powl, the Viscount's gentleman, 'ave give him
the benefick of a few lessons, and it is 'oped that he may give
sitisfection.  Hanythink that you may require, if you will be so good as
to mention the same to Rowley, I will make it my business myself, sir, to
see you sitisfied.'

So saying, the eminent and already detested Mr. Dawson took his
departure, and I was left alone with Rowley.  A man who may be said to
have wakened to consciousness in the prison of the Abbaye, among those
ever graceful and ever tragic figures of the brave and fair, awaiting the
hour of the guillotine and denuded of every comfort, I had never known
the luxuries or the amenities of my rank in life.  To be attended on by
servants I had only been accustomed to in inns.  My toilet had long been
military, to a moment, at the note of a bugle, too often at a ditch-side.
And it need not be wondered at if I looked on my new valet with a certain
diffidence.  But I remembered that if he was my first experience of a
valet, I was his first trial as a master.  Cheered by which
consideration, I demanded my bath in a style of good assurance.  There
was a bathroom contiguous; in an incredibly short space of time the hot
water was ready; and soon after, arrayed in a shawl dressing-gown, and in
a luxury of contentment and comfort, I was reclined in an easy-chair
before the mirror, while Rowley, with a mixture of pride and anxiety
which I could well understand, laid out his razors.

'Hey, Rowley?' I asked, not quite resigned to go under fire with such an
inexperienced commander.  'It's all right, is it?  You feel pretty sure
of your weapons?'

'Yes, my lord,' he replied.  'It's all right, I assure your lordship.'

'I beg your pardon, Mr. Rowley, 'but for the sake of shortness, would you
mind not belording me in private?' said I.  'It will do very well if you
call me Mr. Anne.  It is the way of my country, as I dare say you know.'

Mr. Rowley looked blank.

'But you're just as much a Viscount as Mr. Powl's, are you not?' he said.

'As Mr. Powl's Viscount?' said I, laughing.  'Oh, keep your mind easy,
Mr. Rowley's is every bit as good.  Only, you see, as I am of the younger
line, I bear my Christian name along with the title.  Alain is the
_Viscount_; I am the _Viscount Anne_.  And in giving me the name of Mr.
Anne, I assure you you will be quite regular.'

'Yes, Mr. Anne,' said the docile youth.  'But about the shaving, sir, you
need be under no alarm.  Mr. Powl says I 'ave excellent dispositions.'

'Mr. Powl?' said I.  'That doesn't seem to me very like a French name.'

'No, sir, indeed, my lord,' said he, with a burst of confidence.  'No,
indeed, Mr. Anne, and it do not surely.  I should say now, it was more
like Mr. Pole.'

'And Mr. Powl is the Viscount's man?'

'Yes, Mr. Anne,' said he.  'He 'ave a hard billet, he do.  The Viscount
is a very particular gentleman.  I don't think as you'll be, Mr. Anne?'
he added, with a confidential smile in the mirror.

He was about sixteen, well set up, with a pleasant, merry, freckled face,
and a pair of dancing eyes.  There was an air at once deprecatory and
insinuating about the rascal that I thought I recognised.  There came to
me from my own boyhood memories of certain passionate admirations long
passed away, and the objects of them long ago discredited or dead.  I
remembered how anxious I had been to serve those fleeting heroes, how
readily I told myself I would have died for _them_, how much greater and
handsomer than life they had appeared.  And looking in the mirror, it
seemed to me that I read the face of Rowley, like an echo or a ghost, by
the light of my own youth.  I have always contended (somewhat against the
opinion of my friends) that I am first of all an economist; and the last
thing that I would care to throw away is that very valuable piece of
property--a boy's hero-worship.

'Why,' said I, 'you shave like an angel, Mr. Rowley!'

'Thank you, my lord,' says he.  'Mr. Powl had no fear of me. You may be
sure, sir, I should never 'ave had this berth if I 'adn't 'ave been up to
Dick.  We been expecting of you this month back.  My eye!  I never see
such preparations.  Every day the fires has been kep' up, the bed made,
and all!  As soon as it was known you were coming, sir, I got the
appointment; and I've been up and down since then like a Jack-in-the-box.
A wheel couldn't sound in the avenue but what I was at the window!  I've
had a many disappointments; but to-night, as soon as you stepped out of
the shay, I knew it was my--it was you.  Oh, you had been expected!  Why,
when I go down to supper, I'll be the 'ero of the servants' 'all: the
'ole of the staff is that curious!'

'Well,' said I, 'I hope you may be able to give a fair account of
me--sober, steady, industrious, good-tempered, and with a first-rate
character from my last place?'

He laughed an embarrassed laugh.  'Your hair curls beautiful,' he said,
by way of changing the subject.  'The Viscount's the boy for curls,
though; and the richness of it is, Mr. Powl tells me his don't curl no
more than that much twine--by nature.  Gettin' old, the Viscount is.  He
'_ave_ gone the pace, 'aven't 'e, sir?'

'The fact is,' said I, 'that I know very little about him.  Our family
has been much divided, and I have been a soldier from a child.'

'A soldier, Mr. Anne, sir?' cried Rowley, with a sudden feverish
animation.  'Was you ever wounded?'

It is contrary to my principles to discourage admiration for myself; and,
slipping back the shoulder of the dressing-gown, I silently exhibited the
scar which I had received in Edinburgh Castle.  He looked at it with awe.

'Ah, well!' he continued, 'there's where the difference comes in!  It's
in the training.  The other Viscount have been horse-racing, and dicing,
and carrying on all his life.  All right enough, no doubt; but what I do
say is, that it don't lead to nothink.  Whereas--'

'Whereas Mr. Rowley's?' I put in.

'My Viscount?' said he.  'Well, sir, I _did_ say it; and now that I've
seen you, I say it again!'

I could not refrain from smiling at this outburst, and the rascal caught
me in the mirror and smiled to me again.

'I'd say it again, Mr. Hanne,' he said.  'I know which side my bread's
buttered.  I know when a gen'leman's a gen'leman.  Mr. Powl can go to
Putney with his one!  Beg your pardon, Mr. Anne, for being so familiar,'
said he, blushing suddenly scarlet.  'I was especially warned against it
by Mr. Powl.'

'Discipline before all,' said I.  'Follow your front-rank man.

With that, we began to turn our attention to the clothes.  I was amazed
to find them fit so well: not _a la diable_, in the haphazard manner of a
soldier's uniform or a ready-made suit; but with nicety, as a trained
artist might rejoice to make them for a favourite subject.

''Tis extraordinary,' cried I: 'these things fit me perfectly.'

'Indeed, Mr. Anne, you two be very much of a shape,' said Rowley.

'Who?  What two?' said I.

'The Viscount,' he said.

'Damnation!  Have I the man's clothes on me, too?' cried I.

But Rowley hastened to reassure me.  On the first word of my coming, the
Count had put the matter of my wardrobe in the hands of his own and my
cousin's tailors; and on the rumour of our resemblance, my clothes had
been made to Alain's measure.

'But they were all made for you express, Mr. Anne.  You may be certain
the Count would never do nothing by 'alf: fires kep' burning; the finest
of clothes ordered, I'm sure, and a body-servant being trained
a-purpose.'
