 88. Complete telephone circuit                                   121
 89. Device for making hydrogen and oxygen                        124
 90. Electric-water purifier                                      127
 91. Portable electric purifier                                   129
 92. Section of positive plate                                    130
 93. Section of negative plate                                    130
 94. Positive and negative in position                            130
 95. Form of the insulator                                        130
 96. Simple electric heater                                       137
 97. Side view of resistance device                               139
 98. Top view of resistance device                                139
 99. Plan view of electric iron                                   140
100. Section of electric iron                                     141
101. Thermo-electric couple                                       143
102. Cutting a magnetic field                                     146
103. Alternations, first position                                 148
104. Alternations, second position                                148
105. Alternations, third position                                 148
106. Alternations, fourth position                                148
107. Increasing alternations, first view                          149
108. Increasing alternations, second view                         149
109. Connection of alternating dynamo armature                    150
110. Direct current dynamo                                        151
111. Circuit wires in direct current dynamo                       152
112. Alternating polarity lines                                   154
113. Alternating current dynamo                                   155
114. Choking coil                                                 157
115. A transformer                                                158
116. Parallel carbons                                             164
117. Arc-lighting circuit                                         165
118. Interrupted conductor                                        166
119. Incandescent circuit                                         167
120. Magnetic action in dynamo, 1st                               177
121. Magnetic action in dynamo, 2d                                177
122. Magnetic action in dynamo, 3d                                178
123. Magnetic action in dynamo, 4th                               178
124. Magnetic action in motor, 1st                                179
125. Magnetic action in motor, 2d                                 179
126. Magnetic action in motor, 3d                                 180
127. Magnetic action in motor, 4th                                180




INTRODUCTORY


Electricity, like every science, presents two phases to the student, one
belonging to a theoretical knowledge, and the other which pertains to
the practical application of that knowledge. The boy is directly
interested in the practical use which he can make of this wonderful
phenomenon in nature.

It is, in reality, the most successful avenue by which he may obtain the
theory, for he learns the abstract more readily from concrete examples.

It is an art in which shop practice is a greater educator than can be
possible with books. Boys are not, generally, inclined to speculate or
theorize on phenomena apart from the work itself; but once put them into
contact with the mechanism itself, let them become a living part of it,
and they will commence to reason and think for themselves.

It would be a dry, dull and uninteresting thing to tell a boy that
electricity can be generated by riveting together two pieces of
dissimilar metals, and applying heat to the juncture. But put into his
hands the metals, and set him to perform the actual work of riveting the
metals together, then wiring up the ends of the metals, heating them,
and, with a galvanometer, watching for results, it will at once make him
see something in the experiment which never occurred when the abstract
theory was propounded.

He will inquire first what metals should be used to get the best
results, and finally, he will speculate as to the reasons for the
phenomena. When he learns that all metals are positive-negative or
negative-positive to each other, he has grasped a new idea in the realm
of knowledge, which he unconsciously traces back still further, only to
learn that he has entered a field which relates to the constitution of
matter itself. As he follows the subject through its various channels he
will learn that there is a common source of all things; a manifestation
common to all matter, and that all substances in nature are linked
together in a most wonderful way.

An impulse must be given to a boy's training. The time is past for the
rule-and-rote method. The rule can be learned better by a manual
application than by committing a sentence to memory.

In the preparation of this book, therefore, I have made practice and
work the predominating factors. It has been my aim to suggest the best
form in which to do the things in a practical way, and from that work,
as the boy carries it out, to deduce certain laws and develop the
principles which underlie them. Wherever it is deemed possible to do so,
it is planned to have the boy make these discoveries for himself, so as
to encourage him to become a thinker and a reasoner instead of a mere
machine.

A boy does not develop into a philosopher or a scientist through being
told he must learn the principles of this teaching, or the fundamentals
of that school of reasoning. He will unconsciously imbibe the spirit and
the willingness if we but place before him the tools by which he may
build even the simple machinery that displays the various electrical
manifestations.




CHAPTER I

THE STUDY OF ELECTRICITY. HISTORICAL


There is no study so profound as electricity. It is a marvel to the
scientist as well as to the novice. It is simple in its manifestations,
but most complex in its organization and in its ramifications. It has
been shown that light, heat, magnetism and electricity are the same, but
that they differ merely in their modes of motion.

FIRST HISTORICAL ACCOUNT.--The first historical account of electricity
dates back to 600 years B. C. Thales of Miletus was the first to
describe the properties of amber, which, when rubbed, attracted and
repelled light bodies. The ancients also described what was probably
tourmaline, a mineral which has the same qualities. The torpedo, a fish
which has the power of emitting electric impulses, was known in very
early times.

From that period down to about the year 1600 no accounts of any
historical value have been given. Dr. Gilbert, of England, made a number
of researches at that time, principally with amber and other materials,
and Boyle, in 1650, made numerous experiments with frictional
electricity.

Sir Isaac Newton also took up the subject at about the same period. In
1705 Hawksbee made numerous experiments; also Gray, in 1720, and a
Welshman, Dufay, at about the same time. The Germans, from 1740 to 1780,
made many experiments. In 1740, at Leyden, was discovered the jar which
bears that name. Before that time, all experiments began and ended with
frictional electricity.

The first attempt to "bottle" electricity was attempted by
Muschenbr[oe]ck, at Leyden, who conceived the idea that electricity in
materials might be retained by surrounding them with bodies which did
not conduct the current. He electrified some water in a jar, and
communication having been established between the water and the prime
conductor, his assistant, who was holding the bottle, on trying to
disengage the communicating wire, received a sudden shock.

In 1747 Sir William Watson fired gunpowder by an electric spark, and,
later on, a party from the Royal Society, in conjunction with Watson,
conducted a series of experiments to determine the velocity of the
electric fluid, as it was then termed.

Benjamin Franklin, in 1750, showed that lightning was electricity, and
later on made his interesting experiments with the kite and the key.

DISCOVERING GALVANIC ELECTRICITY.--The great discovery of Galvani, in
1790, led to the recognition of a new element in electricity, called
galvanic or voltaic (named after the experimenter, Volta), and now known
to be identical with frictional electricity. In 1805 Poisson was the
first to analyze electricity; and when [OE]rsted of Copenhagen, in 1820,
discovered the magnetic action of electricity, it offered a great
stimulus to the science, and paved the way for investigation in a new
direction. Ampere was the first to develop the idea that a motor or a
dynamo could be made operative by means of the electro-magnetic current;
and Faraday, about 1830, discovered electro-magnetic rotation.

ELECTRO-MAGNETIC FORCE.--From this time on the knowledge of electricity
grew with amazing rapidity. Ohm's definition of electro-motive force,
current strength and resistance eventuated into Ohm's law. Thomson
greatly simplified the galvanometer, and Wheatstone invented the
rheostat, a means of measuring resistance, about 1850. Then primary
batteries were brought forward by Daniels, Grove, Bunsen and Thomson,
and electrolysis by Faraday. Then came the instruments of precision--the
electrometer, the resistance bridge, the ammeter, the voltmeter--all of
the utmost value in the science.

MEASURING INSTRUMENTS.--The perfection of measuring instruments did more
to advance electricity than almost any other field of endeavor; so that
after 1875 the inventors took up the subject, and by their energy
developed and put into practical operation a most wonderful array of
mechanism, which has become valuable in the service of man in almost
every field of human activity.

RAPIDITY OF MODERN PROGRESS.--This brief history is given merely to show
what wonders have been accomplished in a few years. The art is really
less than fifty years old, and yet so rapidly has it gone forward that
it is not at all surprising to hear the remark, that the end of the
wonders has been reached. Less than twenty-five years ago a high
official of the United States Patent Office stated that it was probable
the end of electrical research had been reached. The most wonderful
developments have been made since that time; and now, as in the past,
one discovery is but the prelude to another still more remarkable. We
are beginning to learn that we are only on the threshold of that
storehouse in which nature has locked her secrets, and that there is no
limit to human ingenuity.

HOW TO ACQUIRE THE VAST KNOWLEDGE.--As the boy, with his limited vision,
surveys this vast accumulation of tools, instruments and machinery, and
sees what has been and is now being accomplished, it is not to be
wondered at that he should enter the field with timidity. In his mind
the great question is, how to acquire the knowledge. There is so much to
learn. How can it be accomplished?

The answer to this is, that the student of to-day has the advantage of
the knowledge of all who have gone before; and now the pertinent thing
is to acquire that knowledge.

THE MEANS EMPLOYED.--This brings us definitely down to an examination of
the means that we shall employ to instil this knowledge, so that it may
become a permanent asset to the student's store of information.

The most significant thing in the history of electrical development is
the knowledge that of all the great scientists not one of them ever
added any knowledge to the science on purely speculative reasoning. All
of them were experimenters. They practically applied and developed their
theories in the laboratory or the workshop. The natural inference is,
therefore, that the boy who starts out to acquire a knowledge of
electricity, must not only theorize, but that he shall, primarily,
conduct the experiments, and thereby acquire the information in a
practical way, one example of which will make a more lasting impression
than pages of dry text.

Throughout these pages, therefore, I shall, as briefly as possible,
point out the theories involved, as a foundation for the work, and then
illustrate the structural types or samples; and the work is so arranged
that what is done to-day is merely a prelude or stepping-stone to the
next phase of the art. In reality, we shall travel, to a considerable
extent, the course which the great investigators followed when they were
groping for the facts and discovering the great manifestations in
nature.




CHAPTER II

WHAT TOOLS AND APPARATUS ARE NEEDED


PREPARING THE WORKSHOP.--Before commencing actual experiments we should
prepare the workshop and tools. Since we are going into this work as
pioneers, we shall have to be dependent upon our own efforts for the
production of the electrical apparatus, so as to be able, with our
home-made factory, to provide the power, the heat and the electricity.
Then, finding we are successful in these enterprises, we may look
forward for "more worlds to conquer."

By this time our neighbors will become interested in and solicit work
from us.

USES OF OUR WORKSHOPS.--They may want us to test batteries, and it then
becomes necessary to construct mechanism to detect and measure
electricity; to install new and improved apparatus; and to put in and
connect up electric bells in their houses, as well as burglar alarms. To
meet the requirements, we put in a telegraph line, having learned, as
well as we are able, how they are made and operated. But we find the
telegraph too slow and altogether unsuited for our purposes, as well as
for the uses of the neighborhood, so we conclude to put in a telephone
system.

WHAT TO BUILD.--It is necessary, therefore, to commence right at the
bottom to build a telephone, a transmitter, a receiver and a
switch-board for our system. From the telephone we soon see the
desirability of getting into touch with the great outside world, and
wireless telegraphy absorbs our time and energies.

But as we learn more and more of the wonderful things electricity will
do, we are brought into contact with problems which directly interest
the home. Sanitation attracts our attention. Why cannot electricity act
as an agent to purify our drinking water, to sterilize sewage and to
arrest offensive odors? We must, therefore, learn something about the
subject of electrolysis.

WHAT TO LEARN.--The decomposition of water is not the only thing that we
shall describe pertaining to this subject. We go a step further, and
find that we can decompose metals as well as liquids, and that we can
make a pure metal out of an impure one, as well as make the foulest
water pure. But we shall also, in the course of our experiments, find
that a cheap metal can be coated with a costly one by means of
electricity--that we can electroplate by electrolysis.

USES OF THE ELECTRICAL DEVICES.--While all this is progressing and our
factory is turning out an amazing variety of useful articles, we are led
to inquire into the uses to which we may devote our surplus electricity.
The current may be diverted for boiling water; for welding metals; for
heating sad-irons, as well as for other purposes which are daily
required.

TOOLS.--To do these things tools are necessary, and for the present they
should not be expensive. A small, rigidly built bench is the first
requirement. This may be made, as shown in Fig. 1, of three 2-inch
planks, each 10 inches wide and 6 feet long, mounted on legs 36 inches
in height. In the front part are three drawers for your material, or the
small odds and ends, as well as for such little tools as you may
accumulate. Then you will need a small vise, say, with a 2-inch jaw, and
you will also require a hand reel for winding magnets. This will be
fully described hereafter.

You can also, probably, get a small, cheap anvil, which will be of the
greatest service in your work. It should be mounted close up to the work
bench. Two small hammers, one with an A-shaped peon, and the other with
a round peon, should be selected, and also a plane and a small wood saw
with fine teeth. A bit stock, or a ratchet drill, if you can afford it,
with a variety of small drills; two wood chisels, say of 3/8-inch and
3/4-inch widths; small cold chisels; hack saw, 10-inch blade; small
iron square; pair of dividers; tin shears; wire cutters; 2 pairs of
pliers, one flat and the other round-nosed; 2 awls, centering punch,
wire cutters, and, finally, soldering tools.

[Illustration: _Fig. 2. Top View_ MAGNET-WINDING REEL]

[Illustration: _Fig. 3. Side View_ MAGNET-WINDING REEL]

If a gas stove is not available, a brazing torch is an essential tool.
Numerous small torches are being made, which are cheap and easily
operated. A small soldering iron, with pointed end, should be provided;
also metal shears and a small square; an awl and several sizes of
gimlets; a screwdriver; pair of pliers and wire cutters.

From the foregoing it will be seen that the cost of tools is not a very
expensive item.

This entire outfit, not including the anvil and vise, may be purchased
new for about $20.00, so we have not been extravagant.

MAGNET-WINDING REEL.--Some little preparation must be made, so we may be
enabled to handle our work by the construction of mechanical aids.

[Illustration: _Fig. 4. Journal Block._]

First of these is the magnet-winding reel, a plan view of which is shown
in Fig. 2. This, for our present work, will be made wholly of wood.

Select a plank 1-1/2 inches thick and 8 inches wide, and from this cut
off two pieces (A), each 7 inches long, and then trim off the corners
