down into a deep well.  He would rescue it even at the risk of his
life, no matter how morally degenerated he might be.  He would have
no time to consider that his act might bring him some reward from its
parents, or a good reputation among his friends and fellow-citizens.
He would do it barely out of his inborn good-nature.'  After
enumerating some instances similar to this one, Mencius concludes
that goodness is the fundamental nature of man, even if he is often
carried away by his brutal disposition.


[FN#161]  Mencius (372-282 B.C.) is regarded as the best expounder of
the doctrine of Confucius.  There exists a well-known work of his,
entitled after his own name.  See 'A History of Chinese Philosophy,'
by R. Endo, and also 'A History of Chinese Philosophy' (pp. 38-50),
by G. Nakauchi.



2. Man is Bad-natured according to Siun Tsz[FN#162] (Jun-shi).

The weaknesses of Mencius's theory are fully exposed by another
diametrically opposed theory propounded by Siun Tsz (Jun-shi) and his
followers.  'Man is bad-natured,' says Siun Tsz, 'since he has inborn
lust, appetite, and desire for wealth.  As he has inborn lust and
appetite, he is naturally given to intemperance and wantonness.  As
he has inborn desire for wealth, he is naturally inclined to quarrel
and fight with others for the sake of gain.'  Leave him without
discipline or culture, he would not be a whit better than the beast.
His virtuous acts, such as charity, honesty, propriety, chastity,
truthfulness, are conduct forced by the teachings of ancient sages
against his natural inclination.  Therefore vices are congenial and
true to his nature, while virtues alien and untrue to his fundamental
nature.


[FN#162]   Siun Tsz's date is later by some fifty years than Mencius.
 Siun Tsz gives the reason why man seeks after morality, saying that
man seeks what he has not, and that he seeks after morality simply
because he has not morality, just as the poor seek riches.  See 'A
History of Chinese Philosophy' (pp. 51-60), by G. Nakauchi, and 'A
History of Development of Chinese Thought,' by R. Endo.


These two theories are not only far from throwing light on the moral
state of man, but wrap it in deeper gloom.  Let us raise a few
questions by way of refutation.  If man's fundamental nature be good,
as Mencius maintains, why is it easy for him to be vicious without
instruction, while he finds it hard to be virtuous even with
instruction.  If you contend that good is man's primary nature and
evil the secondary one, why is be so often overpowered by the
secondary nature?  If you answer saying that man is good-natured
originally, but he acquires the secondary nature through the struggle
for existence, and it gradually gains power over the primary nature
by means of the same cause, then the primitive tribes should be more
virtuous than the highly civilized nations, and children than grownup
people.  Is this not contrary to fact?

If, again, man's nature is essentially bad, as Siun Tsz holds, how
can he cultivate virtue?  If you contend that ancient sages invented
so-called cardinal virtues and inculcated them against his natural
inclination, why does he not give them up?  If vices be congenial and
true to man's nature, but virtues be alien and untrue to him, why are
virtues honoured by him?  If vices be genuine and virtue a deception,
as you think, why do you call the inventors of that deceiving art
sages?  How was it possible for man to do good before these sages'
appearance on earth?



3. Man is both Good-natured and Bad-natured according to Yan
Hiung[FN#163] (Yo-yu).

According to Yang Hiung and his followers, good is no less real than
evil, and evil is no more unreal than good.  Therefore man must be
double-natured-that is, partly good and partly bad.  This is the
reason why the history of man is full of fiendish crimes, and, at the
same time, it abounds with godly deeds.  This is the reason why
mankind comprises, on the one hand, a Socrates, a Confucius, a Jesus,
and, on the other, a Nero and a Kieh.  This is the reason why we find
to-day a honest fellow in him whom we find a betrayer to-morrow.

[FN#163]  Yan Hiung (died A.D. 18) is the reputed author of Tai Huen
(Tai-gen) and Fah Yen (Ho-gen).  His opinion in reference to human
nature is found in Fah Yen.


This view of man's nature might explain our present moral state, yet
it calls forth many questions bard to answer.  If this assertion be
true, is it not a useless task to educate man with the purpose of
making him better and nobler?  How could one extirpate man's bad
nature implanted within him at his origin?  If man be double-natured,
how did he come to set good over evil?  How did he come to consider
that he ought to be good and ought not to be bad?  How could you
establish the authority of morality?



4. Man is neither Good-natured nor Bad-natured according to Su Shih
(So-shoku).[FN#164]

The difficulty may be avoided by a theory given by Su Shih and other
scholars influenced by Buddhism, which maintains that man is neither
good-natured nor bad-natured.  According to this opinion man is not
moral nor immoral by nature, but unmoral.  He is morally a blank.  He
is at a crossroad, so to speak, of morality when he is first born.
As he is blank, he can be dyed black or red.  As he is at the
cross-road, he can turn to the right or to the left.  He is like
fresh water, which has no flavour, and can be made sweet or bitter by
circumstances.  If we are not mistaken, this theory, too, has to
encounter insurmountable difficulties.  How could it be possible to
make the unmoral being moral or immoral?  We might as well try to get
honey out of sand as to get good or evil out of the blank nature.
There can be no fruit of good or evil where there is no seed of good
or bad nature.  Thus we find no satisfactory solution of the problem
at issue in these four theories proposed by the Chinese scholars--the
first theory being incompetent to explain the problem of human
depravity; the second breaking down at the origin of morality; the
third failing to explain the possibility of moral culture; the fourth
being logically self-contradictory.

[FN#164]  Su Shih (1042-1101), a great man of letters, practiser of
Zen, noted for his poetical works.



5. There is no Mortal who is Purely Moral.

By nature man should be either good or bad; or he should be good as
well as bad; or he should be neither good nor bad.  There can be no
alternative possible besides these four propositions, none of which
can be accepted as true.  Then there must be some misconception in
the terms of which they consist.  It would seem to some that the
error can be avoided by limiting the sense of the term 'man,' saying
some persons are good-natured, some persons are bad-natured, some
persons are good-natured and bad-natured as well, and some persons
are neither good-natured nor bad-natured.  There is no contradiction
in these modified propositions, but still they fail to explain the
ethical state of man.  Supposing them all to be true, let us assume
that there are the four classes of people: (1) Those who are purely
moral and have no immoral disposition; (2) those who are half moral
and half immoral; (3) those who are neither moral nor immoral; (4)
those who are purely immoral and have no moral disposition.  Orthodox
Christians, believing in the sinlessness of Jesus, would say he
belongs to the first class, while Mohammedans and Buddhists, who
deify the founder of their respective faith, would in such case
regard their founder as the purely moral personage.  But are your
beliefs, we should ask, based on historical fact?  Can you say that
such traditional and self-contradictory records as the four gospels
are history in the strict sense of the term?  Can you assert that
those traditions which deify Mohammed and Shakya are the statements
of bare facts?  Is not Jesus an abstraction and an ideal, entirely
different from a concrete carpenter's son, who fed on the same kind
of food, sheltered himself in the same kind of building, suffered
from the same kind of pain, was fired by the same kind of anger,
stung by the same kind of lust as our own?  Can you say the person
who fought many a sanguinary battle, who got through many cunning
negotiations with enemies and friends, who personally experienced the
troubles of polygamy, was a person sinless and divine?  We might
allow that these ancient sages are superhuman and divine, then our
classification has no business with them, because they do not
properly belong to mankind.  Now, then, who can point out any sinless
person in the present world?  Is it not a fact that the more virtuous
one grows the more sinful he feels himself?  If there be any mortal,
in the past, the present, and the future, who declares himself to be
pure and sinless, his very declaration proves that he is not highly
moral.  Therefore the existence of the first class of people is open
to question.



6. There is no Mortal who is Non-Moral or Purely Immoral.

The same is the case with the third and the fourth class of people
who are assumed as non-moral or purely immoral.  There is no person,
however morally degraded he may be, but reveals some good nature in
his whole course of life.  It is our daily experience that we find a
faithful friend in the person even of a pickpocket, a loving father
even in a burglar, and a kind neighbour even in a murderer.  Faith,
sympathy, friendship, love, loyalty, and generosity dwell not merely
in palaces and churches, but also in brothels and gaols.  On the
other hand, abhorrent vices and bloody crimes often find shelter
under the silk hat, or the robe, or the coronet, or the crown.  Life
may fitly be compared with a rope made of white and black straw, and
to separate one from the other is to destroy the rope itself; so also
life entirely independent of the duality of good and bad is no actual
life.  We must acknowledge, therefore, that the third and the fourth
propositions are inconsistent with our daily experience of life, and
that only the second proposition remains, which, as seen above,
breaks down at the origin of morality.



7. Where, then, does the Error Lie?

Where, then, does the error lie in the four possible propositions
respecting man's nature?  It lies not in their subject, but in the
predicate-that is to say, in the use of the terms 'good' and 'bad.'
Now let us examine how does good differ from bad.  A good action ever
promotes interests in a sphere far wider than a bad action.  Both are
the same in their conducing to human interests, but differ in the
extent in which they achieve their end.  In other words, both good
and bad actions are performed for one end and the same purpose of
promoting human interests, but they differ from each other as to the
extent of interests.  For instance, burglary is evidently bad action,
and is condemned everywhere; but the capturing of an enemy's property
for the sake of one's own tribe or clan or nation is praised as a
meritorious conduct.  Both acts are exactly the same in their
promoting interests; but the former relates to the interests of a
single individual or of a single family, while the latter to those of
a tribe or a nation.  If the former be bad on account of its ignoring
others' interests, the latter must be also bad on account of its
ignoring the enemy's interests.  Murder is considered bad everywhere;
but the killing of thousands of men in a battle-field is praised and
honoured, because the former is perpetrated to promote the private
interests, while the latter those of the public.  If the former be
bad, because of its cruelty, the latter must also be bad, because of
its inhumanity.

The idea of good and bad, generally accepted by common sense, may be
stated as follows: 'An action is good when it promotes the interests
of an individual or a family; better when it promotes those of a
district or a country; best when it promotes those of the whole
world.  An action is bad when it inflicts injury on another
individual or another family; worse when it is prejudicial to a
district or a country; worst when it brings harm on the whole world.
Strictly speaking, an action is good when it promotes interests,
material or spiritual, as intended by the actor in his motive; and it
is bad when it injures interests, material or spiritual, as intended
by the actor in his motive.'

According to this idea, generally accepted by common sense, human
actions may be classified under four different heads: (1) Purely good
actions; (2) partly good and partly bad actions; (3) neither good nor
bad actions; (4) purely bad actions.  First, purely good actions are
those actions which subserve and never hinder human interests either
material or spiritual, such as humanity and love of all beings.
Secondly, partly good and partly bad actions are those actions which
are both for and against human interests, such as narrow patriotism
and prejudiced love.  Thirdly, neither good nor bad actions are such
actions as are neither for nor against human interests--for example,
an unconscious act of a dreamer.  Lastly, purely bad actions, which
are absolutely against human interests, cannot be possible for man
except suicide, because every action promotes more or less the
interests, material or spiritual, of the individual agent or of
someone else.  Even such horrible crimes as homicide and parricide
are intended to promote some interests, and carry out in some measure
their aim when performed.  It follows that man cannot be said to be
good or bad in the strict sense of the terms as above defined, for
there is no human being who does the first class of actions and
nothing else, nor is there any mortal who does the fourth class of
actions and nothing else.  Man may be called good and bad, and at the
same time be neither good nor bad, in that he always performs the
second and the third class of actions.  All this, nevertheless, is a
more play of words.  Thus we are driven to conclude that the
common-sense view of human nature fails to grasp the real state of
actual life.



8. Man is not Good-natured nor Bad-natured, but Buddha-natured.

We have had already occasion to observe that Zen teaches
Buddha-nature, which all sentient beings are endowed with.  The term
'Buddha-nature,'[FN#165] as accepted generally by Buddhists, means a
latent and undeveloped nature, which enables its owner to become
Enlightened when it is developed and brought to actuality.[FN#166]
Therefore man, according to Zen, is not good-natured nor bad-natured
in the relative sense, as accepted generally by common sense, of
these terms, but Buddha-natured in the sense of non-duality.  A good
person (of common sense) differs from a bad person (of common sense),
not in his inborn Buddha-nature, but in the extent of his expressing
it in deeds.  Even if men are equally endowed with that nature, yet
their different states of development do not allow them to express it
to an equal extent in conduct.  Buddha-nature may be compared with
the sun, and individual mind with the sky.  Then an Enlightened mind
is like the sky in fair weather, when nothing prevents the beams of
the sun; while an ignorant mind is like the sky in cloudy weather,
when the sun sheds faint light; and an evil mind is like the sky in
stormy weather, when the sun seems to be out of existence.  It comes
under our daily observation that even a robber or a murderer may
prove to be a good father and a loving husband to his wife and
children.  He is an honest fellow when he remains at home.  The sun
of Buddha-nature gives light within the wall of his house, but
without the house the darkness of foul crimes shrouds him.

[FN#165]  For a detailed explanation of Buddha-nature, see the
chapter entitled Buddha-nature in Sho-bo-gen-zo.

[FN#166]  Mahaparinirvana-sutra may be said to have been written for
the purpose of stating this idea.



9. The Parable of the Robber Kih.[FN#167]

Chwang Tsz (So-shi) remarks in a humorous way to the following
effect: "The followers of the great robber and murderer Kih asked him
saying: 'Has the robber also any moral principles in his
proceedings?'  He replied: 'What profession is there which has not
its principles?  That the robber comes to the conclusion without
mistake that there are valuable deposits in an apartment shows his
wisdom; that he is the first to enter it shows his bravery; that he
makes an equal division of the plunder shows his justice; that he
never betrays the fellow-robbers shows his faithfulness; and that he
is generous to the followers shows his benevolence.  Without all
these five qualities no one in the world has ever attained to become
a great robber.'"  The parable clearly shows us Buddha-nature of the
robber and murderer expresses itself as wisdom, bravery, justice,
faithfulness, and benevolence in his society, and that if he did the
same outside it, he would not be a great robber but a great sage.


[FN#167]  The parable is told for the purpose of undervaluing
Confucian doctrine, but the author thereby accidentally touches human
nature.  We do not quote it here with the same purpose as the
author's.



10. Wang Yang Ming (O-yo-mei) and a Thief.

One evening when Wang was giving a lecture to a number of students on
his famous doctrine that all human beings are endowed with
Conscience,[FN#168] a thief broke into the house and hid himself in
the darkest corner.  Then Wang declared aloud that every human being
is born with Conscience, and that even the thief who had got into the
house had Conscience just as the sages of old.  The burglar,
overhearing these remarks, came out to ask the forgiveness of the
master; since there was no way of escape for him, and he was
half-naked, he crouched behind the students.  Wang's willing
forgiveness and cordial treatment encouraged the man to ask the
question how the teacher could know such a poor wretch as he was
endowed with Conscience as the sages of old.  Wang replied: "It is
your Conscience that makes you ashamed of your nakedness.  You
yourself are a sage, if you abstain from everything that will put
shame on you."  We firmly believe that Wang is perfectly right in
telling the thief that he was not different in nature from the sages
of old.  It is no exaggeration.  It is a saving truth.  It is also a
most effective way of saving men out of darkness of sin.  Any thief
ceases to be a thief the moment he believes in his own Conscience, or
Buddha-nature.  You can never correct criminals by your severe
reproach or punishment.  You can save them only through your sympathy
and love, by which you call forth their inborn Buddha-nature.
Nothing can produce more pernicious effects on criminals than to
treat them as if they were a different sort of people and confirm
them in their conviction that they are bad-natured.  We greatly
regret that even in a civilized society authorities neglecting this
