have to do our own exporting, and we'll need ships. Now, you men have
been studying about Merlin, and hunting for Merlin, all your lives. I
can't add anything to what you know, and neither can my father. You
find Merlin, and we'll have the ships ready when you do find it."

"Kurt, I think he has a point," somebody said.

"You're blasted well right he has," Klem Zareff put in. "If it wasn't
for Conn Maxwell, you know where we'd be? Back in Litchfield, sitting
around in Kurt's office, talking about how wonderful things'll be when
we find Merlin, and doing nothing to find it."

"Kurt, I believe Conn is entitled to an apology," Judge Ledue ruled.
"How close we are to finding Merlin I don't know, but it is due to him
that we have any hope of finding it at all."

"Conn, I'm sorry," Fawzi said. "I oughtn't to have said some of the
things I did. But we're all on edge; we've been having so much
trouble.... Conn, it's right there at Force Command; I know it is.
We've been all over the place. We have shafts sunk at each of the
corners; we've used scanners, and put off echo shots. Nothing. We
looked for additional passages out of the headquarters; there aren't
any. But it has to be somewhere around. It just _has_ to be!"

"Maybe if I go out to Force Command with you, I might see something
you've overlooked. And if I can't, I'll try to scrape up some stuff on
Koshchei for you. Deep-vein scanners, that sort of thing, from the
mines."

They took the _Lester Dawes_ out at a little past noon and turned
south and east. Everybody aboard was happy--except Conn Maxwell. He
was thinking of the years and years ahead of these trusting, hopeful
old men, each year the grave of another expectation. Two hundred miles
from Force Command, the _Goblin_ met them, her sides still spalled and
dented from the hits she had taken in Barathrum Spaceport. When they
came in sight of it, the mesa-top was deserted. Fawzi began wondering
where in Nifflheim all the drilling rigs, and the seismo-trucks, were.
Somebody with a pair of binoculars called attention to activity on the
side of the high butte on top of which the relay station was located.
Fawzi began swearing exasperatedly.

"Might be something Mr. Leibert thought of," Franz Veltrin suggested.

"Then why in blazes didn't he screen us about it?"

"Who is this Leibert?" Conn asked. "Somebody mentioned him this
morning, I think."

"He joined us after you left, Conn," Dolf Kellton said. "He's a
clergyman from Morven. No regular denomination; he has a sect of his
own."

"Yah, he would!" Klem Zareff rumbled. "Pious fraud!"

"He's really a good man, Conn; Klem's prejudiced. He says we ought to
use Merlin to show us the true nature of God, and how to live in
accordance with the Divine Will. He says Merlin can teach us a new
religion."

A new religion, based on Merlin; that would be good. And then the
fanatics who thought Merlin was the Devil would start a holy war to
wipe out the servants of Satan, and with all the combat equipment that
was lying around on this planet.... For the first time since this
business started, he began to feel really frightened.

An aircar came bulleting away from the butte and landed on the mesa as
the _Lester Dawes_ set down. The man who met them at the head of the
vertical shaft wore Federation fatigues--baggy trousers, ankle boots
and long smock, dyed black. He was bareheaded, and his white hair was
almost shoulder-long. He had a white beard.

"Welcome, Brothers," he greeted, a hand raised in benediction. "And
who is this with you?"

His voice was high and quavery; not a good pulpit voice, Conn thought.

Kurt Fawzi introduced Conn, and Leibert grasped his hand with a grip
that was considerably stronger than his voice.

"Bless you, young man! It is to you alone that we owe our thanks that
we are about to find the Great Computer. Every sapient being in the
Galaxy will honor your name for a thousand years."

"Well, I hadn't counted on quite that much, Mr. Leibert. If it'll only
help a few of these people to make a decent living I'll be satisfied."

Leibert shook his head sadly. "You think entirely in material terms,
young man," he reproved. "Forget these things; acquire the higher
spiritual values. The Great Computer must not be degraded to such
uses; we should let it show us how to lift ourselves to a high
spiritual plane...."

It went on like that, after they went down to Foxx Travis's--now
Fawzi's--office, where there were silver-stoppered decanters instead
of the old green-glass pitcher, and gold-plated ashtrays, and thick
carpets on the floor. The man was a lunatic; he made Fawzi's office
gang look frigidly sane. Furthermore, he was an ignoramus. He had no
idea what a computer could or couldn't do. Anybody who could build a
computer of the sort he thought Merlin was wouldn't need it, he
_would_ be God.

As he talked, Conn began to be nagged by an odd sense of recognition.
He'd seen this Carl Leibert before, somewhere, and somehow he was sure
that the long white hair and the untrimmed beard weren't part of the
picture. That puzzled him. He doubted if he'd have remembered Leibert
from six years ago, almost seven, now, though a lot of itinerant
evangelists showed up in Litchfield. That might have been it.

"I tell you, the Great Computer is there, in the heart of the butte,"
Leibert was insisting, now. "It has been revealed to me in a dream. It
is completely buried. After it was made, no human touched it. The men
who were here and used it in the War communicated with it only by
radio."

That could be so. There were fully robotic computers, intended for use
in places where no human could go and live. There was a big one on
Nifflheim, armored against the fluorine atmosphere and the
hydrofluoric-acid rains. But there was no point in that here, the
things were enormously complicated, and military engineering of any
sort emphasized simplicity--_Aaaagh!_ Was he beginning to believe this
balderdash himself?

Klem Zareff fell in with him as they were going to dinner. "Revealed
in a dream!" the old Rebel snorted. "One thing you can always get
away with lying about is what you dream."

"You think he's lying? I think he's just crazy."

"That's what he wants you to think. Look, Conn, he knows Merlin is
here; he's trying to keep us from it. That's why he shifted all that
equipment over on the butte. He's working for Sam Murchison."

"I thought your theory was that the Federation had lost Merlin."

"It was, at first. It doesn't look that way to me now. It's right here
at Force Command, somewhere. They don't want it found, and they're
going to do everything they can to stop us. I oughtn't to have left
this fellow Leibert here alone; well, I won't do that again. Get Tom
Brangwyn to help me."




XVI


The voyage back to Koshchei had been a week-long nightmare. When she
had been the pride and budget-wrecker of Transcontinent & Overseas
Airline, the _Harriet Barne_ had accommodated two hundred first-class
and five hundred lower-deck passengers, but the conversion to a
spaceship had drastically reduced her capacity. The three hundred men
and women who had been recruited for the Koshchei colony had been
crammed into her with brutal disregard for comfort, privacy or
anything else except the ability of the air-recyclers to keep them
breathing. When Captain Nichols set her down at the administration
building at Port Carpenter, a few had had to be carried off, but they
were all alive, which made the trip an unqualified success.

The dozen leaders of the expedition were congratulating themselves on
that in one of the executive offices after the first dinner at Port
Carpenter. Rodney Maxwell, in Storisende, had joined them in
screen-image; he was mostly listening, and sometimes contributing a
remark apropos of something the rest of them had said five minutes
ago.

"Our hypership," Conn was saying, "is going to have to be item
two on the agenda. The first thing we need is a ship for the
Poictesme-Koshchei run. By this time next year, we ought to have a
thousand to fifteen hundred people here at the least. We can't haul
them all on that flying sardine can."

"We'll need supplies, too. What was left here won't last forever,"
Nichols added.

"And you're going to have to run this at a profit," Luther Chen-Wong,
who had come along for first hand experience and to help with
administrative work, added. "You have a big payroll to meet, and
you'll have to keep the stockholders happy. People like Jethro
Sastraman and some of these Storisende bankers aren't going to be
satisfied with promises and long-term prospects; they'll want
dividends."

"We'll have to get claims staked on something besides Port Carpenter,
too. Those ships that are building at Storisende will be finished
before long," Jerry Rivas said. "If we don't get some more things
claimed, the first thing you know, we'll own Port Carpenter and
nothing else."

"Well, let's see what we can find in the way of a big airboat, or a
small ship," Conn said. "Jerry, you can pick a party for exploring.
Just zigzag around the planet and transmit in locations and views of
whatever you find, and we'll send it on to Storisende."

"And don't pick anybody for your exploring party that can't be spared
from anything here," Jacquemont added. "We don't want to have to chase
you halfway around the world to bring back the only specialist in
something yesterday at the latest."

"Are you going to come along, Conn?" Rivas asked.

"Oh, Lord, no! I'm going to be doing fifteen things at once here."

All the computer work. Finding materials to make astrogational
equipment and robo-pilots. Studying hyperspace theory--fortunately,
there was an excellent library here--and setting up classes, and
teaching school. And keeping in touch with his father, on Poictesme.
It was making him nervous not to know what sort of foolishness the
older and wiser heads might be getting into.

The next morning, they began organizing work-gangs and setting up
committees. Three men, two girls and about twenty robots got an
open-pit iron mine started; as soon as the steel mill was ready, ore
started coming in. Anse Dawes had a gang looking for something they
could build a 350-foot interplanetary ship out of; Jacquemont and Mack
Vibart were getting plans and specifications and making lists of
needed materials. Conn gathered a dozen men and women and started
classes in computer theory and practice; at the same time, he and
Charley Gatworth were teaching themselves and each other hyperspatial
astrogation, which was the art of tossing a ship into some
everythingless noplace outside normal space-time, and then pulling her
out again by her bootstraps at some other place in the normal
continuum, light-years away.

Roughly, it compared to shooting hummingbirds on the wing,
blindfolded, with a not particularly accurate pistol, from a
mile-a-minute merry-go-round.

That was something you could only do with a computer. A human, with a
slide rule, a pencil and pad, could figure it out, of course--if he
had fifty-odd thousand years to do it. A good computer did it in
thirty seconds. That was one difference between people and computers.
The other difference was that the desirability of making a hyperspace
jump would never occur to a computer, unless somebody pushed a button
and taped in instructions.

They found a three-hundred-foot globular skeleton, probably the
nucleus of a big hyperspace ship, and decided that was big enough for
what they wanted. The entire colony got to work on it. Photoprinted
plans and specifications poured out as Jacquemont and a couple of
draftsmen got them up. Steel came out of the steel mill at one end
while ore came in at the other. A swarm of big contragravity machines,
some robotic and some human-operated, clustered around the skeletal
hull like hornets building a nest.

Trisystem & Interstellar Spacelines was chartered; the lawyers
reported having to overcome a little more resistance than usual from
the Government about that. And the bill to nationalize Merlin, which
had died in committee, was resuscitated and was being debated hotly on
the floor of Parliament. The Administration was now supporting it.

"Are they completely crazy?" Conn wanted to know, when he heard about
that. "They pass that bill and nobody's going to look for Merlin if
they know the Government will snatch it as soon as they find it."

"That is precisely Jake Vyckhoven's idea," his father replied. "I told
you he was afraid of Merlin. He's getting more afraid of it every
day."

He had reason to. There was a growing sentiment in favor of turning
the entire Government over to the computer as soon as it was found. To
his horror, Conn heard himself named as chairman of a committee that
should be set up to operate it. The moderates, who had merely wanted
Merlin used in an advisory capacity, were dropping out; the agitation
was coming from extremists who wanted Merlin to be the whole
Government, and now the extremists were developing an extreme wing of
their own, who called themselves Cybernarchists and started wearing
colored-shirt uniforms and greeting each other with an archaic
stiff-arm salute, and the words, "Hail Merlin!"

And the followers of the gospel-shouter on the west coast were now
cropping up all over the mainland, and on the continent of Acaire to
the north, and another cult, non-religious, was convinced that Merlin
was a living machine, with conscious intelligence of its own and
awesome psi-powers, a sort of super-Golem, which, if found and
awakened, would enslave the whole Galaxy. Fortunately, these two hated
each other as venomously as both did the Cybernarchists, and spent
most of their energies attacking each other's meetings. The
news-services were beginning to publish casualty lists, some heavy
enough for outpost fighting between a couple of regular armies.

One thing, it helped the employment situation. Everybody was hiring
mercenaries.

"But what," Conn asked, "are the sane people doing?"

"You ought to know," his father told him. "I suspect that you have all
of them on Koshchei now."

The sane people, if that was what they were, were being busy. They
were putting a set of Abbott lift-and-drive engines together, and
Conn's computer class was estimating the mass of the finished ship and
the amount of energy needed to overcome gravitation and give it
constant acceleration from Koshchei to Poictesme. They were learning,
by trial and error, largely error, how to build a set of pseudograv
engines. And they were putting together a hundred and one other
things, all of which was good training for the time they'd be ready to
start work on _Ouroboros II_.

Jerry Rivas had found a contragravity craft which seemed to have been
used by some top official for business and inspection trips, had
gathered a crew of non-specialists who weren't urgently needed at Port
Carpenter, and set out to circumnavigate the planet. It worked just
the reverse of expectation. He found a big uranium mine, with an
isotope-separation plant and a battery of plutonium-breeders; that
meant that Mohammed Matsui and half a dozen other nuclear-power people
had to get into another boat and speed after him to see what he had
really found. As soon as they landed, Rivas took off again to discover
a copper mine and a complex of smelters and processing plants. That
took a few more experts, or reasonable facsimiles, away from Port
Carpenter. And then he found a whole city that manufactured nothing
but computers and robo-controls and things like that.

Conn loaded his whole computer-theory class onto a freight-scow and
took them there. By the time he landed, his father was screening him
from Storisende.

"When are you going to get the ship finished?" he was asking. "Kurt
Fawzi's pestering the daylights out of me. He wants that equipment you
promised him."

"We're working on it. What's happened, has Carl Leibert had another
revelation?"

"I don't know about that. Kurt's sure Merlin is directly under Force
Command. And speaking about Leibert, Klem Zareff's been after me about
him. You know I've contracted for the full-time and exclusive services
of this Barton-Massarra detective agency. Well, Klem wants me to put
them to work investigating Leibert."

"Yes, I know; Leibert's a Terran Federation spy. Why do you need the
full-time services of the biggest private detective agency on
Poictesme?"

"There have been some odd things happening. People have been trying to
bribe and intimidate some of my office help. I have found microphones
and screen-pickups planted around. I caught one of our clerks trying
to make copies of voice-tapes. I think it's some of these other
Merlin-chasing companies, trying to find out how close we are to it.
Klem Zareff is recruiting more guards. But how soon are you going to
get that ship built?"

"We're working on it. That's all I know, now."

He went back to work getting a classroom ready for his students. If
he'd accepted that instructorship at Montevideo, he wouldn't be a full
professor now, but none of the rest of this would be happening,
either.

That night, he had the dream about starting the big machine and not
being able to stop it again.

There was street-fighting in Storisende between the Cybernarchists and
Government troops. There was a pitched battle in the west between the
Armageddonists (Merlin-is-Satan) and the Human Supremacy League
(Merlin-is-the-Golem), with heavy losses and claims of victory on both
sides. President Vyckhoven proclaimed planet-wide martial law, and
then discovered that he had nothing to enforce it with.

Luther Chen-Wong screened him from Port Carpenter. His voice was
almost inaudibly low at first.

"Conn, I just had a call from Jerry and Clyde. I think we can knock
off work on that ship we're building now. We won't need it."

"Have they found a ship?" If they had, it would be the first one
anybody had found. "Where?"

"They haven't found _a_ ship, Conn; they've found all of them. All the
ships in the Alpha System except the _Harriet Barne_ and the two
they're building at Storisende. The place is marked on the map as
Sickle Mountain Naval Observatory. It's just a bitty little dot, but
the map was made before the evacuation started. It's where most of the
troops in the system were embarked on hyperships, I think. Wait till I
show you the views."

Conn put on another screen; the first view was from an altitude of
five miles. He didn't need Luther's voice to identify Sickle Mountain;
a long curve, with a spur at right angles to one end, the name must
have suggested itself to whoever saw it first. The observatory had
been built where the handle of the sickle joined the blade; as the
ship from which the view had been taken had approached, the details
grew plainer. At the same time, it became evident that the plain
inside the curve of the sickle was powdered with tiny sparkles, like
tinsel dust on red-brown velvet.

"Great Ghu, are those all ships?"

"That's right. Look at this one, now."

The view changed. The aircraft was down, now, below the crest of the
mountain, circling slowly above the plain. Hundreds, no, over a
thousand, of them; two- and three-and five-hundred-footers, and here
and there a thousand-footer that could have been converted into a
hypership if anybody had wanted to take the trouble. The view changed
again; this time from an aircar dropped from the ship, he supposed; it
was down almost to the tops of the ships, and he could read names and
home ports: _Pixie_, Chloris; _Helen O'Loy_, Anaitis. They were from
Jurgen. _Sky-Rover_, Port Saunders; she was from Horvendile. Ships
from Storisende, and Yellowmarsh on Janicot, and....

"Now we know where they all went."

It was logical, of course. Most of the hyperships used in the
evacuation had been built here. It had been less trouble to lead the
troops and the civilian workers from Poictesme and the other planets
onto small normal-space ships and bring them here than to take the big
ships away on short interplanetary runs to the other planets.

"Have you screened my father yet?"

"Yes. This is going to knock the bottom out of the companies that are
building those ships at Storisende, I'm afraid."

"Their tough luck."

"It could be everybody's tough luck. Both those companies have been
