The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Beginning, by Henry Hasse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Beginning

Author: Henry Hasse

Illustrator: Virgil Finlay

Release Date: December 28, 2008 [EBook #27645]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEGINNING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Relentlessly, a narrative as old as time drives forward to a climax
    as old as man--and points a finger as grim as Death._

[Illustration]


the BEGINNING

By HENRY HASSE

Illustrated by FINLAY


In the purely cerebral sense, there was no particular point-of-sequence
at which Gral could have been said to Know. The very causality of his
existence was a succession of brute obedience to brute awareness, for it
was only thus that one survived. There was the _danger-sense_ on
those days when the great-toothed cats roamed the valley, and the
males-who-will-bring remained huddled and sullen in the caves above the
great ledge; there was the _hunger-sense_ when provender was low, and
Gor-wah drove them out with grunts and gibes to hunt the wild-dogs and
lizards and lesser beasts; and not infrequently there was the other
sense, the _not-hunger_, when the bring had been exceptional and there
was somnolence after the gorging.

Gral could not remember when he had experienced the latter, for it was
the dictate of Gor-wah, the Old One, that who did not bring did not
eat--not until the others had gorged. Gral was small, and weakest of all
the males. Not often did he bring. _Once_ on a spurious moment he had
scaled the valley-rim, and came out upon the huge plain where it was
rumored the little three-toed horses roamed. And he had seen them, he
had seen them! He pursued, armed only with blunt shaft and a few of the
throw-stones such as Otah used; but he was less swift than the tiny
horses, and his throw-stones fell wide, and it was rumored that here
roamed the long-tusked shaggy ones that were larger than the very caves
... trembling, Gral had retraced his way, to arrive at the ledge and
meekly await Gor-wah's word that he could partake of the sinews that
night.

_... Point of sequence. Causality in action. An atom is dissected, a
belly rumbles in hunger, a star blooms into brief nova; a bird wheels in
futile escape, an ice-flow impacts, an equation is expressed in awesome
mushrooming shape. These are multitudinous, apocalyptic. They are
timeless and equal. These are things whereby suns wheel or blossom or
die, a tribe vanishes, a civilization climbs or a world decays._

Or an earlier sun, hot and soft-stroking against leaves. Or a
Pleistocene man, smallest of all the males, whose supine acceptance had
devolved into laziness....

Gral would not have called it laziness; his crude synapses could not
have contained the thought, much less given it relevance. Even later--as
Gral-the-Bringer--his only point of relevance was to the Place where the
great thing happened.

The Place was a small rocky cleft above the river, not easily
accessible.... Gral found it one day because he dearly loved to climb,
though all to be found here were the lizards, stringy and without
substance. But this day he found more. It was _warmth_, a warmth
immeasurably more satisfying than the caves-above-the-ledge. Here for
perhaps an hour the late sun stroked directly in, soft and containing,
setting the narrow walls aglow with bright-brushed patterns.

To Gral it was an hour apart. He gathered leaves and placed them here,
and here he paused in the lateness of each day though his bring was
frugal and his belly would rumble that night. But to _that_ he was
accustomed, and this was pleasurable.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the time of the thaw. Gral huddled in his Place and welcomed the
stroking warmth. He was weary, his forage had been fruitless, his
throw-stones wasted ... would he never master them as Otah and the
others? He had confronted a wild-dog and pinned it snarling against
rock, he had employed his shaft and got it fairly into flesh, only to
have the beast slip off the smooth point and escape. Smooth points--they
were useless! Briefly, his mind groped with that but could not sustain
it.

