and 22", p. 62 deg.. In the Pleiades we naturally turn to the brightest star
eta, or Alcyone, famous for having once been regarded as the central sun
around which our sun and a multitude of other luminaries were supposed
to revolve, and picturesque on account of the little triangle of small
stars near it which the least telescopic assistance enables us to see.
One may derive much pleasure from a study of the various groupings of
stars in the Pleiades. Photography has demonstrated, what had long been
suspected from occasional glimpses revealed by the telescope, that this
celebrated cluster of stars is intermingled with curious forms of
nebulae. The nebulous matter appears in festoons, apparently attached to
some of the larger stars, such as Alcyone, Merope, and Maia, and in
long, narrow, straight lines, the most remarkable of which, a faintly
luminous thread starting midway between Maia and Alcyone and running
eastward some 40', is beaded with seven or eight stars. The width of
this strange nebulous streak is, on an average, 3" or 4", and there is,
perhaps, no more wonderful phenomenon anywhere in celestial space.
Unfortunately, no telescope is able to show it, and all our knowledge
about it is based upon photographs. It might be supposed that it was a
nebulous disk seen edgewise, but for the fact that at the largest star
involved in its course it bends sharply about 10 deg. out of its former
direction, and for the additional fact that it seems to take its origin
from a curved offshoot of the intricate nebulous mass surrounding Maia.
Exactly at the point where this curve is transformed into a straight
line shines a small star! In view of all the facts the idea does not
seem to be very far-fetched that in the Pleiades we behold an assemblage
of suns, large and small, formed by the gradual condensation of a
nebula, and in which evolution has gone on far beyond the stage
represented by the Orion nebula, where also a group of stars may be in
process of formation out of nebulous matter. If we look a little farther
along this line of development, we may perceive in such a stellar
assemblage as the cluster in Hercules, a still later phase wherein all
the originally scattered material has, perhaps, been absorbed into the
starry nuclei.

[Illustration: THE CHIEF STARS IN THE PLEIADES.]

The yellow star Sigma 430 has two companions: magnitudes six, nine, and
nine and a half, distances 26", p. 55 deg., and 39", p. 302 deg.. The star 30 of
the fifth magnitude has a companion of the ninth magnitude, distance 9",
p. 58 deg., colors emerald and purple, faint. An interesting variable, of
the type of Algol, is lambda, which at maximum is of magnitude three and
four tenths and at minimum of magnitude four and two tenths. Its period
from one maximum to the next is about three days and twenty-three hours,
but the actual changes occupy only about ten hours, and it loses light
more swiftly than it regains it. A combination of red and blue is
presented by Phi (mistakenly marked on map No. 23 as psi). The
magnitudes are six and eight, distance 56", p. 242 deg.. A double of similar
magnitudes is chi, distance 19", p. 25 deg.. Between the two stars which the
naked eye sees in kappa is a minute pair, each of less than the eleventh
magnitude, distance 5", p. 324 deg.. Another naked-eye double is formed by
theta^1 and theta^2, in the Hyades. The magnitudes are five and five and
a half, distance about 5' 37".

The leading star of Taurus, Aldebaran (alpha), is celebrated for its
reddish color. The precise hue is rather uncertain, but Aldebaran is not
orange as Betelgeuse in Orion is, and no correct eye can for an instant
confuse the colors of these two stars, although many persons seem to be
unable to detect the very plain difference between them in this respect.
Aldebaran has been called "rose-red," and it would be an interesting
occupation for an amateur to determine, with the aid of some proper
color scale, the precise hue of this star, and of the many other stars
which exhibit chromatic idiosyncrasy. Aldebaran is further interesting
as being a standard first-magnitude star. With the four-inch glass we
see without difficulty the tenth-magnitude companion following Aldebaran
at a distance of 114", p. 35 deg.. There is an almost inexplicable charm
about these faint attendants of bright stars, which is quite different
from the interest attaching to a close and nearly equal pair. The
impression of physical relationship is never lacking though it may be
deceptive, and this awakens a lively appreciation of the vast
differences of magnitude that exist among the different suns of space.

The actual size and might of this great red sun form an attractive
subject for contemplation. As it appears to our eyes Aldebaran gives one
twenty-five-thousand-millionth as much light as the sun, but if we were
placed midway between them the star would outshine the sun in the ratio
of not less than 160 to 1. And yet, gigantic as it is, Aldebaran is
possibly a pygmy in comparison with Arcturus, whose possible dimensions
were discussed in the chapter relating to Booetes. Although Aldebaran is
known to possess several of the metallic elements that exist in the sun,
its spectrum differs widely from the solar spectrum in some respects,
and more closely resembles that of Arcturus.

Other interesting objects in Taurus are sigma, divisible with the naked
eye, magnitudes five and five and a half, distance 7'; Sigma 674,
double, magnitudes six and nine, distance 10.5", p. 147 deg.; Sigma 716,
double, magnitudes six and seven, distance 5", p. 200 deg.--a pleasing
sight; tau, triple, magnitudes four, ten and a half, and eleven,
distances 36", p. 249 deg., and 36", p. 60 deg.--the ten-and-a-half-magnitude
star is itself double, as discovered by Burnham; star cluster No. 1030,
not quite as broad as the moon, and containing some stars as large as
the eleventh magnitude; and nebula No. 1157, the so-called "Crab nebula"
of Lord Rosse, which our glasses will show only as a misty patch of
faint light, although large telescopes reveal in it a very curious
structure.

[Illustration: MAP NO. 24.]

We now turn to the cluster of circumpolar constellations sometimes
called the Royal Family, in allusion to the well-known story of the
Ethiopian king Cepheus and his queen Cassiopeia, whose daughter
Andromeda was exposed on the seashore to be devoured by a monster, but
who was saved by the hero Perseus. All these mythologic personages are
represented in the constellations that we are about to study.[4] We
begin with Andromeda (map No. 24). The leading star alpha marks one
corner of the great square of Pegasus. The first star of telescopic
interest that we find in Andromeda is , a double difficult on account of
the faintness of the smaller component. The magnitudes are four and
eleven, distance 49", p. 110 deg.. A few degrees north of the naked eye
detects a glimmering point where lies the Great Nebula in Andromeda.
This is indicated on the map by the number 116. With either of our three
telescopes it is an interesting object, but of course it is advisable to
use our largest glass in order to get as much light as possible. All
that we can see is a long, shuttle-shaped nebulous object, having a
brighter point near the center. Many stars are scattered over the field
in its neighborhood, but the nebula itself, although its spectrum is
peculiar in resembling that of a faint star, is evidently a gaseous or
at any rate a meteoritic mass, since photographs show it to be composed
of a series of imperfectly separated spirals surrounding a vast central
condensation. This peculiarity of the Andromeda nebula, which is
invisible with telescopes although conspicuous in the photographs, has,
since its discovery a few years ago, given a great impetus to
speculation concerning the transformation of nebulae into stars and star
clusters. No one can look at a good photograph of this wonderful
phenomenon without noticing its resemblance to the ideal state of things
which, according to the nebular hypothesis, must once have existed in
the solar system. It is to be remembered, however, that there is
probably sufficient material in the Andromeda nebula to make a system
many times, perhaps hundreds or thousands of times, as extensive as that
of which our sun is the center. If one contemplates this nebula only
long enough to get a clear perception of the fact that creation was not
ended when, according to the Mosaic history, God, having in six days
finished "the heavens and the earth and all the host of them," rested
from all his work, a good blow will have been dealt for the cause of
truth. Systems far vaster than ours are now in the bud, and long before
they have bloomed, ambitious man, who once dreamed that all these things
were created to serve him, will probably have vanished with the
extinguishment of the little star whose radiant energy made his life and
his achievements briefly possible.

[4] For further details on this subject see Astronomy with an
Opera-glass.

In August, 1885, a new star of magnitude six and a half made its
appearance suddenly near the center of the Andromeda nebula. Within one
year it had disappeared, having gradually dwindled until the great
Washington telescope, then the largest in use, no longer showed it. That
this was a phenomenon connected with the nebula is most probable, but
just what occurred to produce it nobody knows. The observed appearances
might have been produced by a collision, and no better hypothesis has
yet been suggested to account for them.

Near the opposite end of the constellation from alpha we find the most
interesting of triple stars in gamma. The two larger components of this
beautiful star are of magnitudes three and six, distance 10", colors
golden yellow and deep blue. The three-inch shows them finely. The
smaller star is itself double, its companion being of magnitude eight,
distance when discovered in 1842 0.5", color bluish green. A few years
ago this third star got so close to its primary that it was invisible
even with the highest powers of the great Lick telescope, but at present
it is widening again. In October, 1893, I had the pleasure of looking at
gamma Andromedae with the Lick telescope, and at that time it was
possible just to separate the third star. The angle seemed too small for
certain measurement, but a single setting of the micrometer by Mr.
Barnard, to whose kindness I was indebted for my view of the star, gave
0.17" as the approximate distance. In 1900 the distance had increased to
0.4", p. 115 deg.. The brilliance of color contrast between the two larger
stars of gamma Andromedae is hardly inferior to that exhibited in beta
Cygni, so that this star may be regarded as one of the most picturesque
of stellar objects for small telescopes.

Other pleasing objects in this constellation are the binary star 36,
magnitudes six and six and a half, distance 1", p. 17 deg.--the two stars
are slowly closing and the five-inch glass is required to separate them:
the richly colored variable R, which fades from magnitude five and a
half to invisibility, and then recovers its light in a period of about
four hundred and five days; and the bright star cluster 457, which
covers a space about equal to the area of the full moon.

Just south of the eastern end of Andromeda is the small constellation
Triangulum, or the Triangles, containing two interesting objects. One of
these is the beautiful little double 6, magnitudes five and six,
distance 3.8", p. 77 deg., colors yellow and blue; and the other, the nebula
352, which equals in extent the star cluster in Andromeda described
above, but nevertheless appears very faint with our largest glass. Its
faintness, however, is not an indication of insignificance, for to very
powerful telescopes it exhibits a wonderful system of nuclei and
spirals--another bit of chaos that is yielding by age-long steps to the
influence of demiurgic forces.

A richer constellation than Andromeda, both for naked-eye and telescopic
observation, is Perseus, which is especially remarkable for its star
clusters. Two of these, 512 and 521, constitute the celebrated double
cluster, sometimes called the Sword-hand of Perseus, and also chi
Persei. To the smallest telescope this aggregation of stars, ranging in
magnitude from six and a half to fourteen, and grouped about two
neighboring centers, presents a marvelous appearance. As an educative
object for those unaccustomed to celestial observations it may be
compared among star clusters to beta Cygni among double stars, for the
most indifferent spectator is struck with wonder in viewing it. All the
other clusters in Perseus represented on the map are worth examining,
although none of them calls for special mention, except perhaps 584,
where we may distinguish at least a hundred separate stars within an
area less than one quarter as expansive as the face of the moon.

Among the double stars of Perseus we note first eta, whose components
are of magnitudes four and eight, distance 28", colors white and pale
blue. The double epsilon is especially interesting on account of an
alleged change of color from blue to red which the smaller star
undergoes coincidently with a variation of brightness. The magnitudes
are three and eight, distance 9", p. 9 deg.. An interesting multiple is
zeta, two of whose stars at least we can see. The magnitudes are three,
nine, ten, and ten, distances 13", p. 207 deg., 90", and 112".

The chief attraction in Perseus is the changeful and wonderful beta, or
Algol, the great typical star among the short-period variables. During
the greater part of its period this star is of magnitude two and two
tenths, but for a very short time, following a rapid loss of light, it
remains at magnitude three and seven tenths. The difference, one
magnitude and a half, corresponds to an actual difference in brightness
in the ratio of 3.75 to 1. The entire loss of light during the
declension occupies only four hours and a half. The star remains at its
faintest for a few minutes only before a perceptible gain of light
occurs, and the return to maximum is as rapid as was the preceding
decline. The period from one minimum to the next is two days twenty
hours forty-eight minutes fifty-three seconds, with an irregularity
amounting to a few seconds in a year. The Arabs named the star Algol, or
the Demon, on account of its eccentricity which did not escape their
attention; and when Goodricke, in 1782, applied a scientific method of
observation to it, the real cause of its variations was suggested by
him, but his explanation failed of general acceptance until its truth
was established by Prof. E. C. Pickering in 1880. This explanation gives
us a wonderful insight into stellar constitution. According to it, Algol
possesses a companion as large as the sun, but invisible, both because
of its proximity to that star and because it yields no light, and
revolving in a plane horizontal to our line of sight. The period of
revolution is identical with the period of Algol's cycle of variation,
and the diminution of light is caused by the interposition of the dark
body as it sweeps along that part of its orbit lying between our point
of view and the disk of Algol. In other words, once in every two days
twenty hours and forty-nine minutes Algol, as seen from the earth,
undergoes a partial eclipse.

In consequence of the great comparative mass of its dark companion,
Algol itself moves in an orbit around their common center with a
velocity quite sufficient to be detected by the shifting of the lines in
its spectrum. By means of data thus obtained the mass, size, and
distance apart of Algol and its singular comrade have been inferred. The
diameter of Algol is believed to be about 1,125,000 miles, that of the
dark body about 840,000 miles, and the mean distance from center to
center 3,230,000 miles. The density of both the light and the dark star
is slight compared with that of the sun, so that their combined mass is
only two thirds as great as the sun's.

Mention has been made of a slight irregularity in Algol's period of
variation. Basing his calculations upon this inequality, Dr. Chandler
has put forward the hypothesis that there is another invisible body
connected with Algol, and situated at a distance from it of about
1,800,000,000 miles, and that around this body, which is far more
massive than the others, Algol and its companions revolve in a period of
one hundred and thirty years! Dr. Chandler has earned the right to have
his hypotheses regarded with respect, even when they are as
extraordinary as that which has just been described. It needs no
indulgence of the imagination to lend interest to Algol; the simple
facts are sufficient. How did that bright star fall in with its black
neighbors? Or were they created together?

[Illustration: MAP NO. 25.]

Passing to the region covered by map No. 25, our eyes are caught by the
curious figure, formed by the five brightest stars of the constellation
Cassiopeia, somewhat resembling the letter W. Like Perseus, this is a
rich constellation, both in star clusters and double stars. Among the
latter we select as our first example sigma, in which we find a
combination of color that is at once very unusual and very
striking--green and blue. The magnitudes are five and seven, distance
3", p. 324 deg.. Another beautiful colored double is eta, whose magnitudes
are four and seven and a half, distance 5", p. 200 deg., colors white and
purple. This is one of the comparatively small number of stars the
measure of whose distance has been attempted, and a keen sense of the
uncertainty of such measures is conveyed by the fact that authorities of
apparently equal weight place eta Cassiopeiae at such discordant
distances as 124,000,000,000,000 miles, 70,000,000,000,000 miles, and
42,000,000,000,000 miles. It will be observed that the difference
between the greatest and the least of these estimates is about double
the entire distance given by the latter. The same thing is practically
true of the various attempts to ascertain the distance of the other
stars which have a perceptible parallax, even those which are evidently
the nearest. In some cases the later measures increase the distance, in
other cases they diminish it; in no case is there anything like a
complete accord. Yet of course we are not to infer that it is hopeless
to learn anything about the distances of the stars. With all their
uncertainties and disagreements the few parallaxes we possess have laid
a good foundation for a knowledge of the dimensions of at least the
nearer parts of the universe.

We find an interesting triple in psi, the magnitudes of the larger
components being four and a half and eight and a half, distance 30". The
smaller star has a nine-and-a-half-magnitude companion, distance 3". A
more beautiful triple is iota, magnitudes four, seven, and eight,
distances 2", p. 256 deg., and 7.5", p. 112 deg.. Cassiopeia contains many
star clusters, three of which are indicated in the map. Of these 392 is
perhaps the most interesting, as it includes stars of many magnitudes,
among which are a red one of the eighth magnitude, and a ninth-magnitude
double whose components are 8" apart. Not far from the star kappa we
find the spot where the most brilliant temporary star on record made its
appearance on November 11, 1572. Tycho Brahe studied this phenomenon
during the entire period of its visibility, which lasted until March,
1574. It burst out suddenly with overpowering splendor, far outshining
