consideration of her illusions, never dissuaded her. At last, they were
married by an understanding clergyman of the locale, who solemnly filled
in the marriage application with the name of M. Edwarde Dauphin.

I, Etienne Dauphin, am their son.

To be candid, I am a handsome youth, not unlike my mother in the
delicacy of my features. My father's heritage is evident in my large,
feline eyes, and in my slight body and quick movements. My mother's
death, when I was four, left me in the charge of my father and his
coterie of loyal servants, and I could not have wished for a finer
upbringing. It is to my father's patient tutoring that I owe whatever
graces I now possess. It was my father, the cat, whose gentle paws
guided me to the treasure houses of literature, art, and music, whose
whiskers bristled with pleasure at a goose well cooked, at a meal well
served, at a wine well chosen. How many happy hours we shared! He knew
more of life and the humanities, my father, the cat, than any human I
have met in all my twenty-three years.

Until the age of eighteen, my education was his personal challenge.
Then, it was his desire to send me into the world outside the gates. He
chose for me a university in America, for he was deeply fond of what he
called "that great raw country," where he believed my feline qualities
might be tempered by the aggressiveness of the rough-coated barking dogs
I would be sure to meet.

I must confess to a certain amount of unhappiness in my early American
years, torn as I was from the comforts of the estate and the wisdom of
my father, the cat. But I became adapted, and even upon my graduation
from the university, sought and held employment in a metropolitan art
museum. It was there I met Joanna, the young woman I intended to make my
bride.

Joanna was a product of the great American southwest, the daughter of a
cattle-raiser. There was a blooming vitality in her face and her body, a
lustiness born of open skies and desert. Her hair was not the gold of
antiquity; it was new gold, freshly mined from the black rock. Her eyes
were not like old-world diamonds; their sparkle was that of sunlight on
a cascading river. Her figure was bold, an open declaration of her sex.

She was, perhaps, an unusual choice for the son of fairy-like mother and
an Angora cat. But from the first meeting of our eyes, I knew that I
would someday bring Joanna to my father's estate to present her as my
fiancee.

I approached that occasion with understandable trepidation. My father
had been explicit in his advice before I departed for America, but on no
point had he been more emphatic than secrecy concerning himself. He
assured me that revelation of my paternity would bring ridicule and
unhappiness upon me. The advice was sound, of course, and not even
Joanna knew that our journey's end would bring us to the estate of a
large, cultured, and conversing cat. I had deliberately fostered the
impression that I was orphaned, believing that the proper place for
revealing the truth was the atmosphere of my father's home in France. I
was certain that Joanna would accept her father-in-law without distress.
Indeed, hadn't nearly a score of human servants remained devoted to
their feline master for almost a generation?

We had agreed to be wed on the first of June, and on May the fourth,
emplaned in New York for Paris. We were met at Orly Field by Francois,
my father's solemn manservant, who had been delegated not so much as
escort as he was chaperone, my father having retained much of the old
world proprieties. It was a long trip by automobile to our estate in
Brittany, and I must admit to a brooding silence throughout the drive
which frankly puzzled Joanna.

However, when the great stone fortress that was our home came within
view, my fears and doubts were quickly dispelled. Joanna, like so many
Americans, was thrilled at the aura of venerability and royal custom
surrounding the estate. Francois placed her in charge of Madame Jolinet,
who clapped her plump old hands with delight at the sight of her fresh
blonde beauty, and chattered and clucked like a mother hen as she led
Joanna to her room on the second floor. As for myself, I had one
immediate wish: to see my father, the cat.

He greeted me in the library, where he had been anxiously awaiting our
