
M. M. The perpetual use of bougies, either of catgut or of caoutchouc. The
latter may be had at No. 37, Red-lion street, Holborn, London. The former
are easily made, by moistening the catgut, and keeping it stretched till
dry, and then rounding one end with a pen-knife. The use of a warm bath
every day for near an hour, at the heat of 94 or 96 degrees, for two or
three months, I knew to be uncommonly successful in one case; the extensive
fistulas completely healing. The patient should introduce a bougie always
before he makes water, and endeavour to make it as slowly as possible. See
Class I. 2. 3. 24.

12. _Hepatitis chronica._ Chronical inflammation of the liver. A collection
of matter in the liver has frequently been found on dissection, which was
not suspected in the living subject. Though there may have been no certain
signs of such a collection of matter, owing to the insensibility of the
internal parts of this viscus; which has thus neither been attended with
pain, nor induced any fever; yet there may be in some cases reason to
suspect the existence of such an abscess; either from a sense of fulness in
the right hypochondre, or from transient pains sometimes felt there, or
from pain on pressure, or from lying on the left side, and sometimes from a
degree of sensitive fever attending it.

Dr. Saunders suspects the acute hepatitis to exist in the inflammation of
the hepatic artery, and the chronical one in that of the vena portarum.
Treatise on the Liver. Robinson. London.

13. _Scrophula suppurans._ Suppurating scrophula. The indolent tumors of
the lymphatic glands are liable, after a long time, to regain their
sensibility; and then, owing to their former torpor, an increased action of
the vessels, beyond what is natural, with inflammation, is the consequence
of their new life, and suppuration succeeds. This cure of scrophula
generally happens about puberty, when a new energy pervades the whole
system, and unfolds the glands and organs of reproduction.

M. M. See Class I. 2. 3. 21. Where scrophulous ulcers about the neck are
difficult to heal, Dr. Beddoes was informed, in Ireland, that an empyric
had had some success by inflaming them by an application of wood sorrel,
oxalis acetosella, the leaves of which are bruised in a mortar, and applied
on the ulcers for two or three days, and then some more lenient application
is used.

A poor boy, about twelve years old, had a large scrophulous ulcer on one
side of the chest beneath the clavicle, and another under his jaw; he was
directed, about three weeks ago, to procure a pound of dry oak-bark from
the tanners, and to reduce it to fine powder, and to add to it one ounce of
white lead in fine powder, and to cover the ulcers daily with it, keeping
it on by brown paper and a bandage. He came to me a few minutes ago, to
shew me that both the ulcers are quite healed. The constant application of
linen rags, moistened with a solution of an ounce of sugar of lead in a
pint of water, I think I have seen equally efficacious.

14. _Scorbutus suppurans._ In the sea-scurvy there exists an inactivity of
venous absorption, whence vibices and petechiae, and sometimes ulcers. As
the column of blood pressing on the of origins of the veins of the lower
extremities, when the body is erect, opposes the ascent of the blood in
them, they are more frequently liable to become enlarged, and to produce
varixes, or vibices, or, lastly, ulcers about the legs, than on the upper
parts of the body. The exposure to cold is believed to be another cause of
ulcers on the extremities; as happens to many of the poor in winter at
Lisbon, who sleep in the open air, without stockings, on the steps of their
churches or palaces. See Class I. 2. 1. 15.

M. M. A bandage spread with plaster to cover the whole limb tight. Rags
dipped in a solution of sugar of lead. A warm flannel stocking or roller.
White lead and oak bark, both in fine powder. Horizontal rest.

15. _Scirrhus suppurans._ When a scirrhus affects any gland of no great
extent or sensibility, it is, after a long period of time, liable to
suppurate without inducing fever, like the indolent tumors of the
conglobate or lymphatic glands above mentioned; whence collections of
matter are often found after death both in men and other animals; as in the
liver of swine, which have been fed with the grounds of fermented mixtures
in the distilleries. Another termination of scirrhus is in cancer, as
described below. See Class I. 2. 3. 22.

16. _Carcinoma._ Cancer. When a schirrous tumor regains its sensibility by
nature, or by any accidental hurt, new vessels shoot amongst the yet
insensible parts of it, and a new secretion takes place of a very injurious
material. This cancerous matter is absorbed, and induces swelling of the
neighbouring lymphatic glands; which also become schirrous, and afterwards
cancerous.

This cancerous matter does not seem to acquire its malignant or contagious
quality, till the cancer becomes an open ulcer; and the matter secreted in
it is thus exposed to the air. Then it evidently becomes contagious,
because it not only produces hectic fever, like common matter in ulcers
open to the air; but it also, as it becomes absorbed, swells the lymphatic
glands in its vicinity; as those of the axilla, when the open cancer is on
the breast. See Class II. 1. 3.

Hence exsection before the cancer is open is generally a cure; but after
the matter has been exposed to the air, it is seldom of service; as the
neighbouring lymphatic glands are already infected. I have observed some of
these patients after the operation to have had diseased livers, which might
either have previously existed, or have been produced by the fear or
anxiety attending the operation.

Erosion with arsenic, after the cancer is become an open ulcer, has
generally no better effect than exsection, but has been successful before
ulceration. The best manner of using arsenic, is by mixing one grain with a
dram of lapis calaminaris, and strewing on the cancer some of the powder
every day, till the whole is destroyed.

Cancers on the face are said to arise from the periosteum, and that unless
this be destroyed by the knife, or by caustics, the cancer certainly
recurs. After the cancer becomes an open ulcer of some extent, a purulent
fever supervenes, as from other open ulcers, and gradually destroys the
patient. See Class II. 1. 6. 13.

Two very interesting cases have been lately published by Dr. Ewart, of
Bath, in which carbonic acid gas, or fixed air, was kept constantly in
contact with the open cancerous ulcers of the breast; which then healed
like other common ulcers. This is rather to be ascribed to the exclusion of
oxygen, than to any specific virtue in the carbonic acid. As in common
ulcers the matter does not induce hectic fever, till it has been exposed to
the air, and then probably united with oxygen.

The manner of applying the fixed air, is by including the cancer in one
half or hemisphere of a large bladder; the edges are made to adhere to the
skin by adhesive plaster, or perhaps a mixture of one part of honey with
about twenty parts of carpenter's glue might better suit some tender skins.
The bladder is then kept constantly filled with carbonic acid gas, by means
of a pipe in the neck of it; and the matter let out at a small aperture
beneath.

17. _Arthrocele._ Swelling of the joints seems to have its remote cause in
the softness of the bones, for they could not swell unless they were
previously softened, see Class I. 2. 2. 14. The epiphyses, or ends of the
bones, being naturally of a looser texture, are most liable to this
disease, and perhaps the cartilages and capsular ligaments may also become
inflamed and swelled along with the heads of the bones. This malady is
liable to distort the fingers and knees, and is usually called gout or
rheumatism; the former of which is liable to disable the fingers by
chalk-stones, and thence to have somewhat a similar appearance. But the
arthrocele, or swelling of the joints, affects people who have not been
intemperate in the use of fermented or spirituous liquors; or who have not
previously had a regular gout in their feet; and in both these
circumstances differs from the gout. Nor does it accord with the
inflammatory rheumatism, as it is not attended with fever, and because the
tumors of the joints never entirely subside. The pain or sensibility, which
the bones acquire, when they are inflamed, may be owing to the new vessels,
which shoot in them in their soft state, as well as to the distention of
the old ones.

M. M. Half a grain of opium twice a day, gradually increased to a grain,
but not further, for many months. Thirty grains of powder of bark twice a
day for many months. Ten grains of bone-ashes, or calcined hartshorn, twice
a day, with decoction of madder? Soda phosphorata?

18. _Arthropuosis._ Joint-evil. This differs from the former, as that never
suppurates; these ulcers of the joints are generally esteemed to arise from
scrophula; but as scrophula is a disease of the lymphatic or absorbent
system, and this consists in the suppuration of the membranes, or glands,
or cartilages about the joints, there does not seem a sufficient analogy to
authorize their arrangement under the same name.

The white swelling of the knee, when it suppurates, comes under this
species, with variety of other ulcers attended with carious bones.

19. _Caries ossium._ A caries of the bones may be termed a suppuration of
them; it differs from the above, as it generally is occasioned by some
external injury, as in decaying teeth; or by venereal virus, as in nodes on
the tibia; or by other matter derived to the bone in malignant fevers; and
is not confined to the ends of them.

The separation of the dead bone from the living is a work of some time. See
Sect. XXXIII. 3. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Sensation._

GENUS V.

_With the Production of new Vessels by external Membranes or Glands,
without Fever._

The ulcers, or eruptions, which are formed on the external skin, or on the
mouth or throat, or on the air-cells of the lungs, or on the intestines,
all of which are more or less exposed to the contact of the atmospheric
air, which we breathe, and which in some proportion we swallow with our
food and saliva; or to the contact of the inflammable air, or hydrogen,
which is set at liberty by the putrefying aliment in the intestines, or by
putrefying matter in large abscesses; all of them produce contagious
matter; which, on being inoculated into the skin of another person, will
produce fever, or a similar disease.

In some cases even the matter formed beneath the skin becomes in some
degree contagious, at least so much so as to produce fever of the hectic or
malignant kind, as soon as it has pierced through the skin, and has thus
gained access to some kind of air; as the fresh puss of a common abscess;
or the putrid pus of an abscess, which has been long confined; or of
cancerous ulcers.

From this analogy there is reason to suspect, that the matter of all
contagious diseases, whether with or without fever, is not infectious till
it has acquired something from the air; which, by oxygenating the secreted
matter, may probably produce a new acid. And secondly, that in hectic fever
a part of the purulent matter is absorbed; or acts on the surface of the
ulcer; as variolous matter affects the inoculated part of the arm. And that
hectic fever is therefore caused by the matter of an open ulcer; and not by
the sensation in the ulcer independent of the aerated pus, which lies on
it. Which may account for the venereal matter from buboes not giving the
infection, according to the experiments of the late Mr. Hunter, and for
some other phenomena of contagion. See Variola discreta, Class II. 1. 3. 9.

SPECIES.

1. _Gonorrhoea venerea._ A pus-like contagious material discharged from the
urethra after impure cohabitation, with smarting or heat on making water;
which begins at the external extremity of the urethra, to which the
contagious matter is applied, and where it has access to the air.

M. M. In this state of the venereal disease once venesection, with mild
cathartics of senna and manna, with mucilage, as almond emulsion, and gum
arabic, taken for two or three weeks, absolve the cure. Is camphor of use
to relieve the ardor urinae? Do balsams increase or lessen the heat of
urine? Neutral salts certainly increase the smarting in making water, by
increasing the acrimony of the urine.

Can the discharge from the urethra be soon stopped by saturnine injections,
or mercurial ones, or with solution of blue vitriol, at first very dilute,
and gradually made stronger? And at the same time lest the syphilis, or
general disease, should supervene, the patient might take a quarter of a
grain of corrosive sublimate of mercury twice a day, as directed below?

2. _Syphilis._ Venereal disease. The contagion shews itself in ulcers on
the part first inoculated, as chancres; ulcers on the tonsils succeed, with
eruption on the skin, especially about the roots of the hair; afterwards on
other parts of the skin, terminating in dry scabs; and lastly, with pain
and swelling of the bones.

The corona veneris, or crown of Venus, consists of the eruptions at the
roots of the hair appearing most round the forehead; which is occasioned by
this part being more exposed to the air; which we observed, at the
beginning of this genus, either produces or increases the virulence of
contagious matter. But it is difficult to conceive from this history, why
the throat should be first affected; as it cannot be supposed, that the
disease is so often taken by the saliva, like the small-pox, though this
may sometimes occur, perhaps very often. The connection between the
genitals in men and the throat, is treated of in Class IV. 1. 2. 7.
Hydrophobia.

M. M. A quarter of a grain of corrosive sublimate of mercury, taken thrice
a day for five or six weeks, made into a pill with breadcrumbs, or
dissolved in a spoonful of brandy and water, is a very efficacious and
almost certain cure. When it does not succeed, it is owing either to the
drug being bad, or to its having precipitated from the brandy, or from its
being spoiled in the pill by long keeping. Opium contributes much to
expedite the cure both of the simple gonorrhoea, and of venereal ulcers, by
increasing absorption both from the mucous membrane, and from the surface
of ulcers.

3. _Lepra._ Leprosy. Leprosy of the Greeks. The skin is rough with white
branny scales, which are full of chinks; often moist beneath, and itching.
The scales on the head or arms of some drinking people are a disease of
this kind. The perspirable matter designed for the purpose of lubricating
the external skin is secreted in this disease in a too viscid state, owing
to the inflammation of the subcutaneous vessels; and, as the absorbents act
too strongly at the same time, a viscid mucus is left adhering to the
surface of the skin.

In the leprosy of the Jews, described in the thirteenth and fourteenth
chapters of Leviticus, the depression of the sore beneath the surface of
the skin, and the hairs in it becoming white, seem to have been the
principal circumstances, which the priest was directed to attend to for the
purpose of ascertaining the disease.

M. M. Essence of antimony from 20 drops to 100 twice or thrice a day, with
half a pint of decoction of elm-bark; or tincture of cantharides from 20 to
60 drops four times a day; or sublimate of mercury, with much diluting
fluid. Acid of vitriol? Perhaps the cure chiefly depends on much dilution
with water, from two to four pints a day, in which elm-bark, or pine-buds,
or juniper-tops, may be boiled. Bath or Buxton water drank in large
quantities. Warm bath. Oil-skin bound on the part to confine the
perspirable matter. Ointment of tar and suet; or poultice for two or three
days, and then cerate with lapis calaminaris. Diet of raisins and bread.
Abstinence from wine, beer, and all spirits.

4. _Elephantiasis._ Leprosy of the Arabs. A contagious disease; the skin is
thickened, wrinkled, rough, unctuous, destitute of hair, without any
sensation of touch in the extremities of the limbs; the face deformed with
tubercles; the voice hoarse, and with a nasal tone. Cullen.

5. _Framboesia._ Yaws is said to be contagious and hereditary. It
principally affects the negroes in the West Indies. Edinb. Essays, Vol. VI.

6. _Psora._ Itch. A contagious prurient eruption. There are two kinds of
itch, that which appears between the fingers, and under the joints of the
knees and elbows; and that which seldom is seen in these places, but all
over the other parts of the body. The latter is seldom thought to be the
itch, as it does not easily infect even a bedfellow, and resists the usual
means of cure by brimstone.

If the itch be cured too hastily by rubbing mercurial or arsenical
preparations over the whole body, or on too great a part of it, many bad
symptoms are produced; as weakness of digestion, with pale bloated
countenance, and tendency to dropsy. I have twice seen St. Vitus's dance
occur from the use of a mercurial girdle; and once a swelled liver. I have
also seen a swelled spleen and swelled legs from the external use of
arsenic in the cure of the itch. And very numerous and large phlegmons
commonly succeed the too hasty cure of it by other means.

There does not appear a strict analogy between the hasty cure of the itch,
and the retrocession of the pustles in the secondary fever of the
small-pox; because in that the absorption of the matter is evinced by the
swelling of the face and hands, as the pustles recede, as explained in
Class II. 1. 3. 9. Variola discreta. And a fever is produced by this
absorption; neither of which happen, when the pustles of the itch are
destroyed by mercury or arsenic.

Nor can these inconveniences, which occur on the too hasty cure of the
itch, be explained by those which follow the cure of some kinds of gutta
rosea, Class II. 1. 4. 6. as in those the eruptions on the face were an
associated disease with inflammation of the liver or stomach, which they
were accustomed to relieve; whereas the itch is not known to have had any
previous catenation with other diseases.

In the itch there exists not only great irritation in the production of the
pustles, but great sensation is caused by their acrimony afterwards;
insomuch that the pain of itching, without the interrupted smarting
occasioned by scratching, would be intolerable. This great excitement of
the two sensorial powers of irritation and sensation is so great, when the
pustles are diffused over the whole surface of the body, that a torpor
succeeds the sudden ceasing of it; which affects those parts of the system,
which were most catenated with the new motions of the skin, as the stomach,
whence indigestion and flatulency; or which are generally most liable to
fall into torpor, as the numerous glands, which form the liver. Whence the
diseases consequent to the hasty cure of the itch are diseases of debility,
as tumid viscera, oedematous swellings, and St. Vitus's dance, which is a
debility of association. In the same manner indigestion, with green
evacuations, are said to follow an injudicious application of cerussa to
stop too hastily the exsudation behind the ears of children, Class I. 1. 2.
9. And dropsies are liable to succeed the cure of old ulcers of the legs,
which have long stimulated the system.

M. M. The size of a large pea, of an ointment consisting of one part of
white precipitate of mercury to six parts of hogs' lard well triturated
together, to be rubbed on a part of the body every night, and washed off
with soap and water next morning, till every part is cleared; with lac
sulphuris twenty grains to be taken every morning inwardly. Warm saline
bath, with white vitriol in it. Flowers of sulphur mixed with thick gruel,
with hogs fat. With either of which the body may be smeared all over.

7. _Psora ebriorum._ Elderly people, who have been much addicted to
spirituous drinks, as beer, wine, or alcohol, are liable to an eruption all
over their bodies; which is attended with very afflicting itching, and
which they probably propagate from one part of their bodies to another with
their own nails by scratching themselves. I saw fatal effects in one such
patient, by a too extensive use of a solution of lead; the eruption
disappeared, he became dropsical, and died; I suppose from the too suddenly
ceasing of the great stimulus caused by the eruptions over the whole skin,
as in the preceding article.

M. M. The patient should gradually accustom himself to half his usual
quantity of vinous potation. The warm bath, with one pound of salt to every
three gallons. Mercurial ointments on small parts of the skin at a time. A
grain of opium at night instead of the usual potation of wine or beer.

8. _Herpes._ Herpes consists of gregarious spreading excoriations, which
are succeeded by branny scales or scabs. In this disease there appears to
be a deficient absorption of the subcutaneous mucus, as well as
inflammation and increased secretion of it. For the fluid not only
excoriates the parts in its vicinity by its acrimony, but is very saline to
the taste, as some of these patients have assured me; I believe this kind
of eruption, as well as the tinea, and perhaps all other cutaneous
eruption, is liable to be inoculated in other parts of the body by the
finger-nails of the patients in scratching themselves.

It is liable to affect the hands, and to return at distant periods; and is
probably a secondary disease, as well as the zona ignea, or shingles,
described below.

M. M. Poultice the eruption with bread and milk, or raw carrots grated, for
two or three whole days, to dilute or receive the discharged fluid, and
abate the inflammation; then cover the parts with fresh cerate mixed with
lapis calaminaris. On the parts not excoriated mercurial ointment, made of
one part of white calx of mercury and six of hogs' fat. Internally, after
venesection, gentle repeated cathartics. Lastly, the bark. Acid of vitriol.
Bolus Armeniae, or testacia. Antimonials. Decoction of interior bark of
elm.

9. _Zona ignea._ Shingles. This eruption has been thought a species of
herpes by some writers, and by others a species of erysipelas. Yellow or
livid vesicles appear, producing a corrosive ichor, which is sometimes
attended with a degree of fever. It is said to infest sometimes the thorax
and ribs, but its most general situation is on the small of the back, over
one kidney, extending forward over the course of one of the ureters.

There is reason to suspect, that this also is a secondary or sympathetic
disease, as well as the preceding one; but future observations are
required, before it can be removed to the fourth class, or diseases of
association. In three patients I have been induced to believe, that the
eruption on the loins was a translation of inflammation from the external
membrane of the kidney to the skin. They had, for a day or two before the
appearance of the eruption, complained of a dull pain on the region of one
kidney, but without vomiting; by which it was distinguished from nephritis
interna, or gravel; and without pain down the outside of the thigh, by
which it was distinguished from sciatica. In other situations the shingles
may sympathize with other internal membranes, as in a case published by Dr.
Russel (De Tabe Glandulari), where the retrocession of the shingles was
succeeded by a serious dyspnaea.

M. M. Venesection, if the pulse is strong. Calomel three or four grains,
very mild repeated cathartics. Poultice for a few days, then cerate of
lapis calaminaris, as in herpes. A grain of emetic tartar dissolved in a
pint of water, and taken so as to empty the stomach and intestines, is said
much to hasten the cure; compresses soaked in a saturnine solution are
recommended externally on the eruption; and cerate where there are
ulcerations. Desanet's Surgical Journal, Vol. II. p. 378. If this be a
vicarious disease, it should continue half a lunation; lest, on its
ceasing, the bad habits of motion of the primary disease should not have
been so perfectly dissevered, but that they may recur.

10. _Annulus repens._ Ring-worm. A prurient eruption formed in a circle,
affecting children, and would seem to be the work of insects, according to
the theory of Linnaeus, who ascribes the itch and dysentery to microscopic
animalcula. These animalcula are probably the effect, and not the cause, of
these eruptions; as they are to be seen in all putrescent animal fluids.
The annular propagation of the ring-worm, and its continuing to enlarge its
periphery, is well accounted for by the acrimony of the ichor or saline
fluid eroding the skin in its vicinity.

M. M. Cover the eruption daily with ink. With white mercurial ointment, as
described above in herpes. With solution of white vitriol ten grains to an
ounce. These metallic calces stimulate the absorbents into stronger action,
whence the fluid has its saline part reabsorbed, and that before it has
access to the air, which probably adds to its acrimony by oxygenating it,
and thus, producing a new acid.

11. _Tinea._ Scald head. This contagious eruption affects the roots of the
hair, and is generally most virulent around the edges of the hair on the
back part of the head; as the corona veneris appears most on the edges of
the hair on the forepart of the head; for in these parts the eruption about
the roots of the hair is most exposed to the external air, by which its
acrimony or noxious quality is increased.

The absorption of the matter thus oxygenated swells the lymphatics of the
neck by its stimulus, occasioning many little hard lumps beneath the seat
of the eruption; when this happens, the sooner it is cured the better, lest
the larger lymphatics of the neck should become affected.

M. M. The art of curing these eruptions consists, first, in abating the
inflammation, and consequent secretion of a noxious material. Secondly, to
prevent its access to the air, which so much increases its acrimony. And
thirdly, to promote the absorption of it, before it has been exposed to the
air; for these purposes venesection once, and gentle cathartics, which
promote absorption by emptying the blood-vessels. Next poultices and
fomentations, with warm water, abate inflammation by diluting the saline
acrimony of the secreted fluid, and abating the painful sensation.
Afterwards cerate joined with some metallic calx, as of zinc or lead, or
solution of lead, mercury, or copper, or iron, which may stimulate the
absorbent system into stronger action.

Cover the shaved head with tar and suet, and a bladder; this, by keeping
the air from the secreted fluid, much contributes to its mildness, and the
stimulus of the tar increases its absorption. See the three preceding
species of this genus.

12. _Crusta lactea._ Milk-crust is a milder disease than tinea, affecting
the face as well as the hairy scalp of very young children. It is not
infectious, nor liable to swell the lymphatics in its vicinity like the
tinea.

M. M. Cover the eruption with cerate made with lapis calaminaris, to be
renewed every day. Mix one grain of emetic tartar with forty grains of
chalk, and divide into eight papers, one to be taken twice a day, or with
magnesia alba, if stools are wanted. The child should be kept cool and much
in the air.

13. _Trichoma._ Plica polonica. A contagious disease, in which the hair is
said to become alive and bleed, forming inextricable knots or plaits of
great length, like the fabled head of Medusa, with intolerable pain, so as
to confine the sufferer on his bed for years.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Sensation._

GENUS VI.

_With Fever consequent to the Production of new Vessels or Fluids._

SPECIES.

1. _Febris sensitiva._ Sensitive fever, when unmixed with either irritative
or inirritative fever, may be distinguished from either of them by the less
comparative diminution of muscular strength; or in other words, from its
being attended with less diminution of the sensorial power of irritation.
An example of unmixed sensitive fever may generally be taken from the
pulmonary consumption; in this disease patients are seen to walk about with
ease, and to do all the common offices of life for weeks, and even months,
with a pulse of 120 strokes in a minute; while in other fevers, whether
irritated or inirritated, with a pulse of this frequency, the patient
generally lies upon the bed, and exerts no muscular efforts without
difficulty.

The cause of this curious phenomenon is thus to be understood; in the
sensitive fever a new sensorial power, viz. that of sensation, is
superadded to that of irritation; which in other fevers alone carries on
the increased circulation. Whence the power of irritation is not much more
exhausted than in health; and those muscular motions, which are produced in
consequence of it, as those which are exerted in keeping the body upright
in walking, riding, and in the performance of many customary actions, are
little impaired. For an account of the irritated sensitive fever, see Class
II. 1. 2. 1.; for the inirritated sensitive fever, Class II. 1. 3. 1. IV.
2. 4. 11.

2. _Febris a pure clauso._ Fever from inclosed matter is generally of the
irritated sensitive kind, and continues for many weeks, and even months,
after the abscess is formed; but is distinguished from the fever from
aerated matter in open ulcers, because there are seldom any night-sweats,
or colliquative diarrhoea in this, as in the latter. The pulse is also
harder, and requires occasional venesection, and cathartics, to abate the
inflammatory fever; which is liable to increase again every three or four
days, till at length, unless the matter has an exit, it destroys the
patient. In this fever the matter, not having been exposed to the air, has
not acquired oxygenation; in which a new acid, or some other noxious
property, is produced; which acts like contagion on the constitution
inducing fever-fits, called hectic fever, which terminate with sweats or
diarrhoea; whereas the matter in the closed abscess is either not absorbed,
or does not so affect the circulation as to produce diurnal or hectic
fever-fits; but the stimulus of the abscess excites so much sensation as to
induce perpetual pyrexia, or inflammatory fever, without such marked
remissions. Nevertheless there sometimes is no fever produced, when the
matter is lodged in a part of little sensibility, as in the liver; yet a
white pus-like sediment in those cases exists I believe generally in the
urine, with occasional wandering pains about the region of the liver or
chest.

3. _Vomica._ An abscess in the lungs is sometimes produced after
peripneumony, the cough and shortness of breath continue in less degree,
with difficulty in lying on the well side, and with sensitive irritated
fever, as explained in the preceding article.

The occasional increase of fever, with hard pulse and sizy blood, in these
patients, is probably owing to the inflammation of the walls of the vomica;
as it is attended with difficulty of breathing, and requires venesection.
Mr. B----, a child about seven years old, lived about five weeks in this
situation, with a pulse from 150 to 170 in a minute, without sweats, or
diarrhoea, or sediment in his water, except mucus occasionally; and took
sufficient nourishment during the whole time. The blood taken was always
covered with a strong cupped size, and on his death three or four pints of
matter were found in one side of the chest; which had probably, but lately,
been effused from a vomica. This child was frequently induced to swing,
both in a reciprocating and in a rotatory swing, without any apparent
absorption of matter; in both these swings he expressed pleasure, and did
not appear to be vertiginous.

M. M. Repeated emetics. Digitalis? Perseverance in rotatory swinging. See
Class II. 1. 6. 7.

Mr. I. had laboured some months under a vomica after a peripneumony, he was
at length taken with a catarrh, which was in some degree endemic in March
1795, which occasioned him to sneeze much, during which a copious
haemorrhage from the lungs occurred, and he spit up at the same time half a
pint of very fetid matter, and recovered. Hence errhines may be
occasionally used with advantage.

4. _Empyema._ When the matter from an abscess in the lungs finds its way
into the cavity of the chest, it is called an empyema. A servant man, after
a violent peripneumony, was seized with symptoms of empyema, and it was
determined, after some time, to perform the operation; this was explained
to him, and the usual means were employed by his friends to encourage him,
"by advising him not to be afraid." By which good advice he conceived so
much fear, that he ran away early next morning, and returned in about a
week quite well. Did the great fear promote the absorption of the matter,
like the sickness occasioned by digitalis? Fear renders the external skin
pale; by this continued decrease of the action of the absorbents of the
skin might not those of the lungs be excited into greater activity? and
thus produce increased pulmonary absorption by reverse sympathy, as it
produces pale urine, and even stools, by direct sympathy?

M.M. Digitalis?

5. _Febris Mesenterica._ Fever from matter formed in the mesentery is
probably more frequent than is suspected. It commences with pain in the
bowels, with irritated sensitive fever; and continues many weeks, and even
months, requiring occasional venesection, and mild cathartics; till at
length the continuance of the pyrexia, or inflammatory fever, destroys the
patient. This is an affection of the lymphatic glands, and properly belongs
to scrophula; but as the matter is not exposed to the air, no hectic fever,
properly so called, is induced.

6. _Febris a pure aerato._ Fever from aerated matter. A great collection of
matter often continues a long time, and is sometimes totally absorbed, even
from venereal buboes, without producing any disorder in the arterial
system. At length, if it becomes putrid by its delay, and one part of the
matter thus becomes aerated by the air given out by the other part; or if
the ulcer has been opened, so that any part of it has been exposed to the
air for but one day, a hectic fever is produced. Whence the utility arises
of opening large abscesses by setons, as in that case little or no hectic
fever is induced; because the matter is squeezed out by the side of the
spongy threads of cotton, and little or no air is admitted; or by tapping
the abscess with a trocar, as mentioned in ischias, Class II. 1. 2. 18.

In this fever the pulse is about 120 in a minute, and its access is
generally in an evening, and sometimes about noon also, with sweats or
purging towards morning, or urine with pus-like sediment; and the patients
bear this fever better than any other with so quick a pulse; and lastly,
when all the matter from a concealed ulcer is absorbed, or when an open
ulcer is healed, the hectic fever ceases. Here the absorbed matter is
supposed to produce the fever, and the diarrhoea, sweats, or copious muddy
urine, to be simply the consequence of increased secretion, and not to
consist of the purulent matter, which was supposed to be absorbed from the
ulcer. See Sudor calidus, Class I. 1. 2. 3.

The action of the air on ulcers, as we have already shewn, increases the
acrimony of the purulent matter, and even converts it into a weaker kind of
contagious matter; that is, to a material inducing fever. This was ascribed
to the union of the azotic part of the atmosphere with the effused pus in
Sect. XXVIII. 2. but by contemplating more numerous facts and analogies, I
am now induced to believe, that it is by the union of oxygen with it;
first, because oxygen so greedily unites with other animal substances, as
the blood, that it will pass through a moist bladder to combine with it,
according to the experiment of Dr. Priestley. Secondly, because the poisons
of venomous creatures are supposed to be acids of different kinds, and are
probably formed by the contact of air after their secretion. And lastly,
because the contagious matter from other ulcers, as in itch, or small-pox,
are formed on external membranes, and are probably combinations of animal
matter and oxygen, producing other new acids; but further experiments must
determine this question.

It was thought a subject of consequence by the Aesculapian Society at
Edinburgh, to find a criterion which should distinguish pus from mucus, for
the purpose of more certainly discovering the presence of ulcers in
pulmonary diseases, or in the urinary passages. For this purpose that
society offered their first gold medal, which was conferred on the late Mr.
Charles Darwin, in the year 1778, for his experiments on this subject. From
which he deduces the following conclusions:

    "1. Pus and mucus are both soluble in the vitriolic acid, though in
    very different proportions, pus being much the less soluble.

    2. The addition of water to either of these compounds decomposes it;
    the mucus thus separated, either swims on the mixture, or forms large
    flocci in it; whereas the pus falls to the bottom, and forms on
    agitation a uniform turbid mixture.

    3. Pus is diffusible through a diluted vitriolic acid, though mucus is
    not; the same occurs with water, or a solution of sea salt.

    4. Nitrous acid dissolves both pus and mucus; water added to the
    solution of pus produces a precipitate; and the fluid above becomes
    clear and green; while water and the solution of mucus form a dirty
    coloured fluid.

    5. Alkaline lixivium dissolves (though sometimes with difficulty)
    mucus, and generally pus.

    6. Water precipitates pus from such a solution, but does not mucus.

    7. Where alkaline lixivium does not dissolve pus, it still
    distinguishes it from mucus; as it then prevents its diffusion through
    water.

    8. Coagulable lymph is neither soluble in diluted nor concentrated
    vitriolic acid.

    9. Water produces no change on a solution of serum in alkaline
    lixivium, until after long standing, and then only a very slight
    sediment appears.

    10. Corrosive sublimate coagulates mucus, but does not pus.

    From the above experiments it appears, that strong vitriolic acid and
    water, diluted vitriolic acid, and caustic alkaline lixivium and water
    will serve to distinguish pus from mucus; that the vitriolic acid can
    separate it from coagulable lymph, and alkaline lixivium from serum.

    And hence, when a person has any expectorated material, the composition
    of which he wishes to ascertain, let him dissolve it in vitriolic acid,
    and in caustic alkaline lixivium; and then add pure water to both
    solutions: and if there is a fair precipitation in each, he may be
    assured that some pus is present. If in neither a precipitation occurs,
    it is a certain test, that the material is entirely mucus. If the
    material cannot be made to dissolve in alkaline lixivium by time and
    trituration, we have also reason to believe that it is pus."
    Experiments on Pus and Mucus. Cadell. London.

7. _Phthisis pulmonalis._ In pulmonary consumption the fever is generally
supposed to be the consequence of the stimulus of absorbed matter
circulating in the blood-vessels, and not simply of its stimulus on their
extremities in the surface of the ulcers; as mentioned in Class II. 1. 5.
and Class II. 1. 3. 9. The ulcers are probably sometimes occasioned by the
putrid acrimony of effused blood remaining in the air-cells of the lungs
after an haemoptoe. See Class I. 2. 1. 9. The remote cause of consumption
is ingeniously ascribed by Dr. Beddoes to the hyper-oxygenation of the
blood, as mentioned Section XXVIII. 2.

As the patients liable to consumption are of the inirritable temperament,
as appears by the large pupils of their eyes; there is reason to believe,
that the haemoptoe is immediately occasioned by the deficient absorption of
the blood at the extremities of the bronchial vein; and that one difficulty
of healing the ulcers is occasioned by the deficient absorption of the
fluids effused into them. See Sect. XXX. 1. and 2.

The difficulty of healing pulmonary ulcers may be owing, as its remote
cause, to the incessant motion of all the parts of the lungs; whence no
scab, or indurated mucus, can be formed so as to adhere on them. Whence
these naked ulcers are perpetually exposed to the action of the air on
their surfaces, converting their mild purulent matter into a contagious
ichor; which not only prevents them from healing, but by its action on
their circumferences, like the matter of itch or tinea, contributes to
spread them wider. See the preceding article, and Sect. XXXIII. 2. 7. where
the pulmonary phthisis is supposed to be infectious.

This acidifying principle is found in all the metallic calces, as in lapis
calaminaris, which is a calciform ore of zinc; and in cerussa, which is a
calx of lead; two materials which are powerful in healing excoriations, and
ulcers, in a short time by their external application. How then does it
happen, that the oxygen in the atmosphere should prevent pulmonary ulcers
from healing, and even induce them to spread wider; and yet in its
combination with metals, it should facilitate their healing? The healing of
ulcers consists in promoting the absorption of the fluids effused into
them, as treated of in Section XXXIII. 3. 2. Oxygen in combination with
metals, when applied in certain quantity, produces this effect by its
stimulus; and the metallic oxydes not being decomposed by their contact
with animal matter, no new acid, or contagious material, is produced. So
that the combined oxygen, when applied to an ulcer, simply I suppose
promotes absorption in it, like the application of other materials of the
articles sorbentia or incitantia, if applied externally; as opium, bark,
alum. But in the pulmonary ulcers, which cannot protect themselves from the
air by forming a scab, the uncombined oxygen of the atmosphere unites with
the purulent matter, converting it into a contagious ichor; which by
infection, not by erosion, enlarges the ulcers, as in the itch or tinea;
which might hence, according to Dr. Beddoes's ingenious theory of
consumption, be induced to heal, if exposed to an atmosphere deprived of a
part of its oxygen. This I hope future experiments will confirm, and that
the pneumatic medicine will alleviate the evils of mankind in many other,
as well as in this most fatal malady.

M. M. First, the respiration of air lowered by an additional quantity of
azote, or mixed with some proportion of hydrogen, or of carbonic acid air,
may be tried; as described in a late publication of Dr. Beddoes on the
medicinal use of factitious airs. Johnson, London. Or lastly, by breathing
a mixture of one tenth part of hydro-carbonate mixed with common air,
according to the discovery of Mr. Watt, which has a double advantage in
these cases, of diluting the oxygen of the atmospheric air, and inducing
sickness, which increases pulmonary absorption, as mentioned below. An
atmosphere diluted with fixed air (carbonic acid) might be readily procured
by setting tubs of new wort, or fermenting beer, in the parlour and
lodging-room of the patient. For it is not acids floating in the air, but
the oxygen or acidifying principle, which injures or enlarges pulmonary
ulcers by combining with the purulent matter.

Another easy method of adding carbonic acid gas to the air of a room, would
be by means of an apparatus invented by Mr. Watt, and sold by Bolton and
Watt at Birmingham, as described in Dr. Beddoes' Treatise on Pneumatic
Medicine. Johnson, London. It consists of an iron pot, with an arm
projecting, and a method of letting water drop by slow degrees on chalk,
which is to be put into the iron pot, and exposed to a moderate degree of
heat over a common fire. By occasionally adding more and more chalk,
carbonic acid gas might be carried through a tin pipe from the arm of the
iron pot to any part of the room near the patient, or from an adjoining
room. In the same manner a diffusion of solution of flowers of zinc might
be produced and breathed by the patient, and would be likely much to
contribute to the healing of pulmonary ulcers; as observed by Mr. Watt. See
the treatise above mentioned.

Breathing over the vapour of caustic volatile alkali might easily be
managed for many hours in a day; which might neutralize the acid poison
formed on pulmonary ulcers by the contact of oxygen, and thus prevent its
deleterious quality, as other acids become less caustic, when they are
formed into neutral salts with alkalis. The volatile salt should be put
into a tin canister, with two pipes like horns from the top of it, one to
suck the air from, and the other to admit it.

[Illustration]

Secondly, the external ulcers in scrophulous habits are pale and flabby,
and naturally disinclined to heal, the deposition of fluids in them being
greater than the absorption; these ulcers have their appearance immediately
changed by the external application of metallic calxes, and the medicines
of the article Sorbentia, such as cerussa and the bark in fine powder, see
Class I. 2. 3. 21. and are generally healed in a short time by these means.
Induced by these observations, I wished to try the external application of
such powders to ulcers in the lungs, and constructed a box with a
circulating brush in it, as described in the annexed plate; into this box
two ounces of fine powder of Peruvian bark were put, and two drams of
cerussa in fine powder; on whirling the central brush, part of this was
raised into a cloud of powder, and the patient, applying his mouth to one
of the tin pipes rising out of the box, inhaled this powder twice a day
into his lungs. I observed it did not produce any cough or uneasiness. This
patient was in the last stage of consumption, and was soon tired of the
experiment, nor have I had such patients as I wished for the repetition of
it. Perhaps a fine powder of manganese, or of the flowers of zinc, or of
lapis calaminaris, might be thus applied to ulcers of the lungs with
greater advantage? Perhaps air impregnated with flowers of zinc in their
most comminuted state, might be a better way of applying this powder to the
lungs, as discovered by Mr. Watt. See Dr. Beddoes on Pneumatic Medicine.
Johnson.

Thirdly, as the healing of an ulcer consists in producing a tendency to
absorption on its surface greater than the deposition on it; see Sect.
XXXIII. 3. 2. other modes of increasing pulmonary absorption, which are
perhaps more manageable than the preceding ones, may be had recourse to;
such as by producing frequent nausea or sickness. See Sect. XXIX. 5. 1. and
Art. IV. 2. The great and sudden absorption of fluid from the lungs in the
anasarca pulmonum by the sickness induced by the exhibition of digitalis,
astonishes those who have not before attended to it, by emptying the
swelled limbs, and removing the difficulty of breathing in a few hours.

The most manageable method of using digitalis is by making a saturated
tincture of it, by infusing two ounces of the powder of the leaves in a
mixture of four ounces of rectified spirit of wine, and four ounces of
water. Of this from 30 to 60 drops, or upwards, from a two-ounce phial, are
to be taken twice in the morning part of the day, and to be so managed as
not to induce violent sickness. If sickness nevertheless comes on, the
patient must for a day or two omit the medicine; and then begin it again in
reduced doses.

Mr. ----, a young man about twenty, with dark eyes, and large pupils, who
had every symptom of pulmonary ulcers, I believed to have been cured by
digitalis, and published the case in the Transactions of the College, Vol.
III. But about two years afterwards I heard that he relapsed and died. Mr.
L----, a corpulent man, who had for some weeks laboured under a cough with
great expectoration, with quick pulse, and difficulty of breathing, soon
recovered by the use of digitalis taken twice a day; and though this case
might probably be a peripneumonia notha, or catarrh, it is here related as
shewing the power of pulmonary absorption excited by the use of this drug.

Another method of inducing sickness, and pulmonary absorption in
consequence, is by sailing on the sea; by which many consumptive patients
have been said to have received their cure; which has been erroneously
ascribed to sea-air, instead of sea-sickness; whence many have been sent to
breathe the sea-air on the coasts, who might have done better in higher
situations, where the air probably contains less oxygen gas, which is the
heaviest part of it. See a Letter from Dr. T. C. below.

A third method of inducing sickness, and consequent pulmonary absorption,
is by the vertigo occasioned by swinging; which has lately been introduced
into practice by Dr. Smith, (Essay on Pulmonary Consumption), who observed
that by swinging the hectic pulse became slower, which is explained in
Class IV. 2. 1. 10. The usual way of reciprocating swinging, like the
oscillations of a pendulum, produces a degree of vertigo in those, who are
unused to it; but to give it greater effect, the patient should be placed
in a chair suspended from the ceiling by two parallel cords in contact with
each other, the chair should then be forcibly revolved 20 or 40 times one
way, and suffered to return spontaneously; which induces a degree of
sickness in most adult people, and is well worthy an exact and pertinacious
trial, for an hour or two, three or four times a day for a month.

The common means of promoting absorption in ulcers, and of thickening the
matter in consequence, by taking the bark and opium internally, or by
