The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Catechism of Familiar Things; Their
History, and the Events Which Led to Their Discovery, by Benziger Brothers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Catechism of Familiar Things; Their History, and the Events Which Led to Their Discovery
       With a Short Explanation of Some of the Principal Natural
       Phenomena. For the Use of Schools and Families. Enlarged
       and Revised Edition.

Author: Benziger Brothers

Release Date: September 20, 2005 [EBook #16728]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CATECHISM OF FAMILIAR ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






      [Illustration: THE AURORA BOREALIS IN THE ARCTIC REGIONS.]


                                   A
                               CATECHISM
                                  OF
                           FAMILIAR THINGS;

              THEIR HISTORY, AND THE EVENTS WHICH LED TO
                           THEIR DISCOVERY.


          _WITH A SHORT EXPLANATION OF SOME OF THE PRINCIPAL_

                          NATURAL PHENOMENA.



                 FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS AND FAMILIES.

                     Enlarged and Revised Edition.



                 NEW YORK, CINCINNATI, AND ST. LOUIS:
                           BENZIGER BROTHERS
                  PRINTERS TO THE HOLY APOSTOLIC SEE.





                COPYRIGHT, 1881, BY BENZIGER BROTHERS.




PREFACE.


This book, a reprint of a successful English publication, has been so
enlarged as to be to all intents and purposes new. It has been
carefully revised by a Reverend gentleman, who for some time filled
the chair of Physics and Chemistry in one of our colleges.

Recent inventions and improvements are described in a simple, popular
style, so as to be easily understood by all, and short notices are
given of prominent inventors and scientists. The paragraphs relating
to doctrinal matters conform in every respect to the teachings of the
Church.

A feature which will commend the book to every teacher is the
definitions of difficult words and terms, following the paragraphs in
which such words occur.

Technical language is avoided as much as possible, so as to enable
young pupils to become familiarly acquainted with the various
phenomena of nature, the leading characteristics and general history
of the objects of the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms, and the
fundamental truths of the arts and sciences.

The illustrations are of a superior order, and a very complete Index,
which will be appreciated by every teacher, supplements the book. In a
word, no pains have been spared to enhance the value of the work, and
render it an important auxiliary in the dissemination of useful and
entertaining knowledge.

The publishers beg to acknowledge their obligations to the Sisters of
Mercy, Loretto, Pa., to whose kindness they are indebted for many
valuable suggestions.

In the hope that the book may be found suited to the accomplishment of
its aim, it is respectfully submitted to schools and instructors of
youth, who are the best judges of its merits.




CONTENTS.

    CHAPTER

    I. Dew, Water, Rain, Snow, Hail, Atmosphere, Wind, Lightning,
    Thunder, Electricity, Twilight, and the Aurora
    Borealis

    II. Corn, Barley, Pearl Barley, Oats, Rye, Potatoes, Tea,
    Coffee, and Chocolate

    III. Calico, Cotton, Cloth, Wool, Baize, Linen, Flax, Hemp,
    Diaper, Holland, Canvas, and Flannel

    IV. Cocoa, Toddy, Cherries, Bark, Cork, Cochineal, Cloves,
    Cinnamon, and Cassia

    V. Bombazine, Crape, Camlet, Cambric, Lace, Silk, Velvet,
    and Mohair

    VI. Currants, Raisins, Figs, Rice, Sugar, Sugar Candy, &c.,
    Sago, Millet, Ginger, Nutmeg, Mace, Pimento or Allspice,
    Pepper, and Cayenne Pepper

    VII. Glass, Mirrors, Earthenware, Porcelain, Needles, Pins,
    Paper, Printing, Parchment, and Vellum

    VIII. Capers, Almonds, Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Limes, Olives,
    Oils, Melons, Tamarinds, and Dates

    IX. Hats, Stockings, Shoes, Gloves, Leather, Furs, and Ink

    X. Asbestus, Salt, Coal, Iron, Copper, Brass, Zinc, and Lapis
    Calaminaris

    XI. Yams, Mangoes, Bread-Fruit, Shea or Butter Tree, Cow
    Tree, Water Tree, Licorice, Manna, Opium, Tobacco,
    and Gum

    XII. Spectacles, Mariner's Compass, Barometer, Thermometer,
    Watches, Clocks, Telescope, Microscope, Gunpowder,
    Steam Engine, and Electro-Magnetic Telegraph

    XIII. Soap, Candles, Tallow Tree, Spermaceti, Wax, Mahogany,
    India Rubber or Caoutchouc, Sponge, Coral,
    Lime, Carbon, Oxygen, Nitrogen, Gas, Hydrogen,
    Chalk, and Marble

    XIV. Gold, Silver, Lead, Tin, Platina, Sulphur, Gems or
    Precious Stones--as Diamonds, Rubies, Emeralds,
    Turquois, Pearls, Mother-of-Pearl, and Ivory

    XV. Starch, Arrow-root, Tapioca, Isinglass, Caviare, the
    Vine, Wine, Gin, Rum, Brandy, Vinegar, Indigo,
    Gamboge, Logwood, Tar, Pitch, Camphor, Musk,
    Myrrh, Frankincense, and Turpentine

    XVI. Bricks, Mortar, Granite, Slate, Limestone, or Calcareous
    Rocks, Steel, Earths, Volcanoes, and Earthquakes

    XVII. Architecture, Sculpture, Use of Money, and Navigation

    XVIII. Music, Painting, Poetry, Astronomy, Arts and
    Sciences, Art of Writing, and Chemistry

    XIX. Attraction, Tides, Gravity, Artesian Wells, Air,
    Aneroid Barometer, Ear-Trumpet, Stethoscope,
    Audiphone, Telephone, Phonograph, Microphone,
    Megaphone, Tasimeter, Bathometer, Anemometer,
    Chronometer

    XX. Light, Lime Light, Magnesium Light, Electric Light,
    Rainbow, Prism, Spectrum, Colors, Photography,
    Camera Obscura, Stereoscope, Kaleidoscope

    XXI. Electricity, Electric Currents, Electric Battery, Electrotyping,
    Stereotyping, Telegraph, Ocean Cable,
    Lightning Rod, The Gulf Stream, The Mt. Cenis
    Tunnel, The Suez Canal, Suspension Bridges, Eminent
    Americans




A CATECHISM

OF

FAMILIAR THINGS.




CHAPTER I.

DEW, WATER, RAIN, SNOW, HAIL, ATMOSPHERE, WIND, LIGHTNING,
THUNDER, ELECTRICITY, TWILIGHT, AND THE AURORA BOREALIS.


What is Dew?

Moisture collected from the atmosphere by the action of cold. During
the day, the powerful heat of the sun causes to arise from the earth
and water a moist vapor, which, after the sun sinks below the horizon,
is condensed by the cold, and falls in the form of dew. Dews are more
copious in the Spring and Autumn than at any other season; in warm
countries than in cold ones: because of the sudden changes of
temperature. Egypt abounds in dews all the summer; for the air being
too hot to condense the vapors in the day-time, they never gather into
clouds and form rain.

     _Horizon_, the line which bounds the view on all sides, so
     that the earth and sky appear to meet. A Greek word, from
     the verb signifying to mark boundaries.

     _Temperature_, degree of heat or cold.

     _Condense_, to cause the particles of a body to approach or
     unite more closely.


What are its uses?

It cools and refreshes the vegetable creation, and prevents it from
being destroyed by the heat of the sun. All hot countries where there
is little or no rain are therefore blessed with this provision by the
all-bountiful Creator, to render them luxuriant and inhabitable; and
the dews which fall are so copious, that the earth is as deeply soaked
with them during the night as if a heavy rain had fallen. For this
reason also it is, that we so often read in the Bible of the "dew of
Heaven" being promised to the Israelites as a signal favor.

     _Luxuriant_, fertile, flourishing.

     _Signal_, remarkable, eminent.


From what does the vapor originate?

Vapor is water, combined with a still greater quantity of
caloric,--that is, an imponderable and subtile form of matter, which
causes the sensation of heat; and which, driving asunder the particles
of the water, renders it aeriform.

     _Imponderable_, without sensible weight.

     _Subtile_, thin, not dense, or compact.

     _Particle_, a small portion of matter.

     _Aeriform_, having the form of air.


What is Water?

The fluid which covers more than three-fifths of the surface of our
globe, and which is necessary for the life and health of the animal
and vegetable creation; for without water there would be neither rain
nor dew, and everything would perish. It is likewise a necessary
beverage for man and the inferior animals.

     _Beverage_, drink, liquor for drinking.


In how many states do we find Water?

In four: 1st, solid, as in ice, snow, hail, &c.; 2d, fluid, as in its
common form; 3d, aeriform, as in steam; and 4th, in a state of union
with other matter. Its most simple state is that of ice, which is
water deprived of a certain portion of its caloric: crystallization
then takes place, and the water becomes solid and is called ice.

     _Crystallization_, the process by which the parts of a solid
     body, separated by solution or fusion, are again brought
     into the solid form. If the process is slow, the figure
     assumed is regular and bounded by plane and smooth surfaces.

     _Solution_, the diffusion of a solid through some liquid.

     _Fusion_, melting, or rendering fluid by heat.


From what cause is the Water deprived of its caloric?

From the coldness of the atmosphere: underneath the poles of our globe
it is mostly solid; there it is similar to the hardest rocks, and may
be cut with a chisel, like stone or marble. This great solidity is
occasioned by the low temperature of the surrounding air; and in very
cold countries ice may be ground so fine as to be blown away by the
wind, and will still be ice.

     _Poles_, the extremities or ends of the axis, an imaginary
     line, supposed to be drawn through the centre of the earth;
     or when applied to the heavens, the two points directly over
     them.


Is ice the only instance of Water existing in a state of solidity?

No; it is found in a solid state in many minerals, as in marble, &c.,
and is then called _water of Crystallization_. It is essential, in
many cases, to their solidity and transparency.

     _Essential_, necessary.

     _Transparency_, clearness, the power of transmitting light.


Does Nature decompose Water in any of her operations?

Yes: every living vegetable has the power of decomposing water, by a
secret process peculiar to itself. Fish, too, and all cold-blooded
amphibious animals are gifted with the same power.

     _Decomposing_, separating a mixed body into its several
     parts.

     _Amphibious_, able to live both in water and out of it.


Of what use is this power to vegetables?

The water which they decompose affords them nourishment for the
support of their vital juices, and enables them, by combining the
fluid gases which compose it with those of the air and the soil, to
form their different products; while the superfluous gas is abundantly
given out by their leaves, to refresh the spent air, and render it
wholesome for the animals that breathe it.

     _Vital_, belonging to life, necessary to existence.

     _Superfluous_, unnecessary, not wanted.


What is Rain?

The condensed aqueous vapors raised in the atmosphere by the sun and
wind, converted into clouds, which fall in rain, snow, hail, or mist:
their falling is occasioned by their own weight in a collision
produced by contrary currents of wind, from the clouds passing into a
colder part of the air, or by electricity. If the vapors are more
copious, and rise a little higher, they form a mist or fog, which is
visible to the eye; higher still they produce rain. Hence we may
account for the changes of the weather: why a cold summer is always a
wet one--a warm, a dry one.

     _Aqueous_, watery; consisting of water.

     _Collision_, a striking together, a clash, a meeting.

     _Electricity_, a natural agent existing in all bodies (see
     page 18).


What seasons are more liable to rain than others?

The Spring and Autumn are generally the most rainy seasons, the vapors
_rise_ more plentifully in Spring; and in the Autumn, as the sun
recedes from us and the cold increases, the vapors, which lingered
above us during the summer heats, _fall_ more easily.

     _Recede_, to fall back, to retreat.


