the victories and defeats since that time you will see on which side the
scale turns."

"You certainly do not intend to tell me that matters are in a good
condition?"

"No, but I do say that they are not in so desperate state as you affect
to believe."

"As I affect!--Truly, general, to hear you one would think I had some
interest in lowering France in the eyes of foreigners.

"I don't say that; I say that I wish to settle the balance of our
victories and defeats for the last three months; and as I came for that,
and am now in your house, and in the position of an accused person--"

"Or an accuser."

"As the accused, in the first instance--I begin."

"And I listen," said Bonaparte, visibly on thorns.

"My ministry dates from the 30th Prairial, the 8th of June if you
prefer; we will not quarrel over words."

"Which means that we shall quarrel about things."

Bernadotte continued without replying.

"I became minister, as I said, the 8th of June; that is, a short time
after the siege of Saint-Jean-d'Acre was raised."

Bonaparte bit his lips. "I did not raise the siege until after I had
ruined the fortifications," he replied.

"That is not what Kleber wrote; but that does not concern me." Then he
added, smiling: "It happened while Clark was minister."

There was a moment's silence, during which Bonaparte endeavored to make
Bernadotte lower his eyes. Not succeeding, he said: "Go on."

Bernadotte bowed and continued: "Perhaps no minister of war--and the
archives of the ministry are there for reference--ever received the
portfolio under more critical circumstances: civil war within, a foreign
enemy at our doors, discouragement rife among our veteran armies,
absolute destitution of means to equip new ones. That was what I had
to face on the 8th of June, when I entered upon my duties. An active
correspondence, dating from the 8th of June, between the civil and
military authorities, revived their courage and their hopes. My
addresses to the armies--this may have been a mistake--were those, not
of a minister to his soldiers, but of a comrade among comrades, just
as my addresses to the administrators were those of a citizen to his
fellow-citizens. I appealed to the courage of the army, and the heart of
the French people; I obtained all that I had asked. The National Guard
reorganized with renewed zeal; legions were formed upon the Rhine, on
the Moselle. Battalions of veterans took the place of old regiments
to reinforce the troops that were guarding our frontiers; to-day our
cavalry is recruited by a remount of forty thousand horses, and one
hundred thousand conscripts, armed and equipped, have received with
cries of 'Vive la Republique!' the flags under which they will fight and
conquer--"

"But," interrupted Bonaparte bitterly, "this is an apology you are
making for yourself."

"Be it so. I will divide my discourse into two parts. The first will
be a contestable apology; the second an array of incontestable facts.
I will set aside the apology and proceed to facts. June 17 and 18, the
battle of the Trebbia. Macdonald wished to fight without Moreau; he
crossed the Trebbia, attacked the enemy, was defeated and retreated
to Modena. June 20, battle of Tortona; Moreau defeated the Austrian
Bellegarde. July 22, surrender of the citadel of Alexandria to the
Austro-Russians. So far the scale turns to defeat. July 30, surrender of
Mantua, another check. August 15, battle of Novi; this time it was more
than a check, it was a defeat. Take note of it, general, for it is
the last. At the very moment we were fighting at Novi, Massena was
maintaining his position at Zug and Lucerne, and strengthening himself
on the Aar and on the Rhine; while Lecourbe, on August 14 and 15, took
the Saint-Gothard. August 19, battle of Bergen; Brune defeated the
Anglo-Russian army, forty thousand strong, and captured the Russian
general, Hermann. On the 25th, 26th and 27th of the same month, the
battles of Zurich, where Massena defeated the Austro-Russians under
Korsakoff. Hotze and three other generals are taken prisoners. The enemy
lost twelve thousand men, a hundred cannon, and all its baggage; the
Austrians, separated from the Russians, could not rejoin them until
after they were driven beyond Lake Constance. That series of victories
stopped the progress the enemy had been making since the beginning of
the campaign; from the time Zurich was retaken, France was secure from
invasion. August 30, Molitor defeated the Austrian generals, Jellachich
and Luiken, and drove them back into the Grisons. September 1, Molitor
attacked and defeated General Rosenberg in the Mutterthal. On the 2d,
Molitor forced Souvaroff to evacuate Glarus, to abandon his wounded,
his cannon, and sixteen hundred prisoners. The 6th, General Brune again
defeated the Anglo-Russians, under the command of the Duke of York.
On the 7th, General Gazan took possession of Constance. On the 8th you
landed at Frejus.--Well, general," continued Bernadotte, "as France will
probably pass into your hands, it is well that you should know the state
in which you find her, and in place of receipt, our possessions bear
witness to what we are giving you. What we are now doing, general,
is history, and it is important that those who may some day have an
interest in falsifying history shall find in their path the denial of
Bernadotte."

"Is that said for my benefit, general?"

"I say that for flatterers. You have pretended, it is said, that you
returned to France because our armies were destroyed, because France was
threatened, the Republic at bay. You may have left Egypt with that fear;
but once in France, all such fears must have given way to a totally
different belief."

"I ask no better than to believe as you do," replied Bonaparte, with
sovereign dignity; "and the more grand and powerful you prove France to
be, the more grateful am I to those who have secured her grandeur and
her power."

"Oh, the result is plain, general! Three armies defeated; the Russians
exterminated, the Austrians defeated and forced to fly, twenty thousand
prisoners, a hundred pieces of cannon, fifteen flags, all the baggage of
the enemy in our possession, nine generals taken or killed, Switzerland
free, our frontiers safe, the Rhine our limit--so much for Massena's
contingent and the situation of Helvetia. The Anglo-Russian army twice
defeated, utterly discouraged, abandoning its artillery, baggage,
munitions of war and commissariat, even to the women and children who
came with the British; eight thousand French prisoners; effective men,
returned to France; Holland completely evacuated--so much for Brune's
contingent and the situation in Holland. The rearguard of General Klenau
forced to lay down its arms at Villanova; a thousand prisoners and three
pieces of cannon fallen into our hands, and the Austrians driven back
beyond Bormida; in all, counting the combats at la Stura and Pignerol,
four thousand prisoners, sixteen cannon, Mondovi, and the occupation of
the whole region between la Stura and Tanaro--so much for Championnet's
contingent and the situation in Italy. Two hundred thousand men under
arms, forty thousand mounted cavalry; that is my contingent, mine, and
the situation in France."

"But," asked Bonaparte satirically, "if you have, as you say, two
hundred thousand soldiers under arms, why do you want me to bring back
the fifteen or twenty thousand men I have in Egypt, who are useful there
as colonizers?"

"If I ask you for them, general, it is not for any need we may have of
them, but in the fear of some disaster over taking them."

"What disaster do you expect to befall them, commanded by Kleber?"

"Kleber may be killed, general; and who is there behind Kleber? Menou.
Kleber and your twenty thousand men are doomed, general!"

"How doomed?"

"Yes, the Sultan will send troops; he controls by land. The English will
send their fleet; they control by sea. We, who have neither land nor
sea, will be compelled to take part from here in the evacuation of Egypt
and the capitulation of our army.

"You take a gloomy view of things, general!"

"The future will show which of us two have seen things as they are."

"What would you have done in my place?"

"I don't know. But, even had I been forced to bring them back by way
of Constantinople, I should never have abandoned those whom France had
intrusted to me. Xenophon, on the banks of the Tigris, was in a much
more desperate situation than you on the banks of the Nile. He brought
his ten thousand back to Ionia, and they were not the children of
Athens, not his fellow citizens; they were mercenaries!"

From the instant Bernadotte uttered the word Constantinople, Bonaparte
listened no longer; the name seemed to rouse a new train of ideas in his
mind, which he followed in solitary thought. He laid his hand on the arm
of the astonished Bernadotte, and, with eyes fixed on space, like a man
who pursues through space the phantom of a vanished project, he said:
"Yes, yes! I thought of it. That is why I persisted in taking that
hovel, Saint-Jean-d'Acre. Here you only thought it obstinacy, a useless
waste of men sacrificed to the self-love of a mediocre general who
feared that he might be blamed for a defeat. What should I have cared
for the raising of the siege of Saint-Jean-d'Acre, if Saint-Jean-d'Acre
had not been the barrier in the way of the grandest project ever
conceived. Cities! Why, good God! I could take as many as ever did
Alexander or Caesar, but it was Saint-Jean-d'Acre that had to be taken!
If I had taken Saint-Jean-d'Acre, do you know what I should have done?"

And he fixed his burning eyes upon Bernadotte, who, this time, lowered
his under the flame of this genius.

"What I should have done," repeated Bonaparte, and, like Ajax, he
seemed to threaten Heaven with his clinched fist; "if I had taken
Saint-Jean-d'Acre, I should have found the treasures of the pasha in the
city and three thousand stands of arms. With that I should have raised
and armed all Syria, so maddened by the ferocity of Djezzar that each
time I attacked him the population prayed to God for his overthrow. I
should have marched upon Damascus and Aleppo; I should have swelled my
army with the malcontents. Advancing into the country, I should, step by
step, have proclaimed the abolition of slavery, and the annihilation of
the tyrannical government of the pashas. I should have overthrown the
Turkish empire, and founded a great empire at Constantinople, which
would have fixed my place in history higher than Constantine and
Mohammed II. Perhaps I should have returned to Paris by way of
Adrianople and Vienna, after annihilating the house of Austria. Well,
my dear general, that is the project which that little hovel of a
Saint-Jean-d'Acre rendered abortive!"

And he so far forgot to whom he was speaking, as he followed the shadows
of his vanished dream, that he called Bernadotte "my dear general." The
latter, almost appalled by the magnitude of the project which Bonaparte
had unfolded to him, made a step backward.

"Yes," said Bernadotte, "I perceive what you want, for you have just
betrayed yourself. Orient or Occident, a throne! A throne? So be it; why
not? Count upon me to help you conquer it, but elsewhere than in France.
I am a Republican, and I will die a Republican."

Bonaparte shook his head as if to disperse the thoughts which held him
in the clouds.

"I, too, am a Republican," said he, "but see what has come of your
Republic!"

"What matter!" cried Bernadotte. "It is not to a word or a form that I
am faithful, but to the principle. Let the Directors but yield me the
power, and I would know how to defend the Republic against her internal
enemies, even as I defended her from her foreign enemies."

As he said these words, Bernadotte raised his eyes, and his glance
encountered that of Bonaparte. Two naked blades clashing together never
sent forth lightning more vivid, more terrible.

Josephine had watched the two men for some time past with anxious
attention. She saw the dual glance teeming with reciprocal menace. She
rose hastily and went to Bernadotte.

"General," said she.

Bernadotte bowed.

"You are intimate with Gohier, are you not?" she continued.

"He is one of my best friends, madame," said Bernadotte.

"Well, we dine with him the day after to-morrow, the 18th Brumaire; dine
there yourself and bring Madame Bernadotte. I should be so glad to know
her better."

"Madame," said Bernadotte, "in the days of the Greeks you would have
been one of the three graces; in the Middle Ages you would have been a
fairy; to-day you are the most adorable woman I know."

And making three steps backward, and bowing, he contrived to retire
politely without including Bonaparte in his bow. Josephine followed him
with her eyes until he had left the room. Then, turning to her husband,
she said: "Well, it seems that it was not as successful with Bernadotte
as with Moreau, was it?"

"Bold, adventurous, disinterested, sincere republican, inaccessible
to seduction, he is a human obstacle. We must make our way around him,
since we cannot overthrow him."

And leaving the salon without taking leave of any one, he went to his
study, whither Roland and Bourrienne followed. They had hardly been
there a quarter of an hour when the handle of the lock turned softly,
the door opened, and Lucien appeared.




CHAPTER XXII. THE OUTLINE OF A DECREE

Lucien was evidently expected. Bonaparte had not mentioned his name once
since entering the study; but in spite of this silence he had turned his
head three or four times with increasing impatience toward the door, and
when the young man appeared an exclamation of contentment escaped his
lips.

Lucien, the general's youngest brother, was born in 1775, making him
now barely twenty-five years old. Since 1797, that is, at the age of
twenty-two and a half, he had been a member of the Five Hundred, who, to
honor Bonaparte, had made him their president. With the projects he had
conceived nothing could have been more fortunate for Bonaparte.

Frank and loyal, republican to the core, Lucien believed that, in
seconding his brother's plans, he was serving the Republic better than
the future First Consul. In his eyes, no one was better fitted to save
it a second time than he who had saved it the first. It was with these
sentiments in his heart that he now came to confer with his brother.

"Here you are," said Bonaparte. "I have been waiting for you
impatiently."

"So I suspected. But I was obliged to wait until I could leave without
being noticed."

"Did you manage it?"

"Yes; Talma was relating a story about Marat and Dumouriez. Interesting
as it was, I deprived myself of the pleasure, and here I am."

"I have just heard a carriage driving away; the person who got in it
couldn't have seen you coming up my private stairs, could he?"

"The person who drove off was myself, the carriage was mine. If that is
not seen every one will think I have left."

Bonaparte breathed freer.

"Well," said he, "let us hear how you have spent your day."

"Oh! I haven't wasted my time, you may be sure."

"Are we to have a decree or the Council?"

"We drew it up to-day, and I have brought it to you--the rough draft at
least--so that you can see if you want anything added or changed."

"Let me see it," cried Bonaparte. Taking the paper hastily from Lucien's
hand, he read:

  Art. I. The legislative body is transferred to the commune of
  Saint-Cloud; the two branches of the Council will hold their
  sessions in the two wings of the palace.

"That's the important article," said Lucien. "I had it placed first, so
that it might strike the people at once."

"Yes, yes," exclaimed Bonaparte, and he continued:

  Art. II. They will assemble there to-morrow, the 20th Brumaire--

"No, no," said Bonaparte, "to-morrow the 19th. Change the date,
Bourrienne;" and he handed the paper to his secretary.

"You expect to be ready for the 18th?"

"I shall be. Fouche said day before yesterday, 'Make haste, or I won't
answer for the result.'"

"The 19th Brumaire," said Bourrienne, returning the paper to the
general.

Bonaparte resumed:

  Art. II. They will assemble there to-morrow, the 19th Brumaire,
  at noon. All deliberations are forbidden elsewhere and before
  the above date.

Bonaparte read the article a second time.

"Good," said he; "there is no double meaning there." And he continued:

  Art. III. General Bonaparte is charged with the enforcement of
  this decree; he will take all necessary measures for the safety
  of the National Legislature.

A satirical smile flickered on the stony lips of the reader, but he
continued almost immediately.

  The general commanding the 17th military division, the guard of
  the Legislature, the stationary national guard the troops of the
  line within the boundaries of the Commune of Paris, and those in
  the constitutional arrondissement, and throughout the limits of
  the said 17th division, are placed directly under his orders, and
  are directed to regard him as their commanding officer.

"Bourrienne, add: 'All citizens will lend him assistance when called
upon.' The bourgeois love to meddle in political matters, and when
they really can help us in our projects we ought to grant them this
satisfaction."

Bourrienne obeyed; then he returned the paper to the general, who went
on:

  Art. IV. General Bonaparte is summoned before the Council to
  receive a copy of the present decree, and to make oath thereto.
  He will consult with the inspecting commissioners of both
  branches of the Council.

  Art. V. The present decree shall be transmitted immediate, by
  messenger, to all the members of the Council of Five Hundred
  and to the Executive Directory. It shall be printed and posted,
  and promulgated throughout the communes of the Republic by
  special messengers.

  Done at Paris this....

"The date is left blank," said Lucien.

"Put 'the 18th Brumaire,' Bourrienne; the decree must take everybody by
surprise. It must be issued at seven o'clock in the morning, and at the
same hour or even earlier it must be posted on all the walls of Paris."

"But suppose the Ancients won't consent to issue it?" said Lucien.

"All the more reason to have it posted, ninny," said Bonaparte. "We must
act as if it had been issued."

"Am I to correct this grammatical error in the last paragraph?" asked
Bourrienne, laughing.

"Where?" demanded Lucien, in the tone of an aggrieved author.

"The word 'immediate,'" replied Bourrienne. "You can't say 'transmitted
immediate'; it ought to be 'immediately.'"

"It's not worth while," said Bonaparte. "I shall act, you may be sure,
as if it were 'immediately.'" Then, after an instant's reflection, he
added: "As to what you said just now about their not being willing to
pass it, there's a very simple way to get it passed."

"What is that."

"To convoke the members of whom we are sure at six o'clock in the
morning, and those of whom we are not sure at eight. Having only our own
men, it will be devilishly hard to lose the majority."

"But six o'clock for some, and eight for the others--" objected Lucien.

"Employ two secretaries; one of them can make a mistake." Then turning
to Lucien, he said: "Write this."

And walking up and down, he dictated without hesitating, like a man who
has long thought over and carefully prepared what he dictates; stopping
occasionally beside Bourrienne to see if the secretary's pen were
following his every word:

  CITIZENS--The Council of the Ancients, the trustee of the nation's
  wisdom, has issued the subjoined decree: it is authorized by
  articles 102 and 103 of the Constitution.

  This decree enjoins me to take measures for the safety of the
  National Legislature, and its necessary and momentary removal.

Bourrienne looked at Bonaparte; _instantaneous_ was the word the
latter had intended to use, but as the general did not correct himself,
Bourrienne left _momentary_.

Bonaparte continued to dictate:

  The Legislature will find means to avoid the imminent danger into
  which the disorganization of all parts of the administration has
  brought us.

  But it needs, at this crisis, the united support and confidence of
  patriots. Rally around it; it offers the only means of establishing
  the Republic on the bases of civil liberty, internal prosperity,
  victory and peace.

Bonaparte perused this proclamation, and nodded his head in sign of
approval. Then he looked at his watch.

"Eleven o'clock," he said; "there is still time."

Then, seating himself in Bourrienne's chair, he wrote a few words in
the form of a note, sealed it, and wrote the address: "To the Citizen
Barras."

"Roland," said he, when he had finished, "take a horse out of the
stable, or a carriage in the street, and go to Barras' house. I have
asked him for an interview tomorrow at midnight. I want an answer."

Roland left the room. A moment later the gallop of a horse resounded
through the courtyard, disappearing in the direction of the Rue du
Mont-Blanc.

"Now, Bourrienne," said Bonaparte, after listening to the sound,
"to-morrow at midnight, whether I am in the house or not, you will take
my carriage and go in my stead to Barras."

"In your stead, general?"

"Yes. He will do nothing all day, expecting me to accept him on my side
at night. At midnight you will go to him, and say that I have such a bad
headache I have had to go to bed, but that I will be with him at seven
o'clock in the morning without fail. He will believe you, or he won't
believe you; but at any rate it will be too late for him to act against
us. By seven in the morning I shall have ten thousand men under my
command."

"Very good, general. Have you any other orders for me?"

"No, not this evening," replied Bonaparte. "Be here early to-morrow."

"And I?" asked Lucien.

"See Sieyes; he has the Ancients in the hollow of his hand. Make all
your arrangements with him. I don't wish him to be seen here, nor to
be seen myself at his house. If by any chance we fail, he is a man to
repudiate. After tomorrow I wish to be master of my own actions, and to
have no ties with any one."

"Do you think you will need me to-morrow?"

"Come back at night and report what happens."

"Are you going back to the salon?"

"No. I shall wait for Josephine in her own room. Bourrienne, tell her,
as you pass through, to get rid of the people as soon as possible."

Then, saluting Bourrienne and his brother with a wave of the hand, he
left his study by a private corridor, and went to Josephine's room.
There, lighted by a single alabaster lamp, which made the conspirator's
brow seem paler than ever, Bonaparte listened to the noise of the
carriages, as one after the other they rolled away. At last the sounds
ceased, and five minutes later the door opened to admit Josephine.

She was alone, and held a double-branched candlestick in her hand. Her
face, lighted by the double flame, expressed the keenest anxiety.

"Well," Bonaparte inquired, "what ails you?"

"I am afraid!" said Josephine.

"Of what? Those fools of the Directory, or the lawyers of the two
Councils? Come, come! I have Sieyes with me in the Ancients, and Lucien
in the Five Hundred."

"Then all goes well?"

"Wonderfully so!"

"You sent me word that you were waiting for me here, and I feared you
had some bad news to tell me."

"Pooh! If I had bad news, do you think I would tell you?"

"How reassuring that is!"

"Well, don't be uneasy, for I have nothing but good news. Only, I have
given you a part in the conspiracy."

"What is it?"

"Sit down and write to Gohier."

"That we won't dine with him?"

"On the contrary, ask him to come and breakfast with us. Between those
who like each other as we do there can't be too much intercourse."

Josephine sat down at a little rosewood writing desk "Dictate," said
she; "I will write."

"Goodness! for them to recognize my style! Nonsense; you know better
than I how to write one of those charming notes there is no resisting."

Josephine smiled at the compliment, turned her forehead to Bonaparte,
who kissed it lovingly, and wrote the following note, which we have
copied from the original:

  To the Citizen Gohier, President of the Executive Directory of the
  French Republic--

"Is that right?" she asked.

"Perfectly! As he won't wear this title of President much longer, we
won't cavil at it."

"Don't you mean to make him something?"

"I'll make him anything he pleases, if he does exactly what I want. Now
go on, my dear."

Josephine picked up her pen again and wrote:

  Come, my dear Gohier, with your wife, and breakfast with us
  to-morrow at eight o'clock. Don't fail, for I have some very
  interesting things to tell you.

  Adieu, my dear Gohier! With the sincerest friendship,
  Yours, LA PAGERIE-BONAPARTE.

"I wrote to-morrow," exclaimed Josephine. "Shall I date it the 17th
Brumaire?"

"You won't be wrong," said Bonaparte; "there's midnight striking."

In fact, another day had fallen into the gulf of time; the clock chimed
twelve. Bonaparte listened gravely and dreamily. Twenty-four hours only
separated him from the solemn day for which he had been scheming for a
month, and of which he had dreamed for years.

Let us do now what he would so gladly have done, and spring over those
twenty-four hours intervening to the day which history has not yet
judged, and see what happened in various parts of Paris, where the
events we are about to relate produced an overwhelming sensation.




CHAPTER XXIII. ALEA JACTA EST

At seven in the morning, Fouche, minister of police, entered the bedroom
of Gohier, president of the Directory.

"Oh, ho!" said Gohier, when he saw him. "What has happened now, monsieur
le ministre, to give me the pleasure of seeing you so early?"

"Don't you know about the decree?" asked Fouche.

"What decree?" asked honest Gohier.

"The decree of the Council of the Ancients."

"When was it issued?"

"Last night."

"So the Council of the Ancients assembles at night now?"

"When matters are urgent, yes."

"And what does the decree say."

"It transfers the legislative sessions to Saint-Cloud."

Gohier felt the blow. He realized the advantage which Bonaparte's daring
genius might obtain by this isolation.

"And since when," he asked Fouche, "is the minister of police
transformed into a messenger of the Council of the Ancients?"

"That's where you are mistaken, citizen president," replied the
ex-Conventional. "I am more than ever minister of police this morning,
for I have come to inform you of an act which may have the most serious
consequences."

Not being as yet sure of how the conspiracy of the Rue de la Victoire
would turn out, Fouche was not averse to keeping open a door for retreat
at the Luxembourg. But Gohier, honest as he was, knew the man too well
to be his dupe.

"You should have informed me of this decree yesterday, and not this
morning; for in making the communication now you are scarcely in
advance of the official communication I shall probably receive in a few
moments."

As he spoke, an usher opened the door and informed the president that a
messenger from the Inspectors of the Council of the Ancients was there,
and asked to make him a communication.

"Let him come in," said Gohier.

The messenger entered and handed the president a letter. He broke the
seal hastily and read:

  CITIZEN PRESIDENT--The Inspecting Commission hasten to inform
  you of a decree removing the residence of the legislative body
  to Saint-Cloud.

  The decree will be forwarded to you; but measures for public
  safety are at present occupying our attention.

  We invite you to meet the Commission of the Ancients. You will
  find Sieyes and Ducos already there.

    Fraternal greetings
      BARILLON,
      FARGUES,
      CORNET,

"Very good," said Gohier, dismissing the messenger with a wave of his
hand.

The messenger went out. Gohier turned to Fouche.

"Ah!" said he, "the plot is well laid; they inform me of the decree, but
they do not send it to me. Happily you are here to tell me the terms of
it."

"But," said Fouche, "I don't know them."

"What! do you the minister of police, mean to tell me that you know
nothing about this extraordinary session of the Council of the Ancients,
when it has been put on record by a decree?"

"Of course I knew it took place, but I was unable to be present."

"And you had no secretary, no amanuensis to send, who could give you an
account, word for word, of this session, when in all probability this
session will dispose of the fate of France! Ah, citizen Fouche, you are
either a very deep, or a very shallow minister of police!"

"Have you any orders to give me, citizen president?" asked Fouche.

"None, citizen minister," replied the president. "If the Directory
judges it advisable to issue any orders, it will be to men whom it
esteems worthy of its confidence. You may return to those who sent you,"
he added, turning his back upon the minister.

Fouche went, and Gohier immediately rang his bell. An usher entered.

"Go to Barras, Sieyes, Ducos, and Moulins, and request them to come to
me at once. Ah! And at the same time ask Madame Gohier to come into my
study, and to bring with her Madame Bonaparte's letter inviting us to
breakfast with her."

Five minutes later Madame Gohier entered, fully dressed, with the note
in her hand. The invitation was for eight o'clock. It was then half-past
seven, and it would take at least twenty minutes to drive from the
Luxembourg to the Rue de la Victoire.

"Here it is, my dear," said Madame Gohier, handing the letter to her
husband. "It says eight o'clock."

"Yes," replied Gohier, "I was not in doubt about the hour, but about the
day."

Taking the note from his wife's hand, he read it over:

  Come, my dear Gohier, with your wife, and breakfast with me
  to-morrow at eight o'clock. Don't fail, for I have some very
  interesting things to tell you.

"Ah," said Gohier, "there can be no mistake."

"Well, my dear, are we going?" asked Madame Gohier.

"You are, but not I. An event has just happened about which the citizen
Bonaparte is probably well-informed, which will detain my colleagues and
myself at the Luxembourg."

"A serious event?"

"Possibly."

"Then I shall stay with you."

"No, indeed; you would not be of any service here. Go to Madame
Bonaparte's. I may be mistaken, but, should anything extraordinary
happen, which appears to you alarming, send me word some way or other.
Anything will do; I shall understand half a word."

"Very good, my dear; I will go. The hope of being useful to you is
sufficient."

"Do go!"

Just then the usher entered, and said:

"General Moulins is at my heels; citizen Barras is in his bath, and will
soon be here; citizens Sieyes and Ducos went out at five o'clock this
morning, and have not yet returned."

"They are the two traitors!" said Gohier; "Barras is only their dupe."
Then kissing his wife, he added: "Now, go."

As she turned round, Madame Gohier came face to face with General
Moulins. He, for his character was naturally impetuous, seemed furious.

"Pardon me, citizeness," he said. Then, rushing into Gohier's study, he
cried: "Do you know what has happened, president?"

"No, but I have my suspicions."

"The legislative body has been transferred to Saint-Cloud; the execution
of the decree has been intrusted to General Bonaparte, and the troops
are placed under his orders."

"Ha! The cat's out of the bag!" exclaimed Gohier.

"Well, we must combine, and fight them."

"Have you heard that Sieyes and Ducos are not in the palace?"

"By Heavens! they are at the Tuileries! But Barras is in his bath; let
us go to Barras. The Directory can issue decrees if there is a majority.
We are three, and, I repeat it, we must make a struggle!"

"Then let us send word to Barras to come to us as soon as he is out of
his bath."

"No; let us go to him before he leaves it."

The two Directors left the room, and hurried toward Barras' apartment.
They found him actually in his bath, but they insisted on entering.

"Well?" asked Barras as soon as he saw them.

"Have you heard?"

"Absolutely nothing."

They told him what they themselves knew.

"Ah!" cried Barras, "that explains everything."

"What do you mean?"

"Yes, that is why he didn't come last night."

"Who?"

"Why, Bonaparte."

"Did you expect him last evening?"

"He sent me word by one of his aides-de-camp that he would call on me at
eleven o'clock last evening."

"And he didn't come?"

"No. He sent Bourrienne in his carriage to tell me that a violent
headache had obliged him to go to bed; but that he would be here early
this morning."

The Directors looked at each other.

"The whole thing is plain," said they.

"I have sent Bollot, my secretary, a very intelligent fellow, to find
out what he can," continued Barras.

He rang and a servant entered.

"As soon as citizen Bollot returns," said Barras, "ask him to come
here."

"He is just getting out of his carriage."

"Send him up! Send him up!"

But Bollot was already at the door.

"Well?" cried the three Directors.

"Well, General Bonaparte, in full uniform, accompanied by Generals
Beurnonville, Macdonald and Moreau, are on their way to the Tuileries,
where ten thousand troops are awaiting them."

"Moreau! Moreau with him!" exclaimed Gohier.

"On his right!"

"I always told you that Moreau was a sneak, and nothing else!" cried
Moulins, with military roughness.

"Are you still determined to resist, Barras?" asked Gohier.

"Yes," replied Barras.

"Then dress yourself and join us in the council-room."

"Go," said Barras, "I follow you."

The two Directors hastened to the council-room. After waiting ten
minutes Moulins said: "We should have waited for Barras; if Moreau is a
sneak, Barras is a knave."

