That our peace is not to be placed in men

"My Son, if thou set thy peace on any person because thou hast
high opinion of him, and art familiar with him, thou shalt be
unstable and entangled.  But if thou betake thyself to the
ever-living and abiding Truth, the desertion or death of a friend
shall not make thee sad.  In Me ought the love of thy friend to
subsist, and for My sake is every one to be loved, whosoever he
be, who appeareth to thee good, and is very dear to thee in this
life.  Without Me friendship hath no strength or endurance,
neither is that love true and pure, which I unite not.  Thou
oughtest to be so dead to such affections of beloved friends,
that as far as in thee lieth, thou wouldst rather choose to be
without any companionship of men.  The nearer a man approacheth
to God, the further he recedeth from all earthly solace.  The
deeper also he descendeth into himself, and the viler he
appeareth in his own eyes, the higher he ascendeth towards God.

2. "But he who attributeth anything good to himself, hindereth
the grace of God from coming to him, because the grace of the
Holy Ghost ever seeketh the humble heart.  If thou couldst make
thyself utterly nothing, and empty thyself of the love of every
creature, then should it be My part to overflow unto thee with
great grace.  When thou settest thine eyes upon creatures, the
face of the Creator is withdrawn from thee.  Learn in all things
to conquer thyself for thy Creator's sake, then shalt thou be
able to attain unto divine knowledge.  How small soever anything
be, if it be loved and regarded inordinately, it holdeth us back
from the highest good, and corrupteth."


CHAPTER XLIII

Against vain and worldly knowledge

"My Son, let not the fair and subtle sayings of men move thee.
For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.(1)  Give ear
to My words, for they kindle the heart and enlighten the mind,
they bring contrition, and they supply manifold consolations.
Never read thou the word that thou mayest appear more learned or
wise; but study for the mortification of thy sins, for this will
be far more profitable for thee than the knowledge of many
difficult questions.

2. "When thou hast read and learned many things, thou must always
return to one first principle.  I am He that teacheth man
knowledge,(2) and I give unto babes clearer knowledge than can
be taught by man.  He to whom I speak will be quickly wise and
shall grow much in the spirit.  Woe unto them who inquire into
many curious questions from men, and take little heed concerning
the way of My service.  The time will come when Christ will
appear, the Master of masters, the Lord of the Angels, to hear
the lessons of all, that is to examine the consciences of each
one.  And then will He search Jerusalem with candles,(3) and the
hidden things of darkness(4) shall be made manifest, and the
arguings of tongues shall be silent.

3. "I am He who in an instant lift up the humble spirit, to learn
more reasonings of the Eternal Truth, than if a man had studied
ten years in the schools.  I teach without noise of words,
without confusion of opinions, without striving after honour,
without clash of arguments.  I am He who teach men to despise
earthly things, to loathe things present, to seek things
heavenly, to enjoy things eternal, to flee honours, to endure
offences, to place all hope in Me, to desire nothing apart from
Me, and above all things to love Me ardently.

4. "For there was one, who by loving Me from the bottom of his
heart, learned divine things, and spake things that were
wonderful; he profited more by forsaking all things than by
studying subtleties.  But to some I speak common things, to
others special; to some I appear gently in signs and figures, and
again to some I reveal mysteries in much light.  The voice of
books is one, but it informeth not all alike; because I inwardly
am the Teacher of truth, the Searcher of the heart, the Discerner
of the thoughts, the Mover of actions, distributing to each man,
as I judge meet."

(1) 1 Corinthians iv. 20.   (2) Psalm xciv. 10.
(3) Zephaniah i. 12.   (4) 1 Corinthians iv. 5.


CHAPTER XLIV

Of not troubling ourselves about outward things

"My Son, in many things it behoveth thee to be ignorant, and to
esteem thyself as one dead upon the earth, and as one to whom the
whole world is crucified.  Many things also thou must pass by
with deaf ear, and must rather think upon those things which
belong unto thy peace.  It is more profitable to turn away thine
eyes from those things that displease, and to leave each man to
his own opinion, than to give thyself to discourses of strife.
If thou stand well with God and hast His judgment in thy mind,
thou wilt verily easily bear to be as one conquered."

2. O Lord, to what have we come?  Behold a temporal loss is
mourned over; for a trifling gain we labour and hurry; and
spiritual loss passeth away into forgetfulness, and we rarely
recover it.  That which profiteth little or nothing is looked
after, and that which is altogether necessary is negligently
passed by; because the whole man slideth away to outward things,
and unless he quickly recovereth himself in outward things he
willingly lieth down.


CHAPTER XLV

That we must not believe everyone, and that we are prone to fall
in our words

Lord, be thou my help in trouble, for vain is the help of man.(1)
How often have I failed to find faithfulness, where I thought I
possessed it.  How many times I have found it where I least
expected.  Vain therefore is hope in men, but the salvation of
the just, O God, is in Thee.  Blessed be thou, O Lord my God, in
all things which happen unto us.  We are weak and unstable, we
are quickly deceived and quite changed.

2. Who is the man who is able to keep himself so warily and
circumspectly as not sometimes to come into some snare of
perplexity?  But he who trusteth in Thee, O Lord, and seeketh
Thee with an unfeigned heart, doth not so easily slip.  And if he
fall into any tribulation, howsoever he may be entangled, yet
very quickly he shall be delivered through Thee, or by Thee shall
be comforted, because Thou wilt not forsake him that trusteth in
Thee unto the end.  A friend who continueth faithful in all the
distresses of his friend is rare to be found.  Thou, O Lord, Thou
alone art most faithful in all things, and there is none other
like unto Thee.

3. Oh, how truly wise was that holy soul which said, "My mind is
steadfastly fixed, and it is grounded in Christ."(2)  If thus it
were with me, the fear of man should not so easily tempt me, nor
the arrows of words move me.  Who is sufficient to foresee all
things, who to guard beforehand against future ills?  If even
things which are foreseen sometimes hurt us, what can things
which are not foreseen do, but grievously injure?  But wherefore
have I not better provided for myself, miserable that I am?  Why,
too, have I given such heed to others?  But we are men, nor are
we other than frail men, even though by many we are reckoned and
called angels.  Whom shall I trust, O Lord, whom shall I trust
but Thee?  Thou art the Truth, and deceivest not, nor canst be
deceived.  And on the other hand, Every man is a liar,(3) weak,
unstable and frail, especially in his words, so that one ought
scarcely ever to believe what seemeth to sound right on the face
of it.

4. With what wisdom hast thou warned us beforehand to beware of
men, and that a man's foes are they of his own household,(4) and
that we must not believe if one say unto us Lo here, or Lo
there.(5)  I have been taught by my loss, and O that I may prove
more careful and not foolish hereby.  "Be cautious," saith some
one: "be cautious, keep unto thyself what I tell thee."  And
whilst I am silent and believe that it is hid with me, he himself
cannot keep silence concerning it, but straightway betrayeth me
and himself, and goeth his way.  Protect me, O Lord, from such
mischief-making and reckless men; let me not fall into their
hands, nor ever do such things myself.  Put a true and steadfast
word into my mouth, and remove a deceitful tongue far from me.
What I would not suffer, I ought by all means to beware of doing.

5. Oh, how good and peacemaking a thing it is to be silent
concerning others, and not carelessly to believe all reports, nor
to hand them on further; how good also to lay one's self open to
few, to seek ever to have Thee as the beholder of the heart; not
to be carried about with every wind of words, but to desire that
all things inward and outward be done according to the good
pleasure of Thy will!  How safe for the preserving of heavenly
grace to fly from human approval, and not to long after the
things which seem to win admiration abroad, but to follow with
all earnestness those things which bring amendment of life and
heavenly fervour!  How many have been injured by their virtue
being made known and too hastily praised.  How truly profitable
hath been grace preserved in silence in this frail life, which,
as we are told, is all temptation and warfare.

(1) Psalm lx. 11.   (2) St. Agatha.
(3) Psalm cxvi. 11; Romans iii. 4.   (4) Matthew x. 17, 36.
(5) Matthew xxiv. 23.


CHAPTER XLVI

Of having confidence in God when evil words are cast at us

"My Son, stand fast and believe in Me.  For what are words but
words?  They fly through the air, but they bruise no stone.  If
thou are guilty, think how thou wouldst gladly amend thyself; if
thou knowest nothing against thyself, consider that thou wilt
gladly bear this for God's sake.  It is little enough that thou
sometimes hast to bear hard words, for thou art not yet able to
bear hard blows.  And wherefore do such trivial matters go to
thine heart, except that thou art yet carnal, and regardest men
more than thou oughtest?  For because thou fearest to be
despised, thou art unwilling to be reproved for thy faults, and
seekest paltry shelters of excuses.

2. "But look better into thyself, and thou shalt know that the
world is still alive in thee, and the vain love of pleasing men.
For when thou fleest away from being abased and confounded for
thy faults, it is plain that thou art neither truly humble nor
truly dead to the world, and that the world is not crucified to
thee.  But hearken to My word, and thou shalt not care for ten
thousand words of men.  Behold, if all things could be said
against thee which the utmost malice could invent, what should it
hurt thee if thou wert altogether to let it go, and make no more
account of it than of a mote?  Could it pluck out a single hair
of thy head?

3. "But he that hath no heart within him, and hath not God before
his eyes, is easily moved by a word of reproach; but he who
trusteth in Me, and seeketh not to abide by his own judgment,
shall be free from the fear of men.  For I am the Judge and the
Discerner of all secrets; I know how the thing hath been done; I
know both the injurer and the bearer.  From Me went forth that
word, by My permission this hath happened, that the thoughts of
many hearts may be revealed.(1)  I shall judge the guilty and the
innocent; but beforehand I have willed to try them both by a
secret judgment.

4. "The testimony of men often deceiveth.  My judgment is true;
it will stand, and it shall not be overturned.  It commonly lieth
hid, and only to few in certain cases is it made known; yet it
never erreth, nor can err, although it seem not right to the eyes
of foolish men.  To Me, therefore, must men have recourse in all
judgment, and must not lean to their opinion.  For there shall no
evil happen to the just,(2) whatsoever may be sent to him by God.
Even though some unjust charge be brought against him, he will
care little; nor, again, will he exult above measure, if through
others he be clearly vindicated.  For he considereth that I am He
who try the hearts and reins,(3) who judge not outwardly and
according to human appearance; for often in Mine eyes that is
found blameworthy which in the judgment of men is held worthy of
praise."

5. O Lord God, O Judge, just, strong, and patient, who knowest
the frailty and sinfulness of men, be Thou my strength and my
whole confidence; for my own conscience sufficeth me not.  Thou
knowest what I know not; and therefore ought I under all rebuke
to humble myself, and to bear it meekly.  Therefore mercifully
forgive me as often as I have not done this, and grant me the
next time the grace of greater endurance.  For better unto me is
Thine abundant pity for the attainment of Thy pardon, than the
righteousness which I believe myself to have for defence against
my conscience, which lieth wait against me.  Although I know
nothing against myself, yet I am not hereby justified,(4) because
if Thy mercy were removed away, in Thy sight should no man
living be justified.(5)

(1) Luke ii. 35.   (2) Proverbs xii. 21.   (3) Psalm vii. 9.
(4) 1 Corinthians iv. 4.   (5) Psalm cxliii. 2.


CHAPTER XLVII

That all troubles are to be endured for the sake of eternal life

"My Son, let not the labours which thou hast undertaken for Me
break thee down, nor let tribulations cast thee down in any wise,
but let my promise strengthen and comfort thee in every event.  I
am sufficient to reward thee above all measure and extent.  Not
long shalt thou labour here, nor always be weighed down with
sorrows.  Wait yet a little while, and thou shalt see a speedy
end of thine evils.  An hour shall come when all labour and
confusion shall cease.  Little and short is all that passeth away
with time.

2. "Do earnestly what thou dost; labour faithfully in My
vineyard; I will be thy reward.  Write, read, sing, weep, be
silent, pray, endure adversities manfully; eternal life is worthy
of all these conflicts, yea, and of greater.  Peace shall come in
one day which is known to the Lord; which shall be neither day
nor night,(1) but light eternal, infinite clearness, steadfast
peace, and undisturbed rest.  Thou shalt not say then, Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?(2) nor cry out, Woe is
me, for my sojourning is prolonged,(3) because death will be
utterly destroyed, and there shall be salvation which can never
fail, no more anxiety, happy delight, sweet and noble society.

3. "Oh, if thou sawest the unfading crowns of the Saints in
heaven, and with what great glory they now rejoice, who aforetime
were reckoned by this world contemptibly and as it were unworthy
of life, truly thou wouldst immediately humble thyself even to
the earth, and wouldst desire rather to be in subjection to all,
than to have authority over one; nor wouldst thou long for
pleasant days of this life, but wouldst more rejoice to be
afflicted for God's sake, and wouldst esteem it gain to be
counted for nought amongst men.

4. "Oh, if these things were sweet to thy taste, and moved thee
to the bottom of thine heart, how shouldst thou dare even once to
complain?  Are not all laborious things to be endured for the
sake of eternal life?  It is no small thing, the losing or
gaining the Kingdom of God.  Lift up therefore thy face to
heaven.  Behold, I and all My Saints with Me, who in this world
had a hard conflict, now rejoice, are now comforted, are now
secure, are now at peace, and shall remain with Me evermore in
the Kingdom of My Father."

(1) Zechariah xiv. 7.   (2) Romans vii. 24. (3) Psalm cxx.


CHAPTER XLVIII

Of the day of eternity and of the straitnesses of this life

Oh most blessed mansion of the City which is above!  Oh most
clear day of eternity which the night obscureth not, but the
Supreme Truth ever enlighteneth!  Day always joyful, always
secure and never changing its state into those which are
contrary.  Oh would that this day might shine forth, and that all
these temporal things would come to an end.  It shineth indeed
upon the Saints, glowing with unending brightness, but only from
afar and through a glass, upon those who are pilgrims on the
earth.

2. The citizens of heaven know how glorious that day is; the
exiled sons of Eve groan, because this is bitter and wearisome.
The days of this life are few and evil, full of sorrows and
straits, where man is defiled with many sins, ensnared with many
passions, bound fast with many fears, wearied with many cares,
distracted with many questionings, entangled with many vanities,
compassed about with many errors, worn away with many labours,
weighed down with temptations, enervated by pleasures, tormented
by poverty.

3. Oh when shall there be an end of these evils?  When shall I be
delivered from the wretched slavery of my sins?  When shall I be
mindful, O Lord, of Thee alone?  When shall I rejoice in Thee to
the full?  When shall I be in true liberty without any
impediment, without any burden on mind or body?  When shall there
be solid peace, peace immovable and secure, peace within and
without, peace firm on every side?  Blessed Jesus, when shall I
stand to behold Thee?  When shall I gaze upon the glory of Thy
kingdom?  When shalt Thou be to me all in all?  Oh when shall I
be with Thee in Thy Kingdom which Thou hast prepared from the
foundation of the world for them that love Thee?  I am left
destitute, an exile in a hostile land, where are daily wars and
grievous misfortunes.

4. Console my exile, mitigate my sorrow, for towards Thee all my
desire longeth.  For all is to me a burden, whatsoever this world
offereth for consolation.  I yearn to enjoy Thee intimately, but
I cannot attain unto it.  I long to cleave to heavenly things,
but temporal things and unmortified passions press me down.  In
my mind I would be above all things, but in my flesh I am
unwillingly compelled to be beneath them.  So, wretched man that
I am, I fight with myself, and am made grievous even unto myself,
while the spirit seeketh to be above and the flesh to be beneath.

5. Oh how I suffer inwardly, while with the mind I discourse on
heavenly things, and presently a crowd of carnal things rusheth
upon me whilst I pray.  My God, be not Thou far from me, nor
depart in wrath from Thy servant.  Cast forth Thy lightning and
scatter them; send out Thine arrows,(1) and let all delusions of
