that which weighs on my conscience, and awakens sad fancies. Ah, father
Simon, we martialists, that have spilt blood in our choler, have dark
thoughts at times; I sometimes wish that my knife had cut nothing but
worsted thrums."

"And I wish," said Simon, "that mine had cut nothing but buck's leather,
for it has sometimes cut my own fingers. But thou mayst spare thy
remorse for this bout: there was but one man dangerously hurt at the
affray, and it was he from whom Henry Smith hewed the hand, and he is
well recovered. His name is Black Quentin, one of Sir John Ramorny's
followers. He has been sent privately back to his own country of Fife."

"What, Black Quentin? Why, that is the very man that Henry and I, as
we ever keep close together, struck at in the same moment, only my blow
fell somewhat earlier. I fear further feud will come of it, and so does
the provost. And is he recovered? Why, then, I will be jovial, and since
thou wilt not let me see how Kate becomes her night gear, I will back to
the Griffin to my morrice dancers."

"Nay, stay but one instant. Thou art a comrade of Henry Wynd, and hast
done him the service to own one or two deeds and this last among others.
I would thou couldst clear him of other charges with which fame hath
loaded him."

"Nay, I will swear by the hilt of my sword they are as false as hell,
father Simon. What--blades and targets! shall not men of the sword stick
together?"

"Nay, neighbour bonnet maker, be patient; thou mayst do the smith a kind
turn, an thou takest this matter the right way. I have chosen thee to
consult with anent this matter--not that I hold thee the wisest head in
Perth, for should I say so I should lie."

"Ay--ay," answered the self satisfied bonnet maker; "I know where you
think my fault lies: you cool heads think we hot heads are fools--I have
heard men call Henry Wynd such a score of times."

"Fool enough and cool enough may rhyme together passing well," said the
glover; "but thou art good natured, and I think lovest this crony of
thine. It stands awkwardly with us and him just now," continued Simon.
"Thou knowest there hath been some talk of marriage between my daughter
Catharine and Henry Gow?"

"I have heard some such song since St. Valentine's Morn. Ah! he that
shall win the Fair Maid of Perth must be a happy man; and yet marriage
spoils many a pretty fellow. I myself somewhat regret--"

"Prithee, truce with thy regrets for the present, man," interrupted the
glover, somewhat peevishly. "You must know, Oliver, that some of these
talking women, who I think make all the business of the world their
own, have accused Henry of keeping light company with glee women and
suchlike. Catharine took it to heart; and I held my child insulted, that
he had not waited upon her like a Valentine, but had thrown himself into
unseemly society on the very day when, by ancient custom, he might have
had an opportunity to press his interest with my daughter. Therefore,
when he came hither late on the evening of St. Valentine's, I, like a
hasty old fool, bid him go home to the company he had left, and denied
him admittance. I have not seen him since, and I begin to think that
I may have been too rash in the matter. She is my only child, and the
grave should have her sooner than a debauchee, But I have hitherto
thought I knew Henry Gow as if he were my son. I cannot think he would
use us thus, and it may be there are means of explaining what is laid
to his charge. I was led to ask Dwining, who is said to have saluted the
smith while he was walking with this choice mate. If I am to believe his
words, this wench was the smith's cousin, Joan Letham. But thou knowest
that the potter carrier ever speaks one language with his visage and
another with his tongue. Now, thou, Oliver, hast too little wit--I mean,
too much honesty--to belie the truth, and as Dwining hinted that thou
also hadst seen her--"

"I see her, Simon Glover! Will Dwining say that I saw her?"

"No, not precisely that; but he says you told him you had met the smith
thus accompanied."

"He lies, and I will pound him into a gallipot!" said Oliver Proudfute.

"How! Did you never tell him, then, of such a meeting?"

"What an if I did?" said the bonnet maker. "Did not he swear that he
would never repeat again to living mortal what I communicated to him?
and therefore, in telling the occurrent to you, he hath made himself a
liar."

"Thou didst not meet the smith, then," said Simon, "with such a loose
baggage as fame reports?"

"Lackaday, not I; perhaps I did, perhaps I did not. Think, father
Simon--I have been a four years married man, and can you expect me to
remember the turn of a glee woman's ankle, the trip of her toe, the lace
upon her petticoat, and such toys? No, I leave that to unmarried wags,
like my gossip Henry."

"The upshot is, then," said the glover, much vexed, "you did meet him on
St. Valentine's Day walking the public streets--"

"Not so, neighbour; I met him in the most distant and dark lane in
Perth, steering full for his own house, with bag and baggage, which, as
a gallant fellow, he carried in his arms, the puppy dog on one and the
jilt herself--and to my thought she was a pretty one--hanging upon the
other."

"Now, by good St. John," said the glover, "this infamy would make a
Christian man renounce his faith, and worship Mahound in very anger! But
he has seen the last of my daughter. I would rather she went to the wild
Highlands with a barelegged cateran than wed with one who could, at such
a season, so broadly forget honour and decency. Out upon him!"

"Tush--tush! father Simon," said the liberal minded bonnet maker, "you
consider not the nature of young blood. Their company was not long,
for--to speak truth, I did keep a little watch on him--I met him before
sunrise, conducting his errant damsel to the Lady's Stairs, that the
wench might embark on the Tay from Perth; and I know for certainty, for
I made inquiry, that she sailed in a gabbart for Dundee. So you see it
was but a slight escape of youth."

"And he came here," said Simon, bitterly, "beseeching for admittance to
my daughter, while he had his harlot awaiting him at home! I had rather
he had slain a score of men! It skills not talking, least of all to
thee, Oliver Proudfute, who, if thou art not such a one as himself,
would fain be thought so. But--"

"Nay, think not of it so seriously," said Oliver, who began to reflect
on the mischief his tattling was likely to occasion to his friend, and
on the consequences of Henry Gow's displeasure, when he should learn
the disclosure which he had made rather in vanity of heart than in evil
intention.

"Consider," he continued, "that there are follies belonging to youth.
Occasion provokes men to such frolics, and confession wipes them off. I
care not if I tell thee that, though my wife be as goodly a woman as the
city has, yet I myself--"

"Peace, silly braggart," said the glover in high wrath; "thy loves and
thy battles are alike apocryphal. If thou must needs lie, which I think
is thy nature, canst thou invent no falsehood that may at least do thee
some credit? Do I not see through thee, as I could see the light through
the horn of a base lantern? Do I not know, thou filthy weaver of rotten
worsted, that thou durst no more cross the threshold of thy own door, if
thy wife heard of thy making such a boast, than thou darest cross naked
weapons with a boy of twelve years old, who has drawn a sword for the
first time of his life? By St. John, it were paying you for your tale
bearing trouble to send thy Maudie word of thy gay brags."

The bonnet maker, at this threat, started as if a crossbow bolt had
whizzed past his head when least expected. And it was with a trembling
voice that he replied: "Nay, good father Glover, thou takest too much
credit for thy grey hairs. Consider, good neighbour, thou art too old
for a young martialist to wrangle with. And in the matter of my Maudie,
I can trust thee, for I know no one who would be less willing than thou
to break the peace of families."

"Trust thy coxcomb no longer with me," said the incensed glover; "but
take thyself, and the thing thou call'st a head, out of my reach, lest I
borrow back five minutes of my youth and break thy pate!"

"You have had a merry Fastern's Even, neighbour," said the bonnet maker,
"and I wish you a quiet sleep; we shall meet better friends tomorrow."

"Out of my doors tonight!" said the glover. "I am ashamed so idle a
tongue as thine should have power to move me thus."

"Idiot--beast--loose tongued coxcomb," he exclaimed, throwing himself
into a chair, as the bonnet maker disappeared; "that a fellow made up
of lies should not have had the grace to frame one when it might have
covered the shame of a friend! And I--what am I, that I should, in my
secret mind, wish that such a gross insult to me and my child had
been glossed over? Yet such was my opinion of Henry, that I would have
willingly believed the grossest figment the swaggering ass could have
invented. Well, it skills not thinking of it. Our honest name must be
maintained, though everything else should go to ruin."

While the glover thus moralised on the unwelcome confirmation of the
tale he wished to think untrue, the expelled morrice dancer had leisure,
in the composing air of a cool and dark February night, to meditate on
the consequences of the glover's unrestrained anger.

"But it is nothing," he bethought himself, "to the wrath of Henry Wynd,
who hath killed a man for much less than placing displeasure betwixt him
and Catharine, as well as her fiery old father. Certainly I were better
have denied everything. But the humour of seeming a knowing gallant, as
in truth I am, fairly overcame me. Were I best go to finish the revel
at the Griffin? But then Maudie will rampauge on my return--ay, and this
being holiday even, I may claim a privilege. I have it: I will not to
the Griffin--I will to the smith's, who must be at home, since no one
hath seen him this day amid the revel. I will endeavour to make peace
with him, and offer my intercession with the glover. Harry is a simple,
downright fellow, and though I think he is my better in a broil, yet
in discourse I can turn him my own way. The streets are now quiet, the
night, too, is dark, and I may step aside if I meet any rioters. I will
to the smith's, and, securing him for my friend, I care little for old
Simon. St. Ringan bear me well through this night, and I will clip my
tongue out ere it shall run my head into such peril again! Yonder old
fellow, when his blood was up, looked more like a carver of buff jerkins
than a clipper of kid gloves."

With these reflections, the puissant Oliver walked swiftly, yet with as
little noise as possible, towards the wynd in which the smith, as our
readers are aware, had his habitation. But his evil fortune had not
ceased to pursue him. As he turned into the High, or principal, Street,
he heard a burst of music very near him, followed by a loud shout.

"My merry mates, the morrice dancers," thought he; "I would know old
Jeremy's rebeck among an hundred. I will venture across the street ere
they pass on; if I am espied, I shall have the renown of some private
quest, which may do me honour as a roving blade."

With these longings for distinction among the gay and gallant, combated,
however, internally, by more prudential considerations, the bonnet maker
made an attempt to cross the street. But the revellers, whoever they
might be, were accompanied by torches, the flash of which fell upon
Oliver, whose light coloured habit made him the more distinctly visible.
The general shout of "A prize--a prize" overcame the noise of the
minstrel, and before the bonnet maker could determine whether it were
better to stand or fly, two active young men, clad in fantastic masking
habits, resembling wild men, and holding great clubs, seized upon him,
saying, in a tragical tone: "Yield thee, man of bells and bombast--yield
thee, rescue or no rescue, or truly thou art but a dead morrice dancer."

"To whom shall I yield me?" said the bonnet maker, with a faltering
voice; for, though he saw he had to do with a party of mummers who were
afoot for pleasure, yet he observed at the same time that they were far
above his class, and he lost the audacity necessary to support his part
in a game where the inferior was likely to come by the worst.

"Dost thou parley, slave?" answered one of the maskers; "and must I
show thee that thou art a captive, by giving thee incontinently the
bastinado?"

"By no means, puissant man of Ind," said the bonnet maker; "lo, I am
conformable to your pleasure."

"Come, then," said those who had arrested him--"come and do homage
to the Emperor of Mimes, King of Caperers, and Grand Duke of the Dark
Hours, and explain by what right thou art so presumptuous as to prance
and jingle, and wear out shoe leather, within his dominions without
paying him tribute. Know'st thou not thou hast incurred the pains of
high treason?"

"That were hard, methinks," said poor Oliver, "since I knew not that his
Grace exercised the government this evening. But I am willing to redeem
the forfeit, if the purse of a poor bonnet maker may, by the mulct of a
gallon of wine, or some such matter."

"Bring him before the emperor," was the universal cry; and the morrice
dancer was placed before a slight, but easy and handsome, figure of a
young man, splendidly attired, having a cincture and tiara of peacock's
feathers, then brought from the East as a marvellous rarity; a short
jacket and under dress of leopard's skin fitted closely the rest of his
person, which was attired in flesh coloured silk, so as to resemble the
ordinary idea of an Indian prince. He wore sandals, fastened on with
ribands of scarlet silk, and held in his hand a sort of fan, such as
ladies then used, composed of the same feathers, assembled into a plume
or tuft.

"What mister wight have we here," said the Indian chief, "who dares to
tie the bells of a morrice on the ankles of a dull ass? Hark ye, friend,
your dress should make you a subject of ours, since our empire extends
over all Merryland, including mimes and minstrels of every description.
What, tongue tied? He lacks wine; minister to him our nutshell full of
sack."

A huge calabash full of sack was offered to the lips of the supplicant,
while this prince of revellers exhorted him:

"Crack me this nut, and do it handsomely, and without wry faces."

But, however Oliver might have relished a moderate sip of the same good
wine, he was terrified at the quantity he was required to deal with. He
drank a draught, and then entreated for mercy.

"So please your princedom, I have yet far to go, and if I were to
swallow your Grace's bounty, for which accept my dutiful thanks, I
should not be able to stride over the next kennel."

"Art thou in case to bear thyself like a galliard? Now, cut me a
caper--ha! one--two--three--admirable. Again--give him the spur (here a
satellite of the Indian gave Oliver a slight touch with his sword). Nay,
that is best of all: he sprang like a cat in a gutter. Tender him the
nut once more; nay, no compulsion, he has paid forfeit, and deserves not
only free dismissal but reward. Kneel down--kneel, and arise Sir Knight
of the Calabash! What is thy name? And one of you lend me a rapier."

"Oliver, may it please your honour--I mean your principality."

"Oliver, man. Nay, then thou art one of the 'douze peers' already, and
fate has forestalled our intended promotion. Yet rise up, sweet Sir
Oliver Thatchpate, Knight of the honourable order of the Pumpkin--rise
up, in the name of nonsense, and begone about thine own concerns, and
the devil go with thee!"

So saying, the prince of the revels bestowed a smart blow with the flat
of the weapon across the bonnet maker's shoulders, who sprung to his
feet with more alacrity of motion than he had hitherto displayed, and,
accelerated by the laugh and halloo which arose behind him, arrived at
the smith's house before he stopped, with the same speed with which a
hunted fox makes for his den.

It was not till the affrighted bonnet maker had struck a blow on the
door that he recollected he ought to have bethought himself beforehand
in what manner he was to present himself before Henry, and obtain his
forgiveness for his rash communications to Simon Glover. No one answered
to his first knock, and, perhaps, as these reflections arose in the
momentary pause of recollection which circumstances permitted, the
perplexed bonnet maker might have flinched from his purpose, and made
his retreat to his own premises, without venturing upon the interview
which he had purposed. But a distant strain of minstrelsy revived his
apprehensions of falling once more into the hands of the gay maskers
from whom he had escaped, and he renewed his summons on the door of the
smith's dwelling with a hurried, though faltering, hand. He was then
appalled by the deep, yet not unmusical, voice of Henry Gow, who
answered from within: "Who calls at this hour, and what is it that you
want?"

"It is I--Oliver Proudfute," replied the bonnet maker; "I have a merry
jest to tell you, gossip Henry."

"Carry thy foolery to some other market. I am in no jesting humour,"
said Henry. "Go hence; I will see no one tonight."

"But, gossip--good gossip," answered the martialist with out, "I am
beset with villains, and beg the shelter of your roof!"

"Fool that thou art!" replied Henry; "no dunghill cock, the most
recreant that has fought this Fastern's Eve, would ruffle his feathers
at such a craven as thou!"

At this moment another strain of minstrelsy, and, as the bonnet maker
conceited, one which approached much nearer, goaded his apprehensions
to the uttermost; and in a voice the tones of which expressed the
undisguised extremity of instant fear he exclaimed:

"For the sake of our old gossipred, and for the love of Our Blessed
Lady, admit me, Henry, if you would not have me found a bloody corpse at
thy door, slain by the bloody minded Douglasses!"

"That would be a shame to me," thought the good natured smith, "and
sooth to say, his peril may be real. There are roving hawks that will
strike at a sparrow as soon as a heron."

With these reflections, half muttered, half spoken, Henry undid his well
fastened door, proposing to reconnoitre the reality of the danger before
he permitted his unwelcome guest to enter the house. But as he looked
abroad to ascertain how matters stood, Oliver bolted in like a scared
deer into a thicket, and harboured himself by the smith's kitchen fire
before Henry could look up and down the lane, and satisfy himself there
were no enemies in pursuit of the apprehensive fugitive. He secured his
door, therefore, and returned into the kitchen, displeased that he had
suffered his gloomy solitude to be intruded upon by sympathising with
apprehensions which he thought he might have known were so easily
excited as those of his timid townsman.

"How now!" he said, coldly enough, when he saw the bonnet maker calmly
seated by his hearth. "What foolish revel is this, Master Oliver? I see
no one near to harm you."

"Give me a drink, kind gossip," said Oliver: "I am choked with the haste
I have made to come hither."

"I have sworn," said Henry, "that this shall be no revel night in this
house: I am in my workday clothes, as you see, and keep fast, as I have
reason, instead of holiday. You have had wassail enough for the holiday
evening, for you speak thick already. If you wish more ale or wine you
must go elsewhere."

"I have had overmuch wassail already," said poor Oliver, "and have been
well nigh drowned in it. That accursed calabash! A draught of water,
kind gossip--you will not surely let me ask for that in vain? or, if it
is your will, a cup of cold small ale."

"Nay, if that be all," said Henry, "it shall not be lacking. But it must
have been much which brought thee to the pass of asking for either."

So saying, he filled a quart flagon from a barrel that stood nigh, and
presented it to his guest. Oliver eagerly accepted it, raised it to
his head with a trembling hand, imbibed the contents with lips which
quivered with emotion, and, though the potation was as thin as he had
requested, so much was he exhausted with the combined fears of alarm and
of former revelry, that, when he placed the flagon on the oak table, he
uttered a deep sigh of satisfaction, and remained silent.

"Well, now you have had your draught, gossip," said the smith, "what is
it you want? Where are those that threatened you? I could see no one."

"No--but there were twenty chased me into the wynd," said Oliver. "But
when they saw us together, you know they lost the courage that brought
all of them upon one of us."

"Nay, do not trifle, friend Oliver," replied his host; "my mood lies not
that way."

"I jest not, by St. John of Perth. I have been stayed and foully
outraged (gliding his hand sensitively over the place affected) by mad
David of Rothsay, roaring Ramorny, and the rest of them. They made me
drink a firkin of Malvoisie."

"Thou speakest folly, man. Ramorny is sick nigh to death, as the potter
carrier everywhere reports: they and he cannot surely rise at midnight
to do such frolics."

"I cannot tell," replied Oliver; "but I saw the party by torchlight,
and I can make bodily oath to the bonnets I made for them since last
Innocents'. They are of a quaint device, and I should know my own
stitch."

"Well, thou mayst have had wrong," answered Henry. "If thou art in real
danger, I will cause them get a bed for thee here. But you must fill it
presently, for I am not in the humour of talking."

"Nay, I would thank thee for my quarters for a night, only my Maudie
will be angry--that is, not angry, for that I care not for--but the
truth is, she is overanxious on a revel night like this, knowing my
humour is like thine for a word and a blow."

"Why, then, go home," said the smith, "and show her that her treasure is
in safety, Master Oliver; the streets are quiet, and, to speak a blunt
word, I would be alone."

"Nay, but I have things to speak with thee about of moment," replied
Oliver, who, afraid to stay, seemed yet unwilling to go. "There has been
a stir in our city council about the affair of St. Valentine's Even. The
provost told me not four hours since, that the Douglas and he had agreed
that the feud should be decided by a yeoman on either party and that our
acquaintance, the Devil's Dick, was to wave his gentry, and take up the
cause for Douglas and the nobles, and that you or I should fight for the
Fair City. Now, though I am the elder burgess, yet I am willing, for the
love and kindness we have always borne to each other, to give thee the
precedence, and content myself with the humbler office of stickler."

Henry Smith, though angry, could scarce forbear a smile.

"If it is that which breaks thy quiet, and keeps thee out of thy bed at
midnight, I will make the matter easy. Thou shalt not lose the advantage
offered thee. I have fought a score of duels--far, far too many.
Thou hast, I think, only encountered with thy wooden soldan: it were
unjust--unfair--unkind--in me to abuse thy friendly offer. So go home,
good fellow, and let not the fear of losing honour disturb thy slumbers.
Rest assured that thou shalt answer the challenge, as good right thou
hast, having had injury from this rough rider."

"Gramercy, and thank thee kindly," said Oliver much embarrassed by his
friend's unexpected deference; "thou art the good friend I have always
thought thee. But I have as much friendship for Henry Smith as he for
Oliver Proudfute. I swear by St. John, I will not fight in this
quarrel to thy prejudice; so, having said so, I am beyond the reach of
temptation, since thou wouldst not have me mansworn, though it were to
fight twenty duels."

"Hark thee," said the smith, "acknowledge thou art afraid, Oliver: tell
the honest truth, at once, otherwise I leave thee to make the best of
thy quarrel."

"Nay, good gossip," replied the bonnet maker, "thou knowest I am never
afraid. But, in sooth, this is a desperate ruffian; and as I have a
wife--poor Maudie, thou knowest--and a small family, and thou--"

"And I," interrupted Henry, hastily, "have none, and never shall have."

"Why, truly, such being the case, I would rather thou fought'st this
combat than I."

"Now, by our halidome, gossip," answered the smith, "thou art easily
gored! Know, thou silly fellow, that Sir Patrick Charteris, who is ever
a merry man, hath but jested with thee. Dost thou think he would venture
the honour of the city on thy head, or that I would yield thee the
precedence in which such a matter was to be disputed? Lackaday, go home,
let Maudie tie a warm nightcap on thy head, get thee a warm breakfast
and a cup of distilled waters, and thou wilt be in ease tomorrow to
fight thy wooden dromond, or soldan, as thou call'st him, the only thing
thou wilt ever lay downright blow upon."

"Ay, say'st thou so, comrade?" answered Oliver, much relieved, yet
deeming it necessary to seem in part offended. "I care not for thy
dogged humour; it is well for thee thou canst not wake my patience to
the point of falling foul. Enough--we are gossips, and this house is
thine. Why should the two best blades in Perth clash with each other?
What! I know thy rugged humour, and can forgive it. But is the feud
really soldered up?"

"As completely as ever hammer fixed rivet," said the smith. "The town
hath given the Johnstone a purse of gold, for not ridding them of a
troublesome fellow called Oliver Proudfute, when he had him at his
mercy; and this purse of gold buys for the provost the Sleepless Isle,
which the King grants him, for the King pays all in the long run. And
thus Sir Patrick gets the comely inch which is opposite to his dwelling,
and all honour is saved on both sides, for what is given to the provost
is given, you understand, to the town. Besides all this, the Douglas
hath left Perth to march against the Southron, who, men say, are called
into the marches by the false Earl of March. So the Fair City is quit of
him and his cumber."

"But, in St. John's name, how came all that about," said Oliver, "and no
one spoken to about it?"

"Why, look thee, friend Oliver, this I take to have been the case. The
fellow whom I cropped of a hand is now said to have been a servant of
Sir John Ramorny's, who hath fled to his motherland of Fife, to which
Sir John himself is also to be banished, with full consent of every
honest man. Now, anything which brings in Sir John Ramorny touches
a much greater man--I think Simon Glover told as much to Sir Patrick
Charteris. If it be as I guess, I have reason to thank Heaven and all
the saints I stabbed him not upon the ladder when I made him prisoner."

"And I too thank Heaven and all the saints, most devoutly," said Oliver.
"I was behind thee, thou knowest, and--"

"No more of that, if thou be'st wise. There are laws against striking
princes," said the smith: "best not handle the horseshoe till it cools.
All is hushed up now."

"If this be so," said Oliver, partly disconcerted, but still more
relieved, by the intelligence he received from his better informed
friend, "I have reason to complain of Sir Patrick Charteris for jesting
with the honour of an honest burgess, being, as he is, provost of our
town."

"Do, Oliver; challenge him to the field, and he will bid his yeoman
loose his dogs on thee. But come, night wears apace, will you be
shogging?"

"Nay, I had one word more to say to thee, good gossip. But first,
another cup of your cold ale."

"Pest on thee for a fool! Thou makest me wish thee where told liquors
are a scarce commodity. There, swill the barrelful an thou wilt."

Oliver took the second flagon, but drank, or rather seemed to drink,
very slowly, in order to gain time for considering how he should
introduce his second subject of conversation, which seemed rather
delicate for the smith's present state of irritability. At length,
nothing better occurred to him than to plunge into the subject at once,
with, "I have seen Simon Glover today, gossip."

"Well," said the smith, in a low, deep, and stern tone of voice, "and if
thou hast, what is that to me?"

"Nothing--nothing," answered the appalled bonnet maker. "Only I thought
you might like to know that he questioned me close if I had seen thee
on St. Valentine's Day, after the uproar at the Dominicans', and in what
company thou wert."

"And I warrant thou told'st him thou met'st me with a glee woman in the
mirk loaning yonder?"

"Thou know'st, Henry, I have no gift at lying; but I made it all up with
him."

"As how, I pray you?" said the smith.

"Marry, thus: 'Father Simon,' said I, 'you are an old man, and know not
the quality of us, in whose veins youth is like quicksilver. You think,
now, he cares about this girl,' said I, 'and, perhaps, that he has her
somewhere here in Perth in a corner? No such matter; I know,' said I,
'and I will make oath to it, that she left his house early next morning
for Dundee.' Ha! have I helped thee at need?"

"Truly, I think thou hast, and if anything could add to my grief and
vexation at this moment, it is that, when I am so deep in the mire,
an ass like thee should place his clumsy hoof on my head, to sink me
entirely. Come, away with thee, and mayst thou have such luck as thy
meddling humour deserves; and then I think, thou wilt be found with a
broken neck in the next gutter. Come, get you out, or I will put you to
the door with head and shoulders forward."

"Ha--ha!" exclaimed Oliver, laughing with some constraint, "thou art
such a groom! But in sadness, gossip Henry, wilt thou not take a turn
with me to my own house, in the Meal Vennel?"

"Curse thee, no," answered the smith.

"I will bestow the wine on thee if thou wilt go," said Oliver.

"I will bestow the cudgel on thee if thou stay'st," said Henry.

"Nay, then, I will don thy buff coat and cap of steel, and walk with thy
swashing step, and whistling thy pibroch of 'Broken Bones at Loncarty';
and if they take me for thee, there dare not four of them come near me."

"Take all or anything thou wilt, in the fiend's name! only be gone."

"Well--well, Hal, we shall meet when thou art in better humour," said
Oliver, who had put on the dress.

"Go; and may I never see thy coxcombly face again."

Oliver at last relieved his host by swaggering off, imitating as well as
he could the sturdy step and outward gesture of his redoubted companion,
and whistling a pibroch composed on the rout of the Danes at Loncarty,
which he had picked up from its being a favourite of the smith's, whom
he made a point of imitating as far as he could. But as the innocent,
though conceited, fellow stepped out from the entrance of the wynd,
where it communicated with the High Street, he received a blow from
behind, against which his headpiece was no defence, and he fell dead
upon the spot, an attempt to mutter the name of Henry, to whom he always
looked for protection, quivering upon his dying tongue.



CHAPTER XVII.

     Nay, I will fit you for a young prince.

     Falstaff.


We return to the revellers, who had, half an hour before, witnessed,
with such boisterous applause, Oliver's feat of agility, being the
last which the poor bonnet maker was ever to exhibit, and at the hasty
retreat which had followed it, animated by their wild shout. After they
had laughed their fill, they passed on their mirthful path in frolic and
jubilee, stopping and frightening some of the people whom they met, but,
it must be owned, without doing them any serious injury, either in their
persons or feelings. At length, tired with his rambles, their chief gave
a signal to his merry men to close around him.

"We, my brave hearts and wise counsellors, are," he said, "the real king
over all in Scotland that is worth commanding. We sway the hours when
the wine cup circulates, and when beauty becomes kind, when frolic is
awake, and gravity snoring upon his pallet. We leave to our vice regent,
King Robert, the weary task of controlling ambitious nobles, gratifying
greedy clergymen, subduing wild Highlanders, and composing deadly feuds.
And since our empire is one of joy and pleasure, meet it is that we
should haste with all our forces to the rescue of such as own our sway,
when they chance, by evil fortune, to become the prisoners of care and
hypochondriac malady. I speak in relation chiefly to Sir John, whom the
vulgar call Ramorny. We have not seen him since the onslaught of Curfew
Street, and though we know he was somedeal hurt in that matter, we
cannot see why he should not do homage in leal and duteous sort. Here,
you, our Calabash King at arms, did you legally summon Sir John to his
part of this evening's revels?"

"I did, my lord."

"And did you acquaint him that we have for this night suspended his
sentence of banishment, that, since higher powers have settled that
part, we might at least take a mirthful leave of an old friend?"

"I so delivered it, my lord," answered the mimic herald.

"And sent he not a word in writing, he that piques himself upon being so
great a clerk?"

"He was in bed, my lord, and I might not see him. So far as I hear, he
hath lived very retired, harmed with some bodily bruises, malcontent
with your Highness's displeasure, and doubting insult in the streets, he
having had a narrow escape from the burgesses, when the churls pursued
him and his two servants into the Dominican convent. The servants, too,
have been removed to Fife, lest they should tell tales."

"Why, it was wisely done," said the Prince, who, we need not inform the
intelligent reader, had a better title to be so called than arose from
