
But we could not incarcerate George Prince for being an eavesdropper.
Nor had we the faintest tangible evidence against Ob Hahn or Rance
Rankin. And even the purser would probably be released by the
Interplanetary Court of Ferrok-Shahn when it heard our evidence.

There was only Miko. We could arrest him for the murder of Anita. But
the others would be put on their guard. It was Carter's idea to let Miko
remain at liberty for a time and see if we could not identify and
incriminate his fellows. The murder of Anita obviously had nothing to do
with any plot against the Grantline Moon treasure.

"Why," exclaimed Balch, "there might be--probably are--huge Martian
interests concerned in this thing. These men here aboard are only
emissaries, making this voyage to learn what they can. When they get to
Ferrok-Shahn they'll make their report, and then we'll have a real
danger on our hands. Why, an outlaw ship could be launched from
Ferrok-Shahn that would beat us back to the Moon--and Grantline is
entirely without warning of any danger!"

It seemed obvious. Unscrupulous, moneyed criminals in Ferrok-Shahn would
be dangerous indeed, once these details of Grantline were given them.
And so now it was decided that in the remaining nine days of our outward
voyage, we would attempt to secure enough evidence to arrest all these
plotters.

"I'll have them all in the cage when we land," Carter declared grimly.
"They'll make no report to their principals. The thing will end, be
stamped out!"

Ah, the futile plans of men!

       *       *       *       *       *

Yet we thought it practical. We were all doubly armed now. Explosive
bullet-projectors and the heat-ray cylinders. And we had several
eavesdropping microphones which we planned to use whenever occasion
offered.

It was now, Earth Eastern Time, A. M. Twenty-eight hours only of this
eventful voyage were passed. The Planetara was some six million miles
from the Earth; it blazed behind us, a tremendous giant.

The body of Anita was being made ready for burial. George Prince was
still in his stateroom. Glutz, effeminate little hairdresser, who waxed
rich acting as beauty doctor for the women passengers, and who in his
youth had been an undertaker, had gone with Dr. Frank to prepare the
body.

Gruesome details. I tried not to think of them. I sat, numbed, in the
chart-room.

An astronomical burial--there was little precedent for it. I dragged
myself to the stern deck-space where, at five A. M., the ceremony took
place. Most of the passengers were asleep, unaware of all this--which
was why Carter hastened it.

We were a solemn little group, gathered there in the checkered starlight
with the great vault of the heavens around us. A dismantled electronic
projector--necessary when a long-range gun was mounted--had been rigged
up in one of the deck ports.

They brought out the body. I stood apart, gazing reluctantly at the
small bundle, wrapped like a mummy in a dark metallic screen-cloth. A
patch of black silk rested over her face.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four cabin stewards carried her. And beside her walked George Prince. A
long black robe covered him, but his head was bare. And suddenly he
reminded me of the ancient play-character of Hamlet. His black, wavy
hair; his finely chiseled, pallid face, set now in a stern, patrician
cast. And staring, I realized that however much of a villain this man
not yet thirty might be, at this instant, walking beside the body of his
dead sister, he was stricken with grief. He loved that sister with whom
he had lived since childhood; and to see him now, with his set white
face, no one could doubt it.

The little procession stopped in a patch of starlight by the port. They
rested the body on a bank of chairs. The black-robed Chaplain, roused
from his bed and still trembling from excitement of this sudden,
inexplicable death on board, said a brief, solemn little prayer. An
appeal: That the Almighty Ruler of all these blazing worlds might guard
the soul of this gentle girl whose mortal remains were now to be
returned to Him.

Ah, if ever God seemed hovering close, it was now at this instant, on
this starlit deck floating in the black void of space.

Then Carter for just a moment removed the black shroud from her face. I
saw her brother gaze silently; saw him stoop and implant a kiss--and
turn away. I did not want to look, but I found myself moving slowly
forward.

       *       *       *       *       *

She lay, so beautiful. Her face, white and calm and peaceful in death.
My sight blurred. Words seemed to echo: "A little son, cast in the
gentle image of his mother...."

"Easy, Gregg!" Snap was whispering to me. He had his arm around me.
"Come on away!"

They tied the shroud over her face. I did not see them as they put her
body in the tube, sent it through the exhaust-chamber, and dropped it.

But a moment later I saw it--a small black oblong bundle--hovering
beside us. It was perhaps a hundred feet away, circling us. Held by the
Planetara's bulk, it had momentarily become our satellite. It swung
around us like a moon. Gruesome satellite, by nature's laws forever to
follow us.

Then from another tube at the bow, Blackstone operated a small
Zed-co-ray projector. Its dull light caught the floating bundle,
neutralizing its metallic wrappings.

It swung off at a tangent. Speeding. Falling free in the dome of the
heavens. A rotating black oblong. But in a moment distance dwindled it
to a speck. A dull silver dot with the sunlight on it. A speck of human
Earth-dust, falling free....

It vanished. Anita--gone. In my heart was an echo of the prayer that the
Almighty might watch over her and guard her always....


CHAPTER XI

_The Electrical Eavesdropper_

I turned from the deck. Miko was near me! So he had dared to show
himself here among us! But I realized that he could not be aware we knew
he was the murderer. George Prince had been asleep, had not seen Miko
with Anita. Miko, with impulsive rage, had shot the girl and escaped. No
doubt now he was cursing himself for having done it. And he could very
well assume that Anita had died without regaining consciousness to tell
who had killed her.

He gazed at me now, here on the deck. I thought for an instant he was
coming over to talk to me. Though he probably considered he was not
suspected of the murder of Anita, he realized, of course, that his
attack on me was known; he must have wondered what action Captain Carter
would take.

But he did not approach me; he moved away, and went inside. Moa had been
near him; and as though by pre-arrangement with him she now accosted
me.

"I want to speak to you, Set Haljan."

"Go ahead."

I felt an instinctive aversion for this Martian girl. Yet she was not
unattractive. Over six feet tall, straight and slim. Sleek blond hair.
Rather a handsome face. Not gray, like the burly Miko, but pink and
white. Stern-lipped, yet feminine, too. She was smiling gravely now. Her
blue eyes regarded me keenly. She said gently:

"A sad occurrence, Gregg Haljan. And mysterious. I would not question
you--"

"Is that all you have to say?" I demanded, when she paused.

"No. You are a handsome man, Gregg--attractive to women--to any Martian
woman."

       *       *       *       *       *

She said it impulsively. Admiration for me was on her face, in her
eyes--a man cannot miss it.

"Thank you."

"I mean, I would be your friend. My brother Miko is so sorry about what
happened between you and him this morning. He only wanted to talk to
you, and he came to your cubby door--"

"With a torch to break its seal," I interjected.

She waved that away. "He was afraid you would not admit him. He told you
he would not hurt you."

"And so he struck me with one of your cursed Martian paralyzing rays!"

"He is sorry...."

She seemed gauging me, trying, no doubt, to find out what reprisal would
be taken against her brother. I felt sure that Moa was as active as a
man in any plan that was under way to capture the Grantline treasure.
Miko, with his ungovernable temper, was doing things that put their
plans in jeopardy.

I demanded abruptly, "What did your brother want to talk to me about?"

"Me," she said surprisingly. "I sent him. A Martian girl goes after what
she wants. Did you know that?"

She swung on her heel and left me. I puzzled over it. Was that why Miko
had struck me down, and was carrying me off? Was my accursed masculine
beauty so attractive to this Martian girl? I did not think so. I could
not believe that all these incidents were so unrelated to what I knew
was the main undercurrent. They wanted me, had tried to capture me. For
something else than because Moa liked my looks....

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Frank found me mooning alone.

"Go to bed, Gregg! You look awful."

"I don't want to go to bed."

"Where's Snap?"

"I don't know. He was here a while ago." I had not seen him since the
burial of Anita.

"The captain wants him." The surgeon left me.

Within an hour the morning siren would arouse the passengers. I was
seated in a secluded corner of the deck, when George Prince came along.
He went past me, a slight, somber, dark-robed figure. He had on high,
thick boots. A hood was over his head, but as he saw me he pushed it
back and dropped down beside me.

But for a moment he did not speak. His face showed pallid in the pallid
star-gleams.

"She said you loved her." His soft voice was throaty with emotion.

"Yes." I said it almost against my will. There seemed a bond springing
between this bereaved brother and me. He added, so softly I could
barely hear him, "That makes you, I think, almost my friend. And you
thought you were my enemy."

I held my answer. An incautious tongue running under emotion is a
dangerous thing. And I was sure of nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

He went on, "Almost my friend. Because--we both loved her, and she loved
us both." He was hardly more than whispering. "And there is aboard--one
whom we both hate."

"Miko!" It burst from me.

"Yes. But do not say it."

Another silence fell between us. He brushed back the black curls from
his forehead. And his dark eyes searched mine.

"Have you an eavesdropping microphone, Haljan?"

I hesitated. "Yes."

"I was thinking...." He leaned closer toward me. "If, in half an hour,
you could use it upon Miko's cabin--I would rather tell you than the
captain or anyone else. The cabin will be insulated, but I shall find a
way of cutting off that insulation so that you may hear."

So George Prince had turned with us! The shock of his sister's
death--himself allied to her murderer!--had been too much for him. He
was with us!

Yet his help must be given secretly. Miko would kill him in an instant
if it became known.

He had been watchful of the deck. He stood up now.

"I think that is all."

As he turned away, I murmured, "But I do thank you...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The name Set Miko glowed upon the small metal door. It was in a
transverse corridor similar to A 22. The corridor was forward of the
lounge: it opened off the small circular library.

The library was unoccupied and unlighted, dim with only the reflected
lights from the nearby passages. I crouched behind a cylinder-case. The
door of Miko's room was in sight, being some thirty feet away from me.

I waited perhaps five minutes. No one entered. Then I realized
that doubtless the conspirators were already there. I set my tiny
eavesdropper on the library floor beside me; connected its little
battery; focused its projector. Was Miko's room insulated? I could not
tell. There was a small ventilating grid above the door. Across its
opening, if the room were insulated, a blue sheen of radiance
would be showing. And there would be a faint hum. But from this
distance I could not see or hear such details, and I was afraid to
approach closer. Once in the transverse corridor, I would have no
place to hide, no way of escape; if anyone approached Miko's door, I
would be discovered.

I threw the current into my little apparatus. I prayed, if it met
interference, that the slight sound would pass unnoticed. George Prince
had said he would make opportunity to disconnect the room's insulation.
He had evidently done so. I picked up the interior sounds at once; my
headphone vibrated with them. And with trembling fingers on the little
dial between my knees as I crouched in the darkness behind the
cylinder-case, I synchronized.

"Johnson is a fool." It was Miko's voice. "We must have the pass-words."

"He got them from the helio-room." A man's voice; I puzzled over it at
first, then recognized it. Rance Rankin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miko said, "He is a fool. Walking around this ship as though with
letters blazoned on his forehead--'Watch me--I need watching--' Hah! No
wonder they apprehended him!"

Was George Prince in there? Rankin's voice said: "He would have turned
the papers over to us. I would not blame him too much. What harm--"

"Oh, I'll release him," Miko declared. "What harm? That braying ass did
us plenty of harm. He has lost the pass-words. Better he had left them
in the helio-room."

Moa was in the room. Her voice said: "We've got to have them. The
Planetara, upon such an important voyage as this, may be watched. How do
we know--"

"It is, no doubt," Rankin said quietly. "We ought to have the
pass-words. When we are in control of this ship...."

It sent a shiver through me. Were they planning to try and seize the
Planetara? Now? It seemed so.

"Johnson undoubtedly memorized them," Moa was saying. "When we get him
out--"

"Hahn is to do that, at the signal." Miko added, "George could do it
better, perhaps."

And then I heard George Prince for the first time. He murmured, "I will
try."

