reported at different times from widely scattered places."

"No one's ever bagged one?"

"Not that I ever heard of." Duncan patted the rifle. "Let me get a
bead on it."

He started eating, spooning the porridge into his mouth, munching on
the stale corn bread left from the night before. He drank some of the
brackish beverage and shuddered.

"Some day," he said, "I'm going to scrape together enough money to buy
a pound of coffee. You'd think--"

"It's the freight rates," Shotwell said. "I'll send you a pound when I
go back."

"Not at the price they'd charge to ship it out," said Duncan. "I
wouldn't hear of it."

They ate in silence for a time. Finally Shotwell said: "I'm getting
nowhere, Gavin. The natives are willing to talk, but it all adds up to
nothing."

"I tried to tell you that. You could have saved your time."

Shotwell shook his head stubbornly. "There's an answer, a logical
explanation. It's easy enough to say you cannot rule out the sexual
factor, but that's exactly what has happened here on Layard. It's easy
to exclaim that a sexless animal, a sexless race, a sexless planet is
impossible, but that is what we have. Somewhere there is an answer and
I have to find it."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now hold up a minute," Duncan protested. "There's no use blowing a
gasket. I haven't got the time this morning to listen to your
lecture."

"But it's not the lack of sex that worries me entirely," Shotwell
said, "although it's the central factor. There are subsidiary
situations deriving from that central fact which are most intriguing."

"I have no doubt of it," said Duncan, "but if you please--"

"Without sex, there is no basis for the family, and without the family
there is no basis for a tribe, and yet the natives have an elaborate
tribal setup, with taboos by way of regulation. Somewhere there must
exist some underlying, basic unifying factor, some common loyalty,
some strange relationship which spells out to brotherhood."

"Not brotherhood," said Duncan, chuckling. "Not even sisterhood. You
must watch your terminology. The word you want is ithood."

The door pushed open and a native walked in timidly.

"Zikkara said that mister want me," the native told them. "I am Sipar.
I can track anything but screamers, stilt-birds, longhorns and
donovans. Those are my taboos."

"I am glad to hear that," Duncan replied. "You have no Cytha taboo,
then."

"Cytha!" yipped the native. "Zikkara did not tell me Cytha!"

Duncan paid no attention. He got up from the table and went to the
heavy chest that stood against one wall. He rummaged in it and came
out with a pair of binoculars, a hunting knife and an extra drum of
ammunition. At the kitchen cupboard, he rummaged once again, filling a
small leather sack with a gritty powder from a can he found.

"Rockahominy," he explained to Shotwell. "Emergency rations thought up
by the primitive North American Indians. Parched corn, ground fine.
It's no feast exactly, but it keeps a man going."

"You figure you'll be gone that long?"

"Maybe overnight. I don't know. Won't stop until I get it. Can't
afford to. It could wipe me out in a few days."

"Good hunting," Shotwell said. "I'll hold the fort."

Duncan said to Sipar: "Quit sniveling and come on."

He picked up the rifle, settled it in the crook of his arm. He kicked
open the door and strode out.

Sipar followed meekly.


II

Duncan got his first shot late in the afternoon of that first day.

In the middle of the morning, two hours after they had left the farm,
they had flushed the Cytha out of its bed in a thick ravine. But there
had been no chance for a shot. Duncan saw no more than a huge black
blur fade into the bush.

Through the bake-oven afternoon, they had followed its trail, Sipar
tracking and Duncan bringing up the rear, scanning every piece of
cover, with the sun-hot rifle always held at ready.

Once they had been held up for fifteen minutes while a massive donovan
tramped back and forth, screaming, trying to work up its courage for
attack. But after a quarter hour of showing off, it decided to behave
itself and went off at a shuffling gallop.

Duncan watched it go with a lot of thankfulness. It could soak up a
lot of lead, and for all its awkwardness, it was handy with its feet
once it set itself in motion. Donovans had killed a lot of men in the
twenty years since Earthmen had come to Layard.

With the beast gone, Duncan looked around for Sipar. He found it fast
asleep beneath a hula-shrub. He kicked the native awake with something
less than gentleness and they went on again.

The bush swarmed with other animals, but they had no trouble with
them.

Sipar, despite its initial reluctance, had worked well at the
trailing. A misplaced bunch of grass, a twig bent to one side, a
displaced stone, the faintest pug mark were Sipar's stock in trade. It
worked like a lithe, well-trained hound. This bush country was its
special province; here it was at home.

With the sun dropping toward the west, they had climbed a long, steep
hill and as they neared the top of it, Duncan hissed at Sipar. The
native looked back over its shoulder in surprise. Duncan made motions
for it to stop tracking.

The native crouched and as Duncan went past it, he saw that a look of
agony was twisting its face. And in the look of agony he thought he
saw as well a touch of pleading and a trace of hatred. It's scared,
just like the rest of them, Duncan told himself. But what the native
thought or felt had no significance; what counted was the beast ahead.

Duncan went the last few yards on his belly, pushing the gun ahead of
him, the binoculars bumping on his back. Swift, vicious insects ran
out of the grass and swarmed across his hands and arms and one got on
his face and bit him.

       *       *       *       *       *

He made it to the hilltop and lay there, looking at the sweep of land
beyond. It was more of the same, more of the blistering, dusty
slogging, more of thorn and tangled ravine and awful emptiness.

He lay motionless, watching for a hint of motion, for the fitful
shadow, for any wrongness in the terrain that might be the Cytha.

But there was nothing. The land lay quiet under the declining sun. Far
on the horizon, a herd of some sort of animals was grazing, but there
was nothing else.

Then he saw the motion, just a flicker, on the knoll ahead--about
halfway up.

He laid the rifle carefully on the ground and hitched the binoculars
around. He raised them to his eyes and moved them slowly back and
forth. The animal was there where he had seen the motion.

It was resting, looking back along the way that it had come, watching
for the first sign of its trailers. Duncan tried to make out the size
and shape, but it blended with the grass and the dun soil and he could
not be sure exactly what it looked like.

He let the glasses down and now that he had located it, he could
distinguish its outline with the naked eye.

His hand reached out and slid the rifle to him. He fitted it to his
shoulder and wriggled his body for closer contact with the ground. The
cross-hairs centered on the faint outline on the knoll and then the
beast stood up.

It was not as large as he had thought it might be--perhaps a little
larger than Earth lion-size, but it certainly was no lion. It was a
square-set thing and black and inclined to lumpiness and it had an
awkward look about it, but there were strength and ferociousness as
well.

Duncan tilted the muzzle of the rifle so that the cross-hairs centered
on the massive neck. He drew in a breath and held it and began the
trigger squeeze.

The rifle bucked hard against his shoulder and the report hammered in
his head and the beast went down. It did not lurch or fall; it simply
melted down and disappeared, hidden in the grass.

"Dead center," Duncan assured himself.

He worked the mechanism and the spent cartridge case flew out. The
feeding mechanism snicked and the fresh shell clicked as it slid into
the breech.

He lay for a moment, watching. And on the knoll where the thing had
fallen, the grass was twitching as if the wind were blowing, only
there was no wind. But despite the twitching of the grass, there was
no sign of the Cytha. It did not struggle up again. It stayed where it
had fallen.

Duncan got to his feet, dug out the bandanna and mopped at his face.
He heard the soft thud of the step behind him and turned his head. It
was the tracker.

"It's all right, Sipar," he said. "You can quit worrying. I got it. We
can go home now."

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been a long, hard chase, longer than he had thought it might
be. But it had been successful and that was the thing that counted.
For the moment, the _vua_ crop was safe.

He tucked the bandanna back into his pocket, went down the slope and
started up the knoll. He reached the place where the Cytha had fallen.
There were three small gouts of torn, mangled fur and flesh lying on
the ground and there was nothing else.

He spun around and jerked his rifle up. Every nerve was screamingly
alert. He swung his head, searching for the slightest movement, for
some shape or color that was not the shape or color of the bush or
grass or ground. But there was nothing. The heat droned in the hush of
afternoon. There was not a breath of moving air. But there was
danger--a saw-toothed sense of danger close behind his neck.

"Sipar!" he called in a tense whisper, "Watch out!"

The native stood motionless, unheeding, its eyeballs rolling up until
there was only white, while the muscles stood out along its throat
like straining ropes of steel.

Duncan slowly swiveled, rifle held almost at arm's length, elbows
crooked a little, ready to bring the weapon into play in a fraction of
a second.

Nothing stirred. There was no more than emptiness--the emptiness of
sun and molten sky, of grass and scraggy bush, of a brown-and-yellow
land stretching into foreverness.

Step by step, Duncan covered the hillside and finally came back to the
place where the native squatted on its heels and moaned, rocking back
and forth, arms locked tightly across its chest, as if it tried to
