to the throne of Khauran? Do not forget that I am Queen of Khauran! I
shall give you a place of honor, as my sister, but--'

Salome laughed hatefully.

'How generous of you, dear, sweet sister! But before you begin putting
me in my place--perhaps you will tell me whose soldiers camp in the
plain outside the city walls?'

'They are the Shemitish mercenaries of Constantius, the Kothic _voivode_
of the Free Companies.'

'And what do they in Khauran?' cooed Salome.

Taramis felt that she was being subtly mocked, but she answered with an
assumption of dignity which she scarcely felt.

'Constantius asked permission to pass along the borders of Khauran on
his way to Turan. He himself is hostage for their good behavior as long
as they are within my domains.'

'And Constantius,' pursued Salome. 'Did he not ask your hand today?'

Taramis shot her a clouded glance of suspicion.

'How did you know that?'

An insolent shrug of the slim naked shoulders was the only reply.

'You refused, dear sister?'

'Certainly I refused!' exclaimed Taramis angrily. 'Do you, an Askhaurian
princess yourself, suppose that the Queen of Khauran could treat such a
proposal with anything but disdain? Wed a bloody-handed adventurer, a
man exiled from his own kingdom because of his crimes, and the leader of
organized plunderers and hired murderers?

'I should never have allowed him to bring his black-bearded slayers into
Khauran. But he is virtually a prisoner in the south tower, guarded by
my soldiers. Tomorrow I shall bid him order his troops to leave the
kingdom. He himself shall be kept captive until they are over the
border. Meantime, my soldiers man the walls of the city, and I have
warned him that he will answer for any outrages perpetrated on the
villagers or shepherds by his mercenaries.'

'He is confined in the south tower?' asked Salome.

'That is what I said. Why do you ask?'

For answer Salome clapped her hands, and lifting her voice, with a
gurgle of cruel mirth in it, called: 'The queen grants you an audience,
Falcon!'

A gold-arabesqued door opened and a tall figure entered the chamber, at
the sight of which Taramis cried out in amazement and anger.

'Constantius! You dare enter my chamber!'

'As you see, Your Majesty!' He bent his dark, hawk-like head in mock
humility.

Constantius, whom men called Falcon, was tall, broad-shouldered,
slim-waisted, lithe and strong as pliant steel. He was handsome in an
aquiline, ruthless way. His face was burnt dark by the sun, and his
hair, which grew far back from his high, narrow forehead, was black as a
raven. His dark eyes were penetrating and alert, the hardness of his
thin lips not softened by his thin black mustache. His boots were of
Kordavan leather, his hose and doublet of plain, dark silk, tarnished
with the wear of the camps and the stains of armor rust.

Twisting his mustache, he let his gaze travel up and down the shrinking
queen with an effrontery that made her wince.

'By Ishtar, Taramis,' he said silkily, 'I find you more alluring in your
night-tunic than in your queenly robes. Truly, this is an auspicious
night!'

Fear grew in the queen's dark eyes. She was no fool; she knew that
Constantius would never dare this outrage unless he was sure of himself.

'You are mad!' she said. 'If I am in your power in this chamber, you are
no less in the power of my subjects, who will rend you to pieces if you
touch me. Go at once, if you would live.'

Both laughed mockingly, and Salome made an impatient gesture.

'Enough of this farce; let us on to the next act in the comedy. Listen,
dear sister: it was I who sent Constantius here. When I decided to take
the throne of Khauran, I cast about for a man to aid me, and chose the
Falcon, because of his utter lack of all characteristics men call good.'

'I am overwhelmed, princess,' murmured Constantius sardonically, with a
profound bow.

'I sent him to Khauran, and, once his men were camped in the plain
outside, and he was in the palace, I entered the city by that small gate
in the west wall--the fools guarding it thought it was you returning
from some nocturnal adventure--'

'You hell-cat!' Taramis's cheeks flamed and her resentment got the
better of her regal reserve.

Salome smiled hardly.

'They were properly surprised and shocked, but admitted me without
question. I entered the palace the same way, and gave the order to the
surprised guards that sent them marching away, as well as the men who
guarded Constantius in the south tower. Then I came here, attending to
the ladies-in-waiting on the way.'

Taramis's fingers clenched and she paled.

'Well, what next?' she asked in a shaky voice.

'Listen!' Salome inclined her head. Faintly through the casement there
came the clank of marching men in armor; gruff voices shouted in an
alien tongue, and cries of alarm mingled with the shouts.

'The people awaken and grow fearful,' said Constantius sardonically.
'You had better go and reassure them, Salome!'

'Call me Taramis,' answered Salome. 'We must become accustomed to it.'

'What have you done?' cried Taramis. 'What have you done?'

'I have gone to the gates and ordered the soldiers to open them,'
answered Salome. 'They were astounded, but they obeyed. That is the
Falcon's army you hear, marching into the city.'

'You devil!' cried Taramis. 'You have betrayed my people, in my guise!
You have made me seem a traitor! Oh, I shall go to them--'

With a cruel laugh Salome caught her wrist and jerked her back. The
magnificent suppleness of the queen was helpless against the vindictive
strength that steeled Salome's slender limbs.

'You know how to reach the dungeons from the palace, Constantius?' said
the witch-girl. 'Good. Take this spitfire and lock her into the
strongest cell. The jailers are all sound in drugged sleep. I saw to
that. Send a man to cut their throats before they can awaken. None must
ever know what has occurred tonight. Thenceforward I am Taramis, and
Taramis is a nameless prisoner in an unknown dungeon.'

Constantius smiled with a glint of strong white teeth under his thin
mustache.

'Very good; but you would not deny me a little--ah--amusement first?'

'Not I! Tame the scornful hussy as you will.' With a wicked laugh Salome
flung her sister into the Kothian's arms, and turned away through the
door that opened into the outer corridor.

Fright widened Taramis's lovely eyes, her supple figure rigid and
straining against Constantius's embrace. She forgot the men marching in
the streets, forgot the outrage to her queenship, in the face of the
menace to her womanhood. She forgot all sensations but terror and shame
as she faced the complete cynicism of Constantius's burning, mocking
eyes, felt his hard arms crushing her writhing body.

Salome, hurrying along the corridor outside, smiled spitefully as a
scream of despair and agony rang shuddering through the palace.




2 The Tree of Death


The young soldier's hose and shirt were smeared with dried blood, wet
with sweat and gray with dust. Blood oozed from the deep gash in his
thigh, from the cuts on his breast and shoulder. Perspiration glistened
on his livid face and his fingers were knotted in the cover of the divan
on which he lay. Yet his words reflected mental suffering that
outweighed physical pain.

'She must be mad!' he repeated again and again, like one still stunned
by some monstrous and incredible happening. 'It's like a nightmare!
Taramis, whom all Khauran loves, betraying her people to that devil from
Koth! Oh, Ishtar, why was I not slain? Better die than live to see our
queen turn traitor and harlot!'

'Lie still, Valerius,' begged the girl who was washing and bandaging his
wounds with trembling hands. 'Oh, please lie still, darling! You will
make your wounds worse. I dared not summon a leech--'

'No,' muttered the wounded youth. 'Constantius's blue-bearded devils
will be searching the quarters for wounded Khaurani; they'll hang every
man who has wounds to show he fought against them. Oh, Taramis, how
could you betray the people who worshipped you?' In his fierce agony he
writhed, weeping in rage and shame, and the terrified girl caught him in
her arms, straining his tossing head against her bosom, imploring him to
be quiet.

'Better death than the black shame that has come upon Khauran this day,'
he groaned. 'Did you see it, Ivga?'

'No, Valerius.' Her soft, nimble fingers were again at work, gently
cleansing and closing the gaping edges of his raw wounds. 'I was
awakened by the noise of fighting in the streets--I looked out a
casement and saw the Shemites cutting down people; then presently I
heard you calling me faintly from the alley door.'

'I had reached the limits of my strength,' he muttered. 'I fell in the
alley and could not rise. I knew they'd find me soon if I lay there--I
killed three of the blue-bearded beasts, by Ishtar! They'll never
swagger through Khauran's streets, by the gods! The fiends are tearing
their hearts in hell!'

The trembling girl crooned soothingly to him, as to a wounded child, and
closed his panting lips with her own cool sweet mouth. But the fire that
raged in his soul would not allow him to lie silent.

'I was not on the wall when the Shemites entered,' he burst out. 'I was
asleep in the barracks, with the others not on duty. It was just before
dawn when our captain entered, and his face was pale under his helmet.
"The Shemites are in the city," he said. "The queen came to the southern
gate and gave orders that they should be admitted. She made the men come
down from the walls, where they've been on guard since Constantius
entered the kingdom. I don't understand it, and neither does anyone
else, but I heard her give the order, and we obeyed as we always do. We
are ordered to assemble in the square before the palace. Form ranks
outside the barracks and march--leave your arms and armor here. Ishtar
knows what this means, but it is the queen's order."

'Well, when we came to the square the Shemites were drawn up on foot
