numbers and figures, it is perhaps for want of application on our
part that mathematics alone have attained to demonstrations.

                                                      --LEIBNITZ.

                         _New Essay concerning Human
                         Understanding, Bk. 4, chap. 2, sect. 9
                         [Langley]._




  CHAPTER XV

  MATHEMATICS AND SCIENCE


=1501.= How comes it about that the knowledge of other sciences,
which depend upon this [mathematics], is painfully sought, and
that no one puts himself to the trouble of studying this science
itself? I should certainly be surprised, if I did not know that
everybody regarded it as being very easy, and if I had not long
ago observed that the human mind, neglecting what it believes to
be easy, is always in haste to run after what is novel and
advanced.--DESCARTES.

                         _Rules for the Direction of the Mind;
                         Philosophy of Descartes [Torrey], (New
                         York, 1892), p. 72._


=1502.= All quantitative determinations are in the hands
of mathematics, and it at once follows from this that all
speculation which is heedless of mathematics, which does not
enter into partnership with it, which does not seek its aid in
distinguishing between the manifold modifications that must of
necessity arise by a change of quantitative determinations, is
either an empty play of thoughts, or at most a fruitless effort.
In the field of speculation many things grow which do not start
from mathematics nor give it any care, and I am far from
asserting that all that thus grow are useless weeds, among them
may be many noble plants, but without mathematics none will
develop to complete maturity.--HERBART, J. F.

                         _Werke (Kehrbach), (Langensalza, 1890),
                         Bd. 5, p. 106._


=1503.= There are few things which we know, which are not capable
of being reduc'd to a Mathematical Reasoning, and when they
cannot, it's a sign our knowledge of them is very small and
confus'd; and where a mathematical reasoning can be had, it's as
great folly to make use of any other, as to grope for a thing in
the dark, when you have a candle standing by you.--ARBUTHNOT.

                         _Quoted in Todhunter's History of the
                         Theory of Probability (Cambridge and
                         London, 1865), p. 51._


=1504.= Mathematical Analysis is ... the true rational basis of
the whole system of our positive knowledge.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 1,
                         chap. 1._


=1505.= It is only through Mathematics that we can thoroughly
understand what true science is. Here alone we can find in the
highest degree simplicity and severity of scientific law, and
such abstraction as the human mind can attain. Any scientific
education setting forth from any other point, is faulty in its
basis.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 1,
                         chap. 1._


=1506.= In the present state of our knowledge we must regard
Mathematics less as a constituent part of natural philosophy than
as having been, since the time of Descartes and Newton, the true
basis of the whole of natural philosophy; though it is, exactly
speaking, both the one and the other. To us it is of less use for
the knowledge of which it consists, substantial and valuable as
that knowledge is, than as being the most powerful instrument
that the human mind can employ in the investigation of the laws
of natural phenomena.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau],
                         Introduction, chap. 2._


=1507.= The concept of mathematics is the concept of science in
general.--NOVALIS.

                         _Schriften (Berlin, 1901), Teil 2, p.
                         222._


=1508.= I contend, that each natural science is real science only
in so far as it is mathematical.... It may be that a pure
philosophy of nature in general (that is, a philosophy which
concerns itself only with the general concepts of nature) is
possible without mathematics, but a pure science of nature
dealing with definite objects (physics or psychology), is
possible only by means of mathematics, and since each natural
science contains only as much real science as it contains _a
priori_ knowledge, each natural science becomes real science only
to the extent that it permits the application of mathematics.

                                                       --KANT, E.

                         _Metaphysische Anfangsgruende der
                         Naturwissenschaft, Vorrede._


=1509.= The theory most prevalent among teachers is that
mathematics affords the best training for the reasoning
powers;... The modern, and to my mind true, theory is that
mathematics is the abstract form of the natural sciences; and
that it is valuable as a training of the reasoning powers, not
because it is abstract, but because it is a representation of
actual things.--SAFFORD, T. H.

                         _Mathematical Teaching etc. (Boston,
                         1886), p. 9._


=1510.= It seems to me that no one science can so well serve to
co-ordinate and, as it were, bind together all of the sciences as
the queen of them all, mathematics.--DAVIS, E. W.

                         _Proceedings Nebraska Academy of
                         Sciences for 1896 (Lincoln, 1897), p.
                         282._


=1511.= And as for Mixed Mathematics, I may only make this
prediction, that there cannot fail to be more kinds of them, as
nature grows further disclosed.--BACON, FRANCIS.

                         _Advancement of Learning, Bk. 2; De
                         Augmentis, Bk. 3._


=1512.= Besides the exercise in keen comprehension and the
certain discovery of truth, mathematics has another formative
function, that of equipping the mind for the survey of a
scientific system.--GRASSMANN, H.

                         _Stuecke aus dem Lehrbuche der
                         Arithmetik; Werke (Leipzig, 1904), Bd.
                         2, p. 298._


=1513.= Mathematicks may help the naturalists, both to frame
hypotheses, and to judge of those that are proposed to them,
especially such as relate to mathematical subjects in conjunction
with others.--BOYLE, ROBERT.

                         _Works (London, 1772), Vol. 3, p. 429._


=1514.= The more progress physical sciences make, the more they
tend to enter the domain of mathematics, which is a kind of
centre to which they all converge. We may even judge of the
degree of perfection to which a science has arrived by the
facility with which it may be submitted to calculation.--QUETELET.

                         _Quoted in E. Mailly's Eulogy on
                         Quetelet; Smithsonian Report, 1874, p.
                         173._


=1515.= The mathematical formula is the point through which all
the light gained by science passes in order to be of use to
practice; it is also the point in which all knowledge gained by
practice, experiment, and observation must be concentrated before
it can be scientifically grasped. The more distant and marked the
point, the more concentrated will be the light coming from it,
the more unmistakable the insight conveyed. All scientific
thought, from the simple gravitation formula of Newton, through
the more complicated formulae of physics and chemistry, the
vaguer so called laws of organic and animated nature, down to the
uncertain statements of psychology and the data of our social and
historical knowledge, alike partakes of this characteristic, that
it is an attempt to gather up the scattered rays of light, the
different parts of knowledge, in a focus, from whence it can be
again spread out and analyzed, according to the abstract
processes of the thinking mind. But only when this can be done
with a mathematical precision and accuracy is the image sharp and
well-defined, and the deductions clear and unmistakable. As we
descend from the mechanical, through the physical, chemical, and
biological, to the mental, moral, and social sciences, the
process of focalization becomes less and less perfect,--the sharp
point, the focus, is replaced by a larger or smaller circle, the
contours of the image become less and less distinct, and with the
possible light which we gain there is mingled much darkness, the
sources of many mistakes and errors. But the tendency of all
scientific thought is toward clearer and clearer definition; it
lies in the direction of a more and more extended use of
mathematical measurements, of mathematical formulae.--MERZ, J. T.

                         _History of European Thought in the 19th
                         Century (Edinburgh and London, 1904),
                         Vol. 1, p. 333._


=1516.= From the very outset of his investigations the physicist
has to rely constantly on the aid of the mathematician, for even
in the simplest cases, the direct results of his measuring
operations are entirely without meaning until they have been
submitted to more or less of mathematical discussion. And when in
this way some interpretation of the experimental results has been
arrived at, and it has been proved that two or more physical
quantities stand in a definite relation to each other, the
mathematician is very often able to infer, from the existence of
this relation, that the quantities in question also fulfill some
other relation, that was previously unsuspected. Thus when
Coulomb, combining the functions of experimentalist and
mathematician, had discovered the law of the force exerted
between two particles of electricity, it became a purely
mathematical problem, not requiring any further experiment, to
ascertain how electricity is distributed upon a charged conductor
and this problem has been solved by mathematicians in several
cases.--FOSTER, G. C.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science, Section A (1877); Nature, Vol.
                         16, p. 312-313._


=1517.= Without consummate mathematical skill, on the part of
some investigators at any rate, all the higher physical problems
would be sealed to us; and without competent skill on the part of
the ordinary student no idea can be formed of the nature and
cogency of the evidence on which the solutions rest. Mathematics
are not merely a gate through which we may approach if we please,
but they are the only mode of approach to large and important
districts of thought.--VENN, JOHN.

                         _Symbolic Logic (London and New York,
                         1894), Introduction, p. xix._


=1518.= Much of the skill of the true mathematical physicist and
of the mathematical astronomer consists in the power of adapting
methods and results carried out on an exact mathematical basis to
obtain approximations sufficient for the purposes of physical
measurements. It might perhaps be thought that a scheme of
Mathematics on a frankly approximative basis would be sufficient
for all the practical purposes of application in Physics,
Engineering Science, and Astronomy, and no doubt it would be
possible to develop, to some extent at least, a species of
Mathematics on these lines. Such a system would, however, involve
an intolerable awkwardness and prolixity in the statements of
results, especially in view of the fact that the degree of
approximation necessary for various purposes is very different,
and thus that unassigned grades of approximation would have to
be provided for. Moreover, the mathematician working on these
lines would be cut off from the chief sources of inspiration, the
ideals of exactitude and logical rigour, as well as from one of
his most indispensable guides to discovery, symmetry, and
permanence of mathematical form. The history of the actual
movements of mathematical thought through the centuries shows
that these ideals are the very life-blood of the science, and
warrants the conclusion that a constant striving toward their
attainment is an absolutely essential condition of vigorous
growth. These ideals have their roots in irresistible impulses
and deep-seated needs of the human mind, manifested in its
efforts to introduce intelligibility in certain great domains of
the world of thought.--HOBSON, E. W.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science, Section A (1910); Nature, Vol.
                         84, pp. 285-286._


=1519.= The immense part which those laws [laws of number and
extension] take in giving a deductive character to the other
departments of physical science, is well known; and is not
surprising, when we consider that all causes operate according to
mathematical laws. The effect is always dependent upon, or in
mathematical language, is a function of, the quantity of the
agent; and generally of its position also. We cannot, therefore,
reason respecting causation, without introducing considerations
of quantity and extension at every step; and if the nature of the
phenomena admits of our obtaining numerical data of sufficient
accuracy, the laws of quantity become the grand instruments for
calculating forward to an effect, or backward to a cause.

                                                    --MILL, J. S.

                         _System of Logic, Bk. 3, chap. 24, sect.
                         9._


=1520.= The ordinary mathematical treatment of any applied
science substitutes exact axioms for the approximate results of
experience, and deduces from these axioms the rigid mathematical
conclusions. In applying this method it must not be forgotten
that the mathematical developments transcending the limits of
exactness of the science are of no practical value. It follows
that a large portion of abstract mathematics remains without
finding any practical application, the amount of mathematics
that can be usefully employed in any science being in proportion
to the degree of accuracy attained in the science. Thus, while
the astronomer can put to use a wide range of mathematical
theory, the chemist is only just beginning to apply the first
derivative, i.e. the rate of change at which certain processes
are going on; for second derivatives he does not seem to have
found any use as yet.--KLEIN, F.

                         _Lectures on Mathematics (New York,
                         1911), p. 47._


=1521.= The bond of union among the physical sciences is the
mathematical spirit and the mathematical method which pervades
them.... Our knowledge of nature, as it advances, continuously
resolves differences of quality into differences of quantity. All
exact reasoning--indeed all reasoning--about quantity is
mathematical reasoning; and thus as our knowledge increases, that
portion of it which becomes mathematical increases at a still
more rapid rate.--SMITH, H. J. S.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science, Section A (1873); Nature, Vol.
                         8, p. 449._


=1522.= Another way of convincing ourselves how largely this
process [of assimilation of mathematics by physics] has gone on
would be to try to conceive the effect of some intellectual
catastrophe, supposing such a thing possible, whereby all
knowledge of mathematics should be swept away from men's minds.
Would it not be that the departure of mathematics would be the
destruction of physics? Objective physical phenomena would,
indeed, remain as they are now, but physical science would cease
to exist. We should no doubt see the same colours on looking into
a spectroscope or polariscope, vibrating strings would produce
the same sounds, electrical machines would give sparks, and
galvanometer needles would be deflected; but all these things
would have lost their meaning; they would be but as the dry
bones--the _disjecta membra_--of what is now a living and growing
science. To follow this conception further, and to try to image to
ourselves in some detail what would be the kind of knowledge of
physics which would remain possible, supposing all mathematical
ideas to be blotted out, would be extremely interesting, but it
would lead us directly into a dim and entangled region where
the subjective seems to be always passing itself off for the
objective, and where I at least could not attempt to lead the way,
gladly as I would follow any one who could show where a firm
footing is to be found. But without venturing to do more than to
look from a safe distance over this puzzling ground, we may see
clearly enough that mathematics is the connective tissue of
physics, binding what would else be merely a list of detached
observations into an organized body of science.--FOSTER, G. C.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science, Section A (1877); Nature, Vol.
                         16, p. 313._


=1523.= In _Plato's_ time mathematics was purely a play of the
free intellect; the mathematic-mystical reveries of a Pythagoras
foreshadowed a far-reaching significance, but such a significance
(except in the case of music) was as yet entirely a matter of
fancy; yet even in that time mathematics was the prerequisite to
all other studies! But today, when mathematics furnishes the
_only_ language by means of which we may formulate the most
comprehensive laws of nature, laws which the ancients scarcely
dreamed of, when moreover mathematics is the _only_ means by
which these laws may be understood,--how few learn today anything
of the real essence of our mathematics!... In the schools of
today mathematics serves only as a disciplinary study, a mental
gymnastic; that it includes the highest ideal value for the
comprehension of the universe, one dares scarcely to think of in
view of our present day instruction.--LINDEMAN, F.

                         _Lehren und Lernen in der Mathematik
                         (Muenchen, 1904), p. 14._


=1524.= All applications of mathematics consist in extending the
empirical knowledge which we possess of a limited number or
region of accessible phenomena into the region of the unknown and
inaccessible; and much of the progress of pure analysis consists
in inventing definite conceptions, marked by symbols, of
complicated operations; in ascertaining their properties as
independent objects of research; and in extending their meaning
beyond the limits they were originally invented for,--thus
opening out new and larger regions of thought.--MERZ, J. T.

                         _History of European Thought in the 19th
                         Century (Edinburgh and London, 1903),
                         Vol. 1, p. 698._


=1525.= All the effects of nature are only mathematical results
of a small number of immutable laws.--LAPLACE.

                         _A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities
                         [Truscott and Emory] (New York, 1902),
                         p. 177; Oeuvres, t. 7, p. 139._


=1526.= What logarithms are to mathematics that mathematics are
to the other sciences.--NOVALIS.

                         _Schriften (Berlin, 1901), Teil 2, p.
                         222._


=1527.= Any intelligent man may now, by resolutely applying
himself for a few years to mathematics, learn more than the great
Newton knew after half a century of study and meditation.

                                                      --MACAULAY.

                         _Milton; Critical and Miscellaneous
                         Essays (New York, 1879), Vol. 1, p. 13._


=1528.= In questions of science the authority of a thousand is
not worth the humble reasoning of a single individual.--GALILEO.

                         _Quoted in Arago's Eulogy on Laplace;
                         Smithsonian Report, 1874, p. 164._


=1529.= Behind the artisan is the chemist, behind the chemist a
physicist, behind the physicist a mathematician.--WHITE, W. F.

                         _Scrap-book of Elementary Mathematics
                         (Chicago, 1908), p. 217._


=1530.= The advance in our knowledge of physics is largely due to
the application to it of mathematics, and every year it becomes
more difficult for an experimenter to make any mark in the
subject unless he is also a mathematician.--BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1901),
                         p. 503._


=1531.= In very many cases the most obvious and direct
experimental method of investigating a given problem is extremely
difficult, or for some reason or other untrustworthy. In such
cases the mathematician can often point out some other problem
more accessible to experimental treatment, the solution of which
involves the solution of the former one. For example, if we try
to deduce from direct experiments the law according to which one
pole of a magnet attracts or repels a pole of another magnet, the
observed action is so much complicated with the effects of the
mutual induction of the magnets and of the forces due to the
second pole of each magnet, that it is next to impossible to
obtain results of any great accuracy. Gauss, however, showed how
the law which applied in the case mentioned can be deduced from
the deflections undergone by a small suspended magnetic needle
when it is acted upon by a small fixed magnet placed successively
in two determinate positions relatively to the needle; and being
an experimentalist as well as a mathematician, he showed likewise
how these deflections can be measured very easily and with great
precision.--FOSTER, G. C.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science, Section A (1877); Nature, Vol.
                         16, p. 313._


=1532.=

        Give me to learn each secret cause;
        Let Number's, Figure's, Motion's laws
        Reveal'd before me stand;
        These to great Nature's scenes apply,
        And round the globe, and through the sky,
        Disclose her working hand.
                                              --AKENSIDE, M.

                         _Hymn to Science._


=1533.= Now there are several scores, upon which skill in
mathematicks may be useful to the experimental philosopher. For
there are some general advantages, which mathematicks may bring
to the minds of men, to whatever study they apply themselves, and
consequently to the student of natural philosophy; namely, that
these disciplines are wont to make men accurate, and very
attentive to the employment that they are about, keeping their
thoughts from wandering, and inuring them to patience in going
through with tedious and intricate demonstrations; besides, that
they much improve reason, by accustoming the mind to deduce
successive consequences, and judge of them without easily
acquiescing in anything but demonstration.--BOYLE, ROBERT.

                         _Works (London, 1772), Vol. 3, p. 426._


=1534.= It is not easy to anatomize the constitution and the
operations of a mind [like Newton's] which makes such an advance
in knowledge. Yet we may observe that there must exist in it, in
an eminent degree, the elements which compose the mathematical
talent. It must possess distinctness of intuition, tenacity and
facility in tracing logical connection, fertility of invention,
and a strong tendency to generalization.--WHEWELL, W.

                         _History of the Inductive Sciences (New
                         York, 1894), Vol. 1, p. 416._


=1535.= The domain of physics is no proper field for mathematical
pastimes. The best security would be in giving a geometrical
training to physicists, who need not then have recourse to
mathematicians, whose tendency is to despise experimental science.
By this method will that union between the abstract and the
concrete be effected which will perfect the uses of mathematical,
while extending the positive value of physical science. Meantime,
the use of analysis in physics is clear enough. Without it we
should have no precision, and no co-ordination; and what account
could we give of our study of heat, weight, light, etc.? We should
have merely series of unconnected facts, in which we could foresee
nothing but by constant recourse to experiment; whereas, they now
have a character of rationality which fits them for purposes of
prevision.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 3,
                         chap. 1._


=1536.= It must ever be remembered that the true positive spirit
first came forth from the pure sources of mathematical science;
and it is only the mind that has imbibed it there, and which has
been face to face with the lucid truths of geometry and
mechanics, that can bring into full action its natural
positivity, and apply it in bringing the most complex studies
into the reality of demonstration. No other discipline can fitly
prepare the intellectual organ.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 3,
                         chap. 1._


=1537.= During the last two centuries and a half, physical
knowledge has been gradually made to rest upon a basis which it
had not before. It has become _mathematical_. The question now
is, not whether this or that hypothesis is better or worse to the
pure thought, but whether it accords with observed phenomena in
those consequences which can be shown necessarily to follow from
it, if it be true. Even in those sciences which are not yet under
the dominion of mathematics, and perhaps never will be, a working
copy of the mathematical process has been made. This is not known
to the followers of those sciences who are not themselves
mathematicians, and who very often exalt their horns against the
mathematics in consequence. They might as well be squaring the
circle, for any sense they show in this particular.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _A Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872),
                         p. 2._


=1538.= Among the mere talkers so far as mathematics are
concerned, are to be ranked three out of four of those who apply
mathematics to physics, who, wanting a tool only, are very
impatient of everything which is not of direct aid to the actual
methods which are in their hands.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Graves' Life of Sir William Rowan
                         Hamilton (New York, 1882-1889), Vol. 3,
                         p. 348._


=1539.= Something has been said about the use of mathematics in
physical science, the mathematics being regarded as a weapon
forged by others, and the study of the weapon being completely
set aside. I can only say that there is danger of obtaining
untrustworthy results in physical science, if only the results of
mathematics are used; for the person so using the weapon can
remain unacquainted with the conditions under which it can be
rightly applied.... The results are often correct, sometimes are
incorrect; the consequence of the latter class of cases is to
throw doubt upon all the applications of such a worker until a
result has been otherwise tested. Moreover, such a practice in
the use of mathematics leads a worker to a mere repetition in the
use of familiar weapons; he is unable to adapt them with any
confidence when some new set of conditions arise with a demand
for a new method: for want of adequate instruction in the
forging of the weapon, he may find himself, sooner or later in
the progress of his subject, without any weapon worth having.

                                                 --FORSYTH, A. R.

                         _Perry's Teaching of Mathematics
                         (London, 1902), p. 36._


=1540.= If in the range of human endeavor after sound knowledge
there is one subject that needs to be practical, it surely is
Medicine. Yet in the field of Medicine it has been found that
branches such as biology and pathology must be studied for
themselves and be developed by themselves with the single aim of
increasing knowledge; and it is then that they can be best
applied to the conduct of living processes. So also in the
pursuit of mathematics, the path of practical utility is too
narrow and irregular, not always leading far. The witness of
history shows that, in the field of natural philosophy,
mathematics will furnish the more effective assistance if, in its
systematic development, its course can freely pass beyond the
ever-shifting domain of use and application.--FORSYTH, A. R.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science, Section A; Nature, Vol. 56
                         (1897), p. 377._


=1541.= If the Greeks had not cultivated Conic Sections, Kepler
could not have superseded Ptolemy; if the Greeks had cultivated
Dynamics, Kepler might have anticipated Newton.--WHEWELL, W.

                         _History of the Inductive Science (New
                         York, 1894), Vol. 1, p. 311._


=1542.= If we may use the great names of Kepler and Newton to
signify stages in the progress of human discovery, it is not too
much to say that without the treatises of the Greek geometers on
the conic sections there could have been no Kepler, without
Kepler no Newton, and without Newton no science in the modern
sense of the term, or at least no such conception of nature as
now lies at the basis of all our science, of nature as subject in
the smallest as well as in its greatest phenomena, to exact
quantitative relations, and to definite numerical laws.

                                                --SMITH, H. J. S.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science, Section A; Nature, Vol. 8
                         (1873), p. 450._


=1543.= The silent work of the great Regiomontanus in his chamber
at Nuremberg computed the Ephemerides which made possible the
discovery of America by Columbus.--RUDIO, F.

                         _Quoted in Max Simon's Geschichte der
                         Mathematik im Altertum (Berlin, 1909),
                         Einleitung, p. xi._


=1544.= The calculation of the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites,
many a man might have been disposed, originally, to regard as a
most unprofitable study. But the utility of it to navigation (in
the determination of longitudes) is now well known.--WHATELY, R.

                         _Annotations to Bacon's Essays (Boston,
                         1783), p. 492._


=1545.= Who could have imagined, when Galvani observed the
twitching of the frog muscles as he brought various metals in
contact with them, that eighty years later Europe would be
overspun with wires which transmit messages from Madrid to St.
Petersburg with the rapidity of lightning, by means of the same
principle whose first manifestations this anatomist then
observed!...

He who seeks for immediate practical use in the pursuit of
science, may be reasonably sure, that he will seek in vain.
Complete knowledge and complete understanding of the action of
forces of nature and of the mind, is the only thing that science
can aim at. The individual investigator must find his reward in
the joy of new discoveries, as new victories of thought over
resisting matter, in the esthetic beauty which a well-ordered
domain of knowledge affords, where all parts are intellectually
related, where one thing evolves from another, and all show the
marks of the mind's supremacy; he must find his reward in the
consciousness of having contributed to the growing capital of
knowledge on which depends the supremacy of man over the forces
hostile to the spirit.--HELMHOLTZ, H.

                         _Vortraege und Reden (Braunschweig,
                         1884), Bd. 1, p. 142._


=1546.= When the time comes that knowledge will not be sought for
its own sake, and men will not press forward simply in a desire
of achievement, without hope of gain, to extend the limits of
human knowledge and information, then, indeed, will the race
enter upon its decadence.--HUGHES, C. E.

                         _Quoted in D. E. Smith's Teaching of
                         Geometry (Boston, 1911), p. 9._


=1547.= [In the Opus Majus of Roger Bacon] there is a chapter, in
which it is proved by reason, that all sciences require
mathematics. And the arguments which are used to establish this
doctrine, show a most just appreciation of the office of
mathematics in science. They are such as follows: That other
sciences use examples taken from mathematics as the most
evident:--That mathematical knowledge is, as it were, innate to
us, on which point he refers to the well-known dialogue of Plato,
as quoted by Cicero:--That this science, being the easiest,
offers the best introduction to the more difficult:--That in
mathematics, things as known to us are identical with things as
known to nature:--That we can here entirely avoid doubt and
error, and obtain certainty and truth:--That mathematics is prior
