discovered, their carriages stopped, and they were escorted back to the
Tuileries by a shouting shrieking mob of men and women who were
fiendishly glad of their capture. After that the King and Queen and the
Dauphin were always treated as prisoners in their own palace, with
guards set over them to watch their every movement, and the poor little
Dauphin could not go out nor play freely and happily as could the
poorest peasant child in France. After some months had passed, however,
the fury of the people grew somewhat less, and they were allowed to
close the doors of their rooms when they wished, and to walk out in the
gardens once more. It even seemed for some time as if what King Louis
had done to win back the trust of his people had been successful, and
that the throne of France might regain its dignity and power before
that time when Louis the Dauphin, should come into his inheritance.

He, meanwhile, was filling this period of calm with such affairs as
interested and amused him, and his greatest joy was that he was again
allowed to work in his garden. Although it was so small in comparison
to that at Versailles, it was yet a bit of paradise to him, and as soon
as his study hours were over, he always hurried out to dig his ground,
and water and pick his blossoms, and it was the great delight of those
subjects who loved the manly little fellow, to stand outside the fence
and watch him as he worked. The Dauphin was generally accompanied, when
he went outside the palace, by several soldiers from the detachment of
the National Guard, who were on duty at the Tuileries, and the boy
himself, who was now having military drills, generally wore the uniform
of the National Guard, and so charming and so manly was this little
National Guardsman of six years, that he became the idol of Paris. Fans
and lockets were decorated with his picture, which society women wore,
and everywhere the beauty and wit of the little fellow were talked of.

The boys of Paris shared the enthusiasm of their elders, and formed
themselves into a regiment, which was called the Regiment of the
Dauphin, which, with the king's permission, marched to the Tuileries to
parade before the Dauphin. As usual, he was found in his garden, and
was anxious to show his treasures to them even before he answered their
request that he become Colonel of their regiment. When he accepted the
honour urged upon him, one of the officers said:

"But that will mean giving up gathering flowers for your mamma."

"Oh, no," said the Dauphin, quickly, "that will not prevent me from
taking care of my flowers. Many of these gentlemen tell me that they,
too, have little gardens, and if they love the queen as much as their
colonel loves her, mamma will have whole regiments of bouquets every
day."

A cheer showed the boys' appreciation of their little colonel's
sentiment, and the regiment of the Dauphin became one of the most
popular organisations in Paris. Their uniform was a miniature copy of
the French guards, with their three-cornered hats and white jackets,
and whenever they marched through the Place de la Carousel, the people
crowded to see the army of sturdy boys with their handsome little
colonel.

So great was the boys' love for the Dauphin that the officers of the
regiment came to the palace one day to make him a present, in the name
of the whole regiment, and they were enthusiastically received by their
colonel.

"Welcome, my comrades," he cried. "My mamma tells me you have brought
me a present. But it gives me such pleasure to see you that nothing
more is needed."

"But Colonel, you will not refuse our gift?" said a little officer
named Palloy, and he added proudly:

"We bring you a set of dominoes made entirely out of the ruins of the
Bastile."[1]

      [1] The Bastile was the national prison, which had been entirely
      destroyed by the Revolutionists.

Taking the wrapper from the white marble box, bound with gold, he gave
it to the Dauphin, at the same time reciting the following lines:

    "Those glowing walls that once woke our fear
    Are changed into the toy we offer here
    And when with joyful face the gift you view
    Think what the people's love can do."

Joyfully the Dauphin received the beautiful present and listened
eagerly to the explanation of how to play the new game. On the back of
each domino, in the black marble, was a gold letter, and when the whole
set of dominoes was arranged in regular order, they formed this
sentence, Vive le Roi, Vive la Reine, et Vive le Dauphin (Long live the
King, the Queen and the Dauphin). The marble of the box was taken from
the altar-slab in the chapel of the Bastile, and in the middle, in gold
relief, was a picture of King Louis.

"That is my papa!" cried Louis joyfully, when he saw it.

"Yes," said Palloy. "Every one of us bears him in his heart. And like
the King, you will live for the happiness of all, and like him, you
will be the idol of France. We who shall one day be French soldiers and
citizens, bring to you, who will then be our commander-in-chief and
king, our homage as the future supporters of the throne which is
destined for you and which the wisdom of your father has placed under
the unshakable power of law. The gift which we offer you is small, but
each one of us adds his heart to it."

"And I give you all of my heart in return for it," cried the Dauphin,
joyfully, "and I shall take great pains to do my lessons well so I may
be allowed to amuse myself playing dominoes."

The delight of the Dauphin was so evident that his comrades who had
brought him the present felt a keener affection even than before for
their little Colonel, and the Queen who had been present during the
whole scene spoke in friendly words of thanks to the boys, who then
withdrew, escorted by the king and the Dauphin, who had no knowledge,
child of destiny that he was, of the omen contained in that present.
But Marie Antoinette knew only too well, and her heart was heavy when
she saw the present made from the stones of the Bastile. But of this
she gave no sign, and from that day attempted more than ever to endear
herself and her son to the people who had so little trust in her. One
day when a crowd of fiendish women behind the fence called out cruel
things about the Queen, the Dauphin could be no longer silent.

"You lie, oh, you lie!" he cried angrily. "My mamma is _not_ a wicked
woman, and she does not hate the people. She is good. She is so good
that--that----" tears choked him, and ashamed to show such signs of
weakness, he dashed out of the garden into the palace, but as he
reached the queen's apartments he choked back the tears, saying, "I
will not cry any more, for that will only trouble mamma and I can see
she has trouble enough without that. I will laugh and sing and jump
about, and then she may smile a little instead of crying, as I often
find her doing."

His tutor, the Abbe Davout, heartily approved of this, and the Dauphin
sprang into his mother's presence with a merry smile which gladdened
the queen's heart and made her forget her sorrows for awhile. This
pleased the Dauphin greatly, and he re-doubled his efforts to be merry,
making the little dog stand on its hind legs, while Louis put on its
black head a paper cap which he had made, painted with red stripes,
like those worn by the Jacobins or Revolutionists and cried:

"Monsieur Jacobi, behave respectfully. Make your salutations to her
majesty, the Queen!"

He was rewarded by a hug and a kiss from the Queen and then ran off
with the dog barking at his heels.

Little Louis was, as we have seen, an eager and brilliant scholar and
one day he begged the Abbe to give him lessons in grammar which he had
begun to learn some time before.

"Gladly," answered the Abbe, "your last lesson, if I remember rightly,
was upon the three degrees of comparison--the positive, the comparative
and the superlative. But you must have forgotten all that."

"You are mistaken," answered the Dauphin, "and I will prove it to you.
Listen:--the positive is when I say, 'my Abbe is a kind Abbe'; the
comparative is when I say 'my Abbe is kinder than another Abbe,' and
the superlative," he continued, looking at the Queen who was
listening--"is when I say, 'mamma is the kindest and most amiable of
all mammas!'"

The retort was so clever, the manner of saying it so charming, that the
Abbe and Marie Antoinette exchanged glances of amusement and pride, but
the little prince was unconscious of having said or done anything
unusual.

Besides grammar, Louis studied Italian, which he could speak and read
fluently; he also studied Latin, and some of the sentences he
translated have been preserved, such as "True friends are useful to
princes." "I know a prince who easily flies into a passion."
"Flatterers are very dangerous to princes." From these sentences it is
evident that the Abbe was trying to teach his clever little scholar
more than one thing at a time. Louis was also taught arithmetic,
geometry and geography, this last by means of a huge hollow globe lit
by a lantern, which had been invented for the special use of the
Dauphin, by a celebrated professor in the University of Paris. Louis
also was trained in all sorts of athletic sports and when he was seven
years old was sturdy of body and far more mature of mind than many
older boys. At seven, according to the court custom of France, he was
obliged to be given into the care of a governor. The people wished to
choose this governor and named several candidates who were utterly
unworthy of the position, but they were obliged to set aside their
wishes and accept a man named by the king, who also himself continued
to superintend his son's education.

At this time the clouds of political disaster were again hanging over
the palace, and even the Dauphin could see and feel the uneasiness that
surrounded him.

On June 20, 1792, King Louis refused to sign two decrees which the
people wished him to sign, and with his refusal the storm of riot and
revolution burst forth again. An immense mob of shrieking, howling
people stormed the Tuileries, where no measures had been taken in
defence, and the king gave orders that the doors of the palace be flung
open and the people be allowed to pass in unhindered. In a few minutes
every inch of space in rooms and corridors and halls was filled with
the dense crowd. Only one room was locked, and in that room were the
king and queen, the Dauphin and his sister, Therese with a few loyal
friends. Therese was terrified and would have screamed with fright, but
the manly little Dauphin watching her, held back his own tears and kept
her terror under control by his words and manner, acting with the
dignity of a grown-up guardian.

Breathlessly, the little company gathered there listened to the sound
of an axe, doors were being battered down, the door of the royal
apartment was opened, and an officer of the National Guard knelt before
the King, beseeching him to show himself to the frenzied mob. The
expression on all faces, the sounds from without were too much for the
Dauphin's self-control. He burst into sobs and begged the queen to take
him to his room, and while Marie Antoinette was comforting him as best
she could, the king went out and stood in the middle of the hall,
surrounded by the rabble, speaking in quiet words, of his love for his
people. The crowd was delighted at this, but in the meantime, the still
greater crowd outside the palace surged through the hall and into the
room where the queen and her children were. The National Guards quickly
rolled a table up between the queen and the mob, and stood at either
side, ready to defend them. Only a table now separated the queen from
her enemies, but she was calm and courageous and stood proudly erect
with a child on either side of her, wide-eyed at the sights they saw.
Suddenly, the queen trembled with a deathly fear. Before her stood the
man whose brawny arm had reached through the paling to grasp the
Dauphin. Simon, the cobbler, stood there, hatred and desire for revenge
on his face, and Marie Antoinette knew with a quick instinct that this
man would bring no good to her child. Then the cries of the Jacobins
rent the air and they surged into the room with the fury of wild beasts
sure of their prey.

The queen lifted the Dauphin up and set him on a table and whispered to
him that he must not grieve or fear or cry, but be a man now, and the
child smiled and kissed her hand. Just then a drunken woman flung a red
cap--the cap worn by the Jacobins--on the table, and commanded the
queen, on pain of death, to put it on.

Calmly, the queen turned to a general standing beside her and told him
to place it on her head.

The general, pale with rage at the insult, obeyed in silence and the
woman howled with pleasure. But in a moment, the general took the cap
off the queen's hair and laid it on the table.

Ever since the King had vetoed the bills, the people had called the
King, Monsieur Veto; Marie Antoinette, Madame Veto, and the Dauphin,
Little Veto, and now from all sides burst forth the cry, "The red cap
for the Dauphin! The tri-colour for little Veto!"

"If you love the nation," cried the woman to the Queen, "put the red
cap on your son."

The Queen motioned to one of the ladies to put the red cap on the
child, and he, not understanding whether it was a joke or not, stood
there in easy grace, as handsome a little prince as ever a nation had.

One of the revolutionary leaders, who had looked complacently at the
scene, now stood near the queen, and as her eyes met his in calm
defiance, he felt a thrill of pity for her and for the little Dauphin,
and when he saw the perspiration rolling down the boy's forehead from
under the thick woollen cap, he called out roughly:

"Take that cap off the child--don't you see how he sweats?"

The queen's gratified glance thanked him, as she took the cap herself
from the Dauphin's head. While this was occurring, the Mayor of Paris
had entered the outer hall and was quieting the mob, bidding them
disband and leave the palace at once, which they did.

The King sank into a chair, exhausted and agonised, and cried out:

"Where is the queen? Where are the children?" and in a moment the royal
victims were together.

The Dauphin's spirits were never long cast down and now he was bubbling
over with joy.

"Papa," he cried. "Give me a kiss! I deserve it, for I was truly brave
and did not cry or even speak when the people put the red cap on my
head."

The king stooped with a dignity which was almost reverent, kissed the
boy's broad forehead and pushed back his thick golden hair, then turned
to answer a question put by one of the representatives of the people;
several of whom were in the room. And all at once these men gathered
around the little Dauphin, of whose brilliant mind they had heard so
much, and began to question him eagerly on all kinds of subjects,
especially about the boundaries of France, and its division into
departments and districts, and every question he answered quickly.
After each answer he glanced up at his mother inquiringly, and when her
face showed that he had answered correctly, his face beamed with
pleasure, and he enjoyed seeing the astonishment on those faces
crowding around him. One of those present asked:

"Do you sing, too, Prince?"

The Dauphin glanced again at the queen.

"Mamma," he asked, "shall I sing the prayer I sang this morning?"

Marie Antoinette nodded assent and the Dauphin knelt beside her, and
folding his hands and looking up with a sweet look of reverence in his
blue eyes, sang in a clear voice:

    "Oh heaven, accept the prayer
        I offer here,
    Unto his subjects spare
        My father dear."

There was absolute silence in the room, while those faces, before so
hard and stern, softened. Then with a single glance at the lovely boy,
who was still kneeling, with a look on his face as if in a happy dream,
one by one, those revolutionists silently left the room.

But even the prayer and the faith of the Dauphin could not longer save
the royal family from their fate.

The people, inflamed to fury by every desire of which the
revolutionists could make use, now demanded the dethronement of the
