
    molecular weight = density x 0.9046 x 32;

or, still more briefly,

    M. = D. x 28.9.

The value found by this method for the determination of molecular
weights will of course agree with those found by calculating the weight
of 22.4 l. of the gas, since both methods depend on the same principles.

[Illustration: Fig. 69]

     ~Determination of densities of gases.~ The relative weights of
     equal volumes of two gases can be easily determined. The
     following is one of the methods used. A small flask, such as is
     shown in Fig. 69, is filled with one of the gases, and after
     the temperature and pressure have been noted the flask is
     sealed up and weighed. The tip of the sealed end is then broken
     off, the flask filled with the second gas, and its weight
     determined. If the weight of the empty flask is subtracted from
     these two weighings, the relative weights of the gases is
     readily found.

~3. Deduction of atomic weights from molecular weights and equivalents.~
We have now seen how the equivalent of an element and the molecular
weight of compounds containing the element can be obtained. Let us see
how it is possible to decide which multiple of the equivalent really is
the true atomic weight. As an example, let us suppose that the
equivalent of nitrogen has been found to be 7.02 and that it is desired
to obtain its atomic weight. The next step is to obtain the molecular
weights of a large number of compounds containing nitrogen. The
following will serve:

==================+============+=============+================+==============
                  |            | APPROXIMATE |  PERCENTAGE OF |    PART OF
                  | DENSITY BY |  MOLECULAR  |   NITROGEN BY  |   MOLECULAR
                  | EXPERIMENT |   WEIGHT    |    EXPERIMENT  |   WEIGHT DUE
                  |            | (D. x 28.9) |                |  TO NITROGEN
------------------+------------+-------------+----------------+--------------
Nitrogen gas      |   0.9671   |    27.95    |    100.00      |    27.95
Nitrous oxide     |   1.527    |    44.13    |     63.70      |    27.11
Nitric oxide      |   1.0384   |    30.00    |     46.74      |    14.02
Nitrogen peroxide |   1.580    |    45.66    |     30.49      |    13.90
Ammonia           |   0.591    |    17.05    |     82.28      |    14.03
Nitric acid       |   2.180    |    63.06    |     22.27      |    14.03
Hydrocyanic acid  |   0.930    |    26.87    |     51.90      |    13.94
==================+============+=============+================+==============

~Method of calculation.~ The densities of the various gases in the first
column of this table are determined by experiment, and are fairly
accurate but not entirely so. By multiplying these densities by 28.9 the
molecular weights of the compounds as given in the second column are
obtained. By chemical analysis it is possible to determine the
percentage composition of these substances, and the percentages of
nitrogen in them as determined by analysis are given in the third
column. If each of these molecular weights is multiplied in turn by the
percentage of nitrogen in the compound, the product will be the weight
of the nitrogen in the molecular weight of the compound. This will be
the sum of the weights of the nitrogen atoms in the molecule. These
values are given in the fourth column in the table.

If a large number of compounds containing nitrogen are studied in this
way, it is probable that there will be included in the list at least one
substance whose molecule contains a single nitrogen atom. In this case
the number in the fourth column will be the approximate atomic weight of
nitrogen. On comparing the values for nitrogen in the table it will be
seen that a number which is approximately 14 is the smallest, and that
the others are multiples of this. These compounds of higher value,
therefore, contain more than one nitrogen atom in the molecule.

~Accurate determination of atomic weights.~ Molecular weights cannot be
determined very accurately, and consequently the part in them due to
nitrogen is a little uncertain, as will be seen in the table. All we can
tell by this method is that the true weight is very near 14. The
equivalent can however be determined very accurately, and we have seen
that it is some multiple or submultiple of the true atomic weight.
Since molecular-weight determinations have shown that in the case of
nitrogen the atomic weight is near 14, and we have found the equivalent
to be 7.02, it is evident that the true atomic weight is twice the
equivalent, or 7.02 x 2 = 14.04.

~Summary.~ These, then, are the steps necessary to establish the atomic
weight of an element.

1. Determine the equivalent accurately by analysis.

2. Determine the molecular weight of a large number of compounds of the
element, and by analysis the part of the molecular weight due to the
element. The smallest number so obtained will be approximately the
atomic weight.

3. Multiply the equivalent by the small whole number (usually 1, 2, or
3), which will make a number very close to the approximate atomic
weight. The figure so obtained will be the true atomic weight.

~Molecular weights of the elements.~ It will be noticed that the molecular
weight of nitrogen obtained by multiplying its density by 28.9 is 28.08.
Yet the atomic weight of nitrogen as deduced from a study of its gaseous
compounds is 14.04. The simplest explanation that can be given for this
is that the gaseous nitrogen is made up of molecules, each of which
contains two atoms. In this respect it resembles oxygen; for we have
seen that an entirely different line of reasoning leads us to believe
that the molecule of oxygen contains two atoms. When we wish to indicate
molecules of these gases the symbols N_{2} and O_{2} should be used.
When we desire to merely show the weights taking part in a reaction this
is not necessary.

The vapor densities of many of the elements show that, like oxygen and
nitrogen, their molecules consist of two atoms. In other cases,
particularly among the metals, the molecule and the atom are identical.
Still other elements have four atoms in their molecules.

While oxygen contains two atoms in its molecules, a study of ozone has
led to the conclusion that it has three. The formation of ozone from
oxygen can therefore be represented by the equation

    3O_{2} = 2O_{3}.

~Other methods of determining molecular weights.~ It will be noticed that
Avogadro's law gives us a method by which we can determine the relative
weights of the molecules of two gases because it enables us to tell when
we are dealing with an equal number of the two kinds of molecules. If by
any other means we can get this information, we can make use of the
knowledge so gained to determine the molecular weights of the two
substances.

~Raoult's laws.~ Two laws have been discovered which give us just such
information. They are known as Raoult's laws, and can be stated as
follows:

1. _When weights of substances which are proportional to their molecular
weights are dissolved in the same weight of solvent, the rise of the
boiling point is the same in each case._

2. _When weights of substances which are proportional to their molecular
weights are dissolved in the same weight of solvent, the lowering of the
freezing point is the same in each case._

By taking advantage of these laws it is possible to determine when two
solutions contain the same number of molecules of two dissolved
substances, and consequently the relative molecular weights of the two
substances.

~Law of Dulong and Petit.~ In 1819 Dulong and Petit discovered a very
interesting relation between the atomic weight of an element and its
specific heat, which holds true for elements in the solid state. If
equal weights of two solids, say, lead and silver, are heated through
the same range of temperature, as from 10 deg. to 20 deg., it is found that very
different amounts of heat are required. The amount of heat required to
change the temperature of a solid or a liquid by a definite amount
compared with the amount required to change the temperature of an equal
weight of water by the same amount is called its specific heat. Dulong
and Petit discovered the following law: _The specific heat of an element
in the solid form multiplied by its atomic weight is approximately equal
to the constant 6.25._ That is,

    at. wt. x sp. ht. = 6.25.


Consequently,

                6.25
    at. wt. = --------
               sp. ht.

This law is not very accurate, but it is often possible by means of it
to decide upon what multiple of the equivalent is the real atomic
weight. Thus the specific heat of iron is found by experiment to be
0.112, and its equivalent is 27.95. 6.25 / 0.112 = 55.8. We see,
therefore, that the atomic weight is twice the equivalent, or 55.9.

~How formulas are determined.~ It will be well in connection with
molecular weights to consider how the formula of a compound is decided
upon, for the two subjects are very closely associated. Some examples
will make clear the method followed.

The molecular weight of a substance containing hydrogen and chlorine was
36.4. By analysis 36.4 parts of the substance was found to contain 1
part of hydrogen and 35.4 parts of chlorine. As these are the simple
atomic weights of the two elements, the formula of the compound must be
HCl.

A substance consisting of oxygen and hydrogen was found to have a
molecular weight of 34. Analysis showed that in 34 parts of the
substance there were 2 parts of hydrogen and 32 parts of oxygen.
Dividing these figures by the atomic weights of the two elements, we get
2 / 1 = 2 for H; 32 / 16 = 2 for O. The formula is therefore H_{2}O_{2}.

A substance containing 2.04% H, 32.6% S, and 65.3% O was found to have a
molecular weight of 98. In these 98 parts of the substance there are 98
x 2.04% = 2 parts of H, 98 x 32.6% = 32 parts of S, and 98 x 65.3% = 64
parts of O. If the molecule weighs 98, the hydrogen atoms present must
together weigh 2, the sulphur atoms 32, and the oxygen atoms 64.
Dividing these figures by the respective atomic weights of the three
elements, we have, for H, 2 / 1 = 2 atoms; for S, 32 / 32 = 1 atom; for
O, 64 / 16 = 4 atoms. Hence the formula is H_{2}SO_{4}.

We have, then, this general procedure: Find the percentage composition
of the substance and also its molecular weight. Multiply the molecular
weight successively by the percentage of each element present, to find
the amount of the element in the molecular weight of the compound. The
figures so obtained will be the respective parts of the molecular weight
due to the several atoms. Divide by the atomic weights of the respective
elements, and the quotient will be the number of atoms present.

~Avogadro's hypothesis and chemical calculations.~ This law simplifies
many chemical calculations.

1. _Application to volume relations in gaseous reactions._ Since equal
volumes of gases contain an equal number of molecules, it follows that
when an equal number of gaseous molecules of two or more gases take part
in a reaction, the reaction will involve equal volumes of the gases. In
the equation

    C_{2}H_{2}O_{4} = H_{2}O + CO_{2} + CO,

since 1 molecule of each of the gases CO_{2} and CO is set free from
each molecule of oxalic acid, the two substances must always be set free
in equal volumes.

Acetylene burns in accordance with the equation

    2C_{2}H_{2} + 5O_{2} = 4CO_{2} + 2H_{2}O.

Hence 2 volumes of acetylene will react with 5 volumes of oxygen to form
4 volumes of carbon dioxide and 2 volumes of steam. That the volume
relations may be correct a gaseous element must be given its molecular
formula. Thus oxygen must be written O_{2} and not 2O.

2. _Application to weights of gases._ It will be recalled that the
molecular weight of a gas is determined by ascertaining the weight of
22.4 l. of the gas. This weight in grams is called the _gram-molecular
weight_ of a gas. If the molecular weight of any gas is known, the
weight of a liter of the gas under standard conditions may be determined
by dividing its gram-molecular weight by 22.4. Thus the gram-molecular
weight of a hydrochloric acid gas is 36.458. A liter of the gas will
therefore weigh 36.458 / 22.4 = 1.627 g.


EXERCISES

1. From the following data calculate the atomic weight of sulphur. The
equivalent, as obtained by an analysis of sulphur dioxide, is 16.03. The
densities and compositions of a number of compounds containing sulphur
are as follows:

      NAME             DENSITY      COMPOSITION BY PERCENTAGE
Hydrosulphuric acid    1.1791     S = 94.11   H  =  5.89
Sulphur dioxide        2.222      S = 50.05   O  = 49.95
Sulphur trioxide       2.74       S = 40.05   O  = 59.95
Sulphur chloride       4.70       S = 47.48   Cl = 52.52
Sulphuryl chloride     4.64       S = 23.75   Cl = 52.53    O = 23.70
Carbon disulphide      2.68       S = 84.24   C  = 15.76

2. Calculate the formulas for compounds of the following compositions:

                                            MOLECULAR
                                              WEIGHT
(1) S  = 39.07%   O = 58.49%   H =  2.44%      81.0
(2) Ca = 29.40    S = 23.56    O = 47.04      136.2
(3) K  = 38.67    N = 13.88    O = 47.45      101.2

3. The molecular weight of ammonia is 17.06; of sulphur dioxide is
64.06; of chlorine is 70.9. From the molecular weight calculate the
weight of 1 l. of each of these gases. Compare your results with the
table on the back cover of the book.

4. From the molecular weight of the same gases calculate the density of
each, referred to air as a standard.

5. A mixture of 50 cc. of carbon monoxide and 50 cc. of oxygen was
exploded in a eudiometer, (a) What gases remained in the tube after
the explosion? (b) What was the volume of each?

6. In what proportion must acetylene and oxygen be mixed to produce the
greatest explosion?

7. Solve Problem 18, Chapter XVII, without using molecular weights.
Compare your results.

8. Solve Problem 10, Chapter XVIII, without using molecular weights.
Compare your results.

9. The specific heat of aluminium is 0.214; of lead is 0.031. From these
specific heats calculate the atomic weights of each of the elements.




CHAPTER XX

THE PHOSPHORUS FAMILY


==================================================
           |        | ATOMIC  |         | MELTING
           | SYMBOL | WEIGHT  | DENSITY |  POINT
-----------+--------+---------+---------+---------
Phosphorus |   P    |    31.0 |    1.8  |    43.3 deg.
Arsenic    |   As   |    75.0 |    5.73 |     ---
Antimony   |   Sb   |   120.2 |    6.7  |     432 deg.
Bismuth    |   Bi   |   208.5 |    9.8  |     270 deg.
==================================================

~The family.~ The elements constituting this family belong in the same
group with nitrogen and therefore resemble it in a general way. They
exhibit a regular gradation of physical properties, as is shown in the
above table. The same general gradation is also found in their chemical
properties, phosphorus being an acid-forming element, while bismuth is
essentially a metal. The other two elements are intermediate in
properties.

~Compounds.~ In general the elements of the family form compounds having
similar composition, as is shown in the following table:

    PH_{3}  PCl_{3}   PCl_{5}   P_{2}O_{3}   P_{2}O_{5}
    AsH_{3} AsCl_{3}  AsCl_{5}  As_{2}O_{3}  As_{2}O_{5}
    SbH_{3} SbCl_{3}  SbCl_{5}  Sb_{2}O_{3}  Sb_{2}O_{5}
     ....   BiCl_{3}  BiCl_{5}  Bi_{2}O_{3}  Bi_{2}O_{5}

In the case of phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony the oxides are acid
anhydrides. Salts of at least four acids of each of these three elements
are known, the free acid in some instances being unstable. The relation
of these acids to the corresponding anhydrides may be illustrated as
follows, phosphorus being taken as an example:

    P_{2}O_{3} + 3H_{2}O = 2H_{3}PO_{3} (phosphorous acid).

    P_{2}O_{5} + 3H_{2}O = 2H_{3}PO_{4} (phosphoric acid).

    P_{2}O_{5} + 2H_{2}O = H_{4}P_{2}O_{7} (pyrophosphoric acid).

    P_{2}O_{5} + H_{2}O = 2HPO_{3} (metaphosphoric acid).


PHOSPHORUS

~History.~ The element phosphorus was discovered by the alchemist Brand,
of Hamburg, in 1669, while searching for the philosopher's stone. Owing
to its peculiar properties and the secrecy which was maintained about
its preparation, it remained a very rare and costly substance until the
demand for it in the manufacture of matches brought about its production
on a large scale.

~Occurrence.~ Owing to its great chemical activity phosphorus never occurs
free in nature. In the form of phosphates it is very abundant and widely
distributed. _Phosphorite_ and _sombrerite_ are mineral forms of calcium
phosphate, while _apatite_ consists of calcium phosphate together with
calcium fluoride or chloride. These minerals form very large deposits
and are extensively mined for use as fertilizers. Calcium phosphate is a
constituent of all fertile soil, having been supplied to the soil by the
disintegration of rocks containing it. It is the chief mineral
constituent of bones of animals, and bone ash is therefore nearly pure
calcium phosphate.

~Preparation.~ Phosphorus is now manufactured from bone ash or a pure
mineral phosphate by heating the phosphate with sand and carbon in an
electric furnace. The materials are fed in at M (Fig. 70) by the feed
screw F. The phosphorus vapor escapes at P and is condensed under
water, while the calcium silicate is tapped off as a liquid at S. The
phosphorus obtained in this way is quite impure, and is purified by
distillation.

[Illustration: Fig. 70]

     ~Explanation of the reaction.~ To understand the reaction which
     occurs, it must be remembered that a volatile acid anhydride is
     expelled from its salts when heated with an anhydride which is
     not volatile. Thus, when sodium carbonate and silicon dioxide
     are heated together the following reaction takes place:

         Na_{2}CO_{3} + SiO_{2} = Na_{2}SiO_{3} + CO_{2}.

     Silicon dioxide is a less volatile anhydride than phosphoric
     anhydride (P_{2}O_{5}), and when strongly heated with a
     phosphate the phosphoric anhydride is driven out, thus:

         Ca_{3}(PO_{4})_{2} + 3SiO_{2} = 3CaSiO_{3} + P_{2}O_{5}.

     If carbon is added before the heat is applied, the P_{2}O_{5}
     is reduced to phosphorus at the same time, according to the
     equation

         P_{2}O_{5} + 5C = 2P + 5CO.

~Physical properties.~ The purified phosphorus is a pale yellowish,
translucent, waxy solid which melts at 43.3 deg. and boils at 269 deg.. It can
therefore be cast into any convenient form under warm water, and is
usually sold in the market in the form of sticks. It is quite soft and
can be easily cut with a knife, but this must always be done while the
element is covered with water, since it is extremely inflammable, and
the friction of the knife blade is almost sure to set it on fire if cut
in the air. It is not soluble in water, but is freely soluble in some
other liquids, notably in carbon disulphide. Its density is 1.8.

~Chemical properties.~ Exposed to the air phosphorus slowly combines with
oxygen, and in so doing emits a pale light, or phosphorescence, which
can be seen only in a dark place. The heat of the room may easily raise
the temperature to the kindling point of phosphorus, when it burns with
a sputtering flame, giving off dense fumes of oxide of phosphorus. It
burns with dazzling brilliancy in oxygen, and combines directly with
many other elements, especially with sulphur and the halogens. On
account of its great affinity for oxygen it is always preserved under
water.

Phosphorus is very poisonous, from 0.2 to 0.3 gram being a fatal dose.
Ground up with flour and water or similar substances, it is often used
as a poison for rats and other vermin.

     ~Precaution.~ The heat of the body is sufficient to raise
     phosphorus above its kindling temperature, and for this reason
     it should always be handled with forceps and never with the
     bare fingers. Burns occasioned by it are very painful and slow
     in healing.

~Red phosphorus.~ On standing, yellow phosphorus gradually undergoes a
remarkable change, being converted into a dark red powder which has a
density of 2.1. It no longer takes fire easily, neither does it dissolve
in carbon disulphide. It is not poisonous and, in fact, seems to be an
entirely different substance. The velocity of this change increases with
rise in temperature, and the red phosphorus is therefore prepared by
heating the yellow just below the boiling point (250 deg.-300 deg.). When
distilled and quickly condensed the red form changes back to the yellow.
This is in accordance with the general rule that when a substance
capable of existing in several allotropic forms is condensed from a gas
or crystallized from the liquid state, the more unstable variety forms
first, and this then passes into the more stable forms.

     ~Matches.~ The chief use of phosphorus is in the manufacture of
     matches. Common matches are made by first dipping the match
     sticks into some inflammable substance, such as melted
     paraffin, and afterward into a paste consisting of (1)
     phosphorus, (2) some oxidizing substance, such as manganese
     dioxide or potassium chlorate, and (3) a binding material,
     usually some kind of glue. On friction the phosphorus is
     ignited, the combustion being sustained by the oxidizing agent
     and communicated to the wood by the burning paraffin. In
     sulphur matches the paraffin is replaced by sulphur.

     In safety matches _red_ phosphorus, an oxidizing agent, and
     some gritty material such as emery is placed on the side of the
     box, while the match tip is provided as before with an
     oxidizing agent and an easily oxidized substance, usually
     antimony sulphide. The match cannot be ignited easily by
     friction, save on the prepared surface.

~Compounds of phosphorus with hydrogen.~ Phosphorus forms several
compounds with hydrogen, the best known of which is phosphine (PH_{3})
analogous to ammonia (NH_{3}).

~Preparation of phosphine.~ Phosphine is usually made by heating
phosphorus with a strong solution of potassium hydroxide, the reaction
being a complicated one.

[Illustration: Fig. 71]

     The experiment can be conveniently made in the apparatus shown
     in Fig. 71. A strong solution of potassium hydroxide together
     with several small bits of phosphorus are placed in the flask
     A, and a current of coal gas is passed into the flask through
     the tube B until all the air has been displaced. The gas is
     then turned off and the flask is heated. Phosphine is formed in
     small quantities and escapes through the delivery tube, the
     exit of which is just covered by the water in the vessel C.
     Each bubble of the gas as it escapes into the air takes fire,
     and the product of combustion (P_{2}O_{5}) forms beautiful
     small rings, which float unbroken for a considerable time in
     quiet air. The pure phosphine does not take fire spontaneously.
     When prepared as directed above, impurities are present which
     impart this property.

~Properties.~ Phosphine is a gas of unpleasant odor and is exceedingly
poisonous. Like ammonia it forms salts with the halogen acids. Thus we
have phosphonium chloride (PH_{4}Cl) analogous to ammonium chloride
(NH_{4}Cl). The phosphonium salts are of but little importance.

~Oxides of phosphorus.~ Phosphorus forms two well-known oxides,--the
trioxide (P_{2}O_{3}) and the pentoxide (P_{2}O_{5}), sometimes called
phosphoric anhydride. When phosphorus burns in an insufficient supply of
air the product is partially the trioxide; in oxygen or an excess of air
the pentoxide is formed. The pentoxide is much the better known of the
two. It is a snow-white, voluminous powder whose most marked property is
its great attraction for water. It has no chemical action upon most
gases, so that they can be very thoroughly dried by allowing them to
pass through properly arranged vessels containing phosphorus pentoxide.

~Acids of phosphorus.~ The important acids of phosphorus are the
following:

    H_{3}PO_{3}       phosphorous acid.
    H_{3}PO_{4}       phosphoric acid.
    H_{4}P_{2}O_{7}   pyrophosphoric acid.
    HPO_{3}           metaphosphoric acid.

These may be regarded as combinations of the oxides of phosphorus with
water according to the equations given in the discussion of the
characteristics of the family.

1. _Phosphorous acid_ (H_{3}PO_{3}). Neither the acid nor its salts are
at all frequently met with in chemical operations. It can be easily
obtained, however, in the form of transparent crystals when phosphorus
trichloride is treated with water and the resulting solution is
evaporated:

    PCl_{3} + 3H_{2}O = H_{3}PO_{3} + 3HCl.

Its most interesting property is its tendency to take up oxygen and pass
over into phosphoric acid.

2. _Orthophosphoric acid (phosphoric acid)_ (H_{3}PO_{4}). This acid can
be obtained by dissolving phosphorus pentoxide in boiling water, as
represented in the equation

    P_{2}O_{5} + 3H_{2}O = 2H_{3}PO_{4}.

It is usually made by treating calcium phosphate with concentrated
sulphuric acid. The calcium sulphate produced in the reaction is nearly
insoluble, and can be filtered off, leaving the phosphoric acid in
solution. Very pure acid is made by oxidizing phosphorus with nitric
acid. It forms large colorless crystals which are exceedingly soluble in
water. Being a tribasic acid, it forms acid as well as normal salts.
Thus the following compounds of sodium are known:

    NaH_{2}PO_{4}   monosodium hydrogen phosphate.
    Na_{2}HPO_{4}   disodium hydrogen phosphate.
    Na_{3}PO_{4}    normal sodium phosphate.

These salts are sometimes called respectively primary, secondary, and
tertiary phosphates. They may be prepared by bringing together
phosphoric acid and appropriate quantities of sodium hydroxide.
Phosphoric acid also forms mixed salts, that is, salts containing two
different metals. The most familiar compound of this kind is microcosmic
salt, which has the formula Na(NH_{4})HPO_{4}.

_Orthophosphates._ The orthophosphates form an important class of salts.
The normal salts are nearly all insoluble and many of them occur in
nature. The secondary phosphates are as a rule insoluble, while most of
the primary salts are soluble.

3. _Pyrophosphoric acid_ (H_{4}P_{2}O_{7}). On heating orthophosphoric
acid to about 225 deg. pyrophosphoric acid is formed in accordance with the
following equation:

    2H_{3}PO_{4} = H_{4}P_{2}O_{7} + H_{2}O.

It is a white crystalline solid. Its salts can be prepared by heating a
secondary phosphate:

    2Na_{2}HPO_{4} = Na_{4}P_{2}O_{7} + H_{2}O.

4. _Metaphosphoric acid (glacial phosphoric acid)_ (HPO_{3}). This acid
is formed when orthophosphoric acid is heated above 400 deg.:

    H_{3}PO_{4} = HPO_{3} + H_{2}O.

It is also formed when phosphorus pentoxide is treated with cold water:

    P_{2}O_{5} + H_{2}O = 2HPO_{3}.

It is a white crystalline solid, and is so stable towards heat that it
can be fused and even volatilized without decomposition. On cooling from
the fused state it forms a glassy solid, and on this account is often
called glacial phosphoric acid. It possesses the property of dissolving
small quantities of metallic oxides, with the formation of compounds
which, in the case of certain metals, have characteristic colors. It is
therefore used in the detection of these metals.

While the secondary phosphates, on heating, give salts of pyrophosphoric
acid, the primary phosphates yield salts of metaphosphoric acid. The
equations representing these reactions are as follows:

    2Na_{2}HPO_{4} = Na_{4}P_{3}O_{7} + H_{2}O,

      NaH_{2}PO_{4} = NaPO_{3} + H_{2}O.

