us."

"And this is your only weapon?" Ashe asked once more.

"The only one strong enough to stand against that which is now
unleashed."

In the pavement the fiery lines were bright and glowing. Even when Ross
shut his eyes, parts of those designs were still visible against his
eyelids.

"We don't know how." He made a last feeble protest on the side of
prudence. "We couldn't move as you did."

"Apart, no--together, yes."

The silvery figures were once more swaying, the mist which was their
hair flowing about them. Karara's hands went out, and the slender
fingers of one of the Foanna lifted, closed about firm, brown Terran
flesh. Ashe was doing the same!

Ross thought he cried out, but he could not be sure, as he watched
Karara's head begin to sway in concert with her Foanna partner, her
black hair springing out from her shoulders to rival the rippling
strands of the alien's. Ashe was consciously matching steps with the
companion who also drew him along a flowing line of fire.

In this last instant Ross realized the time for retreat was past--there
was no place left to go. His hands went out, though he had to force that
invitation because in him there was a shrinking horror of this
surrender. But he could not let the others go without him.

The Foanna's touch was cool, and yet it seemed that flesh met his flesh,
fingers as normal as his met fingers in that grasp. And when that hold
was complete he gave a small gasp. For his horror was wiped away; he
knew in its place a burst of energy which could be disciplined to use as
a weapon or a tool in concentrated and complicated action. His feet so
... and then so.... Did those directions flow without words from the
Foanna's fingers to his and then along his nerves to his brain? He only
knew which was the proper next step, and the next, and the next, as they
wove their way along the pattern lines, with their going adding a
necessary thread to a design.

Forward four steps, backward one--in and out. Did Ross actually hear
that sweet thrumming, akin to the lilting speech of the Foanna, or was
it a throbbing in his blood? In and out.... What had become of the
others he did not know; he was aware only of his own path, of the hand
in his, of the silvery shape at his side to whom he was now tied as if
one of the Rover capture nets enclosed them both.

The fiery lines under his feet were smoking, tendrils rising and
twisting as the hair of the Foanna rippled and twisted. And the smoke
clung, wreathed his body. They moved in a cocoon of smoke, thicker and
thicker, until Ross could not even see the Foanna who accompanied him,
was only assured of her presence by the hand which grasped his.

And a small part of him clung desperately to the awareness of that clasp
as an anchorage against what might come, a tie between the world of
reality and the place into which he was passing.

How did one find words to describe this? Ross wondered with that part of
him which remained stubbornly Ross Murdock, Terran Time Agent. He
thought that he did not see with his eyes, hear with his ears but used
other senses his own kind did not recognize nor acknowledge.

Space ... not a room ... a cave-anything made by normal nature. Space
which held something.

Pure energy? His Terran mind strove to give name to that which was
nameless. Perhaps it was that spark of memory and consciousness which
gave him that instant of "Seeing." Was it a throne? And on it a
shimmering figure? He was regarded intently, measured, and--set aside.

There were questions or a question he could not hear, and perhaps an
answer he would never be able to understand. Or had any of this happened
at all?

Ross crouched on a cold floor, his head hanging, drained of energy, of
all that feeling of power and well-being he had had when they had begun
their dance across the symbols. About him those designs still glowed
dully. When he looked at them too intently his head ached. He could
almost understand, but the struggle was so exhausting he winced at the
effort.

"Gordon--?"

There was no clasp on his hand; he was alone, alone between two glowing
arabesques. That loneliness struck at him with the sharpness of a blow.
His head came up; frantically he stared about him in search of his
companions. "Gordon!" His plea and demand in one was answered:

"Ross?"

On his hands and knees, Ross used the rags of his strength to crawl in
that direction, stopping now and then to shade his eyes with his hands,
to peer through the cracks between his fingers for some sight of Ashe.

There he was, sitting quietly, his head up as if he were listening, or
striving to listen. His cheeks were sunken; he had the drained, worn
look of a man strained to the limit of physical energy. Yet there was a
quiet peace in his face. Ross crawled on, put out a hand to Ashe's arm
as if only by touching the other could he be sure he was not an
illusion. And Ashe's fingers came up to cover the younger man's in a
grasp as tight as the Foanna's hold had been.

"We did it; together we did it," Ashe said. "But where--why--?"

Those questions were not aimed at him, Ross knew. And at that moment the
younger man did not care where they had been, what they had done. It was
enough that his terrible loneliness was gone, that Ashe was here.

Still keeping his hold on Ross, Ashe turned his head and called into the
wilderness of the symbol-glowing space about them, "Karara?"

She came to them, not crawling, not wrung almost dry of spirit and
strength, but on her two feet. About her shoulders her dark hair waved
and spun--or was it dark now? Along those strands there seemed to be
threaded motes of light, giving a silvery sheen which was a faint echo
of the Foanna's tresses. And was it only his bemused and bewildered
sight, Ross mused, or was her skin fairer?

Karara smiled down at them and held out her hands, offering one to each.
When they took them Ross knew again that surge of energy he had felt
when he had followed the Foanna into the maze dance.

"Come! There is much to do."

He could not be mistaken; her voice held the singing lilt of the Foanna.
Somehow she had crossed some barrier to become a paler, perhaps a
lesser, but still a copy of the three aliens. Was this what they had
meant when they warned of a change which might come to those who
followed them into the ritual of this place?

Ross looked from the girl to Ashe with searching intensity. No, he could
see no outward change in Gordon. And he felt none within himself.

"Come!" Some of Karara's old impetuousness returned as she tugged at
them, urging them to their feet and drawing them with her. She appeared
to know where they must go, and both men followed her guidance.

Once more they came out of the weird and alien into the normal, for here
were the rock walls of a passage running up at an angle which became so
steep they were forced to pull along by handholds hollowed in the walls.

"Where are we going?" Ashe asked.

"To cleanse." Karara's answer was ambiguous, and she sped along hardly
touching the handholds. "But hurry!"

They finished their climb and were in another corridor where patches of
sunlight came through a pierced wall to dazzle their eyes. This was
similar to the way which had run beside the courtyard in Zahur's castle.

Ross looked out of the first opening down into a courtyard. But where
Zahur's had held the busy life of a castle, this was silent. Silent, but
not deserted. There were men below, armed, helmed. He recognized the
uniform of the Wrecker warriors, saw one or two who wore the gray of the
Foanna servants. They stood in lines, unmoving, without speech among
themselves, men who might have been frozen into immobility and arranged
so for some game in which they were the voiceless, will-less pieces.

And their immobility was a thing to arouse fear. Were they dead and
still standing?

"Come!" Karara's voice had sunk to a whisper and her hand pulled at the
men.

"What--?" began Ross.

Ashe shook his head. Those rows below drawn up as if in order to march,
unliving rows. They could not be alive as the Terrans knew life!

Ross left his vantage point, ready to follow Karara. But he could not
blot from his mind the picture of those lines, nor forget the terrible
blankness which made their faces more unhuman, more frightenly alien
than those of the Foanna.




17

Shades Against Shadow


The corridor ended in a narrow slit of room, and the wall before them
was not the worked stone of the citadel but a single slab of what
appeared to be glass curdled into creamy ridges and depressions.

Here were the Foanna, their robes once more cloaking them. Each held,
point out, one of the rods. They moved slowly but with the precise
gestures of those about a demanding and very important task as they
traced each depression in the wall before them with the wand points.
Down, up, around ... as their feet had moved in the dance pattern, so
now their wands moved to cover each line.

"Now!"

The wands dropped points to the floor. The Foanna moved equidistant from
one another. Then, as one, the rods were lifted vertically, brought down
together with a single loud tap.

On the wall the blue lines they had traced with such care darkened,
melted. The glassy slab shivered, shattered, fell outward in a lace of
fragments. So the narrow room became a balcony above a large chamber.

Below a platform ran the full length of that hall, and on it were
mounted a line of oval disks. These had been turned to different angles
and each reflected light, a ray beam directed at them from a machine
whose metallic casing, projecting antennae, was oddly out of place here.

Once more the three staffs of the Foanna raised as one in the air. This
time, from the knobs held out over the hall blazed, not the usual whirl
of small sparks, but strong beams of light--blue light darkening as it
pierced downward until it became thrusting lines of almost tangible
substance.

When those blue beams struck the nearest ovals they webbed with lines
which cracked wide open. Shattered bits tinkled down to the platform.
There was a stir at the end of the hall where the machine stood. Figures
ran into plain sight. Baldies! Ross cried out a warning as he saw those
star men raise weapon tubes aimed at the perch on which the Foanna
stood.

Fire crackling with the speed and sound of lightning lashed up at the
balcony. The lances of light met the spears of dark, and there was a
flash which blinded Ross, a sound which split open the whole world.

The Terran's eyes opened, not upon darkness but on dazzling light,
flashes of it which tore over him in great sweeping arcs. Dazed, sick,
he tried to press his prone body into the unyielding surface on which he
lay. But there was no way of burrowing out of this wild storm of light
and clashing sound. Now under him the very fabric of the floor rocked
and quivered as if it were being shaken apart into crumbling rubble.

All the will and ability to move was gone. Ross could only lie there and
endure. What had happened, he did not know save that what raged about
him now was a warring of inimical forces, perhaps both feeding on each
other even as they strove for mastery.

The play of rays resembled sword blades crossing, fencing. Ross threw
his arm over his eyes to shut out the intolerable brilliance of that
thrust and counter. His body tingled and winced as the whirlwind of
energy clashed and reclashed. He was beaten, stupid, as a man pinned
down too long under a heavy shelling.

How did it end? In one terrific thunderclap of sound and blasting power?
And when did it end--hours ... days later? Time was a thing set apart
from this. Ross lay in the quiet which his body welcomed thirstily. Then
he was conscious of the touch of wind on his face, wind carrying the
hint of sea salt.

He opened his eyes and saw above him a patch of clouded sky. Shakily he
levered himself up on his elbows. There were no complete walls any more,
just jagged points of masonry, broken teeth set in a skull's jawbone.
Open sky, dark clouds spattering rain.

"Gordon? Karara?" Ross's voice was a thin whisper. He licked his lips
and tried again:

"Gordon!"

Had there been an answering whimper? Ross crawled into a hollow between
two fallen blocks. A pool of water? No, it was the cloak of one of the
Foanna spread out across the flooring in this fragment of room. Then
Ross saw that Ashe was there, the cloaked figure braced against the
Terran's shoulder as he half supported, half embraced the Foanna.

"Ynvalda!" Ashe called that with an urgency which was demanding. Now the
Foanna moved, raising an arm in the cloak's flowing sleeve.

Ross sat back on his heels.

"Ross--Ashe?" He turned his head. Karara stood here, then came forward,
planting her feet with care, her hands outstretched, her eyes wide and
unseeing. Ross pulled himself up and went to her, finding that the once
solid floor seemed to dip and sway under him, until he, too, must
balance and creep. His hands closed on her shoulders and he pulled her
to him in mutual support.

"Gordon?"

"Over there. You all right?"

"I think so." Her voice was weak. "The Foanna ... Ynlan ... Ynvalda--"
Steadying herself against him, she tried to look around.

The place which had once been a narrow room, then a balcony, was now a
perch above stomach-turning space. The hall of the oval mirrors was
gone, having disappeared into a hollow the depths of which were veiled
by a vapor which boiled and bubbled as if, far below, some huge caldron
hung above a blazing fire.

Karara cried out and Ross drew her back from that drop. He was
clearer-headed now and looked about for some way down from this doubtful
perch. Of the other two Foanna there was no sign. Had they been sucked
up and out in the inferno they had created with their unleashing of
energy against the Baldies' installation?

"Ross--look!" Karara's cry, her upflung arm directed his attention
aloft.

Under the sullen gathering of the storm a sphere arose as a bubble might
seek the surface of a pool before breaking. A ship--a Baldy ship taking
off from the ruined citadel! So some of the enemy had survived that
trial of strength!

The globe was small, a scout used for within-atmosphere exploration,
Ross judged. It arose first, and then moved inland, fleeing the
gathering storm, to be out of sight in moments. Inland, where the
mountain base of the invaders was reputed to be. Retreating? Or bound to
gather reinforcements?

"Baldies?" Karara asked.

"Yes."

She wiped her hand across her face, smearing dust and grime on her
cheeks. As raindrops pattered about them, Ross drew the girl with him
into the alcove where Ashe sheltered with the Foanna. The cowled alien
was sitting up, her hand still gripping one of the wands, now a
half-melted ruin.

Ashe glanced at them as if for the first time he remembered they might
be there.

"Baldy ship just took off inland," Ross told him. "We didn't see either
of the other Foanna."

"They have gone to do what is to be done," Ashe's companion replied. "So
some of the enemy fled. Well, perhaps they have learned one lesson, not
to meddle with others' devices. Ahh, so much gone which will never come
again! Never again--"

She held up the half-melted wand, turning it back and forth before her,
before she cast it away. It flew out, up, then dropped into the caldron
of the hall which had been. A gust of rain, cold, chilling the lightly
clad Terrans, swept across them.

The Foanna was helped to her feet by Ashe. For a moment she turned
slowly, giving a lingering look to the ruins. Then she spoke: "Broken
stone holds no value. Take hands, my brothers, my sister, it is time we
go hence."

Karara's hand in Ross's right, Ashe's in his left, and both linked to
Ynvalda in turn. Then--they were indeed elsewhere, in a courtyard where
bodies lay flaccid under the drenching downpour of the rain. And moving
among those bodies were the two other Foanna, bending to examine one man
after another. Perhaps over one in three they so inspected they held
consultation before a wand was used in tracing certain portions of the
body between them. When they were finished, that man stirred, moaned,
showed signs of life once more.

"Rosss--!" From behind a tumbled wall crept a Hawaikan who did not wear
the guard armor of the others. Gill-pack, flippers, diver's belt, had
been stripped from him. There was a bleeding gash down the side of his
face, and he held his left arm against his body, supported by his right
hand.

