
So, for instance, having with a Lens 4-1/4 Inches broad, and two Prisms
on either hand 6-1/4 Feet distant from the Lens, made such a beam of
compounded Light; to examine the reason of the Colours made by Prisms, I
refracted this compounded beam of Light XY with another Prism HIK _kh_,
and thereby cast the usual Prismatick Colours PQRST upon the Paper LV
placed behind. And then by stopping any of the Colours _p_, _q_, _r_,
_s_, _t_, at the Lens, I found that the same Colour would vanish at the
Paper. So if the Purple _p_ was stopp'd at the Lens, the Purple P upon
the Paper would vanish, and the rest of the Colours would remain
unalter'd, unless perhaps the blue, so far as some purple latent in it
at the Lens might be separated from it by the following Refractions. And
so by intercepting the green upon the Lens, the green R upon the Paper
would vanish, and so of the rest; which plainly shews, that as the white
beam of Light XY was compounded of several Lights variously colour'd at
the Lens, so the Colours which afterwards emerge out of it by new
Refractions are no other than those of which its Whiteness was
compounded. The Refraction of the Prism HIK _kh_ generates the Colours
PQRST upon the Paper, not by changing the colorific Qualities of the
Rays, but by separating the Rays which had the very same colorific
Qualities before they enter'd the Composition of the refracted beam of
white Light XY. For otherwise the Rays which were of one Colour at the
Lens might be of another upon the Paper, contrary to what we find.

So again, to examine the reason of the Colours of natural Bodies, I
placed such Bodies in the Beam of Light XY, and found that they all
appeared there of those their own Colours which they have in Day-light,
and that those Colours depend upon the Rays which had the same Colours
at the Lens before they enter'd the Composition of that beam. Thus, for
instance, Cinnaber illuminated by this beam appears of the same red
Colour as in Day-light; and if at the Lens you intercept the
green-making and blue-making Rays, its redness will become more full and
lively: But if you there intercept the red-making Rays, it will not any
longer appear red, but become yellow or green, or of some other Colour,
according to the sorts of Rays which you do not intercept. So Gold in
this Light XY appears of the same yellow Colour as in Day-light, but by
intercepting at the Lens a due Quantity of the yellow-making Rays it
will appear white like Silver (as I have tried) which shews that its
yellowness arises from the Excess of the intercepted Rays tinging that
Whiteness with their Colour when they are let pass. So the Infusion of
_Lignum Nephriticum_ (as I have also tried) when held in this beam of
Light XY, looks blue by the reflected Part of the Light, and red by the
transmitted Part of it, as when 'tis view'd in Day-light; but if you
intercept the blue at the Lens the Infusion will lose its reflected blue
Colour, whilst its transmitted red remains perfect, and by the loss of
some blue-making Rays, wherewith it was allay'd, becomes more intense
and full. And, on the contrary, if the red and orange-making Rays be
intercepted at the Lens, the Infusion will lose its transmitted red,
whilst its blue will remain and become more full and perfect. Which
shews, that the Infusion does not tinge the Rays with blue and red, but
only transmits those most copiously which were red-making before, and
reflects those most copiously which were blue-making before. And after
the same manner may the Reasons of other Phaenomena be examined, by
trying them in this artificial beam of Light XY.

FOOTNOTES:

[I] See p. 59.

[J] _See our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_ II. _Sect._ II. _p._ 239.

[K] _As is done in our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_ I. _Sect._ III.
_and_ IV. _and Part_ II. _Sect._ II.

[L] _See our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_ II. _Sect._ II. _pag._ 269,
&c.

[M] _This is demonstrated in our_ Author's Lect. Optic. _Part_ I.
_Sect._ IV. _Prop._ 35 _and_ 36.




THE

SECOND BOOK

OF

OPTICKS




_PART I._

_Observations concerning the Reflexions, Refractions, and Colours of
thin transparent Bodies._


It has been observed by others, that transparent Substances, as Glass,
Water, Air, &c. when made very thin by being blown into Bubbles, or
otherwise formed into Plates, do exhibit various Colours according to
their various thinness, altho' at a greater thickness they appear very
clear and colourless. In the former Book I forbore to treat of these
Colours, because they seemed of a more difficult Consideration, and were
not necessary for establishing the Properties of Light there discoursed
of. But because they may conduce to farther Discoveries for compleating
the Theory of Light, especially as to the constitution of the parts of
natural Bodies, on which their Colours or Transparency depend; I have
here set down an account of them. To render this Discourse short and
distinct, I have first described the principal of my Observations, and
then consider'd and made use of them. The Observations are these.

_Obs._ 1. Compressing two Prisms hard together that their sides (which
by chance were a very little convex) might somewhere touch one another:
I found the place in which they touched to become absolutely
transparent, as if they had there been one continued piece of Glass. For
when the Light fell so obliquely on the Air, which in other places was
between them, as to be all reflected; it seemed in that place of contact
to be wholly transmitted, insomuch that when look'd upon, it appeared
like a black or dark spot, by reason that little or no sensible Light
was reflected from thence, as from other places; and when looked through
it seemed (as it were) a hole in that Air which was formed into a thin
Plate, by being compress'd between the Glasses. And through this hole
Objects that were beyond might be seen distinctly, which could not at
all be seen through other parts of the Glasses where the Air was
interjacent. Although the Glasses were a little convex, yet this
transparent spot was of a considerable breadth, which breadth seemed
principally to proceed from the yielding inwards of the parts of the
Glasses, by reason of their mutual pressure. For by pressing them very
hard together it would become much broader than otherwise.

_Obs._ 2. When the Plate of Air, by turning the Prisms about their
common Axis, became so little inclined to the incident Rays, that some
of them began to be transmitted, there arose in it many slender Arcs of
Colours which at first were shaped almost like the Conchoid, as you see
them delineated in the first Figure. And by continuing the Motion of the
Prisms, these Arcs increased and bended more and more about the said
transparent spot, till they were compleated into Circles or Rings
incompassing it, and afterwards continually grew more and more
contracted.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

These Arcs at their first appearance were of a violet and blue Colour,
and between them were white Arcs of Circles, which presently by
continuing the Motion of the Prisms became a little tinged in their
inward Limbs with red and yellow, and to their outward Limbs the blue
was adjacent. So that the order of these Colours from the central dark
spot, was at that time white, blue, violet; black, red, orange, yellow,
white, blue, violet, &c. But the yellow and red were much fainter than
the blue and violet.

The Motion of the Prisms about their Axis being continued, these Colours
contracted more and more, shrinking towards the whiteness on either
side of it, until they totally vanished into it. And then the Circles in
those parts appear'd black and white, without any other Colours
intermix'd. But by farther moving the Prisms about, the Colours again
emerged out of the whiteness, the violet and blue at its inward Limb,
and at its outward Limb the red and yellow. So that now their order from
the central Spot was white, yellow, red; black; violet, blue, white,
yellow, red, &c. contrary to what it was before.

_Obs._ 3. When the Rings or some parts of them appeared only black and
white, they were very distinct and well defined, and the blackness
seemed as intense as that of the central Spot. Also in the Borders of
the Rings, where the Colours began to emerge out of the whiteness, they
were pretty distinct, which made them visible to a very great multitude.
I have sometimes number'd above thirty Successions (reckoning every
black and white Ring for one Succession) and seen more of them, which by
reason of their smalness I could not number. But in other Positions of
the Prisms, at which the Rings appeared of many Colours, I could not
distinguish above eight or nine of them, and the Exterior of those were
very confused and dilute.

In these two Observations to see the Rings distinct, and without any
other Colour than Black and white, I found it necessary to hold my Eye
at a good distance from them. For by approaching nearer, although in the
same inclination of my Eye to the Plane of the Rings, there emerged a
bluish Colour out of the white, which by dilating it self more and more
into the black, render'd the Circles less distinct, and left the white a
little tinged with red and yellow. I found also by looking through a
slit or oblong hole, which was narrower than the pupil of my Eye, and
held close to it parallel to the Prisms, I could see the Circles much
distincter and visible to a far greater number than otherwise.

_Obs._ 4. To observe more nicely the order of the Colours which arose
out of the white Circles as the Rays became less and less inclined to
the Plate of Air; I took two Object-glasses, the one a Plano-convex for
a fourteen Foot Telescope, and the other a large double Convex for one
of about fifty Foot; and upon this, laying the other with its plane side
downwards, I pressed them slowly together, to make the Colours
successively emerge in the middle of the Circles, and then slowly lifted
the upper Glass from the lower to make them successively vanish again in
the same place. The Colour, which by pressing the Glasses together,
emerged last in the middle of the other Colours, would upon its first
appearance look like a Circle of a Colour almost uniform from the
circumference to the center and by compressing the Glasses still more,
grow continually broader until a new Colour emerged in its center, and
thereby it became a Ring encompassing that new Colour. And by
compressing the Glasses still more, the diameter of this Ring would
increase, and the breadth of its Orbit or Perimeter decrease until
another new Colour emerged in the center of the last: And so on until a
third, a fourth, a fifth, and other following new Colours successively
emerged there, and became Rings encompassing the innermost Colour, the
last of which was the black Spot. And, on the contrary, by lifting up
the upper Glass from the lower, the diameter of the Rings would
decrease, and the breadth of their Orbit increase, until their Colours
reached successively to the center; and then they being of a
considerable breadth, I could more easily discern and distinguish their
Species than before. And by this means I observ'd their Succession and
Quantity to be as followeth.

Next to the pellucid central Spot made by the contact of the Glasses
succeeded blue, white, yellow, and red. The blue was so little in
quantity, that I could not discern it in the Circles made by the Prisms,
nor could I well distinguish any violet in it, but the yellow and red
were pretty copious, and seemed about as much in extent as the white,
and four or five times more than the blue. The next Circuit in order of
Colours immediately encompassing these were violet, blue, green, yellow,
and red: and these were all of them copious and vivid, excepting the
green, which was very little in quantity, and seemed much more faint and
dilute than the other Colours. Of the other four, the violet was the
least in extent, and the blue less than the yellow or red. The third
Circuit or Order was purple, blue, green, yellow, and red; in which the
purple seemed more reddish than the violet in the former Circuit, and
the green was much more conspicuous, being as brisk and copious as any
of the other Colours, except the yellow, but the red began to be a
little faded, inclining very much to purple. After this succeeded the
fourth Circuit of green and red. The green was very copious and lively,
inclining on the one side to blue, and on the other side to yellow. But
in this fourth Circuit there was neither violet, blue, nor yellow, and
the red was very imperfect and dirty. Also the succeeding Colours became
more and more imperfect and dilute, till after three or four revolutions
they ended in perfect whiteness. Their form, when the Glasses were most
compress'd so as to make the black Spot appear in the center, is
delineated in the second Figure; where _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_, _e_: _f_,
_g_, _h_, _i_, _k_: _l_, _m_, _n_, _o_, _p_: _q_, _r_: _s_, _t_: _v_,
_x_: _y_, _z_, denote the Colours reckon'd in order from the center,
black, blue, white, yellow, red: violet, blue, green, yellow, red:
purple, blue, green, yellow, red: green, red: greenish blue, red:
greenish blue, pale red: greenish blue, reddish white.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

_Obs._ 5. To determine the interval of the Glasses, or thickness of the
interjacent Air, by which each Colour was produced, I measured the
Diameters of the first six Rings at the most lucid part of their Orbits,
and squaring them, I found their Squares to be in the arithmetical
Progression of the odd Numbers, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11. And since one of
these Glasses was plane, and the other spherical, their Intervals at
those Rings must be in the same Progression. I measured also the
Diameters of the dark or faint Rings between the more lucid Colours, and
found their Squares to be in the arithmetical Progression of the even
Numbers, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12. And it being very nice and difficult to
take these measures exactly; I repeated them divers times at divers
parts of the Glasses, that by their Agreement I might be confirmed in
them. And the same method I used in determining some others of the
following Observations.

_Obs._ 6. The Diameter of the sixth Ring at the most lucid part of its
Orbit was 58/100 parts of an Inch, and the Diameter of the Sphere on
which the double convex Object-glass was ground was about 102 Feet, and
hence I gathered the thickness of the Air or Aereal Interval of the
Glasses at that Ring. But some time after, suspecting that in making
this Observation I had not determined the Diameter of the Sphere with
sufficient accurateness, and being uncertain whether the Plano-convex
Glass was truly plane, and not something concave or convex on that side
which I accounted plane; and whether I had not pressed the Glasses
together, as I often did, to make them touch; (For by pressing such
Glasses together their parts easily yield inwards, and the Rings thereby
become sensibly broader than they would be, did the Glasses keep their
Figures.) I repeated the Experiment, and found the Diameter of the sixth
lucid Ring about 55/100 parts of an Inch. I repeated the Experiment also
with such an Object-glass of another Telescope as I had at hand. This
was a double Convex ground on both sides to one and the same Sphere, and
its Focus was distant from it 83-2/5 Inches. And thence, if the Sines of
Incidence and Refraction of the bright yellow Light be assumed in
proportion as 11 to 17, the Diameter of the Sphere to which the Glass
was figured will by computation be found 182 Inches. This Glass I laid
upon a flat one, so that the black Spot appeared in the middle of the
Rings of Colours without any other Pressure than that of the weight of
the Glass. And now measuring the Diameter of the fifth dark Circle as
accurately as I could, I found it the fifth part of an Inch precisely.
This Measure was taken with the points of a pair of Compasses on the
upper Surface on the upper Glass, and my Eye was about eight or nine
Inches distance from the Glass, almost perpendicularly over it, and the
Glass was 1/6 of an Inch thick, and thence it is easy to collect that
the true Diameter of the Ring between the Glasses was greater than its
measur'd Diameter above the Glasses in the Proportion of 80 to 79, or
thereabouts, and by consequence equal to 16/79 parts of an Inch, and its
true Semi-diameter equal to 8/79 parts. Now as the Diameter of the
Sphere (182 Inches) is to the Semi-diameter of this fifth dark Ring
(8/79 parts of an Inch) so is this Semi-diameter to the thickness of the
Air at this fifth dark Ring; which is therefore 32/567931 or
100/1774784. Parts of an Inch; and the fifth Part thereof, _viz._ the
1/88739 Part of an Inch, is the Thickness of the Air at the first of
these dark Rings.

The same Experiment I repeated with another double convex Object-glass
ground on both sides to one and the same Sphere. Its Focus was distant
from it 168-1/2 Inches, and therefore the Diameter of that Sphere was
184 Inches. This Glass being laid upon the same plain Glass, the
Diameter of the fifth of the dark Rings, when the black Spot in their
Center appear'd plainly without pressing the Glasses, was by the measure
of the Compasses upon the upper Glass 121/600 Parts of an Inch, and by
consequence between the Glasses it was 1222/6000: For the upper Glass
was 1/8 of an Inch thick, and my Eye was distant from it 8 Inches. And a
third proportional to half this from the Diameter of the Sphere is
5/88850 Parts of an Inch. This is therefore the Thickness of the Air at
this Ring, and a fifth Part thereof, _viz._ the 1/88850th Part of an
Inch is the Thickness thereof at the first of the Rings, as above.

I tried the same Thing, by laying these Object-glasses upon flat Pieces
of a broken Looking-glass, and found the same Measures of the Rings:
Which makes me rely upon them till they can be determin'd more
accurately by Glasses ground to larger Spheres, though in such Glasses
greater care must be taken of a true Plane.

These Dimensions were taken, when my Eye was placed almost
perpendicularly over the Glasses, being about an Inch, or an Inch and a
quarter, distant from the incident Rays, and eight Inches distant from
the Glass; so that the Rays were inclined to the Glass in an Angle of
about four Degrees. Whence by the following Observation you will
understand, that had the Rays been perpendicular to the Glasses, the
Thickness of the Air at these Rings would have been less in the
Proportion of the Radius to the Secant of four Degrees, that is, of
10000 to 10024. Let the Thicknesses found be therefore diminish'd in
this Proportion, and they will become 1/88952 and 1/89063, or (to use
the nearest round Number) the 1/89000th Part of an Inch. This is the
Thickness of the Air at the darkest Part of the first dark Ring made by
