cloud in the water disclosed that he had struck his head against the
first of the terraces that rose in the fountain's mist-shrouded
center.

Up one of the corridors a door opened, and an angry voice shouted:

"Gurka! Gurka! I'll have you in bracelets! Captain of the guard!"

"Sir!" From another of the corridors came a sound of running feet. A
command rang out:

"On the double!"

An officer, followed by four soldiers, dashed around the corner and
flashed by the fountain. Peering over the curb, Mich'l saw them, some
hundred yards away, come to a halt before an opened door. With a
thrill of exultation Mich'l recognized the tall figure of Lane Mollon,
looking like a slightly damaged satyr of the better class, for his
head was bandaged, and he was in bad humor.

"Captain!" he stormed. "I want you to put that damned louse in
solitary confinement for a year. Hear?"

"Yes, sir." Like a megaphone the long corridor carried the low,
respectful words to Mich'l's ears.

Lane continued to storm:

"And if you put another damned merclite-crazy blunker[1] on guard in
this place I'll have your commission. Hear?"

"Yes, sir."

[Footnote 1: Blunker--a blunderer, an oaf. Mechanical recording had
preserved the language in much of its original form, but new words did
creep in.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A quick decision was necessary, and Mich'l acted without hesitation.
The guard had rolled over on his back, so that his face was out of the
water, and he was breathing with quick, painful gasps. Mich'l dragged
him up under the concealing shelter of the fountain spray, and there
changed clothes with him. In the meantime the flowing water washed
away the red stain of blood. When the captain returned with his guard,
Mich'l was lying realistically in the pool, apparently deep in drugged
sleep, the little kepi tilted rakishly over his face.

He was roughly seized and dragged out of the water to the
accompaniment of much cursing. A fist crashed into his face.

Suddenly the soldiers felt the supine figure under their hands explode
into energy. Elbows and fists seemed to fly from all directions at
once. A needle-ray appeared, and before they could draw their own
weapons they were howling with pain as searing welts drew over their
bodies. With one accord they plunged into the pool. Only the officer
remained, and he fell to the mosaic floor, his weapon half raised, the
small black hole in his chest giving off a burnt odor.

Mich'l appropriated the officer's brassard of rank, and, menacing the
cowed guards, forced them to herd into a nearby room, carrying the
body of the officer with them. Mich'l locked the door and looked
around. He saw no one observing him, and could count on carrying a
pretty good bluff in his uniform, which was rapidly shedding its
water. With a firm step Mich'l walked to Lane Mollon's door, threw it
open, and entered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lane sat up on his couch, his feet striking the floor with an angry
thump. But when he recognized Mich'l he paled slightly.

"Where is she?" Mich'l demanded roughly, "before I burn you down!"

"You said once," Lane began sneeringly, "that you wanted to fight me.
Now, if you'll just put down that--"

"Not now," Mich'l dissented with deadly coldness. "Where is Nida?
Speak fast."

Lane did so.

"She isn't here. The little short[2] crowned me with a chair, and
slipped out. How did I--"

[Footnote 2: Short--trouble-maker, spitfire. A colloquialism probably
growing out of the once frequently used electrical term
"short-circuit."]

"When? Hurry up!"

"Hardly an hour ago. She walked down the corridor, showed a
thick-witted guard my own executive pass, and got away. But I got that
guard--"

"Never mind what you did to the guard--"

Suddenly the image of an officer strange to Mich'l stood in the room
and saluted smartly.

"Has Captain Ilgen Mr. Lane Mollon's leave to stay?" he asked.

Mollon started forward, but before he could disclose his predicament
Mich'l had sidled over to him and thrown one arm affectionately over
his shoulder. In his hand, concealed by the rich folds of Lane's robe,
Mich'l held his needle-ray, and it was pressed firmly against Lane's
ribs.

"Mr. Mollon will be glad to hear you," Mich'l said smoothly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He fancied that the eyes of the officer's image dilated slightly, but
it lost none of its military rigor. But some explanation of his
presence there in his still damp uniform must be given Ilgen, so he
growled, in a voice that he tried to make a bit thick, as if he had
chewed too much merclite:

"At ease, Captain. At ease! Damn it man, you don't have to be so
damned military. You're among friends!" And he towseled Lane's dark
hair affectionately.

Captain Ilgen looked his disgust.

"Sir," he said to Lane, "we recaptured Nida Mane as she tried to board
a public car near the Executive Mansion."

The black lens at the end of Mich'l's needle-ray pressed hard, and
Lane said naturally:

"You have her in custody?"

"Sir, we have." And to Mich'l's dismay, Nida, defiant, her lovely form
half revealed by rents in her garments, seemed to materialize beside
the officer. Her wrathful eyes were fixed on Lane, and then she saw
Mich'l.

The technie put all his will into the pleading stare which he
returned, and she understood. She gave no sign of recognition, but
favored both Lane and Mich'l equally with the chill of her disdain.

"Sir, what are your orders?"

Lane glanced aside at Mich'l, acutely conscious of the lethal pressure
in his ribs.

"'Sall right with me, old fellow," Mich'l squawked good-humoredly.
"This your girl that got away from you? Let's both go over and bring
her back."

Lane nodded assent. The soldier saluted, and his vision and that of
the girl disappeared.

"And we're going to do just that!" Mich'l added in an entirely changed
voice. "Get up, you. Act right, speak right, do right, and you may
live to see another day."

       *       *       *       *       *

So the two left the warren in apparent amity, and walked the beautiful
street, with its richly formed, brightly colored arches, its seemingly
illimitable vistas, its luxuriant, pampered decorative vegetation, its
blazing lights--until at last they came to Administration Circle, and
entered the ponderous gates behind which lay the very heart of the
Government.

They were challenged at once. Although the officer of the guard knew
Lane, usage required the showing of the daily pass. Many high officers
of the Government had in years past fallen from grace overnight.

This formality complied with, Lane and Mich'l, the latter with his
ray-needle ever ready, sat down to wait in the guard room. And Lane,
under Mich'l's quiet prompting, ordered that Nida and her father be
brought to him.

"We shall bring the girl, yes," the astonished officer protested, "but
not Senator Mane. He is a prisoner of state."

"Perhaps you don't know, Captain," Mich'l suggested smoothly, "that it
is not wise to disregard the orders of the Provisional President's
son?"

"It would cost me my commission, perhaps my life!" the officer said.

"Neither would be worth much if you disobey!" Mich'l countered, a wire
edge creeping into his voice.

The officer looked into Lane's stormy face, then with great reluctance
retreated to carry out the order.

In about ten minutes he was back, with four guards and his prisoners.
He explained that Captain Ilgen was detained on official duty.

"You may go," said Lane, prompted by a jab in the ribs.

"A written receipt, please, sir, for the senator."

Glowering, Lane wrote out the desired document. At last they were
alone.

"Our program," Mich'l announced briskly, "is simple. You will conduct
us to one of the Government cars, and will ride with us to such places
as we may direct, and I shall release you when it pleases me. If you
then want to fight, I will accommodate you."

"I would be willing to fight you, as head of the technies," Lane
countered sullenly, "but I wouldn't be bothered with a rebel and a
traitor. You've overstepped yourself this time, my fine bolthead, and
all I ask is a front seat at your execution!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They stepped into the brightly lighted hall, and in that instant
Mich'l felt a searing heat on his shoulder. Without a moment's pause
he hurled Senator Mane and the girl back into the room. At the same
moment he flung an arm around Lane's neck and pulled him back into the
doorway, where he could use him as a shield while he cautiously peered
out into the corridor. His shoulder throbbed painfully, but his
movement had prevented the needle-ray from penetrating deeply in any
one place.

A short distance up the corridor was a wider space, in the center of
which stood a large bronze urn filled with exotic plants. Behind this
urn were several soldiers, and Mich'l recognized the sharp-eyed
Captain Ilgen. So that officer had recognized the true state of
affairs, or had strong suspicions! But in his haste and eagerness he
had overlooked one important fact. In the guardroom, were riot-rays,
heavy replicas of the ordinary hand weapons. They had not been needed
for many years, but the technies had always kept them fully charged
and in order.

"Nida!" Mich'l called, not removing his eye from the doorway.

"Yes?" She was standing beside him, and Mich'l thrilled to the
admiration and positive affection in her intonation.

"Notice those short tubes mounted on light wheels over against the
walls? Those are riot-ray projectors. Wheel me over a couple."

Nida did as directed. Mich'l stuck the stubby muzzle of one of the
nearest weapons into the corridor, pulled the lever and swung the ray
in an arc toward the ambushed soldiers. There was a sharp crackling
noise and the heat chipped myriads of flakes off the stone walls,
leaving a gray path across the rich murals, and the air was filled
with flying particles. The heat was terrific. It beat back into the
doorway.

Captain Ilgen gave a short, sharp order, and he and his men retreated
before the bronze urn began to wilt and drip melted metal. He could
not be accused of cowardice, for his hand weapons were puny compared
to the riot-rays.

"Quick, before he gets in touch with the outer guard!" Mich'l urged
his prisoner forward, Senator Mane following. The grave patriarch of
rhetoric made a striking picture as he dragged the second riot-ray
along. The other one was abandoned, locked with full power on. It was
converting that corridor into an inferno, and there would be no
pursuit through that avenue.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mich'l pushed open the metal door suddenly. Two guards on duty were
just coming in, their hand weapons ready. They never knew what struck
them for there was no time for compunction. But even as their bodies
sank to the paving there was the harsh clangor of alarm bells.
Soldiers dashed from everywhere and came running, their needle-rays
menacing.

"In there!" Mich'l shouted. He pointed to the doors, at the dead
guards. As they hesitated, he added:

"Revolution! They're storming the President's office! Hear the rays?"

Through the doors came a faint humming, an acrid smell of heat, of
stone and metal fumes. A corporal saluted Mich'l, recognized Lane's
haggard features, and Lane again felt that cogent persuader in his
ribs.

"That's right, Corporal!" he said bitterly.

"Is the guard room occupied, sir?"

"Not now, you fool!" Mich'l snapped at him. This resolved the last of
the corporal's misgivings. Giving an order, he led his men in,
gasping.

"Now we'll run!" Mich'l ordered, giving Lane a shove. "Coming, Nida?"
She was dragging her father along joyously. They crossed the broad
pedestrian walk, and in the street found an official car nestling on
one of the tracks.

"Heave in the riot-ray, will you, old fellow?" Mich'l requested
jovially, and Lane did. Then the listless chauffeur turned a
controller, and the big car rose a few inches, lightly as a feather,
and sped away swiftly through the maze of traffic.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometime later they were in a service lift; not one of the great
public lifts that carried their hundreds at a trip, but one of the
small lifts used mostly by the technies, and known to few outside
their ranks. Mich'l, standing blissfully close to Nida and her father,
enjoyed his moment of relaxation. Many things had been attended to.
Lane had been released at last, in one of the catacomb cemeteries. It
would take him at least two hours to find his way out. They were
discussing the riot-ray, which they had with them.

"I hope we won't have to exhaust it in a fight before we get out,"
Senator Mane said anxiously. "It would be a splendid weapon if we
encounter a hostile environment Outside."

"The Gate is guarded," Mich'l said practically, "but we expect to
surprise them. No use worrying."

The lift came to a stop at an air-lock. The great elevator shafts
were closed by airlocks every 2,000 feet. The reason is obvious. If
the air of the great, spheroid subterranean nation were allowed to
freely obey the laws of gravity, it would be oppressively dense in the
lower levels, and excessively rarified in the upper ones. While the
airlocks were operating Mich'l stepped to a telucid and gave the
agreed-on signal.

In another half hour they were at 37X. The great, dusty, and
little-used storeroom was only poorly lighted; it was dank, and had an
uncomfortable chill. Technies and their families were coming in from
all sides, and it was not long before some five hundred persons, men,
women and children, were assembled. Many of them were pale and
frightened looking, for they were staking everything on an ideal, a
theory. There would be no coming back. The statute books of
Subterranea decreed only one penalty--death--for even the merest
tampering with the Frozen Gate. It was not like this that they had
visioned the opening of the Gate. Under properly controlled
conditions, it would have been possible to open the gate for
preliminary explorations. But not now. They were outside the law.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nida, standing beside Mich'l, shivered and pulled her over-robe closer
around her. There was sadness in her voice as she said:

"These children.... They remind me of the thousands of children we
must abandon with our people. If I could, I'd steal a few to take with
us."

Mich'l grinned without mirth.

