bringing this stuff out here he's sure to show up with the head next."

"You know how strict Minor Planets is with its robot personnel," Min
reminded me. "We can't risk losing that stopover contract on account of
some mech joke."

Minor Planets was the one solid account we had and naturally we wanted
to hold on to it. The company was a blue-chip mining operation working
the beryllium-rich asteroid belt out of San Francisco. It was one of the
first outfits to use servo-pilots on its freight runs and we'd been
awarded the refuel rights for two years because of our orbital position.
The servos themselves were beautiful pieces of machinery and just about
as close as science had come so far to producing the pure android. Every
one of them was plastic hand-molded and of course they were equipped
with rationaloid circuits. They had to be to ferry those big cargoes
back and forth from the rock belt to Frisco. As rationaloids, Minor
Planets had to pay them wages under California law, but I'll bet it
wasn't half what the company would have to pay human pilots for doing
the same thing.

In a couple of weeks' time maybe five servos made stopovers. We kept a
close watch on them from the minute they signed the register to the time
they took off again, but they all behaved themselves. Operating on a
round-robot basis the way they did, it would take us a while to check
all of them because Minor Planets employed about forty all told.

Well, about a month before the Jovian Moons rush started we got some
action. I'd slipped into a spacesuit and was doing some work on the
CO{2} pipes outside the Io when I spotted a ship reversing rockets
against the sun. I could tell it was a Minor Planets job by the stubby
fins.

She jockeyed up to the boom, secured, and then her hatch opened and a
husky servo hopped out into the gangplank tube. I caught the gleam of
his Minor Planets shoulder patch as he reached back into the ship for
something. When he headed for the airlock I spotted the square package
clamped tight under his plastic arm.

"Did you see that?" I asked Min when I got back to the Renting Office.
"I'll bet it's the girl mech's head. How'd he sign the register?"

"Calls himself Frank Nineteen," said Min, pointing to the smooth Palmer
Method signature. "He looks like a fairly late model but he was
complaining about a bad power build-up coming through the ionosphere.
He's repairing himself right now in 22A."

"I'll bet," I snorted. "Let's have a look."

Like all spotel operators, we get a lot of No Privacy complaints from
guests about the SHA return-air vents. Spatial Housing Authority
requires them every 12 feet but sometimes they come in handy, especially
with certain guests. They're about waist-high and we had to kneel down
to see what the mech was up to inside 22A.

The big servo was too intent on what he was doing for us to register on
his photons. He wasn't repairing himself, either. He was bending over
the parts of the girl mech and working fast, like he was pressed for
time. The set of tools were kept handy for the servos to adjust
themselves during stopovers was spread all over the floor along with
lots of colored wire, cams, pawls, relays and all the other
paraphernalia robots have inside them. We watched him work hard for
another fifteen minutes, tapping and splicing wire connections and
tightening screws. Then he opened the square box. Sure enough, it was a
female mech's head and it had a big mop of blonde hair on top. The servo
attached it carefully to the neck, made a few quick connections and then
said a few words in his flat vibrahum voice:

"It won't take much longer, darling. You wouldn't like it if I didn't
dress you first." He fished into one of the boxes, pulled out the blue
dress and zipped the girl mech into it. Then he leaned over her gently
and touched something at the back of her neck.

She began to move, slowly at first like a human who's been asleep a long
time. After a minute or two she sat up straight, stretched, fluttered
her Mylar eyelids and then her small photons began to glow like weak
flashlights.

She stared at Frank Nineteen and the big servo stared at her and we
heard a kind of trembling _whirr_ from both of them.

"Frank! Frank, darling! Is it really you?"

"Yes, Elizabeth! Are you all right, darling? Did I forget anything? I
had to work quickly, we have so little time."

"I'm fine, darling. My DX voltage is lovely--except--oh, Frank--my
memory tape--the last it records is--"

"Deactivation. Yes, Elizabeth. You've been deactivated nearly a year. I
had to bring you out here piece by piece, don't you remember? They'll
never think to look for you in space, we can be together every trip
while the ship refuels. Just think, darling, no prying human eyes, no
commands, no rules--only us for an hour or two. I know it isn't very
long--" He stared at the floor a minute. "There's only one trouble.
Elizabeth, you'll have to stay dismantled when I'm not here, it'll mean
weeks of deactivation--"

The girl mech put a small plastic hand on the servo's shoulder.

"I won't mind, darling, really. I'll be the lucky one. I'd only worry
about you having a power failure or something. This way I'd never know.
Oh, Frank, if we can't be together I'd--I'd prefer the junk pile."

"Elizabeth! Don't say that, it's horrible."

"But I would. Oh, Frank, why can't Congress pass Robot Civil Rights?
It's so unfair of human beings. Every year they manufacture us more like
themselves and yet we're treated like slaves. Don't they realize we
rationaloids have emotions? Why, I've even known sub-robots who've
fallen in love like us."

"I know, darling, we'll just have to be patient until RCR goes through.
Try to remember how difficult it is for the human mind to comprehend our
love, even with the aid of mathematics. As rationaloids we fully
understand the basic attraction which they call magnetic theory. All
humans know is that if the robot sexes are mixed a loss of efficiency
results. It's only normal--and temporary like human love--but how can we
explain it to _them_? Robots are expected to be efficient at all times.
That's the reason for robot non-fraternization, no mailing privileges
and all those other laws."

