be, if continuous pressure could be applied to it for perhaps a few
thousand years; at any rate, the formation of a natural jewel is not
greatly different, and after being subjected for a period, extending to
ages, to the washings of moisture, the contact of its containing bed
(its later matrix), the action of the changes in the temperature of the
earth in its vicinity, it emerges by volcanic eruption, earthquake,
landslip and the like, or is discovered as a rare and valuable specimen
of some simple compound of earth-crust and water, as simple as Glauber's
Salt, or as the pure crystallized carbon.

It is also curious to note that in some cases the stones have not been
caused by aqueous deposit in an already existing hollow, but the aqueous
infusion has acted on a portion of the rock on which it rested,
absorbing the rock, and, as it were, replacing it by its own substance.
This is evidenced in cases where gems have been found encrusted on their
matrix, which latter was being slowly transformed to the character of
the jewel encrusted, or "scabbed" on it.

The character of the matrix is also in a great measure the cause of the
variety of the stone, for it is obvious that the same salt-charged
aqueous solution which undergoes change in and on ironstone would result
in an entirely different product from that resting on or embedded in
silica.

Following out the explanation of the aqueous solution, in which the
earth-crust constituents are secreted, we find that the rarer and more
precious metals do not generally enter into the composition of precious
stones--which fact may advisedly be repeated. It is, of course, to be
expected that beryllium will be found in the emerald, since it is under
the species beryl, and zirconium in zircon; but such instances are the
exception, and we may well wonder at the actions of the infinite powers
of nature, when we reflect that the rarest, costliest and most beautiful
of all precious stones are the simplest in their constituents.

Thus we find the diamond standing unique amongst all gems in being
composed of one element only--carbon--being pure crystallised carbon; a
different form from graphite, it is true, but, nevertheless, pure carbon
and nothing else. Therefore, from its chemical, as well as from its
commercial aspect, the diamond stands alone as the most important of
gems.

The next in simplicity, whilst being the most costly of all, is the
ruby, and with this may be classed the blue sapphire, seeing that their
chemical constituents are exactly the same, the difference being one of
colour only. These have two elements, oxygen and aluminium, which
important constituents appear also in other stones, but this example is
sufficient to prove their simplicity of origin.

Another unique stone is the turquoise, in that it is the only rare gem
essentially containing a great proportion of water, which renders it
easily liable to destruction, as we shall see later. It is a combination
of alumina, water, and phosphoric acid, and is also unique in being the
only known valuable stone containing a phosphate.

Turning to the silica series, we again find a number of gems with two
elements only, silica--an important constituent of the earth's
crust--and oxygen--an important constituent of atmospheric air. In this
group may be mentioned the opal, amethyst, agate, rock-crystal, and the
like, as the best known examples, whilst oxygen appears also mostly in
the form of oxides, in chrysoberyl, spinel, and the like. This silica
group is extremely interesting, for in it, with the exception of the
tourmaline and a few others, the composition of the gems is very simple,
and we find in this group such stones as the chrysolite, several
varieties of topaz, the garnet, emerald, etc., etc.

Malachite and similar stones are more ornamental than precious, though
they come in the category of precious stones. These are the carbonate
series, containing much carbonic acid, and, as may be expected, a
considerable proportion of water in their composition, which water can,
of course, be dispelled by the application of heat, but to the
destruction of the stone.

From all this will be seen how strong is the theory of aqueous
percolation, for, given time and pressure, water charged with
earth-crust constituents appears to be the origin of the formation of
all precious stones; and all the precious stones known have, when
analysed, been found to be almost exclusively composed of
upper-earth-crust constituents; the other compounds which certain stones
contain may, in all cases, be traced to their matrix, or to their
geological or mineralogical situation.

In contradistinction to this, the essentially underground liquids, with
time and pressure, form metallic minerals and mineralise the rocks,
instead of forming gems.

Thus we see that in a different class of minerals--compounds of metals
with the sulphates, such as sulphuric acid and compounds; also those
containing the metallic sulphides; in cases where the metalliferous ores
or the metallic elements enter into composition with the
halogens--bromine, chlorine, fluorine, and iodine--in all these,
precious stones are comparatively common, but the stones of these groups
are invariably those used for decorative or ornamental purposes, and
true "gems" are entirely absent.

It would therefore appear that though metallic minerals, as already
mentioned, are formed by the action of essentially _underground_
chemically-charged water--combined with ages of time and long-continued
pressure, rocks and earth being transformed into metalliferous ores by
the same means--precious stones (or that portion of them ranking as
jewels or gems) must on the contrary be wholly, or almost wholly,
composed of _upper_-earth-crust materials, carried deep down by water,
and subjected to the action of the same time and pressure; the simpler
the compound, the more perfect and important the result, as seen in the
diamond, the ruby, and the like.




CHAPTER III.

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES.


A--CRYSTALLINE STRUCTURE.

Before proceeding to the study of precious stones as individual gems,
certain physical properties common to all must be discussed, in order to
bring the gems into separate classes, not only because of some chemical
uniformity, but also because of the unity which exists between their
physical formation and properties.

The first consideration, therefore, may advisedly be that of their
crystals, since their crystalline structure forms a ready means for the
classification of stones, and indeed for that of a multitudinous variety
of substances.

It is one of the many marvellous phenomena of nature that mineral, as
well as many vegetable and animal substances, on entering into a state
of solidity, take upon themselves a definite form called a crystal.
These crystals build themselves round an axis or axes with wonderful
regularity, and it has been found, speaking broadly, that the same
substance gives the same crystal, no matter how its character may be
altered by colour or other means. Even when mixed with other
crystallisable substances, the resulting crystals may partake of the two
varieties and become a sort of composite, yet to the physicist they are
read like an open book, and when separated by analysis they at once
revert to their original form. On this property the analyst depends
largely for his results, for in such matters as food adulteration, etc.,
the microscope unerringly reveals impurities by means of the crystals
alone, apart from other evidences.

It is most curious, too, to note that no matter how large a crystal may
be, when reduced even to small size it will be found that the crystals
are still of the same shape. If this process is taken still further, and
the substance is ground to the finest impalpable powder, as fine as
floating dust, when placed under the microscope each speck, though
perhaps invisible to the naked eye, will be seen a perfect crystal, of
the identical shape as that from which it came, one so large maybe that
its planes and angles might have been measured and defined by rule and
compass. This shows how impossible it is to alter the shape of a
crystal. We may dissolve it, pour the solution into any shaped vessel or
mould we desire, recrystallise it and obtain a solid sphere, triangle,
square, or any other form; it is also possible, in many cases, to
squeeze the crystal by pressure into a tablet, or any form we choose,
but in each case we have merely altered the _arrangement_ of the
crystals, so as to produce a differently shaped _mass_, the crystals
themselves remaining individually as before. Such can be said to be one
of the laws of crystals, and as it is found that every substance has its
own form of crystal, a science, or branch of mineralogy, has arisen,
called "crystallography," and out of the conglomeration of confused
forms there have been evolved certain rules of comparison by which all
known crystals may be classed in certain groups.

This is not so laborious a matter as would appear, for if we take a
substance which crystallises in a cube we find it is possible to draw
nine symmetrical planes, these being called "planes of symmetry," the
intersections of one or more of which planes being called "axes of
symmetry." So that in the nine planes of symmetry of the cube we get
three axes, each running through to the opposite side of the cube. One
will be through the centre of a face to the opposite face; a second will
be through the centre of one edge diagonally; the third will be found in
a line running diagonally from one point to its opposite. On turning the
cube on these three axes--as, for example, a long needle running through
a cube of soap--we shall find that four of the six identical faces of
the cube are exposed to view during each revolution of the cube on the
needle or axis.

These faces are not necessarily, or always, planes, or flat, strictly
speaking, but are often more or less curved, according to the shape of
the crystal, taking certain characteristic forms, such as the square,
various forms of triangles, the rectangle, etc., and though the crystals
may be a combination of several forms, all the faces of any particular
form are similar.

All the crystals at present known exhibit differences in their planes,
axes and lines of symmetry, and on careful comparison many of them are
found to have some features in common; so that when they are sorted out
it is seen that they are capable of being classified into thirty-three
groups. Many of these groups are analogous, so that on analysing them
still further we find that all the known crystals may be classed in six
separate systems according to their planes of symmetry, and all stones
of the same class, no matter what their variety or complexity may be,
show forms of the same group. Beginning with the highest, we have--(1)
the cubic system, with nine planes of symmetry; (2) the hexagonal, with
seven planes; (3) the tetragonal, with five planes; (4) the rhombic,
with three planes; (5) the monoclinic, with one plane; (6) the
triclinic, with no plane of symmetry at all.

In the first, the cubic--called also the isometric, monometric, or
regular--there are, as we have seen, three axes, all at right angles,
all of them being equal.

The second, the hexagonal system--called also the rhombohedral--is
different from the others in having four axes, three of them equal and
in one plane and all at 120 deg. to each other; the fourth axis is not
always equal to these three. It may be, and often is, longer or shorter.
It passes through the intersecting point of the three others, and is
perpendicular or at right angles to them.

The third of the six systems enumerated above, the tetragonal--or the
quadratic, square prismatic, dimetric, or pyramidal--system has three
axes like the cubic, but, in this case, though they are all at right
angles, two only of them are equal, the third, consequently, unequal.
The vertical or principal axis is often much longer or shorter in this
group, but the other two are always equal and lie in the horizontal
plane, at right angles to each other, and at right angles to the
vertical axis.

The fourth system, the rhombic--or orthorhombic, or prismatic, or
trimetric--has, like the tetragonal, three axes; but in this case, none
of them are equal, though the two lateral axes are at right angles to
each other, and to the vertical axis, which may vary in length, more so
even than the other two.

The fifth, the monoclinic--or clinorhombic, monosymmetric, or
oblique--system, has also three axes, all of them unequal. The two
lateral axes are at right angles to each other, but the principal or
vertical axis, which passes through the point of intersection of the two
lateral axes, is only at right angles to one of them.

In the sixth and last system, the triclinic--or anorthic, or
asymmetric--the axes are again three, but in this case, none of them are
equal and none at right angles.

It is difficult to explain these various systems without drawings, and
the foregoing may seem unnecessarily technical. It is, however,
essential that these particulars should be clearly stated in order
thoroughly to understand how stones, especially uncut stones, are
classified. These various groups must also be referred to when dealing
with the action of light and other matters, for in one or other of them
most stones are placed, notwithstanding great differences in hue and
character; thus all stones exhibiting the same crystalline structure as
the diamond are placed in the same group. Further, when the methods of
testing come to be dealt with, it will be seen that these particulars of
grouping form a certain means of testing stones and of distinguishing
spurious from real. For if a stone is offered as a real gem (the true
stone being known to lie in the highest or cubic system), it follows
that should examination prove the stone to be in the sixth system, then,
no matter how coloured or cut, no matter how perfect the imitation, the
test of its crystalline structure stamps it readily as false beyond all
shadow of doubt--for as we have seen, no human means have as yet been
forthcoming by which the crystals can be changed in form, only in
arrangement, for a diamond crystal _is_ a diamond crystal, be it in a
large mass, like the brightest and largest gem so far discovered--the
great Cullinan diamond--or the tiniest grain of microscopic
diamond-dust, and so on with all precious stones. So that in future
references, to avoid repetition, these groups will be referred to as
group 1, 2, and so on, as detailed here.




CHAPTER IV.

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES.


B--CLEAVAGE.

By cleavage is meant the manner in which minerals separate or split off
with regularity. The difference between a break or fracture and a
"cleave," is that the former may be anywhere throughout the substance of
the broken body, with an extremely remote chance of another fracture
being identical in form, whereas in the latter, when a body is
"cleaved," the fractured part is more readily severed, and usually takes
a similar if not an actually identical form in the divided surface of
each piece severed. Thus we find a piece of wood may be "broken" or
"chopped" when fractured across the grain, no two fractured edges being
alike; but, strictly speaking, we only "cleave" wood when we "split" it
with the grain, or, in scientific language, along the line of cleavage,
and then we find many pieces with their divided surfaces identical. So
that when wood is "broken," or "chopped," we obtain pieces of any width
or thickness, with no manner of regularity of fracture, but when
"cleaved," we obtain strips which are often perfectly parallel, that is,
of equal thickness throughout their whole length, and of such uniformity
of surface that it is difficult or even impossible to distinguish one
strip from another. Advantage is taken of these lines of cleavage to
procure long and extremely thin even strips from trees of the willow
variety for such trades as basket-making.

The same effect is seen in house-coal, which may easily be split the way
of the grain (on the lines of cleavage), but is much more difficult and
requires greater force to break across the grain. Rocks also show
distinct lines of cleavage, and are more readily split one way than
another, the line of cleavage or stratum of break being at any angle and
not necessarily parallel to its bed. A striking example of this is seen
in slate, which may be split in plates, or laminae, with great facility,
though this property is the result of the pressure to which the rock has
been for ages subjected, which has caused a change in the molecules,
rather than by "cleavage" as the term is strictly understood, and as
existing in minerals. Mica is also another example of laminated
cleavage, for given care, and a thin, fine knife to divide the plates,
this mineral may be "cleaved" to such remarkably thin sheets as to be
unable to sustain the most delicate touch without shattering.

These are well-known examples of simple cleavage, in one definite
direction, though in many instances there are several forms and
directions of cleavage, but even in these there is generally one part or
line in and on which cleavage will take place much more readily than on
the others, these planes or lines also showing different properties and
angular characters, which, no matter how much fractured, always remain
the same. It is this "cleavage" which causes a crystal to reproduce
itself exactly, as explained in the last chapter, showing its parent
form, shape and characteristics with microscopic perfection, but more
and more in miniature as its size is reduced.

This may clearly be seen by taking a very small quantity of such a
substance as chlorate of potash. If a crystal of this is examined under
a magnifying glass till its crystalline form and structure are familiar,
and it is then placed in a test-tube and gently heated, cleavage will at
once be evident. With a little crackling, the chlorate splits itself
into many crystals along its chief lines of cleavage (called the
cleavage planes), every one of which crystals showing under the
microscope the identical form and characteristics of the larger crystal
from which it came.

The cleavage of minerals must, therefore, be considered as a part of
their crystalline structure, since this is caused by cleavage, so that
both cleavage and crystalline structure should be considered together.
Thus we see that given an unchangeable crystal with cleavage planes
evident, it is possible easily to reproduce the same form over and over
again by splitting, whereas by simply breaking, the form of the crystal
would be lost; just as a rhomb of Iceland spar might be sawn or broken
across the middle and its form lost, although this would really be more
apparent than real, since it would be an alteration in the mass and not
in the shape of each individual crystal. And given further cleavage, by
time or a sudden breaking down, even the mass, as mass, would eventually
become split into smaller but perfect rhombs.

Much skill is, therefore, required in cutting and fashioning a precious
stone, otherwise the gem may be ruined at the onset, for it will only
divide along its lines of cleavage, and any mistake in deciding upon
these, would "break," not "split" the stone, and destroy the beauty of
its crystalline structure. An example of this was specially seen in the
great Cullinan diamond, the splitting of which was perhaps the most
thrilling moment in the history of precious stones.[A] The value of the
enormous crystal was almost beyond computation, but it had a flaw in the
centre, and in order to cut out this flaw it was necessary to divide the
stone into two pieces. The planes of cleavage were worked out, the
diamond was sawn a little, when the operator, acknowledged to be the
greatest living expert, inserted a knife in the saw-mark, and with the
second blow of a steel rod, the marvellous stone parted precisely as
intended, cutting the flaw exactly in two, leaving half of it on the
outside of each divided portion. The slightest miscalculation would have
meant enormous loss, if not ruin, to the stone, but the greatest feat
the world has ever known in the splitting of a priceless diamond was
accomplished successfully by this skilful expert in an Amsterdam
workroom in February, 1908. Some idea of the risk involved may be
gathered from the fact that this stone, the largest ever discovered, in
the rough weighed nearly 3,254 carats, its value being almost anything
one cared to state--incalculable.

[Footnote A: The hammer and knife used in cutting the diamond, the two
largest pieces of which are now called "The Stars of Africa," together
with a model of the great uncut stone, are in the Tower of London
amongst the Regalia.]

These cleavage planes help considerably in the bringing of the stone to
shape, for in a broad sense, a finished cut stone may be said to be in
the form in which its cleavages bring it. Particularly is this seen in
the diamond "brilliant," which plainly evidences the four cleavage
planes. These cleavage planes and their number are a simple means of
identification of precious stones, though those possessing distinct and
ready cleavages are extremely liable to "start" or "split" on these
planes by extremes of heat and cold, accidental blows, sudden shocks and
the like.

In stones possessing certain crystalline structure, the cleavage planes
are the readiest, often the only, means of identification, especially
when the stones are chemically coloured to imitate a more valuable
stone. In such cases the cleavage of one stone is often of paramount
importance in testing the cleavage of another, as is seen in the
perfection of the cleavage planes of calcite, which is used in the
polariscope.

It sometimes happens, however, that false conditions arise, such as in
substances which are of no form or shape, and are in all respects and
directions without regular structure and show no crystallisation even in
the minutest particles; these are called amorphous. Such a condition
sometimes enters wholly or partially into the crystalline structure, and
the mineral loses its true form, possessing instead the form of
crystals, but without a crystalline structure. It is then called a
pseudomorph, which is a term applied to any mineral which, instead of
