                     Qui n'avait aucun ressource,
                   Et qui ne mangeait que du boeuf.
                    Le pauvre Monseigneur d'Elbeuf,
                      A maintenant un habit neuf
                   Et quelques justes dans sa bourse.
                     Le pauvre Monseigneur d'Elbeuf,
                      Qui n'avait aucun ressource.'


There was more sense in taking the Duke of Bouillon, though he was not
his brother, M. de Turenne. These young men were in high spirits. You
will find no traces of their feelings in the memoirs of the time, for of
course nothing of the kind would be allowed to pass the censors of the
press. But there was a wonderful sense of liberty of speech and tongue
during that siege. The younger gens de la robe, as they were called,
who, like Clement Darpent, had read their Livy and Plutarch, were full
of ideas of public virtue, and had meetings among themselves, where M.
Darpent dwelt on what he had imbibed from my brother of English notions
of duty to God, the King and the State. It may seem strange that a
cavalier family like ourselves should have infused notions which were
declared to smack of revolution, but the constitution we had loved and
fought for was a very Utopia to these young French advocates. They, with
the sanguine dreams of youth, hoped that the Fronde was the beginning of
a better state of things, when all offices should be obtained by merit,
never bought and sold, and many of them were inventions of the Court
for the express purpose of sale. The great Cardinal had actually created
forty offices for counselors merely in order to sell them and their
reversions! The holders of these were universally laughed at, and not
treated as on a level with the old hereditary office-bearers, who at
least might think themselves of some use.

We smile sadly now to think of the grand aspirations, noble visions,
and brave words of those young advocates, each of whom thought himself
a very Epaminondas, or Gracchus, though M. Darpent, on looking back, had
to confess that his most enthusiastic supporters were among the younger
brothers, or those with less fortunate fathers, for whom the Paulette
had never been paid, or who felt it very hard to raise. He himself
brought sincere ardour for his own part, and was full of soaring hope
and self-devotion, though I suspect his father would soon have silenced
him if the poor man had been able to think of anything beyond his own
sick-chamber.

The real absurdity, or rather the sadness, of it was, as we two saw,
that the fine folk in whom the Parliament put its trust merely wanted to
spite the Cardinal, and cared not a rush for the Parliament, unlike my
Lord Essex, and our other Roundhead noblemen, who, right or wrong, were
in honest earnest, and cared as much about the Bill of Rights and all
the rest of their demands as Sir Harry Vane or General Cromwell himself,
whereas these were traitors in heart to the cause they pretended to
espouse. Even the Coadjutor, who was the prime mover of all, only wanted
to be chief of a party.

One part of his comedy, which I should like to have seen, was the
conducting the Duchesses of Longueville and Bouillon along the Greve to
the Hotel de Ville to ask protection, though I do not know what for.

However, there they were, exquisitely dressed, with Madame de
Longueville's beautiful hair daintily disheveled, on foot, and each with
a child in her arms. Crowds followed them with shouts of ecstasy, and
the Coadjutor further gratified the world by having a shower of pistoles
thrown from the windows of the Hotel de Ville.

It was good sport to hear Sir Andrew Macniven discourse on the sight,
declaring that the ladies looked next door to angels, and kenned it full
well too, and that he marvelled what their gudemen would have said to
see them make a raree show of themselves to all the loons in Paris!

The streets soon became as quiet as they ever were, and we could go
about as usual, except when we had warning of any special cause for
disturbance. We were anxious to know how poor little Madame d'Aubepine
was getting on, and, to our surprise, we found her tolerably cheerful.
In truth, she had really tamed the Croquelebois! As she said afterwards
in her little pathetic tone, so truly French, when they both so truly
loved Monsieur le Comte (wretch that he was) how could they differ? You
see he was not present to cause jealousies, and when Madame Croquelebois
found that Cecile never blamed him or murmured she began to be uneasy at
his neglect and unkindness.

Though, of course, at that moment he was out of reach, being in the army
that was blockading us. Not that we should ever have found out that we
were blockaded, if we could have got any letters from any one, except
for the scarcity of firewood. My mother wanted much to get to our own
Queen, but the approaches to the Louvre were watched lest she should
communicate with the Regent; and we were cut off from her till M.
Darpent gave his word for us, and obtained for us a pass. And, oh! it
was a sad sight to see the great courts and long galleries left all
dreary and empty. It made me think of Whitehall and of Windsor, though
we little knew that at that very time there was worse there than even
desolation.

And when at last we reached our poor Queen's apartments, there was not a
spark of fire in them. She was a guest there. She had no money, and all
the wood had either been used up or pillaged; and there we found her,
wrapped in a great fur cloak, sitting by the bed where was the little
Lady Henrietta.

When my mother cried out with grief that the child should be ill, the
poor Queen replied with that good-humoured laugh with which she met all
the inconveniences that concerned herself alone: 'Oh, no, Madame, not
ill, only cold! We cannot get any firewood, and so bed is the safest
place for my little maid, who cares not if she can have her mother to
play with her! Here is a new playfellow for thee, ma mie. Sweet Nan will
sit by thee, and make thee sport, while I talk to her mother.'

So the child made the big four-post bed, all curtained round, into a
fortress, and I besieged her there, till she screamed with glee, while
the Queen took my mother's arm, and they paced the rooms together, sadly
discussing the times and the utter lack of news from home, when the last
tidings had been most alarming. Poor lady! I think it was a comfort to
her, for she loved my mother; but we could not but grieve to see her in
such a plight. As we went home we planned that we would carry a faggot
in the carriage the next day, and that I would take it upstairs to her.
And so I actually did, but the sentry insisted on knowing what I was
carrying hidden in a cloak, and when he saw it, the honest man actually
burst into tears that the daughter of Henri IV. should be in such
straits. The Queen kissed me for it, and said I was like the good girl
in Madame d'Aulnoy's tales, and she would fain be the benevolent fairy
to reward me. And then the little Princess insisted that I was Capuchon
Rouge, and that she was my Grandmother Wolf, and after making her great
eyes at me, she ate me up with kisses over and over again! Ah! how happy
children can be. It was strange to remember that this was the way King
Charles's little daughter spent that 30th of January!

We had told M. Darpent of the condition in which we found the Queen, and
he told the Coadjutor, who went himself to see her, and then stirred
up the Parliament to send her regular supplies both of firing and
provisions, so that she never suffered again in the same way.

Each day increased our anxiety for His Sacred Majesty. Lord Jermyn made
his way into Paris, and came to consult with my mother, telling her that
he had little doubt that the iniquitous deed had been consummated, and
between them, by way of preparing the unhappy Queen, they made up a
story that the King had been led out to execution, but had been rescued
by the populace. I could not see that this would be of much use in
softening the blow; in fact, I thought all these delicate false-hoods
only made the suspense worse, but I was told that I was a mere downright
English country lass, with no notion of the refinements such things
required with persons of sensibility.

So I told them, if ever I were in trouble, all I asked of them was to
let me know the worst at once. One great pleasure came to the Queen
at this time in the arrival of the Duke of York, who made his way into
Paris, and arriving in the midst of dinner, knelt before his mother. He
knew no more of his father than we did, and the Queen's urgent entreaty,
undertook to go to St. Germain with a letter from her, asking what Queen
Anne had heard from England.

The siege was not so strait but that unsuspected persons could get in
and out, but after all, the poor Queen's anxiety and suspense were such
that Lord Jermyn was forced to disclose the truth to her before Sir
Andrew came back with the letters. She stood like a statue, and could
neither move nor speak till night, when the Duchess of Vendome came and
caressed her until at last the tears broke forth, and she sobbed and
wept piteously all night. The next day she retired into the Carmelite
convent in the Faubourg St. Jaques, taking my mother with her. As,
according to French fashion, I was not to be left to keep house myself,
my mother invited Sir Francis and Lady Ommaney to come and take charge
of me, and a very good thing it was, for we at least had food enough,
and my dear good friends had very little.

We were all stunned by the dreadful news from England. It was very
sad old Sir Francis, who had borne without complaint the loss of land,
honours, and home, nay, who had stood by to see his only son die at
Naseby, sitting like one crushed, and only able to mutter now and then:
'My Master, my good Master.' You might know an English exile in those
days by the mourning scarf and sad countenance. I remember a poor wild
cavalier whom my mother and Meg never liked to admit when Eustace was
not at home, going down on his knees to Lady Ommaney for a bit of black
silk, when he looked as if he was starving.

We could not, of course, have evening receptions for our poor hungry
countrymen in the absence of my mother, and with such sorrow upon us
all, but Lady Ommaney and I did contrive pies and pasties, and all sorts
of food that could be sent as gifts without offence to the families we
thought most straitened.

The poor of Paris itself were not so very ill-off, for there were
continual distributions of money and flour to keep them in good humour,
and there were songs about.


                     'Le bon tems que c'etait
                      A Paris Durant la famine,
                     Tout le monde s'entrebaisait
                       A Paris Durant la famine,
                      La plus belle se contentait
                    D'un simple boisseau de farine.'


La plus belle was the Duchess of Longueville, who tried hard to persuade
the people that she was one with them. Her second son had been born only
a few days after her expedition to the Hotel de Ville, and she asked the
City of Paris to stand godmother to him in the person of the provosts
and echevins. Afterwards she had a great reception, which Clement
Darpent attended, and he told us the next morning that it had been the
most wonderful mixture of black gowns and cassocks, with blue scarfs and
sword-knots, lawyers, ladies, warriors, and priests.

He continued to bring us tidings every day, and Sir Francis and Lady
Ommaney really liked him, and said he was worthy to be an Englishman.

His father remained very ill, and day by day he told of the poor old
man's pain and shortness of breath. Now Lady Ommaney had great skill
in medicine, indeed there were those who said she had done the work of
three surgeons in the war; and she had been of great service to my dear
brother, Lord Walwyn, when he first came to Paris. She thought little
or nothing of the French doctors, and waxed eloquent in describing to
Clement Darpent how she would make a poultice of bran or of linseed. Now
he had learned of my mother to read English easily, and to converse in
it on all great matters of state and policy, but the household terms and
idioms were still far beyond him, and dear good Lady Ommaney had never
learned more French than enabled her to say 'Combien' when she made a
purchase. Or if they had understood one another's tongue, I doubt me if
any one could have learned the compounding of a poultice through a third
person, and that a man!

So, while I was labouring to interpret, Lady Ommaney exclaimed, 'But why
should I not come and show your mother?'

'Ah! if you would, Madame, that would verily be goodness,' returned
Clement in his best English.

Well, I knew Eustace and Meg would have called me self-willed, when
my mother had once made such a noise about our taking shelter from
Broussel's mob at the Maison Darpent; but this was a mere visit of
charity and necessity, for it was quite certain that the two good ladies
could never have understood one another without me to interpret for
them. Moreover, when Clement Darpent had rescued my sister from the mob,
and was always watching to protect us, we surely owed him some return of
gratitude, and it would have been mere bourgeois.

So I went with Lady Ommaney, and was refreshed by the sight of that calm
face of Madame Darpent, which she always seemed to me to have borrowed
from the angels, and which only grew the sweeter and more exalted the
greater was her trouble, as if she imbibed more and more of heavenly
grace in proportion to her needs.

We did our best, Lady Ommaney and I, to show and explain, but I do not
think it was to much purpose. The materials were not like our English
ones, and though mother and son were both full of thanks and gratitude,
Madame Darpent was clearly not half convinced that what was good for an
Englishman was good for a Frenchman, and even if she had been more fully
persuaded, I do not think her husband would have endured any foreign
treatment.

When we took leave she said, 'Permettez moi, ma chere demoiselle,' and
would have kissed my hand, but I threw my arms round her neck embraced
her, for there was something in her face that won my heart more than it
had ever gone out to any woman I ever saw; and I saw by Lady Ommaney's
whole face and gesture that she thought a great sorrow was coming on the
good woman. I believe she was rather shocked, for she was a Huguenot by
birth, and a Jansenist by conviction, and thus she did not approve of
any strong signs of affection and emotion; but nevertheless she was
touched and very kind and good, and she returned my embrace by giving me
her sweet and solemn blessing.

And as he put me into the carriage, Clement, that foolish Clement, must
needs thank me, with tears in his eyes, for my goodness to her.

'What do you mean, sir,' said I, 'by thanking me for what I delight in
and value as a daughter?'

Whereupon I, equally foolish, knew what I had said, and felt my face and
neck grow crimson all over, and what must he do, but kiss my hand in a
rapture.

And all the way home I could hear old Lady Ommaney murmuring to herself,
quite unconscious that she was speaking aloud, 'My stars! I hope I
have not done wrong! What will my Lady Walwyn say? Not that he would be
altogether a bad match for her after our notions. Her father was only a
baron, and theirs is a good old family of the citizen sort, but then my
Lady Walwyn is a Frenchwoman, and thinks all that is not noble the dirt
under her feet.'

My heart gave a great bound, and then seemed to swell and take away
my breath, so that I could not at first speak to stop those uttered
thoughts, which made me presently feel as if I were prying into a
letter, so as soon as I could get my voice I said, as well as I could,
'My Lady, I hear you.'

'Hear me! Bless me, was I talking to myself! I only was thinking that
the poor old gentleman there is not long for this world. But maybe your
mother would not call him a gentleman. Ha! What have they got written up
there about the Cardinal?'

I read her the placard, and let her lead me away from the subject. I
could not talk about it to any one, and how I longed for Eustace!

However, I believe terror was what most ailed the old gentleman
(not that the French would call him so). He must always have been
chicken-hearted, for he had changed his religion out of fear. His wife
was all sincerity, but the dear good woman was religious for both of
them!

And as time went on his alarms could not but increase. The Parliament
really might have prevailed if it had any constancy, for all the
provincial Parliaments were quite ready to take part with it, and
moreover the Duke of Bouillon had brought over his brother, the Vicomte
de Turenne, to refuse to lead his army against them, or to keep back the
Spaniards. The Queen-Regent might really have been driven to dismiss the
Cardinal and repeal the taxes if the city had held out a little longer,
but in the midst the First President Mole was seized with patriotic
scruples. He would not owe his success to the foreign enemies of his
country, and the desertion of the army, and he led with him most of his
compeers. I suppose he was right--I know Clement thought so--but the
populace were sorely disappointed when negotiations were opened with
the Queen and Court, and it became evident that the city was to submit
without any again but some relaxation of the tax.

The deputies went and came, and were well mobbed everywhere. The
Coadjutor and Duke of Beaufort barely restrained the populace from
flying at the throat of the First President, who they fancied had been
bribed to give them up. One wretch on the steps of the Palais de Justice
threatened to kill the fine old man, who calmly replied, 'Well, friend,
when I am dead I shall want nothing but six feet of earth.'

The man fell back, daunted by his quietness, and by the majesty of
his appearance in his full scarlet robes. These alarms, the continual
shouting in the streets, and the growing terror lest on the arrival of
the Court all the prominent magistrates should be arrested and sent to
the Bastille, infinitely aggravated President Darpent's disorder. We no
longer saw his son every day, for he was wholly absorbed in watching by
the sick-bed, and besides there was no further need, as he averred, of
his watching over us. However, Sir Francis went daily to inquire at
the house, and almost always saw Clement, who could by this time speak
English enough to make himself quite intelligible, but who could only
say that, in spite of constantly being let blood, the poor old man grew
weaker and weaker; and on the very day the treaty was signed he was to
receive the last rites of the Church.




CHAPTER XX. -- CONDOLENCE

(By Margaret)



Our siege was over at last. I can hardly explain how or why, for there
was no real settlement of the points at issue. I have since come to
understand that the Queen and the Cardinal were alarmed lest the Vicomte
de Turenne with his army should come to the assistance of his brother,
the Duke of Bouillon, and thus leave the frontier open to the Spaniards;
and that this very possibility also worked upon the First President
Mole, who was too true a Frenchman not to prefer giving way to the Queen
to bringing disunion into the army and admitting the invader. Most of
the provincial Parliaments were of the same mind as that of Paris, and
if all had united and stood firm the Court would have been reduced to
great straits. It was well for us at St. Germain that they never guessed
at our discomforts on our hill, and how impossible it would have been to
hold out for a more complete victory.

I was glad enough to leave St. Germain the day after the terms had been
agreed upon. The royal family did not yet move, but my term of waiting
had long been expired; I burned to rejoin my mother and sister, and
likewise to escape from the assiduities of M. de Lamont, who was
becoming more insufferable than ever.

So I asked permission of the Queen to let my son resume his studies, and
of Mademoiselle to leave her for the time. Both were gracious, though
the Queen told me I was going into a wasp's nest; while, on the
other hand, Mademoiselle congratulated me on returning to those dear
Parisians, and said she should not be long behind me. I was too much
afraid of being hindered not to set out immediately after having
received my license, so as to take advantage of the escort of some of
the deputies with whom I had a slight acquaintance. I also hoped to
avoid M. de Lamont's leave-takings, but I was not fortunate enough to
do this. The absurd man, learning that I was on the point of departure,
came rushing headlong into the court where the carriages stood, having
first disordered his hair and untied his scarf, so as to give himself a
distracted appearance, and thus he threw himself on his knees between
me and the coach door, declaring that I was killing him and breaking his
heart by my cruelty.

I was very angry, and afraid of showing any excitement, lest it should
give him any advantage, so I only drew up my head coldly and said:

'Let me pass, sir.' But that only made him throw himself on the ground
as if he would kiss my robe, whereupon Gasppard, with his hand on his
little sword, said: 'Why don't you give him a good kick, mama?' This
made everybody laugh; and I said, still keeping my head stiff: 'We will
go round to the other door, my son, since there is this obstruction in
our way.'

This we did before he could follow us; and the last I saw of M. de
Lamont as I quitted St. Germain, he was still kneeling in the court, in
the attitude of an Orlando Furioso, reaching out his arms towards the
departing carriage. I did not pity him, for I did not for a moment
believe his passion a serious one, and I thought his wife would not be
much happier than my poor little sister-in-law, about whom I was very
anxious, and as to these extravagances, they were the ordinary custom of
those who professed to be lovers. He was one of the equerries-in-waiting
on the Duchess of Orleans, and thus happily could not follow; and I
never rejoiced more than when Gaspard and I, with my two women, had
turned our backs on St. Germain and began to descend through the
scattered trees of the forest towards Paris.

No less than forty carriages came out to meet the deputies on their
return, and our progress was very slow, but at last we found ourselves
at our hotel, where we were entirely unexpected, and the porter was so
much surprised that, instead of announcing us properly, he rushed into
the courtyard, screaming out: 'Madame! Monsieur le Marquis!' The whole
household came rushing down the steps pell-mell, so that it was plain at
the first glance that my mother was not there. Annora was the first to
throw herself into my arms, with a shriek and sob of joy, which gave
me a pleasure I cannot describe when I contrasted this meeting with our
former one, for now again I felt that we were wholly sisters.

Gaspard sprang to the Abbe's neck, and declared himself tired of his
holidays, and quite ready to resume his studies. They would be much
pleasanter than running after the King and Duke of Anjou, and bearing
the blame of all their pranks. My mother, I heard, was at the Convent of
St. Jaques with her poor bereaved Queen, and she had left my sister in
the charge of Sir Francis and Lady Ommaney.

The old lady came to welcome me; Sir Francis was out gone to inquire
for the President Darpent; and before I had been an hour in the house, I
found how entirely different a world it was from that which I had left,
and how changed were the interests that absorbed it. Of my poor little
Cecile scarcely anything was known. Annora had only seen her once or
twice, and even the poor English Queen was second in interest to the
illness of M. Darpent, and the fatigues of his wife in nursing him. It
seemed to me as if Lady Ommaney and my sister discussed, as if he had
been their near relation, every symptom of him, who, in the eyes of all
my recent companions, was nothing better than an old frondeur, a rebel
richly deserving to be put to death.

If Lady Ommaney had understood French, I really believe she would have
gone to help Madame Darpent, who had now been sitting up for several
nights; and though her son was most dutiful, and shared her vigils,
taking every imaginable care of his father, he could not relieve her
materially. The old man died the morning after my return home, and Sir
Francis, who had been to inquire, reported that the funeral was to take
place the next night by Madame's desire, as she was resolved that it
should not be made an occasion for the meeting of inveighing against the
Government as the remote cause of his death.

The city was, in fact, in a very unquiet state; nevertheless, Queen
