time--seven o'clock--and on opening my eyes I saw at once that my young
assistant was not in the room. This gave me no uneasiness. I presumed
that he had waked after a good night's sleep and was taking a morning
walk. I rose from the bed, put on my clothes leisurely, and it was only
after I was completely dressed that I felt in my pocket for my wallet.
Then I made a startling discovery. The wallet was gone!"

"Was there much money in it?"

"About a hundred and ten dollars. Fortunately I had about fifty dollars,
besides, in another pocket, so that I was not left quite penniless."

"Was your assistant the thief?"

"There is no doubt about it. He had gone downstairs at five o'clock,
told the clerk he was going for a walk, and did not show up after that."

"Have you seen or heard of him since?"

"No; I may meet him again some time, but I doubt if I should have him
arrested. He injured himself more than he did me. I lost a hundred
dollars or more, but he lost a good place and his character for honesty.
Depend upon it, Walter, honesty is the best policy in the long run."

"I am sure of that, sir."

Four miles from the hotel they entered a wood, through which the road
ran for half a mile. It was dark, but not completely dark. A few stars
sent down a faint light. By the light of these stars Walter descried a
man, mounted on a large horse, stationed motionless in the middle of the
road, apparently waiting for them to come up.

"Professor," he exclaimed, clutching his employer by the arm, "that's
the man we saw at the hotel."




CHAPTER XXIII

WALTER AND THE HIGHWAYMAN


The professor was startled at the exclamation, but was unwilling to
believe that the man before him was a highwayman.

"My friend," he said, "won't you move to one side? You are in my path."

"We have a little business together," said the horseman, grimly, as he
drew out and presented a revolver, "that must be attended to first."

"Do you wish a bottle of balm?" inquired Professor Robinson, in a
tremulous voice.

"No; you may need one yourself unless we come to terms."

"What do you mean?"

"Hand over your pocketbook, old man, and be quick about it."

"I presume you are joking," said the professor nervously.

"You won't find it much of a joke!"

"Are you a--highwayman?" gasped the professor.

The other gave a quick, short laugh.

"You may call me that if you like," he said.

Now, Professor Robinson had, as was natural, a decided objection to
surrendering his money, and, though there seemed little chance of
producing an effect on the mind of the outlaw, ventured to remonstrate.

"My friend," he said, "if you are in want, I will lend, nay, give you
five dollars, out of a spirit of humanity; but I trust you will not
jeopardize your liberty by descending to robbery."

"Five dollars won't do, old man! Hand over your wallet, with all there
is in it, and dry up that Sunday-school talk."

"What shall I do, Walter?" asked the poor professor.

"I am afraid you will have to let him have it, professor."

"That's where your head is level, boy!" said the highwayman approvingly.
"Just fling over your wallet, and be quick about it."

"Tell him to ride up and get it," said Walter, in an undertone.

Though the professor did not understand Walter's object in suggesting
this, he was in a mood to be guided by any one, and repeated Walter's
words.

"Anything to oblige," said the stranger.

"Don't give it to him till I say the word," whispered Walter.

The highwayman, lowering his revolver, rode up alongside of the wagon
and held out his hand for the wallet.

Walter had conceived a bold scheme for disarming him and rendering him
harmless.

"Give the wallet to me, professor," he said.

His employer meekly obeyed.

Then Walter, rising, dropped the wallet on the floor of the wagon,
and reaching over suddenly grasped the revolver from the unsuspecting
robber, and before he recovered from his amazement brought down the whip
with terrible force on the flanks of his horse. The startled animal gave
a spring that nearly unseated his rider and dashed madly down the road.

The robber was furious. As soon as he could he regained control of his
steed and galloped back.

"Give me that revolver!" he shouted, in a rage.

Walter held the weapon in his hand and steadily pointed it at its late
owner.

"I'll give you the contents if you don't ride off."

"Confound you, you young rascal! If you don't give me back my weapon
I'll kill you!"

It was an empty threat, as Walter well knew.

"Do you hear me?" he said quietly.

The robber scanned him curiously. He had thought him a mere boy, without
spirit or courage. Now he was compelled to revise his opinion of him.
Threats would not answer. He must have recourse to strategy.

"You're smart, youngster. I'll give you credit for that," he said, in a
milder tone. "You've got the best of me, I admit."

"Yes," answered Walter, "I have the advantage of you."

"I meant to take your money, but I won't do it now."

"Thank you!" said Walter, with an ironical smile.

"Just give me back that weapon of mine, and I'll ride off and let you
alone."

"I don't think it would be wise."

The highwayman frowned.

"Don't be a fool, youngster!" he said. "Do you doubt my word?"

"I don't know you well enough to decide whether you are to be trusted,
but I guess I'll keep the revolver."

"Then you will have robbed me."

"Walter," said the professor nervously, "perhaps you had better give him
back his weapon. He has promised not to molest us further."

"That's where you talk sense, old man," said the robber approvingly.
"You're a gentleman, you are."

"You hear, Walter?"

"Yes, youngster, you hear? Give me back my weapon and we'll part
friends."

"And I trust, my friend, you will see the error of your ways and adopt
some honest business."

"I will, old man, believe me!" said the robber, in a melodramatic tone.
"I was not always thus."

"You will have my best wishes for your prosperity, and if you are in
need I will give you five dollars."

"No, I will not take advantage of your liberal offer. Only give me the
revolver and I will ride away."

"Come, Walter, give the man his revolver."

"Professor," said Walter, quietly, "you must excuse me, I can't comply
with your request. This man is humbugging you. If I give him back the
revolver you will have to give him your wallet too."

"Didn't I promise to ride away?" demanded the outlaw, angrily.

"Yes; but I have no confidence in your promise. Now, go at once, or I
fire!"

Walter pointed the revolver full at the robber's head. He met the
unflinching gaze of Walter's resolute eyes and saw that our hero was in
earnest.

"Do you mean to keep my property?" he demanded hoarsely.

"No; come round to the hotel in Fremont to-morrow morning and you shall
have your weapon."

With an execration the outlaw turned his horse and dashed off at full
speed.

"There, he is gone!" said Walter, sinking back in his seat with an air
of relief. His nerves had been at high tension, though he was outwardly
calm, for he knew that he had to deal with a desperate man, and feared a
sudden attack, which might have resulted disastrously for him.

"I don't know whether you have done right, Walter," said the professor,
in a tone of mild deprecation.

"Surely, professor, you would not have had me give back the revolver?"

"He promised to ride off and leave us to ourselves."

"What is the word of such a man worth? He would have ridden off, but he
would have carried with him your wallet and mine. Was there much money
in yours?"

"Two hundred and fifty dollars."

"That's too much to lose. Take my advice, professor, and put the greater
part of the money in one of your pockets. That is what I have done, for
I suspected that this gentleman would lie in wait for us."

"What put it into your head to seize the pistol, Walter? If your attempt
had miscarried he might have shot you."

"I don't propose to give up my money without a struggle. When the time
came to act I moved suddenly upon the enemy. I did not propose to fail."

"You were very quick. You were like a flash of lightning."

"I meant to be," said Walter, smiling. "I haven't attended a gymnasium
for nothing."

"Do you think he will attack us again?" asked the professor timidly.

"No; he has no revolver and I have. Besides, I don't mean to be taken
at a disadvantage. If you will drive, I will hold the revolver ready for
instant use."

There was no further interruption during their ride, and about ten
o'clock they drew up in front of the hotel in Fremont. Rooms were
secured, and both Walter and the professor retired to rest.

About seven o'clock the next morning there was a knock at Walter's door.
He opened it, half dressed, and found a boy of sixteen with a note in
his hand.

"A gentleman gave me this for you," he said.

Walter opened the note and read these lines, which had been hastily
scribbled:

"Give the bearer my revolver. I have a long journey before me and shall
need it.

"YOU KNOW WHO."

"Where is the gentleman who gave you the note?" asked Walter.

"Down the road a piece. He asked me to be quick."

"Tell him," said Walter, putting the note in his vest pocket, "that he
will have to come here himself."

He finished his toilet and went down to breakfast, but the robber did
not put in an appearance. He probably thought that Walter was laying a
trap for him.




CHAPTER XXIV

AN ATTEMPT TO RECOVER THE REVOLVER


As Walter had been brought up with a strict sense of honesty, he was
somewhat in doubt whether he ought to keep the revolver, which was a
handsome one, silver-mounted. He decided, however, that it would be
quixotic to disarm himself and put the outlaw in a position to renew his
attack, as he undoubtedly would, if only because he would wish to
get even with the boy who had humiliated him. Walter had, to be sure,
promised to give it up if the owner called for it, but he meant at the
same time to secure his arrest.

He did not mention to the professor that he had received a letter from
the owner of the weapon, as his employer would have insisted upon his
giving it up. Professor Robinson was a timid man, and, though he was of
stout build and possessed a fair measure of strength, he had not as much
spirit as some boys of ten.

"What are you going to do with the revolver, Walter?" he asked uneasily,
as they set out on their way from Fremont to Stilwell.

"I am going to carry it with me, professor."

"Then you had better withdraw the charges."

"Why should I?"

"The weapon might go off."

"I mean that it shall if the owner makes another attack upon us."

"You don't think he will?" asked the professor, nervously.

"I think it very probable."

"I wish we had never met him," said the unhappy professor.

"So do I; but as we have, we must make the best of it."

"If you had only given him back the revolver we should have had no more
trouble."

"Pardon me, professor, I think we should have had a great deal of
trouble. Once give the fellow his old advantage over us and he would use
it."

"I never had such an experience before," complained the professor,
looking at Walter reproachfully, as if he thought that somehow it was
the fault of his young assistant.

Walter smiled.

"Do you know, professor," he said, "your remark reminds me of a
statement in an Irish paper to this effect: 'Several persons have died
during the last year who never died before.'"

"I don't see the point," said the professor, peevishly.

They were about half-way to the next town when Walter heard the sound of
a galloping horse behind him.

Looking out of the side of the wagon, he saw the now familiar figure of
the outlaw as he rode up alongside. He looked critically at Walter, and
saw that the coveted revolver was in our hero's hand, ready for action.

"Why didn't you give the revolver to my messenger this morning, boy?" he
demanded, with a frown.

"I didn't think it would be safe," Walter answered significantly.

"Didn't you know it was my property?"

"I wasn't sure of it."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I didn't know whether you had paid for it."

"You are impudent. Professor Robinson, will you make the boy give me
back my revolver?"

"I have told him to," answered the professor, in an apologetic tone,
"but he won't obey me."

"Then why don't you discharge him? I wouldn't keep a boy in my employ
who disobeyed me."

"I am well satisfied with him, except on this point."

"I am ready to leave you, professor, if you say the word," said Walter,
and he made a motion as if to jump out of the wagon.

"No, no!" exclaimed the professor, in alarm. "I don't want you to leave
me."

"Then I won't. I think it might be bad for you if I did," said Walter,
with a significant look at the horseman.

"Well, boy," said the outlaw, harshly, "I can't waste my time here. You
sent me a message to come for my revolver myself if I wanted it."

"Yes."

"Well, here I am. Now give me the weapon."

"I think I shall have to decline."

"Are you going back on your word?" demanded the outlaw.

"Not exactly."

"Then what do you propose to do?"

"Keep along with us till we reach Stilwell. Then we will go before
a magistrate. You will make your demand for the weapon, and in his
