       *       *       *       *       *

The door to Brian Taggert's office was open when Candron finally reached
the fifth floor. Taggert, of course, was not only expecting him, but had
long been aware of his approach.

Candron went in, closed the door, and said, "Hi, Brian," to the
dark-haired, dark-eyed, hawk-nosed man who was sprawled on the couch
that stood against one corner of the room. There was a desk at the other
rear corner, but Brian Taggert wasn't a desk man. He looked like a
heavy-weight boxer, but he preferred relaxation to exercise.

But he did take his feet from the couch and lift himself to a sitting
position as Candron entered. And, at the same time, the one resemblance
between Taggert and Candron manifested itself--a warm, truly human
smile.

"Spence," he said warmly, "you look as though you were bored. Want a
job?"

"No," said Candron, "but I'll take it. Who do I kill?"

"Nobody, unless you absolutely have to," said Taggert.

Spencer Candron understood. The one thing that characterized the real
members of The Society for Mystical and Metaphysical Research--not the
"front" members, like Balfour and Mrs. Jesser, not the hundreds of
"honorable" members who constituted the crackpot portion of the
membership, but the real core of the group--the thing that characterized
them could be summed up in one word: _understanding_. Without that one
essential property, no human mind can be completely free. Unless a human
mind is capable of understanding the only forces that can be pitted
against it--the forces of other human minds--that mind cannot avail
itself of the power that lies within it.

Of course, it is elementary that such understanding must also apply to
oneself. Understanding of self must come before understanding of others.
_Total_ understanding is not necessary--indeed, utter totality is very
likely impossible to any human mind. But the greater the understanding,
the freer the mind, and, at a point which might be called the "critical
point," certain abilities inherent in the individual human mind become
controllable. A change, not only in quantity, but in quality, occurs.

A cube of ice in a glass of water at zero degrees Celsius exhibits
certain properties and performs certain actions at its surface. Some of
the molecules drift away, to become one with the liquid. Other molecules
from the liquid become attached to the crystalline ice. But, the ice
cube remains essentially an entity. Over a period of time, it may change
slowly, since dissolution takes place faster than crystallization at the
corners of the cube. Eventually, the cube will become a sphere, or
something very closely approximating it. But the change is slow, and,
once it reaches that state, the situation becomes static.

But, if you add heat, more and more and more, the ice cube will change,
not only its shape, but its state. What it was previously capable of
doing only slightly and impermanently, it can now do completely. The
critical point has been passed.

Roughly--for the analog itself is rough--the same things occurs in the
human mind. The psionic abilities of the human mind are, to a greater or
lesser degree, there to begin with, just as an ice cube has the
_ability_ to melt if the proper conditions are met with.

The analogy hardly extends beyond that. Unlike an ice cube, the human
mind is capable of changing the forces outside it--as if the ice could
seek out its own heat in order to melt. And, too, human minds vary in
their inherent ability to absorb understanding. Some do so easily,
others do so only in spotty areas, still others cannot reach the
critical point before they break. And still others can never really
understand at all.

No one who had not reached his own critical point could become a "core"
member of the S.M.M.R. It was not snobbery on their part; they
understood other human beings too well to be snobbish. It was more as
though a Society for Expert Mountain Climbers met each year on the peak
of Mount Everest--anyone who can get up there to attend the meeting is
automatically a member.

Spencer Candron sat down in a nearby chair. "All right, so I refrain
from doing any more damage than I have to. What's the objective?"

Taggert put his palms on his muscular thighs and leaned forward. "James
Ch'ien is still alive."

Candron had not been expecting the statement, but he felt no surprise.
His mind merely adjusted to the new data. "He's still in China, then,"
he said. It was not a question, but a statement of a deduction. "The
whole thing was a phony. The death, the body, the funeral. What about
the executions?"

"They were real," Taggert said. "Here's what happened as closely as we
can tell:

"Dr. Ch'ien was kidnaped on July 10th, the second day of the conference
in Peiping, at some time between two and three in the morning. He was
replaced by a double, whose name we don't know. It's unimportant,
anyway. The double was as perfect as the Chinese surgeons could make
him. He was probably not aware that he was slated to die; it is more
likely that he was hypnotized and misled. At any rate, he took Ch'ien's
place on the rostrum to speak that afternoon.

"The man who shot him, and the man who threw the flame bomb, were
probably as equally deluded as to what they were doing as the double
was. They did a perfect job, though. The impersonator was dead, and his
skin was charred and blistered clear up to the chest--no fingerprints.

"The men were tried, convicted, and executed. The Chinese government
sent us abject apologies. The double's body was shipped back to the
United States with full honors, but by the time it reached here, the
eye-cone patterns had deteriorated to the point where they couldn't be
identified any more than the fingerprints could. And there were half a
hundred reputable scientists of a dozen friendly nations who were
eye-witnesses to the killing and who are all absolutely certain that it
was James Ch'ien who died."

Candron nodded. "So, while the whole world was mourning the fact that
one of Earth's greatest physicists has died, he was being held captive
in the most secret and secure prison that the Red Chinese government
could put him in."

Taggert nodded. "And your job will be to get him out," he said softly.

Candron said nothing for a moment, as he thought the problem out.
Taggert said nothing to interrupt him.

Neither of them worried about being overheard or spied upon. Besides
being equipped with hush devices and blanketing equipment, the building
was guarded by Reeves and Donahue, whose combined senses of perception
could pick up any activity for miles around which might be inimical to
the Society.

"How much backing do we get from the Federal Government?" Candron asked
at last.

"We can swing the cover-up afterwards all the way," Taggert told him
firmly. "We can arrange transportation back. That is, the Federal
Government can. But getting over there and getting Ch'ien out of durance
vile is strictly up to the Society. Senator Kerotski and Secretary
Gonzales are giving us every opportunity they can, but there's no use
approaching the President until after we've proven our case."

Candron gestured his understanding. The President of the United States
was a shrewd, able, just, and ethical human being--but he was not yet a
member of the Society, and perhaps would never be. As a consequence it
was still impossible to convince him that the S.M.M.R. knew what it was
talking about--and that applied to nearly ninety per cent of the Federal
and State officials of the nation.

Only a very few knew that the Society was an _ex officio_ branch of the
government itself. Not until the rescue of James Ch'ien was an
accomplished fact, not until there was physical, logical proof that the
man was still alive would the government take official action.

"What's the outline?" Candron wanted to know.

Taggert outlined the proposed course of action rapidly. When he was
finished, Spencer Candron simply said, "All right. I can take care of my
end of it." He stood up. "I'll see you, Brian."

Brian Taggert lay back down on the couch, propped up his feet, and
winked at Candron. "Watch and check, Spence."

