
We now know that the reasoning and conclusion here given are entirely
correct, but they have for their basis only a philosophical conception,
and not a series of experiments designed especially to test their
correctness. Such an experimental test of this important question was
the motive for a third and last paper in this department of physics.
This paper was published in volume ninety of the _Philosophical
Transactions_, and gave the results of two hundred and nineteen
quantitative experiments.

Here we are at a loss to know which to admire most--the marvellous skill
evinced in acquiring such accurate data with such inadequate means, and
in varying and testing such a number of questions as were suggested in
the course of the investigation--or the intellectual power shown in
marshalling and reducing to a system such intricate and apparently
self-contradictory phenomena. It is true that this discussion led him to
a different conclusion from that announced in the previous paper, and,
consequently, to a false conclusion; but almost the only escape from his
course of reasoning lay in a principle which belongs to a later period
of intellectual development than that of HERSCHEL'S own time.

HERSCHEL made a careful determination of the quantitative distribution
of light and of heat in the prismatic spectrum, and discovered the
surprising fact that not only where the light was at a maximum the heat
was very inconsiderable, but that where there was a maximum exhibition
of heat, there was not a trace of light.

    "This consideration," he writes, "must alter the form of our
    proposed inquiry; for the question being thus at least partly
    decided, since it is ascertained that we have rays of heat which
    give no light, it can only become a subject of inquiry whether some
    of these heat-making rays may not have a power of rendering objects
    visible, superadded to their now already established power of
    heating bodies. This being the case, it is evident that the _onus
    probandi_ ought to lie with those who are willing to establish such
    an hypothesis, for it does not appear that Nature is in the habit of
    using one and the same mechanism with any two of our senses. Witness
    the vibration of air that makes sound, the effluvia that occasion
    smells, the particles that produce taste, the resistance or
    repulsive powers that affect the touch--all these are evidently
    suited to their respective organs of sense."

It is difficult to see how the fallacy of this argument could have been
detected by any one not familiar with the fundamental physiological law
that the nature of a sensation is in no wise determined by the character
of the agent producing it, but only by the character of the nerves acted
upon; but, as already intimated, this law belongs to a later epoch than
the one we are considering. HERSCHEL thus finally concluded that light
and radiant heat were of essentially different natures, and upon this
supposition he explained all of the phenomena which his numerous
experiments had shown him. So complete and satisfactory did this work
appear to the scientific world, that for a long time the question was
looked upon as closed, and not until thirty-five years later was there
any dissent. Then the Italian physicist, MELLONI, with instrumental
means a thousand times more delicate than that of HERSCHEL, and with a
far larger store of cognate phenomena, collected during the generation
which had elapsed, to serve as a guide, discovered the true law. This,
as we have seen, was at first adopted by HERSCHEL on philosophical
grounds, and then rejected, since he did not at that time possess the
key which alone could have enabled him to properly interpret his
experiments.

It is well to summarize the capital discoveries in this field made by
HERSCHEL, more particularly because his claims as a discoverer seem to
have been strangely overlooked by historians of the development of
physical science. He, before any other investigator, showed that radiant
heat is refracted according to the laws governing the refraction of
light by transparent media; that a portion of the radiation from the sun
is incapable of exciting the sensation of vision, and that this portion
is the less refrangible; that the different colors of the spectrum
possess very unequal heating powers, which are not proportional to their
luminosity; that substances differ very greatly in their power of
transmitting radiant heat, and that this power does not depend solely
upon their color; and that the property of diffusing heat is possessed
to a varying degree by different bodies, independently of their color.
Nor should we neglect to emphasize, in this connection, the importance
of his measurements of the intensity of the heat and light in the
different portions of the solar spectrum. It is the more necessary to
state HERSCHEL'S claims clearly, as his work has been neglected by those
who should first have done him justice. In his "History of Physics,"
POGGENDORFF has no reference to HERSCHEL. In the collected works of
VERDET, long bibliographical notes are appended to each chapter, with
the intention of exhibiting the progress and order of discovery. But all
of HERSCHEL'S work is overlooked, or indexed under the name of his son.
One little reference in the text alone shows that his very name was not
unknown. Even in the great work of HELMHOLTZ on physiological optics,
HERSCHEL'S labors are not taken account of.

It is easy to account for this seemingly strange neglect. HERSCHEL is
known to this generation only as an astronomer. A study of his memoirs
will show that his physical work alone should give him a very high rank
indeed, and I trust that the brief summaries, which alone can be given
here, will have made this plain.

       *       *       *       *       *

We may conclude from the time expended, the elaborate nature of the
experiments involved, and the character of the papers devoted to their
consideration, that the portion of HERSCHEL'S researches in physics
which interested him to the greatest degree, was the investigation of
the optical phenomena known as NEWTON'S rings. In 1792 he obtained the
two object-glasses of HUYGHENS, which were in the possession of the
Royal Society, for the purpose of repeating NEWTON'S experiments, and in
1810 he read the last of his three papers on the subject.

Sir ISAAC NEWTON had given some of his most vigorous efforts to the
study of the phenomena of interference of light, which are exemplified
in the colors of thin and of thick plates. The colors of thin plates are
most conveniently studied in the regular form which they present when
produced by a thin plate of air, limited on one side by a plane
polished surface, and on the other by a spherical surface of long
radius, such as the exterior surface of a convex lens, for example.
The colors are then arranged in concentric circles, and, though others
had so produced them before NEWTON, these rings have, ever since the
publication of his remarkable work, been known by his name.

To explain the phenomena, NEWTON was obliged to supplement his theory of
the corpuscular nature of light, by supposing that the inconceivably
minute particles constituting light are not always equally susceptible
of reflection, but that they have periodically recurring "fits of easy
reflection" and of "easy transmission." This conception, though by no
means unphilosophical, seemed to HERSCHEL too artificial and improbable
for ready acceptance, and his effort was to supply a more probable
explanation.

The developments of optical science have justified HERSCHEL in his
objections, but we cannot accord to him must any considerable part in
making clear the true nature of the phenomenon. Indeed, it must be
recognized that his position was distinctly less advanced than that of
NEWTON. That great philosopher announced the true law governing the
relation between the color and the thickness of the film. HERSCHEL did
not recognize such a relation. NEWTON showed exactly how the phenomenon
depended upon the obliquity at which it was viewed. HERSCHEL found no
place in his theory for this evident variation.

In the series of experiments described in the first paper on this
subject, HERSCHEL mistook the locus of a certain set of rings which he
was observing. This mistake, though so slight as hardly to be detected
without the guidance of the definite knowledge acquired in later times,
not only vitiated the conclusion from the experiments, but gave an
erroneous direction to the whole investigation. To him these experiments
proved that NEWTON'S conception of a periodic phenomenon was untenable.
Thus cut loose from all hypothesis, his fertility in ideas and ingenuity
in experimentation are as striking as ever. He tried the effect of
having a polished metal as one of the surfaces limiting the thin plate
of air. Observing the so-called "blue bow" of NEWTON at the limit of
total reflection in a prism, he was led to the discovery of its
complement, the "red bow" by refraction. Here he thought he had found
the solution of his problem, and attributed the rings to the reflection
of the light which passed through in the red bow. Though mistaken, he
had presented to the world of science two experiments which have since
played very prominent parts in the undulatory theory of light, namely,
the rings formed upon polished metal, and the bands produced by a thin
plate near the critical angle.

As in his later researches upon the nature of radiant heat, he was wrong
in his conclusions, and perhaps with less excuse. His experiments were
skilfully devised and most ingenious. His philosophizing was distinctly
faulty. We can see not only that he was wrong, but exactly where he
began to go wrong. Yet these papers are full of interest to the
physicist, and by no means deserve the neglect into which they have
fallen.


               _Researches on the Dimensions of the Stars._

HERSCHEL examined a number of bright stars, using extremely high
magnifying powers, in order to determine whether the stars have sensible
dimensions. In a good telescope stars present round and pretty uniformly
illuminated disks. If these disks really represent the angular diameter
of the stars, they should admit of magnifying, like other objects; but,
instead of this, HERSCHEL found that they appeared smaller as the
telescopic power was increased. He accordingly called the disk of light
seen in the telescope a spurious disk. This singular phenomenon gave its
discoverer a ready criterion for determining whether a small bright body
has an appreciable size, or only impresses the sense of sight by virtue
of its intrinsic brightness. If the first were the case, the apparent
size would increase with increased magnifying power, while, if the
angular dimensions were inappreciable, the apparent size would, on the
contrary, diminish with additional magnifying. An occasion for using
this criterion came in the first years of this century, with the
discovery of three small planets having orbits lying between those of
_Mars_ and _Jupiter_. HERSCHEL gave the name _Asteroids_ to these
bodies. As the appropriateness of this term had been violently assailed,
the discovery of _Juno_, in 1804, the third one of the group, led to a
careful experimental study of the defining power of the telescope used,
and of the laws governing the phenomena of spurious disks.

With a telescope of about nine inches in aperture, HERSCHEL found that
if _Juno_ subtended an angle greater than a quarter of a second of arc,
a certain indication of the fact would have shown itself in the course
of the experiments. This conclusion was a justification of the name
Asteroid, since the appearance of the new planet was strictly stellar.
On other grounds, a better name might have been selected.

In the paper giving the results of the experiments, the phenomena of the
spurious disks are very completely described; but they did not attract
the attention which they deserved, and they only became an object of
especial interest to students of physics when they were again studied by
the famous German optician FRAUNHOFER, a generation later.

Incidentally the experiments are of interest, as yielding us a measure
of the excellence of HERSCHEL'S telescopes, and a measure which is quite
independent of the keenness of his vision. From them we may be sure that
the efficiency of the nine-inch mirror used was not sensibly less than
that of the highest theoretically attainable excellence. In this
connection, too, we may refer to the _Philosophical Transactions_ for
1790, pp. 468 and 475, where HERSCHEL gives observations of both
_Enceladus_ and _Mimas_ seen in contact with the ball of _Saturn_.
I have never seen so good definition, telescopic and atmospheric, as he
must have had on these occasions.


              _Researches on the Spectra of the Fixed Stars._

The spectroscope was applied by SECCHI to the study of the spectra of
the fixed stars visible to the naked eye in the years 1863 to 1866.
He examined the nature of the spectrum of each of the larger stars,
and found that these stars could be arranged in three general classes or
_types_. His results have been verified and extended by other
astronomers, and his classification has been generally accepted.
According to SECCHI, the lucid stars may be separated into three groups,
distinguished by marked differences in their spectra. SECCHI'S Type I.
contains stars whose spectra are like those of _Sirius_, _Procyon_, and
_[alpha] Lyrae_; his Type II. stars like _Arcturus_ and _Aldebaran_;
his Type III. stars like _[alpha] Orionis_.

HERSCHEL also made some trials in this direction. In the _Philosophical
Transactions_ for 1814 (p. 264), he says:

    "By some experiments on the light of a few of the stars of the first
    magnitude, made in 1798, by a prism applied to the eye-glasses of my
    reflectors, adjustable to any angle and to any direction, I had the
    following analyses:

    "The light of _Sirius_ consists of red, orange, yellow, green, blue,
    purple, and violet. _[alpha] Orionis_ contains the same colors,
    but the red is more intense, and the orange and yellow are less
    copious in proportion than they are in _Sirius_. _Procyon_ contains
    all the colors, but proportionately more blue and purple than
    _Sirius_. _Arcturus_ contains more red and orange, and less yellow
    in proportion than _Sirius_. _Aldebaran_ contains much orange and
    very little yellow. _[alpha] Lyrae_ contains much yellow, green,
    blue, and purple."

Here the essential peculiarities of the spectrum of each of the stars
investigated by HERSCHEL is pointed out, and if we were to use his
observations alone to classify these stars into types, we should put
_Sirius_ and _Procyon_ into one type of stars which have "all the
colors" in their spectra; _Arcturus_ and _Aldebaran_ would represent
another group of stars, with a deficiency of yellow and an excess of
orange and red in the spectrum; and _[alpha] Orionis_ would stand as
a type of those stars with an excess of red and a deficiency of orange.
_[alpha] Lyrae_ would represent a sub-group of the first class.

HERSCHEL'S immediate object was not classification, and his observations
are only recorded in a passing way. But the fact remains that he
clearly distinguished the essential differences of the spectra of these
stars, and that he made these observations in support of his statement
that the fixed stars, "like the planets, also shine with differently
colored light. That of _Arcturus_ and _Aldebaran_, for instance, is as
different from the light of _Sirius_ and _Capella_ as that of _Mars_ and
_Saturn_ is from the light of _Venus_ and _Jupiter_."

Of course, no special discovery can be claimed for him on these few
instances. We can see, however, a good example of the manner in which he
examined a subject from every side, and used the most remote evidence
exactly in its proper place and time.


          _Researches on the Variable Emission of Light
                  and Heat from the Sun._

It is certainly a remarkable fact that HERSCHEL was the first observer
to recognize the real importance of the aperture or diameter of a
telescope. Before his time it was generally assumed that this element
only conditioned the amount of light transmitted to the eye, or, in
other words, merely determined the brightness of the image. Hence the
conclusion that if an object is sufficiently bright, the telescope may
be made as small as desired without loss of power. Thus, in observing
the sun, astronomers before HERSCHEL had been accustomed to reduce the
aperture of their telescopes, in order to moderate the heat and light
transmitted. SCHEINER, it is true, nearly two centuries before the time
we are considering, had invented a method for observing the sun without
danger, still employing the full aperture. This was by projecting the
image of the sun on a white screen beyond the eye-piece, the telescope
being slightly lengthened. For special purposes this ingenious method
has even been found useful in modern times, though for sharpness of
definition it bears much the same relation to the more usual manner of
observing, that a photographic picture does to direct vision.

Although HERSCHEL saw the advantages of using the whole aperture of a
telescope in such observations, the practical difficulties in the way
were very great. We have noted his attempts to find screens which would
effectively cut off a large portion of the heat and light without
impairing vision, and have considered, somewhat in detail, the
remarkable discoveries in radiant heat to which these attempts led him.
His efforts were not unsuccessful. A green glass smoked, and a glass
cell containing a solution of black writing ink in water--were found to
work admirably.

Thus provided with more powerful instrumental means than had ever been
applied to the purpose, HERSCHEL turned his attention to the sun. In a
very short time he exhausted nearly all there was to be discovered, so
that since the publication of his last paper on this subject, in 1801,
until the present time, there has been but a single telescopic
phenomenon, connected with the physical appearance of the sun, which was
unknown to HERSCHEL. That phenomenon is the frequent occurrence of a
darker central shade or kernel in large spots, discovered by DAWES about
1858.

HERSCHEL, though observing a hundred and ninety years after the earliest
discovery of sun spots, seems to have been the first to suspect their
periodic character. To establish this as a fact, and to measure the
period, was left for our own times and for the indefatigable observer
