for dinner.

In spite of her disaster with the bread, the Story Girl had been taking
cooking lessons from Felicity all the week, and getting on tolerably
well, although, mindful of her former mistake, she never ventured
on anything without Felicity's approval. But Felicity had no time to
oversee her this morning.

"You must attend to the pudding yourself," she said. "The recipe's so
plain and simple even you can't go astray, and if there's anything you
don't understand you can ask me. But don't bother me if you can help
it."

The Story Girl did not bother her once. The pudding was concocted
and baked, as the Story Girl proudly informed us when we came to
the dinner-table, all on her own hook. She was very proud of it; and
certainly as far as appearance went it justified her triumph. The slices
were smooth and golden; and, smothered in the luscious maple sugar
sauce which Cecily had compounded, were very fair to view. Nevertheless,
although none of us, not even Uncle Roger or Felicity, said a word at
the time, for fear of hurting the Story Girl's feelings, the pudding
did not taste exactly as it should. It was tough--decidedly tough--and
lacked the richness of flavour which was customary in Aunt Janet's
cornmeal puddings. If it had not been for the abundant supply of sauce
it would have been very dry eating indeed. Eaten it was, however, to the
last crumb. If it were not just what a cornmeal pudding might be, the
rest of the bill of fare had been extra good and our appetites matched
it.

"I wish I was twins so's I could eat more," said Dan, when he simply had
to stop.

"What good would being twins do you?" asked Peter. "People who squint
can't eat any more than people who don't squint, can they?"

We could not see any connection between Peter's two questions.

"What has squinting got to do with twins?" asked Dan.

"Why, twins are just people that squint, aren't they?" said Peter.

We thought he was trying to be funny, until we found out that he was
quite in earnest. Then we laughed until Peter got sulky.

"I don't care," he said. "How's a fellow to know? Tommy and Adam Cowan,
over at Markdale, are twins; and they're both cross-eyed. So I s'posed
that was what being twins meant. It's all very fine for you fellows
to laugh. I never went to school half as much as you did; and you was
brought up in Toronto, too. If you'd worked out ever since you was
seven, and just got to school in the winter, there'd be lots of things
you wouldn't know, either."

"Never mind, Peter," said Cecily. "You know lots of things they don't."

But Peter was not to be conciliated, and took himself off in high
dudgeon. To be laughed at before Felicity--to be laughed at BY
Felicity--was something he could not endure. Let Cecily and the Story
Girl cackle all they wanted to, and let those stuck-up Toronto boys grin
like chessy-cats; but when Felicity laughed at him the iron entered into
Peter's soul.

If the Story Girl laughed at Peter the mills of the gods ground out
his revenge for him in mid-afternoon. Felicity, having used up all the
available cooking materials in the house, had to stop perforce; and she
now determined to stuff two new pincushions she had been making for
her room. We heard her rummaging in the pantry as we sat on the cool,
spruce-shadowed cellar door outside, where Uncle Roger was showing us
how to make elderberry pop-guns. Presently she came out, frowning.

"Cecily, do you know where mother put the sawdust she emptied out of
that old beaded pincushion of Grandmother King's, after she had sifted
the needles out of it? I thought it was in the tin box."

"So it is," said Cecily.

"It isn't. There isn't a speck of sawdust in that box."

The Story Girl's face wore a quite indescribable expression, compound of
horror and shame. She need not have confessed. If she had but held her
tongue the mystery of the sawdust's disappearance might have forever
remained a mystery. She WOULD have held her tongue, as she afterwards
confided to me, if it had not been for a horrible fear which flashed
into her mind that possibly sawdust puddings were not healthy for people
to eat--especially if there might be needles in them--and that if any
mischief had been done in that direction it was her duty to undo it if
possible at any cost of ridicule to herself.

"Oh, Felicity," she said, her voice expressing a very anguish of
humiliation, "I--I--thought that stuff in the box was cornmeal and used
it to make the pudding."

Felicity and Cecily stared blankly at the Story Girl. We boys began to
laugh, but were checked midway by Uncle Roger. He was rocking himself
back and forth, with his hand pressed against his stomach.

"Oh," he groaned, "I've been wondering what these sharp pains I've been
feeling ever since dinner meant. I know now. I must have swallowed a
needle--several needles, perhaps. I'm done for!"

The poor Story Girl went very white.

"Oh, Uncle Roger, could it be possible? You COULDN'T have swallowed a
needle without knowing it. It would have stuck in your tongue or teeth."

"I didn't chew the pudding," groaned Uncle Roger. "It was too tough--I
just swallowed the chunks whole."

He groaned and twisted and doubled himself up. But he overdid it. He was
not as good an actor as the Story Girl. Felicity looked scornfully at
him.

"Uncle Roger, you are not one bit sick," she said deliberately. "You are
just putting on."

"Felicity, if I die from the effects of eating sawdust pudding,
flavoured with needles, you'll be sorry you ever said such a thing to
your poor old uncle," said Uncle Roger reproachfully. "Even if there
were no needles in it, sixty-year-old sawdust can't be good for my
tummy. I daresay it wasn't even clean."

"Well, you know every one has to eat a peck of dirt in his life,"
giggled Felicity.

"But nobody has to eat it all at once," retorted Uncle Roger, with
another groan. "Oh, Sara Stanley, it's a thankful man I am that your
Aunt Olivia is to be home to-night. You'd have me kilt entirely by
another day. I believe you did it on purpose to have a story to tell."

Uncle Roger hobbled off to the barn, still holding on to his stomach.

"Do you think he really feels sick?" asked the Story Girl anxiously.

"No, I don't," said Felicity. "You needn't worry over him. There's
nothing the matter with him. I don't believe there were any needles in
that sawdust. Mother sifted it very carefully."

"I know a story about a man whose son swallowed a mouse," said the Story
Girl, who would probably have known a story and tried to tell it if she
were being led to the stake. "And he ran and wakened up a very tired
doctor just as he had got to sleep.

"'Oh, doctor, my son has swallowed a mouse,' he cried. 'What shall I
do?'

"'Tell him to swallow a cat,' roared the poor doctor, and slammed his
door.

"Now, if Uncle Roger has swallowed any needles, maybe it would make it
all right if he swallowed a pincushion."

We all laughed. But Felicity soon grew sober.

"It seems awful to think of eating a sawdust pudding. How on earth did
you make such a mistake?"

"It looked just like cornmeal," said the Story Girl, going from white to
red in her shame. "Well, I'm going to give up trying to cook, and stick
to things I can do. And if ever one of you mentions sawdust pudding to
me I'll never tell you another story as long as I live."

The threat was effectual. Never did we mention that unholy pudding. But
the Story Girl could not so impose silence on the grown-ups, especially
Uncle Roger. He tormented her for the rest of the summer. Never a
breakfast did he sit down to, without gravely inquiring if they were
sure there was no sawdust in the porridge. Not a tweak of rheumatism did
he feel but he vowed it was due to a needle, travelling about his body.
And Aunt Olivia was warned to label all the pincushions in the house.
"Contents, sawdust; not intended for puddings."



CHAPTER XVIII. HOW KISSING WAS DISCOVERED

An August evening, calm, golden, dewless, can be very lovely. At sunset,
Felicity, Cecily, and Sara Ray, Dan, Felix, and I were in the orchard,
sitting on the cool grasses at the base of the Pulpit Stone. In the west
was a field of crocus sky over which pale cloud blossoms were scattered.

Uncle Roger had gone to the station to meet the travellers, and the
dining-room table was spread with a feast of fat things.

"It's been a jolly week, take it all round," said Felix, "but I'm glad
the grown-ups are coming back to-night, especially Uncle Alec."

"I wonder if they'll bring us anything," said Dan.

"I'm thinking long to hear all about the wedding," said Felicity, who
was braiding timothy stalks into a collar for Pat.

"You girls are always thinking about weddings and getting married," said
Dan contemptuously.

"We ain't," said Felicity indignantly. "I am NEVER going to get married.
I think it is just horrid, so there!"

"I guess you think it would be a good deal horrider not to be," said
Dan.

"It depends on who you're married to," said Cecily gravely, seeing that
Felicity disdained reply. "If you got a man like father it would be all
right. But S'POSEN you got one like Andrew Ward? He's so mean and cross
to his wife that she tells him every day she wishes she'd never set eyes
on him."

"Perhaps that's WHY he's mean and cross," said Felix.

"I tell you it isn't always the man's fault," said Dan darkly. "When I
get married I'll be good to my wife, but I mean to be boss. When I open
my mouth my word will be law."

"If your word is as big as your mouth I guess it will be," said Felicity
cruelly.

"I pity the man who gets you, Felicity King, that's all," retorted Dan.

"Now, don't fight," implored Cecily.

"Who's fighting?" demanded Dan. "Felicity thinks she can say anything
she likes to me, but I'll show her different."

Probably, in spite of Cecily's efforts, a bitter spat would have
resulted between Dan and Felicity, had not a diversion been effected
at that moment by the Story Girl, who came slowly down Uncle Stephen's
Walk.

"Just look how the Story Girl has got herself up!" said Felicity. "Why,
she's no more than decent!"

The Story Girl was barefooted and barearmed, having rolled the sleeves
of her pink gingham up to her shoulders. Around her waist was twisted a
girdle of the blood-red roses that bloomed in Aunt Olivia's garden; on
her sleek curls she wore a chaplet of them; and her hands were full of
them.

She paused under the outmost tree, in a golden-green gloom, and laughed
at us over a big branch. Her wild, subtle, nameless charm clothed her as
with a garment. We always remembered the picture she made there; and
in later days when we read Tennyson's poems at a college desk, we knew
exactly how an oread, peering through the green leaves on some haunted
knoll of many fountained Ida, must look.

"Felicity," said the Story Girl reproachfully, "what have you been doing
to Peter? He's up there sulking in the granary, and he won't come
down, and he says it's your fault. You must have hurt his feelings
dreadfully."

"I don't know about his feelings," said Felicity, with an angry toss of
her shining head, "but I guess I made his ears tingle all right. I boxed
them both good and hard."

"Oh, Felicity! What for?"

"Well, he tried to kiss me, that's what for!" said Felicity, turning
very red. "As if I would let a hired boy kiss me! I guess Master Peter
won't try anything like that again in a hurry."

The Story Girl came out of her shadows and sat down beside us on the
grass.

"Well, in that case," she said gravely, "I think you did right to
slap his ears--not because he is a hired boy, but because it would be
impertinent in ANY boy. But talking of kissing makes me think of a story
I found in Aunt Olivia's scrapbook the other day. Wouldn't you like to
hear it? It is called, 'How Kissing Was Discovered.'"

"Wasn't kissing always discovered?" asked Dan.

"Not according to this story. It was just discovered accidentally."

"Well, let's hear about it," said Felix, "although I think kissing's
awful silly, and it wouldn't have mattered much if it hadn't ever been
discovered."

The Story Girl scattered her roses around her on the grass, and clasped
her slim hands over her knees. Gazing dreamily afar at the tinted sky
between the apple trees, as if she were looking back to the merry days
of the world's gay youth, she began, her voice giving to the words
and fancies of the old tale the delicacy of hoar frost and the crystal
sparkle of dew.

"It happened long, long ago in Greece--where so many other beautiful
things happened. Before that, nobody had ever heard of kissing. And then
it was just discovered in the twinkling of an eye. And a man wrote it
down and the account has been preserved ever since.

"There was a young shepherd named Glaucon--a very handsome young
shepherd--who lived in a little village called Thebes. It became a very
great and famous city afterwards, but at this time it was only a little
village, very quiet and simple. Too quiet for Glaucon's liking. He grew
tired of it, and he thought he would like to go away from home and
see something of the world. So he took his knapsack and his shepherd's
crook, and wandered away until he came to Thessaly. That is the land of
the gods' hill, you know. The name of the hill was Olympus. But it has
nothing to do with this story. This happened on another mountain--Mount
Pelion.

"Glaucon hired himself to a wealthy man who had a great many sheep. And
every day Glaucon had to lead the sheep up to pasture on Mount Pelion,
and watch them while they ate. There was nothing else to do, and he
would have found the time very long, if he had not been able to play on
a flute. So he played very often and very beautifully, as he sat under
the trees and watched the wonderful blue sea afar off, and thought about
Aglaia.

"Aglaia was his master's daughter. She was so sweet and beautiful that
Glaucon fell in love with her the very moment he first saw her; and
when he was not playing his flute on the mountain he was thinking about
Aglaia, and dreaming that some day he might have flocks of his own, and
a dear little cottage down in the valley where he and Aglaia might live.

"Aglaia had fallen in love with Glaucon just as he had with her. But she
never let him suspect it for ever so long. He did not know how often
she would steal up the mountain and hide behind the rocks near where
the sheep pastured, to listen to Glaucon's beautiful music. It was very
lovely music, because he was always thinking of Aglaia while he played,
though he little dreamed how near him she often was.

"But after awhile Glaucon found out that Aglaia loved him, and
everything was well. Nowadays I suppose a wealthy man like Aglaia's
father wouldn't be willing to let his daughter marry a hired man; but
this was in the Golden Age, you know, when nothing like that mattered at
all.

"After that, almost every day Aglaia would go up the mountain and sit
beside Glaucon, as he watched the flocks and played on his flute. But he
did not play as much as he used to, because he liked better to talk with
Aglaia. And in the evening they would lead the sheep home together.

"One day Aglaia went up the mountain by a new way, and she came to a
little brook. Something was sparkling very brightly among its pebbles.
Aglaia picked it up, and it was the most beautiful little stone that
she had ever seen. It was only as large as a pea, but it glittered and
flashed in the sunlight with every colour of the rainbow. Aglaia was so
delighted with it that she resolved to take it as a present to Glaucon.

"But all at once she heard a stamping of hoofs behind her, and when she
turned she almost died from fright. For there was the great god, Pan,
and he was a very terrible object, looking quite as much like a goat as
a man. The gods were not all beautiful, you know. And, beautiful or not,
nobody ever wanted to meet them face to face.

"'Give that stone to me,' said Pan, holding out his hand.

"But Aglaia, though she was frightened, would not give him the stone.

"'I want it for Glaucon,' she said.
