The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gospel of Luke, An Exposition by
Charles R. Erdman



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: The Gospel of Luke, An Exposition

Author: Charles R. Erdman

Release Date: October 11, 2008 [Ebook #26881]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOSPEL OF LUKE, AN EXPOSITION***





                            The Gospel of Luke

                              An Exposition

                                    By

                            Charles R. Erdman

                     Professor of Practical Theology

                     Princeton Theological Seminary,

                          Princeton, New Jersey

                               Philadelphia

                          The Westminster Press

                                   1936





CONTENTS


FOREWORD
INTRODUCTION
I. The Preface To the Gospel. Luke 1:1-4
II. The Birth and Childhood of Jesus. Chs. 1:5 to 2:52
   A. The Birth of John Foretold. Chs. 1:5-25
   B. The Annunciation To Mary. Ch. 1:26-38
   C. The "Magnificat." Ch. 1:39-56
   D. The Birth of John, and the "Benedictus." Ch. 1:57-80
   E. The Birth of Jesus. Ch. 2:1-20
   F. The Presentation of Jesus, and the "Nunc Dimittis." Ch. 2:21-40
   G. The Boy Jesus At Jerusalem. Ch. 2:41-52
III. The Preparation. Chs. 3:1 to 4:13
   A. The Preaching Of John. Ch. 3:1-20
   B. The Baptism Of Jesus. Ch. 3:21, 22
   C. The Genealogy Of Jesus. Ch. 3:23-38
   D. The Temptation Of Jesus. Ch. 4:1-13
IV. The Ministry in Galilee. Chs. 4:14 to 9:50
   A. The First Period. Ch. 4:14-44
      1. Jesus Preaching at Nazareth. Ch. 4:14-30
      2. Jesus Performing Miracles at Capernaum. Ch. 4:31-44
   B. The Second Period. Chs. 5:1 to 6:11
      1. The Call of the First Disciples. Ch. 5:1-11
      2. Jesus Cleansing a Leper. Ch. 5:12-16
      3. Jesus Forgiving Sins. Ch. 5:17-26
      4. The Call of Levi. Ch. 5:27-32
      5. The Question of Fasting. Ch. 5:33-39
      6. The Sabbath Controversy. Ch. 6:1-11
   C. The Third Period. Chs. 6:12 to 8:56
      1. The Choice of the Twelve. Ch. 6:12-19
      2. The Great Sermon. Ch. 6:20-49
      3. The Centurion of Capernaum. Ch. 7:1-10
      4. Jesus Raising the Widow's Son. Ch. 7:11-17
      5. Jesus Praising John. Ch. 7:18-35
      6. A Sinful Woman Forgiven. Ch. 7:36-50
      7. The Ministering Women. Ch. 8:1-3
      8. The Parable of the Sower. Ch. 8:4-18
      9. Kinship with Jesus. Ch. 8:19-21
      10. Jesus Stilling the Storm. Ch. 8:22-25
      11. A Demoniac Healed. Ch. 8:26-39
      12. The Daughter of Jairus and the Woman with an Issue of Blood. Ch.
      8:40-56
   D. The Fourth Period. Ch. 9:1-50
      1. The Mission of the Twelve. Ch. 9:1-9
      2. The Five Thousand Fed. Ch. 9:10-17
      3. Jesus Predicting his Death. Ch. 9:18-27
      4. The Transfiguration. Ch. 9:28-36
      5. The Demoniac Boy. Ch. 9:37-45
      6. Jesus Rebuking Pride and Bigotry. Ch. 9:46-50
V. The Journeys Toward Jerusalem. Chs. 9:51 to 19:28
   A. The First Stages. Ch. 9:51 to 13:21
      1. The Inhospitable Samaritans. Ch. 9:51-56
      2. Jesus Rebuking Rashness, Insincerity, and Indecision. Ch. 9:57-62
      3. The Mission of the Seventy. Ch. 10:1-24
      4. The Good Samaritan. Ch. 10:25-37
      5. Martha and Mary. Ch. 10:38-42
      6. Jesus' Teaching Concerning Prayer. Ch. 11:1-13
      7. Jesus Rebuking Blasphemy and Unbelief. Ch. 11:14-36
      8. Pharisaism Exposed and Denounced. Ch. 11:37-54
      9. Faithful Testimony Encouraged. Ch. 12:1-12
      10. A Warning Against Covetousness. Ch. 12:13-21
      11. The Cure of Anxiety. Ch. 12:22-34
      12. An Exhortation to Watchfulness. Ch. 12:35-48
      13. The Divisive Influence of Christ. Ch. 12:49-59
      14. A Call to Repentance. Ch. 13:1-9
      15. A Cure on the Sabbath. Ch. 13:10-21
   B. The Second Stages. Chs. 13:22 to 17:10
      1. The Narrow Door. Ch. 13:22-30
      2. The Message to Herod and the Lament Over Jerusalem. Ch. 13:31-35
      3. Jesus as a Sabbath Guest. Ch. 14:1-24
      4. Counting the Cost. Ch. 14:25-35
      5. The Prodigal Son. Ch. 15
      6. The Unrighteous Steward. Ch. 16:1-13
      7. The Rich Man and Lazarus. Ch. 16:14-31
      8. Warnings to the Disciples. Ch. 17:1-10
   C. The Last Stages. Chs. 17:11 to 19:28
      1. The Samaritan Leper. Ch. 17:11-19
      2. The Coming of the Kingdom. Ch. 17:20-37
      3. The Unrighteous Judge. Ch. 18:1-8
      4. The Pharisee and the Publican. Ch. 18:9-14
      5. Jesus Receiving Little Children. Ch. 18:15-17
      6. The Rich Ruler. Ch. 18:18-30
      7. Jesus Again Foretelling His Death. Ch. 18:31-34
      8. The Blind Man at Jericho. Ch. 18:35-43
      9. The Conversion of Zacchaeus. Ch. 19:1-10
      10. The Parable of the Pounds. Ch. 19:11-28
VI. The Closing Ministry. Chs. 19:29 to 21:38
   A. The Triumphal Entry. Ch. 19:29-48
   B. The Question As To Authority. Ch. 20:1-8
   C. The Parable Of The Husbandmen. Ch. 20:9-18
   D. The Question As To Paying Tribute. Ch. 20:19-26
   E. The Question As To The Resurrection. Ch. 20:27-40
   F. The Question Of Jesus. Ch. 20:41-44
   G. The Warning Against The Scribes. Ch. 20:45-47
   H. The Widow's Mites. Ch. 21:1-4
   I. The Destruction Of Jerusalem And The Coming Of Christ. Ch. 21:5-38
      1. The Present Age. Ch. 21:5-19
      2. The Destruction of Jerusalem. Ch. 21:20-24
      3. The Coming of Christ. Ch. 21:25-28
      4. The Encouragement to Hope and Vigilance. Ch. 21:29-36
      5. The Historic Statement. Ch. 21:37, 38
VII. The Death and Resurrection. Chs. 22 to 24
   A. The Treachery Of Judas. Ch. 22:1-6
   B. The Last Supper. Ch. 22:7-38
   C. The Agony In Gethsemane. Ch. 22:39-46
   D. The Arrest Of Jesus. Ch. 22:47-53
   E. Peter's Denial. Ch. 22:54-62
   F. Jesus Before The Jewish Rulers. Ch. 22:63-71
   G. Jesus Before Pilate. Ch. 23:1-25
   H. The Crucifixion. Ch. 23:26-38
   I. The Penitent Thief. Ch. 23:39-43
   J. The Death And Burial. Ch. 23:44-56
   K. The Empty Tomb. Ch. 24:1-12
   L. The Walk To Emmaus. Ch. 24:13-35
   M. Jesus Appearing To The Apostles. Ch. 24:36-43
   N. The Last Words. Ch. 24:44-49
   O. The Ascension. Ch. 24:50-53






The Bible text printed in boldface is taken from the American Standard
Edition of the Revised Bible, copyright, 1901, by Thomas Nelson & Sons,
and is used by permission.





TO THE MEN WHO LONG TO BE LIKE HIM





FOREWORD


The Gospel of Luke is the most beautiful book in the world; at least, so
it has been called, and those who know it best are not likely to dispute
such praise. The purpose of this little volume is to place the book in
convenient form, and by an outline and brief comments to aid in focusing
the thought of the reader upon the successive scenes of the gospel story.
These are familiar scenes, but each review of them more vividly reveals
the great central Figure as supreme among men in the matchless loveliness
of his divine manhood, himself the perfect, the ideal Man.





INTRODUCTION


The surpassing beauty of this book betokens the personal attractiveness of
its author and the dignity and importance of its theme. It was written by
Luke, "the beloved physician," and it concerns the life and saving work of
our Lord. The phrase which describes the writer as "the physician, the
beloved one," is full of significance. It was penned by Paul, when a
prisoner in Rome, to his friends in distant Colossae. It indicates that
Luke was a man of culture and scientific training and that the charm of
his character was so conspicuous as to be recognized by the Christian
churches of Europe and of Asia. The connection in which this phrase occurs
indicates that Luke was not a Jew but a Gentile by birth, and further,
that he was a close companion of Paul.

To Luke's authorship is attributed not only this "Third Gospel" but also
"The Acts." He was a man of such modesty that he never mentioned his own
name even when recording the stirring events in which he played so
prominent a part. Nevertheless he revealed himself in every page of his
writings and was evidently a man of broad sympathies, an acute observer, a
careful historian, and a loyal friend.

The story of his companionship with Paul begins in the record of the
apostle's second missionary journey when he was about to sail from Troas
on the memorable voyage which resulted in establishing Christianity on a
new continent. The two friends journeyed together to Philippi, where a
strong church was founded; but while Paul continued his travels through
Macedonia and Greece, Luke remained behind, possibly to care for the young
converts. Seven years later when Paul was on his third missionary tour he
seems to have found Luke at Philippi and to have been accompanied by him
on his way to Jerusalem. When Paul was arrested and was confined for two
years at Caesarea, Luke was his companion. Later they shared together the
perils of the voyage and the shipwreck on the way to Rome, and the
imprisonment in the imperial city. Paul appears to have been released and
then imprisoned a second time, and when he wrote his last letter, under
the shadow of approaching martyrdom, the only friend to remain faithful
and to comfort him in his loneliness was Luke.

As might be expected, the narrative composed by such an author is
characterized by (1) unusual literary beauty; it is plainly the product of
Greek culture. The divine Spirit chose and equipped a rare instrument in
the poetic and refined personality of Luke and through him gave to the
world that version of the gospel story which is most exquisite in style
and most finished in form.

Yet Luke was not only a man of culture, he was also a Christian physician
and thus a man of wide and tender sympathies, and his narrative is
therefore characterized (2) by its absorbing human interest. It is a story
of real life; it is suffused with emotion; it is full of gladness and
sorrow, of songs and of tears; it is vocal with praise and with prayer.

It is the gospel of childhood. By its tender stories of the birth of John
and of Jesus, it places an unfading halo of glory about the brow of
infancy, and it alone preserves the precious picture of the boyhood of our
Lord. It is the gospel of womanhood. It sketches for us that immortal
group of women associated with the life of Jesus. We see Elisabeth and the
virgin mother and the aged Anna, the widow of Nain, the sisters at
Bethany, and the repentant sinner, the sufferer bowed down by Satan and
the stranger who congratulates Mary, the company that minister to Jesus on
his journeys and the "daughters of Jerusalem" weeping on the way to the
cross.

It is the gospel of the home. It gives us glimpses of the family life at
Nazareth, of the scene in the house of Simon, of the hospitality of Martha
and Mary, of the evening meal with the two disciples at Emmaus and the
picture in the parables of the importunate friend at midnight, of the
woman searching the room for the lost coin and of the prodigal turning
back to his father's house.

It is the gospel of the poor and the lowly; it warns against the perils of
wealth and expresses sympathy and hope for those who are oppressed by
poverty and want. This sympathy is sounded in the song of Mary, in the
first sermon of the Saviour, in the first Beatitude, "Blessed are ye
poor." Luke also records the parables of the Rich Fool and of the Rich Man
and Lazarus, and paints, with Mark, the picture of the widow offering to
the Lord her two mites.

It is also the gospel of praise and of prayer, expressions of the deepest
convictions and longings of the human heart. The Gospel opens with a scene
in the Temple at the hour of incense and with the "Magnificat" of Mary and
the songs of Zacharias and of the angels. It closes with the benediction
of the ascending Lord and the thanksgiving of his joyful disciples.

Luke, however, was not only a man of culture and a beloved physician; he
was also a companion of Paul and had traveled with the apostle over a
great portion of the Roman world; therefore he naturally wrote a gospel
characterized by (3) universal interest. Here no narrow prejudice divides
race from race; a despised Samaritan stands as the supreme example of a
neighbor, the angels sing of peace among men, and the aged Simeon declares
that Jesus is to be a "light for revelation to the Gentiles" as well as
the glory of Israel. Luke alone gives the data which link the sacred story
to the secular history of the world. His outlook is unlimited. He regards
the good news concerning Christ as a message which is vital to the welfare
and redemption of the entire human race.

These aspects of his Gospel blend with the picture of his Lord which Luke
portrays. The character of Jesus is so subtle and complex as to defy exact
analysis, and yet it is evident that certain of its features, common to
all, are emphasized successively by each one of the Gospel writers.
