or have made some good progress in the way of life.  No, He has begun
His dealings with us with special, spontaneous acts of mercy.  He has,
by an inconceivable goodness, sent His Son to be our life.  Far from
asking any gift at our hands in the first instance, He has from our
infancy taken us in charge, and freely given us "all things that
pertain unto life and godliness."  He has been urgent with us in the
very morning of our days, and by the fulness of His grace has
anticipated the first stirrings of pride and lust, while as yet sin
slept within us.  Is it not so?  What more could have been done for us?
Yet, in spite of all this, men will not come unto Him that they may
have life.

So strange is this, that thoughtful persons are sometimes tempted to
suppose that the mass of mankind do not sufficiently know what their
duty is; that they need teaching, else they would be obedient.  And
others fancy that if the doctrines of the Gospel were set before them
in a forcible or persuasive manner, this would serve as a means of
rousing them to an habitual sense of their true state.  But ignorance
is not the true cause why men will not come to Christ.

Who are these willing outcasts from Christ's favour, of whom I speak?
Do not think I say a strong thing, my brethren, when I tell you that I
am speaking of some of those who now hear me.  Not that I dare draw the
line any where, or imagine that I can give any rule for knowing for
certain, just who come to Him in heart and spirit, and who do not; but
I am quite sure that many, who would shrink from giving up their
interest in the Gospel, and who profess to cast their lot with Christ,
and to trust in His death for their salvation, nevertheless do not
really seek Him that they may have life, in spite of their fair
speeches.  This I say I am too well enabled to know, because in fact so
it is, that He has shown us _how_ to come to Him, and I see that men do
_not_ come to Him in that way which He has pointed out.  He has shown
us, that to come to Him for life is a literal bodily action; not a mere
figure, not a mere movement of the heart towards Him, but an action of
the visible limbs; not a mere secret faith, but a coming to church, a
passing on along the aisle to His holy table, a kneeling down there
before Him, and a receiving of the gift of eternal life in the form of
bread and wine.  There can be no mistaking His own appointment.  He
said indeed, "He that cometh to Me shall never hunger;" but then He
explained what this coming was, by adding, "He that eateth Me, even he
shall live by Me."  If then a man does not seek Him where He is, there
is no profit in seeking Him where He is not.  What is the good of
sitting at home seeking Him, when His Presence is in the holy
Eucharist?  Such perverseness is like the sin of the Israelites who
went to seek for the manna at a time when it was not given.  May not He
who gives the gift, prescribe the place and mode of giving it?

Observe how plain and cogent is the proof of what I have been saying.
Our Lord declares, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and
drink His blood, ye have no life in you:" no life, life being the gift
He offers in the text; also He says of the bread which He had broken,
"_This_ is My Body;" and of the cup, "_This_ is My Blood," is it not
very plain, then, that if we refuse to eat that Bread, and drink that
Cup, we are refusing to come unto Him that we may have life?

The true reason why people will not come to this Holy Communion is
this,--they do not wish to lead religious lives; they do not like to
promise to lead religious lives; and they think that that blessed
Sacrament does bind them to do so, bind them to live very much more
strictly and thoughtfully than they do at present.  Allow as much as we
will for proper distrust of themselves, reasonable awe, the burden of
past sin, imperfect knowledge, and other causes, still after all there
is in most cases a reluctance to bear, or at least to pledge themselves
to bear, Christ's yoke; a reluctance to give up the service of sin once
for all; a lingering love of their own ease, of their own will, of
indolence, of carnal habits, of the good opinion of men whom they do
not respect; a distrust of their perseverance in holy resolves,
grounded on a misgiving about their present sincerity.  This is why men
will not come to Christ for life; they know that He will not impart
Himself to them, unless they consent to devote themselves to Him.

In what way does He offer Himself to them in Holy Communion? through
the commands and sanctions of the Law.  First, we are warned against
secret sin, and called to self-examination; a week's preparation
follows, then, when the time of celebration is come, we hear the
Commandments read, we are solemnly exhorted to put off every thing
which may offend God; we confess our sins and our deep sorrow for them;
lastly, after being admitted to the Sacrament, we expressly bind
ourselves to the service of our Lord and Saviour.  Doubtless _this_ it
is which the unrenewed heart cannot bear, the very notion of giving up
sin altogether and once for all.  And thus, though a gracious voice cry
ever so distinctly from the altar, "Come unto Me, and I will refresh
you;" and though it be ever so true that this refreshment is nothing
short of life, eternal life, yet we recollect the words which follow,
"Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me," and we forthwith murmur and
complain, as if the gift were most ungracious, laden with conditions,
and hardly purchased, merely because it is offered in that way in which
alone a righteous Lord could offer it,--the way of righteousness.

Men had rather give up the promise than implicate themselves in the
threats which surround it.  Bright and attractive as is the treasure
presented to us in the Gospel, still the pearl of great price lies in
its native depths, at the bottom of the ocean.  We see it indeed, and
know its worth; but not many dare plunge in to bring it thence.  What
reward offered to the diver shall overcome the imminent peril of a
frightful death? and those who love sin, and whose very life consists
in habits and practices short of religious, what promised prize can
reconcile them to the certain destruction of what they delight in, the
necessary annihilation of all their most favourite indulgences and
enjoyments which are contrary to the rule of the Gospel?  Let us not
suppose that any exhortations will induce such men to change their
conduct; they confess the worth of the soul, their obligation to obey,
and their peril if they do not; yet, for all this, the present
sacrifice required of them is too much for them.  They may be told of
their Lord's love for them, His self-denying mercy when on earth, His
free gifts, and His long-suffering since; they will not be influenced;
and why? because the fault is in their heart; they do not like God's
service.  _They_ know full well what they would have, if they might
choose.  Christ is said to have done all things for us; "Far from it,"
say they, "He is not a Mediator suited to our case.  Give life, give
holiness, give truth, give a Saviour to deliver from sin; this is not
enough: no, _we_ want a Saviour to deliver _in_ sin.  This is our need.
It is a small thing to offer us life, if it be in the way of God's
commandments; it is a mockery of our hopes to call that a free gift,
which is, in fact, a heavy yoke.  We want to do nothing at all, and
then the gift will be free indeed.  If our hearts _must_ be changed to
fit us for heaven, let them be changed, only let us have no trouble in
the work ourselves.  Let the change be part of the work done for us;
let us literally be clay in the hands of the potter; let us sleep, and
dream, and wake in the morning new men; let us have no fear and
trembling, no working out salvation, no self-denial.  Let Christ
suffer, but be it ours to rejoice only.  What we wish is, to be at
ease; we wish to have every thing our own way; we wish to enjoy both
this world and the next; we wish to be happy all at once.  If the
Gospel promises this, we accept it; but if not, it is but a bondage, it
has no persuasiveness, it will receive no acceptance from us."  Such is
the language of men's hearts, though their tongues do not utter it;
language most unthankful, most profane, most sinful.

These reflections I recommend to the serious attention of those who
live in neglect of Holy Communion; but, alas! I must not quit the
subject without addressing some cautions to those who are in the
observance of it.  I would that none of us had need of cautions; but
the best of us is in warfare, and on his trial, and none of us can be
the worse for them.  I need not remind you, my brethren, that there is
a peril attached to the unworthy reception; for this is the very excuse
which many plead for not receiving; but it often happens, as in other
matters also, that men have fears when they should not fear, and do not
fear when they should fear.  A slight consideration will show this; for
what is the danger in communicating? that of coming to it, as St. Paul
implies, _without_ fear.  It is evident then, that, in spite of what
was just now said, when persons are in danger of receiving it
unworthily, they commonly do not really feel their danger; for their
very danger consists in their not fearing.  If they did truly and
religiously fear the blessed Sacrament, so far they would not be in
danger of an unworthy reception.

Now it is plain when it is that persons are in danger of receiving it
fearlessly and thoughtlessly; not when they receive it for the first
time, but when they have often received it, when they are in the habit
of receiving it.  This is the dangerous time.

When a Christian first comes to Holy Communion, he comes with awe and
anxiety.  At least, I will not suppose the case of a person so little
in earnest about his soul, and so profane, as to despise the ordinance
when he first attends it.  Perhaps he has no clear doctrinal notion of
the sacred rite, but the very title of it, as the Sacrament of his
Lord's Body and Blood, suffices to make him serious.  Let us believe
that he examines himself, and prays for grace to receive the gift
worthily; and he feels at the time of celebration and afterwards, that,
having bound himself more strictly to a religious life, and received
Divine influences, he has more to answer for.  But after he has
repeated his attendance several times, this fear and reverence wear
away with the novelty.  As he begins to be familiar with the words of
the prayers, and the order of the Service, so does he both hear and
receive with less emotion and solemnity.  It is not that he is a worse
man than he was at first, but he is exposed to a greater temptation to
be profane.  He had no deeper religious principle when he first
communicated than he has now (probably not so deep), but his want of
acquaintance with the Service kept him from irreverence, indifference,
and wandering thoughts: but now this accidental safeguard is removed,
and as he has not succeeded in acquiring any habitual reverence from
former seasons of communicating, and has no clear knowledge of the
nature of the Sacrament to warn and check him, he is exposed to his own
ordinary hardness of heart and unbelief, in circumstances much more
perilous than those in which they are ordinarily displayed.  If it is a
sin to neglect God in the world, it is a greater sin to neglect Him in
church.  Now is the time when he is in danger of not discerning the
Lord's Body, of receiving the gift of life as a thing of course,
without awe, gratitude, and self-abasement.  And the more constant he
is in his attendance at the sacred rite, the greater will be his risk;
his _risk_, I say; that is, if he neglects to be jealous over himself,
to watch himself narrowly, and to condemn and hate in himself the
faintest risings of coldness and irreverence; for, of course, if he so
acts, the less will be his risk, and the greater will be his security
that his heart will not betray him.  But I speak of those who are not
sufficiently aware of their danger, and these are many.

Here, too, let me mention another sin of a similar character into which
communicants are apt to fall; _viz._ a forgetfulness, after
communicating, that they have communicated.  Even when we resist the
coldness which frequent communion may occasion, and strive to possess
our minds in as profound a seriousness as we felt when the rite was new
to us, even then there is often a painful difference between our
feelings before we have attended it, and after.  We are diligent in
preparation, we are careless in retrospect; we dismiss from our memory
what we cherished in our expectations; we forget that we ever hoped and
feared.  But consider; when we have solemn thoughts about Holy
Communion only till we have come to it, what does this imply, but that
we imagine that we have received the benefit of it once for all, as a
thing done and over, and that there is nothing more to seek?  This is
but a formal way of worshipping; as if we had wiped off a writing which
was against us, and there was an end of the matter.  But blessed are
those servants who are ever expecting Him, who is ever coming to them;
whether He come "at even, or at midnight, or at cock-crowing, or in the
morning;" whereas those who first come to Him for the gift of grace,
and then neglect to wait for its progressive accomplishment in their
hearts, how profanely they act! it is as if to receive the blessing in
mockery, and then to cast it away.  Surely, after so great a privilege,
we ought to behave ourselves as if we had partaken some Divine food and
medicine (if great things may be compared to ordinary), which, in its
own inscrutable way, and in its own good time, will "prosper in the
thing whereunto God sends it"--the fruit of the tree of life which Adam
forfeited, which had that virtue in it, that it was put out of his
reach in haste, lest he should take and eat, and live for ever.  How
earnest, then, should be our care lest this gracious treasure which we
carry within us should be lost by our own fault, by the unhealthy
excitements, or the listless indolence, to which our nature invites us!
"Quench not the Spirit," says the Apostle; surely our privilege is a
burden heavy to bear, before it turn to a principle of life and
strength, till Christ be formed in us perfectly; and we the while, what
cause have we to watch, and pray, and fulfil all righteousness, till
the day dawn, and the day-star arise in our hearts!

Nor let us suppose that by once or twice seeking God in this gracious
ordinance, we can secure the gift for ever; "Seek the Lord and His
strength, seek His face evermore."  The bread which comes down from
heaven is like the manna, "_daily_ bread," and that "till He come,"
till His "kingdom come."  In His coming at the end of the world, all
our wishes and prayers rest and are accomplished; and in His present
communion we have a stay and consolation meanwhile, joining together
the past and future, reminding us that He has come once, and promising
us that He will come again.  Who can live any time in the world,
pleasant as it may seem on first entering it, without discovering that
it is a weariness, and that if this life is worth any thing, it is
because it is the passage to another?  It needs no great religion to
feel this; it is a self-evident truth to those who have much experience
of the world.  The only reason why all do not feel it is, that they
have not lived long enough to feel it; and those who feel it more than
others, have but been thrown into circumstances to feel it more.  But
while the times wax old, and the colours of earth fade, and the voice
of song is brought low, and all kindreds of the earth can but wail and
lament, the sons of God lift up their heads, for their salvation
draweth nigh.  Nature fails, the sun shines not, and the moon is dim,
the stars fall from heaven, and the foundations of the round world
shake; but the Altar's light burns ever brighter; there are sights
there which the many cannot see, and all above the tumults of earth the
command is heard to show forth the Lord's death, and the promise that
the Lord is coming.

"Happy are the people that are in such a case!" who, when wearied of
the things seen, can turn with good hope to the things unseen; yea,
"blessed are the people who have the Lord for their God!"  "Come unto
Me," He says, "all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest."  Rest is better than toil; peace satisfies, and quietness
disappoints not.  These are sure goods.  Such is the calm of the
heavenly Jerusalem, which is the mother of us all; and such is their
calm worship, the foretaste, of heaven, who for a season shut
themselves out from the world, and seek Him in invisible Presence, whom
they shall hereafter see face to face.



[1] First Sunday after Easter.




SERMON XII.

The Gospel Feast

"_When Jesus then lifted up His eyes, and saw a great company come unto
Him, He saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread that these may
eat?_"--John vi. 5.


After these words the Evangelist adds, "And this He said to prove him,
for He Himself knew what He would do."  Thus, you see, our Lord had
secret meanings when He spoke, and did not bring forth openly all His
divine sense at once.  He knew what He was about to do from the first,
but He wished to lead forward His disciples, and to arrest and open
their minds, before He instructed them: for all cannot receive His
words, and on the blind and deaf the most sacred truths fall without
profit.

And thus, throughout the course of His gracious dispensations from the
beginning, it may be said that the Author and Finisher of our faith has
hid things from us in mercy, and listened to our questionings, while He
Himself knew what He was about to do.  He has hid, in order afterwards
to reveal, that then, on looking back on what He said and did before,
we may see in it what at the time we did not see, and thereby see it to
more profit.  Thus He hid Himself from the disciples as He walked with
them to Emmaus; thus Joseph, too, under different and yet similar
circumstances, hid himself from his brethren.

With this thought in our minds, surely we seem to see a new and further
meaning still, in the narrative before us.  Christ spoke of buying
bread, when He intended to create or make bread; but did He not, in
that bread which He made, intend further that Heavenly bread which is
the salvation of our souls?--for He goes on to say, "Labour not for the
meat" or food "which perisheth, but for that food which endureth unto
everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you."  Yes,
surely the wilderness is the world, and the Apostles are His priests,
and the multitudes are His people; and that feast, so suddenly, so
unexpectedly provided, is the Holy Communion.  He alone is the same.
He the provider of the loaves then, of the heavenly manna now.  All
other things change, but He remaineth.

And what is that Heavenly Feast which we now are vouchsafed, but in its
own turn the earnest and pledge of that future feast in His Father's
kingdom, when "the marriage of the Lamb shall come, and His wife hath
made herself ready," and "holy Jerusalem cometh down from God out of
heaven," and "blessed shall they be who shall eat bread in the kingdom
of God"?

And further, since to that Feast above we do lift up our eyes, though
it will not come till the end; and as we do not make remembrance of it
once only, but continually, in the sacred rite which foreshadows it;
therefore, in like manner, not in the miracle of the loaves only,
though in that especially, but in all parts of Scripture, in history,
and in precept, and in promise, and in prophecy, is it given us to see
the Gospel Feast typified and prefigured, and that immortal and
never-failing Supper in the visible presence of the Lamb which will
follow upon it at the end.  And if they are blessed who shall eat and
drink of that table in the kingdom, so too blessed are they who
meditate upon it, and hope for it now,--who read Scripture with it in
their thoughts, and endeavour to look beneath the veil of the literal
