The Project Gutenberg EBook of Acton's Feud, by Frederick Swainson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Acton's Feud
       A Public School Story

Author: Frederick Swainson

Release Date: January 25, 2005 [EBook #14772]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ACTON'S FEUD ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Beginners Projects, Marie Stelly, Bruce
Thomas and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net).





[Illustration: ACTON DROPPED TO THE GROUND LIKE A BLUDGEONED DOG.]

     ACTON'S FEUD


     A PUBLIC SCHOOL STORY

     BY
     FREDERICK SWAINSON

     1901

     WITH TWELVE ILLUSTRATIONS


     LONDON
     GEORGE NEWNES, LIMITED
     SOUTHAMPTON STREET, STRAND
     1901

     AD MATREM




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

  I. THE FOUL                                   1

  II. THE PENALTY                               8

  III. THE REGENERATION OF BIFFEN'S HOUSE      15

  IV. BIFFEN'S PROGRESS                        22

  V. COTTON AND HIS JACKAL                     27

  VI. THE LAST CAP                             36

  VII. THANKS TO ACTON                         49

  VIII. BIFFEN'S CONCERT                       57

  IX. THE END OF TERM                          65

  X. THE YOUNG BROTHER                         75

  XI. TODD PAYS THE BILL                       88

  XII. RAFFLES OF ROTHERHITHE                  93

  XIII. "EASY IS THE DOWNWARD ROAD"            99

  XIV. IN THE STABLE                          106

  XV. GRIM'S SUSPICIONS                       112

  XVI. TODD "FINDS HIMSELF"                   119

  XVII. RAFFLES' BILL                         126

  XVIII. HODGSON'S QUIETUS                    133

  XIX. HOW THEY "'ELPED THE PORE FELLER"      138

  XX. ACTON'S TRUMP CARD                      146

  XXI. LONDON AND BACK                        156

  XXII. THE PENFOLD TABLET FUND               161

  XXIII. BOURNE _v._ ACTON                    170

  XXIV. A RENEWED FRIENDSHIP                  179

  XXV. A LITTLE ROUGH JUSTICE                 187

  XXVI. THE MADNESS OF W.E. GRIM              194

  XXVII. CONCERNING TODD AND COTTON           204

  XXVIII. ACTON'S LAST MOVE                   209

  XXIX. WHY BIFFEN'S LOST                     215

  XXX. THE END OF THE FEUD                    225


ACTON'S CHRISTMAS

  I. SNOWED UP                                237

  II. OVER THE FELLS                          248




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


ACTON DROPPED TO THE GROUND LIKE A BLUDGEONED DOG             Frontispiece

PHIL WALKED DOWN THE STEPS WITHOUT A FRIENDLY CHEER                40

ACTON JUST REACHED IT WITH HIS HEAD                                50

AS THE TRAIN MOVED, GRIM SAID, "THREE CHEERS!"                     74

ACTON THREW HIM INTO THE SNOW-HEAP                                 78

A LITTLE YELLOW, EAR-TORN DOG BUSTLED OUT OF SOME SHED             94

"I'M GOING TO HAVE THE SEVEN TEN, OR SHOW YOU UP"                 128

THE GREEN POWDER UNDERWENT SOME WEIRD EXPERIMENTS                 142

HE PUSHED UP HIS WINDOW AND CRAWLED THROUGH                       160

"CUT, YOU MISERABLE PUPPY"                                        172

HE GAVE ME A LONG, STEADY LOOK OF HATRED                          204

AS THE HORSES WHIRLED PAST, HE CLUTCHED MADLY AT THE LOOSE REINS  226




CHAPTER I

THE FOUL


Shannon, the old Blue, had brought down a rattling eleven--two
Internationals among them--to give the school the first of its annual
"Socker" matches. We have a particular code of football of our own, which
the school has played time out of mind; but, ten years ago, the
Association game was introduced, despite the murmuring of some of the
masters, many of the parents--all old Amorians--and of Moore, the Head,
who had yielded to varied pressures, but in his heart thought "Socker"
vastly inferior to the old game. Association had flourished exceedingly;
so much so that the Head made it a law that, on each Thursday in the
Michaelmas term, the old game, and nothing but the old game, should be
played, and woe betide any unauthorized "cutters" thereof. This was almost
the only rule that Corker never swerved a hair's breadth from, and bitter
were the regrets when Shannon had sent word to Bourne, our captain, that
he could bring down a really clinking team to put our eleven through their
paces, if the match were played on Thursday. Saturday, on account of big
club fixtures, was almost impossible. Corker consented to the eleven
playing the upstart code for this occasion only, but for the school
generally the old game was to be _de rigueur_.

So on this Thursday pretty well the whole school was out in the Acres,
where the old game was in full swing; and, though I fancy the players to a
man would have liked to have lined up on the touch-line in the next field
and given Shannon the "whisper" he deserves, O.G. claimed them that
afternoon for its own, and they were unwilling martyrs to old Corker's
cast-iron conservatism. Consequently, when Bourne spun the coin and
Shannon decided to play with the wind, there would not be more than
seventy or eighty on the touch-line. Shannon asked me to referee, so I
found a whistle, and the game started.

It was a game in which there seemed to be two or three players who served
as motive forces, and the rest were worked through. On one side Shannon at
back, Amber the International at half, and Aspinall, the International
left-winger, were head and shoulders above the others; on our side, Bourne
and Acton dwarfed the rest.

Bourne played back, and Acton was his partner. Bourne I knew well, since
he was in the Sixth, and I liked him immensely; but of Acton I knew only a
little by repute and nothing personally. He was in the Fifth, but, except
in the ordinary way of school life, he did not come much into the circle
wherein the Sixth moves. He was brilliantly clever, with that sort of
showy brilliance which some fellows possess: in the exams, he would walk
clean through a paper, or leave it untouched--no half measures. He was in
Biffen's house and quite the most important fellow in it, and no end
popular with his own crowd, for they looked to him to give their house a
leg up, both in the schools and in the fields, for Biffen's were the
slackest house in St. Amory's. He played football with a dash and vim good
to see, and I know a good few of the eleven envied him his long, lungeing
rush, which parted man and ball so cleanly, and his quick, sure kick that
dropped the ball unerringly to his forwards. He was not in the eleven; but
that he would be in before the term was over was a "moral." He was
good-looking and rather tall, and had a certain foreign air, I thought;
his dark face seemed to be hard and proud, and I had heard that his temper
was fiery.

Bourne had chosen him to play against Shannon's team, and as Acton bottled
up the forwards on his wing Bourne felt that the school's future right
back would not be far to seek.

I soon saw that the school was not quite good enough for the others:
Shannon was almost impassable, and Amber, the half, generally waltzed
round our forwards, and when he secured he passed the ball on to Aspinall,
who doubled like a hare along the touch-line. The question then was "Could
Acton stop the flying International, who spun along like Bassett
himself?" And he did, generally; or, if he could not, he forced him to
part with the ball, and either Baines, our half, lying back, nipped in and
secured, or Bourne cleared in the nick of time. Nine times out of ten,
when Acton challenged Aspinall, the International would part with the ball
to his inside partner; but twice he feinted, and before either of the
school backs could recover, the ball was shot into the net with a high and
catapultic cross shot. Again and again the game resolved itself into a
duello between Acton and Aspinall, and Bourne, when he saw the dealings
with the International and his wiles, smiled easily. He saw the school was
stronger than he thought.

The interval came with the score standing at two against us. When I
started the game again I found that our fellows were pulling along much
better with the wind, and that some of Shannon's men were not quite so
dangerous as before, for condition told. We quickly had one through, and
when I found myself blowing the whistle for a second goal I began to think
that the school might pull through after all. Meanwhile Acton and Aspinall
were having their occasional tussles, though somewhat less often than
before, and three or four times the school back was overturned pretty
heartily in the encounters.

Though there was not a suspicion of unfairness or temper on Aspinall's
part, I fancied that Acton was getting rather nettled at his frequent
upsets. He was, I considered, heavier than Aspinall, and much taller, so I
was both rather waxy and astonished to find that he was infusing a little
too much vigour into his tackling, and, not to put too fine a point on it,
was playing a trifle roughly. Aspinall was bundled over the touch-line a
good half-dozen times, with no little animus behind the charge, and
ultimately Bourne noticed it. Now, Bourne loathed anything approaching bad
form, so he said sharply to Acton, though quietly, "Play the game, sir!
Play the ball!" Acton flushed angrily, and I did not like the savage way
he faced round to Bourne, who was particularly busy at that moment and did
not notice it. The game went on until within about five minutes from time.
Amber had been feeding Aspinall assiduously for the last ten minutes, and
Acton had, despite his cleverness, more than he could really hold in the
flying International. He stalled off the attack somehow, and Bourne always
covered his exertions, so that it seemed as if there would be a draw after
all. At last the ball was swung across, and Aspinall was off on a final
venture. Acton stuck to him like a leech, but the winger tipped the ball
to his partner, and as Acton moved to intercept the inside, the latter
quickly and wisely poked the ball back again to Aspinall. He was off again
in his own inimitable style, and I saw him smile as he re-started his run.
I rather fancy Acton saw it too, and accepted the smile as a sneering
challenge; anyhow, he set his lips and I believe made up his mind that in
any case Aspinall should not get the winning goal. How it exactly happened
I cannot say, but as Aspinall was steadying himself, when at top speed,
for an almost point-blank delivery, I saw Acton break his own stride,
shoot out his leg, and the next moment the International was stumbling
forward, whilst the ball rolled harmlessly onward into our goal-keeper's
hands. I could hardly believe my own eyes, but it was a deliberate trip,
if ever there was one! Aspinall tried to recover himself, failed, and came
with a sickening crash against the goal-post. I blew the whistle and
rushed to Aspinall; his cheek was bleeding villainously and he was deadly
pale. I helped him up, and he said with his usual smile--who could mistake
it for a sneer?--"Thanks, old man. Yes, I do feel a bit seedy. That back
of yours is an animal, though." He tried hard to keep his senses; I saw
him battling against his faintness, but the pain and shock were too much
for him; he fell down again in a dead faint.

We improvised a hurdle and carried him up to the school. Acton, pale to
the lips, prepared to bear a hand, but Bourne unceremoniously took him by
the arm and said with concentration, "No thanks, Acton. We'll excuse
you--you beastly cad!" I heard Bourne's remark, though no one else saw or
heard. Acton's hand closed involuntarily, and he gave Bourne a vitriolic
look, but did nothing nor said anything. We took Aspinall up to
Merishall's--his old house--where he was staying, and left him there still
unconscious.

What astonished me was that no one save Bourne had noticed the trip, but
when I came to think it over the explanation was easy. Acton had, whether
from accident or of purpose, "covered" his man and blocked the view from
behind. I myself had not really _seen_ the trip, but it would have
been plainly visible for any one opposite on the touch-line, and luckily
there was no one opposite. The goal-keeper might have seen it, but Roberts
never attends to anything but the ball--the reason he's the fine keeper
that he is. Bourne had actually seen it, being practically with Acton, and
I knew by his pale face and scornful eyes that he would dearly have liked
to kick Acton on the spot.

I was, as you may guess, intensely pleased that no one had an idea of the
foul except Bourne and myself, for I could imagine vividly where the
rumour of this sort of "form" would spread to. We'd hear of it for years
after.

I mentally promised that Acton should have a little of my opinion on the
matter on the first opportunity.




CHAPTER II

THE PENALTY


I arranged to see Bourne that evening, when we should have heard the
doctor's report on Aspinall. In the evening Bourne strolled into my room,
looking a little less gloomy than I expected. "Briggs says that there is
nothing broken, and that as soon as Aspinall gets over the shock he will
be all right. The cut may leave a scar, but that will be about all. All
the same, Carr, I think that's too heavy a price to pay for the bad temper
of one of our fellows who can't stand a tumble into the mud at 'footer.'
You saw the villainy, didn't you?"

"I can't say I actually saw him trip, but there's no doubt whatever that
it was an abominable foul."

"None at all. I saw him, worse luck, tolerably plainly."

"Do you know anything about him?"

"Practically nothing."

"I think Biffen's rather fancy he's going to lift them out of the mire."

"Can't say I envy them their champion."

"What strikes me as odd is that such a magnificent player should do such a
vile trick."

"Rum, certainly. The affair will give quite a professional touch to our
'Socker' fixtures, and the Carthusians will ask us to bar our bullies when
they come down again. Oh, this _is_ sweet!"

"I say, Bourne, this business must not move one inch further. You've
spoken to no one?"

"Is it likely?"

"We'll not have any of our dirty linen washed _coram populo_, old
chap. Frightful bad form. No one knows but you, Aspinall, and self."

"Surely Aspinall will----"

"You don't know Aspinall, old man. He'd shrivel up sooner than say a word
more. Bet you he'll speak of it as an accident. Remember, he was captain
of the school here once."

"Which makes it a blacker shame than ever," said Bourne, wrathfully.

"I've inquired casually of the Fifth, and it seems our friend once
distinguished himself in the gym. Lost his temper--as _per
recipe_--and Hodgson had to knock him down before he could see that
we put on the gloves here for a little healthy exercise, and the pleasure
of lifting some of the public schools championships. He, however,
apologized to Hodgson, but I don't think he'll do the honourable here."

"Then, the chief attraction of the beauty is its temper?"

"Or want of it."

"Who is he, anyhow?"

"Yorkshire people, I believe. Own half a town and no end of coin. Been to
school in France and Germany, and consequently came here rather late. I
know his head-piece Is all right, and I imagine his amiability is only a
little foreign blood working its way out. He will be with us in the Sixth
at Christmas."

"Delightful prospect. What I want to know is--how are we to settle this
business as far as he is concerned? Ought Moore to know?"

"I don't think so. Never trouble Corker more than you can help, old man.
That's a tip for you when I'm gone. Besides, masters generally mishandle
affairs of this sort. I rather fancy I'll put it to Aspinall when he pulls
through."

"Do. One thing, though, is pretty certain. He'll never get his cap as long
as I'm captain of the footer eleven. I'd rather come out of it myself."

"Of course. I see there's no help for that, but, all the same, it will
