a sixth, a seventh, and eighth. As fast as they fell the warriors at her
command brought up new victims for her weapon. Paul shut his eyes, but
he knew by the sounds what was passing. Suddenly a stern voice cried:

"Hold, woman! Enough of this! Will your tomahawk never be satisfied?"

Paul understood it, the meaning, but not the words. He opened his eyes
and saw the great figure of Timmendiquas striding forward, his hand
upraised in protest.

The woman turned her fierce gaze upon the young chief. "Timmendiquas,"
she said, "we are the Iroquois, and we are the masters. You are far from
your own land, a guest in our lodges, and you cannot tell those who have
won the victory how they shall use it. Stand back!"

A loud laugh came from the Iroquois. The fierce old chiefs, Hiokatoo and
Sangerachte, and a dozen warriors thrust themselves before Timmendiquas.
The woman resumed her chant, and a hundred throats pealed out with her
the chorus:

Victory and glory Aieroski gives to his children The mighty Six Nations,
greatest of men.

She gave the signal anew. The ninth victim stood before her, and then
fell, cloven to the chin; then the tenth, and the eleventh, and the
twelfth, and the thirteenth, and the fourteenth, and the fifteenth, and
the sixteenth-sixteen bound men killed by one woman in less than fifteen
minutes. The four in that group who were left had all the while been
straining fearfully at their bonds. Now they had slipped or broken
them, and, springing to their feet, driven on by the mightiest of human
impulses, they dashed through the ring of Iroquois and into the forest.
Two were hunted down by the warriors and killed, but the other two,
Joseph Elliott and Lebbeus Hammond, escaped and lived to be old men,
feeling that life could never again hold for them anything so dreadful
as that scene at "The Bloody Rock."

A great turmoil and confusion arose as the prisoners fled and the
Indians pursued. Paul and Shif'less Sol; full of sympathy and pity for
the fugitives and having felt all the time that their turn, too, would
come under that dreadful tomahawk, struggled to their feet. They did
not see a form slip noiselessly behind them, but a sharp knife descended
once, then twice, and the bands of both fell free.

"Run! run!" exclaimed the voice of Timmendiquas, low but penetrating. "I
would save you from this!"

Amid the darkness and confusion the act of the great Wyandot was not
seen by the other Indians and the renegades. Paul flashed him one look
of gratitude, and then he and Shif'less Sol darted away, choosing a
course that led them from the crowd in pursuit of the other flying
fugitives.

At such a time they might have secured a long lead without being
noticed, had it not been for the fierce swarm of old squaws who were
first in cruelty that night. A shrill wild howl arose, and the pointing
fingers of the old women showed to the warriors the two in flight. At
the same time several of the squaws darted forward to intercept the
fugitives.

"I hate to hit a woman," breathed Shif'less Sol to Paul, "but I'm goin'
to do it now."

A hideous figure sprang before them. Sol struck her face with his open
hand, and with a shriek she went down. He leaped over her, although
she clawed at his feet as he passed, and ran on, with Paul at his side.
Shots were now fired at him, but they went wild, but Paul, casting a
look backward out of the corner of his eye, saw that a real pursuit,
silent and deadly, had begun. Five Mohawk warriors, running swiftly,
were only a few hundred yards away. They carried rifle, tomahawk, and
knife, and Paul and Shif'less Sol were unarmed. Moreover, they were
coming fast, spreading out slightly, and the shiftless one, able even
at such a time to weigh the case coolly, saw that the odds were against
them. Yet he would not despair. Anything might happen. It was night.
There was little organization in the army of the Indians and of their
white allies, which was giving itself up to the enjoyment of scalps and
torture. Moreover, he and Paul were, animated by the love of life, which
is always stronger than the desire to give death.

Their flight led them in a diagonal line toward the mountains. Only once
did the pursuers give tongue. Paul tripped over a root, and a triumphant
yell came from the Mohawks. But it merely gave him new life. He
recovered himself in an instant and ran faster. But it was terribly hard
work. He could hear Shif'less Sol's sobbing breath by his side, and he
was sure that his own must have the same sound for his comrade.

"At any rate one uv 'em is beat," gasped Shif'less Sol. "Only four are
ban-in' on now."

The ground rose a little and became rougher. The lights from the Indian
fires had sunk almost out of sight behind them, and a dense thicket lay
before them. Something stirred in the thicket, and the eyes of Shif'less
Sol caught a glimpse of a human shoulder. His heart sank like a plummet
in a pool. The Indians were ahead of them. They would be caught, and
would be carried back to become the victims of the terrible tomahawk.

The figure in the bushes rose a little higher, the muzzle of a rifle was
projected, and flame leaped from the steel tube.

But it was neither Shif'less Sol nor Paul who fell. They heard a cry
behind them, and when Shif'less Sol took a hasty glance backward he saw
one of the Mohawks fall. The three who were left hesitated and stopped.
When a second shot was fired from the bushes and another Mohawk went
down, the remaining two fled.

Shif'less Sol understood now, and he rushed into the bushes, dragging
Paul after him. Henry, Tom, and Long Jim rose up to receive them.

"So you wuz watchin' over us!" exclaimed the shiftless one joyously. "It
wuz you that clipped off the first Mohawk, an' we didn't even notice the
shot."

"Thank God, you were here!" exclaimed Paul. "You don't know what Sol and
I have seen!"

Overwrought, he fell forward, but his comrades caught him.




CHAPTER XI. THE MELANCHOLY FLIGHT


Paul revived in a few minutes. They were still lying in the bushes,
and when he was able to stand up again, they moved at an angle several
hundred yards before they stopped. One pistol was thrust into Paul's
hand and another into that of Shif'less Sol.

"Keep those until we can get rifles for you," said Henry. "You may need
'em to-night."

They crouched down in the thicket and looked back toward the Indian
camp. The warriors whom they had repulsed were not returning with help,
and, for the moment, they seemed to have no enemy to fear, yet they
could still see through the woods the faint lights of the Indian camps,
and to Paul, at least, came the echoes of distant cries that told of
things not to be written.

"We saw you captured, and we heard Sol's warning cry," said Henry.
"There was nothing to do but run. Then we hid and waited a chance for
rescue."

"It would never have come if it had not been for Timmendiquas," said
Paul.

"Timmendiquas!" exclaimed Henry.

"Yes, Timmendiquas," said Paul, and then he told the story of "The
Bloody Rock," and how, in the turmoil and excitement attending the
flight of the last four, Timmendiquas had cut the bonds of Shif'less Sol
and himself.

"I think the mind o' White Lightnin', Injun ez he is," said Shif'less
Sol, "jest naterally turned aginst so much slaughter an' torture o'
prisoners."

"I'm sure you're right," said Henry.

"'Pears strange to me," said Long Jim Hart, "that Timmendiquas was made
an Injun. He's jest the kind uv man who ought to be white, an' he'd be
pow'ful useful, too. I don't jest eggzactly understan' it."

"He has certainly saved the lives of at least three of us," said Henry.
"I hope we will get a chance to pay him back in full."

"But he's the only one," said Shif'less Sol, thinking of all that he had
seen that night. "The Iroquois an' the white men that's allied with 'em
won't ever get any mercy from me, ef any uv 'em happen to come under
my thumb. I don't think the like o' this day an' night wuz ever done on
this continent afore. I'm for revenge, I am, like that place where the
Bible says, 'an eye for an eye, an' a tooth for a tooth,' an' I'm goin'
to stay in this part o' the country till we git it!"

It was seldom that Shif'less Sol spoke with so much passion and energy.

"We're all going to stay with you, Sol," said Henry. "We're needed here.
I think we ought to circle about the fort, slip in if we can, and fight
with the defense."

"Yes, we'll do that," said Shif'less Sol, "but the Wyoming fort can't
ever hold out. Thar ain't a hundred men left in it fit to fight, an'
thar are more than than a thousand howlin' devils outside ready to
attack it. Thar may be worse to come than anything we've yet seen."

"Still, we'll go in an' help," said Henry. "Sol, when you an' Paul have
rested a little longer we'll make a big loop around in the woods, and
come up to the fort on the other side."

They were in full accord, and after an hour in the bushes, where they
lay completely hidden, recovering their vitality and energy, they
undertook to reach the fort and cabins inclosed by the palisades.
Paul was still weak from shock, but Shif'less Sol had fully recovered.
Neither bad weapons, but they were sure that the want could be supplied
soon. They curved around toward the west, intending to approach the fort
from the other side, but they did not wholly lose sight of the fires,
and they heard now and then the triumphant war whoop. The victors were
still engaged in the pleasant task of burning the prisoners to death.
Little did the five, seeing and feeling only their part of it there in
the dark woods, dream that the deeds of this day and night would soon
shock the whole civilized world, and remain, for generations, a crowning
act of infamy. But they certainly felt it deeply enough, and in each
heart burned a fierce desire for revenge upon the Iroquois.

It was almost midnight when they secured entrance into the fort, which
was filled with grief and wailing. That afternoon more than one hundred
and fifty women within those walls had been made widows, and six hundred
children had been made orphans. But few men fit to bear arms were left
for its defense, and it was certain that the allied British and Indian
army would easily take it on the morrow. A demand for its surrender
in the name of King George III of England had already been made, and,
sitting at a little rough table in the cabin of Thomas Bennett, the
room lighted only by a single tallow wick, Colonel Butler and Colonel
Dennison were writing an agreement that the fort be surrendered the next
day, with what it should contain. But Colonel Butler put his wife on a
horse and escaped with her over the mountains.

Stragglers, evading the tomahawk in the darkness, were coming in, only
to be surrendered the next day; others were pouring forth in a stream,
seeking the shelter of the mountains and the forest, preferring any
dangers that might be found there to the mercies of the victors.

When Shif'less Sol learned that the fort was to be given up, he said:

"It looks ez ef we had escaped from the Iroquois jest in time to beg 'em
to take us back."

"I reckon I ain't goin' to stay 'roun' here while things are bein'
surrendered," said Long Jim Hart.

"I'll do my surrenderin' to Iroquois when they've got my hands an' feet
tied, an' six or seven uv 'em are settin' on my back," said Tom Ross.

"We'll leave as soon as we can get arms for Sol and Paul," said Henry.
"Of course it would be foolish of us to stay here and be captured again.
Besides, we'll be needed badly enough by the women and children that are
going."

Good weapons were easily obtained in the fort. It was far better to let
Sol and Paul have them than to leave them for the Indians. They were
able to select two fine rifles of the Kentucky pattern, long and
slender barreled, a tomahawk and knife for each, and also excellent
double-barreled pistols. The other three now had double-barreled
pistols, too. In addition they resupplied themselves with as much
ammunition as scouts and hunters could conveniently carry, and toward
morning left the fort.

Sunrise found them some distance from the palisades, and upon the flank
of a frightened crowd of fugitives. It was composed of one hundred women
and children and a single man, James Carpenter, who was doing his best
to guide and protect them. They were intending to flee through the
wilderness to the Delaware and Lehigh settlements, chiefly Fort Penn,
built by Jacob Stroud, where Stroudsburg now is.

When the five, darkened by weather and looking almost like Indians
themselves, approached, Carpenter stepped forward and raised his rifle.
A cry of dismay rose from the melancholy line, a cry so intensely bitter
that it cut Henry to the very heart. He threw up his hand, and exclaimed
in a loud voice:

"We are friends, not Indians or Tories! We fought with you yesterday,
and we are ready to fight for you now!"

Carpenter dropped the muzzle of the rifle. He had fought in the battle,
too, and he recognized the great youth and his comrades who had been
there with him.

"What do you want of us?" asked he.

"Nothing," replied Henry, "except to help you."

Carpenter looked at them with a kind of sad pathos.

"You don't belong here in Wyoming," he said, "and there's nothing to
make you stick to us. What are you meaning to do?"

"We will go with you wherever you intend to go," replied Henry; "do
fighting for you if you need it, and hunt game for you, which you are
certain to need."

The weather-beaten face of the farmer worked.

"I thought God had clean deserted us," he said, "but I'm ready to take
it back. I reckon that he has sent you five to help me with all these
women and little ones."

It occurred to Henry that perhaps God, indeed, had sent them for this
very purpose, but he replied simply:

"You lead on, and we'll stay in the rear and on the sides to watch for
the Indians. Draw into the woods, where we'll be hidden."

Carpenter, obscure hero, shouldered his rifle again, and led on toward
the woods. The long line of women and children followed. Some of the
women carried in their arms children too small to walk. Yet they were
more hopeful now when they saw that the five were friends. These lithe,
active frontiersmen, so quick, so skillful, and so helpful, raised their
courage. Yet it was a most doleful flight. Most of these women had
been made widows the day before, some of them had been made widows and
childless at the same time, and wondered why they should seek to live
longer. But the very mental stupor of many of them was an aid. They
ceased to cry out, and some even ceased to be afraid.

Henry, Shif'less Sol, and Tom dropped to the rear. Paul and Long
Jim were on either flank, while Carpenter led slowly on toward the
mountains.

"'Pears to me," said Tom, "that the thing fur us to do is to hurry 'em
up ez much ez possible."

"So the Indians won't see 'em crossing the plain," said Henry. "We
couldn't defend them against a large force, and it would merely be a
massacre. We must persuade them to walk faster."

Shif'less Sol was invaluable in this crisis. He could talk forever in
his-placid way, and, with his gentle encouragement, mild sarcasm, and
anecdotes of great feminine walkers that he had known, he soon had them
moving faster.

Henry and Tom dropped farther to the rear. They could see ahead of them
the long dark line, coiling farther into the woods, but they could
also see to right and left towers of smoke rising in the clear morning
sunlight. These, they knew, came from burning houses, and they knew,
also, that the valley would be ravaged from end to end and from side
to side. After the surrender of the fort the Indians would divide into
small bands, going everywhere, and nothing could escape them.

The sun rose higher, gilding the earth with glowing light, as if the
black tragedy had never happened, but the frontiersmen recognized their
greatest danger in this brilliant morning. Objects could be seen at a
great distance, and they could be seen vividly.

Keen of sight and trained to know what it was they saw, Henry, Sol, and
Tom searched the country with their eyes, on all sides. They caught a
distant glimpse of the Susquehanna, a silver spot among some trees, and
they saw the sunlight glancing off the opposite mountains, but for the
present they saw nothing that seemed hostile.

They allowed the distance between them and the retreating file to grow
until it was five or six hundred yards, and they might have let it grow
farther, but Henry made a signal, and the three lay down in the grass.


"You see 'em, don't you!" the youth whispered to his comrade.

"Yes, down thar at the foot o' that hillock," replied Shif'less Sol;
"two o' em, an' Senecas, I take it."

"They've seen that crowd of women and children," said Henry.

It was obvious that the flying column was discovered. The two Indians
stepped upon the hillock and gazed under their hands. It was too far
away for the three to see their faces, but they knew the joy that would
be shown there. The two could return with a few warriors and massacre
them all.

"They must never get back to the other Indians with their news,"
whispered Henry. "I hate to shoot men from ambush, but it's got to be
done. Wait, they're coming a little closer."

The two Senecas advanced about thirty yards, and stopped again.

"S'pose you fire at the one on the right, Henry," said Tom, "an' me an'
Sol will take the one to the left."

"All right," said Henry. "Fire!"

They wasted no time, but pulled trigger. The one at whom Henry had aimed
fell, but the other, uttering a cry, made off, wounded, but evidently
with plenty of strength left.

"We mustn't let him escape! We mustn't let him carry a warning!" cried
Henry.

But Shif'less Sol and Tom Ross were already in pursuit, covering the
ground with long strides, and reloading as they ran. Under ordinary
circumstances no one of the three would have fired at a man running for
his life, but here the necessity was vital. If he lived, carrying the
tale that he had to tell, a hundred innocent ones might perish. Henry
followed his comrades, reloading his own rifle, also, but he stayed
behind. The Indian had a good lead, and he was gaining, as the others
were compelled to check speed somewhat as they put the powder and
bullets in their rifles. But Henry was near enough to Shif'less Sol and
Silent Tom to hear them exchange a few words.

"How far away is that savage?" asked Shif'less Sol.

"Hundred and eighty yards," said Tom Ross.

"Well, you take him in the head, and I'll take him in the body."
