"On what matter have you desired this interview, Captain Drake?" asked
the Queen.

"It is one which, for obvious reasons, Master Drake desires should not
be made public," observed Sir Christopher Hatton.

On this her Majesty signed to her courtiers to retire out of earshot,
and then ordered Drake to speak.  He accordingly, craving her Majesty's
sanction, and pointing out its importance, and the gold and advantage
which her kingdom might derive from its prosperous issue, unfolded his
design.  His ambition was, he said, to conduct a fleet of stout ships,
well armed, through the straits which the Portuguese Magalhaens had
discovered more than half a century before, into that Pacific Ocean
which he had navigated from east to west, and on which John Oxenham's
bark had floated, and he himself had besought Almighty God that he too
might sail in an English ship.  He spoke not at the time of attacking
the Spaniards wherever he should meet them, and depriving them of the
wealth they had procured by the death of the thousands of helpless
Indians they had enslaved, knowing that her Majesty, since she was at
peace with Spain, could not openly approve of such a proceeding.

What more was said need not be repeated; but as he took his parting
farewell of the Queen, her Majesty presented him with a sword, saying,
"We do account that he which striketh at thee, Drake, striketh at us."

With this verbal warrant, the brave Captain lost no time in making
energetic preparations for his projected voyage.  He found no lack of
followers eager to share his fortunes; but, according to the best of his
judgment, he chose men of experience and tried bravery, on whom he could
depend.  He gave out that the squadron was intended for a trading voyage
to Alexandria, though neither his officers nor the ever-watchful
Spaniards were deceived by those pretexts.

Five ships were procured, and, being rapidly fitted out, were supplied
with all necessary stores and munitions.  Drake himself superintended
everything, down to the minutest point, so that nothing required might
be wanting.  It was to this, as well as to the interest he took in his
men, and to his superior seamanship and enterprise, that much of his
success was owing.

His squadron consisted of five vessels,--the _Pelican_, of a hundred
tons burden, in which he himself sailed; the second being the
_Elizabeth_, vice-admiral, burden eighty tons, Captain John Winter; the
third the _Marigold_, a bark of thirty tons, Captain John Thomas; the
fourth the _Swan_, a fly-boat of fifty tons, Captain John Chester; the
fifth the _Christopher_, a pinnace of fifteen tons, Captain Thomas Moon.
These ships were manned with a hundred and sixty-four able seamen,
officers, and others, and among other things carried were several
pinnaces, ready framed in pieces, to be set up in smooth water as might
be required.  He had a band of musicians, his cabins were richly
furnished, and the services for the table, and many utensils even
belonging to the cook room, were of silver.  All things being ready, the
Admiral and his officers went on board, and set sail from Plymouth Sound
at five o'clock in the afternoon of the 15th of November, 1577.

When off the Lizard, meeting with a heavy south-westerly gale, they were
driven back, the _Pelican_ and _Marigold_ having to cut away their
mainmasts, to Falmouth, where they remained until the 13th of the next
month, when, all their damages being repaired, they once more put to
sea.

All on board were eager to know their destination.  When out of sight of
land, the Admiral, should the ships be separated, appointed Mogador as a
rendezvous, and it was thus guessed that they were not bound up the
Straits of Gibraltar.

Sighting the Barbary coast on the 25th of December, the squadron entered
the harbour of Mogador, in the dominions of the King of Fez, on the
27th.  While some of the people were employed in setting up a pinnace,
several natives appeared, among whom were two Moorish chiefs, requesting
to be taken on board to the Admiral.  A boat was accordingly dispatched,
and the two Moors were brought off, an Englishman being left as a
hostage.  The Moors were courteously entertained.  When wine was
presented to them, they declined drinking it in public, but had no
objection to swallow a good quantity when they could do so unobserved.

On their return the hostage was restored.  The next day some men and
camels came down to the beach, apparently wishing to trade, as they
exhibited various commodities.  On this a boat from one of the ships,
unknown to the Admiral, was sent to meet them, when one of the men in
her, John Fry by name, wishing to become a hostage, that he might hear
them speak and observe their manners, leapt hurriedly on shore, and ran
on some way from the boat.  Before he was aware of his danger, he was
seized by the Moors, who, lifting him up on one of the camels, set off
with him at a rapid rate.  As the rest of the crew were about to land, a
large number of the natives sprang out from behind the rocks, and
compelled the English seamen to retreat.  It was afterwards found that
the man had been carried off by the orders of the King of Fez, who
wished to gain information regarding an expected invasion of his
territory by the Portuguese.

Drake, on hearing what had occurred, landed a party of men and marched
some distance into the interior, but the Moors kept out of his way, so
that he was compelled to return without gaining information; and,
supposing that Fry was lost, he ordered the squadron to put to sea.  Fry
meanwhile was kindly treated by the King of Fez, who, finding that no
information could be got from him, sent him back to the coast, where, to
his grief, he found that the fleet had sailed.  He, however, before long
got home in an English merchant vessel.

Running down the African coast, they took three Spanish fishing-boats
called caunters, and shortly afterwards two caravels, when at length
they caught sight of the Southern Cross.  Passing Cape Barbas, they
sighted a Spanish ship at anchor.  She was captured with only two people
on board, the rest having fled on shore.  In a harbour, three leagues
within the cape, the ships brought up, and there remained several days,
obtaining fresh water and provisions, as well as all sorts of fish in
abundance.

The people here appeared to be suffering from famine, and a wretched
woman, with a babe in her arms, was brought down to the beach to be sold
as a slave; but Drake indignantly refused to purchase her, saying that
he did not trade in human beings.  Other people brought leather bags to
buy water.  Drake gave them water, but declined receiving payment in
return.  Having refitted the ships and discharged all the Spanish
prizes, except one caunter, in exchange for which the _Christopher_ was
given to the owner, and one caravel, the squadron proceeded to the Cape
de Verde Islands, and put into the harbour of Saint Mary's.  Here, when
the inhabitants, who were subjects of the King of Portugal, saw them
coming on shore, they fled to the mountains, and no provisions or fresh
water could be purchased.

A party, under Captain Winter and Mr Thomas Doughty, was sent on shore
to try and obtain what was required.  They saw large herds of goats;
wild hens, and salt which had been gathered in great quantities from the
rocks.  The country was fertile, covered with trees and vines, bearing
delicious grapes, with which the seamen refreshed themselves.  There
were many other fruit-trees, some bearing plantains, a pleasant and
wholesome fruit, others figs, with ripe fruit on them.  Sailing from
Saint Mary's on the 30th of January, they the next day passed the island
of Saint Jago, beyond which lies the burning island called by the
Portuguese Fogo.  To the south-west of this island they took a Portugal
ship laden with wine, linen and woollen cloths, and other necessaries,
bound for the Brazils, and having many gentlemen and merchants on board
her.  The command of this prize was given to Thomas Doughty, who was an
old friend of Drake's, and much trusted by him.

The ships passed by several towns, the people in which fired off their
great guns to signify that they were prepared for an assault.  The pilot
of the Portuguese ship, Nuna da Silva, being found to be an expert
mariner, well acquainted with the coast of Brazil, was taken on board
the admiral.

Passing Fogo, the squadron brought to off the fertile island of Brava.
Here the only inhabitant to be found was a monk, who had built himself a
rude dwelling; but on seeing the English landing, he fled, leaving
behind him the relics of his false worship--a cross with a crucifix, an
altar with its superior altar, and idols of wood of rude workmanship.

Here the Portugals taken near Saint Jago were dismissed; the
_Christopher_, pinnace, being given them in exchange for their own ship,
and wine, bread, and fish for their provision, excepting Nuna da Silva,
who, when he heard that the fleet was bound for the South Sea, willingly
remained with Drake.

Only a small supply of water being taken on board, the fleet sailed from
Brava on the 2nd of February, steering a course for the Straits of
Magellan.  Passing the equator on the 17th, they sailed for sixty-three
days out of sight of land.

Drake was not without his troubles: it having been found that Captain
Doughty had appropriated to his own use certain presents made by the
prisoners, he was superseded by Thomas Drake, the Admiral's brother.
This disgrace appears to have rankled in Mr Doughty's heart, and caused
him to feel a bitter animosity against his former friend and commander.
During this long passage the squadron sometimes met with adverse winds
and violent storms, when lightnings flashed and terrific claps of
thunder rattled above their heads; at others they were long becalmed,
suffering from the effects of the sweltering heat of the torrid zone.
They were depressed, and would have suffered greatly from the want of
water, had they not been able to supply themselves, both before and
after crossing the Line, by means of the heavy showers which every day
fell, the water being collected in sails and sheets.

When in the tropics they saw, for the first time, shoals of flying-fish
of the size of pilchards, chased by bonitos and dolphins, or
"_dorados_," as the Spaniards called them.  Also, as they watched the
flying-fish trying to escape from their foes in the water, they observed
huge birds pounce down and seize the helpless fugitives.  Cuttle-fish
likewise--strange, black creatures--leapt on board the ships in
considerable numbers.  These and other novel sights did not fail to
interest them.  On the 5th of April they sighted the coast of Brazil,
where the land was low, and, sounding, they found only twelve fathoms
three leagues off the shore.  Huge fires were observed, kindled by the
inhabitants.  The Portuguese had before this landed on the coast, and
reduced the natives to a miserable stage of bondage, compelling them by
their cruelty to fly from the fertile parts of the country into the more
unfruitful districts.

Drake wished to go on shore, but, finding no harbour, the squadron
coasted along until the 7th of April, when a terrible storm of wind from
the southward rose, during which the _Christopher_ was separated from
the rest of the fleet.  She was the caunter taken at Blanco, on which
the name of _Christopher_ was bestowed when the vessel originally
so-called was given to the prisoners.  After the squall, which lasted
only three hours, the squadron continued beating to the southward, until
they got off the Rio de la Plata, up which they ran until they came to
an anchor under Cape Joy.  Drake so-called it from the satisfaction he
felt at seeing the _Christopher_ come in two days after they had
anchored, he having thoughtfully appointed it as a rendezvous, should
any of the vessels be separated.

Among the principal of his subordinate objects was to keep the fleet
together, to obtain good drinking-water and fresh provisions as often as
possible.  They found the climate delicious, and saw a number of large
deer.  Considerably higher up the river they anchored near some rocks,
where they killed a large number of seals, or sea-wolves, as the
Spaniards called them.  They found their flesh wholesome and pleasant,
and salted a number for their further use.

Having spent a fortnight in the River Plate, they again put to sea, when
shortly afterwards the fly-boat _Swan_ was lost sight of.  In order to
save the inconvenience of so many vessels to look after, Drake
determined to lessen their number, that the crews of those remaining
might be strengthened and have less duty to perform.  Winter was coming
on, and, in order to prepare for it, a convenient harbour was searched
for.  While examining the coast, on May 8th, during another storm, the
caunter was again separated from the fleet.  The ships being much tossed
about, they stood in with the intention of coming to an anchor near a
headland, off which many rocks were observed.  Drake, who never trusted
to other men when he could perform the work himself, despising danger
and toil, had a boat lowered, and rowed in himself to examine the bay.

Approaching the shore, a native was seen singing and dancing, and
shaking a rattle, expecting him to land.  Suddenly the wind still
further increased, while a thick fog coming on, the Admiral lost sight
of his ships.  He immediately pulled off to try and regain them, but
would very probably have been lost in the heavy sea running, had not
Captain Thomas of the _Marigold_, at great risk, stood in, and having
taken him on board, bravely rode out the gale.

Next morning the weather cleared, but the rest of the ships were nowhere
visible; the Admiral, therefore, landing, lighted up large signal-fires
in the hopes of their being seen by the ships.  The natives had fled up
the country for fear of the strangers.  The seamen found, however, in
their huts near the shore the flesh of upwards of fifty ostriches cured,
as well of that of other birds, the size of the former being equal to
legs of mutton.  They discovered also the device by which the ostriches
were captured.  This consisted of the head, neck, and plumage of the
bird fixed to the end of a pole, with large feathers sticking out behind
sufficient to conceal a man's body.  With these the ostriches were
stalked and driven either into some neck of land, or against large and
strong nets, with the assistance of dogs.

The dispersed ships, seeing the fires, shortly came to an anchor,
excepting the _Swan_ and the _Mary_, the Portugal prize, which had
parted company.  This not being a convenient place, the squadron sailed
on the 15th of May, and on the 17th anchored in a sheltered bay, where
they remained fifteen days.  Having made various necessary arrangements,
the Admiral sailed northwards to look out for the _Swan_, and dispatched
Captain Winter in the _Elizabeth_ for the same object.  She was
fortunately soon discovered, and being brought back, was unladen and run
on shore, when she was broken up, her ironwork and planking being
distributed among the ships, the latter to be used as fuel and other
purposes.

While the crews were thus employed, the natives made their appearance on
the top of a hill, leaping, dancing, and holding up their hands, and
crying out in a curious fashion.  With the exception of a skin of fur
cast about their shoulders, they were naked.  Their bodies were painted,
and the chiefs wore feathers in their hair, which looked at a distance
like horns.

The Admiral on this sent a boat on shore with knives, bells, beads, and
other things, which he thought would please them.  Seeing the strangers,
two of the natives came rushing down at a great rate, but stopped short
when still at some distance.  On the English retiring, they, however,
advanced and took the articles which had been placed on sticks so that
they could be seen, leaving instead plumes of feathers, and bones shaped
like large toothpicks.

Their confidence was soon gained, and numbers coming down, mixed freely
among their visitors.  They appeared to be a mild, well-disposed people,
and learned to place implicit confidence in the Admiral, who won the
affection of the chief by bestowing upon him the cap he usually wore.
The savage, as a curious mark of his affection, wounded himself with an
arrow in the leg, letting the blood stream on the ground.

These natives were well-made, good-looking, and remarkably active and
swift of foot.  They obtained from the birds and seals frequenting the
shore an abundance of food, which, it appeared, they ate raw.  They were
all armed with short bows, and arrows of reed headed with flints.  The
English here killed large numbers of birds, which were so tame that they
perched on the men's heads and shoulders, and in a bay near at hand they
took upwards of two hundred seals in the space of an hour.

Having repaired and provisioned the ships, on the 3rd of June they set
sail, steering southward, but anchored again in two days in a bay, where
the caunter _Christopher_ was run on shore and her cargo removed.

Again they proceeded, after anchoring a short time, until they brought
up once more in another bay in 15 degrees 20 minutes, short only one
degree off the mouth of the straits.

Here the Admiral, anxious to find the long-missing _Mary_, which had on
board their chief store of wine, determined to sail back again until
they reached the latitude where she had been lost.  A bright look-out
was kept for her, and happily, on the evening of the 19th of June, when
the squadron was within a few leagues of Port Saint Julien, the missing
ship was sighted.  They were greatly rejoiced at this; but she was found
to be so much out of order, and her crew had suffered so many
privations, that the Admiral thought it well to put into that harbour,
which was to prove a place fatal to several of their number.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

VOYAGE OF SIR FRANCIS DRAKE, CONTINUED--A.D. 1578.

Squadron at Port Saint Julien--Attacked by the natives--Captain Winter,
and Oliver the gunner, killed--Doughty's conspiracy--Trial--Execution--
Squadron sails--Enters the Straits of Magellan--Name of the _Dolphin_
changed to the _Golden Hind_--Passage through the Straits--Elizabeth
Island--Meets natives--Enters the Southern Ocean--Ships driven before a
northerly gale--The _Marigold_ lost sight of--After a month's buffeting,
the two ships gain a harbour--The _Hind_ again driven to sea--The
_Elizabeth_ deserts her--A pinnace lately set up remains, but is finally
lost--The _Hind_ alone regains a harbour--Sails north--Calls off Mucho
Island--Boat treacherously attacked by natives--Drake wounded--Refuses
to retaliate--Reaches the mainland--Search for provisions--Meets an
Indian--Treats him kindly--His friends bring off provisions--He pilots
the _Hind_ to Valparaiso--Capture of a richly-laden vessel, and sack of
the town--Sail northward--Put into a bay--Boat's crew attacked by
Spaniards--Minjoy killed--The pinnace set up--Drake sails in her--Driven
back by foul winds--Booty obtained from an Indian asleep and from a
train of llamas--Indians come off on balsas--Two Spaniards, through
fear, bring off provisions--Llamas described--Vessels at Arica and
Arequipa plundered--A vessel laden with linen captured--Callao reached--
Drake hears of the _Cacafuego_--Plunders several vessels--Sails in
pursuit of the _Cacafuego_--Pursued.

The squadron came to an anchor in Port Saint Julien on the 20th of June,
and, having arranged various matters, the next day but one the Admiral,
accompanied by his brother, John Thomas, Robert Winter, Oliver the
master gunner, John Brewer, and Thomas Hood, rowed up along the shore in
search of a good place for watering.

Not far off on the shore was seen the remains of a gibbet, supposed to
be that set up by Magalhaens for the execution of one of his rebellious
captains.  On landing, two huge natives, called by that navigator
Patagons, came down and appeared to be friendly, being ready to receive
whatever was offered to them.  They took especial pleasure at seeing Mr
Oliver, the master gunner, shoot with his bow, till they were joined by
an ill-tempered-looking savage, who tried to draw them away.  At this
juncture a number more of big fellows, armed with bows, who had hitherto
been concealed, crept up towards the English.  While Mr Winter was also
shooting with his bow, thinking to amuse them as Mr Oliver had done,
the string broke.  Not liking their gestures, the Admiral ordered his
party to retreat, covering themselves with their targets, and
remembering, probably, how Magalhaens had been slain, ordering them to
break all the arrows aimed at them.

While Mr Winter was trying to repair his string, an arrow shot by one
of the savages pierced his lungs, but he did not fall.  On this the
master gunner levelled his caliver--a sort of blunderbuss--but it missed
fire, and before he could shoot it off two savages, taking sure aim at
him, killed him on the spot.

Many other natives had by this time made their appearance, and were
coming on with threatening gestures, when the Admiral, taking the
gunner's piece, fired it at the native who had killed him, and as it had
been loaded with bullets and small shot, it tore open his belly.  The
tremendous roars he uttered, equalling that of ten bulls together, so
appalled his companions that they took to flight.

Drake, unwilling further to injure them, allowed them to escape, and had
Captain Winter, to whom he was greatly attached, conveyed down to the
boat, leaving the body of the gunner behind.  Mr Winter, however, was
too severely injured to recover, and died the following day on board his
ship.  That night a boat was again sent on shore with a number of men
well armed.  Here they discovered the body of the gunner lying where he
had fallen, with his coat wrapped up to form a pillow, and an English
arrow stuck in his right eye, showing, as it was conjectured, that the
natives had no wish to be on hostile terms with their visitors.  He and
Mr Winter were buried together, close to the spot where the Spanish
captain was supposed to have died.

Drake was greatly grieved at the loss of his friend Winter and his
gunner, but he had a still greater anxiety on his mind from the reports
he received of the conduct of one whom he had considered his friend, Mr
Thomas Doughty.  His conduct in appropriating the gifts made to him by
the Portuguese prisoners was reprehensible, but it was now found that he
was plotting a mutiny to kill the Admiral or to supersede him in the
command, intending to carry off some of the squadron, and to sail on a
different venture.

So strong was the evidence brought of the nefarious designs of Doughty,
that the Admiral was compelled to summon together forty of the principal
officers.  By these, he sitting as president, Doughty was found guilty,
and was condemned either to suffer death, to be left on shore among the
savages, or to be sent home as a prisoner in one of the vessels, with a
full statement of his trial, to be dealt with as her Majesty the Queen
might think proper: the choice of which punishment he would suffer was
offered him.

Rather than undergo the shame of being sent home, or to endure the
wretched fate which would have been his lot among the savages--some days
being allowed him to decide--he resolved, after fully acknowledging his
guilt, notwithstanding the persuasions of his friends to the contrary,
to select the first alternative offered, desiring only that he might
take the communion with the Admiral, as a token that he died at peace
with him and all men.

Strange as it may seem, the sacred ordinance having been celebrated by
Mr Francis Fletcher, the preacher and pastor of the fleet, he dined at
the same table as the Admiral, both appearing cheerful and drinking to
each other as if only some journey had been in contemplation.

After dinner he was led forth, and entreating those around to pray for
him, he kneeled down and bade the executioner perform his office.

The stern justice meted out on a gentlemen and an officer who had
hitherto been highly esteemed, had no doubt a great effect in deterring
others who might have contemplated any mutinous proceedings.  He was
taken on shore and buried where Don Luis de Mendoza was supposed to
lie--in a grave close to those of Mr Winter and the gunner.

This painful duty performed, and other matters arranged, the _Mary_, the
Portuguese prize, being in a leaky state, she was run on shore near the
island on which, for the two months of their stay, their tents had been
pitched.

Here her planks were stripped off, and divided amongst the other three
ships, which now constituted the whole squadron, besides the pinnaces
which were still on board.

Having wooded, watered, and thoroughly repaired their vessels, the
explorers sailed from this "Port Accursed," as some of the seamen called
it, on the 17th of August, and again steered southward.

On the 20th they came off the Cabo de las Virgines, as the Spaniards
called the entrance to the Magellan Straits.  About four leagues off it
had the appearance of black rocks full of grey stars, against which the
sea beat like the spouting of whales.  At this cape the Admiral ordered
the ships to lower their topsails on the bunt, in homage to the Queen's
Majesty; and he here changed the name of his ship, the _Pelican_, to
that of the _Golden Hind_, in compliment to his patron Sir Christopher
Hatton, whose coat of arms bore a golden hind.  A sermon being preached
by the chaplain, Master Fletcher, and prayer being offered up, the
squadron entered the straits, passing along which, with land in sight on
both sides, they in a short time made their way through a narrow
channel, with a strong wind blowing astern.  They then passed through a
broad expanse.  The following night they saw a lofty island to the
southward, which appeared to burn like that of the island of Fogo.  The
tides as they passed on rose and fell regularly, the difference between
high and low water being upwards of five fathoms.

On the 24th of August they came off a large and fruitful island, on
which, the weather being fine, the Admiral and some of his officers
landed, taking possession of it in the name of her Majesty, and calling
it Elizabeth Island.  Some other islands close to it abounded with
strange--looking birds, somewhat in size less than a goose, and although
they could not fly, ran at a great rate.  They were in reality penguins,
which abounded in those regions.  In one day they killed no less than
three thousand.  On another island they found the body of a man who had
been long dead.  From these islands onwards the passage was so crooked
and narrow that they very frequently had to come to an anchor.  They
found numerous harbours and abundance of fresh water.  The mountains
here rose to a great height, their tops apparently lost in the sky, and
covered with ice and snow.  On the low grounds many fine trees were
seen, with green grass and herbs, the temperature being very similar to
that of England.

The inhabitants made fires as they passed along, but did not come off to
them.  As they drew near the western entrance of the straits, the
passage appeared so narrow, with so many broad channels opening to the
southward, that the Admiral doubted which to select.  He, therefore,
ordering the squadron to anchor, put off himself in a boat, and rowed
forwards to survey the passage.  Having found one of sufficient width,
he turned back to rejoin the fleet.  On his way he fell in with a canoe
made of bark, and full of people.  It was of a peculiarly elegant form,
turning up both at the stem and stern in a semicircle, the workmanship
being also excellent in the extreme.  The people in it were of low
stature, but of compact form, and had their faces painted.  They were on
their way to the island off which the ships lay at anchor.  A visit was
afterwards paid to them on shore.  Their dwellings were of framework,
covered with the skins of beasts.  Their food appeared to be mussels and
other shell-fish.  All their houses were of bark neatly sewn together.
Their knives were formed of mussel-shells of great size, and were so
sharp that they could cut the hardest wood with them, as well as bone,
out of which they made the fizgigs they used for killing fish.

On the 6th of September, to the joy of all on board, the three ships
sailed proudly into the South Sea, having accomplished the whole passage
in about a fortnight, which had occupied their predecessors--Magalhaens,
Loyasa, and Juan de Ladrilleros, who had come from the Pacific side--
several months.

The land to the south had been found to consist, not of a mainland, or
even of one large island, but of numerous islands, with broad passages
between them.  In consequence of the cold weather which now came on, the
Admiral intended to sail northward, to get as soon as possible into a
warmer latitude; but, a furious north wind arising, the ships could in
no way make head against it, and were driven farther and farther south
and east.

Instead of finding it the Pacific Ocean, they, from their experience,
considered that it should be called the Stormy Sea.  Day after day the
tempest blew with extraordinary violence.  During that period, on the
15th of September, an eclipse of the moon occurred, which lasted for a
considerable time, adding to the horrors of the storm.  For many days
they ran on under bare poles, being unable to face it.  On the 30th of
the same month, the _Marigold_, commanded by Captain John Thomas, who
had rendered such service to the Admiral, and having many other of his
friends on board, was separated from her consorts.  It was hoped,
however, that she might be able to rejoin them at their place of
rendezvous, about the thirtieth degree of south latitude, on the coast
of Peru.

For a whole month the two remaining ships, sorely battered by the
tempest, were out of sight of land, which at length regaining, on the
night of the 7th of October, they ran into a harbour to the southward.
They had not, however, long dropped their anchors before both ships were
again driven out to sea, and that of the Admiral left an anchor behind
her, but a sloop which had been put up at the entrance of the straits
soon regained the harbour.  The _Elizabeth_ was lost sight of, while the
_Golden Hind_ was driven far away to the southward, where she lay
helplessly tossed about by the fury of the waves.  Again, the storm
abating, she made sail, and sighted the utmost cape or headland of those
islands, about the fifty-sixth degree of south latitude, and since known
as Cape Horn.

On the 28th of October the _Golden Hind_ anchored within a creek of the
same island.  Though people were seen on shore, no communication was
held with them.  On the 30th of October, with a fair wind, Drake steered
to the north-west, and then north, in order not to lose sight of the
continent.  The following day the explorers came off an island covered
so thickly with birds that they were able to obtain a plentiful supply;
indeed, the whole fleet might have been equally well furnished.

Coasting along in sight of land, they observed a lofty range of
mountains, but the country appeared barren, without water or wood,
except here and there, where Spanish settlements had been formed.  There
being no possibility of obtaining information of the missing ships, they
again ran off towards an island called Mucho, on account of its large
size.  Here they came to an anchor on the 25th, and found it a fertile
place, with an abundance of sheep, cattle, Indian corn, and potatoes.
The inhabitants were Indians, who had been driven off by the cruelty of
the Spaniards, and had here fortified themselves.  On ascertaining that
the visitors were English, they came with great courtesy, bringing with
them various fruits and two fat sheep, which they presented to the
Admiral.  He, in return, gave them a variety of useful articles, at
which they seemed greatly pleased, and signified that they would return
with further provisions.

Next day, therefore, at an early hour, the Admiral, with a number of
men, repaired to the beach, carrying articles for barter.  He first put
two men ashore, with casks to obtain water at a place which had been
pointed out, but scarcely had they landed when they were treacherously
set upon and killed.  Shortly afterwards, five hundred savages, armed
with bows and darts, springing up from behind the rocks where they had
been concealed, let fly a shower of arrows.  The boat being driven in by
the force of the sea towards the beach, the crew had great difficulty in
pulling off.  The Admiral received two wounds, one under his right eye,
and one on his head, nearly penetrating to the bone; the rest of the
party being also severely injured in different parts of their bodies.
Had they not succeeded in getting the boat off, the whole might have
been massacred.  The arrows were long reeds, with heads of stone, and
their darts were of great length, with iron or bone tips.

Serious as were the wounds, none proved mortal, and although the chief
surgeon was dead, and the other had gone off in the _Elizabeth_, so that
they had only a lad, whose anxiety to do right was far greater than his
skill, they all in a short time recovered.  Drake, though he might have
revenged himself on the ignorant savages for their unwarrantable attack,
convinced that they were influenced from their hatred of the Spaniards,
who had so cruelly ill-treated them, refrained from retaliating.

In the afternoon the _Golden Hind_ again set sail, Drake being anxious
to fall in with the missing ships as soon as possible, and to find some
convenient harbour where fresh provisions and needed repose for the
wounded men could be obtained.

On the 30th of November the Admiral put into a bay at about the
thirty-second degree of south latitude, and forthwith sent a boat to
discover what likelihood there was that the place would afford the
things they stood in need of.  After a long search, neither fresh
provisions nor water could be found; but they saw on shore huge herds of
buffalo, though no signs of inhabitants.  On their return they fell in
with an Indian canoe, which, with the person in it, they brought
alongside.  He was a fine-looking man, dressed in a white shirt reaching
to his knees.  His hair was long, but he had no beard; he appeared to be
of a mild and amiable disposition, and very grateful for the things the
Admiral gave him.  He was a fair specimen of the gentle and harmless
people whom the Spaniards were treating so barbarously.

The native's confidence having been thoroughly won, he was sent away in
the _Hind's_ boat, accompanied by his own canoe, that he might be landed
wherever he chose.  Being put on shore, he met several of his friends,
to whom he described the kind treatment he had received, and they,
accompanied by their chief or head man, in a short time came off to the
ship, bringing hens, eggs, a fat hog, and other provisions.  The Indian
