Protestant renegades from the ways an' the traditions of your fathers!
There is been shenanigans goin' on! I'll find 'em!"

The president could not speak, with Timothy in full view. But then what
was practically a miracle took place. A diny popped out of a hole in
the turf. He looked interestedly about. He was all of three inches
long, with red eyes and a blue tail, and in every proportion he was a
miniature of the extinct dinosaurs of Earth. But he was an improved
model. The dinies of Eire were fitted by evolution--or Satan--to plague
human settlers. They ate their crops, destroyed their homes, devoured
their tools, and when other comestibles turned up they'd take care of
them, too.

This diny surveyed its surroundings. The presidential mansion looked
promising. The diny moved toward it. But Timothy--nap plans
abandoned--flung himself at the diny like the crack of a whip. The diny
plunged back into its hole. Timothy hurtled after it in pursuit. He
disappeared.

The president of Eire breathed. He'd neglected that matter for some
minutes, it seemed. He heard a voice continuing, formidably:

"And I know ye'll try to hide the shenanigans that've destroyed all the
sacrifices Earth's made to have Eire a true Erse colony, ready for Erse
lads and colleens to move to and have room for their children and their
grandchildren too. I know ye'll try! But unless I do find out--not
another bit of help will this colony get from Earth! No more tools! No
more machinery that ye can't have worn out! No more provisions that ye
should be raisin' for yourselves! Your cold-storage plant should be
bulgin' with food! It's near empty! It will not be refilled! And even
the ship that we pay to have stop here every three months, for mail--no
ship!"

"It's the dinies," said the president feebly. "They're a great trouble
to us, sir. They're our great handicap."

"Blather and nonsense!" snapped Sean O'Donohue. "They're no bigger than
mice! Ye could've trapped 'em! Ye could've raised cats! Don't tell me
that fancy-colored little lizards could hinder a world especially set
aside by the intercession of St. Patrick for the Erse people to thrive
on! The token's plain! There's no snakes! And with such a sign to go
by, there must've been shenanigans goin' on to make things go wrong!
And till those shenanigans are exposed an' stopped--there'll be no more
help from Earth for ye blaggards!"

He stamped his way into the presidential mansion. The door slammed
shut. Moira, his granddaughter, regarded the president with sympathy.
He looked bedraggled and crushed. He mopped his forehead. He did not
raise his eyes to her. It was bad enough to be president of a planetary
government that couldn't even pay his salary, so there were patches in
his breeches that Moira must have noticed. It was worse that the colony
was, as a whole, entirely too much like the remaining shanty areas in
Eire back on Earth. But it was tragic that it was ridiculous for any
man on Eire to ask a girl from Earth to join him on so unpromising a
planet.

He said numbly:

"I'll be wishing you good morning, Moira."

He moved away, his chin sunk on his breast. Moira watched him go. She
didn't seem happy. Then, fifty yards from the mansion, a luridly
colored something leaped out of a hole. It was a diny some eight inches
long, in enough of a hurry to say that something appalling was after
it. It landed before the president and took off again for some far
horizon. Then something sinuous and black dropped out of a tree upon it
and instantly violent action took place in a patch of dust. A small
cloud arose. The president watched, with morbid interest, as the
sporting event took place.

Moira stared, incredulous. Then, out of the hole from which the diny
had leaped, a dark round head appeared. It could have been Timothy. But
he saw that this diny was disposed of. That was that. Timothy--if it
was Timothy--withdrew to search further among diny tunnels about the
presidential mansion.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Half an hour later the president told the solicitor general of Eire
about it. He was bitter.

"And when it was over, there was Moira starin' dazed-like from the
porch, and the be-damned snake picked up the diny it'd killed and
started off to dine on it in private. But I was in the way. So the
snake waited, polite, with the diny in its mouth, for me to move on.
But it looked exactly like he'd brought over the diny for me to admire,
like a cat'll show dead mice to a person she thinks will be
interested!"

"Holy St. Patrick!" said the solicitor general, appalled. "What'll
happen now?"

"I reason," said the president morbidly, "she'll tell her grandfather,
and he'll collar somebody and use those gimlet eyes on him and the poor
_omadhoum_ will blurt out that on Eire here it's known that St. Patrick
brought the snakes and is the more reverenced for it. And that'll mean
there'll be no more ships or food or tools from Earth, and it'll be
lucky if we're evacuated before the planet's left abandoned."

The solicitor general's expression became one of pure hopelessness.

"Then the jig's up," he said gloomily. "I'm thinkin', Mr. President,
we'd better have a cabinet meeting on it."

"What's the use," demanded the president. "I won't leave! I'll stay
here, alone though I may be. There's nothing left in life for me
anywhere, but at least, as the only human left on Eire I'll be able to
spend the rest of my years knockin' dinies on the head for what they've
done!" Then, suddenly, he bellowed. "Who let loose the snakes! I'll
have his heart's blood----"

                     *      *      *      *      *

The Chancellor of the Exchequer peered around the edge of the door into
the cabinet meeting room. He saw the rest of the cabinet of Eire
assembled. Relieved, he entered. Something stirred in his pocket and he
pulled out a reproachful snake. He said:

"Don't be indignant, now! You were walkin' on the public street. If
Sean O'Donohue had seen you----" He added to the other members of the
cabinet: "The other two members of the Dail Committee seem to be good,
honest, drinkin' men. One of them now--the shipbuilder I think it
was--wanted a change of scenery from lookin' at the bottom of a glass.
I took him for a walk. I showed him a bunch of dinies playin' leapfrog
tryin' to get one of their number up to a rain spout so he could bite
off pieces and drop 'em down to the rest. They were all colors and it
was quite somethin' to look at. The committeeman--good man that he
