Project Gutenberg's The Discovery of a World in the Moone, by John Wilkins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Discovery of a World in the Moone
       Or, A Discovrse Tending To Prove That 'Tis Probable There
       May Be Another Habitable World In That Planet

Author: John Wilkins

Release Date: August 23, 2006 [EBook #19103]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORLD IN THE MOONE ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Robert Shimmin and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





  [Transcriber's Note:

  Spelling and punctuation are as in the original, including the
  consistently "modern" use of V and U. Italic capital V has two forms,
  used interchangeably. Since italic capital U does not occur, the
  rounded V-form has been transcribed as U.

  Greek words and phrases have been transliterated and shown between
  +marks+. Hebrew is shown between #marks#.

  Latin quotations were given in italics; the translation was usually
  printed with marginal quotation marks. In this e-text, Latin passages
  are shown as block quotes (indented) _without_ quotation marks, while
  passages with marginal quotes are shown as block quotes _with_
  quotation marks.

  The six Sidenotes shown with an asterisk alongside their number were
  printed with an asterisk in the original text; all other notes were
  unmarked.

  References from the Sidenotes are identified at the end of the text,
  followed by a complete list of errata.]

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


  [Illustration:
  Sun with six orbits, each with symbol:
    Mercurius, Venus, Ceres et Proserpina, Mars, Jupiter, Saturnus
  Sun utters: Ame omnes
  "Ceres and Proserpina" orbit continuing below sun shows earth with
    orbiting moon.
  Text on earth orbit: Sua fovent; Vniuersum ornant.
  Text on moon's orbit: Mutuo se illuminant]


                      THE
                   DISCOVERY
                      OF A
                     WORLD
                    IN THE
                     MOONE.


                      or,

                  A DISCOVRSE
                    Tending
                    TO PROVE

            that 'tis probable there
            may be another habitable
             World in that Planet.


    _Quid tibi inquis ista proderunt? Si nihil aliud,
        hoc certe, sciam omnia angusta esse._
        SENECA. Praef. ad 1. Lib. _N. Q._

                 [Decoration]

                   _LONDON_,

     Printed by _E. G._ for _Michael Sparl_
          and _Edward Forrest_, 1638.




  [Decoration]

  _Perlegi haec +paradoxa+ & novitatis gracia typis
     mandari permitto._

  Mart. 29. 1638.
    THO. WEEKES _R.P._
      _Episc. Lond. Cap._
        _Domest._

  [Decoration]




To the Reader.


_If amongst thy leisure houres thou canst spare any for the perusall of
this discourse, and dost looke to finde somewhat in it which may serve
for thy information and benefit: let me then advise thee to come unto
it with an equall minde, not swayed by prejudice, but indifferently
resolved to assent unto that truth which upon deliberation shall seeme
most probable unto thy reason, and then I doubt not, but either thou
wilt agree with mee in this assertion, or at least not thinke it to be
as farre from truth, as it is from common opinion._

_Two cautions there are which I would willingly admonish thee of in the
beginning._

1. _That thou shouldst not here looke to find any exact, accurate
   Treatise, since this discourse was but the fruit of some lighter
   studies, and those too hudled up in a short time, being first
   thought of and finished in the space of some few weekes, and
   therefore you cannot in reason expect, that it should be so
   polished, as perhaps, the subject would require, or the leisure
   of the Author might have done it._

2. _To remember that I promise onely probable arguments for the
   proofe of this opinion, and therefore you must not looke that every
   consequence should be of an undeniable dependance, or that the truth
   of each argument should be measured by its necessity. I grant that
   some Astronomicall appearances may possibly be solved otherwise then
   here they are. But the thing I aime at is this, that probably they
   may so be solved, as I have here set them downe: Which, if it be
   granted (as I thinke it must) then I doubt not, but the indifferent
   reader will find some satisfaction in the maine thing that is to be
   proved._

_Many ancient Philosophers of the better note, have formerly defended
this assertion, which I have here laid downe, and it were to be wished,
that some of us would more apply our endeavours unto the examination of
these old opinions, which though they have for a long time lien
neglected by others, yet in them may you finde many truths well worthy
your paines and observation. Tis a false conceit, for us to thinke, that
amongst the ancient variety and search of opinions, the best hath still
prevailed. Time (saith the learned _Verulam_) seemes to be of the nature
of a river or streame, which carrieth downe to us that which is light,
or blowne up, but sinketh that which is weighty and solid._

_It is my desire that by the occasion of this discourse, I may raise up
some more active spirit to a search after other hidden and unknowne
truthes. Since it must needes be a great impediment unto the growth of
sciences, for men still so to plod on upon beaten principles, as to be
afraid of entertaining any thing that may seeme to contradict them. An
unwillingnesse to take such things into examination, is one of those
errours of learning in these times observed by the judicious _Verulam_.
Questionlesse there are many secret truths, which the ancients have
passed over, that are yet left to make some of our age famous for their
discovery._

_If by this occasion I may provoke any reader to an attempt of this
nature, I shall then thinke my selfe happy, and this work successefull._

Farewell.




  [Decoration]


The First Proposition, by way of Preface.

_That the strangenesse of this opinion is no sufficient reason why it
  should be rejected, because other certaine truths have beene formerly
  esteemed ridiculous, and great absurdities entertayned by common
  consent._


There is an earnestnesse and hungering after novelty, which doth still
adhere unto all our natures, and it is part of that primative image,
that wide extent and infinite capacity at first created in the heart of
man, for this since its depravation in _Adam_ perceiving it selfe
altogether emptied of any good doth now catch after every new thing,
conceiving that possibly it may finde satisfaction among some of its
fellow creatures. But our enemy the divell (who strives still to pervert
our gifts, and beate us with our owne weapons) hath so contriv'd it,
that any truth doth now seeme distastefull for that very reason, for
which errour is entertain'd--Novelty, for let but some upstart heresie
be set abroach, and presently there are some out of a curious humour;
others, as if they watched an occasion of singularity, will take it up
for canonicall, and make it part of their creede and profession; whereas
solitary truth cannot any where finde so ready entertainement; but the
same Novelty which is esteemed the commendation of errour and makes that
acceptable, is counted the fault of truth, and causes that to bee
rejected. How did the incredulous World gaze at _Columbus_ when hee
promised to discover another part of the earth, and he could not for a
long time by his confidence, or arguments, induce any of the Christian
Princes, either to assent unto his opinion, or goe to the charges of an
experiment. Now if he who had such good grounds for his assertion, could
finde no better entertainement among the wiser sort, and upper end of
the World; 'tis not likely then that this opinion which I now deliver,
shall receive any thing from the men of these daies, especially our
vulgar wits, but misbeliefe or derision. It hath alwaies beene the
unhappinesse of new truths in Philosophy, to be derided by those that
are ignorant of the causes of things, and reiected by others whose
perversenesse ties them to the contrary opinion, men whose envious pride
will not allow any new thing for truth which they themselves were not
the first inventors of. So that I may iustly expect to be accused of a
pragmaticall ignorance, and bold ostentation, especially since for this
opinion _Xenophanes_, a man whose authority was able to adde some credit
to his assertion could not escape the like censure from others. For
_Natales Comes_ speaking of that Philosopher,[1] and this his opinion,
saith thus,

  _Nonnulli ne nihil scisse videantur, aliqua nova monstra in
  Philosophia introducunt, ut alicujus rei inventores fuisse appareant._

  "Some there are who least they might seeme to know nothing, will
  bring up monstrous absurdities in Philosophy, that so afterward they
  may bee famed for the invention of somewhat."

The same author doth also in another place accuse _Anaxagoras_[2] of
folly for the same opinion,

  _Est enim non ignobilis gradus stultitiae, vel si nescias quid dicas,
  tamen velle de rebus propositis hanc vel illam partem stabilire._

"'Tis none of the worst kindes of folly, boldly to affirme one side or
other, when a man knows not what to say."

  [Sidenote 1: _Mytholog. lib. 3. c. 17._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Lib. 7. c. 1._]

If these men were thus censur'd, I may iustly then expect to be derided
by most, and to be believed by few or none; especially since this
opinion seemes to carry in it so much strangenesse, so much
contradiction to the generall consent of others. But how ever, I am
resolved that this shall not be any discouragement, since I know that it
is not the common opinion of others that can either adde or detract from
the truth. For,

1. Other truths have beene formerly esteemed altogether as ridiculous
   as this can be.

2. Grosse absurdities have beene entertained by generall opinion.

I shall give an instance of each, that so I may the better prepare the
Reader to consider things without a prejudice, when hee shall see that
the common opposition against this which I affirme cannot any way
derogate from its truth.

1. Other truths have beene formerly accounted as ridiculous as this, I
shall specifie that of the Antipodes, which have beene denied and laught
at by many wise men and great Schollers, such as were _Herodotus_, St.
_Austin_, _Lactantius_, the _Venerable Bede_, _Lucretius_ the Poet,
_Procopius_, and the voluminous _Abulensis_ with others. _Herodotus_
counted it so horrible an absurdity, that hee could not forbeare
laughing to thinke of it. +Gelo de horon ges periodous grapsantas,
pollous ede kai oudena noon echontas exegesamenon hoi Okeanon te
rheonta graphousi, perix ten te gen eousan kukloterea hos apo tornou.+

  "I cannot choose but laugh, (saith he) to see so many men venture to
  describe the earths compasse, relating those things that are without
  all sense, as that the Sea flowes about the World, and that the earth
  it selfe is round as an Orbe."

But this great ignorance is not so much to be admired in him, as in
those learneder men of later times, when all sciences began to flourish
in the World. Such was Saint _Austin_ who censures that relation of the
Antipodes to be an incredible fable,[1] and with him agrees the eloquent
_Lactantius_,[2]

  _quid illi qui esse contrarios vestigiis nostris Antipodes putant?
  num aliquid loquuntur? aut est quispiam tam ineptus, qui credat esse
  homines, quorum vestigia sunt superiora quam capita? aut ibi quae apud
  nos jacent inversa pendere? fruges & arbores deorsum versus crescere,
  pluvias & nives, & grandinem sursum versus cadere in terram? &
  miratur aliquis hortor pensiles inter septem mira narrari, quum
  Philosophi, & agros & maria, & urbes & montes pensiles faciunt? &c._

  "What (saith he) are they that thinke there are Antipodes, such as
  walke with their feet against ours? doe they speake any likelyhood?
  or is there any one so foolish as to believe that there are men whose
  heeles are higher than their heads? that things which with us doe lie
  on the ground doe hang there? that the Plants and Trees grow
  downewards, that the haile, and raine, and snow fall upwards to the
  earth? and doe wee admire the hanging Orchards amongst the seven
  wonders, whereas here the Philosophers have made the Field and Seas,
  the Cities and Mountaines hanging."

What shall wee thinke (saith hee in _Plutarch_) that men doe clyng to
that place like wormes, or hang by their clawes as Cats, or if wee
suppose a man a little beyond the Center, to bee digging with a spade?
is it likely (as it must bee according to this opinion) that the earth
which hee loosened, should of it selfe ascend upwards? or else suppose
two men with their middles about the center, the feete of the one being
placed where the head of the other is, and so two other men crosse them,
yet all these men thus situated according to this opinion should stand
upright, and many other such grosse consequences would follow (saith
hee) which a false imagination is not able to fancy as possible. Upon
which considerations, _Bede_[3] also denies the being of any Antipodes,

  _Neque enim Antipodarum ullatenus est Fabulis accommodandus assensus_,

"Nor should wee any longer assent to the Fable of Antipodes." So also
_Lucretius_ the Poet speaking of the same subject, sayes:

  _Sed vanus stolidis haec omnia finxerit error._[4]

  [Sidenote 1: _De civit. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 9._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Institut. l. 3. c. 24._]

  [Sidenote 3: _De ratione temporum, Cap. 32._]

  [Sidenote 4: _De nat. rerum, lib. 1._]

That some idle fancy faigned these for fooles to believe. Of this
opinion was _Procopius Gazaeus_,[1] but he was perswaded to it by another
kinde of reason; for he thought that all the earth under us was sunke in
the water, according to the saying of the Psalmist,[2] Hee hath founded
the Earth upon the Seas, and therefore hee accounted it not inhabited by
any. Nay _Tostatus_ a man of later yeeres and generall learning doth
also confidently deny that there are any such Antipodes, though the
reason which hee urges for it bee not so absurde as the former, for the
Apostles, saith hee,[3] travelled through the whole habitable world, but
they never passed the Equinoctiall; and if you answer that they are said
to goe through all the earth, because they went through all the knowne
world, hee replies, that this is not sufficient, since Christ would have
all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth,[4] and
therefore 'tis requisite that they should have travelled thither also,
if there had been any inhabitants, especially since he did expressely
command them to goe and teach all nations, and preach the Gospell
through the whole world,[5] and therefore he thinkes that as there are
no men, so neither are there seas, or rivers, or any other conveniency
for habitation: 'tis commonly related of one _Virgilius_, that he was
excommunicated and condemned for a Heretique by _Zachary_ Bishop of
_Rome_, because hee was not of the same opinion. But _Baronius_
saies,[6] it was because hee thought there was another habitable world
within ours. How ever, you may well enough discerne in these examples
how confident many of these great Schollars were in so grosse an errour,
how unlikely, what an incredible thing it seemed to them, that there
should be any Antipodes, and yet now this truth is as certaine and
plaine, as sense or demonstration can make it. This then which I now
deliver is not to be rejected; though it may seeme to contradict the
common opinion.

  [Sidenote 1: _Comment. in 1. Cap. Gen._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Psal. 24. 2._]

  [Sidenote 3: _Comment. in_ 1. Genes.]

  [Sidenote 4: 1 Tim. 2. 4.]

  [Sidenote 5: Mat. 28. 19]

  [Sidenote 6: _Annal. Eccles. A.D. 748._]

2. Grosse absurdities have beene entertained by generall consent. I
might instance in many remarkeable examples, but I will onely speake of
the supposed labour of the Moone in her eclipses, because this is
neerest to the chiefe matter in hand, and was received as a common
opinion amongst many of the ancients, and therefore _Plutarch_ speaking
of a Lunary eclipse, relates, that at such times 'twas a custome amongst
the _Romanes_ (the most civill and learned people in the world) to sound
brasse Instruments, and hold great torches toward the heaven. +Ton de
Romaion (hosper esto enomismenon) chalkou te patagois anakaloumenon
to phos autos kai pura polla dalois kai dassin anechonton pros ton
ouranon+,[1] for by this meanes they supposed the Moone was much eased
in her labours, and therfore _Ovid_ calls such loud Instruments the
auxiliaries or helpes of the Moone.[2]

  _Cum frustra resonant aera auxiliaria Lunae._

and therefore the Satyrist too describing a loud scold, saies, she was
able to make noise enough to deliver the labouring Moone.[3]

  _Vna laboranti poterit succurrere Lunae._

  [Sidenote 1: _In vita Paul. AEmil._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Metam. l. 4._]

  [Sidenote 3: _Iuven. Sat. 6_]

Now the reason of all this their ceremonie, was, because they feared the
world would fall asleepe, when one of its eyes began to winke, and
therefore they would doe what they could by loud sounds to rouse it from
its drowsinesse, and keepe it awake by bright torches, to bestow that
light upon it which it began to lose. Some of them thought hereby to
keepe the Moone in her orbe, whereas otherwise she would have fallen
downe upon the earth, and the world would have lost one of its lights,
for the credulous people believed, that Inchanters, and Witches could
bring the Moone downe, which made _Virgil_ say,

  _Cantus & e coelo possunt deducere Lunam._

And those Wizards knowing the times of her eclipses, would then threaten
to shew their skill, by pulling her out of her orbe. So that when the
silly multitude saw that she began to looke red, they presently feared
they should lose the benefit of her light, and therefore made a great
noise that she might not heare the sound of those Charmes, which would
otherwise bring her downe, and this is rendered for a reason of this
custome by _Pliny_ and _Propertius_:

  _Cantus & e curru lunam deducere tentant,
  Et facerent, si non aera repulsa sonent._[1]

  [Sidenote 1: _Nat. hist. lib. 2. c. 12._]

_Plutarch_ gives another reason of it, and he sayes, 'tis because they
would hasten the Moone out of the darke shade wherein shee was involv'd,
that so she might bring away the soules of those Saints that inhabit
within her, which cry out by reason they are then deprived of their
wonted happinesse, and cannot heare the musicke of the Spheares, but are
forced to behold the torments, and wailing of those damned soules which
are represented to them as they are tortured in the region of the aire,
but whether this or what ever else was the meaning of this superstition,
yet certainly 'twas a very ridiculous custome, and bewrayed a great
ignorance of those ancient times, especially since it was not onely
received by the vulgar, such as were men of lesse note and learning, but
believed also, by the more famous and wiser sort, such as were those
great Poets, _Stesichorus_ and _Pindar_. And not onely amongst the more
sottish heathens, who might account that Planet to be one of their Gods,
