cut off one of the temptations which had assailed him. Gradually the
opinion entertained of Dick in the village as a ne'er-do-well was
modified, and he had come to be called as one of the steady and reliable
boys--a reputation not to, be lightly regarded.

In the present election Dick did not dream that he could have any
interest. While he had been interested in the lessons, and done his
best, he felt that his previous reputation would injure his chance, and
he had made up his mind that he should have to serve in the ranks. This
did not trouble him, for Dick, to his credit be it said, was very free
from jealousy, and had not a particle of envy in his composition. He
possessed so many good qualities that it would have been a thousand
pities if he had kept on in his former course.

"You will bring in your votes for captain," said the chairman.

Tom Wheeler distributed slips of paper among the boys, and there was
forthwith a plentiful show of pencils.

"Are the votes all in?" inquired the chairman, a little later. "If so,
we will proceed to count them."

There was a general hush of expectation while Wilbur Summerfield,
the chairman, and Robert Ingalls, the secretary of the meeting, were
counting the votes. John Haynes, was evidently nervous, and fidgeted
about, anxious to learn his fate.

At length the count was completed, and Wilbur, rising, announced it as
follows:

      Whole number of votes...... 49
      Necessary for a choice..... 25
      Robert Ingalls.............. 2 votes
      John Haynes................. 2  "
      Wilbur Summerfield.......... 4  "
      Moses Rogers................ 4  "
      Charles Reynolds........... 10  "
      Frank Frost................ 27  "


"Gentlemen, I have the pleasure of announcing that you have made choice
of Frank Frost as your captain."

Frank rose amid a general clapping of hands, and, with heightened color
but modest self-possession, spoke as follows "Boys, I thank you very
much for this proof of your confidence. All I can say is that I will
endeavor to deserve it. I shall no doubt make some mistakes, but I feel
sure that you will grant me your indulgence, and not expect too much of
my inexperience."

This speech was regarded with favor by all except John Haynes, who
would rather have had any one else elected, independent of his own
disappointment, which was great.

"You will now prepare your votes for first lieutenant," said the
presiding officer.

It will be noticed that two votes were cast for John Haynes. One of
these was thrown by a competitor, who wished to give his vote to some
one who stood no possible chance of succeeding, and accordingly selected
John on account of his well-known unpopularity. This vote, therefore,
was far from being a compliment. As for the other vote, John Haynes
himself best knew by whom it was cast.

The boys began to prepare their votes for first lieutenant.

John brightened up a little. He felt that it would be something to
gain this office. But when the result of the balloting was announced it
proved that he had but a single vote.

There were several scattering votes. The two prominent candidates were
Dick Bumstead, who received eight votes, and Charles Reynolds, who
received thirty-two, and was accordingly declared elected.

No one was more surprised by this announcement than Dick. He felt quite
bewildered, not having the slightest expectation of being a candidate.
He was almost tempted to believe that the votes had only been cast in
jest.

But Dick was destined to a still greater surprise. At the next vote, for
second lieutenant, there were five scattering votes. Then came ten for
Wilbur Summerfield, and Richard Bumstead led off with thirty-four, and
was accordingly declared elected.

"Speech! speech!" exclaimed half a dozen, vociferously.

Dick looked a little confused, and tried to escape the call. But the
boys were determined to have him up, and he was finally compelled to
rise, looking and feeling rather awkward But his natural good sense
and straightforwardness came to his aid, and he acquitted himself quite
creditably.

This was Dick's speech:

"Boys, I don't know how to make speeches, and I s'pose you know that as
well as I do. I hardly knew who was meant when Richard Bumstead's name
was mentioned, having always been called Dick, but if it means me, all I
can say is, that I am very much obliged to you for the unexpected honor.
One reason why I did not expect to be elected to any office was because
I ain't as good a scholar as most of you. I am sure there are a great
many of you who would make better officers than I, but I don't think
there's any that will try harder to do well than I shall."

Here Dick sat down, very much astonished to find that he had actually
made a speech. His speech was modest, and made a favorable impression,
as was shown by the noisy stamping of feet and shouts of "Bully for
you, Dick!" "You're a trump!" and other terms in which boys are wont to
signify their approbation.

Through all this John Haynes looked very much disgusted, and seemed
half-decided upon leaving the room. He had some curiosity, however, to
learn who would be elected to the subordinate offices, and so remained.
He had come into the room with the determination not to accept anything
below a lieutenancy, but now made up his mind not to reject the post of
orderly sergeant if it should be offered to him. The following list of
officers, however will show that he was allowed no choice in the matter:

      Captain, Frank Frost.
      First Lieutenant, Charles Reynolds.
      Second Lieutenant, Richard Bumstead.
      Orderly Sergeant, Wilbur Summerfield.
      Second Sergeant, Robert Ingalls.
      Third Sergeant, Moses Rogers.
      First Corporal, Tom Wheeler.
      Second Corporal, Joseph Barry.
      Third Corporal, Frank Ingalls.


The entire list of officers was now read and received with applause. If
there were some who were disappointed, they acquiesced good-naturedly,
with one exception.

When the applause had subsided, John Haynes rose and, in a voice
trembling with passion, said:

"Mr. Chairman, I wish to give notice to all present that I resign my
place as a member of this company. I don't choose to serve under such
officers as you have chosen to-day. I don't think they are fit to have
command."

Here there was a general chorus of hisses, drowning John's voice
completely. After glancing about him a moment in speechless fury, he
seized his hat, and left the room in indignant haste, slamming the door
after him.

"He's a mean fellow!" said Frank Ingalls. "I suppose he expected to be
captain."

"Shouldn't wonder," said Sam Rivers. "Anyhow, he's a fool to make such a
fuss about it. As for me," he added, with a mirthful glance, "I am
just as much disappointed as he is. When I came here this afternoon I
expected I should be elected captain, and I'd got my speech all ready,
but now I'm sorry that it will have to be wasted."

There was a general burst of laughter, for Sam Rivers, whom everybody
liked for his good nature, was incorrigibly awkward, and had made
a larger number of blunders, probably, than any other member of the
company.

"Give us the speech, Sam," said Bob Ingalls.

"Yes, don't let it be wasted."

"Speech! speech!" cried Joseph Barry.

"Very well, gentlemen, if you desire it."

Sam drew from his pocket a blank piece of paper, and pretended to read
the following speech, which he made up on the spur of the moment.

"Ahem! gentlemen," he commenced, in a pompous tone, assuming an air
of importance; "I am deeply indebted to you for this very unexpected
honor."

"Oh, very," said one of the boys near.

"I feel that you have done yourself credit in your selection."

Here there was a round of applause.

"I am sorry that some of you are still very awkward, but I hope under my
excellent discipline to make veterans of you in less than no time."

"Good for you!"

"You cannot expect me to remain long with you, as I am now in the line
of promotion, and don't mean to stop short of a brigadier. But as long
as I am your captain I hope you will appreciate your privileges."

Sam's speech was followed by a chorus of laughter, in which he joined
heartily himself.

As for John's defection, nobody seemed to regret it much. It was
generally felt that the company would have no difficulty in getting
along without him.



CHAPTER XXVI. THE REBEL TRAP

ON the first of April Frank received the following letter from his
father. It was the more welcome because nearly a month had elapsed
since anything had been received, and the whole family had become quite
anxious:


"Dear Frank," the letter commenced, "you are no doubt feeling anxious on
account of my long silence. You will understand the cause of it when
I tell you that since the date of my last letter I have been for a
fortnight in the enemy's hands as a prisoner. Fortunately, I have
succeeded in effecting my escape. You will naturally be interested to
learn the particulars.

"Three weeks since, a lady occupying an estate about five miles distant
from our camp waited on our commanding officer and made an urgent
request to have a few soldiers detailed as a guard to protect her and
her property from molestation and loss. Our colonel was not at first
disposed to grant her request, but finally acceded to it, rather
reluctantly, declaring that it was all nonsense. I was selected, with
five other men, to serve as a guard. Mrs. Roberts--for this was her
name--appeared quite satisfied to find her request granted, and drove
slowly home under our escort.

"On arriving, we found a mansion in the old Virginia style, low in
elevation, broad upon the ground, and with a piazza extending along the
front. Surrounding it was a good-sized plantation. At a little distance
from the house was a row of negro huts. These were mostly vacant, the
former occupants having secured their freedom by taking refuge within
our lines.

"As sergeant in command--you must know that I have been promoted--I
inquired of Mrs. Roberts what danger she apprehended. Her answers were
vague and unsatisfactory. However, she seemed disposed to treat me very
civilly, and at nine o'clock invited the whole party into the house to
partake of a little refreshment. This invitation was very welcome to
soldiers who had not for months partaken of anything better than camp
fare. It was all the more acceptable because outside a cold rain was
falling, and the mod was deep and miry.

"In the dining-room we found a plentiful meal spread, including hot
coffee, hot corn bread, bacon, and other viands. We were not, however,
destined to take our supper in peace. As I was drinking my second cup
of coffee I thought I heard a noise outside, and remarked it to Mrs.
Roberts.

"'It is only the wind, sergeant,' said she, indifferently.

"It was not long before I became convinced that it was something more
serious. I ordered my men to stand to their arms, in spite of the urgent
protestations of the old lady, and marched them out upon the lawn, just
in time to be confronted by twenty or thirty men on horseback, clad in
the rebel uniform.

"Resistance against such odds would have been only productive of useless
loss of life, and with my little force I was compelled to surrender
myself a prisoner.

"Of course, I no longer doubted that we were the victims of a trick, and
had been lured by Mrs. Roberts purposely to be made prisoners. If I had
had any doubts on the subject, her conduct would have dissipated them.
She received our captors with open arms. They stepped into our places as
guests, and the house was thrown open to them. Our arms were taken from
us, our hands pinioned, and a scene of festivity ensued. A cask of wine
was brought up from the cellar, and the contents freely distributed
among the rebels, or gray backs, as we call them here.

"Once, as Mrs. Roberts passed through the little room where we were
confined, I said, 'Do you consider this honorable conduct, madam,
to lure us here by false representations, and then betray us to our
enemies?'

"'Yes, I do!' said she hotly. 'What business have you to come down
here and lay waste our territory? There is no true Southern woman but
despises you heartily, and would do as much as I have, and more, too.
You've got my son a prisoner in one of your Yankee prisons. When I heard
that he was taken, I swore to be revenged, and I have kept my word. I've
got ten for one, though he's worth a hundred such as you!'

"So saying, she swept out of the room, with a scornful look of triumph
in her eyes. The next day, as I afterward learned, she sent word to our
colonel that her house had been unexpectedly attacked by a large party
of the rebels, and that we had been taken prisoners. Her complicity was
suspected, but was not proved till our return to the camp. Of course, a
further guard, which she asked for, to divert suspicion, was refused.

"Meanwhile we were carried some twenty miles across the river, and
confined in a building which had formerly been used as a storehouse.

"The place was dark and gloomy. There were some dozen others who shared
our captivity. Here we had rather a doleful time. We were supplied with
food three times a day; but the supply was scanty, and we had meat
but once in two days. We gathered that it was intended to send us to
Richmond; but from day to day there was a delay in doing so. We decided
that our chance of escape would be much better then than after we
reached the rebel capital. We, therefore, formed a plan for defeating
the intentions of our captors.

"Though the building assigned to us as a prison consisted of two
stories, we were confined in the lower part. This was more favorable to
our designs. During the night we busied ourselves in loosening two of
the planks of the flooring, so that we could remove them at any time.
Then lowering two of our number into the cellar, we succeeded in
removing enough of the stone foundation to allow the escape of one man
at a time through the aperture. Our arrangements were hastened by the
assignment of a particular day on which we were to be transferred from
our prison, and conveyed to Richmond. Though we should have been glad to
enter the city under some circumstances, we did not feel very desirous
of going as prisoners of war.

"On the night selected we waited impatiently till midnight. Then, as
silently as possible, we removed the planking, and afterwards the
stones of the basement wall, and crept through one by one. All this was
effected so noiselessly that we were all out without creating any alarm.
We could hear the measured tramp of the sentinel, as he paced up and
down in front of the empty prison. We pictured to ourselves his surprise
when he discovered, the next morning, that we escaped under his nose
without his knowing it!

"I need not dwell upon the next twenty-four hours. The utmost vigilance
was required to elude the rebel pickets. At last, after nearly twenty
hours, during which we had nothing to eat, we walked into camp,
exhausted with hunger and fatigue, to the great joy of our comrades from
whom we had been absent a fortnight.

"On receiving information of the manner in which we had been captured,
our commanding officer at once despatched me with a detachment of men to
arrest Mrs. Roberts and her daughter. Her surprise and dismay at seeing
me whom she supposed safe in Richmond were intense. She is still under
arrest.

"I suppose our campaign will open as soon as the roads are dried up. The
mud in Virginia is much more formidable than at the North, and presents
an insuperable, perhaps I should say an unfathomable, obstacle to active
operations. I hope General Grant will succeed in taking Vicksburg. The
loss of that important stronghold would be a great blow to the rebels.

"You ask me, in your last letter, whether I see much of the contrabands.
I have talked with a considerable number. One, a very intelligent
fellow, had been very much trusted by his master, and had accompanied
him to various parts of the South. I asked him the question: 'Is it
true that there are a considerable number of slaves who would prefer to
remain in their present condition to becoming free?'

"'Nebber see any such niggers, massa,' he answered, shaking his head
decisively. 'We all want to be free. My old massa treated me kindly, but
I'd a left him any minute to be my own man.'

"I hope the time will soon come, when, from Canada to the Gulf, there
will not be a single black who is not his own man. We in the army are
doing what we can, but we must be backed up by those who stay at home.
My own feeling is that slavery has received its death-blow. It may
continue to live for some years, but it has fallen from its pomp and
pride of place. It is tottering to its fall. What shall be done with
the negroes in the transition state will be a problem for statesmen to
consider. I don't think we need fear the consequences of doing right,
and on this subject there can be no doubt of what is right; The apparent
insensibility and brutish ignorance which we find among some of the
slaves will wear away under happier influences.

"There is a little fellow of perhaps a dozen years who comes into our
camp and runs of errands and does little services for the men. Yesterday
morning he came to my tent, and with a grin, said to me, 'De ol' man
died last night.'

"'What, your father?' I inquired in surprise.

"'Yes, massa,' with another grin: 'Goin' to tote him off dis mornin'.'

"As he only lived a quarter of a mile off, I got permission to go over
to the house, or cabin, where Scip's father had lived.

"The outer door was open, and I entered without knocking. A woman was
bending over a washtub at the back part of the room. I looked around me
for the body, but could see no indication of anything having happened
out of the ordinary course.

"I thought it possible that Scip had deceived me, and accordingly spoke
to the woman, inquiring if she was Scip's mother.

"She replied in the affirmative.

"'And where is his father?' I next inquired.

"'Oh, he's done dead,' she said, continuing her washing.

"'When did he die?'

"'Las' night, massa.'

"'And where is the body?'

"'Toted off, massa, very first t'ing dis mornin'.'

"In spite of this case of apparent insensibility, the negro's family
attachments are quite as warm naturally as our own. They have little
reason, indeed, to mourn over the loss of a husband or father, since, in
most cases, it is the only portal to the freedom which they covet. The
separation of families, too, tends, of course, to weaken family ties.
While I write these words I cannot help recalling our own happy home,
and longing for an hour, if not more, of your society. I am glad that
you find Mr. Morton so agreeable an inmate. You ought to feel quite
indebted him for his assistance in your studies. I am glad you have
formed a boy's company. It is very desirable that the elements of
military science should be understood even by boys, since upon them must
soon devolve the defense of their country from any blows that may
be directed against her, whether by foes from within or enemies from
abroad.

"The coming season will be a busy one with you. When you receive this
letter it will be about time for you to begin to plow whatever land is
to be planted. As I suggested in my first letter from camp, I should
like you to devote some space-perhaps half an acre-to the culture of
onions. We find them very useful for promoting health in the army. They
are quite high on account of the largely increased demand, so that it
will be a good crop for financial reasons."

(Here followed some directions with regard to the spring planting, which
we omit, as not likely to interest our readers.) The letter ended thus:

"It is nearly time for me to mail this letter, and it is already much
longer than I intended to write. May God keep you all in health and
