he had opportunities, as bookkeeper, which an outsider could not have."

Gibbon eyed his companion in crime distrustfully. He saw that Stark was
intending to throw him over.

"I am entirely willing to have my room at the hotel searched," continued
Stark, gathering confidence. "If you find any traces of the stolen
property there, you are welcome to make the most of them. I have no
doubt Mr. Gibbon will make you the same offer in regard to his house."

Gibbon saw at once the trap which had been so craftily prepared for him.
He knew that any search of his premises would result in the discovery
of the tin box, and had no doubt that Stark would be ready to testify to
any falsehood likely to fasten the guilt upon him. His anger was roused
and he forgot his prudence.

"You--scoundrel!" he hissed between his closed teeth.

"You seem excited," sneered Stark. "Is it possible that you object to
the search?"

"If the missing box is found on my premises," said Gibbon, in a white
heat, "it is because you have concealed it there."

Phil Stark shrugged his shoulders.

"I think, gentlemen," he said, "that settles it. I am afraid Mr Gibbon
is guilty. I shall be glad to assist you to recover the stolen property.
Did the box contain much that was of value?"

"I must caution you both against saying anything that will compromise
you," said one of the officers.

"I have nothing to conceal," went on Stark, brazenly. "I am obliged to
believe that this man committed the burglary. It is against me that I
have been his companion for the last week or two, but I used to know
him, and that will account for it."

The unhappy bookkeeper saw the coils closing around him.

"I hope you will see your way to release me," said Stark, addressing
himself to Mr. Jennings. "I have just received information that my poor
mother is lying dangerously sick in Cleveland, and I am anxious to start
for her bedside to-day."

"Why did you come round here this morning?" asked Mr. Jennings.

"To ask Mr. Gibbon to repay me ten dollars which he borrowed of me the
other day," returned Stark, glibly.

"You--liar!" exclaimed Gibbon, angrily.

"I am prepared for this man's abuse," said Stark. "I don't mind
admitting now that a few days since he invited me to join him in the
robbery of the safe. I threatened to inform you of his plan, and he
promised to give it up. I supposed he had done so, but it is clear to me
now that he carried out his infamous scheme."

Mr. Jennings looked amused. He admired Stark's brazen effrontery.

"What have you to say to this charge, Mr. Gibbon?" he asked.

"Only this, sir, that I was concerned in the burglary."

"He admits it!" said Stark, triumphantly.

"But this man forced me to it. He threatened to write you some
particulars of my past history which would probably have lost me my
position if I did not agree to join him in the conspiracy. I was weak,
and yielded. Now he is ready to betray me to save himself."

"Mr. Jennings," said Stark, coldly, "you will know what importance to
attach to the story of a self-confessed burglar. Gibbon, I hope you will
see the error of your ways, and restore to your worthy employer the box
of valuable property which you stole from his safe."

"This is insufferable!" cried the bookkeeper "You are a double-dyed
traitor, Phil Stark. You were not only my accomplice, but you instigated
the crime."

"You will find it hard to prove this," sneered Stark. "Mr. Jennings, I
demand my liberty. If you have any humanity you will not keep me from
the bedside of my dying mother." "I admire your audacity, Mr. Stark,"
observed the manufacturer, quietly. "Don't suppose for a moment that I
give the least credit to your statements."

"Thank you, sir," said Gibbon. "I'm ready to accept the consequences of
my act, but I don't want that scoundrel and traitor to go free."

"You can't prove anything against me," said Stark, doggedly, "unless
you accept the word of a self-confessed burglar, who is angry with me
because I would not join him."

"All these protestations it would be better for you to keep till your
trial begins, Mr. Stark," said the manufacturer. "However, I think
it only fair to tell you that I am better informed about you and your
conspiracy than you imagine. Will you tell me where you were at eleven
o'clock last evening?"

"I was in my room at the hotel--no, I was taking a walk. I had received
news of my mother's illness, and I was so much disturbed and grieved
that I could not remain indoors."

"You were seen to enter the office of this factory with Mr. Gibbon, and
after ten minutes came out with the tin box under your arm."

"Who saw me?" demanded Stark, uneasily.

Carl Crawford came forward and answered this question.

"I did!" he said.

"A likely story! You were in bed and asleep."

"You are mistaken. I was on watch behind the stone wall just opposite.
If you want proof, I can repeat some of the conversation that passed
between you and Mr. Gibbon."

Without waiting for the request, Carl rehearsed some of the talk already
recorded in a previous chapter.

Phil Stark began to see that things were getting serious for him, but he
was game to the last.

"I deny it," he said, in a loud voice.

"Do you also deny it, Mr. Gibbon?" asked Mr. Jennings.

"No, sir; I admit it," replied Gibbon, with a triumphant glance at his
foiled confederate.

"This is a conspiracy against an innocent man," said Stark, scowling.
"You want to screen your bookkeeper, if possible. No one has ever before
charged me with crime."

"Then how does it happen, Mr. Stark, that you were confined at the
Joliet penitentiary for a term of years?"

"Did he tell you this?" snarled Stark, pointing to Gibbon.

"No."

"Who then?"

"A customer of mine from Chicago. He saw you at the hotel, and informed
Carl last evening of your character. Carl, of course, brought the news
to me. It was in consequence of this information that I myself removed
the bonds from the box, early in the evening, and substituted strips of
paper. Your enterprise, therefore, would have availed you little even if
you had succeeded in getting off scot-free."

"I see the game is up," said Stark, throwing off the mask. "It's true
that I have been in the Joliet penitentiary. It was there that I became
acquainted with your bookkeeper," he added, maliciously. "Let him deny
it if he dare."

"I shall not deny it. It is true," said Gibbon. "But I had resolved to
live an honest life in future, and would have done so if this man had
not pressed me into crime by his threats."

"I believe you, Mr. Gibbon," said the manufacturer, gently, "and I will
see that this is counted in your favor. And now, gentlemen, I think
there is no occasion for further delay."

The two men were carried to the lockup and in due time were tried. Stark
was sentenced to ten years' imprisonment, Gibbon to five. At the end
of two years, at the intercession of Mr. Jennings, he was pardoned,
and furnished with money enough to go to Australia, where, his past
character unknown, he was able to make an honest living, and gain a
creditable position.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

AFTER A YEAR.


Twelve months passed without any special incident. With Carl it was a
period of steady and intelligent labor and progress. He had excellent
mechanical talent, and made remarkable advancement. He was not content
with attention to his own work, but was a careful observer of the work
of others, so that in one year he learned as much of the business as
most boys would have done in three.

When the year was up, Mr. Jennings detained him after supper.

"Do you remember what anniversary this is, Carl?" he asked, pleasantly.

"Yes, sir; it is the anniversary of my going into the factory."

"Exactly. How are you satisfied with the year and its work?"

"I have been contented and happy, Mr. Jennings; and I feel that I owe my
happiness and content to you."

Mr. Jennings looked pleased.

"I am glad you say so," he said, "but it is only fair to add that your
own industry and intelligence have much to do with the satisfactory
results of the year."

"Thank you, sir."

"The superintendent tells me that outside of your own work you have
a general knowledge of the business which would make you a valuable
assistant to himself in case he needed one."

Carl's face glowed with pleasure.

"I believe in being thorough," he said, "and I am interested in every
department of the business."

"Before you went into the factory you had not done any work."

"No, sir; I had attended school."

"It was not a bad preparation for business, but in some cases it gives a
boy disinclination for manual labor."

"Yes; I wouldn't care to work with my hands all my life."

"I don't blame you for that. You have qualified yourself for something
better. How much do I pay you?"

"I began on two dollars a week and my board. At the end of six months
you kindly advanced me to four dollars."

"I dare say you have found it none too much for your wants."

Carl smiled.

"I have saved forty dollars out of it," he answered.

Mr. Jennings looked pleased.

"You have done admirably," he said, warmly. "Forty dollars is not a
large sum, but in laying it by you have formed a habit that will be
of great service to you in after years. I propose to raise you to ten
dollars a week."

"But, sir, shall I earn so much? You are very kind, but I am afraid you
will be a loser by your liberality."

Mr. Jennings smiled.

"You are partly right," he said. "Your services at present are hardly
worth the sum I have agreed to pay, that is, in the factory, but I shall
probably impose upon you other duties of an important nature soon."

"If you do, sir, I will endeavor to meet your expectations."

"How would you like to take a journey Carl?"

"Very much, sir."

"I think of sending you--to Chicago."

Carl, who had thought perhaps of a fifty-mile trip, looked amazed, but
his delight was equal to his surprise. He had always wished to see the
West, though Chicago can hardly be called a Western city now, since
between it and the Pacific there is a broad belt of land two thousand
miles in extent.

"Do you think I am competent?" he asked, modestly.

"I cannot say positively, but I think so," answered Mr. Jennings.

"Then I shall be delighted to go. Will it be very soon?"

"Yes, very soon. I shall want you to start next Monday."

"I will be ready, sir."

"And I may as well explain what are to be your duties. I am, as you
know, manufacturing a special line of chairs which I am desirous of
introducing to the trade. I shall give you the names of men in my line
in Albany, Buffalo, Cleveland and Chicago, and it will be your duty to
call upon them, explain the merits of the chair, and solicit orders. In
other words, you will be a traveling salesman or drummer. I shall pay
your traveling expenses, ten dollars a week, and, if your orders exceed
a certain limit, I shall give you a commission on the surplus."

"Suppose I don't reach that limit?"

"I shall at all events feel that you have done your best. I will
instruct you a little in your duties between now and the time of your
departure. I should myself like to go in your stead, but I am needed
here. There are, of course, others in my employ, older than yourself,
whom I might send, but I have an idea that you will prove to be a good
salesman."

"I will try to be, sir."

On Monday morning Carl left Milford, reached New York in two hours and
a half and, in accordance with the directions of Mr. Jennings, engaged
passage and a stateroom on one of the palatial night lines of Hudson
River steamers to Albany. The boat was well filled with passengers, and
a few persons were unable to procure staterooms.

Carl, however, applied in time, and obtained an excellent room. He
deposited his gripsack therein, and then took a seat on deck, meaning to
enjoy as long as possible the delightful scenery for which the Hudson
is celebrated. It was his first long journey, and for this reason Carl
enjoyed it all the more. He could not but contrast his present position
and prospects with those of a year ago, when, helpless and penniless, he
left an unhappy home to make his own way.

"What a delightful evening!" said a voice at his side.

Turning, Carl saw sitting by him a young man of about thirty, dressed in
somewhat pretentious style and wearing eyeglasses. He was tall and thin,
and had sandy side whiskers.

"Yes, it is a beautiful evening," replied Carl, politely.

"And the scenery is quite charming. Have you ever been all the way up
the river?"

"No, but I hope some day to take a day trip."

"Just so. I am not sure but I prefer the Rhine, with its romantic
castles and vineclad hills."

"Have you visited Europe, then?" asked Carl.

"Oh, yes, several times. I have a passion for traveling. Our family is
wealthy, and I have been able to go where I pleased."

"That must be very pleasant."

"It is. My name is Stuyvesant--one of the old Dutch families."

Carl was not so much impressed, perhaps, as he should have been by this
announcement, for he knew very little of fashionable life in New York.

"You don't look like a Dutchman," he said, smiling.

"I suppose you expected a figure like a beer keg," rejoined Stuyvesant,
laughing. "Some of my forefathers may have answered that description,
but I am not built that way. Are you traveling far?"

"I may go as far as Chicago."

"Is anyone with you?"

"No."

"Perhaps you have friends in Chicago?"

"Not that I am aware of. I am traveling on business."

"Indeed; you are rather young for a business man."

"I am sixteen."

"Well, that cannot exactly be called venerable."

"No, I suppose not."

"By the way, did you succeed in getting a stateroom?"

"Yes, I have a very good one."

"You're in luck, on my word. I was just too late. The man ahead of me
took the last room."

"You can get a berth, I suppose."

"But that is so common. Really, I should not know how to travel without
a stateroom. Have you anyone with you?"

"No."

"If you will take me in I will pay the entire expense."

Carl hesitated. He preferred to be alone, but he was of an obliging
disposition, and he knew that there were two berths in the stateroom.

"If it will be an accommodation," he said, "I will let you occupy the
room with me, Mr. Stuyvesant."

"Will you, indeed! I shall esteem it a very great favor. Where is your
room?"

"I will show you."

Carl led the way to No. 17, followed by his new acquaintance. Mr.
Stuyvesant seemed very much pleased, and insisted on paying for the room
at once. Carl accepted half the regular charges, and so the bargain was
made.

At ten o'clock the two travelers retired to bed. Carl was tired and
went to sleep at once. He slept through the night. When he awoke in
the morning the boat was in dock. He heard voices in the cabin, and the
noise of the transfer of baggage and freight to the wharf.

"I have overslept myself," he said, and jumped up, hurriedly. He looked
into the upper berth, but his roommate was gone. Something else was
gone, too--his valise, and a wallet which he had carried in the pocket
of his trousers.



CHAPTER XXIX.

THE LOST BANK BOOK.


Carl was not long in concluding that he had been robbed by his roommate.
It was hard to believe that a Stuyvesant--a representative of one of
the old Dutch families of New Amsterdam--should have stooped to such
a discreditable act. Carl was sharp enough, however, to doubt the
genuineness of Mr. Stuyvesant's claims to aristocratic lineage.
Meanwhile he blamed himself for being so easily duped by an artful
adventurer.

To be sure, it was not as bad as it might be. His pocketbook only
contained ten dollars in small bills. The balance of his money he had
deposited for safe keeping in the inside pocket of his vest. This he had
placed under his pillow, and so it had escaped the notice of the thief.

The satchel contained a supply of shirts, underclothing, etc., and he
was sorry to lose it. The articles were not expensive, but it would cost
him from a dozen to fifteen dollars to replace them.

Carl stepped to the door of his stateroom and called a servant who was
standing near.

"How long have we been at the pier?" he asked.

"About twenty minutes, sir."

"Did you see my roommate go out?"

"A tall young man in a light overcoat?"

"Yes."

"Yes, sir. I saw him."

"Did you notice whether he carried a valise in his hand?"

"A gripsack? Yes, sir."
