he takes the blame and the shame of his sins on himself, acknowledging
the law which he hath broken to be "holy, just and good." Of these
things, this offender could not be insensible David was indeed under
strong temptation to hide his sins. He was the head of a family,
several members of which were abandoned characters. These he had
doubtless often reproved. He was the head of a nation, numbers of
which were children of Belial. These he had called to repentance,
reproved, punished. He had long professed religion--perhaps often
declared its power to change the heart and mend the life. But if his
crimes were now made public, he must appear "a sinner above all who
dwelt at Jerusalem!" To have his conduct known would cover him with
shame, and "give great occasion to the enemy to blaspheme, and speak
reproachfully."

Did these considerations prevent him from confessing his sins, and
induce him to cover his transgressions? They were mostly arguments for
his proclaiming his repentance, had his sins been public.

By his sins he had countenanced wickedness, and set the example of it
in a dignified station. By his confession he would condemn it, and
justify the law of God, which forbids it; and by his return to duty,
do every thing then in his power, to repair the injury he had done and
prevent or remove the bad effects of his example. Why then had
he neglected it?

There was only one consideration which could excuse him--that, we
apprehend, justified him. His sins in this affair were not public. It
appears from several circumstances that they were kept out of sight
till the prophet was sent to reprove and publish them, and his
repentance of them. Joab knew indeed that the king wished the death of
Uriah. It is not certain that he knew the cause. If he did, it is not
probable that he had divulged it.

That these matters were not transacted openly, or generally known,
maybe inferred from two considerations, namely, from Bathsheba's going
into mourning for Uriah, and from Nathan's declaration, when he
foretold the evils which would come on David and his family, to punish
his sins on this occasion, notwithstanding his repentance. Mournings
were very short among the Hebrews; but this adulteress would not have
put on mourning, or David delayed to take her to his house, to be his
wife, till her mourning was ended, had this affair been public. But,
that it was not so, is put out of doubt by the language of the prophet
in his address to the king--"Thou didst it secretly."

If the matter was not public, the delinquent was not to be criminated
because he did not make it so. Sins committed in secret are to be
confessed and mourned only before him who sees in secret. Such seems
to have been David's fixation from the time of his fall, till the
publication of his guilt, by the prophet; during which term he felt
all the horrors of conscious guilt; "God's hand lying heavy on him."

As it pleased God that both his fall and recovery should be made
public, the prophet seems to have delivered his message before
witnesses. This took away the ground of temptation longer to hide his
fins, and cleared the way to a public renunciation, and return to
duty. And the fallen prince waited no exhortations--needed no
entreaties--"I acknowledged my sin unto thee; and mine iniquity have I
not hid; I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord;
and thou foregavest the iniquity of my sin." *

* Psalm xxxii. 5.

Thus the opinion of those who suppose that David remained impenitent
and secure, till awakened to consideration by the ministry of Nathan,
is devoid of proof, and even of probability. David's well known
character--the nature of renewing grace; and the temper and conduct of
this transgressor, when reproved by the prophet, concur to prove him
then already a penitent; which is confirmed by the consolations
forthwith administered to him by the Lord's messenger.

If in this instance God pardoned, and gave a sense of pardon, to so
heinous an offender, without a moment intervening sense of guilt, and
evidence of pardon and peace, it must have been a very singular divine
treatment of so vile a sinner!

And if David, after having been long eminent for piety, lived a year
of stupid unconcern, under such enormous guilt, it must have been a
very strange event! A phenomenon in the history of man, unequalled in
the annals of the world! Whether there is evidence to justify so
strange a conclusion, judge ye.

If we have not mistaken our subject, this affair gives no countenance
to those who pretend religion to be a thing of nought--that it doth
not change the heart and life, turning men from sin to holiness.
Good people may be seduced into sin, but they are soon renewed by
repentance--soon turn again to the Lord in the way of duty, confessing
their sins and renewing their purposes and engagements to serve the
Lord--"That which I know not teach thou me; and wherein I have done
iniquity, I will do no more."

Neither doth this affair yield comfort and hope to those, who while
they call themselves saints, live like sinners. If _here_, they find
no comfort and support, where will they find it? The only example
thought to have been found in "the footsteps of the flock," fails
them; and we are left to conclude that sanctification is the principal
evidence of justification--"that by their fruits we are to know men."

It is a dark omen when professors paliate their errors and deviations
from duty, by pleading those of saints of old. Those saints erred; but
they did not long continue in sin--"When they thought on their ways
they turned by repentance." Neither did they flatter themselves in
allowed wickedness.

If any allege the sins of former saints in excuse for their own, they
allege not that which distinguished them as saints, but that which
they retained as sinners--not that which they possessed of the image
of God, but that which remained to them of the image of Satan. This
they may have in full, and yet be of their father the Devil. And such
is the sad state of those who allowed serve sin, under whatever
pretence.

Those who are born of God, favor the thing which are of God. Sin is
odious in their view. They long for freedom from it--"Oh wretched man
that I am! Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?"

The saints wish for heaven, not only that they may see "their father
who is in heaven," and the divine Redeemer, "who loved them and gave
himself for them;" but because there "the spirits of the just are
made perfect"--because there they expect to be holy as God is holy--
because there, to be "satisfied with God's likeness, and rejoice
always before him." May God give us this temper, and keep us to his
kingdom, for his mercy's sake in Christ. Amen.



 * * * * * *



SERMON XI.

General Character of Christians.

Galatians v. 24.

"And they that are Christ's have crucified the Flesh, with the
Affections and Lusts."


St. Paul is supposed to have been the first herald of gospel grace to
the Galatians; and they appear to have rejoiced at the glad tidings,
and to have received the bearer with much respect. But after his
departure, certain judaizing teachers went among them, and labored but
too successfully, to alienate their affections from him, and turn them
form the simplicity of the gospel.

The malice and errors of those deceitful workers, and the mischief
which they occasioned at Galatia, caused the writing of this epistle:
which, like the other writings of this apostle, reflects light on the
gospel in general, while it served to correct the mistakes of those
professors of Christianity, and guide their erring footsteps into the
way of peace and truth.

It is not our design to enter into the controversy between this
inspired teacher, and his enemies. We are only concerned to understand
him, and shall receive his instructions as communicated from above.
The primary design of this epistle was to refute those false teachers
who urged circumcision, and the observance of sundry parts of the
Levitical code, which had been abrogated by the gospel. This appears
to have been a leading error of those anarchists. That the apostle did
not lay the intolerable burdens of the Mosaic ritual, on the
professors of Christianity, was made the ground of a charge against
him. St. Paul defended himself by evincing the errors of his
opponents, shewing that Christians are made free from the ceremonial
law; and that their justification before God is not in virtue of any
obedience of their own, to either the ceremonial, or the moral law,
but of grace through faith in Christ.

In the former part of the epistle, he shows the impossibility of
justification in any other than the gospel way--especially in that
way, to which those false teachers directed--shews that they subverted
the gospel, and rendered Christ's sufferings of no effect--"By the
works of the law, shall no flesh be justified--If righteousness come
by the law, then Christ is dead in vain." *

* Chapter ii. 16, 21.

We conceive these to be obvious truths, and wonder that they should be
matter of doubt, or dispute, among those who are favored with
revelation, and receive it as given of God. Perfect obedience is
evidently the demand of the divine law, and condemnation is denounced
against the breakers of it. "This do, and thou shalt live, but the
soul that sinneth, it shall die." * But none of our race keep the law.
"There is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good and sinneth not."
The scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise "by faith
of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe." Mankind are
"shut up to the faith in Christ.." This is the way in which God "hath
mercy on whom he will have mercy. He that believeth shall be saved;
but he that believeth not shall be damned." Therefore the hope of the
apostle, in the way of faith, while discarding hope in any other way.
"Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by
the faith of Jesus Christ; even we have believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the law."

* Lev. xviii. 5. Ezek. xviii. 4.

From the reasoning of the apostle, the false teachers at Galatia seem
not to have urged obedience to the whole law. Circumcision they taught
to be indispensible. St. Paul allures them, that if they were under
obligation to receive circumcision, they were equally obliged to keep
the whole law; and that they bound themselves to this by submitting to
be circumcised--that if they reverted to the law, and placed their
dependence on their obedience to it, they renounced the grace of
Christ, and would not be benefited by it.

"Behold, I Paul, say unto you, that if ye be circumcised. Christ
shall profit you nothing. For I testify again to every man that it is
circumcised, that he is a debtor to keep the whole law. Christ is
become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the
law, ye are fallen from grace,"

While such was the state of those who followed the judaizing teachers,
those who retained the gospel as taught by the apostle, had another
hope--a hope which would not make ashamed--a hope in divine grace
through faith in Christ--"We through the spirit wait for the hope of
righteousness by faith. For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision
availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by
love."

Such is every Christian's hope before God. He "counts all things to be
loss and dung that he win Christ; but the righteousness which is of
God by faith."

But while St. Paul was exhibiting and urging these important truths,
on the wavering Galatians, he foresaw, that it would be objected, that
the scheme which he advanced, tended to licentiousness--that if men
might be saved by faith without the works of the law, they might
indulge themselves in sin--that this would render Christ the minister
of sin. The same objection appears to have been made at Rome, where a
faction existed similar to this at Galatia. This consequence the
apostle rejected with abhorrence. "Do we then make void the law
through faith? God forbid: Yea we establish the law."

The Levitical code included both the ceremonial and the moral law.
Though St. Paul declares justification unattainable by obedience to
either or to both, he did not set aside the moral law, as no longer
obligatory, as he did the ceremonial. This latter had answered the
ends of its appointment, and was abolished by fulfillment. It was only
a shadow of good things to come, and fled away before that of which it
was a shadow. Christ had therefore blotted it out and taken it away.
But the moral law was not done away. Christ hath fulfilled it for
those who believe on him; but it doth not therefore cease to be
obligatory upon them. It is of universal and eternal obligation. The
salvation of mankind, doth not, however, depend on their obedience to
it. If it did, they could not be saved, because all mankind have
broken it. "Salvation is of grace, through faith."

Instead of setting Christians free from obligation to keep the moral
law, what Christ hath done for them strengthens their obligations to
obey it. An increase of mercies is an increase of obligations to serve
the Lord.

But yet more is done to secure obedience from those who are Christ's
--yea enough to secure it. A change passeth on them, when they become
his, which reconciles them to the law, and causes them to delight in
it, and in the duties which it enjoins. This produces a pleasing
conformity to it--"his commandments are not grievous." Their obedience
is sincere and universal. Others may render a partial obedience, out
of fear, but the obedience of the renewed flows from love, and hath
respect to all God's commandments.

Remains of depravity abide in the Christian, but they do not
habitually govern in him. That they are not wholly purged out of his
nature, is to him the occasion of grief--causes him to go sorrowing:
But he doth not gain complete deliverance till he puts off the body.
He puts on, however, the gospel armor, and maintains a warfare against
his own corruptions within, no less than against the powers of
darkness without. Though sometimes wounded, and made to go on his way
halting, he is in his general course victorious, rising superior to
opposition, and living unto God. "Whosoever is born of God, doth not
commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin, because
he is born of God"--cannot sin: like others, allowedly and habitually.
"How shall he who is dead to sin, live any longer therein?"

Such is the character of the Christian, as drawn in the bible; so that
all ground of objection to the gospel scheme, as drawn by St. Paul, is
removed. Those who are Christ's instead of taking liberty to sin,
because "they are not under the law, but under grace," are of all men
most careful to do God's commandments; and from the noblest
principles. Their obedience is not servile, but filial.

This is the spirit of the text. _They that are Christ's have crucified
the flesh, with the afflictions and lusts--HAVE crucified_. The change
which frees from the governing power of indwelling corruption, and
disposeth to walk in newness of life, hath already passed upon them.
None are Christ's till this change takes place in them.

But while the apostle vindicates the doctrine of grace, and shews its
beneficial influence on the morals of men, care is taken to guard
against mistakes on the other hand--not to give occasion to consider
renewing grace as wholly eradicating the principles of depravity, and
putting an end, at once to the spiritual context. This subject is
treated more largely in the epistle to the Romans.* But the opposition
of natural and gracious principles, is here mentioned, and some of its
effects described. "The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other;
so that ye cannot do the things that ye would."

* Chapter vii.

In every man, whatever may be his character, there are different
principles, which, struggle and contend with one another. The natural
man feels a bias to wickedness, and wishes to indulge his depraved
inclinations. But reason forbids, and conscience remonstrates, and
warns him to beware what he doth--reminds him that to yield to passion
is wrong--to indulge appetite unreasonably is sinful--that for these
things God will bring him into judgment. Thus the principles implanted
in the mind, by the God of nature, withstand the sinner in his way,
and resist him in his course; they hold him back and restrain him from
gratifying his natural desires--from doing that to which he is
inclined, and hath power to do. By this means he is prevented from
giving full latitude to his corruptions; yea, he is sometimes
influenced to do good. Herod was a vile character; but "he feared
John, knowing that he was a just man, and an holy, and observed him;
and when he heard him he did many things, and heard him gladly." *
Many similar instances might be adduced. There is not a sinner who
doth not feel the natural bias, and the power of reason and
conscience, driving and contending within him; and sometimes the one
prevails to influence his conduct, and sometimes the other.

* Mark vi. 20.

Neither is the Christian free from similar struggles. Reason and
conscience have naturally the same power in him which they have in
others. The corrupt bias, is also weakened in renovation; yea receives
a deadly wound. But it is not immediately destroyed. Still its
influence is felt, and its effects observed. Sometimes it evinceth so
much power, that its deadly wound seems to be healed. Reason and
conscience, strengthened by renewing grace, ordinarily prevail over
indwelling depravity; but not without a struggle, as every Christian
can testify--neither do the better principles always conquer.
Sometimes the opposing principles, or powers, prevail, and lead to
error and wickedness. Thus "the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh--so that ye cannot do the things that ye
would."

Neither the regenerate, nor the unregenerate, are free to do all that
to which the generally governing principle inclines. The difference
between the renewed, and the unrenewed, is not that the former is free
from temptation, the latter overcome by it, at every attack. Neither
is the case. Both meet with temptation, and often that which is
severe. Each sometimes overcomes; at other times is overcome by it.
But the renewed formed to the habit of attention and watchfulness, and
looking to God for help, and acting, in the main, uprightly before
God, is usually a conqueror; while the unrenewed, habitually careless,
and negligent of watchfulness and prayer, is more often conquered, and
hurried into error and wickedness. The renewed are chiefly
restrained by love to God and duty; the unrenewed by fear of
punishment; Though fear hath a degree of influence on the former; and
other considerations, beside fear, are not wholly, devoid of influence
on the latter.

How far a Christian may be influenced by remaining corruption, and
carried away by the prevalence of temptation; or how far a sinner may
be restrained by the influence of those principles and considerations,
which withstand him in his course, we are unable to determine. That
both feel and are influenced by those opposing principles, is not
matter of doubt. We experience it in ourselves, whatever our
characters may be; and we observe it in others. None are so moulded
into the divine image, as to become perfect--neither doth depravity
attain so complete an ascendant over any who remain in the body, as to
divest them of all restraints, and yield them wholly up to the vicious
propensity. Restraints, yea inward restraints operate in degree, on
the most depraved.

This is a mixed state. The good and the bad are here blended together.
"The wheat and the tares must grow together until the harvest"--yea
