children stood to watch them. The door still remained open. Taking
Maurice's hand, Cecile crept into the silent church; it felt warm and
sheltered. Toby slipped under one of the pews; Cecile and Maurice sat
side by side on a hassock. Maurice was still bright and not at all
sleepy, and Cecile began to think it a good opportunity to tell him a
little of the life he had before him.

"Maurice," she said, "do you mind having to walk a long way, having to
walk hundreds and hundreds of miles, and do you mind having to keep on
walking for days and weeks?"

"Yes," said Maurice. "I don't like walking; I'd rather go back to our
old court."

"But you'd like to pick flowers--pretty, pretty flowers growing by the
waysides; and there'd be lots of sunshine all day long. It would not be
like England, it would be down South."

"Is it warm down South?" asked Maurice.

"Why, Maurice, of course, that was where our father lived and where our
own, own mother died; 'tis lovely, lovely down South."

"Then I don't mind walking, Cecile; let's set of South at once."

"Oh! I wish--I wish we could, darling. We have very little money,
Maurice; 'tis most important for me and you and Toby to go to France as
soon as possible. But I don't know the way. The cabby said something
about Jography. If Jography is a person, _he_ knows the way to France.
I should like to find Jography, and when we get to France, I have a
hope, a great hope, that Jesus the Guide will come with us. Yes, I do
think He will come."

"That's Him as you said was in the dark in our attic?"

"Yes, that's the same; and do you know He came into the dark of that
other dreadful attic again last night, and 'twas He told the woman to
take us out and give us those much nicer lodgings. Oh, Maurice! I _do_
think, yes, I do think, after His doing that, that He has quite made up
His mind to take us to France."

Maurice was silent. His baby face looked puzzled and thoughtful.
Suddenly he sprang to his feet. His eyes were bright. He was possessed
with an idea.

"Cecile," he said, "let's get back to our old court. Do you know that
back of our old court there's a square, and in that square a lovely,
lovely garden? I have often stood at the rails and wanted to pick the
flowers. There are heaps of them, and they are of all colors. Cecile,
p'raps that garden is South. I should not mind walking in there all
day. Let's go back at once and try to find it."

"One moment, one moment first, Maurice," said Cecile. She, too, had a
thought in her head. "You and Toby stay here. I'll be back in a
moment," she exclaimed.

Behind the organ was a dark place. In this short winter's day it looked
like night.

The idea had darted into Cecile's head that Jesus might be there. She
went to the dark corner; yes, it was very gloomy. Peer hard as she
would, she could not see into all its recesses. Jesus might be there.
No one had ever taught her to kneel, but instinctively she fell on her
knees and clasped her hands.

"Jesus," she said, "I think you're here. I am most grateful to you,
Jesus the Guide, for what you did for me and Maurice and Toby the last
two nights. Jesus the Guide, will you tell me how to find Jography and
how to get to France? and when we go there will you guide us? Please
do, though it isn't the New Jerusalem nor the Celestial City. But I
have very important business there, Jesus, very important. And Maurice
is so young, he's only a baby boy, and he'll want you to carry him part
of the way. Will you, who are so very good, come with us little
children, and with Toby, who is the dearest dog in the world? And will
you tell some kind, kind woman to give us a lodging for the night in a
safe place where I won't be robbed of my money?"

Here, while Cecile was on her knees still praying, a wonderful thing
happened. It might have been called a coincidence, but I, who write the
story of these little pilgrims, think it was more; for into Cecile's
dark corner, unperceived by her, a man had come, and this man began to
fill the great organ with wind, and then in a moment the whole church
began to echo with sweet sounds, and in the midst of the music came a
lull, and then one voice rose triumphant, joyful, and reassuring on the
air.

"Certainly, I will be with thee," sang the voice, "I will be with thee,
I will be with thee."




CHAPTER IV.

THE WOMAN WITH THE KINDEST FACE.


Cecile went back to where she had left Maurice sitting on the church
hassock, and, taking his hand, said to him, "Come."

Her little, worn face was bright and some of the sweetness of the music
she had been listening to had got into her blue eyes.

"Come, Maurice," said Cecile. "I know now what to do. Everything will
be quite right now. I have told Jesus all about it, and Jesus the Guide
has answered me, and said He would come with us. Did you hear that
wonderful, lovely music? That was Jesus answering me. And, Maurice, I
asked Him to let us find a kind woman who will help us to a night's
lodging, and I know He will do that too."

"A kind woman?" said Maurice. "The kindest woman I ever saw is coming
up the church steps this minute."

Cecile looked in the direction in which Maurice pointed.

A woman, with a pail in one hand and a large sweeping brush in the
other, was not only coming up the steps, but had now entered the church
door. Cecile and Maurice stood back a little in the shadow. The woman
could not see them, but they could gaze earnestly at her. She was a
stout woman with a round face, rosy cheeks, and bright, though small
and sunken, brown eyes. Her eyes had, however, a light in them, and her
wide lips were framed in smiles. She must have been a women of about
fifty, but her broad forehead was without a wrinkle. Undoubtedly she
was very plain. She had not a good feature, not even a good point about
her ungainly figure. Never in her youngest days could this woman have
been fair to see, but the two children, who gazed at her with beating
hearts, thought her beautiful. Goodness and loving-kindness reigned in
that homely face; so triumphantly did they reign, these rare and
precious things, that the little children, with the peculiar
penetration of childhood, found them out at once.

"She's a _lovely_ woman," pronounced Maurice. "I'm quite sure she has
got a night's lodging. I'll run and ask her."

"No, no, she might not like it," whispered the more timid Cecile.

But just then Toby, who had been standing very quiet and motionless
behind Maurice, perceived a late, late autumn fly, sailing lazily by,
within reach of his nose. That fly was too much for Toby; he made a
snap at it, and the noise which ensued roused the woman's attention.

"Oh! my little Honies," she said, coming forward, "we don't allow dogs
in the church. Even a nice dog like that is against the rules. I'm very
sorry, my loves, but the dog must go out of church."

"Don't Jesus like dogs then?" asked Maurice.

"And please, ma'am," suddenly demanded Cecile, before the woman had
time to answer Maurice, "_is_ that Jesus the Guide playing the
beautiful music up there?"

"That, my dears! You shock me! That is only Mr. Ward the organist. He's
practicing for tomorrow. To-morrow's Sunday, you know. Why, you _are_ a
queer little pair."

"We're going on a pilgrimage," said Maurice. "We're going South; and
Cecile has been talking a great deal lately to Jesus the Guide; and she
asked Him just now to find us a woman with a kind face to give us a
night's lodging, and we both think you are quite lovely. Will you give
us a night's lodging, ma'am?"

"Will I? Hark to the baby! Well, I never! And are you two little
orphans, dears?"

"Yes," said Cecile, "our father is dead, and our mother, and our
stepmother, and we have no one to care for us, except Jane Parsons, and
we can't stay with Jane any longer, for if we did, we should only be
sent to the Union."

"And we couldn't go to the Union, though there _are_ good fires there,"
interrupted Maurice, "because of Toby. If we went to the Union, our dog
Toby would get a yard of rope, that would be murder. We can never,
never, never go to the Union on account of murdering Toby."

"So we came away." continued Cecile. "Jane Parsons sent us to London
with the guard yesterday. We are not English, we are foreign; me and
Maurice are just a little French boy and girl, and we are going back to
France, if we can find Jography to tell us how. But we want a night's
lodging first. Will you give us a night's lodging, ma'am? We can pay
you, please, ma'am."

"Oh, yes, I've no doubt you can pay me well, and I'm like to want yer
bit of money, and I suppose you want to bring Toby too."

"Yes and Toby too," said Maurice.

"Well, I never did hear the like, never. John, I say, John, come here."

The man addressed as John came forward with great strides.

He was a tall man about double the height of his stout wife.

"John, honey," said the little stout woman, "yere's the queerest story.
Two mites, all alone, with only a dog belonging to them; father dead,
mother dead, and they asks ef that's Jesus playing the organ, and they
wants a night's lodging, and I have the kindest face. Hark to the
rogues! and will I give it to 'em? What say you, John?"

"What say _you_, Molly? Have you room for 'em, old girl?"

"The house is small," said the woman, "but there _is_ the little closet
back of our bedroom, and Susie's mattress lying vacant. I could make
'em up tidy in that little closet."

The man laughed, and chucked his wife under the chin.

"Where's the use o' asking me," he said, "when you knows as you _can't_
say no to no waif nor stray as hever walked?"

He went away, for he was employed just then in blowing the organ, and
the organist was beckoning to him, so the woman turned to the children.

"My name is Mrs. Moseley, darlings, and ef you're content with a werry
small closet for you and yer dog, why, yer welcome, and I'll promise as
it shall be clean. Why, ef that'll do for the night's lodging, you
three jest get back into the church pew, and hide Toby well under the
seat, and I'll have done my work in about an hour, and then we'll go
back home to dinner."




CHAPTER V.

A HOUSE WITHOUT A DOOR.


The children in their wanderings the day before, and again this
morning, had quite unknown to themselves traveled quite away from
Bloomsbury, and when they entered the church, and sat down in that pew,
and hid Toby underneath, they were in the far-famed East-End quarter of
the great town. They knew nothing of this themselves, though Cecile did
think the houses very poor and the people very dirty. They were,
therefore, doubly fortunate in coming across Mrs. Moseley.

Mrs. Moseley was sextoness to the very new and beautiful church in Mile
End. Her husband was a policeman at present on night duty, which
accounted for his being at leisure to blow the organ in the church.
This worthy couple had a little grave to love and tend, a little grave
which kept their two hearts very green, but they had no living child.
Mrs. Moseley had, however, the largest of mother's hearts--a heart so
big that were it not for its capacity of acting mother to every
desolate child in Mr. Danvers' parish, it must have starved. Now, she
put Cecile and Maurice along with twenty more into that big heart of
hers, and they were a truly fortunate little pair when she took them
home.

Such a funny home was hers, but so clean when you got into it.

It was up a great many pairs of stairs, and the stairs at the top were
a good deal broken, and were black with use, and altogether
considerably out of repair. But the strangest part, though also the
most delightful to Maurice and Cecile in their funny new home, was the
fact that it had no door at all.

When you got to the top and looked for the door, you were confronted
with nothing but a low ceiling over your head, and a piece of rope
within reach of your hand. If you pulled the rope hard enough, up would
suddenly jump two or three boards, and then there was an opening big
enough for you to creep into the little kitchen.

Yes, it was the queerest entrance into the oddest little home. But when
once you got there how cozy it all was!

The proverbial saying, "eating off the floor," might have been
practiced on those white boards. The little range shone like a looking
glass, and cups and saucers were ranged on shelves above it. In the
middle of the floor stood a bright and thick crimson drugget. The
window, dormer though it was, was arranged quite prettily with crimson
curtains, while some pots of sweet-smelling herbs and flowers stood on
its ledge. There were two or three really good colored prints on the
white-washed walls and several illuminated texts of Scripture. The
little deal table, too, was covered with a crimson cloth.

A canary bird hung in a cage in the window, and it is not too much to
say that this poor bird, born and bred in the East End, was thoroughly
happy in his snug home. A soft-furred gray cat purred before the little
range. The bedroom beyond was as clean and neat as the kitchen, and the
tiny room where Cecile, Maurice and Toby were to sleep, though nearly
empty at present, would, Mrs. Moseley assured them, make a sleeping
chamber by no means to be despised by and by.

When they got into the house, Maurice ran all over it in fearless
ecstasies. Cecile sat on the edge of a chair, and Toby, after sniffing
at the cat, decided to make friends with her by lying down in the
delicious warmth by her side.

"What's yer name, dear heart?" asked Mrs. Moseley to the rather
forlorn-looking little figure seated on the edge of a chair.

"Cecile, please, ma'am."

"Cecil! That sounds like a boy's name. It ain't English to give boy
names to little girls. But then you're foreign, you say--French, ain't
it? I once knew a girl as had lived a long time in France and loved it
dearly. Well, well, but here's dinner ready; the potatoes done to a
turn, and boiled bacon and greens. Now, where's my good man? We won't
wait for him, honey. Come, Maurice, my man, I don't doubt but you're
rare and hungry."

"Yes," answered Maurice; "me and Cecile and Toby are very hungry. We
had bad food yesterday; but I like this dinner, it smells good."

"It will eat good too, I hope. Now, Cecile, why don't you come?"

Cecile's face had grown first red and then pale.

"Please," she said earnestly, "that good dinner that smells so
delicious may be very dear. We little children and our dog we have got
to be most desperate careful, please, Mrs. Moseley, ma'am. We can't eat
that nice dinner if 'tis dear."

"But s'pose 'tis cheap," said Mrs. Moseley; "s'pose 'tis as cheap as
dirt? Come, my love, this dinner shan't cost you nothink; come and eat.
Don't you see that the poor little man there is fit to cry?"

"And nothink could be cheaper than dirt," said Maurice, cheering up.
"I'm so glad as this beautiful, delicious dinner is as cheap as dirt."

"Now we'll say grace," said Mrs. Moseley.

She folded her hands and looked up.

"Lord Jesus, bless this food to me and to Thy little ones, and use us
