listening to the suit of a petty robber baron of the Marches?'

'I do not think! but I know that though I am a fool for giving in to my
son's madness, these are the only terms I propose; and if you, Lady, so
deal with her as to make her accept them, you are free without ransom to
go where you will.'

'You expect me to sell my sister,' said Eleanor disdainfully.

'Look you here,' broke in Rudiger, bursting out of his shyness. 'She is
the fairest maiden, gentle or simple, I ever saw; I love her with all my
heart. If she be mine, I swear to make her a thousand times more cared
for than your sister the Dauphiness; and if all be true your Scottish
archers tell me, you Scottish folk have no great cause to disdain an
Elsass forest castle.'

An awkward recollection, of the Black Knight of Lorn came across
Eleanor, but she did not lose her stately dignity.

'It is not the wealth or poverty that we heed,' she said, 'but the
nobility and princeliness.'

'There is nothing to be done then, son,' said the old Baron, 'but to
wait a day or two and see whether the maiden herself will be less proud
and more reasonable. Otherwise, these ladies understand that there will
be close imprisonment and diet according to the custom of the border
till a thousand gold crowns be paid down for each of these sisters of a
Scotch king, and five hundred for Madame here; and when that is like to
be found, the damoiselle herself may know,' and he laughed.

'We have those who will take care of our ransom,' said Eleanor, though
her heart misgave her. 'Moreover, Duke Sigismund will visit such an
offence dearly!' and there was a glow on her cheeks.

'He knows better than to meddle with a vassal of Lorraine,' said the old
man.

'King Rene--' began Eleanor.

'He is too wary to meddle with a vassal of Elsass,' sneered the Baron.
'No, no, Lady, ransom or wedding, there lies your choice.'

With this there appeared to be a kind of truce, perhaps in consequence
of the appearance of a great pie; and Eleanor did not refuse to sit
down to the table and partake of the food, though she did not choose to
converse; whereas Madame de Ste. Petronelle thought it wiser to be as
agreeable as she could, and this, in the opinion of the Court of the
Dauphiness, was not going very far.

Long before the Barons and their retainers had finished, little Trudchen
came hurrying down to say that the lady was crying and calling for her
sister, and Eleanor was by no means sorry to hasten to her side, though
only to receive a petulant scolding for the desertion that had lasted so
very long, according to the sick girl's sensations.

Matters remained in abeyance while the illness continued; Jean had a
night of fever, and when that passed, under the experienced management
of Dame Elspie, as the sisters called her more and more, she was very
weak and sadly depressed. Sometimes she wept and declared she should die
in these dismal walls, like her mother at Dunbar, and never see Jamie
and Mary again; sometimes she blamed Elleen for having put this mad
scheme into her head; sometimes she fretted for her cousins Lilias and
Annis of Glenuskie, and was sure it was all Elleen's fault for having
let themselves be separated from Sir Patrick; while at others she
declared the Drummonds faithless and disloyal for having gone after
their own affairs and left the only true and leal heart to die for
her; and then came fresh floods of tears, though sometimes, as she
passionately caressed Skywing, she declared the hawk to be the only
faithful creature in existence.

Baron Rudiger was evidently very uneasy about her; Barbe reported how
gloomy and miserable he was, and how he relieved his feelings by beating
the unfortunate man who had been leading the horse, and in a wiser
manner by seeking fish in the torrent and birds on the hills for
her refreshment, and even helping Trudchen to gather the mountain
strawberries for her. This was, however, so far from a recommendation to
Jean, that after the first Barbe gave it to be understood that all were
Trudchen's providing.

They suspected that Barbe nattered and soothed 'her boy,' as she termed
him, with hopes, but they owed much to the species of authority with
which she kept him from forcing himself upon them. Eleanor sometimes
tried to soothe her sister, and while away the time with her harp. The
Scotch songs were a great delight to Dame Elspie, but they made Jean
weep in her weakness, and Elleen's great resource was King Rene's
parting gift of the tales of Huon de Bourdeaux, with its wonderful
chivalrous adventures, and the appearances of the dwarf Oberon; and she
greatly enjoyed the idea of the pleasure it would give Jamie--if ever
she should see Jamie again; and she wondered, too, whether the Duke of
the Tirol knew the story--which even at some moments amused Jean.

There was a stair above their chamber, likewise in the thickness of
the wall, which Barbe told them they might safely explore, and
thence Eleanor discovered that the castle was one of the small but
regularly-built fortresses not uncommon on the summit of hills. It was
an octagon--as complete as the ground would permit--with a huge wall and
a tower at each angle. One face, that on the most accessible side, was
occupied by the keep in which they were, with a watch-tower raising its
finger and banner above them, the little, squat, round towers around not
lifting their heads much above the battlements of the wall. The descent
on most of the sides was almost precipitous, on two entirely so, while
in the rear another steep hill rose so abruptly that it seemed to frown
over them though separated by a ravine.

Nothing was to be seen all round but the tops of trees--dark pines,
beeches, and chestnuts in the gay, light green of spring, a hopeless and
oppressive waste of verdure, where occasionally a hawk might be seen to
soar, and whence the howlings of wolves might be heard at night.

Jean was, in a week, so well that there was no cause for deferring the
interview any longer, and, indeed, she was persuaded that Elleen had not
been half resolute or severe enough, and that she could soon show the
two Barons that they detained her at their peril. Still she looked white
and thin, and needed a scarf for her arm, when she caused herself to be
arrayed as splendidly as her sister had been, and descended to the hall,
where, like Eleanor, she took the initiative by an appeal against the
wrong and injustice that held two free-born royal ladies captive.

'He who has the power may do as he wills, my pretty damsel,' replied the
old Baron. 'Once for all, as I told your sister, these threats are of
no avail, though they sound well to puff up your little airs. Your own
kingdom is a long way off, and breeds more men than money; and as to
our neighbours, they dare not embroil themselves by meddling with us
borderers. You had better take what we offer, far better than aught your
barbarous northern lords could give, and then your sister will be free,
without ransom, to depart or to stay here till she finds another bold
baron of the Marches to take her to wife. Ha, thou Rudiger! why dost
stand staring like a wild pig in a pit? Canst not speak a word for
thyself?'

'She shall be my queen,' said Rudiger hoarsely, bumping himself down on
his knees, and trying to master her hand, but she drew it away from him.

'As if I would be queen of a mere nest of robbers and freebooters,' she
said. 'You forget, Messires, that my sister is daughter-in-law to the
King of France. We must long ago have been missed, and I expect every
hour that my brother, the Dauphin, will be here with his troops.'

'That's what you expect. So you do not know, my proud demoiselle, that
my son would scarce have been rash enough to meddle with such lofty
gear, for all his folly, if he had not had a hint that maidens with
royal blood but no royal portions were not wanted at Court, and might be
had for the picking up!'

'It is a brutal falsehood, or else a mere invention of the traitor
Hall's, our father's murderer!' said Jean, with flashing eyes. 'I would
have you to know, both of you, my Lords, that were we betrayed and
forsaken by every kinsman we have, I will not degrade the blood royal of
Scotland by mating it with a rude and petty freebooter. You may keep us
captives as you will, but you will not break our spirit.'

So saying, Jean swept back to the stairs, turning a deaf ear to the
Baron's chuckle of applause and murmur, 'A gallant spirited dame she
will make thee, my junker, and hold out the castle well against all
foes, when once she is broken in.'

Jean and Eleanor alike disbelieved that Louis could have encouraged this
audacious attempt, but they were dismayed to find that Madame de Ste.
Petronelle thought it far from improbable, for she believed him capable
of almost any underhand treachery. She did, however, believe that though
there might be some delay, a stir would be made, if only by her own
son, which would end in their situation being publicly known, and final
release coming, if Jean could only be patient and resolute.

But to the poor girl it seemed as if the ground were cut from under her
feet; and as her spirits drooped more and more, there were times when
she said, 'Elleen, I must consent. I have been the death of the one true
heart that was mine! Why should I hold out any longer, and make thee and
Dame Elspie wear out your days in this dismal forest hold? Never shall I
be happy again, so it matters not what becomes of me.'

'It matters to me,' said Elleen. 'Sister, thinkest thou I could go away
to be happy, leaving thee bound to this rude savage in his donjon? Fie,
Jean, this is not worthy of King James's daughter; he spent all those
years of patience in captivity, and shall we lose heart in a few days?'

'Is it a few days? It is like years!'

'That is because thou hast been sick. See now, let us dance and sing, so
that the jailers may know we are not daunted. We have been shut up ere
now, God brought us out, and He will again, and we need not pine.'

'Ah, then we were children, and had seen nothing better; and--and there
was not his blood on me!'

And Jean fell a-weeping.




CHAPTER 10. TENDER AND TRUE


     'For I am now the Earlis son,
      And not a banished, man.'--The Nut-Brown Maid.


'O St. Andrew! St. Bride! Our Lady of Succour! St. Denys!--all the lave
of you, that may be nearest in this fremd land,--come and aid him. It
is the Master of Angus, ye ken--the hope of his house. He'll build you
churches, gie ye siller cups and braw vestments gin ye'll bring him
back. St. Andrew! St. Rule! St. Ninian!--you ken a Scots tongue! Stay
his blood,--open his een,--come to help ane that ever loved you and did
you honour!'

So wailed Ringan of the Raefoot, holding his master's head on his knees,
and binding up as best he might an ugly thrust in the side, and a blow
which had crushed the steel cap into the midst of the hair. When he saw
his master fall and the ladies captured, he had, with the better part
of valour, rushed aside and hid himself in the thicket of thorns and
hazels, where, being manifestly only a stray horseboy, no search was
made for him. He rightly concluded that, dead or alive, his master might
thus be better served than by vainly struggling over his fallen body.

It seemed as though, in answer to his invocation, a tremor began to pass
through Douglas's frame, and as Ringan exclaimed, 'There! there!--he
lives! Sir, sir! Blessings on the saints! I was sure that a French
reiver's lance could never be the end of the Master,' George opened his
eyes.

'What is it?' he said faintly. 'Where are the ladies?'

'Heed not the leddies the noo, sir, but let me bind your head. That cap
has crushed like an egg-shell, and has cut you worse than the sword.
Bide still, sir, I say, if ye mean to do any gude another time!'

'The ladies--Ringan--'

'The loons rid aff wi' them, sir--up towards the hills yonder. Nay! but
if ye winna thole to let me bind your wound, how d'ye think to win to
their aid, or ever to see bonnie Scotland again?'

George submitted to this reasoning; but, as his senses returned, asked
if all the troop had gone.

'Na, sir; the ane with that knight who was at the tourney--a plague
light on him--went aff with the leddies--up yonder; but they, as they
called the escort--the Archers of the Guard, as they behoved to call
themselves--they rid aff by the way that we came by--the traitor loons!'

'Ah! it was black treachery. Follow the track of the ladies,
Ringan;--heed not me.'

'Mickle gude that wad do, sir, if I left you bleeding here! Na, na; I
maun see you safely bestowed first before I meet with ony other. I'm the
Douglas's man, no the Stewart's.'

'Then will I after them!' cried George of Angus, starting up; but he
staggered and had to catch at Ringan.

There was no water near; nothing to refresh or revive him had been left.
Ringan looked about in anxiety and distress on the desolate scene--bare
heath on one side, thicket, gradually rising into forest and mountain,
on the other. Suddenly he gave a long whistle, and to his great joy
there was a crackling among the bushes and he beheld the shaggy-faced
pony on which he had ridden all the way from Yorkshire, and which had
no doubt eluded the robbers. There was a bundle at the saddle-bow, and
after a little coquetting the pony allowed itself to be caught, and
a leathern bottle was produced from the bag, containing something
exceedingly sour, but with an amount of strength in it which did
something towards reviving the Master.

'I can sit the pony,' he said; 'let us after them.'

'Nae sic fulery,' said Ringan. 'I ken better what sorts a green wound
like yours, sir! Sit the pony ye may, but to be safely bestowed, ere I
stir a foot after the leddies.'

George broke out into fierce language and angry commands, none of which
Ringan heeded in the least.

'Hist:' he cried, 'there's some one on the road. Come into shelter,
sir.'

He was half dragging, half supporting his master to the concealment
of the bushes, when he perceived that the new-comers were two friars,
cowled, black gowned, corded, and barefooted.

'There will be help in them,' he muttered, placing his master with his
back against a tree; for the late contention had produced such fresh
exhaustion that it was plain the wounds were more serious than he had
thought at first.

The two friars, men with homely, weather-beaten, but simple good faces,
came up, startled at seeing a wounded man on the way-side, and ready to
proffer assistance.

Need like George Douglas's was of all languages, and besides, Ringan
had, among the exigencies of the journey, picked up something by which
he could make himself moderately well understood. The brethren stooped
over the wounded man and examined his wounds. One of them produced some
oil from a flask in his wallet, and though poor George's own shirt was
the only linen available, they contrived to bandage both hurts far more
effectually than Ringan could.

They asked whether this was the effect of a quarrel or the work of
robbers.

'Routiers,' Ringan said. 'The ladies--we guarded them--they carried them
off--up there.'

'What ladies?--the Scottish princesses?' asked one of the friars; for
they had been at Nanci, and knew who had been assembled there; besides
that, the Scot was known enough all over France for the nationality of
Ringan and his master to have been perceived at once.

George understood this, and answered vehemently, 'I must follow them and
save them!'

'In good time, with the saints' blessing,' replied Brother Benigne
soothingly, 'but healing must come first. We must have you to our poor
house yonder, where you will be well tended.'

George was lifted to the pony's back, and supported in the saddle by
Ringan and one of the brethren. He had been too much dazed by the cut
on the head to have any clear or consecutive notion as to what they were
doing with him, or what passed round him; and Ringan did his best to
explain the circumstances, and thought it expedient to explain that his
master was 'Grand Seigneur' in his own country, and would amply
repay whatever was done for him; the which Brother Gerard gave him
to understand was of no consequence to the sons of St. Francis. The
brothers had no doubt that the outrage was committed by the Balchenburg
Baron, the ally of the ecorcheurs and routiers, the terrors of the
country, in his impregnable castle. No doubt, they said, he meant to
demand a heavy ransom from the good King and Dauphin. For the honour
of Scotland, Ringan, though convinced that Hall had his share in the
treason, withheld that part of the story. To him, and still more to his
master, the journey seemed endless, though in reality it was not more
than two miles before they arrived at a little oasis of wheat and
orchards growing round a vine-clad building of reddish stone, with a
spire rising in the midst.

Here the porter opened the gate in welcome. The history was volubly
told, the brother-infirmarer was summoned, and the Master of Angus was
deposited in a much softer bed than the good friars allowed themselves.
There the infirmarer tended him in broken feverish sleep all night,
Ringan lying on a pallet near, and starting up at every moan or murmur.
But with early dawn, when the brethren were about to sing prime, the lad
rose up, and between signs and words made them understand that he must
be released, pointing towards the mountains, and comporting himself much
like a dog who wanted to be let out.

Perceiving that he meant to follow the track of the ladies, the friars
not only opened the doors to him, but gave him a piece of black barley
bread, with which he shot off, like an arrow from a bow, towards the
place where the catastrophe had taken place.

George Douglas's mind wandered a good deal from the blow on his head,
and it was not till two or three days had elapsed that he was able
clearly to understand what his follower had discovered. Almost with the
instinct of a Red Indian, Ringan had made his way. At first, indeed, the
bushes had been sufficiently trampled for the track to be easy to find,
but after the beech-trees with no underwood had been reached, he had
often very slight indications to guide him. Where the halt had taken
place, however, by the brook-side, there were signs of trampling, and
even a few remnants of food; and after a long climb higher, he had come
on the marks of the fall of a horse, and picked up a piece of a torn
veil, which he recognised at once as belonging to the Lady Joanna. He
inferred a struggle. What had they been doing to her?

Faithful Ringan had climbed on, and at length had come below the castle.
He had been far too cautious to show himself while light lasted, but
availing himself of the shelter of trees and of the projections, he had
pretty well reconnoitred the castle as it stood on its steep slopes of
turf, on the rounded summit of the hill, only scarped away on one side,
whence probably the materials had been taken.

There could be no doubt that this was the prison of the princesses, and
the character of the Barons of Balchenburg was only too well known to
the good Franciscans.

'Soevi et feroces,' said the Prior to George, for Latin had turned
out to be the most available medium of communication. Spite of Scott's
averment in the mouth of George's grandson, Bell the Cat, that--

          'Thanks to St Bothan, son of mine,
           Save Gawain, ne'er could pen a line,'

the Douglases were far too clever to go without education, and young
nobles who knew anything knew a little Latin. There was a consultation
over what was to be done, and the Prior undertook to send one of his
brethren into Nanci with Ringan, to explain the matter to King Rene, or,
if he had left Nanci for Provence, to the governor left in charge. But a
frontier baron like Balchenburg was a very serious difficulty to one so
scrupulous in his relations with his neighbours as was good King Rene.

'A man of piety, peace, and learning,' said the Prior, 'and therefore
despised by lawless men, like a sheep among wolves, though happy are we
in living under such a prince.'

'Then what's the use of him and all his raree shows,' demanded the Scot,
'if he can neither hinder two peaceful maids from being carried off,
nor will stir a finger to deliver them? Much should we heed borders and
