They were not going to leave the ground, however, without assuring
themselves of this fact; and several of the largest approached boldly
under the scaffolds, and commenced leaping up to try the height.

After several attempts, springing each time as high as they were able,
they appeared to grow discouraged; and no doubt would in time have
imitated the fox with the grapes, and gone quietly away.  But Von Bloom,
indignant at being roused after such a fashion, from his pleasant rest,
was determined to take some revenge upon his tormenters; so he whispered
the word to the others, and a volley was delivered from behind the tree.

The unexpected discharge caused a quick scattering of both hyenas and
jackals, and the pattering of their numerous feet could be heard as they
ran off.  When the ground under the scaffold was examined, two of the
larger of these ravenous quadrupeds, and one of the smaller, were found
to have bitten the dust.

Swartboy had discharged his arrow along with the guns, and it was he
that had slain the jackal, for the poisoned shaft was seen sticking
between the animal's ribs.

The guns were again loaded, the party took their stations as before;
but, although they waited another half-hour, neither hyena nor jackal
made their appearance.

They had not gone far away, however, as their wild music testified; but
the reason they did not return was, that they had now discovered the
half carcass of the elephant that lay in the lake, and upon that they
were making their supper.  Their plunging in the water could be
distinctly heard from the camp, and during the whole night they
quarrelled and growled, and laughed and yelled, as they gorged
themselves on their ample prey.

Of course Von Bloom and his people did not sit up all night to listen to
this medley of noises.  As soon as they perceived that the brutes were
not likely to come any more near the camp, they laid aside their
weapons, returned to their respective sleeping-places, and were all soon
buried in the sweet slumber that follows a day of healthy exercise.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

STALKING THE OUREBI.

Next morning the hyenas and jackals had disappeared from the scene, and,
to the surprise of all, not a particle of flesh was left upon the bones
of the elephant.  There lay the huge skeleton picked clean, the bones
even polished white by the rough tongues of the hyenas.  Nay, still
stranger to relate, two of the horses--these poor brutes had been long
since left to themselves,--had been pulled down during the night, and
their skeletons lay at a short distance from the camp as cleanly picked
as that of the elephant!

All this was evidence of the great number of ravenous creatures that
must have their home in that quarter,--evidence, too, that game animals
abounded, for where these are not numerous the beasts of prey cannot
exist.  Indeed, from the quantity of tracks that were seen upon the
shores of the vley, it was evident that animals of various kinds had
drunk there during the night.  There was the round solid hoof of the
quagga, and his near congener the dauw; and there was the neat
hoof-print of the gemsbok, and the larger track of the eland; and among
these Von Bloom did not fail to notice the spoor of the dreaded lion.
Although they had not heard his roaring that night, they had no doubt
but there were plenty of his kind in that part of the country.  The
presence of his favourite prey,--the quaggas, the gemsboks, and the
elands,--were sure indications that the king of beasts was not far off.

Not much work was done that day.  The heavy labour of curing the
biltongue, that had occupied them the whole of the preceding day, and
their disturbed rest, had rendered them all listless; and neither Von
Bloom nor the others had any inclination for work.  So they moved around
the camp and did very little.

Swartboy took his elephant's feet from the oven, and cleaned them; and
also let down the biltongue and arranged it so as to be better exposed
to the sun.  Von Bloom himself shot the three remaining horses, having
driven them to a good distance from the camp.  He did this to put an end
to the suffering of the poor brutes,--for it was plain to every one that
they could survive but a day or two longer; and to send a bullet through
the heart of each was an act of mercy to them.

Out of all the live-stock of the field-cornet, the cow alone remained,
and she was now tended with the greatest care.  Without the precious
milk, which she yielded in such quantity, their diet would have been
savage enough; and they fully appreciated the service she rendered them.
Each day she was driven out to the best pasture, and at night shut up
in a safe kraal of wait-a-bit thorns, that had been built for her at a
little distance from the tree.  These thorns had been placed in such a
manner that their shanks all radiated inward, while the bushy tops were
turned out, forming a _chevaux-de-frise_, that scarce any animal would
have attempted to get through.  Such a fence will turn even the lion,
unless when he has been rendered fierce and reckless by provocation.

Of course a gap had been left for the cow to pass in and out, and this
was closed by one immense bush, which served all the purpose of a gate.
Such was the kraal of "old Graaf."  Besides the cow, the only living
thing that remained in camp was Truey's little pet, the fawn of the
gazelle.

But on that very day another pet was added, a dear little creature, not
less beautiful than the springbok, and of still more diminutive
proportions.  That was the fawn of an "ourebi,"--one of the elegant
little antelopes that are found in such variety over the plains and in
the "bush" of Southern Africa.

It was to Hendrik they were indebted not only for this pet, but for a
dinner of delicate venison, which they had that day eaten, and which all
of them, except Swartboy, preferred to elephant-beef.  Hendrik had
procured the venison by a shot from his rifle, and in the following
manner.  About midday he went out--having fancied that upon a large
grassy meadow near the camp he saw some animal.  After walking about
half a mile, and keeping among bushes, around the edge of the meadow, he
got near enough to be sure that it _was_ an animal he had observed, for
he now saw _two_ in the place he had marked.

They were of a kind he had not met with before.  They were very small
creatures,--smaller even than springboks,--but, from their general form
and appearance, Hendrik knew they were either antelopes or deer; and, as
Hans had told him there were _no deer in Southern Africa_, he concluded
they must be some species of antelope.  They were a buck and doe,--this
he knew because one of them only carried horns.  The buck was _under two
feet_ in height, of slender make, and pale tawny colour.  He was
white-bellied, with white arches above the eyes, and some long white
hair under the throat.  Below his knees were yellowish tufts of long
hair, and his horns--instead of being lyrate, like those of the
springbok--rose nearly vertical to the height of four inches.  They were
black in colour, round-shaped, and slightly ringed.  The doe was without
horns, and was a much smaller animal than her mate.

From all these marks Hendrik thought the little antelopes were
"ourebis;" and such they were.

He continued to stalk in upon them, until he was as close as he could
get.  But he was still more than two hundred yards from them, and of
course far from being within shooting distance with his small rifle.

A thick _jong dora_ bush concealed him, but he dared not go farther else
the game would have taken the alarm.  He could perceive that they were
shy creatures.

Every now and gain the buck would raise his graceful neck to its full
stretch, utter a slight blearing call, and look suspiciously around him.
From these symptoms Hendrik drew the inference that it was shy game,
and would not be easily approached.

He lay for a moment, thinking what he should do.  He was to leeward of
the game, as he had purposely gone there; but after a while, to his
chagrin, he saw that they were _feeding up the wind_, and of course
widening the distance between them and himself.

It occurred to Hendrik that it might be their habit to browse up the
wind, as springboks and some other species do.  If so, he might as well
give it up, or else make a long circuit and _head_ them.  To do this
would be a work of labour and of time, and a very uncertain stalk it
would be in the end.  After all his long tramping, and creeping, and
crouching, the game would be like enough to scent him before they came
within shot--for it is for this very reason that their instinct teaches
them to browse _against_, and not _with_ the wind.

As the plain was large, and the cover very distant, Hendrik was
discouraged and gave up the design he had half formed of trying to head
them.

He was about to rise to his feet, and return home, when it occurred to
him that perhaps he might find a decoy available.  He knew there were
several species of antelopes, with whom curiosity was stronger than
fear.  He had often lured the springbok within reach.  Why would not
these obey the same impulse?

He determined to make trial.  At the worst he could only fail, and he
had no chance of getting a shot otherwise.

Without losing a moment he thrust his hand into his pocket.  He should
have found there a large red handkerchief which he had more than once
used for a similar purpose.  To his chagrin it was not there!

He dived into both pockets of his jacket, then into his wide trousers,
then under the breast of his waistcoat.  No.  The handkerchief was not
to be found.  Alas! it had been left in the wagon!  It was very
annoying.

What else could he make use of?  Take off his jacket and hold it up?  It
was not gay enough in colour.  It would not do.

Should he raise his hat upon the end of his gun?  That might be better,
but still it would look too much like the human form, and Hendrik knew
that all animals feared that.

A happy thought at length occurred to him.  He had heard, that with the
curious antelopes, strange forms or movements attract almost as much as
glaring colours.  He remembered a trick that was said to be practised
with success by the hunters.  It was easy enough, and consisted merely
in the hunter standing upon his hands and head, and kicking his heels in
the air!

Now Hendrik happened to be one of those very boys who had often
practised this little bit of gymnastics for amusement; and he could
stand upon his head like an acrobat.

Without losing a moment he placed his rifle upon the ground, between his
hands, and hoisting his feet into the air, commenced kicking them about,
clinking them together, and crossing them in the most fantastic manner.

He had placed himself so that his face was turned towards the animals,
while he stood upon his head.  Of course he could not see them while in
this position, as the grass was a foot high; but, at intervals, he
permitted his feet to descend to the earth; and then, by looking between
his legs, he could tell how the ruse was succeeding.

It _did_ succeed.  The buck, on first perceiving the strange object,
uttered a sharp whistle, and darted off with the swiftness of a bird--
for the "ourebi" is one of the swiftest of African antelopes.  The doe
followed, though not so fast, and soon fell into the rear.

The buck, perceiving this, suddenly halted--as if ashamed of his want of
gallantry--wheeled round, and galloped back, until he was once more
between the doe and the odd thing that had alarmed him.

What could this odd thing be? he now seemed to inquire of himself.  It
was not a lion, nor a leopard, nor a hyena, nor yet a jackal.  It was
neither fox, nor fennec, nor earth-wolf, nor wild hound, nor any of his
well-known enemies.  It was not a Bushman neither, for they are not
double-headed as it appeared.  What _could_ it be?  It had kept its
place--it had not pursued him.  Perhaps it was not at all dangerous.  No
doubt it was harmless enough.

So reasoned the ourebi.  His curiosity overcame his fear.  He would go a
little nearer.  He would have a better view of the thing before he took
to flight.  No matter what it was, it could do no hurt at that distance;
and as to _overtaking him_, pah! there wasn't a creature, biped or
quadruped, in all Africa that he could not fling dust in the face of.

So he went a little nearer, and then a little nearer still, and
continued to advance by successive runs, now this way and now that way,
zigzagging over the plain, until he was within less than a hundred paces
of the odd object that at first light had so terrified him.

His companion, the doe, kept close after him; and seemed quite as
curious as himself--her large shining eyes opened to their full extent,
as she stopped to gaze at intervals.

Sometimes the two met each other in their course; and halted a moment,
as though they held consultation in whispers; and asked each other if
they had yet made out the character of the stranger.

It was evident, however, that neither had done so--as they still
continued to approach it with looks and gestures of inquiry and wonder.

At length the odd object disappeared for a moment under the grass; and
then reappeared,--but this time in an altered form.  Something about it
glanced brightly under the sun, and this glancing quite fascinated the
buck, so that he could not stir from the spot, but stood eyeing it
steadily.

Fatal fascination!  It was his last gaze.  A bright flash shot up--
something struck him through the heart, and he saw the shining object no
more!

The doe bounded forward to where her mate had fallen, and stood bleating
over him.  She knew not the cause of his sudden death, but she saw that
he was dead.  The wound in his side--the stream of red blood--were under
her eyes.  She had never witnessed death in that form before, but she
knew her lover was dead.  His silence--his form stretched along the
grass motionless and limber--his glassy eyes--all told her he had ceased
to live.

She would have fled, but she could not leave him--she could not bear to
part even from his lifeless form.  She would remain a while, and mourn
over him.

Her widowhood was a short one.  Again flashed the priming,--again
cracked the shining tube--and the sorrowing doe fell over upon the body
of her mate.

The young hunter rose to his feet, and ran forward.  He did not,
according to usual custom, stop to load before approaching his quarry.
The plain was perfectly level, and he saw no other animal upon it.  What
was his surprise on reaching the antelopes, to perceive that there was a
_third_ one of the party still alive!

Yes, a little fawn, not taller than a rabbit, was bounding about through
the grass, running around the prostrate body of its mother, and uttering
its tiny bleat.

Hendrik was surprised, because he had not observed this creature before;
but, indeed, he had not seen much of the antelopes until the moment of
taking aim, and the grass had concealed the tiny young one.

Hunter as Hendrik was, he could not help feeling strongly as he regarded
the _tableau_ before him.  But he felt that he had not wantonly
destroyed these creatures for mere amusement, and that satisfied his
conscience.

The little fawn would make a famous pet for Jan, who had often wished
for one, to be equal with his sister.  It could be fed upon the cow's
milk, and, though it had lost both father and mother, Hendrik resolved
that it should be carefully brought up.  He had no difficulty in
capturing it, as it refused to leave the spot where its mother lay, and
Hendrik soon held the gentle creature in his arms.

He then tied the buck and doe together; and, having fastened a strong
cord round the horns of the latter, he set off dragging the two
antelopes behind him.

As these lay upon the ground, heads foremost, they were drawn _with the
grain of the hair_, which made it much easier; and as there was nothing
but grass sward to be passed over, the young hunter succeeded in taking
the whole of his game to camp without any great difficulty.

The joy of all was great, at seeing such a fine lot of venison, but
Jan's rejoicing was greater than all; and he no longer envied Truey the
possession of her little gazelle.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

LITTLE JAN'S ADVENTURE.

It would have been better that Jan had never seen the little "ourebi,"--
better both for Jan and the antelope, for that night the innocent
creature was the cause of a terrible panic in the camp.

They had all gone to sleep as on the previous night,--Von Bloom and the
four children in the wagon, while the Bushman and Totty slept upon the
grass.  The latter lay under the wagon; but Swartboy had kindled a large
fire at a little distance from it, and beside this had stretched
himself, rolled up in his sheep-skin kaross.

They had all gone to sleep without being disturbed by the hyenas.  This
