turn, Rama and Krishna.

Rama, often distinguished as Ramacandra, is usually treated as the
seventh incarnation and anterior to Krishna, for he was born in the
second age of this rapidly deteriorating world, whereas Krishna did
not appear until the third. But his deification is later than that of
Krishna and probably an imitation of it. He was the son of
Dasaratha, King of Ayodhya or Oudh, but was driven into banishment by
a palace intrigue. He married Sita, daughter of the King of Mithila.
She was carried off by Ravana, the demon tyrant of Ceylon, and Rama
re-captured her with the aid of Hanuman, King of the Monkeys, and his
hosts.[361] Is there any kernel of history in this story? An
examination of Hindu legends suggests that they usually preserve names
and genealogies correctly but distort facts, and fantastically combine
independent narratives. Rama was a semi-divine hero in the tales of
ancient Oudh, based on a real personality, and Ceylon was colonized by
Indians of Aryan speech.[362] But can we assume that a king of Oudh
really led an expedition to the far south, with the aid of ape-like
aborigines? It is doubtful, and the narrative of the Ramayana reads
like poetic invention rather than distorted history. And yet, what can
have prompted the legend except the occurrence of some such
expedition? In Rama's wife Sita, seem to be combined an agricultural
goddess and a heroine of ancient romance, embodying the Hindu ideal of
the true wife.

We have no record of the steps by which Rama and Krishna were
deified, although in different parts of the epic they are presented in
very different aspects, sometimes as little more than human, sometimes
as nothing less than the Supreme Deity. But it can hardly be doubted
that this deification owes something to the example of Buddhism. It
may be said that the development of both Buddhism and Hinduism in the
centuries immediately preceding and following our era gives parallel
manifestations of the same popular tendency to deify great men. This
is true, but the non-Buddhist forms of Indian religion while not
objecting to deification did not particularly encourage it. But in
this period, Buddhism and Jainism were powerful: both of them
sanctioned the veneration of great teachers and, as they did not
recognize sacrifice or adoration of gods, this veneration became the
basis of their ceremonies and easily passed into worship. The
Buddhists are not responsible for the introduction of deification, but
the fact that it was to some extent the basis of their public
ceremonies must have gone far to make the worship of Rama and
Krishna seem natural.

It is commonly said that whereas the whole divine nature of Vishnu
was embodied in Krishna, Rama was only a partial incarnation. Half
the god's essence took human form in him, the other half being
distributed among his brothers. Krishna is a greater figure in
popular esteem and receives the exclusive devotion of more
worshippers. The name of Rama commands the reverence of most Hindus,
and has a place in their prayers, but his figure has not been invested
with the attributes (often of dubious moral value) which most attract
sectarian devotion. His worship combines easily with the adoration of
other deities. The great temple of Ramesvaram on Adam's Bridge is
dedicated not to Rama himself but to the linga which he erected there,
and Tulsi Das, the author of the Hindi Ramayana, while invoking Rama
as the Supreme Lord and redeemer of the world, emphatically
states[363] that his worship is not antagonistic to that of Siva.

No inscriptions nor ancient references testify to the worship of Rama
before our era and in the subsequent centuries two phases can be
distinguished. First, Rama is a great hero, an incarnation of Vishnu
for a particular purpose and analogous to the Vamana or any other
avatara: deserving as such of all respect but still not the object of
any special cult. This is the view taken of Rama in the Mahabharata,
the Puranas, the Raghuvamsa, and those parts of the Ramayana which
go beyond it are probably late additions.[364] But secondly Rama
becomes for his worshippers the supreme deity. Ramanuja (on the
Vedanta sutras, II. 42) mentions him and Krishna as two great
incarnations in which the supreme being became manifest, and since
Krishna was certainly worshipped at this period as identical with
the All-God, it would appear that Rama held the same position. Yet it
was not until the fourteenth or fifteenth century that he became for
many sects the central and ultimate divine figure.

In the more liberal sects the worship of Rama passes easily into
theism and it is the direct parent of the Kabirpanth and Sikhism, but
unlike Krishnaism it does not lead to erotic excess. Rama
personifies the ideal of chivalry, Sita of chastity. Less edifying
forms of worship may attract more attention, but it must not be
supposed that Rama is relegated to the penumbra of philosophic
thought. If anything so multiplex as Hinduism can be said to have a
watchword, it is the cry, Ram, Ram. The story of his adventures has
travelled even further than the hero himself, and is known not only
from Kashmir to Cape Comorin but from Bombay to Java and Indo-China
where it is a common subject of art. In India the Ramayana is a
favourite recitation among all classes, and dramatized versions of
various episodes are performed as religious plays. Though two late
Upanishads, the Ramapurvatapaniya and Ramauttaratapaniya extol Rama as
the Supreme Being, there is no Ramapurana. The fact is significant,
as showing that his worship did not possess precisely those features
of priestly sectarianism which mark the Puranas and perhaps that it
is later than the Puranas. But it has inspired a large literature,
more truly popular than anything that the Puranas contain. Thus we
have the Sanskrit Ramayana itself, the Hindi Ramayana, the Tamil
Ramayana of Kamban, and works like the Adhyatma-Ramayana and
Yoga-Vasishtha-Ramayana.[365] Of all these, the Ramayana of Tulsi
Das is specially remarkable and I shall speak of it later at some
length.


4



Krishna, the other great incarnation of Vishnu, is one of the most
conspicuous figures in the Indian pantheon, but his historical origin
remains obscure. The word which means black or dark blue occurs in the
Rig Veda as the name of an otherwise unknown person. In the Chandogya
Upanishad,[366] Krishna, the son of Devaki, is mentioned as having
been instructed by the sage Ghora of the Angirasa clan, and it is
probably implied that Krishna too belonged to that clan.[367] Later
sectarian writers never quote this verse, but their silence may be due
to the fact that the Upanishad does not refer to Krishna as if he
were a deity, and merely says that he received from Ghora instruction
after which he never thirsted again. The purport of it was that the
sacrifice may be performed without rites, the various parts being
typified by ordinary human actions, such as hunger, eating, laughter,
liberality, righteousness, etc. This doctrine has some resemblance to
Buddhist language[368] and if this Krishna is really the ancient
hero out of whom the later deity was evolved, there may be an allusion
to some simple form of worship which rejected ceremonial and was
practised by the tribes to whom Krishna belonged. I shall recur to
the question of these tribes and the Bhagavata sect below, but in this
section I am concerned with the personality of Krishna.

Vasudeva is a well-known name of Krishna and a sutra of
Panini,[369] especially if taken in conjunction with the comment of
Patanjali, appears to assert that it is not a clan name but the name
of a god. If so Vasudeva must have been recognized as a god in the
fourth century B.C. He is mentioned in inscriptions which appear to
date from about the second century B.C.[370] and in the last book of
the Taittiriya Aranyaka,[371] which however is a later addition of
uncertain date.

The name Krishna occurs in Buddhist writings in the form Kanha,
phonetically equivalent to Krishna. In the Digha Nikaya[372] we hear
of the clan of the Kanhayanas (= Karshnayanas) and of one Kanha who
became a great sage. This person may be the Krishna of the Rig
Veda, but there is no proof that he is the same as our Krishna.

The Ghata-Jataka (No. 454) gives an account of Krishna's childhood
and subsequent exploits which in many points corresponds with the
Brahmanic legends of his life and contains several familiar incidents
and names, such as Vasudeva, Baladeva, Kamsa. Yet it presents many
peculiarities and is either an independent version or a
misrepresentation of a popular story that had wandered far from its
home. Jain tradition also shows that these tales were popular and were
worked up into different forms, for the Jains have an elaborate system
of ancient patriarchs which includes Vasudevas and Baladevas.
Krishna is the ninth of the Black Vasudevas[373] and is connected
with Dvaravati or Dvaraka. He will become the twelfth tirthankara of
the next world-period and a similar position will be attained by
Devaki, Rohini, Baladeva and Javakumara, all members of his family.
This is a striking proof of the popularity of the Krishna legend
outside the Brahmanic religion.

No references to Krishna except the above have been found in the
earlier Upanishads and Sutras. He is not mentioned in Manu but in one
aspect or another he is the principal figure in the Mahabharata, yet
not exactly the hero. The Ramayana would have no plot without Rama,
but the story of the Mahabharata would not lose its unity if Krishna
were omitted. He takes the side of the Pandavas, and is sometimes a
chief sometimes a god but he is not essential to the action of the
epic.

The legend represents him as the son of Vasudeva, who belonged to the
Sattvata sept[374] of the Yadava tribe, and of his wife Devaki. It had
been predicted to Kamsa, king of Mathura (Muttra), that one of her
sons would kill him. He therefore slew her first six children: the
seventh, Balarama, who is often counted as an incarnation of Vishnu,
was transferred by divine intervention to the womb of Rohini.
Krishna, the eighth, escaped by more natural methods. His father was
able to give him into the charge of Nanda, a herdsman, and his wife
Yasoda who brought him up at Gokula and Vrindavana. Here his youth was
passed in sporting with the Gopis or milk-maids, of whom he is said to
have married a thousand. He had time, however, to perform acts of
heroism, and after killing Kamsa, he transported the inhabitants of
Mathura to the city of Dvaraka which he had built on the coast of
Gujarat. He became king of the Yadavas and continued his mission of
clearing the earth of tyrants and monsters. In the struggle between
the Pandavas and the sons of Dhritarashtra he championed the cause
of the former, and after the conclusion of the war retired to Dvaraka.
Internecine conflict broke out among the Yadavas and annihilated the
race. Krishna himself withdrew to the forest and was killed by a
hunter called Jaras (old age) who shot him supposing him to be a deer.

In the Mahabharata and several Puranas this bare outline is distended
with a plethora of miraculous incident remarkable even in Indian
literature, and almost all possible forms of divine and human activity
are attributed to this many-sided figure. We may indeed suspect that
his personality is dual even in the simplest form of the legend for
the scene changes from Mathura to Dvaraka, and his character is not
quite the same in the two regions. It is probable that an ancient
military hero of the west has been combined with a deity or perhaps
more than one deity. The pile of story, sentiment and theology which
ages have heaped up round Krishna's name, represents him in three
principal aspects. Firstly, he is a warrior who destroys the powers of
evil. Secondly, he is associated with love in all its forms, ranging
from amorous sport to the love of God in the most spiritual and
mystical sense. Thirdly, he is not only a deity, but he actually
becomes God in the European and also in the pantheistic acceptation of
the word, and is the centre of a philosophic theology.

The first of these aspects is clearly the oldest and it is here, if
anywhere, that we may hope to find some fragments of history. But the
embellishments of poets and story-tellers have been so many that we
can only point to features which may indicate a substratum of fact.
In the legend, Krishna assists the Pandavas against the Kauravas.
Now many think that the Pandavas represent a second and later
immigration of Aryans into India, composed of tribes who had halted in
the Himalayas and perhaps acquired some of the customs of the
inhabitants, including polyandry, for the five Pandavas had one wife
in common between them. Also, the meaning of the name Krishna,
black, suggests that he was a chief of some non-Aryan tribe. It is,
therefore, possible that one source of the Krishna myth is that a
body of invading Aryans, described in the legend as the Pandavas,
who had not exactly the same laws and beliefs as those already
established in Hindustan, were aided by a powerful aboriginal chief,
just as the Sisodias in Rajputana were aided by the Bhils. It is
possible too that Krishna's tribe may have come from Kabul or other
mountainous districts of the north west, although one of the most
definite points in the legend is his connection with the coast town of
Dvaraka. The fortifications of this town and the fruitless efforts of
the demon king, Salva, to conquer it by seige are described in the
Mahabharata,[375] but the narrative is surrounded by an atmosphere of
magic and miracle rather than of history.[376]

Though it would not be reasonable to pick out the less fantastic parts
of the Krishna legend and interpret them as history, yet we may
fairly attach significance to the fact that many episodes represent
him as in conflict with Brahmanic institutions and hardly maintaining
the position of Vishnu incarnate.[377] Thus he plunders Indra's
garden and defeats the gods who attempt to resist him. He fights with
Siva and Skanda. He burns Benares and all its inhabitants. Yet he is
called Upendra, which, whatever other explanations sectarian ingenuity
may invent, can hardly mean anything but the Lesser Indra, and he
fills the humble post of Arjuna's charioteer. His kinsmen seem to have
been of little repute, for part of his mission was to destroy his own
clan and after presiding over its annihilation in internecine strife,
he was slain himself. In all this we see dimly the figure of some
aboriginal hero who, though ultimately canonized, represented a force
not in complete harmony with Brahmanic civilization. The figure has
also many solar attributes but these need not mean that its origin is
to be sought in a sun myth, but rather that, as many early deities
were forms of the sun, solar attributes came to be a natural part of
divinity and were ascribed to the deified Krishna just as they were
to the deified Buddha.[378]

Some authors hold that the historical Krishna was a teacher, similar
to Zarathustra, and that though of the military class he was chiefly
occupied in founding or supporting what was afterwards known as the
religion of the Bhagavatas, a theistic system inculcating the worship
of one God, called Bhagavat, and perhaps identical with the Sun. It is
probable that Krishna the hero was connected with the worship of a
special deity, but I see no evidence that he was primarily a
teacher.[379] In the earlier legends he is a man of arms: in the later
he is not one who devotes his life to teaching but a forceful
personage who explains the nature of God and the universe at the most
unexpected moments. Now the founders of religions such as Mahavira and
Buddha preserve their character as teachers even in legend and do not
accumulate miscellaneous heroic exploits. Similarly modern founders of
sects, like Caitanya, though revered as incarnations, still retain
their historical attributes. But on the other hand many men of action
have been deified not because they taught anything but because they
seemed to be more than human forces. Rama is a classical example of
such deification and many local deities can be shown to be warriors,
bandits and hunters whose powers inspired respect. It is said that
there is a disposition in the Bombay Presidency to deify the Maratha
leader Sivaji.[380]

In his second aspect, Krishna is a pastoral deity, sporting among
nymphs and cattle. It is possible that this Krishna is in his origin
distinct from the violent and tragic hero of Dvaraka. The two
characters have little in common, except their lawlessness, and the
date and locality of the two cycles of legend are different. But the
death of Kamsa which is one of the oldest incidents in the story (for
it is mentioned in the Mahabhashya[381]) belongs to both and Kamsa is
consistently connected with Muttra. The Mahabharata is mainly
concerned with Krishna the warrior: the few allusions in it to the
freaks of the pastoral Krishna occur in passages suspected of being
late interpolations and, even if they are genuine, show that little
attention was paid to his youth. But in later works, the relative
importance is reversed and the figure of the amorous herdsman almost
banishes the warrior. We can trace the growth of this figure in the
sculptures of the sixth century, in the Vishnu and Bhagavata Puranas
and the Gita-govinda (written about 1170). Even later is the worship
of Radha, Krishna's mistress, as a portion of the deity, who is
supposed to have divided himself into male and female halves.[382] The
birth and adventures of the pastoral Krishna are located in the land
of Braj, the district round Muttra and among the tribe of the Abhiras,
but the warlike Krishna is connected with the west, although his
exploits extend to the Ganges valley.[383] The Abhiras, now called
Ahirs, were nomadic herdsmen who came from the west and their
movements between Kathiawar and Muttra may have something to do with
the double location of the Krishna legend.

Both archaeology and historical notices tell us something of the
history of Muttra. It was a great Buddhist and Jain centre, as the
statues and viharas found there attest. Ptolemy calls it the city of
the gods. Fa-Hsien (400 A.D.) describes it as Buddhist, but that faith
was declining at the time of Hsuean Chuang's visit (c. 630 A.D.). The
sculptural remains also indicate the presence of Graeco-Bactrian
influence. We need not therefore feel surprise if we find in the
religious thought of Muttra elements traceable to Greece, Persia or
Central Asia. Some claim that Christianity should be reckoned among
these elements and I shall discuss the question elsewhere. Here I will
only say that such ideas as were common to Christianity and to the
religions of Greece and western Asia probably did penetrate to India
by the northern route, but of specifically Christian ideas I see no
proof. It is true that the pastoral Krishna is unlike all earlier
Indian deities, but then no close parallel to him can be adduced from
elsewhere, and, take him as a whole, he is a decidedly un-christian
figure. The resemblance to Christianity consists in the worship of a
divine child, together with his mother. But this feature is absent in
the New Testament and seems to have been borrowed from paganism by
Christianity.

The legends of Muttra show even clearer traces than those already
quoted of hostility between Krishna and Brahmanism. He forbids the
worship of Indra,[384] and when Indra in anger sends down a deluge of
rain, he protects the country by holding up over it the hill of
Goburdhan, which is still one of the great centres of pilgrimage.[385]
The language which the Vishnu Purana attributes to him is extremely
remarkable. He interrupts a sacrifice which his fosterfather is
offering to Indra and says, "We have neither fields nor houses: we
wander about happily wherever we list, travelling in our waggons. What
have we to do with Indra? Cattle and mountains are (our) gods.
Brahmans offer worship with prayer: cultivators of the earth adore
their landmarks but we who tend our herds in the forests and mountains
should worship them and our kine."

This passage suggests that Krishna represents a tribe of highland
nomads who worshipped mountains and cattle and came to terms with the
Brahmanic ritual only after a struggle. The worship of mountain
spirits is common in Central Asia, but I do not know of any evidence
for cattle-worship in those regions. Clemens of Alexandria,[386]
writing at the end of the second century A.D., tells us that the
Indians worshipped Herakles and Pan. The pastoral Krishna has
considerable resemblance to Pan or a Faun, but no representations of
such beings are recorded from Graeco-Indian sculptures. Several Bacchic
groups have however been discovered in Gandhara and also at
Muttra[387] and Megasthenes recognized Dionysus in some Indian deity.
Though the Bacchic revels and mysteries do not explain the pastoral
element in the Krishna legend, they offer a parallel to some of its
other features, such as the dancing and the crowd of women, and I am
inclined to think that such Greek ideas may have germinated and proved
fruitful in Muttra. The Greek king Menander is said to have occupied
the city (c. 155 B.C.), and the sculptures found there indicate that
Greek artistic forms were used to express Indian ideas. There may have
been a similar fusion in religion.

In any case, Buddhism was predominant in Muttra for several centuries.
It no doubt forbade the animal sacrifices of the Brahmans and favoured
milder rites. It may even offer some explanation for the frivolous
character of much in the Krishna legend.[388] Most Brahmanic
deities, extraordinary as their conduct often is, are serious and
imposing. But Buddhism claimed for itself the serious side of religion
and while it tolerated local godlings treated them as fairies or
elves. It was perhaps while Krishna was a humble rustic deity of
this sort, with no claim to represent the Almighty, that there first
gathered round him the cycle of light love-stories which has clung to
him ever since. In the hands of the Brahmans his worship has undergone
the strangest variations which touch the highest and lowest planes of
Hinduism, but the Muttra legend still retains its special note of
pastoral romance, and exhibits Krishna in two principal characters,
as the divine child and as the divine lover. The mysteries of birth
and of sexual union are congenial topics to Hindu theology, but in
the cult of Muttra we are not concerned with reproduction as a world
force, but simply with childhood and love as emotional manifestations
of the deity. The same ideas occur in Christianity, and even in the
Gospels Christ is compared to a bridegroom, but the Krishna legend
is far more gross and naive.

The infant Krishna is commonly adored in the form known as Makhan
Chor or the Butter Thief.[389] This represents him as a crawling child
holding out one hand full of curds or butter which he has stolen. We
speak of idolizing a child, and when Hindu women worship this image
they are unconsciously generalizing the process and worshipping
childhood, its wayward pranks as well as its loveable simplicity, and
though it is hard for a man to think of the freaks of the butter thief
as a manifestation of divinity, yet clearly there is an analogy
between these childish escapades and the caprices of mature deities,
which are respectfully described as mysteries. If one admits the
worship of the Bambino, it is not unreasonable to include in it
admiration of his rogueries, and the tender playfulness which is
permitted to enter into this cult appeals profoundly to Indian women.
Images of the Makhan Chor are sold by thousands in the streets of
Muttra.

Even more popular is the image known as Kanhaya, which represents the
god as a young man playing the flute as he stands in a careless
attitude, which has something of Hellenic grace. Krishna in this
form is the beloved of the Gopis, or milk-maids, of the land of Braj,
and the spouse of Radha, though she had no monopoly of him. The
stories of his frolics with these damsels and the rites instituted in
memory thereof have brought his worship into merited discredit.
Krishnaism offers the most extensive manifestation to be found in the
world of what W. James calls the theopathic condition as illustrated
by nuns like Marguerite Marie Alacoque, Saint Gertrude and the more
distinguished Saint Theresa. "To be loved by God and loved by him to
distraction (jusqu'a la folie), Margaret melted away with love at the
thought of such a thing.... She said to God, 'Hold back, my God, these
torrents which overwhelm me or else enlarge my capacity for their
reception'."[390] These are not the words of the Gita-govinda or the
Prem Sagar, as might be supposed, but of a Catholic Bishop describing
the transports of Sister Marguerite Marie, and they illustrate the
temper of Krishna's worshippers. But the verses of the Marathi poet,
Tukaram, who lived about 1600 A.D. and sang the praises of Krishna,
rise above this sentimentality though he uses the language of love. In
a letter to Sivaji, who desired to see him, he wrote, "As a chaste
wife longs only to see her lord, such am I to Vitthala.[391] All the
world is to me Vitthala and nothing else: thee also I behold in
him." He also wrote elsewhere, "he that taketh the unprotected to his
heart and doeth to a servant the same kindness as to his own children,
is assuredly the image of God." More recently Ramakrishna, whose
sayings breathe a wide intelligence as well as a wide charity, has
given this religion of love an expression which, if somewhat too
sexual to be perfectly in accordance with western taste, is nearly
related to emotional Christianity. "A true lover sees his god as his
nearest and dearest relative" he writes, "just as the shepherd women
of Vrindavana saw in Krishna not the Lord of the Universe but their
own beloved.... The knowledge of God may be likened to a man, while
the love of God is like a woman. Knowledge has entry only up to the
outer rooms of God, and no one can enter into the inner mysteries of
God save a lover.... Knowledge and love of God are ultimately one and
the same. There is no difference between pure knowledge and pure
love."[392]

These extracts show how Krishna as the object of the soul's desire
assumes the place of the Supreme Being or God. But this surprising
transformation[393] is not specially connected with the pastoral and
erotic Krishna: the best known and most thorough-going exposition of
his divinity is found in the Bhagavad-gita, which represents him as
being in his human aspect, a warrior and the charioteer of Arjuna.
Probably some seventy-five millions to-day worship Krishna,
especially under the name of Hari, as God in the pantheistic sense and
naturally the more his identity with the supreme spirit is emphasized,
the dimmer grow the legendary features which mark the hero of Muttra
and Dvaraka, and the human element in him is reduced to this very
important point that the tie uniting him to his worshippers is one of
sentiment and affection.

In the following chapters I shall treat of this worship when
describing the various sects which practise it. A question of some
importance for the history of Krishna's deification is the meaning
of the name Vasudeva. One explanation makes it a patronymic, son of
Vasudeva, and supposes that when this prince Vasudeva was deified his
name, like Rama, was transferred to the deity. The other regards
Vasudeva as a name for the deity used by the Sattvata clan and
supposes that when Krishna was deified this already well-known
divine name was bestowed on him. There is much to be said for this
latter theory. As we have seen the Jains give the title Vasudeva to a
series of supermen, and a remarkable legend states[394] that a king
called Paundraka who pretended to be a deity used the title Vasudeva
and ordered Krishna to cease using it, for which impertinence he was
slain. This clearly implies that the title was something which could
be detached from Krishna and not a mere patronymic. Indian writings
countenance both etymologies of the word. As the name of the deity
they derive it from _vas_ to dwell, he in whom all things abide and
who abides in all.[395]


5


Siva and Vishnu are not in their nature different from other Indian
ideas, high or low. They are the offspring of philosophic and poetic
minds playing with a luxuriant popular mythology. But even in the
epics they have already become fixed points in a flux of changing
fancies and serve as receptacles in which the most diverse notions are
collected and stored. Nearly all philosophy and superstition finds its
place in Hinduism by being connected with one or both of them. The two
worships are not characteristic of different periods: they coexist
when they first become known to us as they do at the present day and
in essential doctrines they are much alike. We have no name for this
curious double theism in which each party describes its own deity as
the supreme god or All-god, yet without denying the god of the other.
Something similar might be produced in Christianity if different
Churches were avowedly to worship different persons of the Trinity.

