

_Founded by Mathew Carey, 1785._

BAIRD'S SCIENTIFIC BOOK CATALOGUES NOW READY, NEW REVISED EDITIONS.

Of our valuable SCIENTIFIC BOOK CATALOGUES, which will be sent by mail
gratis, and free of postage, on application.

We are now receiving and keeping in stock the most important ENGLISH
AND AMERICAN SCIENTIFIC BOOKS as they are published, and are prepared
to furnish them or to give information in regard to all American and
Foreign publications in this department of literature.

HENRY CAREY BAIRD & CO.,

Industrial Publishers, Booksellers & Importers, _810 Walnut Street,
Philadelphia._

       *       *       *       *       *


AIR COMPRESSORS FOR ALL PURPOSES.

_A SPECIALTY of HEAVY PRESSURES._

THE NORWALK IRON WORKS CO., SOUTH NORWALK, CONN.

       *       *       *       *       *


OTIS' SAFETY HOISTING MACHINERY.

OTIS BROS. & CO., No. 348 Broadway, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


WROUGHT IRON

_Beams and Girders_

THE UNION IRON MILLS, Pittsburgh, Pa., Manufacturers of improved
wrought iron Beams and Girders (patented).

The great fall which has taken place in the prices of Iron and
especially in Beams used in the construction of FIRE PROOF BUILDINGS,
induces us to call the special attention of Engineers, Architects, and
Builders to the undoubted advantages of now erecting Fire Proof
structures; and by reference to pages 52 & 54 of our Book of
Sections--which will be sent on application to those contemplating the
erection of fire proof buildings--THE COST CAN BE ACCURATELY
CALCULATED, the cost of Insurance avoided, and the serious losses and
interruption to business caused by fire; these and like considerations
fully justify any additional first cost. It is believed, that were
owners fully aware of the small difference which now exists between
the use of Wood and Iron, that in many cases the latter would be
adopted. We shall be pleased to furnish estimates for all the Beams
complete, for any specific structure, so that the difference in cost
may at once be ascertained. Address

CARNEGIE, BROS. & CO., Pittsburgh, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *


ARSENIC IN THE ARTS.--A Lecture before the Medical Association of
Central New York. By S.A. Lattimore, LL.D., Professor of Chemistry in
the Rochester University. A popular and important paper. SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT No. 29. Price, 10 cents. To be had at this office
and of all newsdealers.

       *       *       *       *       *


A NEW DEPARTURE.

Traveling and local salesmen wanted. STAPLE GOODS. NO PEDDLING. Salary
$75 a month. Hotel and traveling expenses paid, S.A. GRANT & CO.,
manufacturers of ENVELOPES and PAPER. 2,4, 6, and 8 Home St.,
CINCINNATI, OHIO.

       *       *       *       *       *


$66 a Week in your own town. Terms and $5 outfit free. H. HALLETT &
CO., Portland, Maine.

       *       *       *       *       *


MESSRS. B. DAMBACHER & CO., Hamburg, Germany dealers in American
Wood-Working Machinery and Tools of all kinds. Messrt. D. & Co.,
solicit consignments from American manufacturers. Catalogues and
descriptive circulars desired, by mail.

       *       *       *       *       *


MACHINERY OF EVERY DESCRIPTION,

COLD ROLLED SHAFTING, HANGERS, PULLEYS, COUPLINGS, BELTING, TANITE
EMERY WHEELS AND GRINDERS, IN STOCK.

GEORGE PLACE,

121 Chambers & 103 Reade Sts., New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *


$10 to $500 INVESTED IN WALL ST.

Often leads to wealth. A 72 page book explaining everything, and a
copy of the Wall Street Review, sent free.

JOHN HICKLING & CO.,
Bankers and Brokers 72 Broadway, New York

       *       *       *       *       *


WE ENAMEL in FINE JET BLACK every variety of turned woodwork parts of
machinery, casting's, tinware and other metalwork, ENAMELED JET GOODS,
in wood or metal, made to order. AMERICAN ENAMEL CO. 17 WARREN ST.,
PROVIDENCE, R.I.

       *       *       *       *       *


A GIFT By an arrangement with the Publisher we will send every reader
of this Paper a sample package of Transfer Pictures free. Send 3c.
stamp for postage. They are highly colored, beautiful, and easily
transferred to any object. Agents wanted. J.L. PATTEN & CO., 162
William St., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


FLOWERS

_Strong Plants_ delivered, _free of cost_ safely per mail at your
door. Satisfaction guaranteed. Splendid assortment of ROSES 6 for $1;
13 for $2. Send for _New Catalogue of Plants._ HOOPES, BRO. & THOMAS,
Cherry Hill Nurseries. West Chester. Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *


SHAFTS. PULLEYS. HANGERS COUPLINGS ETC.

In Stock, and for Sale by WILLIAM SELLERS & CO., Philadelphia, and 79
Liberty St., New York.

Price lists and pamphlets on application.

       *       *       *       *       *


WANTED Salesmen to sell light hardware to _Dealers,_ NO PEDDLING.
Salary, $1,200 a year. Hotel and traveling expenses paid. Address
DEFIANCE M'F'G CO., Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

BARNES FOOT POWER MACHINERY.

10 INVALUABLE MACHINES for Mechanics and Amateurs. Also Fancy Woods
and Designs. Send for 48 page Illustrated Catalogue, Free. W.F. & JOHN
BARNES, ROCKFORD, Winnebago Co., Ills.

       *       *       *       *       *


CELEBRATED FOOT LATHES.

[Illustration]

Foot Power, Back-geared Screw Lathes, Small Hand and Power Planers for
Metal, Small Gear Cutters, Slide-rests, Ball Machine for Lathes, Foot
Scroll Saws, light and heavy, Foot Circular Saws. Just the articles
for Amateurs or Artisans. Highly recommended. Send for illustrated
Catalogues. N.H. BALDWIN, Laconia, N.H.

       *       *       *       *       *


POND'S TOOLS.

Engine Lathes, Planers, Drills, &c. Send for Catalogue. DAVID W. POND,
Successor to Lucius W. Pond, Worcester, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *


L. SMITH HOBART, PRESIDENT.
JOHN C. MOSS, SUPERINTENDENT.
D.J. CARSON, GENERAL AGENT.

PHOTO ENGRAVING CO.

MOSS' PROCESS

NO. 67 PARK PLACE

NEW YORK

[Illustration]

RELIEF PLATES IN HARD TYPE METAL, FOR PRINTING ALL KINDS OF PICTORIAL
ILLUSTRATIONS IN BOOKS, NEWSPAPERS, AND CATALOGUES.

These plates are an excellent substitute for woodcuts, being used in
precisely the same way, giving equally good results for much less
money.

ELECTROTYPES AND STEREOTYPES are made from them in the usual manner.
We offer special advantages to MANUFACTURERS AND INVENTORS, as our
mechanical work is of the best quality and rapidly executed. Our
plates are used satisfactorily in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, and by Manufacturers and Publishers in
all parts of the country.

"COPY"

We work direct only from Prints or properly prepared Pen and Ink
Drawings. Any other copy may be furnished, such as Photographs, Pencil
Sketches, or the articles themselves, in which cases we have drawings
made in the best manner by our own trained draughtsmen. Photographs,
taken in the ordinary way, are suitable, and they may be of any size.
We make the plates larger or smaller, as desired. We are glad to have
customers prepare their own Pen Drawings, and append one or two,

DIRECTIONS TO ARTISTS:

The most important requisite in Drawings for our use is that every
line shall be _perfectly black._ The paper or drawing board must be
_white_ and _smooth_. For fine work drawings should be made double the
scale of the plate desired. Carefully observing these main points, the
artist has the utmost freedom in his choice of styles of drawing. For
further information and fine samples of our work, send stamp for
current number of our illustrated _Quarterly Circular_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WE ALSO PUBLISH,                  |      LIST OF ENGRAVINGS.
  PRICE ONE DOLLAR                  | 1.  THE LETTER WRITER.
  ART ALBUM                         | 2.  THE CROSSING SWEEPER.
  CONTAINING                        | 3.  THE ROYAL PRINCESSES.
  Twelve Beautiful Photo Engravings | 4.  THE SKEIN WINDER.
  Suitable for Framing              | 5.  THE SPANISH SISTERS.
  Reproduced by Moss Process from   | 6.  A REST ON THE HILL.
  Art Journal Steel Engravings      | 7.  THE FAIR CORRESPONDENT.
  Published By                      | 8.  BARTHRAM'S DIRGE.
  PHOTO ENGRAVING CO.               | 9.  GOING TO SCHOOL.
  67 PARK PLACE                     | 10.  PEEP O'DAY BOY'S CABIN.
                                    | 11.  THE SCANTY MEAL.
                                    | 12.  THE AMAZON.

Printed on heavy toned plate paper, 12x15 inches. Liberal discount to
the trade. Sent postpaid on receipt of price. _Please say where you
saw this._ PHOTO-ENGRAVING CO., 67 PARK PLACE, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

THE TRADE ENGINE.

Noiseless in operation--Perfect in workmanship--all light parts of
Cast Steel.

Every Engine indicated, and valve corrected to give the highest
attainable results.

Warranted superior to any semi-portable Engine in the market!

Send for Price List and Circular.

HERRMANN & HERCHELRODE M'F'G CO.,

Dayton, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *


Wood-Working Machinery.

Patent Scroll Saws and Band Saws a Specialty. OVER 100 MACHINES IN
USE. Medal at Cincinnati Industrial Exposition. Agents in all large
cities.

CORDESMAN, EGAN & CO., M'f'rs, Cincinnati, O

       *       *       *       *       *

