by Pasteur into the nature and mode of cure of that most dreadful of
maladies, hydrophobia. The value of his discovery was greater than
could be estimated by its present utility, for it showed that it might
be possible to avert other diseases besides hydrophobia by the
adoption of a somewhat similar method of investigation and of
treatment.

Here it might seem as if we had outstepped the boundaries of
chemistry, and had to do with phenomena purely vital. But recent
research indicated that this was not the case, and pointed to the
conclusion that the microscopist must again give way to the chemist,
and that it was by chemical rather than biological investigation that
the causes of diseases would be discovered, and the power of removing
them obtained. For we learned that the symptoms of infective diseases
were no more due to the microbes which constituted the infection than
alcoholic intoxication was produced by the yeast cell, but that these
symptoms were due to the presence of definite chemical compounds, the
result of the life of these microscopic organisms. So it was to the
action of these poisonous substances formed during the life of the
organism, rather than to that of the organism itself, that the special
characteristics of the disease were to be traced, for it had been
shown that the disease could be communicated by such poisons in the
entire absence of living organisms.

Had time permitted, he would have wished to have illustrated the
dependence of industrial success upon original investigation, and to
have pointed out the prodigious strides which chemical industry in
this country had made during the fifty years of her Majesty's reign.
As it was, he must be content to remark how much our modern life, both
in its artistic and useful aspects, owed to chemistry, and therefore
how essential a knowledge of the principles of the science was to all
who had the industrial progress of the country at heart. The country
was now beginning to see that if she was to maintain her commercial
and industrial supremacy, the education of her people from top to
bottom must be carried out on new lines. The question how this could
be most safely and surely accomplished was one of transcendent
national importance, and the statesman who solved this educational
problem would earn the gratitude of generations yet to come.

In welcoming the unprecedentedly large number of foreign men of
science who had on this occasion honored the British Association by
their presence, he hoped that that meeting might be the commencement
of an international scientific organization, the only means nowadays
existing of establishing that fraternity among nations from which
politics appeared to remove them further and further, by absorbing
human powers and human work, and directing them to purposes of
destruction. It would indeed be well if Great Britain, which had
hitherto taken the lead in so many things that are great and good,
should now direct her attention to the furthering of international
organizations of a scientific nature. A more appropriate occasion than
the present meeting could perhaps hardly be found for the inauguration
of such a movement. But whether this hope were realized or not, they
all united in that one great object, the search after truth for its
own sake, and they all, therefore, might join in re-echoing the words
of Lessing: "The worth of man lies not in the truth which he
possesses, or believes that he possesses, but in the honest endeavor
which he puts forth to secure that truth; for not by the possession of
truth, but by the search after it, are the faculties of man enlarged,
and in this alone consists his ever-growing perfection. Possession
fosters content, indolence, and pride. If God should hold in his right
hand all truth, and in his left hand the ever-active desire to seek
truth, though with the condition of perpetual error, I would humbly
ask for the contents of the left hand, saying, 'Father, give me this;
pure truth is only for thee.'"

At the close of his address a vote of thanks was passed to the
president, on the motion of the Mayor of Manchester, seconded by
Professor Asa Gray, of Harvard College. The president mentioned that
the number of members is already larger than at any previous annual
meeting, namely, 3,568, including eighty foreigners.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CRIMSON LINE OF PHOSPHORESCENT ALUMINA.


Crookes has presented to the Royal Society a paper on the color
emitted by pure alumina when submitted to the electric discharge _in
vacuo_, in answer to the statements of De Boisbaudran. In 1879 he had
stated that "next to the diamond, alumina, in the form of ruby, is
perhaps the most strikingly phosphorescent stone I have examined. It
glows with a rich, full red; and a remarkable feature is that it is of
little consequence what degree of color the earth or stone possesses
naturally, the color of the phosphorescence is nearly the same in all
cases; chemically precipitated amorphous alumina, rubies of a pale
reddish yellow, and gems of the prized 'pigeon's blood' color glowing
alike in the vacuum." These results, as well as the spectra obtained,
he stated further, corroborated Becquerel's observations. In
consequence of the opposite results obtained by De Boisbaudran,
Crookes has now re-examined this question with a view to clear up the
mystery. On examining a specimen of alumina prepared from tolerably
pure aluminum sulphate, shown by the ordinary tests to be free from
chromium, the bright crimson line, to which the red phosphorescent
light is due, was brightly visible in its spectrum. The aluminum
sulphate was then, in separate portions, purified by various processes
especially adapted to separate from it any chromium that might be
present; the best of these being that given by Wohler, solution in
excess of potassium hydrate and precipitation of the alumina by a
current of chlorine. The alumina filtered off, ignited, and tested in
a radiant matter tube gave as good a crimson line spectrum as did that
from the original sulphate.

A repetition of this purifying process gave no change in the result.
Four possible explanations are offered of the phenomena observed: "(1)
The crimson line is due to alumina, but it is capable of being
suppressed by an accompanying earth which concentrates toward one end
of the fractionations; (2) the crimson line is not due to alumina, but
is due to the presence of an accompanying earth concentrating toward
the other end of the fractionations; (3) the crimson line belongs to
alumina, but its full development requires certain precautions to be
observed in the time and intensity of ignition, degree of exhaustion,
or its absolute freedom from alkaline and other bodies carried down by
precipitated alumina and difficult to remove by washing; experience
not having yet shown which of these precautions are essential to the
full development of the crimson line and which are unessential; and
(4) the earth alumina is a compound molecule, one of its constituent
molecules giving the crimson line. According to this hypothesis,
alumina would be analogous to yttria."--_Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




CARBONIC ACID IN THE AIR.

By THOMAS C. VAN NUYS and BENJAMIN F. ADAMS, JR.


During the month of April, 1886, we made eighteen estimations of
carbonic acid in the air, employing Van Nuys' apparatus,[1] recently
described in this journal. These estimations were made in the
University Park, one-half mile from the town of Bloomington. The park
is hilly, thinly shaded, and higher than the surrounding country. The
formation is sub-carboniferous and altitude 228 meters. There are no
lowlands or swamps near. The estimations were made at 10 A.M.

  [Footnote 1: See SCI. AM. SUPPLEMENT No. 577.]

The air was obtained one-half meter from the ground and about 100
meters from any of the university buildings. The number of volumes of
carbonic acid is calculated at zero C. and normal pressure 760 mm.

  --------+----------+--------------+------------------------
          |          | Vols. CO_{2} |
   Date.  |   Bar.   |  in 100,000  | State of Weather.
          | Pressure |  Vols. Air.  |
  --------+----------+--------------+------------------------
  April 2 |  743.5   |    28.86     | Cloudy, snow on ground.
    "   5 |  743.5   |    28.97     |    "     "   "    "
    "   6 |  735     |    28.61     | Snowing.
    "   7 |  744.5   |    28.63     | Clear, snow on ground.
    "   8 |  748     |    27.59     |   "    thawing.
    "   9 |  747.5   |    28.10     |   "       "
    "  12 |  744     |    28.04     | Cloudy.
    "  13 |  744     |    28.10     | Clear.
    "  14 |  743.5   |    28.98     |   "
    "  15 |  750.5   |    28.17     | Raining.
    "  19 |  748     |    28.09     | Clear.
    "  20 |  746     |    27.72     |   "
    "  21 |  746     |    28.16     |   "
    "  22 |  741.5   |    27.92     |   "
    "  23 |  740     |    28.12     |   "
    "  24 |  738.5   |    28.15     |   "
    "  25 |  738.5   |    27.46     |   "
    "  28 |  738     |    27.34     |   "
  --------+----------+--------------+------------------------

The average number of volumes of carbonic acid in 100,000 volumes of
air is 28.16, the maximum number is 28.98, and the minimum 27.34.
These results agree with estimations made within the last ten or
fifteen years. Reiset[2] made a great number of estimations from
September 9, 1872, to August 20, 1873, the average of which is 29.42.
Six years later[3] he made many estimations from June to November, the
average of which is 29.78. The average of Schultze's[4] estimations is
29 2. The results of estimations of carbonic acid in the air, made
under the supervision of Munz and Aubin[5] in October, November, and
December, 1882, at the stations where observations were made of the
transit of Venus by astronomers sent out by the French government,
yield the average, for all stations north of the equator to latitude
29 deg. 54' in Florida, 28.2 volumes carbonic acid in 100,000 volumes air,
and for all stations south of the equator 27.1 volumes. The average of
Claesson's[6] estimations is 27.9 volumes, his maximum number is 32.7,
and his minimum is 23.7. It is apparent, from the results of
estimations of carbonic acid of the air of various parts of the globe,
by the employment of apparatus with which errors are avoided, that the
quantity of carbonic acid is subject to slight variation, and not, as
stated in nearly all text books of science, from 4 to 6 volumes in
10,000 volumes of air; and it is further apparent that the law of
Schloesing[7] holds good. By this law the carbonic acid of an
atmosphere in contact with water containing calcium or magnesium
carbonate in solution is dissolved according to the tension of the
carbonic acid; that is, by an increased quantity its tension
increases, and more would pass in solution in the form of
bicarbonates. On the other hand, by diminishing the quantity of
carbonic acid in the atmosphere, some of the bicarbonates would
decompose and carbonic acid pass into the atmosphere.

  [Footnote 2: Comptes Rendus, 88, 1007.]
  [Footnote 3: Comptes Rendus, 90, 1144.]
  [Footnote 4: Chem. Centralblatt, 1872 and 1875.]
  [Footnote 5: Comptes Rendus, 96, 1793.]
  [Footnote 6: Berichte der deutsch chem. Gesellschaft, 9, 174.]
  [Footnote 7: Comptes Rendus, 74, 1552, and 75, 70.]

Schloesing's law has been verified by R. Engel[8].

  [Footnote 8: Comptes Rendus, 101, 949.]

The results of estimations of bases and carbonic acid in the water of
the English Channel lead Schloesing[9] to conclude that the carbonic
acid combined with normal carbonates, forming bicarbonates, dissolved
in the water of the globe is ten times greater in quantity than that
of the atmosphere, and on account of this available carbonic acid, if
the atmosphere should be deprived of some of its carbonic acid, the
loss would soon be supplied.

  [Footnote 9: Comptes Rendus, 90, 1410.]

As, in nearly all of the methods which were employed for estimating
carbonic acid in the air, provision is not made for the exclusion of
air not measured containing carbonic acid from the alkaline fluid
before titrating or weighing, the results are generally too high and
show a far greater variation than is found by more exact methods. For
example, Gilm[10] found from 36 to 48 volumes; Levy's[11] average is
34 volumes; De Luna's[12] 50 volumes; and Fodor's,[13] 38.9 volumes.
Admitting that the quantity of carbonic acid in the air is subject to
variation, yet the results of Reiset's and Schultze's estimations go
to prove that the variation is within narrow limits.

  [Footnote 10: Sitzungsher. d. Wien. Akad. d. Wissenschaften, 34, 257.]
  [Footnote 11: Ann. d. l'Observ. d. Mountsouris, 1878 and 1879.]
  [Footnote 12: Estudios quimicos sobre el aire atmosferico, Madrid, 1860.]
  [Footnote 13: Hygien. Untersuch., 1, 10.]

                  Indiana University Chemical Laboratory,
                     Bloomington, Indiana.
                        --_Amer. Chem. Journal._

       *       *       *       *       *




ANALYSIS OF KOLA NUT.


Alkaloids or crystallizable principles:

                                                     Per Cent.
    Caffeine.                                           2.710
    Theobromine.                                        0.084
    Bitter principle.                                   0.018
        Total alkaloids.                                -----   2.812
  Fatty matters:
    Saponifiable fat or oil.                            0.734
    Essential oil.                                      0.081
        Total oils.                                     -----   0.815
  Resinoid matter (_sol. in abs. alcohol_)              1.012

  Sugar:
    Glucose (_reduces alkaline cuprammonium_).          3.312
    Sucrose? (_red. alk. cupram. after inversion_)[1].  0.602
        Total sugars.                                   -----   3.914

  Starch, gum, etc.:
    Gum (_soluble in H2O at 90 deg. F_.).                   4.876
    Starch.                                            28.990
    Amidinous matter (_coloring with iodine_).          2.130
        Total gum and fecula.                           -----  35.999
  Albuminoid matters.                                           8.642
  Red and other coloring matters.                               3.670
  Kolatannic acids.                                             1.204

  Mineral matter:
    Potassa.                                            1.415
    Chlorine.                                           0.702
    Phosphoric acid.                                    0.371
    Other salts, etc.                                   2.330
        Total ash.                                      -----   4.818
  Moisture.                                                     9.722
  Ligneous matter and loss.                                    27.395
                                                              -------
                                                              100.000

  [Footnote 1: Inverted by boiling with a 2.5 per cent. solution of
               citric acid for ten minutes.]

Both the French and German governments are introducing it into their
military dietaries, and in England several large contract orders
cannot yet be filled, owing to insufficiency of supply, while a
well-known cocoa manufacturing firm has taken up the preparation of
kola chocolate upon a commercial scale.--_W. Lascelles-Scott, in Jour.
Soc. Arts._

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPIN WROUGHT IRON.

By W.H. SEARLES, Chairman of the Committee, Civil Engineers' Club
of Cleveland, O.


Notwithstanding the wonderful development of our steel industries in
the last decade, the improvements in the modes of manufacture, and the
undoubted strength of the metal under certain circumstances,
nevertheless we find that steel has not altogether met the
requirements of engineers as a structural material. Although its
breaking strain and elastic limit are higher than those of wrought
iron, the latter metal is frequently preferred and selected for
tensile members, even when steel is used under compression in the same
structure. The Niagara cantilever bridge is a notable instance of this
practice. When steel is used in tension its working strains are not
allowed to be over fifty per cent. above those adopted for wrought
iron.

The reasons for the suspicion with which steel is regarded are well
understood. Not only is there a lack of uniformity in the product, but
apparently the same steel will manifest very different results under
slight provocation. Steel is very sensitive, not only to slight
changes in chemical composition, but also to mechanical treatment,
such as straightening, bending, punching, planing, heating, etc.
Initial strains may be developed by any of these processes that would
seriously affect the efficiency of the metal in service.

Among the steels, those that are softer are more serviceable and
reliable than the harder ones, especially whereever shocks and
concussions or rapidly alternating strains are to be endured. In other
words, the more nearly steel resembles good wrought iron, the more
certain it is to render lasting service when used within appropriate
limits of strain. Indeed, a wrought iron of fine quality is better
calculated to endure fatigue than any steel. This is particularly
noticeable in steam hammer pistons, propeller shafts, and railroad
axles. A better quality of wrought iron, therefore, has long been a
desideratum, and it appears now that it has at last been found.

Several years since, a pneumatic process of manufacturing wrought iron
was invented and patented by Dr. Chapin, and an experimental plant was
erected near Chicago. Enough was done to demonstrate, first, that an
iron of unprecedentedly good qualities was attainable from common pig;
and second, that the cost of its manufacture would not exceed that of
Bessemer steel. Nevertheless, owing to lack of funds properly to push
the invention against the jealous opposition which it encountered, the
enterprise came to a halt until quite recently, when its merits found
a champion in Gustav Lindenthal, C.E., member of this club, who is
now the general manager of the Chapin Pneumatic Iron Co., and under
whose direction this new quality of iron will soon be put upon the
market.

The process of manufacture is briefly as follows: The pig metal, after
being melted in a cupola and tapped into a discharging ladle, is
delivered into a Bessemer converter, in which the metal is largely
relieved of its silicon, sulphur, carbon, etc., by the ordinary
pneumatic process. At the end of the blow the converter is turned down
and its contents discharged into a traveling ladle, and quickly
delivered to machines called ballers, which are rotary reverberatory
furnaces, each revolving on a horizontal axis. In the baller the iron
is very soon made into a ball without manual aid. It is then lifted
out by means of a suspended fork and carried to a Winslow squeezer,
where the ball is reduced to a roll twelve inches in diameter. Thence
it is taken to a furnace for a wash heat, and finally to the muck
train.

No reagents are employed, as in steel making or ordinary iron
puddling. The high heat of the metal is sufficient to preserve its
fluidity during its transit from the converter to the baller; and the
cinder from the blow is kept in the ladle.

The baller is a bulging cylinder having hollow trunnions through which
the flame passes. The cylinder is lined with fire brick, and this in
turn is covered with a suitable refractory iron ore, from eight to ten
inches thick, grouted with pulverized iron ore, forming a bottom, as
in the common puddling furnace. The phosphorus of the iron, which
cannot be eliminated in the intense heat of the converter, is,
however, reduced to a minimum in the baller at a much lower
temperature and on the basic lining. The process wastes the lining
very slightly indeed. As many as sixty heats have been taken off in
succession without giving the lining any attention. The absence of any
reagent leaves the iron simply pure and homogeneous to a degree never
realized in muck bars made by the old puddling process. Thus the
expense of a reheating and rerolling to refine the iron is obviated.
It was such iron as here results that Bessemer, in his early
experiments, was seeking to obtain when he was diverted from his
purpose by his splendid discoveries in the art of making steel. So
effective is the new process, that even from the poorest grades of pig
may be obtained economically an iron equal in quality to the refined
irons made from the best pig by the ordinary process of puddling.

Numerous tests of the Chapin irons have been made by competent and
disinterested parties, and the results published. The samples here
noted were cut and piled only once from the muck bar.

Sample A was made from No. 3 mill cinder pig.

Sample B was made from No. 4 mill pig and No. 3 Bessemer pig, half and
half.

Sample C was made from No. 3 Bessemer pig, with the following results:

            Sample.                 A         B         C
  Tensile strength per sq. in.    56,000    60,772    64,377
  Elastic limit.                  34,000      ....    36,000
  Extension, per cent.              11.8      ....      17.0
  Reduction of area, per cent.      65.0      16.0      33.0

The tensile strength of these irons made by ordinary puddling would be
about 38,000, 40,000, and 42,000 respectively, or the gain of the iron
in tensile strength by the Chapin process is about fifty per cent. Not
only so, but these irons made in this manner from inferior pig show a
higher elastic limit and breaking strain than are commonly specified
for refined iron of best quality. The usual specifications are for
refined iron: Tensile strength, 50,000; elongation, 15 per cent.;
elastic limit, 26,000; reduction, 25 cent.

Thus the limits of the Chapin iron are from 12 to 20 per cent. above
those of refined iron, and not far below those of structural steel,
while there is a saving of some four dollars per ton in the price of
the pig iron from which it can be made. When made from the best pig
metal its breaking and elastic limits will probably reach 70,000 and
40,000 pounds respectively. If so, it will be a safer material than
steel under the same working strains, owing to its greater resilience.

Such results are very interesting in both a mechanical and economical
point of view. Engineers will hail with delight the accession to the
list of available building materials of a wrought iron at once fine,
fibrous, homogeneous, ductile, easily weldable, not subject to injury
by the ordinary processes of shaping, punching, etc., and having a
tensile strength and elastic limit nearly equal to any steel that
could safely be used in the same situation.

A plant for the manufacture of Chapin iron is now in course of
erection at Bethlehem, Pa., and there is every reason to believe that
the excellent results attained in Chicago will be more than reached in
the new works.--_Proceed. Jour. Asso. of Eng. Societies_.

       *       *       *       *       *




CELLULOID.


Professor Sadler, of the University of Pennsylvania, has lately given
an account of the development and method of the manufacture of
celluloid. Alexander Parkes, an Englishman, invented this remarkable
substance in 1855, but after twelve years quit making it because of
difficulties in manipulation, although he made a fine display at the
Paris Exposition of 1867. Daniel Spill, also of England, began
experiments two years after Parkes, but a patent of his for dissolving
the nitrated wood fiber, or "pyroxyline," in alcohol and camphor was
decided by Judge Blatchford in a suit brought against the Celluloid
Manufacturing Company to be valueless. No further progress was made
until the Hyatt Brothers, of Albany, N.Y., discovered that gum
camphor, when finely divided, mixed with the nitrated fiber and then
heated, is a perfect solvent, giving a homogeneous and plastic mass.
American patents of 1870 and 1874 are substantially identical with
those now in use in England. In France there is only one factory, and
there is none elsewhere on the Continent, one in Hanover having been
given up on account of the explosive nature of the stuff. In this
country pure cellulose is commonly obtained from paper makers, in the
form of tissue paper, in wide rolls; this, after being nitrated by a
bath of mixed nitric and sulphuric acids, is thoroughly washed and
partially dried. Camphor is then added, and the whole is ground
together and thoroughly mixed. At this stage coloring matter may be
put in. A little alcohol increases the plasticity of the mass, which
is then treated for some time to powerful hydraulic pressure. Then
comes breaking up the cakes and feeding the fragments between heated
rolls, by which the amalgamation of the whole is completed. Its
perfect plasticity allows it to be rolled into sheets, drawn into
tubes, or moulded into any desired shape.--_Jewelers' Journal._

       *       *       *       *       *




