sides.  So the blessing received from on high is received in order to
be transmitted to others.

The phrase _who alone workest great marvels_ seems to be justified by
the consideration that much is asked for in the prayer--God's spirit,
and the dew of His blessing, for all the Clergy, and for all the People.

{144}

A Prayer of S. Chrysostom is so called because it comes to us from the
Liturgy of S. Chrysostom.  It is said to be older than A.D. 900 but not
so old as to have been composed by S. Chrysostom himself (354-407).  It
addresses Christ as _Almighty God_, and reminds Him of His present gift
of grace, and of His ancient promise.  The two blessings claimed
are--for this life, the knowledge of God's truth--for the life to come,
the knowledge of God Himself (S. John xvii. 3).

2 Cor. xiii.  This Benediction is not merely the ending of the worship
in church: it is also the link between the Church Service and the
Service of God which we perform outside.  We go out of church to do our
work with grace, and love, and fellowship, in the Name and Power of the
Holy Trinity.

The more solemn part of the Holy Communion, in the Clementine Liturgy,
S. Basil's, S. Chrysostom's and other Eastern Liturgies, began with
this Benediction.

The occasional Prayers and Thanksgivings.  Like the six Collects after
the Communion Service, these may be used before the Prayer of S.
Chrysostom in the Morning and Evening, and (with one exception) also
when the Litany is said.

There are 11 Prayers: the first two were made in 1549: the next four in
1552: the first of the Ember prayers, in 1661: the second, in a
slightly different form, was a prayer in the Ordination Services of
1549, where it still stands.  The ninth is from Gelasius' Sacramentary.
The Prayer for Parliament appeared in the last Revision (1661), but had
been printed before, in Special forms of Service.

{145}

The _Prayer for all conditions of men_ first appeared in 1661.  There
are eight Thanksgivings: the first, fourth, and sixth, were printed in
1661: the rest in 1604.  In the first of these, if the petition were
_Send us, we beseech thee, such weather_, the Prayer might be very
frequently used during the spring and summer.  Having these, we seem to
want other, occasional prayers, and thanksgivings.  The spread of
Emigration, the enlargement of our Navy and Army, the multiplication of
Municipal bodies, and other developments of the National life, demand
occasional prayers in the Service, and especially, perhaps, a prayer to
be used at times of anxiety for those at sea.



[1] See his Ancient Collects, Appendix: and his Paper in S.P.C.K.
Prayer Book Commentary "On the Collects."




{146}

CHAPTER XIV.

THE PRAYER SERVICE.

II. Anthems.

Anthem=Antiphon, fr. _antiphonon_: so called because two choirs sing
alternately.


Anthems are of two sorts--simple Anthems and compound Anthems.  A
simple Anthem is one or more verses (often from Holy Scripture), used
to give character to a Psalm.  A compound Anthem is a Hymn or Psalm
followed by a Verse, Respond, and Prayer.  A simple Anthem was used,
for example, to give an Easter, Advent, &c. character to _Venite_.
Thus Dec. 16 is marked in the Calendar as _O Sapientia_ because on that
day the following Anthem was used with Magnificat:

O Wisdom, which camest forth out of the mouth of the Most High, and
reachest from one end to the other, mightily and sweetly ordering all
things; Come and teach us the way of prudence.

These words are taken, with some alteration, from Wisd. viii. 1.  On
each of the seven days which follow, until Dec. 23, a different Anthem
was used with Magnificat; and forasmuch as these eight Anthems begin
with O (O Wisdom, O Lord, O Root of Jesse, &c.), they were known as the
O Anthems.  Similarly on The Epiphany, S. Matth. ii. 1, 2, 11 was sung
as an Antiphon to Magnificat; and on Whitsunday S. John iv. 23.  {147}
These are instances of the use of simple Anthems in the Services before
1549.  The following illustrates the purpose for which they were
appointed.  It will be observed that the Advent thought was made to
pervade the whole Psalm.


ADVENT SETTING OF VENITE.

Behold the King cometh.  Let us go to meet our Saviour.

O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the
strength of our Salvation.  Let us come before his presence with
thanksgiving: and shew ourselves glad in him with Psalms.


Behold the King cometh.  Let us go to meet our Saviour.

For the Lord is a great God: and a great King above all gods.  In his
hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hills is
his also.


Let us go to meet our Saviour.

The sea is his, and he made it; and his hands prepared the dry land.  O
come, let us worship, and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our
Maker, for he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his
pasture, and the sheep of his hand.


Behold the King cometh.  Let us go to meet our Saviour.

To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.  When
your fathers tempted me: proved me and saw my works.


Let us go to meet our Saviour.

Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said; It is a
people that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways.
Unto whom I sware in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.


Behold the King cometh.  Let us go to meet our Saviour.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.  As it
was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end.
Amen.


Let us go to meet our Saviour.

Behold thy King cometh.  Let us go to meet our Saviour.


{148}

THE COMPOUND ANTHEM.

The Prioress, in Chaucer's _Canterbury Tales_, relates that a

  Litel child his litel book lernynge,
  As he sat in the scole in his primere,
  He _O alma redemptoris_ herde synge,
  As children lerned her antiphonere:

From this we understand that _O alma redemptoris_ was an "Antym" out of
the Antiphonere, or Anthem Book.  This Anthem has six hexameter lines
followed by a Verse and Respond, and the Collect which we now use for
Lady Day.  This, then, is what we have called the Compound Anthem.

A good example of it is found in the Prayer Book of 1549 where the
Easter Anthems, as we still call them, were ordered to be used in the
Morning afore Mattins.  Their "setting" was as follows:

Christ rising again from the dead now dieth not: Death from henceforth
hath no power upon him.  For in that he died, he died but once to put
away sin; but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God.  And so likewise
count yourselves dead unto sin, but living unto God in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Hallelujah.  Hallelujah.

Christ is risen again, the firstfruits of them that sleep.  For seeing
that by man came death, by man also cometh the resurrection of the
dead.  For as by Adam all men do die: so by Christ all men shall be
restored to life.

Hallelujah.

_The Priest_.  Shew forth to all nations the glory of God.

_The Answer_.  And among all people his wonderful works.

Let us pray.

O God who for our redemption didst give thine only begotten Son to the
death of the cross; and by his glorious resurrection hast delivered us
from the power of our enemy: Grant us so {149} to die daily from sin,
that we may evermore live with him, in the joy of his resurrection;
through the same Christ our Lord.  Amen.


The history of the transformation of this Anthem into a Psalm, as it is
now used, may be given here.  In 1552 its rubric was changed to the
present form: that is, it was no longer to be used before Mattins; it
was to be sung or said instead of _Venite_.  The Verse, Respond and
Collect were omitted.  In 1662 _Gloria Patri_ was added, and the words
of 1 Cor. v. 7, 8 were inserted at the beginning.

The Easter Anthems, as now ordered, are most properly set as a Psalm.
With similar propriety, when they were used _before_ the Service of
Mattins, they were set as a Prayer-Anthem--beginning with the jubilance
which is expressed by the twofold Hallelujah, and gradually modulating
the jubilance in preparation for the Service which followed.

Simple Anthems were so frequent, and their changes for special
occasions were so many, that they created some confusion and intricacy
in the old Services.  We may, however, recognise the beauty and
worshipfulness of the plan.  In the Visitation of the Sick, the words
_O Saviour of the world_ &c. as used with Psalm lxxi. are a survival of
it.  The verse _Remember not Lord_ &c. was introduced at the beginning
of the same Service, as an Anthem to Psalm cxliii.  The Psalm was
omitted in 1552, but its Anthem remains.

The singing of the Psalm and Anthem will be understood from the example
quoted above--the half choir which sang the Psalm was continually
interrupted by {150} the half choir which sang the Anthem.  The
following illustration is quoted (by Martene) as of the 11th century.
In this case a verse of _Magnificat_ was sung after each verse of the
Anthem.


EASTER EVE SETTING OF MAGNIFICAT.

[Transcriber's note: In the following section, in the original book,
the material in the right-hand column was italicized.  In standard
Project Gutenberg practice, such text is (usually) surrounded by
underscores ("_"), but for clarity, that underscoring has been omitted
here.]


  Now on the evening of the
  Sabbath, as it began to dawn       My soul doth magnify the
  toward the first day of the        Lord:
  week, came Mary Magdalene
  and the other Mary to see the
  Sepulchre.

  And behold, there was a            And my spirit hath rejoiced
  great earthquake.                  in God my Saviour.

  For the angel of the Lord          For he hath regarded the
  descended from heaven, and         lowliness of his handmaiden:
  came and rolled back the stone     for behold, from henceforth all
  from the door, and sat upon it.    generations shall call me blessed.

  His countenance was like           For he that is mighty hath
  lightning, and his raiment         magnified me, and holy is his
  white as snow.                     name.

  And for fear of him the            And his mercy is on them
  keepers did shake, and             that fear him, throughout all
  became as dead men.                generations.

  And the angel answered             He hath shewed strength
  and said unto the women, Fear      with his arm; he hath scattered
  not ye; for I know that ye         the fraud in the imagination
  seek Jesus, which was crucified.   of their hearts.
  He is not here: for he is risen,
  as he said.

  Come, see the place where          He hath put down the
  the Lord lay.                      mighty from their seat, and
                                     hath exalted the humble and
                                     meek.

  And go quickly, and tell           He hath filled the hungry
  his disciples, that he is risen    with good things, and the rich
  from the dead.                     he hath sent empty away.

{151}

  In Galilee shall ye see him:       He remembering his mercy
  lo, I have told you.               hath holpen his servant Israel.

  Fear not ye; for he is risen       As he promised to our forefathers,
  as he said.                        Abraham and his seed
                                     for ever.

  And very early in the first        Glory be to the Father, and
  day of the week, they came         to the Son, and to the Holy
  unto the sepulchre at the rising   Ghost:
  of the sun.

  And they said among themselves,    As it was in the beginning,
  Who shall roll us away             is now, and ever shall be,
  the stone, and when they looked,   world without end.  Amen.
  they saw that it was rolled
  away.


We have now given examples of Anthems, which show that they have their
name from the responding of two choirs to one another[1].  But Anthems
were not of necessity hymns of Praise.  The place provided at Morning
and Evening Prayer, for the singing of an Anthem, is singularly
ill-suited to the singing of a Praise-Anthem: for it is the place also
of the Litany.  It is sometimes pleaded that people grow tired of
prayer, by the end of the 3rd Collect, and need a change: hence, after
praying for three or four minutes, they rise up and sing praise for ten
minutes, before kneeling again for seven or eight minutes.  If we have
grasped the reverent orderliness of the Services, we shall not easily
be persuaded that this was the design of the order at this place.  We
have elsewhere shown that an Anthem here unites the Collects which
precede it, to those which follow.

{152}

We must believe that there was an intention to provide an Anthem Book.
Until this is done by authority, it would be well to distinguish, in
Hymn Books, between those Hymns which are suitable in the midst of the
Prayers, and those which are appropriate as Hymns of Praise.  The same
might also be done in the Anthem Books, so that a Praise-Anthem, or
Hymn, might be sung at the close of the whole Service.  A
Prayer-Anthem, or Hymn, or one upon the Redeemer's Love, and His Work
as Mediator, suits well as a modulation to the Prayers after the 3rd
Collect.  And it might be sung Antiphonally.



[1] Rabanus, _De Inst. Cler._ Mart. IV. iv. 1.




{153}

CHAPTER XV.

THE SERVICE OF PRAYER.

III. The Litany.

Origin of Litanies.  Some of the Offices of Holy Communion--especially
in the East--have had a portion after the Gospel very similar to what
