such a telescope as the equatorial at Allegheny is 13 inches in
diameter, and it is such light, and such heat, concentrated by it, that
we have to gaze on. The best contrivance so far found for diminishing
both, and without which our present acquaintance with the real
appearance and character of sunspots would not have been gained, depends
upon a curious property of light, discovered by a French physicist,
Malus, in the beginning of this century. Let A (Fig. 10) be a piece of
plane unsilvered glass, receiving the solar rays and reflecting them to
a second similar one, B, which itself reflects them again in the
direction C. Of course, since the glass is transparent, most of the rays
will pass through A, and not be reflected. Of those which reach B again
most will pass through, so that not a hundredth part of the original
beam reaches C. This then, is so far a gain; but of itself of little
use, since, such is the solar brilliancy, that even this small fraction
would, to an eye at C, appear blindingly bright. Now, if we rotate B
about the line joining it with A, keeping always the same reflecting
angle with it, it might naturally be supposed that the light would
merely be reflected in a new direction unchanged in quantity.

But according to the curious discovery of Malus this is not what
happens. What does happen is that the second glass, after being given a
quarter turn (though always kept at the same angle), seems to lose its
power of reflection almost altogether. The light which comes from it now
is diminished enormously, and yet nothing is distorted or displaced;
everything is seen correctly if enough light remains to see it by at
all, and the ray is said to have been "polarized by reflection." It
would be out of place to enter here on the cause of the phenomenon; the
fact is certain, and is a very precious one, for the astronomer can now
diminish the sun's light till it is bearable by the weakest eye, without
any distortion of what he is looking at, and without disturbing the
natural tints by colored glasses. In practice, a third and sometimes a
fourth reflector, each of a wedge shaped, optically plane piece of
unsilvered glass, are thus introduced, and by a simple rotation of the
last one the light is graded at pleasure, so that with such an
instrument, called "the polarizing eyepiece" (Fig. A), I have often
watched the sun's magnified image for four or five hours together with
no more distress to the eye than in reading a newspaper.

With this, in favorable moments, we see that the sun's surface away from
the spots, everywhere, is made up of hundreds of thousands of small,
intensely brilliant bodies, that seem to be floating in a gray medium,
which, though itself no doubt very bright, appears dark by comparison.
What these little things are is still uncertain; whatever they are, they
are the immediate principal source of the sun's light and heat. To get
an idea of their size we must resort to some more delicate means of
measurement than we used in the case of the watch. The filar micrometer
consists essentially of two excessively fine strands of cobwebs (or,
rather, of spider's cocoon), called technically "wires," stretched
parallel to each other and placed just at the focus of the telescope.
Suppose one of them to be fixed and the second to be movable (keeping
always parallel to the first) by means of a screw, having perhaps one
hundred threads to the inch, and a large drum shaped head divided into
one hundred equal parts, so that moving this head by one division
carries the second "wire" 1/10000 part of an inch nearer to the first.
Motions smaller than this can clearly be registered, but it will be
evident that everything here really depends upon the accuracy of the
screw. The guide screw of the best lathe is a coarse piece of work by
comparison with "micrometer" screws as now constructed (especially those
for making the "gratings" to be described later), for recent uses of
them demand perhaps the most accurate workmanship of anything in
mechanics--the maker of one which will pass some lately invented tests
is entitled at any rate to call himself "a workman."

[Illustration: Fig. 11]

Since the "wires" are stretched precisely in the focus, where the
principal image of the sun is formed, and move in it, they, and the
features of the surface, form one picture, as magnified by the eye lens,
so that they appear as if moving about on the sun itself. We can first
set them far enough apart, for instance, to take in the whole of a spot,
and then by bringing them together measure its apparent diameter, in ten
thousandths of an inch. Then, measuring the diameter of the whole sun,
we have evidently the proportion that one bears to the other, and hence
the means of easily calculating the real size. A powerful piece of
clockwork, attached to the equatorial, keeps it slowly rotating on its
axis, at the same angular rate as that with which the sun moves in the
sky, so that any spot or other object there will seem to stay fixed with
relation to the "wires," if we choose, all day long. The picture of
"wires," spots, and all, may be projected on a screen if desired; and
Fig. 11 shows the field of view, with the micrometer wires lying across
a "spot," so seen on the 6th of March, 1873. Part of a cambric needle
with the end of a fine thread is represented also as being projected on
the screen along with the "wires" to give a better idea of the delicacy
of the latter.

Now we may measure, if we please, the size of one of those bright
objects, which have just been spoken of as being countable by hundreds
of thousands. These "little things" are then seen to be really of
considerable size, measuring from one to three seconds of arc, so that
(a second of arc here being over 400 miles) the average surface of each
individual of these myriads is found to be considerably larger than
Great Britain. Near the edge of the disk, under favorable circumstances,
they appear to rise up through the obscuring atmosphere, which darkens
the limb, and gathered here and there in groups of hundreds, to form the
white cloudlike patches (_faculae_), which may sometimes be seen even
with a spy-glass--"something in the sun brighter than the sun itself,"
to employ the expression by which Huyghens described them nearly two
hundred years ago. They are too minute and delicate objects to be
rendered at all in our engraving; but this is true also of much of the
detail to be seen at times in the spots themselves. The wood cuts make
no pretense to do more than give an outline of the more prominent
features, of which we are now about to speak. The wonderful beauty of
some of their details must be taken on trust, from the writer's
imperfect description of what no pencil has ever yet rendered and what
the photograph has not yet seized.

[Illustration: Fig. A.]

[Illustration: Fig. 10.]

Bearing this in mind, let us now suppose that while using the polarizing
eyepiece on the part of the spot distinguished by the little circle, we
have one of those rare opportunities when we can, by the temporary
steadiness of our tremulous atmosphere, use the higher powers of the
telescope and magnify the little circle till it appears as in Fig. 12.
We have now nearly the same view as if we were brought close to the
surface of the sun, and suspended over this part of the spot. All the
faint outer shade, seen in the smaller views (the _penumbra_) is seen to
be made up of long white filaments, twisted into curious ropelike forms,
while the central part is like a great flame, ending in fiery spires.
Over these hang what look like clouds, such as we sometimes see in our
highest sky, but more transparent than the finest lace vail would be,
and having not the "fleecy" look of our clouds, but the appearance of
being filled with almost infinitely delicate threads of light. Perhaps
the best idea of what is so hard to describe, because so unlike anything
on earth, is got by supposing ourselves to look _through_ successive
vails of white lace, filled with flower-like patterns, at some great
body of white flame beyond, while between the spires of the flame and
separating it from the border are depths of shade passing into
blackness. With all this, there is something crystalline about the
appearance, which it is hard to render an idea of--frost-figures on a
window pane may help us as an image, though imperfect. In fact the
intense whiteness of everything is oddly suggestive of something very
cold, rather than very hot, as we know it really. I have had much the
same impression when looking into the open mouth of a puddling furnace
at the lumps of pure white iron, swimming half-melted in the grayer
fluid about them. Here, however, the temperature leaves nothing solid,
nothing liquid even; the iron and other metals of which we know these
spot-forms do in part at least consist are turned into vapor by the
inconceivable heat, and everything we are looking at consists probably
of clouds of such vapor; for it is fluctuating and changing from one
form into another while we look on. Forms as evanescent almost as those
of sunset clouds, and far more beautiful in everything but color, are
shifting before us, and here and there we see, or think we see, in the
sweep of their curves beyond, evidences of mighty whirlwinds (greater by
far than the largest terrestrial cyclone) at work. While we are looking,
and trying to make the most of every moment, our atmosphere grows
tremulous again, the shapes get confused, there is nothing left distinct
but such coarser features as our engraving shows, and the wonderful
sight is over. When we consider that this little portion of the spot we
have been looking at is larger than the North and South American
continents together, and that we could yet see its parts change from
minute to minute, it must be evident that the actual motion must have
been rapid almost beyond conception--a speed of from 20 to 50 miles a
_second_ being commonly observed and sometimes exceeded. (A cannon ball
moves less than 1/4 of a mile per second.) I have seen a portion of the
photosphere, or bright general surface of the sun, drawn into a spot,
much as any floating thing would be drawn into a whirlpool, and then,
though it occupied by measurement over 3,000,000 miles in area,
completely break up and change so as to be unrecognizable in less than
twenty minutes.

When we come to discuss the subject of the sun's heat, we shall find
that the temperature of a blast furnace or of the oxyhydrogen blowpipe
is low compared with that which obtains all over such a vast region, and
remembering this, it is evident that its disappearance is a cataclysm of
which the most tremendous volcanic outburst here gives no conception. We
cannot, by any terrestrial comparison, describe it, for we have no
comparison for it in human experience. If we try to picture such an
effect on the earth, we may say in another's words that these solar
whirlwinds are such as, "coming down upon us from the north, would in
thirty seconds after they had crossed the St. Lawrence be in the Gulf of
Mexico, carrying with them the whole surface of the continent in a mass,
not simply of ruin, but of glowing vapor, in which the vapors arising
from the dissolution of the materials composing the cities of Boston,
New York, and Chicago would be mixed in a single indistinguishable
cloud."

These vast cavities then in the sun we call spots are not solid things,
and not properly to be compared even to masses of slag or scoria
swimming on a molten surface. They are rather rents in that bright cloud
surface of the sun which we call the photosphere, and through which we
look down to lower regions. Their shape may be very rudely likened to a
funnel with sides at first slowly sloping (the _penumbra_), and then
suddenly going down into the central darkness (the _umbra_). This
central darkness has itself gradations of shade, and cloud forms may be
seen there obscurely glowing with a reddish tinge far down its depths,
but we never see to any solid bottom, and the hypothesis of a habitable
sun far within the hot surface, suggested by Sir William Herschel, is
now utterly abandoned. We are able now to explain in part that
mysterious feature in the sun's rotation before insisted on, for if the
sun be not a solid or a liquid, but a mass of glowing vapor, it is
evidently possible that one part of it may turn faster than another.
_Why_ it so turns, we repeat, no one knows, but the fact that it does is
now seen to bear the strongest testimony to the probable gaseous form of
the sun throughout its mass--at any rate, to the gaseous or vaporous
nature of everything we see. We must not forget, however, that under
such enormous temperature and pressure as prevail there the conditions
may be--in fact, must be--very different from any familiar to us here,
so that when we speak of "clouds," and use like expressions, we are to
be understood as implying rather an analogy than an exact resemblance.

[Illustration: Fig. 12]

We must expect, with the great advances photography has lately made, to
know more of this part of our subject (which we may call solar
meteorology) at the next spot maximum than ever before, and by that time
it may be hoped that some of the wonderful forms described above so
imperfectly will have been caught for us by the camera.

* For parts 1 and 2 see SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN for July 20 and July 27.

       *       *       *       *       *

IN the notice in our issue for July 27 of a new screw cutting lathe made
by Messrs. Goodnow & Wightman, the address should have been 176
Washington street instead of 128, and the diameter of the tail spindle,
which was given as 5/16, should have been 15/16 inch.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE Olympia (Wyoming Territory) _Standard_ announces that a company has
been formed there to bring ice from a glacier. The deposit covers a
number of acres, is seventy or eighty feet deep, and is supposed to
contain a hundred thousand or more tons, some of which may have been
there as many years. The ice can be cut and sold at one and one half
cents a pound, and by the ship load at five dollars a ton.

       *       *       *       *       *




                    =MECHANICAL PUDDLING IN SWEDEN.=

The accompanying engravings, which we take from _Iron_, give plan and
section of the puddling apparatus invented by Mr. Oestlund, as used at
the Finspong Ironworks. The gas generator, A, is of the common Swedish
type, as used for charcoal. The tube, _k_, conducts the gases into the
refining pot, _a_. This pot has a lining of refinery slag, which is
melted, as the apparatus revolves, to get it to adhere to the sides. The
revolution of the pot, _a_, on its axis, _d_, is effected by the action
of the beveled wheels, _b_ and _b'_, and the pulley, _c_, which takes
from an iron chain the power given off by a turbine. The spindle, _d_,
is supported in the bearings, _e_ and _e', c_ carrying a pair of
trunnions which form the axis of oscillation, and allow the apparatus to
rise or fall, the whole of this mechanism being supported on the plummer
blocks, _f f_. One of the trunnions, _e''_, is prolonged so as to form
the axis of the beveled wheel, _b_, and the pulley, _c_, the latter
sliding along the trunnion so as to put _b_ in or out of gear. The bush,
_e_ is tied by means of the stay, _g'_ to the upper end of the toothed
segment, _g_, the lower extremity of which is connected with the second
bush at the end of the spindle. By means of the pinion, _h_, revolving
on standards, _i i_, and the segmental rack, _g_, the pot can be raised
or lowered without interfering with the action of the beveled wheels.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR MECHANICAL PUDDLING.]

The gas from the generator is brought to the mouth of the pot by the
tubes, _k_ and _m_. The air necessary for the combustion of the gas is
brought in by a tube, _l_, branching from the air main, _l''_. The air
tube, _l_, passes into the gas tube and is continued concentrically
within the latter. The gas and air tubes both have joints at _m'_ and
_m''_. By means of the bar, _n_, which has a counterpoise to keep the
moving parts in position, the tubes can be brought from or toward the
mouth of the pot, so as to make it free of access to the workman. With a
key fitting on the stem, _n'_, the tubes can be turned in _m'_, so as to
give the currents of gas and air a more or less oblique direction. To
screen the workmen from the heat of the pot a disk of iron, _o_, lined
with fire clay on the side next the pot, is fitted to the end of the
tubes.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR MECHANICAL PUDDLING.]

Before running the metal into the pot, the latter must be heated, to
such a degree that the slag lining is pasty or semi-fluid at its
surface. Generally an hour and a half will be spent in heating with gas
to this point. There should be sufficient live coal in the pot when the
gas is first let in to keep up its combustion; should it be extinguished
by excess of air or gas, it must be relit. As soon as the pot begins to
get red hot the full heat can be put on.

The gas generator is tended in the usual way with the ordinary
precautions. To keep ashes and dust out of the gas tube, lumps of
charcoal are heaped up to the height of the top of the flue. The wind
pressure for the generator was 33 to 41 millimeters of mercury, that of
the wind for the combustion of the gas (at Finspong the blast is not
heated) being only 16-1/2 millimeters. The pressure of the gas in the tube
near the pot was 6.2 millimeters of mercury. The method of working,
viewed chemically, does not sensibly differ from puddling; although
giving as good, perhaps better, results at a much less cost. There are
three principal periods in the operation: 1. The period before boiling.
2. The boiling itself. 3. The end of the boiling, and the formation of
balls. When cast metal is poured into the pot a shovelful or two of
refinery slag is added. The temperature of the bath is thus brought
down; it thickens and boils, the pot revolving at the rate of 30 or 40
revolutions a minute. The metal is worked with a rabble, either to cool
it or to get the slag to incorporate with it, as is done in puddling.
Note must be taken of the temperature of the melted metal and that of
the pot, at the moment of charging, the heat during working being
regulated accordingly by increasing or diminishing the inflow of air
and gas. When circumstances are favorable, boiling begins five minutes
after the metal is run into the pot, and it lasts about ten minutes.

Boiling having begun, the batch swells, the iron forms, granulates, and
seems to cling to the rabble and the sides of the pot. The rotation of
the pot is continued, as well as the working, to separate out parts
which are not yet refined; but no more cold cinder is put in. While
boiling goes on the temperature is regulated so that the pig does not
cling to the side of the pot during a complete revolution, but so that
the particles next the side fall back into the bath when the side comes
uppermost in the revolution. The heat is raised a little when the iron
can be felt by the rabble to be completely refined, when shining lumps
make their appearance in the bath, and the iron begins to cling to the
walls. At the moment, therefore, that the temperature is brought to its
highest point, and the iron begins to agglutinate, the rotation of the
pot should be stopped, and either immediately, or after the delay of a
couple of minutes, it is removed. If the iron does not ball well, it is
not completely refined, and the pot may be started again. If the iron is
firm enough already, the isolated particles are exposed to the hottest
flame possible, the blast being carried to its maximum. The refining is
thus completely finished, and all the particles are agglomerated. The
mobility of the gas tube at _m''_ is of advantage in this operation. It
is sometimes useful to start the pot again to round up the puddled ball,
but it is best if this has been formed with the rabble.

The iron from a charge of 75 kilos. of pig may be divided with advantage
into a couple of balls; a third may be made of the iron separated from
the walls of the pot. To get out the balls the pot is lowered, and the
workmen use tongs, pointed rabble, and hooked bar. If things have gone
well the balls ought to come out soft at a welding heat, filled with
cinder like puddled balls, but a little more resisting and solid under
the hammer. They are forged into bars, and these are at once passed to
the rolls. If nothing hinders the balling and shingling, these
operations will not consume more than fifteen minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *




                       =Photographic Engraving.=

Scamoni's process is as follows: The original drawings are carefully
touched up, so that the whites are as pure and the blacks as intense as
possible, and then the negative is taken in the ordinary way, the plate
being backed in the camera with damp red blotting paper, to prevent
reflection from the camera or back of the plate. The negative is
developed in the ordinary manner, intensified by mercuric chloride, and
varnished. A positive picture is taken in the camera, the negative being
carefully screened from any light coming between it and the lens. This
is intensified by pyrogallic acid, and afterward washed with a pure
water to which a little ammonia has been added. It is then immersed in
mercuric chloride for half an hour, and again intensified with
pyrogallic acid. This is repeated several times. When the intensity of
the lines is considerable, the plate is well washed, treated with
potassium iodide, and finally with ammonia, the image successively
appearing yellow, green, brown, and then violet brown. The plate is then
thoroughly drained, and the image is treated successively with a
solution of platinic chloride, auric chloride, ferrous sulphate, and
finally by pyrogallic acid, which has the property of solidifying the
metallic deposits. The metallic relief thus obtained is dried over a
spirit lamp, and covered with an excessively thin varnish. This varnish,
which is evidently a special preparation, retains sufficient tackiness
to hold powdered graphite on its surface (the bronze powder now used may
be employed instead), which is dusted on in the usual manner. After
giving the plate a border of wax, it is placed in an electrotyping bath,
and a perfect facsimile in intaglio is obtained, from which prints may
be taken in a printing press.

       *       *       *       *       *




                     =A NEW DEEP SEA THERMOMETER.=

Perhaps some of our readers may have seen a description of a form of
thermometer devised by MM. Negretti and Zambra for the purpose of
ascertaining the temperature of the ocean at great depths. This
consisted of a tube bent into the shape of a siphon, which when it had
reached the desired depth was made, by means of an ingenious
arrangement, to pour all the mercury found above a certain point near
the reservoir into the second arm of the siphon. This second arm, which,
like the other, was a capillary tube, carried a scale of divisions on
which might be read the temperature of the depths to which the
instrument had been lowered. This thermometer gave all the results that
might have been expected. The ship Challenger during its polar
expedition had on board a certain number of these instruments. The
report of Capt. G. S. Nares made to the English Admiralty describes all
the benefits that we may hope to reap from a serious study of the
temperature of the ocean at different depths, and not the least of these
are those that pertain to the fishery interest. Notwithstanding the good
results given by this instrument, its inventors have endeavored to
render it still more practical and more within the reach of all by
diminishing the cost of construction, and increasing its compactness.

[Illustration: Fig. 1 Fig. 2 Fig. 3 NEW THERMOMETER FOR OBTAINING THE
TEMPERATURE OF THE OCEAN AT GREAT DEPTHS.]

Fig. 1 represents the thermometer isolated from its case. It is an
ordinary thermometer furnished at A with a little device that M.
Negretti has already made use of in the construction of his larger
instrument, and which allows the liquid to run from the reservoir into
the capillary tube when the temperature rises, without letting it flow
back when it lowers, if moreover the precaution has been taken to
incline the tube slightly, reservoir upward. At B there is a bulge in
the tube in which a certain quantity of mercury may lodge; this bulge is
placed in such a way that the mercury resulting from the dilatation of
the reservoir may come to it and continue its ascension in the capillary
tube when the reservoir is down (the thermometer being vertical), but
cannot get out when the reservoir is upward.

We should add that these thermometers are constructed so as to give the
variations of temperature within determined limits.

The small reservoir, B, is indispensable to the well working of the
apparatus; for in seeking the temperature at a certain depth the
instrument may, on being drawn up, pass through warmer strata, and it is
necessary, therefore, to provide the reservoir with a means of diffusing
the small quantity of mercury resulting from this excess of temperature.
The tube has also a small bulge at its upper extremity at C.

The thermometer is placed in a small wooden case having a double bottom
throughout its length. In this double bottom are placed a certain number
of lead balls that can run from one end of the case to the other, and of
sufficient weight to render the instrument buoyant in sea water. To use
the apparatus, one end of a cord is passed through a hole in the case
under the reservoir of the thermometer, and the other end is tied to the
sounding line at a certain distance from the lead (Fig. 2). While the
line is descending the thermometer will remain reservoir downward (Fig.
2); but when it is again drawn up the thermometer case will take the
position indicated in Fig. 3, and the column of mercury breaking at A
will fall into the capillary tube, the divisions of which, as will be
seen at Fig. 1, are reversed.

As to the thermometer itself, it is important to protect it against the
pressure which becomes so considerable at great depths; to do this the
reservoir is surrounded by an envelope of thick glass about three
quarters full of mercury. The mercury serves to transmit the temperature
to the reservoir, and should the exterior envelope yield to the effects
of pressure, the reservoir proper would not be affected, the mercury not
exactly filling the annular part which surrounds it.

       *       *       *       *       *




                           =New Inventions.=

George E. Palmer, of Cedar Rapids, Iowa, has patented an improved
Ironing Board, on which the garments may be held in stretched state
while being smoothed with the irons, and readily adjusted thereon to any
required degree of tension by a simple attachment.

William B. Rutherford and Joel T. Hawkins, of Rockdale, Texas, have
patented an improved Bale Tie, which is formed of the plate provided
with a longitudinal groove and cross ribs or loops, and having
projections or keys to adapt it to receive and hold the notched ends of
the bale band.

An improvement in Composition Pavements has been patented by John C.
Russell, of Kensington, Eng. This invention relates to the treatment of
peat and spent tan for the manufacture of an improved product or
material suitable for paving roads and other places and for roofing,
etc. The most important steps in making the composition consist in
drying bruised or finely ground peat or spent tan, heating the same _in
vacuo_ to degree of 150 deg. Fah., and adding sulphur and gas tar, gas
pitch, and stearine pitch in the proportions specified, then kneading
the mixture while heated and adding carbonate of lime and furnace slag.

Louis Blanck, of New York city, has patented an improved Safety Brake or
attachment for locomotives and railroad cars, by which the entire train,
either by a collision with another train or by contact with any
obstruction, is first raised from the rails, and then moved in backward
direction for the distance of a few feet, so that all danger of accident
is avoided, and no other sensation than that of a slight rocking motion
exerted. The attachment is constructed so as to admit of being worked by
the engineer from the cab or the locomotive, or, if desired, from any
car of the train.

An improved Evaporating Pan had been patented by Andrew D. Martin, of
Abbeville, La. This invention consists in a tapering sheet metal tank
having transverse partitions and longitudinal tapering flues that extend
through all of the partitions and terminate at the ends of the tank.

Lloyd Arnold, of Galveston, Texas, has patented an improved Bale Tie,
which is formed of a block of iron, with a space or opening running
longitudinally through its breadth from one end nearly to the other, and
having the alternate edges of the two plates thus formed notched, the
notch of the lower plate being square and of a width equal to or a
little greater than the bale band, and the notch of the upper plate
being narrower at its bottom than the bale band, and with its sides
inclined and beveled to an edge, to adapt it to receive and hold the
bale band.

An improved Tie for Letter Packages has been patented by John Mersellis,
of Knowersville, N. Y. The object of this invention is to provide a tie
by means of which letter packages may be quickly and securely fastened
or tied. It consists in a plate apertured to receive one end of the
string and also to receive the hook upon which the tie is hung when not
in use, and having a button and clasp spring for engaging the string in
the process of tying.

Fred P. Hammond, of Aurora, Ill., has patented an improved Inking Pad,
which consists in a novel arrangement of layers of cloth or felt,
chamois skin, oiled silk, and printing roller composition, which enables
a clean impression of the stamp to be made. The pad retains the desired
rounded surface and proper degree of softness, and is easily manipulated
when necessary to replenish the supply of ink.

William J. Clark and Thomas W. Roberts, of Coffeeville, Miss., have
patented an improved Trap for Catching Fish in streams, which will allow
the fish to be conveniently taken out without taking up the trap.

John W. Cooper, of Salem, Ind., is the inventor of an improved Alcohol
Lamp for soldering and similar purposes; and it consists in a reservoir
pivoted in a supporting frame, and provided with two wick tubes, and an
extinguisher secured to a spring support, and capable of closing the
larger wick tube when it is in a vertical position. It has an
independent extinguisher for the smaller wick tube, and is provided with
a novel device for projecting the wick from the larger tube as it is
moved out of a vertical position.

Benjamin Slater, of Attica, N. Y., has invented a simple and effective
device for Renovating Feathers by the combined action of steam and hot
air. It consists of a cylindrical receptacle, partly surrounded by a
steam jacket, and having a hot air box, a perforated bottom, a cover or
damper for the same, and an aperture in the top, to which is fitted a
perforated cover and a close cover.

An improved Blind Fastening has been patented by George Runton and John
Runton, of Hoboken, N. J. This fastening is so constructed as to fasten
the blind or shutter automatically when swung open, and in such a way as
to prevent all rattling or shaking of the blind or shutter from the
action of the wind.

David R. Nichols, of Alexandria Bay, N. Y., has patented an improved
Animal Trap, which is so constructed as to set itself after each animal
has been caught, and leave no trace of the trapped animal to frighten
away those that may come afterward.

William A. Doherty, of Fall River, Mass., has patented an improved Loom
Shuttle Attachment, by which the weaving of bad cloth is prevented, and
in case any false shed is made by any irregularities in the warp, and
that part of the shed carried lower than usual, the attachment is
released and thrown over the spindle point, so as to render it
impossible to draw out the filling from the shuttle, and thus break it
and stop the loom.

Jonas Bowman, of Somerset, O., has patented an improved Vehicle Spring,
which permits of dispensing with side bars, thus taking less space to
turn on, and by which the tilting and pitching motion usual with springs
as heretofore constructed is avoided.

Hiram Unger, of Germantown, O., is the inventor of an improved Gate
Latch, which is so constructed that the gate cannot be opened
accidentally by being lifted or by rebounding of the catch or latch.

Madison Calhoun, of Ocate, Ter. of New Mex., has patented an improved
Hame Fastening, which is not liable to become accidentally unfastened,
and is easily and quickly fastened and unfastened, even with cold or
gloved hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

