myself killed, and your father's house may be harried again by the
Bairds, and he may not succeed in getting off scatheless, as he did
last time; and I should blame myself, afterwards, if I had not seen
him, and shaken his hand, when I had an opportunity such as the
present."

Oswald had seen so much, during the two years that had passed since he
first left the hold that, as he rode towards it, it seemed strange that
everything should be going on as if it was but the day before that he
had ridden away--the only difference being that the hold looked
strangely small, and of little account, after the many strong castles
he had seen.

As soon as they reached the moor, within sight of the hold, a horseman
was seen to leave it, and ride at a gallop towards them.

"That is ever the way," Oswald said; "we like to know, when a visitor
is seen, whether he comes as friend or foe."

As the moss trooper rode up, and was about to put the customary
question, he recognized Oswald; and, wheeling his pony without a word,
dashed off at full gallop, waving his spear and shouting, as he
approached the hold.

They rode at a canter after him and, as they reached the entrance, his
father and mother appeared at the door at the top of the steps. The
latter ran down the steps and, as Oswald leapt from his horse, threw
her arms round his neck.

"Thank God you are back again, my boy!" she cried; "though as yet, I
can hardly believe that this tall fellow is my Oswald. But otherwise
you are in no way changed."

"I think, Mother, that you are looking better than when I saw you
last."

"I am well, dear," she said. "We have had a quiet year, and no cause
for anxiety, and things have gone well with us; and it has been
pleasant, indeed, for us to have received such good news of your
doings, and to know that you stood so well with Hotspur."

Oswald now ran up the steps to greet his father, who was already
talking with Alwyn, who had slipped off his horse and run to speak to
his brother, while Oswald was occupied with his mother.

"Well, lad," John Forster said, laying his hand upon his shoulder, and
looking him up and down, "you have grown well nigh into manhood. I
always said that you would over top me, and though methinks that I have
still three inches of advantage, you have yet time to grow up to look
down on me.

"Well, you have done credit to us, boy, and your monkish reading and
writing has not harmed you, as I was afraid it would. Alwyn tells me
that no man of Percy's troop did better than you, in that fight with
the Welsh; save, mayhap, that big man-at-arms down there, who, he tells
me, cracked the skulls of four Welshmen who were trying to stab you,
besides those he disposed of on his own account."

"I owe him my life, indeed, Father. He is a man after your own heart,
strong and brave and hearty, even jovial when occasion offers. He can
troll out a border lay with the best, and can yet read and write as
well as an abbot. His name is Roger."

"Come up, Roger," John Forster shouted, "and give me a grip of your
hand. You have saved my son's life, as he tells me; and, so long as you
live, there will be a nook by the fire, here, and a hearty welcome,
when you are tired of soldiering."

"In truth, you are a mighty man," he went on, after he and Roger had
exchanged a grip that would have well nigh broken the bones of an
ordinary man. "I have been looked upon as one able to strike as hard a
blow as any on the border; but assuredly, you would strike a heavier
one. Why, man, you must be five or six inches bigger, round the chest,
than I am."

"You have been an active man from your youth," Roger replied, "ever on
horseback and about, while I spent years with nought to do but eat and
drink, and build up my frame, in a monastery."

"Oswald told us, in his letters, that you had been a monk; but had,
with the consent of the abbot, unfrocked yourself."

"It was so," Roger replied, with a laugh. "Methinks that it was a happy
day for the abbot, as well as for myself, when I laid aside my gown;
for I fear that I gave him more trouble than all the rest of his
convent. Besides, it was as if a wolf's cub had been brought up among a
litter of ladies' lapdogs--it was sure to be an ill time for both."

"And for how long are you at home with us, brother Alwyn?" John Forster
asked, presently.

"I am here for a week only, John; but Oswald has leave for a month,
seeing that, at present, there is no great chance of Hotspur needing
his services. The Scotch are quiet since the king returned, I hear."

"Ay, they are as quiet as is their nature to be, but 'tis not likely to
last long. I went not with the army, but I hear that Henry behaved so
gently that the Scotch feel that it would be almost an act of
ingratitude to meddle with us, for a time. However, that will not last
long. Next spring they will doubtless be storming down over the hills
again."

The holiday passed delightfully to Oswald. Roger enjoyed it even more.
It was so long since the latter had been permitted the freedom of
riding at will, over mountain and moor, that he was like a schoolboy
enjoying an altogether unwonted holiday. He and Oswald scoured the
country, sometimes returning late in the afternoon, but often staying
for the night at the houses of one or other of Oswald's friends. Once
they crossed the border, and rode to the Armstrongs', where they
stopped for a couple of days, bringing Allan and Janet back with them;
for Roxburgh was still held by the English, and unless when hostilities
were actively going on, the people of the border, save the marauders,
who were always ready to seize any opportunity that offered of carrying
off booty, were on friendly terms, and maintained frequent intercourse
with each other.

Alwyn had returned to Alnwick when his leave was up. He had spent his
time quietly at the hold. He and his brother had discussed many plans
by which its defences could be strengthened, but arrived at the same
conclusion: that it could defend itself, at present, against any small
party, but must yield, however much its defences were increased, at the
approach of an invading army; since, even with the assistance of the
inhabitants of the surrounding districts, it could not maintain itself
until an army was gathered, and the invaders driven out.

Occasionally an afternoon was devoted to sports on the moor; and, on
one occasion, John Forster sent messengers down to Yardhope, and other
villages on the Coquet, and to the holds of his neighbours; inviting
them to come to a gathering, at which there would be prizes for riding,
wrestling, running, shooting, and feats of arms on horseback and foot,
and at which all comers would be entertained.

The result was a gathering such as had not taken place, in that part of
the country, for years. Over a thousand people assembled, comprising
women as well as men. The sports began early, and the various events
were all eagerly contested. Ralph Gray won the horse race, a horse
which he had brought from the south being far superior, in speed, to
any of the smaller border horses; although, had the trial been for
endurance, it would have had but small chance with them. The shooting
was close, one of Percy Hope's men winning at last. The quarterstaff
prize was awarded to Long Hackett, one of John Forster's retainers. At
wrestling Roger bore off the palm. Some of his opponents were, in the
opinion of lookers on, more skilled at the sport; but his weight and
strength more than counterbalanced this, and one after another tried,
in vain, to throw him to the ground; succumbing, themselves, as soon as
he put out his strength, and theirs began to be exhausted; when,
drawing them up to him with irresistible strength, he laid them quietly
on the ground.

Oswald himself carried off the palm in a mile foot race.

At one o'clock the sports were concluded. While they had been going on,
a score of men were attending to the great joints roasting over
bonfires, six bullocks having been slaughtered the day before. Ducks,
geese, and chickens innumerable were also cooking; while, for the table
in the hold, at which the principal guests sat down, were trout, game,
and venison pasties. Here wine was provided, while outside a long row
of barrels of beer were broached, for the commonalty.

Dinner over, there was singing and dancing. Alwyn had engaged, and sent
from Alnwick, a score of musicians. These were divided into five
parties, stationed at some little distance apart, and round these the
younger portion of the gathering soon grouped themselves; while the
elders listened to border lays sung by wandering minstrels. The days
were shortening fast and, as many of those present had twenty miles to
ride, by six o'clock the amusements came to an end, and the gathering
scattered in all directions, delighted with the day's proceedings;
which, although they would have been thought of but small account in
the southern counties, were rare, indeed, in a district so thinly
populated, and so frequently engaged in turmoil and strife.

Except in the running match, Oswald had engaged in none of the
contests, he being fully occupied in aiding his mother in welcoming the
guests, and seeing to their comfort; while his father, assisted by his
friends, Hope, Gray, and Liddel, superintended the arrangements for the
sports, and acted as judges. In the afternoon, Oswald and his cousins
had joined heartily in the dances, and enjoyed the day to the full as
much as their visitors.

Gatherings of this kind were not uncommon. Shooting, wrestling, and
sword-playing for the men, and dancing on the green for the young
people, took place at most of the village fairs; but the gathering at
Yardhope was long talked about, as a special occasion, from the
hospitality in which all were included, and the number of the heads of
the border families who were present, and took part in the proceedings.

Oswald's mother had been the prime mover in the matter. She was proud
of her son, and thought that it was a good occasion to present him to
the countryside, as one who was now arriving at manhood, and was
likely, in time, to make a figure on the border. John Forster had at
first declared that it was wholly unnecessary, and that such a thing
had never taken place in his time, or in his father's before him.

"That may be, husband," she said, "but Oswald has been away from us for
two years, and it may be as much more before he returns. He is like to
become a knight, before long--Alwyn said that the lad was sure to win
his spurs--and it would be well that he should not slip out of the
memory of folks here. Besides, we have his cousins, and it is well that
they should carry back news that, in spite of the troublous times, we
can yet be merry on suitable occasions.

"The cost will not be very great. The meat can scarcely be counted,
seeing that we have as many cattle on the moor as can pick up a living
there. Moreover, our neighbours all gave us a helping hand, to repair
the hold after it was sacked last year, and 'tis but right that we
should hold some sort of gathering, and this will do for the two
purposes."

The last argument had more weight with John Forster than the former
ones. Once having consented, he took as much interest in it as did his
wife; and dug up the pot in which he stowed away any sums that
remained, at the end of each year, over and above the expenses of the
hold; and provided all that was required, without stinting.

Three days after the gathering, the Armstrongs returned home, and
Oswald rode with Roger to Alnwick. The next three months passed quietly
and uneventfully. Snow was lying deep on the Cheviots, and until spring
there was little chance of the Scotch making a foray.

Oswald worked hard in the hall, where the knights kept themselves in
exercise, practised with the young squires, and superintended the
drilling and practice of the men-at-arms, of whom the number at the
castle had been much increased; for none doubted that in the spring the
Scots would, after Henry's invasion, pay a return visit to England, and
that the northern counties would need a very strong force to hold them
in check.

He was, several times, sent by Percy with messages to the governors of
Roxburgh and Jedburgh, and to other commanders; calling upon them to be
vigilant, and to send in lists of arms and stores required, so that all
should be in good order to make a stout resistance, when the need came.

When he had received no special orders to return with speed to Alnwick,
Oswald generally found time to pay a visit of a few hours to the
Armstrongs. On these excursions Roger and another man-at-arms always
rode with him, for it would not have been becoming for a squire, and
messenger of Hotspur, to ride without such escort.

Alwyn had picked out, for Roger's use, one of the strongest horses in
the castle. It was not a showy animal, having a big ugly head, and
being vicious in temper; therefore, after some trial, it had been
handed over to the men-at-arms, instead of being retained for the
service of the knights. It had, at first, tried its best to establish a
mastership over the trooper; but it soon found that its efforts were as
nothing against the strength of its rider, and that it might as well
try to shake off its saddle as to rid itself of the trooper, the grip
of whose knees almost stopped its breathing. Oswald, too, was very well
mounted, Sir Edmund Mortimer having presented him with one of the best
horses in the stable, upon his leaving him.

Upon nearing Hiniltie one day, just as the new year had begun, Oswald
was alarmed at seeing smoke wreaths ascending from the knoll behind the
village upon which the Armstrongs' hold stood. Galloping on, he soon
saw that his first impressions were correct, and that his uncle's tower
was on fire. He found the village in confusion.

"What has happened?" he asked, reining in his horse for a moment.

"The hold was suddenly attacked, two hours ago," a man said. "A party
of reivers rode through here. None had seen them coming, and there was
no time for us to take our women and children, and hurry to the shelter
of the hold. Adam Armstrong is away at Roxburgh. Young Allan, with what
few men there were at the hold, had but just time to shut the gates;
but these were hewed down, in a short time, by the troopers. There was
a stout fight as they entered. Allan was cut down and left for dead,
and the troopers were all killed. Dame Armstrong was slain, and her
daughters carried off by the reivers; and these, as soon as they had
sacked the house, set it alight and galloped off. Most of the men here
were away in the fields, or with the flocks in the valleys, and we were
too few to hinder them, and could but shut ourselves up in the houses,
until they had gone."

Oswald had dropped his reins, in speechless dismay.

"It is terrible," he said, at last. "Aunt killed, Janet and Jessie
carried away, and Allan wounded, perhaps to death!"

"Whence came these villains?" he asked suddenly. "From beyond the
Cheviots? It can hardly be so, for this part is under the governor of
Roxburgh, and no English raiders would dare to meddle with any here.
Besides, my uncle has always been on good terms with them, holding
himself aloof from all quarrels, and having friends and relations on
both sides of the border."

"We believe that it was the Bairds," a man said. "There has long been a
standing quarrel between them and the Armstrongs, partly about stolen
cattle, but more, methinks, because of the relationship between the
Armstrongs and your people"--for Oswald's visits to his uncle had made
his face familiar to the villagers--"and they say that the Bairds have
sworn that they will never rest, until they have slain the last of the
Forsters."

"Where is Allan Armstrong?"

"They have carried him down to the last house in the village. The
priest and Meg Margetson, who knows more of wounds and simples than
anyone here, are with him."

"Has his mother's body been recovered?"

The man shook his head.

"The hold was on fire, from roof to cellar, before they left," he said.
"I and others ran up there, directly they had galloped away. The house
was like a furnace. And indeed, we knew not of her death until a boy,
who had seen her slain, and had dropped from a window and hidden
himself till they had gone, came out and told us. He, and two or three
others, are the only ones left alive of those in the hold, when we
arrived and saved young Allan; and indeed, whether he lives now, or
not, I know not. The priest said, when we carried him in, that his
state was almost beyond hope."

Oswald galloped on to the end of the village, leapt from his horse, and
threw the reins to Roger, who had been muttering words that he
certainly would not have found in the missals, or the books, of the
monastery.

"Is there nothing to be done, Master Oswald?"

"Not at present. We must wait till my uncle returns."

Then he entered the house. He had met the priest frequently, during his
stay with the Armstrongs; as he entered the room, he was standing by a
pallet on which Allan was laid, while a very old woman was attending to
a decoction that was boiling over the fire.

"Is there any hope, father?"

"I know not," the priest replied, shaking his head sorrowfully. "We
have stanched the wounds, but his head is well nigh cleft open. I have
some skill in wounds, for they are common enough in this unfortunate
country, and I should say that there was no hope; but Meg here, who is
noted through the country round for her knowledge in these matters,
thinks that it is possible he may yet recover. She is now making a
poultice of herbs that she will lay on the wound; or rather on the
wounds, for he has no less than four."

"I think that he will live, young master," the old woman said in a
quavering, high-pitched voice. "'Tis hard to kill an Armstrong. They
have ever been a hardy race and, save the lad's father, have ever been
prone to the giving and taking of blows. I watched by his grandfather's
bed, when he was in as sore a strait as this; but he came round, and
was none the worse for it, though the blow would have killed any man
with a softer skull.

"A curse upon the Bairds, I say. They have ever been a race of thieves
and raiders, and it is their doings that have brought trouble on the
border, as long as I can remember."

"Has any gone to bear the news to Adam Armstrong, father?"

"Yes. I sent off a messenger on horseback, as soon as they had gone.
Adam left early, and the man will meet him on his way back."

Half an hour later, indeed, Adam Armstrong rode in. Oswald met him
outside. His face was set and hard, and Oswald would scarce have
recognized the kindly, genial man who had always received him so
heartily.

"There are hopes that he will live," Oswald said.

There was a slight change in the expression of Armstrong's face.

"'Tis well," he said, "that one should be saved, to take revenge for
this foul business. All the others are gone."

"I hope we may rescue my cousins."

"We might as well try to rescue a young lamb, that had been carried off
by an eagle," he said bitterly. "Even could an archer send a shaft
through the bird's breastbone, the lamb would be bleeding and injured,
beyond all hope, ere it touched the ground. We may revenge, Oswald, but
I have no hope of rescue."

Then he went into the house, without further word.



Chapter 12: A Dangerous Mission.


Half an hour later, Adam Armstrong came out of the cottage where his
son was lying. His mood had changed. He had gathered hope from Meg
Margetson's confident assurances that there was ground for it.

"Now, let us talk of what had best be done, Oswald," he said, as he led
the way into the next cottage, where the woman at once turned her
children out, and cleared a room for him.

"What force could you gather, Uncle?"

"In my grandfather's time," he said, "two hundred Armstrongs, and their
followers, could gather in case of need; but the family was grievously
thinned, in the days when Edward carried fire and sword through
Scotland; and for the last fifty years Roxburgh and these parts have
been mostly under English rule, and in that time we have never gathered
as a family. Still, all my kin would, I know, take up this quarrel; and
I should say that, in twelve hours, we could gather fifty or sixty
stout fighting men.

"But the Bairds would be expecting us, and can put, with the families
allied to them and their retainers, nigh three hundred men under arms.
Their hold is so strong a one that it took fifteen hundred Englishmen,
under Umfraville, three weeks to capture it. It was destroyed then, but
it is stronger now than ever.

"Could we get aid from Roxburgh, think you?"

"I fear not, Uncle. I know that the governor has strict orders not to
give Douglas any pretext for invading us, and to hold his garrison
together; since the earl may, at any moment, endeavour to capture the
town before help could arrive. And even were he to send four or five
hundred men, the Bairds could hold out for a fortnight, at least; and
long before this Douglas would be down, with an army, to his rescue.

"I have been talking it over with my trusty companion, here, and he
agrees with me that, unless a body of men-at-arms that would avail to
capture the fortalice by a sudden assault can be raised, we must trust
to guile rather than force; and I propose that he and I shall, at once,
start for the hold and see how matters stand, and where the prisoners
are confined, and what hope there is of getting them free. I propose to
send my other man to Yardhope, to tell my father what has happened, and
to ask him to warn his friends to be ready to cross the border, and to
join any force you can gather for an attack on the Bairds. It is true
that stringent orders have been issued that there is to be no raiding
in Scotland, but my father would not heed that for a moment. The attack
that has been made upon you, the killing of his wife's sister, the
wounding of Allan, and carrying off of his nieces would be deemed, by
him, a grievance sufficient to justify his disregarding all orders.
Besides which, he has the old grievance against the Bairds, which is
all the more bitter since they led the Scots to attack Yardhope. I can
guarantee that, when he gets word from you as to the day and place, he
will meet you there with at least a hundred spears. It is true that,
with this force and that which you can bring, he could not hope to
capture the Bairds' hold; but together you could carry sword and fire
through his district, before he could gather a force to meet you in the
field."

"I fear that would not do, Oswald. William Baird would be capable of
hanging the girls from the battlements, when the first fire was lit."

Oswald was silent. From the tales he had heard of the ferocity of these
dreaded marauders, he felt that it was more than probable that his
uncle was right.

"It seems to me," he said, after a pause, "that it were best for you to
send two men to Parton; which is, as I have heard, though I have never
been there, ten miles south of the Bairds'. Let them give the name of
Johnstone; and, at the tavern where they put up, say they expect a
relative of the same name. As soon as I can find out how the affair had
best be managed, I will give them instructions as to the plans I
propose. One will carry them to you, and the other to my father. Will
Parton be a good place for you to join forces?"

"As well as any other, Oswald. Your plan seems to me a good one. At any
rate, I can think of nothing better. My brain is deadened by this
terrible misfortune. Had I my own will, I would ride straight to the
Bairds' hold and challenge him and his brothers and sons to meet me,
one after another, in fair combat; and should be well contented if I
could slay one or two of them, before being myself killed."

"I can quite understand that, Uncle. But your death would be, in no
way, an advantage to the girls; nay, would rather render them more
helpless, therefore I pray you to let me carry things out as I have
planned."
