"How much was there in it?" asked his employer.

"Thirty-three dollars," answered Harry.

"Whew! that's a good deal of money to lose. I shouldn't want to lose so
much myself. When did you have it last?"

Harry told his story, Mr. Leavitt listening attentively

"And you came right home?"

"Yes."

"Alone."

"No; Luke Harrison came with me."

"Are you two thick together?"

"Not at all. He doesn't like me, and I don't fancy him."

"What was he talking about?"

"He wanted me to join a sleighing party."

"What did you say?"

"I said I couldn't afford it. Then he charged me with being a miser, as
he often does."

"Did he come all the way home with you?"

"No; he left me at Deacon Brewster's. He said he must go back to the
store."

"There is something queer about this," said Mr. Leavitt, shrewdly. "Do
you want my advice?"

"Yes; I wish you would advise me, for I don't know what to do."

"Then go to the store at once. Ask, but without attracting any
attention, if Luke came back there after leaving you. Then ask
Mr. Meade, the storekeeper, whether he noticed you put back your
pocketbook."

"But I know I did."

"Then it will be well to say nothing about it, at least publicly. If you
find that Luke's excuse was false, and that he did not go back, go at
once to his boarding place, and ask him whether he saw you drop the
pocketbook. You might have dropped it and he picked it up."

"Suppose he says no?"

"Then we must watch whether he seems flush of money for the next few
days."

This seemed to Harry good advice. He retraced his steps to the store,
carefully looking for the lost pocketbook. But of course, it was not to
be seen and he entered the store troubled and out of spirits.

"I thought you went home, Harry," said Frank Heath.

"You see I am here again," said our hero.

"Time to shut up shop," said Mr. Meade, the storekeeper. "You boys will
have to adjourn till to-morrow."

"Where's Luke Harrison?" asked Frank Heath.

"Didn't he go out with you?"

"Yes; but he left me some time ago. He came back here, didn't he?"

"No; he hasn't been here since."

"He spoke of coming," said Harry. "He wanted me to join that sleighing
party."

"Good night, boys," said the storekeeper, significantly.

They took the hint and went out. Their way lay in different directions,
and they parted company.

"Now I must call on Luke," said Harry to himself.

"I hope he found the pocketbook. He wouldn't be wicked enough to keep
it."

But he was not quite so sure of this as he would like to have been. He
felt almost sick as he thought of the possibility that he might never
recover the money which he had saved so gladly, though with such painful
economy. It represented the entire cash earnings of eleven weeks.

Luke Harrison boarded with a Mr. Glenham, a carpenter, and it was at his
door that Harry knocked.

"Is Luke Harrison at home?" he inquired of Mrs. Glenham, who opened the
door.

"At home and abed, I reckon," she replied.

"I know it's late, Mrs. Glenham, but it is about a matter of importance
that I wish to see Luke."

"I reckon it's about the sleighing party."

"No, it is quite another thing. I won't stay but minute."

"Well, I suppose you can go up."

Harry went upstairs and knocked. Ordinarily, Luke would have been
asleep, for generally he sank to sleep five minutes after his head
touched the pillow; but to-night the excitement of his dishonest
intention kept him awake, and he started uneasily when he heard the
knock.

"Who's there?" he called out from the bed.

"It's I--Harry Walton."

"He's come about that pocketbook," thought Luke.

"I'm in bed," he answered.

"I want to see you a minute, on a matter of importance."

"Come to-morrow morning."

"I must see you now."

"Oh, well, come in, if you must," said Luke.





CHAPTER XX.


"You seem to be in an awful hurry to see me," said Luke, grumbling. "I
was just getting to sleep."

"I've lost my pocketbook. Have you seen it?"

"Have I seen it? That's a strange question. How should I have seen it?"

"I lost it on the way from the store to the house."

"Do you mean to charge me with taking it?"

"I haven't said anything of the sort," said Harry; "but you were with
me, and I thought you might have seen it drop out of my pocket."

"Did you drop it out of your pocket?"

"I can't think of any other way I could lose it."

"Of course I haven't seen it. Was that all you woke me up about?"

"Is that all? You talk as if it was a little thing losing thirty-three
dollars."

"Thirty-three dollars!" repeated Luke, pretending to be surprised. "You
don't mean to say you've lost all that?"

"Yes, I do."

"Well," said Luke, yawning, "I wish I could help you; but I can't. Good
night."

"Good night," said Harry, turning away disappointed.

"What success, Harry?" inquired Mr. Leavitt, who had deferred going to
bed in order to hear his report.

"None at all," answered Harry.

"Is there anything by which you can identify any of the bills?"

"Yes," answered Harry, with sudden recollection, "I dropped a penful of
ink on one of the bills--a two-dollar note--just in the center. I had
been writing a letter, and the bill lay on the table near by."

"Good!" said Mr. Leavitt. "Now, supposing Luke has taken this money, how
is he likely to spend it?"

"At the tailor's, most likely. He is always talking about new clothes;
but lately he hasn't had any because Merrill shut down on him on account
of an unpaid bill."

"Then you had better see Merrill and ask him to take particular notice
of any bills that Luke pays him."

"Innocence must often be suspected, or guilt would never be detected. It
is the only way to get on the track of the missing bills."

Harry saw that this was reasonable and decided to call on Merrill the
next day.

"Do you think Luke took it?" asked the tailor.

"I don't know. I don't like to suspect him."

"I haven't much opinion of Luke. He owes me a considerable bill."

"He prefers your clothes to Hayden's, and if he has the money, he will
probably come here and spend some of it."

"Suppose he does, what do you want me to do?"

"To examine the bills he pays you, and if you find an ink spot on the
center of one let me know."

"I understand. I think I can manage it."

"My money was mostly in ones and twos."

"That may help you. I will bear it in mind."

Two days afterwards, Luke Harrison met Harry.

"Have you found your money, Walton?" he asked.

"No, and I am afraid I never shall," said our hero.

"What do you think has become of it?"

"That's just what I would like to find out," said Harry.

"The only thing you can do is to grin and bear it."

"And be more careful next time."

"Of course."

"He's given it up," said Luke to himself. "I think I can venture to use
some of it now. I'll go round to Merrill's and see what he's got in the
way of pants."

Accordingly he strolled into Merrill's that evening.

"Got any new cloths in, Merrill?" asked Luke.

"I've got some new cloths for pants."

"That's just what I want."

"You're owing me a bill."

"How much is it?"

"Some over thirty dollars."

"I can't pay it all, but I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll pay you
fifteen dollars on account, and you can make me a new pair of pants.
Will that answer?"

"All right. Of course I'd rather you'd pay the whole bill. Still I want
to be accommodating."

"Let me look at your cloths."

The tailor displayed a variety of cloths, one of which suited Luke's
fancy.

"Here's fifteen dollars," he said. "Just credit me with that on the
bill, will you?"

"All right," said Merrill.

He proceeded to count the money, which consisted of consisted of ones
and twos, and instantly came to the conclusion that it was from Harry's
missing pocketbook, particularly as he came upon the identical note with
the blot in the center.

Unaware of the manner in which he had betrayed himself, Luke felt quite
complacent over his reestablished credit, and that without any expense
to himself.

"Have you got any new cloth for coats?" he asked.

"I shall have some new cloths in next week."

"All right. When will you have the pants done?"

"You may call round in two or three days."

"Just make 'em in style, Merrill, and I'll send all my friends here."

"Very well. I hope you'll soon be able to pay me the balance of my
bill."

"Oh, yes, to be sure. You won't have to wait long."

He swaggered out of the shop, lighting a cigar.

"My young friend," soliloquized the tailor, watching his exit, "you have
walked into my trap neatly. Colman,"--turning to a young man present at
the time--"did you see Luke Harrison pay me this money?"

"Yes; to be sure."

"Do you see this blot on one of the bills--a two?"

"Yes; What of it?"

"Nothing. I only called your attention to it."

"I don't see what there is strange about that. Anybody might get ink on
a bill, mightn't he?"

"Of course."

Colman was puzzled. He could not understand why he should have been
called upon to notice such a trifle; but the tailor had his reasons. He
wanted to be able to prove by Colman's testimony that the blotted bill
was actually put into his hands by Luke Harrison.





CHAPTER XXI. IN THE TAILOR'S POWER


"Is that the bill you spoke of, Walton?" asked the tailor, on Harry's
next visit to the shop.

"Yes," said Harry, eagerly. "Where did you get it?"

"You can guess."

"From Luke Harrison?"

"Yes; he paid me, last evening, fifteen dollars on account. This note
was among those he paid me."

"It is mine. I can swear to it."

"The rest of the money was yours, no doubt."

"What shall I do, Mr. Merrill?"

"The money is yours, and I will restore it to you after seeing Luke. I
will send for him to be here at seven o'clock this evening."

As Luke was at work in his shop that day, the tailor's boy came in with
a note.

Luke opened it and read as follows:


"Will you call at my shop at seven this evening about the pants you
ordered?

"Henry Merrill."


"Tell your father I'll come," said Luke.

At seven o'clock he entered the tailor's shop once more.

"Well, Merrill, what do you want to see me about?" he asked. "Have you
cut the pants?"

"No."

"You haven't? I wanted you to go to work on them at once."

"I know; but it was necessary to see you first."

"Why--didn't you take the measure right?"

"Luke," said Mr. Merrill, looking him steadily in the eye, "where did
you get that money you paid me?"

"Where did I get the money?" repeated Luke, flushing up. "What makes you
ask me that question? Isn't it good money? 'Tisn't counterfeit, is it?"

"I asked you where you got it from?"

"From the man I work for, to be sure," said Luke.

"Will you swear to that?"

"I don't see the use. Can't you take my word?"

"I may as well tell you that Harry Walton recognizes one of the bills as
a part of the money he lost."

"He does, does he?" said Luke, boldly. "That's all nonsense. Bills all
look alike."

"This one has a drop of ink just in the center. He remembered having
dropped a blot upon it."
