blood-thirsty, capricious, inconsiderate humor of man, who has not yet
cultivated his reason? Oh, men! you worship but a great savage, whom you
consider as a model to follow, as an amiable master, as a perfect
sovereign.

The religious opinions of men in every country are antique and durable
monuments of ignorance credulity, of the terrors and the ferocity of
their ancestors. Every barbarian is a child thirsting for the wonderful,
which he imbibes with pleasure, and who never reasons upon that which he
finds proper to excite his imagination; his ignorance of the ways of
nature makes him attribute to spirits, to enchantments, to magic, all
that appears to him extraordinary; in his eyes his priests are
sorcerers, in whom he supposes an Almighty power; before whom his
confused reason humiliates itself, whose oracles are for him infallible
decrees, to contradict which would be dangerous. In matters of religion
the majority of men have remained in their primitive barbarity. Modern
religions are but follies of old times rejuvenated or presented in some
new form. If the ancient barbarians have worshiped mountains, rivers,
serpents, trees, fetishes of every kind; if the wise Egyptians worshiped
crocodiles, rats, onions, do we not see nations who believe themselves
wiser than they, worship with reverence a bread, into which they imagine
that the enchantments of their priests cause the Divinity to descend? Is
not the God-bread the fetish of many Christian nations, as little
rational in this point as that of the most barbarous nations?




CXXI.--ALL RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES BEAR THE SEAL OF STUPIDITY OR BARBARITY.

In all times the ferocity, the stupidity, the folly of savage men were
shown in religious customs which were often cruel and extravagant. A
spirit of barbarity has come down to our days; it intrudes itself into
the religions which are followed by the most civilized nations. Do we
not still see human victims offered to Divinity? In order to appease the
wrath of a God whom we suppose as ferocious, as jealous, as vindictive,
as a savage, do not sanguinary laws cause the destruction of those who
are believed to have displeased Him by their way of thinking?

Modern nations, at the instigation of their priests, have even excelled
the atrocious folly of the most barbarous nations; at least do we not
find that it never entered into a savage's mind to torment for the sake
of opinions, to meddle in thought, to trouble men for the invisible
actions of their brains? When we see polished and wise nations, such as
the English, French, German, etc., notwithstanding all their
enlightenment, continue to kneel before the barbarous God of the Jews,
that is to say, of the most stupid, the most credulous, the most savage,
the most unsocial nation which ever was on the earth; when we see these
enlightened nations divide themselves into sects, tear one another, hate
and despise each other for opinions, equally ridiculous, upon the
conduct and the intentions of this irrational God; when we see
intelligent persons occupy themselves foolishly in meditating on the
wishes of this capricious and foolish God; we are tempted to exclaim,
"Oh, men! you are still savages! Oh, men! you are but children in the
matter of religion!"




CXXII.--THE MORE ANCIENT AND GENERAL A RELIGIOUS OPINION IS, THE GREATER
THE REASON FOR SUSPECTING IT.

Whoever has formed true ideas of the ignorance, credulity, negligence,
and sottishness of common people, will always regard their religious
opinions with the greater suspicion for their being generally
established. The majority of men examine nothing; they allow themselves
to be blindly led by custom and authority; their religious opinions are
specially those which they have the least courage and capacity to
examine; as they do not understand anything about them, they are
compelled to be silent or put an end to their reasoning. Ask the common
man if he believes in God. He will be surprised that you could doubt it.
Then ask him what he understands by the word God. You will confuse him;
you will perceive at once that he is incapable of forming any real idea
of this word which he so often repeats; he will tell you that God is
God, and you will find that he knows neither what he thinks of Him, nor
the motives which he has for believing in Him.

All nations speak of a God; but do they agree upon this God? No! Well,
difference of opinion does not serve as evidence, but is a sign of
uncertainty and obscurity. Does the same man always agree with himself
in his ideas of God? No! This idea varies with the vicissitudes of his
life. This is another sign of uncertainty. Men always agree with other
men and with themselves upon demonstrated truths, regardless of the
position in which they find themselves; except the insane, all agree
that two and two make four, that the sun shines, that the whole is
greater than any one of its parts, that Justice is a benefaction, that
we must be benevolent to deserve the love of men, that injustice and
cruelty are incompatible with goodness. Do they agree in the same way if
they speak of God? All that they think or say of Him is immediately
contradicted by the effects which they wish to attribute to Him. Tell
several artists to paint a chimera, each of them will form different
ideas of it, and will paint it differently; you will find no resemblance
in the features each of them will have given to a portrait whose model
exists nowhere. In painting God, do any of the theologians of the world
represent Him otherwise than as a great chimera, upon whose features
they never agree, each one arranging it according to his style, which
has its origin but in his own brain? There are no two individuals in the
world who have or can have the same ideas of their God.




CXXIII.--SKEPTICISM IN THE MATTER OF RELIGION, CAN BE THE EFFECT OF BUT A
SUPERFICIAL EXAMINATION OF THEOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES.

Perhaps it would be more truthful to say, that all men are either
skeptics or atheists, than to pretend that they are firmly convinced of
the existence of a God. How can we be assured of the existence of a
being whom we never have been able to examine, of whom it is impossible
to form any permanent idea, whose different effects upon ourselves
prevent us from forming an invariable judgment, of whom no idea can be
uniform in two different brains? How can we claim to be completely
persuaded of the existence of a being to whom we are constantly obliged
to attribute a conduct opposed co the ideas which we had tried to form
of it? Is it possible firmly to believe what we can not conceive? In
believing thus, are we not adhering to the opinions of others without
having one of our own? The priests regulate the belief of the vulgar;
but do not these priests themselves acknowledge that God is
incomprehensible to them? Let us conclude, then, that the conviction of
the existence of a God is not as general as it is affirmed to be.

To be a skeptic, is to lack the motives necessary to establish a
judgment. In view of the proofs which seem to establish, and of the
arguments which combat the existence of a God, some persons prefer to
doubt and to suspend their judgment; but at the bottom, this uncertainty
is the result of an insufficient examination. Is it, then, possible to
doubt evidence? Sensible people deride, and with reason, an absolute
pyrrhonism, and even consider it impossible. A man who could doubt his
own existence, or that of the sun, would appear very ridiculous, or
would be suspected of reasoning in bad faith. Is it less extravagant to
have uncertainties about the non-existence of an evidently impossible
being? Is it more absurd to doubt of one's own existence, than to
hesitate upon the impossibility of a being whose qualities destroy each
other? Do we find more probabilities for believing in a spiritual being
than for believing in the existence of a stick without two ends? Is the
notion of an infinitely good and powerful being who permits an infinity
of evils, less absurd or less impossible than that of a square triangle?



Let us conclude, then, that religious skepticism can be but the effect
of a superficial examination of theological principles, which are in a
perpetual contradiction of the clearest and best demonstrated
principles! To doubt is to deliberate upon the judgment which we should
pass. Skepticism is but a state of indecision which results from a
superficial examination of subjects. Is it possible to be skeptical in
the matter of religion when we design to return to its principles, and
look closely into the idea of the God who serves as its foundation?
Doubt arises ordinarily from laziness, weakness, indifference, or
incapacity. To doubt, for many people, is to dread the trouble of
examining things to which one attaches but little interest. Although
religion is presented to men as the most important thing for them in
this world as well as in the other, skepticism and doubt on this subject
can be for the mind but a disagreeable state, and offers but a
comfortable cushion. No man who has not the courage to contemplate
without prejudice the God upon whom every religion is founded, can know
what religion to accept; he does not know what to believe and what not
to believe, to accept or to reject, what to hope or fear; finally, he is
incompetent to judge for himself.

Indifference upon religion can not be confounded with skepticism; this
indifference itself is founded upon the assurance or upon the
probability which we find in believing that religion is not made to
interest us. The persuasion which we have that a thing which is
presented to us as very important, is not so, or is but indifferent,
supposes a sufficient examination of the thing, without which it would
be impossible to have this persuasion. Those who call themselves
skeptics in regard to the fundamental points of religion, are generally
but idle and lazy men, who are incapable of examining them.




CXXIV.--REVELATION REFUTED.

In all parts of the world, we are assured that God revealed Himself.
What did He teach men? Does He prove to them evidently that He exists?
Does He tell them where He resides? Does He teach them what He is, or of
what His essence consists? Does He explain to them clearly His
intentions and His plan? What He says of this plan, does it agree with
the effects which we see? No! He informs us only that "He is the One
that is," [I am that I am, saith the Lord] that He is an invincible God,
that His ways are ineffable, that He becomes furious as soon as one has
the temerity to penetrate His decrees, or to consult reason in order to
judge of Him or His works. Does the revealed conduct of God correspond
with the magnificent ideas which are given to us of His wisdom,
goodness, justice, of His omnipotence? Not at all; in every revelation
this conduct shows a partial, capricious being, at least, good to His
favorite people, an enemy to all others. If He condescends to show
Himself to some men, He takes care to keep all the others in invincible
ignorance of His divine intentions. Does not every special revelation
announce an unjust, partial, and malicious God?

Are the revealed wishes of a God capable of striking us by the sublime
reason or the wisdom which they contain? Do they tend to the happiness
of the people to whom Divinity has declared them? Examining the Divine
wishes, I find in them, in all countries, but whimsical ordinances,
ridiculous precepts, ceremonies of which we do not understand the aim,
puerile practices, principles of conduct unworthy of the Monarch of
Nature, offerings, sacrifices, expiations, useful, in fact, to the
ministers of God, but very onerous to the rest of mankind. I find also,
that they often have a tendency to render men unsocial, disdainful,
intolerant, quarrelsome, unjust, inhuman toward all those who have not
received either the same revelations as they, or the same ordinances, or
the same favors from Heaven.




CXXV.--WHERE, THEN, IS THE PROOF THAT GOD DID EVER SHOW HIMSELF TO MEN OR
SPEAK TO THEM?

Are the precepts of morality as announced by Divinity truly Divine, or
superior to those which every rational man could imagine? They are
Divine only because it is impossible for the human mind to see their
utility. Their virtue consists in a total renunciation of human nature,
in a voluntary oblivion of one's reason, in a holy hatred of self;
finally, these sublime precepts show us perfection in a conduct cruel to
ourselves and perfectly useless to others.

How did God show Himself? Did He Himself promulgate His laws? Did He
speak to men with His own mouth? I am told that God did not show Himself
to a whole nation, but that He employed always the organism of a few
favored persons, who took the care to teach and to explain His
intentions to the unlearned. It was never permitted to the people to go
to the sanctuary; the ministers of the Gods always alone had the right
to report to them what transpired.




CXXVI.--NOTHING ESTABLISHES THE TRUTH OF MIRACLES.

If, in the economy of all Divine revelations, I am unable to recognize
either the wisdom, the goodness, or the equity of a God; if I suspect
deceit, ambition, selfish designs in the great personages who have
interposed between Heaven and us, I am assured that God has confirmed,
by splendid miracles, the mission of those who have spoken for Him. But
was it not much easier to show Himself, and to explain for Himself? On
the other hand, if I have the curiosity to examine these miracles, I
find that they are tales void of probability, related by suspicious
people, who had the greatest interest in making others believe that they
were sent from the Most High.

What witnesses are referred to in order to make us believe incredible
miracles? They call as witnesses stupid people, who have ceased to exist
for thousands of years, and who, even if they could attest the miracles
in question, would be suspected of having been deceived by their own
imagination, and of permitting themselves to be seduced by the illusions
which skillful impostors performed before their eyes. But, you will say,
these miracles are recorded in books which through constant tradition
have been handed down to us. By whom were these books written? Who are
the men who have transmitted and perpetuated them? They are either the
same people who established these religions, or those who have become
their adherents and their assistants. Thus, in the matter of religion,
the testimony of interested parties is irrefragable and can not be
contested!




CXXVII.--IF GOD HAD SPOKEN, IT WOULD BE STRANGE THAT HE HAD SPOKEN
DIFFERENTLY TO ALL THE ADHERENTS OF THE DIFFERENT SECTS, WHO DAMN EACH
OTHER, WHO ACCUSE EACH OTHER, WITH REASON, OF SUPERSTITION AND IMPIETY.

God has spoken differently to each nation of the globe which we inhabit.
The Indian does not believe one word of what He said to the Chinaman;
the Mohammedan considers what He has told to the Christian as fables;
the Jew considers the Mohammedan and the Christian as sacrilegious
corruptors of the Holy Law, which his God has given to his fathers. The
Christian, proud of his more modern revelation, equally damns the Indian
and the Chinaman, the Mohammedan, and even the Jew, whose holy books he
holds. Who is wrong or right? Each one exclaims: "It is I!" Every one
claims the same proofs; each one speaks of his miracles, his saints, his
prophets, his martyrs. Sensible men answer, that they are all delirious;
that God has not spoken, if it is true that He is a Spirit who has
neither mouth nor tongue; that the God of the Universe could, without
borrowing mortal organism, inspire His creatures with what He desired
them to learn, and that, as they are all equally ignorant of what they
ought to think about God, it is evident that God did not want to
instruct them. The adherents of the different forms of worship which we
see established in this world, accuse each other of superstition and of
ungodliness. The Christians abhor the superstition of the heathen, of
the Chinese, of the Mohammedans. The Roman Catholics treat the
Protestant Christians as impious; the latter incessantly declaim against
Roman superstition. They are all right. To be impious, is to have unjust
opinions about the God who is adored; to be superstitious, is to have
false ideas of Him. In accusing each other of superstition, the
different religionists resemble humpbacks who taunt each other with
their malformation.




CXXVIII.--OBSCURE AND SUSPICIOUS ORIGIN OF ORACLES.

The oracles which the Deity has revealed to the nations through His
different mediums, are they clear? Alas! there are not two men who
understand them alike. Those who explain them to others do not agree
among themselves; in order to make them clear, they have recourse to
interpretations, to commentaries, to allegories, to parables, in which
is found a mystical sense very different from the literal one. Men are
