
"It's against all the theory," objected Huvane. "But there seems to
be--" his voice trailed off absently. It returned after some thought:
"I've tried to sort it out, just as if I were one of them. The
recurrence of their ... er ... 'names of antiquity' as they call them,
seem to recur and recur. Their Planet Two, now called Venus, was called
Astarte last time, and before that it was Ishtar."

"Other way around."

"No matter. The names are still being used and, according to their
belief, merely parallel names culled out of local pagan religious
beliefs."

The chief nodded. "That's only part of the parallelism. The big thing is
the way they follow the same pattern. Savage, agrarian, urban, right on
up the ladder according to the rules of civic science but squabbling and
battling all the way right on up and out into space. Hell, Huvane,
warfare and conflict I can both understand and cope with, but not the
Terran flavor. They don't come out bent on conquest or stellar
colonialism. They come out with their little private fight still going
on and each side lines up its volume of influence and pits one against
the other until the whole section of that spiral arm is glittering like
a sputtering spark along a train of black powder. I wish," he said
savagely, "that we could cut off that arm and fling it deep into
extragalactic space."

Huvane shook his head. "And leave the problem for our children to
solve?"

"They'll have one to solve, I think," said Chelan. "In another twenty
thousand years the Terrans will be right back doing business at the same
old stand. Unless we can solve it for once and for all right now."

Huvane looked around as if he were seeking another door to the chief's
office. "How?" he asked sarcastically. "The first time we greeted them
and they took both our welcome and us for everything they could before
we pulled the rug out from under them. The second time we boxed them off
and they broke out after converting the isolation screen into an
offensive weapon. The third time we tried to avoid them and they ran
wild exploiting less ambitious races. The fourth time we missed the boat
and they were chewing at our back door before we knew about them;
containing them was almost a nova job. The fifth time we went in and
tried to understand them, they traded us two for one. Two things they
didn't want for one they did," Huvane's lips curled, "and I'm not sure
that they didn't trade us the other way around; two they needed for one
they declared useless. Sixth? that was the last time and they just came
out shooting as if the whole galaxy automatically objected. This time?
Who knows?" Huvane sat down again and put his hands between his knees.

"They don't operate like _people_. Sensible folk settle their own
problems, then look for more. Terra? One half of the globe is against
the other half of the globe. Fighting one another tooth and nail, they
still find time to invent and cross space to other planets and continue
their fight on unknown territory."

"Maybe we'd better just admit that we don't know the solution. Then we
can clobber Terra back to the swamp, juggle the place into another ice
age, put the details down in History, and hope that our remote progeny
will be smarter than we."

"Like maybe we're smarter than our remote ancestors?" jeered Huvane.

"Got a better idea?"

"Maybe. Has anybody really taken a couple of them and _analyzed_ them?"

"It's inhumane."

"I agree, but--?"

"Get me a healthy, well-balanced specimen of somewhat
better-than-average education and training. Can do?"

"Can do. But how are you going to keep him?"

"I don't intend to study him like I'd study a bug under a microscope.
This one won't get away. Make it in fourteen versaids, Huvane."

"Make it in ten plus or minus a radite or two. So long!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The beast at Cape Canaveral stood three hundred and fifteen feet tall
dwarfing her creators into microscopic proportions. Swarming up and down
the gantry, bug-sized humans crawled in and out of check ports with
instrument checks, hauling hoses, cables, lines. Some thousand feet
away, a puff-bomb of red smoke billowed out and a habit-flattened voice
announced: "At the mark, X Minus Fifteen Minutes ... ... ... Mark! X
Minus Fifteen Minutes!"

Jerry Markham said, "That's me!" He looked up at the lofty porthole and
almost lost his balance over backwards sighting it. He was a healthy
specimen, about twenty-four and full of life. He had spent the day going
through two routines that were sometimes simultaneous and at other times
serially; one re-stating his instructions letter by letter including the
various alternatives and contingencies that involved his making
decisions if the conditions on Venus were according to this theory or
that. The other was a rigorous medical checkup. Neither of them showed
