and before the Lord, absolutely depend upon Him, and submit himself to be
governed by His will and pleasure.

26. The natural man not having so much as one spark left of this spiritual
light, it cannot but be that all men must abide in their natural
blindness, unless they be enlightened by God himself. This is that
hereditary spiritual blindness, which utterly incapacitates us for the
knowledge of such concerns as relate to the kingdom of God. But if it
happen, as too often it does, that a man besides this, indulge in evil
practices, then that spiritual blindness is followed still by another,
even natural blindness, which produces mournful effects in the fallen
soul. For by so prevailing a wickedness, that weak glimmering light which
yet sparkles in man, and would reason him into _outward_ honesty of life,
is at last totally extinguished; and the soul is struck with utter
blindness and darkness of heart, and must forever continue so, unless
Christ enlightens it.

27. What art thou, then, O man, unless Christ by his Spirit regenerate
thee, make thee a new creature, and transform thee into the image of God?
This new creation, necessary as it is, is, however, only _begun_ in this
life, and must struggle under the weight of many infirmities. If thou dost
but look into thyself, even after thou art become a new creature through
the Holy Ghost, it will plainly appear that the image of God is but
slightly delineated, and, as it were, shadowed out in thee. Dost thou not
see, that faith, hope, charity, and the fear of the Lord, are as yet but
weak, and hardly able to advance beyond the first principles of the
Christian life? Dost thou not see how slender thy humility is, and how
deeply the sin of distrust, pride, and impatience, is rooted in thy
breast? Dost thou not find thy devotion weak and languid; and thy charity
towards thy neighbor comparatively cold? How tender a spark of pure
chastity remains in the heart; and how vast a fire of carnal desire burns
within! How faint the one, how violent the other! How great still are thy
self-love, self-honor, and interest, sins that lurk within, and do not
always outwardly appear! And how fierce is the tide of evil concupiscence
which flows in upon thee, and disturbs thy inward repose! Whence it
follows, that to the very last moment of our lives, we must, by the Spirit
of God, continually wrestle with the old Adam, and with the image of
Satan. All this urges us incessantly to pray, sigh, and seek, till the
Divine Spirit be bestowed upon us, in order to destroy the image of Satan
daily, and to restore the image of God to us.

28. From all this, thou canst easily understand, O man! that thou art
never to rely on thine own strength; but entirely to cleave to the grace
of God, which alone is able to work all this in thy soul. All things are
to be sought and obtained from and by Christ through faith. From Him thou
art to receive divine knowledge and wisdom, against thy own blindness; his
righteousness, against all thy unrighteousness; his holiness against all
thy impurity; a full redemption, power, and victory, against death, hell,
and the devil. From Christ thou must obtain remission of all thy sins,
against the kingdom of sin and Satan, and against all the combined powers
thereof; and, lastly, everlasting happiness, against all spiritual and
bodily adversities and troubles. In this order, life eternal is to be
derived from Christ. But of this, more shall be said in the Second Book of
this volume.




Chapter XLII.


In This Concluding Chapter The Reasons For Adopting The Method Observed In
  Book I. Are Explained; The Duty Of Guarding Against Spiritual Pride Is
Described, And The Truth Is Set Forth That True Spiritual Gifts Cannot Be
                         Obtained Without Prayer.


    _What hast thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst
    receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received
    it?_--1 COR. 4:7.


I regard it as necessary, before I conclude this Book, to call the
reader's attention to several points.

2. In this Book, _repentance and its fruits_, have, for various reasons,
been explained at large, and in different ways. Most of the Chapters in
this Book, accordingly, treat upon the fruits of true repentance; such as
our renovation in Christ, the daily mortification of the flesh, the
practice of self-denial, contempt of the world, the exercise of charity,
etc. For therein we find the beginning and foundation of true
Christianity, of a holy life, and of salvation itself, through true faith.
So, too, no solid comfort can ever be tasted in the heart of man, unless
he be thoroughly acquainted with the nature of Original Sin, that
dreadful, mortal, and diabolical evil, which is like an infernal poison
(ah, it is impossible sufficiently to describe and deplore it!) and has
proved the seed of a multitude of fatal and pernicious fruits. All the
books of comfort, and all the promises with which the Gospel abounds,
afford no substantial consolation to a man, except he be first thoroughly
humbled by a sense of his misery, and of that awful evil, Original Sin.
Man, in this fallen state, is too apt to flatter himself, and to look for
comfort, before a thorough search has been made into his own sinful
condition, degeneracy, and apostasy from God. Nature is concerned for
comfort more than for a cure.

3. But this is very preposterous, and altogether against the tenor of
Scripture, and the method of salvation therein explained. Our Lord says,
"The whole need not a physician, but they that are sick." Matt. 9:12. No
cure can be expected, no medicine can be prescribed, no comfort can be
applied, nor can Christ himself, the great Physician of souls, be of any
benefit at all, so long as a man, thinking himself well, is not sensible
of those deep distempers that rage in his soul. Hence a true Christian's
life consists in a _daily crucifixion_ of the flesh, and of all its sinful
propensities. O that every one might lay this earnestly to heart! No man
can belong to Christ, or have a share in his merits, but he that regulates
his life according to this rule. Now, such a soul shall not be left
comfortless in the end; but, shall be refreshed with divine consolation.
No sooner is a soul thoroughly humbled by a lively sense of inbred
corruption, and the infectious influence it hath on all the actions, than
it is raised again by those suitable grounds of comfort which the Gospel
affords. In all this, the operation of the Divine Spirit, and man's
meditation on the word of promise, concur, and bring over the soul to
Christ, who is both willing and able to heal her, and to turn her mourning
into permanent gladness. He who will enter upon this course of true and
sincere repentance, must be careful, at the same time, not to be shaken by
the foolish judgment which this impious world will be apt to pass upon the
whole design of true Christianity. Let the profane worldling think ever so
much of his own natural parts and wisdom, it is certain that he is
altogether blind in the things of the Spirit of God, and most ignorant.
And though he may exercise his reasoning faculty on things that are far
above his reach and capacity, yet while he has no knowledge of the
wretchedness of his own nature, and of those spiritual diseases that
spring from it, he continues an utter stranger to spiritual concerns. He
does not understand what Adam and Christ are, or how Adam is to die, and
Christ to live in us again. And as he disdains to learn what he knows not,
he must forever remain in darkness and ignorance. Nor will he ever be able
in that state to obtain any insight into the grounds and properties of
true repentance, faith in Christ, and the new birth, wherein true
Christianity consists, and whereby he might be rescued from everlasting
ruin.

4. The next thing which I would mention at the close of this Book, and
which thou art carefully to avoid, is the sin of _spiritual pride_, after
God has begun to implant in thee, by his grace, spiritual gifts, new
virtues, new habits of mind, and new knowledge. See that thou ascribe
these attainments not to thy own power, wisdom, or industry, but to the
grace of God. Carefully avoid taking up thy rest in those virtues and good
dispositions that are formed within thee; and never confide in them as
_means_ of thy justification before God. For as they are yet marked by
various defects and imperfections, so they can never pass for the perfect
righteousness of God. Never seek thy own honor and glory by the gifts
which God has been pleased to bestow upon thee. On the contrary, use them
with humility and fear, divesting thyself of all selfish designs, and
returning all thou hast unto Him, who is the true Disposer and Author
thereof. Do not say in thy heart: "I have now a strong faith, fervent
charity, much knowledge, many gifts;" for these suggestions are the
_tares_, which the enemy of thy soul sows among the wheat while thou
sleepest.

For, (_a_) none of these gifts are thine, but God's only, without whose
illumination and all-quickening power, thou art but a lifeless lump of
clay. These gifts are no more thine, than the light and heat of the sun
are the earth's, which is warmed and penetrated by them. Thou art, at the
best, but the casket to hold the jewels; and the glory of these no more
belongs to thee, than the lustre of a precious stone belongs to the box in
which it is kept. Is it not, therefore, great folly to boast of the goods
of another, which are laid up in thee?

(_b_) Thou art to consider, that, as the lord of a treasure may lodge his
treasure wherever he pleases, and remove it as he thinks fit; so God, in
like manner, may deposit his heavenly treasure in thee, and take it away
again, as he sees proper. Him, therefore, thou oughtest to fear with holy
reverence, and at the same time carefully beware of spiritual pride and
presumption: for this would issue in the inevitable loss of the celestial
jewel committed to thy trust. "Be not high-minded, but fear." Rom. 11:20.

(_c_) Thou art, further, to consider, that the righteous God will call
thee to an exact account of all he has intrusted to thy care. The more
thou hast received, the more will he require at thy hands.

(_d_) In the midst of all thy gifts, do not think that thou hast received
all that the Lord has in store for his children. Ah! beloved Christian! be
thy attainments ever so high and excellent, they are hardly the beginning;
there is yet much which thou lackest.

(_e_) Seriously consider, that no good and perfect gifts are obtained or
preserved except by _prayer_: for every good and perfect gift descendeth
from God. James 1:17. Whatever thou seemest to possess without this, is
but a lifeless shadow, a seed bearing no fruit, but withering away. For
without prayer, no heavenly gift can descend into the heart of man. The
reader is desired to peruse what is said on the subject of Prayer in the
_Second_ Book of this Work. There are two things which thou must chiefly
regard in thy prayers and application to the Lord: _first_, That the
_Image of Satan be destroyed in thee_; as unbelief, pride, covetousness,
lust, wrath, etc.; _secondly_, That the _Image of God be restored __ in
thee_; in which are contained faith, love, hope, humility, patience,
meekness, and the fear of the Lord. These two, that is, the destruction of
the satanic, and the restoration of the divine image, are illustrated in
the Lord's Prayer. This prayer makes both _against_ thee, and _for_ thee.
If the name of God alone is to be hallowed, then thy name must be debased
and thy haughtiness be pulled down. If the kingdom of God shall come, then
certainly the devil's kingdom must be overthrown in thee. If thou desirest
that the will of God should be done, then truly thine own must be
renounced.

These are the two parts into which any useful prayer-book or method of
prayer may be fitly digested; an order which is clearly exhibited in the
prayer of our Lord, so far as it respects those heavenly and eternal
benefits and gifts which we are directed to seek. Nay, in the Lord's
Prayer, all the treasures both for soul and body, and all the things which
we need both for this life and that which is to come, are summed up. And
there is no question, but that the Father in heaven, according to his
paternal compassion, will readily grant, what the Son of his love has so
strongly commanded us to ask.





BOOK II.




Preface To The Second Book.


As in nature, my dear Christian reader, the destruction of one thing is
the production of another; even so is it in a true Christian life. The
old, carnal man must be destroyed and pass away, that so the new spiritual
man may be produced in his place. And as our carnal life is directly
contrary to the holy life of Christ (which in the preceding Book is
sufficiently declared); it is absolutely needful that we renounce this
carnal life, before we can attain the spiritual life of Christ, or follow
him in those steps which he has been pleased to leave us. Thus, for
instance, thou must put an end to thy pride, before thou canst be truly
humble; thou must cease from wrath, before thou canst possess the virtue
of meekness. And this is the reason why the spiritual Christian's life
ought to proceed from true _repentance_. This is also the design and
substance of the preceding Book, as plainly appears both from the order in
which the chapters are arranged, and from the _Conclusion_ appended to the
whole Book.

2. Since, however, there will be occasion to treat of the doctrine of
repentance in some chapters of this Second Book, I shall now give some
account of the whole method into which this Book is digested. As the main
design of the First Book was to lay open the nature of Original Sin, and
the deadly influence which it has upon all our actions; so it is but fit
that the Second Book should begin with JESUS CHRIST, that everlasting
wellspring of man's salvation, in whom alone we find help and a remedy
against the destructive poison of Original Sin, and against that flood of
calamities and miseries which thence proceeds. All this on man's side, is
effected by FAITH, apprehending that salvation which is merited by Christ.
This matter is explained in the first three chapters of this Book. As,
however, that _faith_ which leads the soul to this fountain, and draws
thence effects so excellent and good, also brings forth living and sound
_fruits_; the next three chapters (IV-VI), are spent in describing the
same more at large. But, even as the fruits of righteousness and of the
Spirit are to grow up in us and wax strong, so must the fruits of the
flesh, in proportion, decay and decrease. And this is the daily,
effectual, and unfeigned repentance, wherein a Christian ought constantly
to be employed, if ever the flesh be mortified, and the Spirit be restored
to dominion. It was, therefore, judged expedient, to give here a clear
description of the difference betwixt the flesh and the Spirit, and of the
properties of a daily repentance. Here consult Chapters VII-X. But
inasmuch as from this habitual repentance, and the mortification of the
_old_ man (the life of a true Christian being nothing else but a constant
crucifixion of the flesh), the _new_ man is daily to come forth, it is
impossible to find a more perfect pattern, than that which our Lord Jesus
Christ himself has left us. And for this reason, the life of Christ ought
to be a mirror unto us, in which to view ourselves and him; and by
beholding him, to embrace the more freely his poverty and reproach, his
contempt and sorrow, his cross and passion, his agony and death. And this
holy life of Christ is the death of the flesh, and is accompanied with the
exercise of prayer, love, and humility. This is set forth at large in
Chapters XI-XXV.

3. Thus are the humility and lowliness of Christ a true ladder of
ascension for a penitent soul; by means of which we ascend into the heart
of God, as of a loving Father, and calmly repose in his paternal
affection. It is the _human_ nature of Christ with which we begin our
spiritual life, and rising up higher and higher, arrive at last at his
_divine_ nature. It is then that we contemplate in Christ the heart of our
Father in heaven. It is then that we behold him as the sublime, the
everlasting, essential, and infinite Good; we behold him as the
immeasurable omnipotence, as the unfathomable mercy, the unsearchable
wisdom, the purest holiness, the unspotted and endless righteousness, the
most perfect goodness, the noblest beauty, the most perfect graciousness,
and, at last, as the most joyful salvation. These points, as they chiefly
make up Christian contemplation, so they are explained in Chapters
XXVI-XXXIII. But because no one can ever arrive at this state without
prayer, hence the ensuing ten Chapters (XXXIV-XLIII), treat upon the
nature of _prayer_, and the exercise of divine _praise_. And since this
life, grounded on maxims of sound and unfeigned religion, will soon be
attended with _crosses_ and _tribulations_, there follow fifteen Chapters
(XLIV-LVIII), wherein are considered the _cross_ of Christians, and the
virtue of _patience_, the practice of which is thereby exceedingly
promoted. To all this, something is added of the nature and conquest of
those deep _spiritual temptations_, with which Satan harasses those that
adhere to the Lord, and who endeavor to be faithful to the end.

God grant that we may all be true followers of Christ, not ashamed of his
holy life; but follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, and be led at last
to the living fountains of waters, where the Lord will wipe away all tears
from our eyes! Amen.

JOHN ARNDT,
General Superintendent in the Principality of Lueneburg.




Chapter I.


Jesus Christ, The Son Of God, Is Given To Us By Our Heavenly Father As Our
   Help Against The Damnable And Deadly Poison Of Original Sin, And The
    Pernicious Fruits Thereof, As Well As A Protector Against All The
           Calamities And Evils Both Of The Body And The Soul.


    _With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation._--ISA.
    12:3.


As our distemper is exceedingly great, mortal, damnable, and out of the
power of any creature to remove; therefore it is needful that we should
have a remedy proportioned to the disease; a high, a divine, an
everlasting, remedy and help, entirely derived from the pure mercy of God.
As our original disease was caused by the wrath, hatred, and envy of the
devil (Gen. 3:1): so God, in tender compassion, was moved to heal the
mortal wound of our sin by his infinite mercy. And as Satan had used his
utmost endeavors and subtlety, in order to infect, slay, and condemn us,
God was pleased, in his infinite wisdom, to give us his beloved Son, in
order to restore us to that life, happiness, and salvation which we had
lost. Hence he has made the precious blood of Christ to be the grand
restorative of our nature, and the cleanser from all the contagion of sin.
He hath given us his quickening flesh, to be our bread of life; his holy
wounds, as a sovereign balsam to heal our wounded condition; and his
precious death, to be an abolition of our death, both temporal and
eternal. 1 John 1:7; Acts 20:28; John 6:32, etc.; Isa. 53:5; 25:8.

2. But so disabled, so weak, and undone, is fallen man, that he cannot so
much as apply this precious medicine even when it is freely offered: so
little health, so much weakness is there in him. Nay, we even, by nature,
strive against our cure, and reject the remedy which should help
us.--Wherefore, O Lord, unless thou shouldst draw me after thee (Cant.
1:4), and, as a faithful physician, administer to me what thou hast
ordered, the best prescriptions will avail me nothing. Take me, therefore,
entirely into thine own hands, and trust me not to myself. If I be left to
myself, the eternal ruin of my soul will be my lot. Therefore "turn thou
me, and I shall be turned: heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; for
thou art my praise." Jer. 31:18; 17:14. As long as thou keepest back thy
mercy, and hidest thy face from my sorrow, I shall remain in a diseased
condition. Ps. 30:3. Whilst thou forbearest to quicken me, I am tied down
by the chains of death. Therefore I cry with David, "I am poor and needy;
make haste unto me, O God. Thou art my help, and my deliverer; O Lord,
make no tarrying." Ps. 70:5.

3. O blessed Lord! shall not thy mercy be strong enough to raise a sick
soul from her languishing illness? a soul that is not able to raise
herself? Wilt thou not condescend to come to me, since it is not possible
that I should come to thee? Didst thou not love me, even before I had so
much as a thought of loving thee again? Thy mercy is so prevailing and so
strong, that it has even overcome thyself. Was it not mercy that nailed
thee to the cross, and gave thee up to death? What is so strong as to
encounter and conquer thee, if it be not the strength of thy own mercy?
What has might sufficient to apprehend thee, and to bind and conduct thee
to death, but thy love only, wherewith thou hast loved and quickened us,
when we were dead in trespasses and sins? Eph. 2:1. For thou wouldst
thyself undergo the pangs of death, rather than suffer us to be forever
bound over to death and eternal damnation!

4. Thy mercy, O Lord, has made thee all our own, and put a title to all
thy merits into our hands. When thou becamest a tender infant, it was
wholly for our sakes, unto whom thou art "born a child." Isa. 9:6. When
thou wast made an offering for our sins, and when thou wast slain as an
innocent lamb on the cross, it was to give up thyself unto us, and freely
to impart unto us all things beside. O excellent gift of God! a good
wholly appropriated to us, even our own peculiar good and treasure!

(_a_) Behold! beloved Christian, the wisdom of God! God has by means of
this everlasting good made himself our own property, that he might thereby
in return make us _his own_. For having purchased us "with a price," we
are no longer our own, but his who hath bought us. 1 Cor. 6:19, 20. For
whosoever receives so excellent a gift, receives also the Giver himself,
from whom it proceeds. And again, whosoever possesses any good as his own,
he makes it his own to all intents and purposes, and to the best advantage
he can. Thus, likewise, is CHRIST become thy own and proper GOOD. Thou
canst apply him in such a manner, as to obtain by him everlasting life and
salvation.

(_b_) CHRIST is become the true medicine of thy soul, to restore thee--thy
meat and thy drink, to refresh thee--thy fountain of life, to quench thy
thirst--thy light, in darkness--thy joy, in sadness--thine advocate, against
thy accusers--wisdom, against thy folly--righteousness, against thy
sin--sanctification, against thy unworthiness--redemption, against thy
bondage--the mercy-seat, against the judgment-seat--the throne of grace,
against thy condemnation--thy absolution, against thy fearful sentence--thy
peace and rest, against an evil conscience--thy victory, against all thine
enemies--thy champion, against all thy persecutors--the bridegroom of thy
soul, against all rivals--thy mediator, against the wrath of God--thy
propitiation, against all thy trespasses--thy strength, against thy
weakness--thy way, against thy wandering--thy truth, against lying and
vanity--thy life, against death. He is thy counsel, when thou hast none to
advise thee--thy power, in the midst of thine infirmities--thy Everlasting
Father, when thou art forsaken and fatherless--thy Prince of Peace, against
the adversary--thy ransom, against thy debt--thy crown of glory, against thy
reproach--thy teacher, against thy ignorance--thy Judge, against thy
oppressor--thy King, to destroy the kingdom of Satan--thine everlasting High
Priest, to intercede for thee.

5. (_a_) Consider now, O Christian, what an excellent gift the Lord JESUS
CHRIST is. Let it be thy daily prayer and supplication to make a true
saving use of all those heavenly benefits, and to improve all the
_offices_ of Christ to the end for which they are designed. If he be thy
Medicine (Matt. 9:12), fear not but thou shalt be healed: since he is thy
Bread (John 6:51), thy soul shall be filled. Is he to thee a Fountain of
Life (Isai. 12:3), then truly thou shalt thirst no more. Is he to thee a
Light (John 8:12), then thou shalt remain no longer in darkness. Is he thy
Joy (Luke 2:10), what then shall afflict thee? Is he the Advocate (1 John
2:1) that pleads thy cause, what adversary shall cast thee? Is he thy
Truth, who shall deceive thee? Is he thy Way, who shall make thee to err?
Is he thy Life (John 14:6), who shall slay thee? Is he thy Wisdom, who
shall seduce thee? Is he thy Righteousness, who shall condemn thee? Is he
thy Sanctification, who shall reject thee? Is he thy Redemption, who shall
imprison thee? 1 Cor. 1:30. Is he thy Peace (Eph. 2:14), who can disturb
thee? Is he thy Mercy-Seat (Rom. 3:25), who can arraign thee? Is he thy
Throne of Grace (Heb. 4:16), who can give sentence against thee? Is he thy
Discharge and Absolution (Colos. 2:14), who then dares impeach thee? Is he
the Champion and the Captain of thy Salvation (Heb. 2:10), who shall be
able to stand against thee? Is he thy Bridegroom (John 3:29), who then
shall snatch thee from him? Is he thy Ransom (1 Tim. 2:6), who will arrest
thee? Is he thy Crown of Glory (Heb. 2:7), who then shall reproach thee?
Is he thy Master (John 13:13), and Teacher, who then shall correct thee?
If he be thy Judge (2 Thess. 1:9), who shall oppress thee? If he be thy
Propitiation (1 John 2:2), who shall accuse thee? If he be thy Mediator (1
Tim. 2:5), who shall set God against thee? If he be thy Advocate (1 John
2:1), who shall prosecute thee? Is he thy Immanuel (Isai. 7:14), who shall
be against thee? Is he thy King (John 12:15), who shall expel thee out of
his kingdom? Is he thy High Priest (Heb. 7:25), who can refuse his
intercession and sacrifice? Is he thy Saviour (Matt. 1:21), who shall
destroy thee?

(_b_) How canst thou have a more excellent, a more valuable present? It is
a present of greater worth than thou thyself, than all mankind, and all
the world besides. It is a present that infinitely surpasses all the sins,
miseries, and calamities of the whole world. Christ hereby is all our own,
both as to his divine and his human nature. It was by sin we had forfeited
the richest of all treasures, the Sovereign Good, even God himself: and it
is by Christ, that all is made up again, and God himself given to us as
our property. And for this reason, Christ is called Immanuel (Isai. 7:14),
(which being interpreted is, _God with us_), that in him we might have
both a God and a Brother.

6. (_a_) Consider now, O Christian! what an immense, what an infinite good
thou hast in Christ thy Redeemer, and to what spiritual benefits thou art
entitled by him. If people were but better acquainted with the sources of
this heavenly comfort, then no cross, no affliction, would seem any longer
insupportable to them; because Christ would be all in all, and by his
presence alleviate the miseries of this life. Christ himself is ours not
only as a crucified Christ, but also as he is glorified, together with all
the majesty that resides in him. "All things are yours, whether Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come; all are yours; and ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's."
1 Cor. 3:21-23.

(_b_) Alas! poor, miserable, accursed, and condemned sinners, that we by
nature all are! How came we to be favored and honored with so high and
inestimable a gift? For thou, O Lord Jesus, art to us--Jehovah our
Righteousness--a Mediator between God and man--our everlasting Priest--the
Christ of God--a Lamb without spot--our propitiatory oblation--the fulfilment
of the law--the Desire of the patriarchs--the Inspirer of the prophets--the
Master of the apostles--the teacher of the evangelists--the light of the
confessors--the crown of the martyrs--the Praise of all the saints--the
resurrection of the dead--the first-born from the dead--the glory of the
blessed--the consolation of the mourners--the righteousness of sinners--the
hope of the afflicted--the refuge of the miserable--the entertainer of
strangers--the fellow-traveller of pilgrims--the way of them that were
mistaken--the help to them who were forsaken--the strength of the weak--the
health of the sick--the protector of the simple--the reward of the just--the
flaming fire of charity--the Author of faith--the anchor of hope--the flower
of humility--the rose of meekness--the root of all the virtues--the exemplar
of patience--the enkindler of devotion--the incense of prayer--the tree of
health--the fountain of blessedness--the bread of life--the Head of the
church--the bridegroom of the soul--the precious pearl--the rock of
salvation--the living stone--the heir of all things--the redemption of the
world--the triumphant Conqueror of Hell--the Prince of Peace--the mighty lion
of Judah--the father of the world to come--the guide to our heavenly
country--the sun of righteousness--the morning star--the inextinguishable
light of the celestial Jerusalem--the brightness of the everlasting
glory--the unspotted mirror--the splendor of the divine majesty--the image of
the paternal goodness--the treasure of wisdom--the abyss of eternity--the
beginning without beginning--the word upholding all things--the life
quickening all things--the light enlightening all things--the truth judging
all things--the counsel moderating all things--the rule directing all
things--the love sustaining all things--the whole comprehension of all that
is good.

(_c_) This is the great and infinite gift, which God has so freely
bestowed upon mortal men.




Chapter II.


The Manner In Which The Christian Should Apply And Appropriate To Himself
                  The Consolation Noticed In Chapter I.


    _The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was
    lost._--LUKE 19:10.


The _first_ or chief foundation on which the Christian depends, when he
derives consolation from the doctrines of the remission of sin, and of the
merit of Christ, consists in the _universal_ extent of the divine
_promises_; of which that mentioned above is not the least considerable.
For if Christ came to save those that are lost, who can possibly doubt,
that he will also seek and save _thee_, since thou art of the number of
the lost. It is also said, that God, "commandeth all men everywhere to
repent; because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness." Acts 17:30, 31. This argument is full of
consolation. As if the apostle had said, Christ will judge the world; and
_therefore_ God commandeth _all_ to repent, that all may escape the
dreadful sentence of eternal damnation. This is confirmed by St. Peter,
who tells us, that God "is not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to repentance." 2 Peter 3:9. All which passages plainly
assert the universal grace of God, extending itself to _all_ men.

2. The _second_ foundation is the divine _oath_. In order that no room
might be left to doubts and scruples in this grand article, God has
confirmed the universal promise of grace with an _oath_. "As I live, saith
the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that he
turn from his way and live: none of the sins that he hath committed, shall
be mentioned unto him." Ezek. 33:11, 16. As if he had said, How can I
delight in the death of a sinner, who am Life itself? Let but the wicked
be converted, and he shall certainly live.--Behold! God desires sinners to
be converted! And dost thou doubt, that thou, who art a sinner, art by God
solicited to conversion? When the apostle explains this oath, he says,
"This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners." 1 Tim. 1:15. But if Christ
came into the world with an intent to save sinners, thou art undoubtedly
one of the number of those whom he came to save.

3. In order to show that the Lord will not retain the remembrance of sin,
he hath no less than three times engaged his word. First, by the prophet
Isaiah, "I, even I," says he, "am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins." Isa. 43:25. Secondly, by
Jeremiah he hath thus expressed his mind: "This shall be the covenant: I
will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more." Jer.
31:33, 34. And, thirdly, by the prophet Ezekiel, "If the wicked," says he,
"will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, he shall surely live,
he shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath committed, they
shall not be mentioned unto him." Ezek. 18:21, 22. This is the divine act
of oblivion, solemnly declared in favor of all returning sinners, without
exception.

4. Now the cause or reason why God promises that he will not remember sin
any more, is no other than the all-sufficient satisfaction and
reconciliation wrought by Christ. For whatever is entirely paid, yea, over
and above paid, should be altogether buried in an everlasting oblivion.
Now, God being once perfectly reconciled and satisfied by the most holy
and most complete sacrifice of Jesus Christ, he can no longer be angry,
nor perpetuate the remembrance of our transgressions.

5. The same oath is repeated in the prophet Isaiah, "Look unto me," says
the Lord, "and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: I have sworn by
myself; the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not
return." Isa. 45:22, 23. Which oath, the Epistle to the Hebrews explains
in this manner: "Wherein God, willing more abundantly to shew unto the
heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath:
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie,
we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold
upon the hope set before us: which hope we have as an anchor of the soul,
both sure and steadfast." Heb. 6:17-19. That is, God, by his counsel and
promise, having confirmed them with an oath, hath more than sufficiently
sealed and established his gracious will; that so none might be
discouraged.

6. The _third_ foundation is the eternal covenant of grace, which consists
in the pardon of sin: "This shall be the covenant: I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more." Jer. 31:33, 34. And this
covenant or testament, because confirmed by the death of Christ, is
therefore everlasting. To the same purpose the Lord says by the prophet:
"Neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord, that
hath mercy on thee." Isa. 54:10. And again, "I will make an everlasting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David" (i. e., Christ). Isa.
55:3. And Moses declares the same: "The Lord thy God is a merciful God: he
will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of
thy fathers which he sware unto them." Deut. 4:31. And again we read: "He
will ever be mindful of his covenant." Ps. 111:5. On which eternal
covenant, that we might the more firmly rely, he hath renewed and
established it with every one by Holy Baptism, which therefore is called
"The answer (or covenant) of a good conscience towards God." 1 Peter 3:21.
For this end, Christ himself was baptized in Jordan, and thereby entered
with us into this covenant. Matt. 3:13.

7. The _fourth_ foundation is the death of Christ, by which the covenant
or testament of God was ratified. But if any ask, For whom did he die? St.
Paul answers, that "he died for ALL." 2 Cor. 5:14, 15. And St. John says,
"He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world." 1 John 2:2. So
John the Baptist said: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin
of the world." John 1:29. This, the apostle explains in the following
comforting manner: "As by the offence of one, judgment came upon all men
to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came
upon ALL men unto justification of life" (Rom. 5:18): where a comparison
is made betwixt Christ and Adam. As if he had said, "Since the offence of
Adam hath been so strong, as to make all men sinners; shall not the
righteousness of Christ be far more powerful to make them righteous? If
sin hath abounded, shall not grace much more abound?" The same apostle,
having occasion to show that the merit of Christ is universal, and extends
itself to all, thus reasons: "For there is one God, and one mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for
all." But if this be true, it also follows, "that God will have all men to
be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth." 1 Tim. 2:4-6. On
all this Paul remarks, that God, by "Christ hath reconciled all things to
himself, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven." Col. 1:20.
And again: "God spared not his own SON, but delivered him up for us ALL."
Rom. 8:32. In this number, reckon also thyself, because "God is no
respecter of persons." Acts 10:34. Since, therefore, Christ died for
sinners, thou, who acknowledgest thyself to be one, must necessarily have
an interest in his death, and in all the benefits purchased by it.

8. The _fifth_ foundation is the universal call, grounded upon the
universal merit of Christ. The latter was exhibited for the sins of the
whole world, and it was proper that it should be preached to all
creatures. Matt. 9:13. Now since Christ declares: "I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance" (Mark 16:15), it follows, that thou
also, because thou art a sinner, art called. But called to what? To
repentance. And why? That thou mayest obtain remission of sin, through
faith. "It behooved," says the Lord, "that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in the name of Christ among all nations." Luke
24:46, 47. And the apostle affirms, that "the gospel was preached to every
creature which is under heaven." Col. 1:23. But to what end did God cause
it to be preached? Surely for no other end than that thereby faith might
be kindled and established among men, according to that saying of the same
apostle: "How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and
how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard?" Rom. 10:14.
Whenever, therefore, God calls us to repentance, far be it from us to
think that God calls us in vain, or without a real design to save us.
Surely God does not deceive us: but in this serious affair he seriously
calls upon us, that we may embrace his mercy, and accept the offer of
grace. Hence he is also angry with those who make light of his supper, and
disdain to come to his feast. Matt. 22:7. Whereas, to those who obey his
call, through faith, he hath given his promise, full of heavenly comfort
that "whosoever believeth in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting
life." John 3:16. Nay, he hath graciously promised to preserve the same
faith unto the end, even till the salvation of the soul, which is the end
of faith, be secured. Phil. 1:6; 1 Pet. 1:9.

9. The _sixth_ foundation is the inward testimony of the divine Spirit in
us, who seeks after righteousness, and seals us unto the day of
redemption. Rom. 8:16; Eph. 4:30. This Spirit incessantly rouses and
awakens the conscience. He reproves without intermission, convinces of
sins, and sets them before thine eyes. He summons thee to repentance,
calls thee inwardly in thy heart, strives with thee, and leaves nothing
untried, in order to keep thee from every sin, and lead to thy conversion.
John 16:8. These things thou canst not conceal, though ever so desirous to
do it. This witness of Christ in thee, is never silent: and though thou
shouldst stop thine ears against him, yet shalt thou be compelled to hear
him _inwardly_. And if thou shouldst desire to reject his summons, yet
must thou feel the internal energy of his correction. All this is a
convincing, strong, and unquestionable proof, that "God would have thee to
be saved."

10. The _seventh_ foundation consists of the examples of sinners, whom
God, upon their conversion, hath received into favor. Surely "there is
none righteous," of himself, "no, not one." Rom. 3:10, 23. Not only David,
Manasseh (2 Chron. 33:11-13), Peter, Paul, Mary Magdalene, and Zaccheus;
but "ALL of us are sinners, and come short of the glory of God." There is
none innocent in his sight. Whatever favor God shows to one, the same he
offers to all the rest; since he "is no respecter of persons." Acts 10:34.
We all are saved by grace, without any merit of our own, and all stand in
need of a gracious pardon of sin: for, "if thou, Lord, shouldest mark
iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?" (Ps. 130:3), and if thou enterest
into judgment, "in thy sight shall no man living be justified." Ps. 143:2.

11. The _eighth_ foundation is, that the merit of Christ is not only
sufficient, but even more than sufficient for the sins of all men, how
numerous, great and heinous soever they may be. Why then shouldst thou
exclude thyself, and refuse to share in the benefits of the ransom which
Christ paid? Is it not infinitely greater than the sins of the whole
world? For as thou art of the race of men, so thou canst apply to thyself
that word of the Lord, "The Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives,
but to save them" (Luke 9:56): and that of St. Paul, "God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself" (2 Cor. 5:19): and again, that of St.
John, "He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world" (1 John
2:2); that is, for all the sins of every man in particular.

12. A _ninth_ foundation is this, that the merit of Christ is an
_infinite_ satisfaction, beyond all number, measure, and end; and it is so
on account of the exalted Person that suffered, who is both God and man.
Why shouldst thou then limit the extent, number, measure, and bounds of
merit so ample, and exclude thyself from it? So great, so high, and so
extensive are the power and efficacy of that merit, that it would still
prove a sufficient ransom if every man were guilty of the sins of the
whole world. Nay, if there were as many worlds drowned in sin, as there
are men that live on this earth, yet would the merit of Christ and his
righteousness be large enough to cover all their sins. Cast not therefore
away a mercy so universal, so full and every way abounding. This surely is
that "depth of the sea, into which God hath cast all our sins." Mic. 7:19.
Hence the Psalmist says: "As the heaven is high above the earth, so great
is his mercy towards them that fear him. As far as the east is from the
west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us." Ps. 103:11, 12.
This is that "eternal redemption which is obtained for us." Heb. 9:12. The
benefit of this complete redemption, is summed up by St. Paul: "It is God
that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died," etc.
Rom. 8:33, 34.

13. The _tenth_ foundation is this, that the obedience of Christ is
perfect: because he fulfilled the will and law of his Father in all
things, thereby to give satisfaction for all the disobedience which all
the men in the world had committed against God's law. For if the sin and
transgression of any one man were not expiated by him, then surely, his
obedience would not prove perfect, and the disobedience of Adam would be
more effectual to condemnation, than the obedience of Christ to
justification. This cannot be, since the apostle in plain terms affirms
the contrary, in Rom. 5:18. What reason is there then, that any one should
exclude himself from this perfect obedience, or be backward to assert his
own interest in it? Let us rather consider, that Christ for this very end
humbled himself, "and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross" (Phil. 2:8), "that he might redeem them that were under the law."
Gal. 4:5. In the number of these, we all surely are comprised. For, as our
first parents aspired after and affected the majesty of God, so it
behooved Christ, the repairer of our breaches, by a most profound
humility, to atone for this heinous offence, and to be "made a curse for
us" (Gal. 3:13), in order that the blessing might come upon all, who were
cursed in Adam.

14. The _eleventh_ foundation is, that since the royal victory and triumph
of Christ surpass all the multitude, weight, and heinousness of sin,
together with all the power of death, hell, and Satan, what cause canst
thou assign, O sinner, why the same victorious Christ should not triumph
over _thy_ sin as well as over all the rest? What! canst thou believe that
_thy_ transgressions _alone_ are more powerful than Christ, the omnipotent
king? When he shall make all his enemies his footstool (Ps. 110:1), cannot
he subdue under him also thy sins? Dost thou think that _thy_ crimes only
shall prove too hard for him? God forbid, therefore, that thou shouldest
call in question thy interest in so universal a conquest, in so glorious a
triumph.

15. The _twelfth_ foundation is the everlasting priesthood of Christ. Ps.
110:4; Heb. 4:14. He freely grants pardon to all them that ask it; and
gives the Holy Spirit to those that earnestly pray for that gift. Nor will
he, or can he refuse to any what belongs to his office (Heb. 5:6; 7:17);
for he is the Saviour of the world, and the High Priest and Mediator
between God and man. 1 Tim. 2:5. If he refuse his office to any one that
implores it, he would verily cease to be a Mediator. But so far is he from
this, that he freely offers to sinners the benefit of his mediatorial
office. "Come unto me," saith he, "all ye that labor and are heavy laden."
Matt. 11:28. And again: "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the
waters" (Isa. 55:1) of life. And does he not by his apostles and
messengers, seriously invite us to be reconciled to God (2 Cor. 5:20), and
at the same time offer us his help and assistance for that end? He seeks
the lost sheep (Ezek. 34:16), and receives into favor the Prodigal son as
soon as he returns. Luke 15:20. Take heed, therefore, O man, that thou
reject not the office of Christ the Mediator, and that thou deprive not
thyself of the benefit of a sacerdotal intercessor, every way full of
divine consolation and comfort.




Chapter III.


Our Righteousness Before God, Consists Solely In The Perfect Obedience And
 Merit Of Christ Jesus, And In The Remission Of Sin Apprehended By Faith.


    _As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
    obedience of one shall many be made righteous._--ROM. 5:19.


As a skilful builder, when he is about to raise a lofty structure, takes
care to lay first a deep and solid foundation, so the merciful and
compassionate God, when he was to erect the high and everlasting palace of
our salvation and righteousness, thought fit to lay the foundation
thereof, in the depth of his mercy, upon the Person and office of his dear
Son Christ Jesus, as on the true rock of salvation. This is the promise
recorded by the prophet: "Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone,
a tried stone, a precious corner-stone, a sure foundation: he that
believeth shall not make haste." Isa. 28:16. This stone was indicated by
Christ, when he declared to Peter, that "thereon he would build his
church;" a church so firmly and surely sustained, that "the very gates of
hell should not prevail against it." Matt. 16:18.

2. This was the rock and corner-stone, which was preached by the apostles
Peter and Paul. 1 Pet. 2:4; 2 Tim. 2:19. This is that marvellous
corner-stone celebrated by the Psalmist, and upon which the 118th Psalm is
grounded. Upon this foundation, God has been pleased to raise the whole
structure of our righteousness, faith, and eternal salvation. But as God,
our merciful Heavenly Father, has, on his side, placed the groundwork of
our salvation and righteousness in the unsearchable depth of his mercy and
everlasting love; nay, even in his beloved Son, and the paternal affection
of his own heart; so he wills that on our side also the same be laid in
the depth of our heart, and in the centre of our soul; in order that,
through the divine light and power of faith alone (and even faith is
solely the work of the Divine Spirit), the righteousness of Christ may be
apprehended, and without any respect of our own works, whether antecedent
or consequent, be freely imputed and appropriated to us. The reasons of
this way of proceeding are as follows.

3. In the _first_ place, that God by this means might cleanse and justify
a man from within, and in the inmost centre of his soul: for as man is
inwardly corrupted by Satan, and infected in all the interior powers of
his soul, so it is but fit that his cure should be wrought from within,
and that all the faculties of his soul should be restored to their former
integrity and soundness.

4. _Secondly_, that our righteousness proceeds from _faith_ only. This
faith is wrought by God himself, and it stands entirely in his _power_ (1
Cor. 2:5), being supported by it, and not by any human performance, or
hypocritical action of men. Of this latter sort was the righteousness of
the Pharisees (Matt. 5:20), who made indeed a show of outward
performances, but were little concerned about the reformation of the
heart, and the inward recesses of the mind.

5. _Thirdly_, that our heart, soul, and spirit, renouncing human power and
strength (upon which, through the temptation of the Devil, and the snares
of self-love, ambition, and pride, they too much rely), might wholly
depend upon _Christ alone_, and upon his precious merit and satisfaction.
For from him alone flow the gracious remission of all our sins, and the
whole train of graces consequent on it; Jesus Christ having abundantly
satisfied for the sins of the whole world, and reconciled the Father to
mankind.

6. _Fourthly_, that the righteousness of Christ, by faith, might be made
_our_ own. In order to the same end he also by his Word and Spirit begets
this faith in our hearts, that thereby we may become actually possessed of
this inestimable treasure. For this is the highest, the unspeakable, and
inconceivably great consolation, that our righteousness is not the
righteousness of a man, nor even of a saint or angel, but of Christ, and
of God himself; "It is God that justifieth." Rom. 8:33. Therefore if the
whole world were overflowed with the sins of one man, yet would the
righteousness of Christ be still more extensive and overflowing. For
verily, he is "the Lord our Righteousness" (Jer. 33:16), and how can sin
be more powerful than the Lord Jehovah? Would it be an insufficient
satisfaction, thinkest thou, if instead of a penny which thou owest thy
creditor, thou shouldest return ten thousand pounds? But such a price,
nay, one infinitely greater, is paid with the blood of Christ, which
therefore is called by St. Paul, "God's own blood." Acts 20:28. So great
and immense is the righteousness of Christ, conferred on us by faith, that
thereby we are not only made _righteous_, but also _righteousness_ itself.
2 Cor. 5:21. For, as it is not enough that a defiled infant be washed from
its uncleanness, but it must also be wrapped up in clean apparel (Ezek.
6:10), so Christ not only cleanses us with his blood, but clothes us also
with the garment of salvation, and covers us with the robe of
righteousness (Isa. 61:10): which we have received from the hand of the
Lord. This garment is called by the prophet, priestly or holy apparel; by
David, "the beauty of holiness" (Ps. 29:2); by St. John, "fine linen clean
and white, which is the righteousness of saints" (Rev. 19:8); by the
prophet Amos, "rivers of righteousness" (Amos 5:24); by St. Paul,
"superabounding grace" (Rom. 5:20); and "exceeding riches of grace." Eph.
2:7. All these expressions set forth that the righteousness bestowed on a
penitent soul, is as great as God himself, and therefore beyond all human
comprehension. Though in the state of innocency, our first parents had a
complete righteousness in its kind, yet was it not so full and exuberant
as that which we have obtained in Christ: for this righteousness and
holiness, which we apply to ourselves by faith, is far more excellent than
that which Adam would have left us, had he continued in his original
innocency. So, too, the humility and obedience of Christ, as it was more
perfect, so it was more acceptable to God, than the obedience and
innocency of Adam; nay, a thousand such persons as Adam, could not have
come up to the perfection of Christ alone. Adam would have transmitted to
us indeed an hereditary righteousness, and thereby united us with God; yet
it cannot be denied, that our union, established with God in Christ, is
much more noble and excellent than that which we should have derived from
Adam: for Christ being made man, has in himself so cleansed and exalted
human nature, that the primitive state of Adam is not at all to be
compared with it. And as Christ retains his human nature to all eternity;
so all believers continue in the same united to God; because Christ is
wholly ours, and we are wholly his. Whatever purity the human nature hath
obtained in general in His Person, is also transferred to the nature of
each believer in particular. This will appear in the glorification of our
bodies at the last day, when "they shall be fashioned like unto the
glorious body of Christ." Phil. 3:21. Nay, even in this life, it is said
in faith: "Behold, thou art fair, my love" (Cant. 1:15); "glorious, not
having spot or wrinkle" (Eph. 5:27): "the king's daughter is all glorious
within, her clothing is of wrought gold." Ps. 45:13. In a word, our
righteousness in Christ is no less immense than God himself; and if his
depth may be found out, so will our righteousness. Whence all creatures,
finding nothing that can be reproved in man, must stand as it were
astonished, and cry out with admiration: "Who is he that shall accuse or
condemn man, whose righteousness is the Son of God himself?" And this is
that righteousness of faith on which we rest, as on an eternal rock, and
which is a foundation that cannot be shaken. Of this we glory, in this we
rejoice in time and in eternity. By this we are conquerors, and triumph
over sin, death, the devil, and hell. By this we tread upon the lion and
adder, and trample under foot the young lion and the dragon. Ps. 91:13.

7. _Fifthly_, an angel (who never died for us) cannot be the foundation of
our righteousness, much less any _man_. The righteousness of man is but
weak and inconstant; and if he should fall, "all his righteousness that he
hath done shall not be mentioned" (Ezek. 18:24; 33:13), and therefore
whatever is built thereon falls soon to the ground and comes to nothing.
For this reason, our righteousness must have another foundation; a
foundation, namely, which is firm and constant, and not liable to be
shattered to pieces, though the "mountains should depart, and the hills be
removed." Isa. 54:10. "An everlasting righteousness must be brought in"
(Dan. 9:24), so that "the salvation of the Lord may be forever, and his
righteousness be not abolished." Isa. 51:6. A most excellent, eternal, and
sovereign Person, must procure an eternal and infinite good, by an immense
and infinite satisfaction offered for us.

8. The _sixth_ cause why God will have our righteousness to be apprehended
by faith, is found in his truth and promise, on which our faith entirely
rests, and by which God declared and promised righteousness to Abraham,
and to all his faithful seed. Whence St. Paul argues, that "our
righteousness must be of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end that
the promise might be sure." Rom. 4: 16. Upon this promise of grace,
fulfilled in Christ, has God established our righteousness and salvation,
as the same apostle in another place more fully asserts: "Even as
Abraham," says he, "believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same
are the children of Abraham." And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would
justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto
Abraham: saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed (Gen. 12:3). "So
then they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham." Gal.
3:6-9. And thus "grace and truth are come by Jesus Christ." John 1:17.

9. _Seventhly_, God has made his grace, and the merit of Christ, the
foundation of our righteousness, that Christ alone may have the honor of
it. Isa. 45:22-24; 53:11. "In him alone is our help." Hos. 13:9. He is the
beginning, middle, and end of our righteousness and salvation, so that
"every mouth may be stopped." Rom. 3:19. For we are "saved by grace
through faith; not of works, lest any man should boast." Eph. 2:8, 9. But
if our righteousness were founded on our own works and merits, there would
then be no room for grace, nor should we have occasion for mercy or pardon
of sin, "for which every one that is godly doth pray." Ps. 32:6. Moreover,
there would be no place for humility, nor for the fear of God; neither
would faith and prayer turn to any great account; yea, we should have no
need of a Mediator, Redeemer, and Saviour. Christ would have then died in
vain; and we should be obliged, both by an external and an internal
obedience, perfectly to fulfil the whole law. We should remain under the
curse, have fallen from grace, and have lost Christ; as St. Paul expressly
testifies in Gal. 5:3, 4. So that the doctrine of justification by
_works_, in the sight of God, is altogether inconsistent with the whole
Scripture, both of the Old Testament and the New, and with our holy
Christian faith.

10. In short, our salvation and righteousness are founded entirely upon
the eternal grace of God, and the eternal Person and office of Christ; and
in Christ alone we are made righteous, holy, alive, blessed, sons and
heirs of God. The righteousness of Christ is ours, his goodness ours, his
holiness ours; his life ours, his happiness ours, and lastly, the sonship
and inheritance of Christ are ours; and so the WHOLE Christ, both
according to his divine and his human nature, is ours; (for God gives us
the WHOLE CHRIST for a Saviour, that he with his Person, office, grace,
glory, and blessedness, may be wholly appropriated to us). That all this
is our own, is our highest consolation, glory, praise, honor, love, joy,
and peace before God and all the angels and elect; it is our sublimest
wisdom, strength, might, victory, and triumph over sin and death, the
devil and hell, the world and all our enemies. For which God be praised to
all eternity! Amen.




Chapter IV.


 Showing That Saving Faith In The True Christian Produces Manifold Fruits
Of Righteousness, And That These Must Proceed From The Depth Of The Heart;
Also, That The Character Of Our Outward Works, Depends, In The Judgment Of
                    God, Upon The State Of The Heart.


    _And this I pray, that ye may be sincere and without offence till
    the day of Christ: being filled with the fruits of righteousness,
    which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of
    God._--PHIL. 1:9-11.


