
It was all so orthodox that even if he had doubted (which he did not)
the sincerity of the gaoler's contrition and belief, Monsieur the
Viscount could have done nothing but envy the easy nature of Antoine's
convictions. He forgot the difference of their respective
capabilities!

When the night was far advanced the men rose from their knees, and
Monsieur the Viscount persuaded Antoine to lie down on his pallet, and
when the gaoler's heavy breathing told that he was asleep, Monsieur
the Viscount felt relieved to be alone once more--alone, except for
Monsieur Crapaud, whose round fiery eyes were open as usual.

The simplicity with which he had been obliged to explain the truths of
Divine Love to Antoine, was of signal service to Monsieur the Viscount
himself. It left him no excuse for those intricacies of doubt, with
which refined minds too often torture themselves; and as he paced
feebly up and down the cell, all the long-withheld peace for which he
had striven since his imprisonment seemed to flood into his soul. How
blessed--how undeservedly blessed--was his fate! Who or what was he
that after such short, such mitigated sufferings, the crown of victory
should be so near? The way had seemed long to come, it was short to
look back upon, and now the golden gates were almost reached, the
everlasting doors were open. A few more hours, and then--! and as
Monsieur the Viscount buried his worn face in his hands, the tears
that trickled from his fingers were literally tears of joy.

He groped his way to the stone, pushed some straw close to it, and lay
down on the ground to rest, watched by Monsieur's Crapaud's fiery
eyes. And as he lay, faces seemed to him to rise out of the darkness,
to take the form and features of the face of the priest, and to gaze
at him with unutterable benediction. And in his mind, like some
familiar piece of music, awoke the words that had been written on the
fly-leaf of the little book; coming back, sleepily and dreamily, over
and over again--

"_Souvenez-vous du Sauveur! Souvenez-vous du Sauveur_!"

(Remember the Saviour!)

In that remembrance he fell asleep.

Monsieur the Viscount's sleep for some hours was without a dream. Then
it began to be disturbed by that uneasy consciousness of sleeping too
long, which enables some people to awake at whatever hour they have
resolved upon. At last it became intolerable, and wearied as he was,
he awoke. It was broad daylight, and Antoine was snoring beside him.
Surely the cart would come soon, the executions were generally at an
early hour. But time went on, and no one came, and Antoine awoke. The
hours of suspense passed heavily, but at last there were steps and a
key rattled into the lock. The door opened, and the gaoler appeared
with a jug of milk and a loaf. With a strange smile he set them down.

"A good appetite to you, citizens."

Antoine flew on him. "Comrade! we used to be friends. Tell me, what is
it? Is the execution deferred?"

"The execution has taken place at last," said the other,
significantly; "_Robespierre is dead!_" and he vanished.

Antoine uttered a shriek of joy. He wept, he laughed, he cut capers,
and flinging himself at Monsieur the Viscount's feet, he kissed them
rapturously. When he raised his eyes to Monsieur the Viscount's face,
his transports moderated. The last shock had been too much, he seemed
almost in a stupor. Antoine got him on to the pallet, dragged the
blanket over him, broke the bread into the milk, and played the nurse
once more.

On that day thousands of prisoners in the city of Paris alone awoke
from the shadow of death to the hope of life. The Reign of Terror was
ended!




CHAPTER III.


It was a year of Grace early in the present century.

We are again in the beautiful country of beautiful France. It is the
chateau once more. It is the same, but changed. The unapproachable
elegance, the inviolable security, have witnessed invasion. The right
wing of the chateau is in ruins, with traces of fire upon the
blackened walls; while here and there, a broken statue or a roofless
temple are sad memorials of the Revolution. Within the restored part
of the chateau, however, all looks well. Monsieur the Viscount has
been fortunate, and if not so rich a man as his father, has yet
regained enough of his property to live with comfort, and, as he
thinks, luxury. The long rooms are little less elegant than in former
days, and Madame the present Viscountess's boudoir is a model of
taste. Not far from it is another room, to which it forms a singular
contrast. This room belongs to Monsieur the Viscount. It is small,
with one window. The floor and walls are bare, and it contains no
furniture; but on the floor is a worn-out pallet, by which lies a
stone, and on that a broken pitcher, and in a little frame against the
wall is preserved a crumpled bit of paper like the fly-leaf of some
little book, on which is a half-effaced inscription, which can be
deciphered by Monsieur the  Viscount if by no one else. Above the
window is written in large letters, a date and the word REMEMBER.
Monsieur the Viscount is not likely to forget, but he is afraid of
himself and of prosperity lest it should spoil him.

It is evening, and Monsieur the Viscount is strolling along the
terrace with Madame on his arm. He has only one to offer her, for
where the other should be an empty sleeve is pinned to his breast, on
which a bit of ribbon is stirred by the breeze. Monsieur the Viscount
has not been idle since we saw him last; the faith that taught him to
die, has taught him also how to live--an honourable, useful life.

It is evening, and the air comes up perfumed from a bed of violets by
which Monsieur the Viscount is kneeling. Madame (who has a fair face
and ashen hair) stands by him with her little hand on his shoulder,
and her large eyes upon the violets.

"My friend! my friend! my friend!" It is Monsieur the Viscount's
voice, and at the sound of it, there is a rustle among the violets
that sends the perfume high into the air. Then from the parted leaves
come forth first a dirty wrinkled leg, then a dirty wrinkled head with
gleaming eyes, and Monsieur Crapaud crawls with self-satisfied dignity
on to Monsieur the Viscount's outstretched hand.

So they stay laughing and chatting, and then Monsieur the Viscount
bids his friend good-night, and holds him towards Madame that she may
do the same. But Madame (who did not enjoy Monsieur Crapaud's society
in prison) cannot be induced to do more than scratch his head
delicately with the tip of her white finger. But she respects him
greatly, at a distance, she says. Then they go back along the terrace,
and are met by a man-servant in Monsieur the Viscount's livery. Is it
possible that this is Antoine, with his shock head covered with
powder?

Yes; that grating voice, which no mental change avails to subdue, is
his, and he announces that Monsieur le Cure has arrived. It is the old
Cure of the village (who has survived the troubles of the Revolution),
and many are the evenings he spends at the chateau, and many the times
in which the closing acts of a noble life are recounted to him, the
life of his old friend whom he hopes ere long to see--of Monsieur the
Preceptor. He is kindly welcomed by Monsieur and by Madame, and they
pass on together into the chateau. And when Monsieur the Viscount's
steps have ceased to echo from the terrace, Monsieur Crapaud buries
himself once more among the violets.

       *       *       *       *       *

Monsieur the Viscount is dead, and Madame sleeps also at his side;
and their possessions have descended to their son.

Not the least valued among them is a case with a glass front and
sides, in which, seated upon a stone is the body of a toad stuffed
with exquisite skill, from whose head gleam eyes of genuine topaz.
Above it in letters of gold is a date, and this inscription:--

     "MONSIEUR THE VISCOUNT'S FRIEND."

     ADIEU!




THE YEW-LANE GHOSTS

CHAPTER I.

     "Cowards are cruel." OLD PROVERB.


This story begins on a fine autumn afternoon when, at the end of a
field over which the shadows of a few wayside trees were stalking like
long thin giants, a man and a boy sat side by side upon a stile. They
were not a happy-looking pair. The boy looked uncomfortable, because
he wanted to get away and dared not go. The man looked uncomfortable
also; but then no one had ever seen him look otherwise, which was the
more strange as he never professed to have any object in life but his
own pleasure and gratification. Not troubling himself with any
consideration of law or principle--of his own duty or other people's
comfort--he had consistently spent his whole time and energies in
trying to be jolly; and though now a grown-up young man, had so far
had every appearance of failing in the attempt. From this it will be
seen that he was not the most estimable of characters, and we shall
have no more to do with him than we can help; but as he must appear in
the story, he may as well be described.

If constant self-indulgence had answered as well as it should have
done, he would have been a fine-looking young man; as it was, the
habits of his life were fast destroying his appearance. His hair would
have been golden if it had been kept clean. His figure was tall and
strong; but the custom of slinking about places where he had no
business to be, and lounging in corners where he had nothing to do,
had given it such a hopeless slouch that for the matter of beauty he
might almost as well have been knock-kneed. His eyes would have been
handsome if the lids had been less red; and if he had ever looked you
in the face, you would have seen that they were blue. His complexion
was fair by nature and discoloured by drink. His manner was something
between a sneak and a swagger, and he generally wore his cap
a-one-side, carried his hands in his pockets and a short stick under
his arm, and whistled when any one passed him. His chief
characteristic, perhaps, was the habit he had of kicking. Indoors he
kicked the furniture, in the road he kicked the stones, if he lounged
against a wall he kicked it; he kicked all animals and such human
beings as he felt sure would not kick him again.

It should be said here that he had once announced his intention of
"turning steady, and settling, and getting wed." The object of his
choice was the prettiest girl in the village, and was as good as she
was pretty. To say the truth, the time had been when Bessy had not
felt unkindly towards the yellow-haired lad; but his conduct had long
put a gulf between them, which only the conceit of a scamp would have
attempted to pass. However, he flattered himself that he "knew what
the lasses meant when they said no;" and on the strength of this
knowledge he presumed far enough to elicit a rebuff so hearty and
unmistakable that for a week he was the laughing stock of the village.
There was no mistake this time as to what "no" meant; his admiration
turned to a hatred almost as intense, and he went faster "to the bad"
than ever.

It was Bessy's little brother who sat by him on the stile; "Beauty
Bill," as he was called, from the large share he possessed of the
family good looks. The lad was one of those people who seem born to be
favourites. He was handsome, and merry, and intelligent; and, being
well brought up, was well-conducted and amiable--the pride and pet of
the village. Why did Mother Muggins of the shop let the goody side of
her scales of justice drop the lower by one lollipop for Bill than for
any other lad, and exempt him by unwonted smiles from her general
anathema on the urchin race? There were other honest boys in the
parish, who paid for their treacle-sticks in sterling copper of the
realm! The very roughs of the village were proud of him, and would
have showed their good nature in ways little to his benefit had not
his father kept a somewhat severe watch upon his habits and conduct.
Indeed, good parents and a strict home counterbalanced the evils of
popularity with Beauty Bill, and, on the whole, he was little spoilt,
and well deserved the favour he met with. It was under cover of
friendly patronage that his companion was now detaining him; but, all
the circumstances considered, Bill felt more suspicious than
gratified, and wished Bully Tom anywhere but where he was.

The man threw out one leg before him like the pendulum of a clock.

"Night school's opened, eh?" he inquired; and back swung the pendulum
against Bill's shins.

"Yes;" and the boy screwed his legs on one side.

"You don't go, do you?"

"Yes, I do," said Bill, trying not to feel ashamed of the fact,
"Father can't spare me to the day-school now, so our Bessy persuaded
him to let me go at nights."

Bully Tom's face looked a shade darker, and the pendulum took a swing
which it was fortunate the lad avoided; but the conversation continued
with every appearance of civility.

"You come back by Yew-lane, I suppose?"

"Yes."

"Why, there's no one lives your way but old Johnson; you must come
back alone?"

"Of course, I do," said Bill, beginning to feel vaguely uncomfortable.

"It must be dark now before school looses?" was the next inquiry; and
the boy's discomfort increased, he hardly knew why, as he answered--

"There's a moon."

"So there is," said Bully Tom, in a tone of polite assent; "and
there's a weathercock on the church-steeple but I never heard of
either of 'em coming down to help a body, whatever happened."

Bill's discomfort had become alarm.

"Why, what could happen?" he asked. "I don't understand you."

His companion whistled, looked up in the air, and kicked vigorously,
but said nothing. Bill was not extraordinarily brave, but he had a
fair amount both of spirit and sense; and having a shrewd suspicion
that Bully Tom was trying to frighten him, he almost made up his mind
to run off then and there. Curiosity, however, and a vague alarm which
he could not throw off, made him stay for a little more information.

"I wish you'd out with it!" he exclaimed, impatiently. "What could
happen? No one ever comes along Yew-lane; and if they did they
wouldn't hurt me."

"I know no one ever comes near it when they can help it," was the
reply; "so, to be sure, you couldn't get set upon. And a pious lad of
your sort wouldn't mind no other kind. Not like ghosts, or anything of
that."

And Bully Tom looked round at his companion; a fact disagreeable from
its rarity.

"I don't believe in ghosts," said Bill, stoutly.

"Of course you don't," sneered his tormentor; "you're too well
educated. Some people does, though. I suppose them that has seen them
does. Some people thinks that murdered men walk. P'raps some people
thinks the man as was murdered in Yew-lane walks."

"What man?" gasped Bill, feeling very chilly down the spine.

"Him that was riding by the cross-roads and dragged into Yew-lane, and
his head cut off and never found, and his body buried in the
churchyard," said Bully Tom, with a rush of superior information;
"and all I know is, if I thought he walked in Yew-lane, or any other
lane, I wouldn't go within five mile of it after dusk--that's all. But
then I'm not book-larned."

The two last statements were true if nothing else was that the man had
said; and after holding up his feet and examining his boots with his
head a-one-side, as if considering their probable efficiency against
flesh and blood, he slid from his perch, and "loafed" slowly up the
street, whistling and kicking the stones as he went along. As to
Beauty Bill, he fled home as fast as his legs would carry him. By the
door stood Bessy, washing some clothes; who turned her pretty face as
he came up.

"You're late, Bill," she said. "Go in and get your tea, it's set out.
It's night-school night, thou knows, and Master Arthur always likes
his class to time." He lingered, and she continued--"John Gardener was
down this afternoon about some potatoes, and he says Master Arthur is
expecting a friend."

Bill did not heed this piece of news, any more than the slight flush
on his sister's face as she delivered it; he was wondering whether
what Bully Tom said was mere invention to frighten him, or whether
there was any truth in it.

"Bessy!" he said, "was there a man ever murdered in Yew-lane?"

Bessy was occupied with her own thoughts, and did not notice the
anxiety of the question.

"I believe there was," she answered carelessly, "somewhere about
there. It's a hundred years ago or more. There's an old gravestone
over him in the churchyard by the wall, with an odd verse on it. They
say the parish clerk wrote it. But get your tea, or you'll be late,
and father'll be angry;" and Bessy took up her tub and departed.

Poor Bill! Then it was too true. He began to pull up his trousers and
look at his grazed legs; and the thoughts of his aching shins, Bully
Tom's cruelty, the unavoidable night-school, and the possible ghost,
were too much for him, and he burst into tears.




CHAPTER II.

    "There are birds out on the bushes,
       In the meadows lies the lamb,
     How I wonder if they're ever
       Half as frightened as I am?"

C.F. ALEXANDER.

