"But how can you do that, Ma, when nobody knows his address?" objected
Pa, with a wistful look at that delicious, laughing baby.

"I'll find out his address if I have to advertise in the papers for
him," retorted Ma. "As for you, Pa Sloane, you're not fit to be out of a
lunatic asylum. The next auction you'll be buying a wife, I s'pose?"

Pa, quite crushed by Ma's sarcasm, pulled his chair in to supper. Ma
picked up the baby and sat down at the head of the table. Little Teddy
laughed and pinched her face--Ma's face! Ma looked very grim, but she
fed him his supper as skilfully as if it had not been thirty years
since she had done such a thing. But then, the woman who once learns the
mother knack never forgets it.

After tea Ma despatched Pa over to William Alexander's to borrow a high
chair. When Pa returned in the twilight, the baby was fenced in on
the sofa again, and Ma was stepping briskly about the garret. She was
bringing down the little cot bed her own boy had once occupied, and
setting it up in their room for Teddy. Then she undressed the baby and
rocked him to sleep, crooning an old lullaby over him. Pa Sloane sat
quietly and listened, with very sweet memories of the long ago, when he
and Ma had been young and proud, and the bewhiskered William Alexander
had been a curly-headed little fellow like this one.

Ma was not driven to advertising for Mrs. Garland's brother. That
personage saw the notice of his sister's death in a home paper and wrote
to the Carmody postmaster for full information. The letter was referred
to Ma and Ma answered it.

She wrote that they had taken in the baby, pending further arrangements,
but had no intention of keeping it; and she calmly demanded of its uncle
what was to be done with it. Then she sealed and addressed the letter
with an unfaltering hand; but, when it was done, she looked across the
table at Pa Sloane, who was sitting in the armchair with the baby on his
knee. They were having a royal good time together. Pa had always been
dreadfully foolish about babies. He looked ten years younger. Ma's keen
eyes softened a little as she watched them.

A prompt answer came to her letter. Teddy's uncle wrote that he had six
children of his own, but was nevertheless willing and glad to give his
little nephew a home. But he could not come after him. Josiah Spencer,
of White Sands, was going out to Manitoba in the spring. If Mr. and Mrs.
Sloane could only keep the baby till then he could be sent out with the
Spencers. Perhaps they would see a chance sooner.

"There'll be no chance sooner," said Pa Sloane in a tone of
satisfaction.

"No, worse luck!" retorted Ma crisply.

The winter passed by. Little Teddy grew and throve, and Pa Sloane
worshipped him. Ma was very good to him, too, and Teddy was just as fond
of her as of Pa.

Nevertheless, as the spring drew near, Pa became depressed. Sometimes he
sighed heavily, especially when he heard casual references to the Josiah
Spencer emigration.

One warm afternoon in early May Josiah Spencer arrived. He found Ma
knitting placidly in the kitchen, while Pa nodded over his newspaper and
the baby played with the cat on the floor.

"Good afternoon, Mrs. Sloane," said Josiah with a flourish. "I just
dropped in to see about this young man here. We are going to leave next
Wednesday; so you'd better send him down to our place Monday or Tuesday,
so that he can get used to us, and--"

"Oh, Ma," began Pa, rising imploringly to his feet.

Ma transfixed him with her eye.

"Sit down, Pa," she commanded.

Unhappy Pa sat.

Then Ma glared at the smiling Josiah, who instantly felt as guilty as if
he had been caught stealing sheep red-handed.

"We are much obliged to you, Mr. Spencer," said Ma icily, "but this baby
is OURS. We bought him, and we paid for him. A bargain is a bargain.
When I pay cash down for babies, I propose to get my money's worth.
We are going to keep this baby in spite of any number of uncles in
Manitoba. Have I made this sufficiently clear to your understanding, Mr.
Spencer?"

"Certainly, certainly," stammered the unfortunate man, feeling guiltier
than ever, "but I thought you didn't want him--I thought you'd written
to his uncle--I thought--"

"I really wouldn't think quite so much if I were you," said Ma kindly.
"It must be hard on you. Won't you stay and have tea with us?"

But, no, Josiah would not stay. He was thankful to make his escape with
such rags of self-respect as remained to him.

Pa Sloane arose and came around to Ma's chair. He laid a trembling hand
on her shoulder.

"Ma, you're a good woman," he said softly.

"Go 'long, Pa," said Ma.





X. The Courting of Prissy Strong


I WASN'T able to go to prayer meeting that evening because I had
neuralgia in my face; but Thomas went, and the minute he came home I
knew by the twinkle in his eye that he had some news.

"Who do you s'pose Stephen Clark went home with from meeting to-night?"
he said, chuckling.

"Jane Miranda Blair," I said promptly. Stephen Clark's wife had been
dead for two years and he hadn't taken much notice of anybody, so far as
was known. But Carmody had Jane Miranda all ready for him, and really
I don't know why she didn't suit him, except for the reason that a man
never does what he is expected to do when it comes to marrying.

Thomas chuckled again.

"Wrong. He stepped up to Prissy Strong and walked off with her. Cold
soup warmed over."

"Prissy Strong!" I just held up my hands. Then I laughed. "He needn't
try for Prissy," I said. "Emmeline nipped that in the bud twenty years
ago, and she'll do it again."

"Em'line is an old crank," growled Thomas. He detested Emmeline Strong,
and always did.

"She's that, all right," I agreed, "and that is just the reason she can
turn poor Prissy any way she likes. You mark my words, she'll put her
foot right down on this as soon as she finds it out."

Thomas said that I was probably right. I lay awake for a long time after
I went to bed that night, thinking of Prissy and Stephen. As a general
rule, I don't concern my head about other people's affairs, but Prissy
was such a helpless creature I couldn't get her off my mind.

Twenty years ago Stephen Clark had tried to go with Prissy Strong. That
was pretty soon after Prissy's father had died. She and Emmeline were
living alone together. Emmeline was thirty, ten years older than Prissy,
and if ever there were two sisters totally different from each other in
every way, those two were Emmeline and Prissy Strong.

Emmeline took after her father; she was big and dark and homely, and she
was the most domineering creature that ever stepped on shoe leather. She
simply ruled poor Prissy with a rod of iron.

Prissy herself was a pretty girl--at least most people thought so.
I can't honestly say I ever admired her style much myself. I like
something with more vim and snap to it. Prissy was slim and pink, with
soft, appealing blue eyes, and pale gold hair all clinging in baby rings
around her face. She was just as meek and timid as she looked and there
wasn't a bit of harm in her. I always liked Prissy, even if I didn't
admire her looks as much as some people did.

Anyway, it was plain her style suited Stephen Clark. He began to drive
her, and there wasn't a speck of doubt that Prissy liked him. Then
Emmeline just put a stopper on the affair. It was pure cantankerousness
in her. Stephen was a good match and nothing could be said against
him. But Emmeline was just determined that Prissy shouldn't marry. She
couldn't get married herself, and she was sore enough about it.

Of course, if Prissy had had a spark of spirit she wouldn't have given
in. But she hadn't a mite; I believe she would have cut off her nose if
Emmeline had ordered her to do it. She was just her mother over again.
If ever a girl belied her name, Prissy Strong did. There wasn't anything
strong about her.

One night, when prayer meeting came out, Stephen stepped up to Prissy
as usual and asked if he might see her home. Thomas and I were just
behind--we weren't married ourselves then--and we heard it all. Prissy
gave one scared, appealing look at Emmeline and then said, "No, thank
you, not to-night."

Stephen just turned on his heel and went. He was a high-spirited fellow
and I knew he would never overlook a public slight like that. If he
had had as much sense as he ought to have had he would have known that
Emmeline was at the bottom of it; but he didn't, and he began going to
see Althea Gillis, and they were married the next year. Althea was a
rather nice girl, though giddy, and I think she and Stephen were happy
enough together. In real life things are often like that.

Nobody ever tried to go with Prissy again. I suppose they were afraid
of Emmeline. Prissy's beauty soon faded. She was always kind of sweet
looking, but her bloom went, and she got shyer and limper every year of
her life. She wouldn't have dared put on her second best dress without
asking Emmeline's permission. She was real fond of cats and Emmeline
wouldn't let her keep one. Emmeline even cut the serial out of the
religious weekly she took before she would give it to Prissy, because
she didn't believe in reading novels. It used to make me furious to see
it all. They were my next door neighbours after I married Thomas, and I
was often in and out. Sometimes I'd feel real vexed at Prissy for giving
in the way she did; but, after all, she couldn't help it--she was born
that way.

And now Stephen was going to try his luck again. It certainly did seem
funny.

Stephen walked home with Prissy from prayer meeting four nights before
Emmeline found it out. Emmeline hadn't been going to prayer meeting all
that summer because she was mad at Mr. Leonard. She had expressed her
disapproval to him because he had buried old Naomi Clark at the harbour
"just as if she was a Christian," and Mr. Leonard had said something to
her she couldn't get over for a while. I don't know what it was, but
I know that when Mr. Leonard WAS roused to rebuke anyone the person so
rebuked remembered it for a spell.

All at once I knew she must have discovered about Stephen and Prissy,
for Prissy stopped going to prayer meeting.

I felt real worried about it, someway, and although Thomas said for
goodness' sake not to go poking my fingers into other people's pies,
I felt as if I ought to do something. Stephen Clark was a good man
and Prissy would have a beautiful home; and those two little boys of
Althea's needed a mother if ever boys did. Besides, I knew quite well
that Prissy, in her secret soul, was hankering to be married. So was
Emmeline, too--but nobody wanted to help HER to a husband.

The upshot of my meditations was that I asked Stephen down to dinner
with us from church one day. I had heard a rumour that he was going to
see Lizzie Pye over at Avonlea, and I knew it was time to be stirring,
if anything were to be done. If it had been Jane Miranda I don't
know that I'd have bothered; but Lizzie Pye wouldn't have done for a
stepmother for Althea's boys at all. She was too bad-tempered, and as
mean as second skimmings besides.

Stephen came. He seemed dull and moody, and not much inclined to talk.
After dinner I gave Thomas a hint. I said,

"You go to bed and have your nap. I want to talk to Stephen."

Thomas shrugged his shoulders and went. He probably thought I was
brewing up lots of trouble for myself, but he didn't say anything. As
soon as he was out of the way I casually remarked to Stephen that I
understood that he was going to take one of my neighbours away and that
I couldn't be sorry, though she was an excellent neighbour and I would
miss her a great deal.

"You won't have to miss her much, I reckon," said Stephen grimly. "I've
been told I'm not wanted there."

I was surprised to hear Stephen come out so plump and plain about
it, for I hadn't expected to get at the root of the matter so easily.
Stephen wasn't the confidential kind. But it really seemed to be a
relief to him to talk about it; I never saw a man feeling so sore about
anything. He told me the whole story.

Prissy had written him a letter--he fished it out of his pocket and gave
it to me to read. It was in Prissy's prim, pretty little writing, sure
enough, and it just said that his attentions were "unwelcome," and would
he be "kind enough to refrain from offering them." Not much wonder the
poor man went to see Lizzie Pye!

"Stephen, I'm surprised at you for thinking that Prissy Strong wrote
that letter," I said.

"It's in her handwriting," he said stubbornly.

"Of course it is. 'The hand is the hand of Esau, but the voice is the
voice of Jacob,'" I said, though I wasn't sure whether the quotation was
exactly appropriate. "Emmeline composed that letter and made Prissy copy
it out. I know that as well as if I'd seen her do it, and you ought to
have known it, too."

"If I thought that I'd show Emmeline I could get Prissy in spite of
her," said Stephen savagely. "But if Prissy doesn't want me I'm not
going to force my attentions on her."

Well, we talked it over a bit, and in the end I agreed to sound Prissy,
and find out what she really thought about it. I didn't think it would
be hard to do; and it wasn't. I went over the very next day because
I saw Emmeline driving off to the store. I found Prissy alone, sewing
carpet rags. Emmeline kept her constantly at that--because Prissy hated
it I suppose. Prissy was crying when I went in, and in a few minutes I
had the whole story.

Prissy wanted to get married--and she wanted to get married to
Stephen--and Emmeline wouldn't let her.

"Prissy Strong," I said in exasperation, "you haven't the spirit of a
mouse! Why on earth did you write him such a letter?"

"Why, Emmeline made me," said Prissy, as if there couldn't be any appeal
from that; and I knew there couldn't--for Prissy. I also knew that if
Stephen wanted to see Prissy again Emmeline must know nothing of it, and
I told him so when he came down the next evening--to borrow a hoe, he
said. It was a long way to come for a hoe.

"Then what am I to do?" he said. "It wouldn't be any use to write, for
it would likely fall into Emmeline's hands. She won't let Prissy go
anywhere alone after this, and how am I to know when the old cat is
away?"

"Please don't insult cats," I said. "I'll tell you what we'll do. You
can see the ventilator on our barn from your place, can't you? You'd be
able to make out a flag or something tied to it, wouldn't you, through
that spy-glass of yours?"

Stephen thought he could.

"Well, you take a squint at it every now and then," I said. "Just as
soon as Emmeline leaves Prissy alone I'll hoist the signal."

The chance didn't come for a whole fortnight. Then, one evening, I saw
Emmeline striding over the field below our house. As soon as she was out
of sight I ran through the birch grove to Prissy.

"Yes, Em'line's gone to sit up with Jane Lawson to-night," said Prissy,
all fluttered and trembling.

"Then you put on your muslin dress and fix your hair," I said. "I'm
going home to get Thomas to tie something to that ventilator."

But do you think Thomas would do it? Not he. He said he owed something
to his position as elder in the church. In the end I had to do it
myself, though I don't like climbing ladders. I tied Thomas' long red
woollen scarf to the ventilator, and prayed that Stephen would see it.
He did, for in less than an hour he drove down our lane and put his
horse in our barn. He was all spruced up, and as nervous and excited as
a schoolboy. He went right over to Prissy, and I began to tuft my new
comfort with a clear conscience. I shall never know why it suddenly came
into my head to go up to the garret and make sure that the moths hadn't
got into my box of blankets; but I always believed that it was a special
interposition of Providence. I went up and happened to look out of the
east window; and there I saw Emmeline Strong coming home across our pond
field.

I just flew down those garret stairs and out through the birches. I
burst into the Strong kitchen, where Stephen and Prissy were sitting as
cozy as you please.

"Stephen, come quick! Emmeline's nearly here," I cried.

Prissy looked out of the window and wrung her hands.

"Oh, she's in the lane now," she gasped. "He can't get out of the house
without her seeing him. Oh, Rosanna, what shall we do?"

I really don't know what would have become of those two people if I
hadn't been in existence to find ideas for them.

"Take Stephen up to the garret and hide him there, Prissy," I said
firmly, "and take him quick."

Prissy took him quick, but she had barely time to get back to the
kitchen before Emmeline marched in--mad as a wet hen because somebody
had been ahead of her offering to sit up with Jane Lawson, and so she
lost the chance of poking and prying into things while Jane was asleep.
The minute she clapped eyes on Prissy she suspected something. It wasn't
any wonder, for there was Prissy, all dressed up, with flushed cheeks
and shining eyes. She was all in a quiver of excitement, and looked ten
years younger.

"Priscilla Strong, you've been expecting Stephen Clark here this
evening!" burst out Emmeline. "You wicked, deceitful, underhanded,
ungrateful creature!"

And she went on storming at Prissy, who began to cry, and looked so weak
and babyish that I was frightened she would betray the whole thing.

"This is between you and Prissy, Emmeline," I struck in, "and I'm not
going to interfere. But I want to get you to come over and show me how
to tuft my comfort that new pattern you learned in Avonlea, and as it
had better be done before dark I wish you'd come right away."

"I s'pose I'll go," said Emmeline ungraciously, "but Priscilla shall
come, too, for I see that she isn't to be trusted out of my sight after
this."

I hoped Stephen would see us from the garret window and make good his
escape. But I didn't dare trust to chance, so when I got Emmeline safely
to work on my comfort I excused myself and slipped out. Luckily my
kitchen was on the off side of the house, but I was a nervous woman as I
