trap he would point out the Tiger.  "May we depend upon your word?"
said the men.

"Certainly," said the Fox, while the men went with him in a circle to
see that he did not escape.

Then the Fox said to the Tiger and the men: "Sir Tiger, here are the
men; gentlemen, here is the Tiger."

The men left the Fox and turned to the Tiger.  The former beat a hasty
retreat to the wood, saying, "I have kept my promise to both; now you
may settle it between yourselves."

The Tiger exclaimed, when it was too late: "_Alas! what art for a
double part?_"



The Hare and the Pig

A Hare and a Pig once agreed to leap over a ditch.  The Hare went a
great way, and fell into it, just short by an inch.  The Pig went some
way and fell into it; but far behind the Hare.  Yet they were eager to
know which of them leapt more, and was therefore the better animal.

So they said to a Fox, who had been watching the race: "Will you tell
us which of us is superior, and which inferior, in the race?"

The Fox said: "_Both in the ditch: can't say which!_"



The Peacock and the Fox

A Fox, who had an eye on a Peacock, was one day standing in a field
with his face turned up to the sky.

"Reynard," said the Peacock, "what have you been doing?"

"Oh, I have been counting the stars," said the Fox.

"How many are they?" said the Peacock.

"About as many as the fools on earth," said the Fox.

"But which do you think is the greater, the number of the stars or of
the fools?" asked the Peacock.

"If you put it so, I should say the fools are more by one," said the
Fox.

"Who is that one?" said the Peacock.

"Why, my own silly self!" said the Fox.

"How are you silly, Reynard?" questioned the Peacock.

"Why, was it not foolish of me to count the stars in the sky, when I
could have counted the stars in your brilliant plumage to better
advantage?" said the Fox.

"No, Reynard," said the Peacock, "therein is not your folly--although
there is neither wit nor wisdom in your prattle--but in the thought
that your fine words would make an easy prey of me!"

The Fox quietly left the place, saying: "_The Knave that hath been
found out cannot have legs too quick_."



The Tiger and the Giraffe

A Tiger, named Old Guile, who had grown weak with age, was lying under
a tree by the side of a lake in quest of some animal off which he could
make a meal.

A Giraffe, named Tall Stripes, who came to the lake to quench his
thirst, attracted his attention, and Old Guile addressed him as
follows: "Oh, what a happy day!  I see there the son of my old friend
Yellow Haunch, who lived in the great forest near that distant
mountain."

Tall Stripes was astonished to hear the words of Old Guile, and asked
him how he, a Tiger, could be the friend of his father, a Giraffe.

"I am not surprised at your question," replied Old Guile; "it is a
truth known to very few indeed that the Tiger and the Giraffe belong to
the same family.  Just look at your skin and my own: yours is of a pale
yellow colour, mine is very nearly the same; you have stripes, I have
them, too.  What more proofs do you want?"

Tall Stripes, who was extremely simple and guileless, believed these
words, and said: "I am very happy to know that my father was your
friend, and that we are of the same family.  Can I do anything for you?"

Old Guile replied, "No, thank you; old as I am, I make it a point of
relying on myself.  Further, a great part of my time is spent in prayer
and meditation; for I consider it necessary, at this age, to devote all
my attention to spiritual things.  It will, however, be a great
gratification to me to have your company whenever you should chance to
pass by this lake."

Tall Stripes acceded to this request, and was about to go on his Way,
when Old Guile observed; "My dear Tall Stripes, you are well aware of
the instability of all earthly things.  I am old and infirm, and who
knows what may happen to me to-morrow.  Perhaps I may not see you
again; so let me do myself the pleasure of embracing you before you
leave me for the present."

"Certainly," said Tall Stripes.  Thereupon Old Guile rose up slowly
from his seat, like one devoid of all energy, and embracing him,
plunged his deadly teeth into his long neck, and stretching him on the
ground made a hearty breakfast on him.

_Beware of the crafty professions of the wicked_.



The Man of Luck and the Man of Pluck

A King in the East said to his Minister; "Do you believe in luck?"

"I do," said the Minister.

"Can you prove it?" said the King.

"Yes, I can," said the Minister.

So one night he tied up to the ceiling of a room a parcel containing
peas mixed with diamonds, and let in two men, one of whom believed in
luck and the other in human effort alone.  The former quietly laid
himself down on the ground; the latter after a series of efforts
reached the parcel, and feeling in the dark the peas and the stones,
ate the former, one by one, and threw down the latter at his companion,
saying, "Here are the stones for your idleness."  The man below
received them in his blanket.

In the morning the king and the minister came to the room and bade each
take to himself what he had got.  The Man of Effort found he had
nothing beyond the peas he had eaten.  The Man of Luck quietly walked
away with the diamonds.

The Minister said to the King: "Sire, there is such a thing as luck;
but it is as rare as peas mixed with diamonds.  So I would say: '_Let
none hope to live by luck_.'"



The Fox and the Crabs

One day a Fox seated himself on a stone by a stream and wept aloud.
The Crabs in the holes around came up to him and said: "Friend, why are
you wailing so loud?"

"Alas!" said the Fox, "I have been turned by my kindred out of the
wood, and do not know what to do."

"Why were you turned out?" asked the Crabs in a tone of pity.

"Because," said the Fox, sobbing, "they said they should go out
to-night hunting Crabs by the stream, and I said it would be a pity to
lull such pretty little creatures."

"Where will you go hereafter?" said the Crabs.

"Where I can get work," said the Fox; "for I would not go to my kindred
again, come what would."

Then the Crabs held a meeting, and came to the conclusion that, as the
Fox had been thrown out by his kindred on their account, they could do
nothing better than engage his services to defend them.  So they told
the Fox of their intention.  He readily consented, and spent the whole
day in amusing the Crabs with all kinds of tricks.

Night came.  The moon rose in full splendour.  The Fox said: "Have you
ever been out for a walk in the moonlight?"

"Never, friend," said the Crabs; "we are such little creatures that we
are afraid of going far from our holes."

"Oh, never mind!" said the Fox; "follow me!  I can defend you against
any foe."

So the Crabs followed him with pleasure.  On the way the Fox told them
all sorts of delightful things, and cheered them on most heartily.
Having thus gone some distance, they reached a plain, where the Fox
came to a stand, and made a low moan in the direction of an adjacent
wood.  Instantly a number of foxes came out of the wood and joined
their kinsman, and all of them at once set about hunting the poor
Crabs, who fled in all directions for their lives, but were soon caught
and devoured.

When the banquet was over, the Foxes said to their friend: "How great
thy skill and cunning!"

The heartless villain replied, with a wink: "My friends, _There is
cunning in cunning_."



The Camel and the Pig

A Camel said: "Nothing like being tall!  Look how tall I am!"

A Pig, who heard these words, said: "Nothing like being short!  Look
how short I am!"

The Camel said: "Well, if I fail to prove the truth of what I said, I
shall give up my hump."

The Pig said: "If I fail to prove the truth of what I have said, I
shall give up my snout."

"Agreed!" said the Camel.

"Just so!" said the Pig.

They came to a garden, enclosed by a low wall without any opening.  The
Camel stood on this side the wall, and reaching the plants within by
means of his long neck made a breakfast on them.  Then he turned
jeeringly to the Pig, who had been standing at the bottom of the wall
without even a look at the good things in the garden, and said: "Now,
would you be tall, or short?"

Next they came to a garden, enclosed by a high wall, with a wicket gate
at one end.  The Pig entered by the gate and, after having eaten his
fill of the vegetables within, came out, laughing at the poor Camel,
who had had to stay outside, because he was too tall to enter the
garden by the gate, and said: "Now, would you be tall, or short?"

Then they thought the matter over, and came to the conclusion that the
Camel should keep his hump and the Pig his snout, observing: "_Tall is
good, where tall would do; if short, again, 'tis also true!_"




MALAYAN FABLES

"He who is not possessed of such a book as will dispel many doubts,
point out hidden treasures, and is, as it were, a mirror of all things,
is even an ignorant man."


MALAYAN FABLES

Father "Lime-stick" and the Flower-pecker

Old Father Lime-stick once limed a tree for birds and caught a
Flower-pecker.  He was just about to kill and eat it when the bird
cried out, "O Grandfather, surely you are not going to eat me?  Why,
flesh, feathers and all, I am no bigger than your thumb!"  "What!" said
the old man; "do you expect me then to let you go?"  "Yes," said the
bird, "only let me go, and I will fetch you such a talisman as never
was--a Bezoar-stone as big as a cocoanut and worth at least a
thousand."  Said the old man, "Do you really mean it?"  "Really, I do,"
replied the bird.  "Just let me go, and I'll bring it to you."  Then,
on being released, he flew off and perched on a tree, and began to
preen his feathers, to get rid of the bird-lime.

Presently the old man said: "Where has that bird got to?  Bird, where
is the Bezoar-stone you promised to bring me, the one that was worth at
least a thousand?"  "Out-on-you," was the reply, "this is really _too_
ridiculous.  Just think of me, with my body as big as your thumb,
carrying a Bezoar-stone as big as a cocoanut!  It really is too absurd.
Why, have I even got the strength to lift it?"  At this the old man
held his peace.  "Well," continued the bird, "you will gain nothing by
repenting that you set me free.  Only remember in future not to
undertake an affair quite out of keeping with your own powers.  Neither
try to get your arms round a tree too big for your embrace, nor attempt
to climb one higher than your strength permits you."



The Mouse-deer's Shipwreck

"Come," said the Mouse-deer to the Stump-tailed Heron, "come and sail
with me to Java."  So they set sail, and Friend Mouse-deer held the
tiller and Friend Heron spread the sail, and the wind blew from the
north.  Soon however Friend Mouse-deer got drowsy, and let the boat
fall out of the wind.

At this Friend Heron said: "Why does the boat fall off?  How is your
helm, Friend Mouse-deer?"  "I was only taking a few winks," said he.
"Bring her up to the wind again," said the Heron.  And the Mouse-deer
replied: "All right, I'm 'on the spot.'"  Presently, however, he dozed
again and the Heron exclaimed: "Oh, if that's to be it, you may die and
be done with.  I'll peck a hole in this boat of ours and you'll go to
the bottom."

But the Mouse-deer said: "_Please_ don't, I'm _such_ a bad hand at
swimming."  So they sailed on.  And the Mouse-deer dozed a third time.
At this the Heron could contain himself no longer, and said, "Confound
you, Friend Mouse-deer, for sleeping at the helm."  And losing his
temper he pecked a hole in the boat, and the boat let in the water and
Friend Heron flew away.  But the Mouse-deer swam struggling with his
feet in the midst of the sea.

Presently there came up a young Shark who exclaimed, "I'll have a meal
off you this time at all events."  But the Mouse-deer answered, "What,
Friend Shark, you'll make a meal off me?  Why, in place of the little
flesh I've got, if you'll carry me ashore, I'll teach you some
excellent Magic which will save you from ever having to hunt for your
food again."  To this the Shark replied, "Agreed.  If you'll teach me
'your excellent Magic' I'll carry you ashore."  So the Mouse-deer got
upon Friend Shark's back, and was carried straight ashore.

And on their arrival the Mouse-deer said: "Wait here a bit, while I go
and get the simples."  And going a-land he hunted up a rattan creeper
and took it back with him and said: "Now I'll give you the simples I
spoke of," and bound it fast to Friend Shark's tail.  And presently the
Shark said: "Why have you made the line fast to my tail?"  But the
Mouse-deer replied: "'Keep quite quiet till I have tied you up
properly, and then I'll give you the simples."  But presently he
dragged the Shark up on to the dry beach, and made butcher's meat of
him.  Just then, however, a Tiger came up, exclaiming, "Here's really a
good meal for Me, for once in a way!"  To this, however, the Mouse-deer
replied: "What is the use of eating me, when there's already plenty of
butcher's meat and to spare?"  "Very well, I'll share it with you,"
said the Tiger.  The Mouse-deer replied, "You may share it with me by
all means, if you will only go and get some water to do the cooking."
So the Tiger went off to get water and presently came back with it.

"Wash the meat before you roast it," said the Mouse-deer.  The Tiger
took the meat and washed it in the water.  "Go and fetch fire and roast
it," said the Mouse-deer.  The Tiger fetched fire and came back to do
the cooking.  And when the meat was done, "Now go and fetch some
drinking water," said the Mouse-deer, "and we'll have our meal
together."  So the Tiger went off again to fetch the drinking water.
But the Mouse-deer in the meantime made off with the Shark's meat and
climbed up with it to the top of a She-oak Tree.  And presently the
Tiger came back and found both Mouse-deer and meat missing.  At this he
exclaimed: "For once in a way, Mr. Mouse-deer, you've fairly cheated
Me; if we don't meet again no matter, but if we do, I'll be the death
of you."  And here the story ends.



The Tiger Gets His Deserts

A Tiger which had been caught in a trap, seeing a man, begged to be
released.  The man said to the Tiger: "If I let you out of the trap
will you promise not to attack me?"  "Certainly," said the Tiger, and
the man therefore let the Tiger go; but the moment the Tiger was loose
it sprang upon the man and caught him.  At this the man begged the
Tiger to wait until he had inquired how the law stood with reference to
their contract, and the Tiger agreed to do so.  The man and the Tiger
