
"It is like a dream of the Arabian Nights to meet such a little angel
here," murmured Robin; "what a dreadful blow the loss of her must have
been to her poor mother!"

"O! come to Johnson, please," she said, taking Sam by the hand with a
very trustful look and manner.

"Why; he's not worse, is he?"

"O no! he has just awakened, and says he is _very_ much better, and _so_
peckish.  What does he mean by that?"

"Peckish, my dear, is hungry," explained Robin, as they went into the
cave together.

They found that Johnson was not only peckish but curious, and thirsting
for information as well as meat and drink.  As his pulse was pronounced
by Dr Shipton to be all right, he was gratified with a hearty supper, a
long pull at the tankard of sparkling water, and a good deal of
information and small-talk about the pirates, the wreck of the Triton,
and the science of electricity.

"But you have not told us yet," said Sam, "how it was that you came to
fail into the hands of the pirates."

"I can soon tell 'ee that," said the seaman, turning slowly on his
couch.

"Lie still, now, you must not move," said Sam, remonstratively.

"But that not movin', doctor, is wuss than downright pain, by a long
way.  Hows'ever, I s'pose I must obey orders--anyhow you've got the whip
hand o' me just now.  Well, as I was sayin', the yarn ain't a long 'un.
I sailed from the port o' Lun'on in a tea-clipper, of which I was the
cook; got out to Hong-Kong all right, shipped a cargo, and off again for
old England.  We hadn't got far when a most horrible gale blew us far
out of our course.  When it fell calm, soon arter, we was boarded by a
pirate.  Our captain fought like a hero, but it warn't of no use.  They
was too many for us; most of my shipmates was killed, and I was knocked
flat on the deck from behind with a hand-spike.  On recoverin', I found
myself in the ship's hold, bound hand and futt, among a lot of
unfortunits like myself, most of 'em bein' Chinese and Malays.  The
reptiles untied my hands and set me to an oar.  They thrashed us all
unmercifully to make us work hard, and killed the weak ones to be rid of
'em.  At last we came to an anchor, as I knew by the rattlin' o' the
cables, though, bein' below, I couldn't see where we was.  Then I heard
the boats got out, an' all the crew went ashore, as I guessed, except
the guard left to watch us.

"That night I dreamed a deal about bein' free, an' about former
voyages--specially one when I was wrecked in the Atlantic, an' our good
ship, the Seahorse, went down in latitude--"

"The Seahorse!" echoed Robin, with an earnest look at the sailor; "was
she an emigrant ship?"

"Ay, that's just what she was."

"Was she lost in the year 1850?" continued Robin, with increasing
excitement.

"Jus' so, my lad."

"And you were cook?"

"You've hit the nail fair on the head," replied the sailor, with a look
of surprise.

"Well, now, that _is_ most remarkable," said Robin, "for I was born on
board of that very ship."

"You _don't_ mean it," said Johnson, looking eagerly at our hero.  "Was
you really the babby as was born to that poor miserable sea-sick
gentleman, Mr Wright--you'll excuse my sayin' so--in the middle of a
thunder-clap an' a flash o' lightnin' as would have split our main-mast
an' sent us to the bottom, along wi' the ship, if it hadn't bin for the
noo lightnin' conductor that Mr Harris, the inventor, indooced our
skipper to put up!"

"Yes, I am that very baby," said Robin, "and although, of course, I
remember nothing about the thunder and lightning, or anything else.  My
father and mother have often told me all about it, and the wonderful
deliverance which God mercifully sent when all hope had been given up.
And many a time did they speak of you, Johnson, as a right good fellow
and a splendid cook."

"Much obleedged to 'em," said Johnson, "an' are they both alive?"

"They were both alive and well when I left England."

"Come now, this _is_ pleasant, to meet an old shipmate in such pecooliar
circumstances," said the sailor, extending his hand, which Robin shook
warmly; "quite as good as a play, ain't it?"

"Ay," observed Jim Slagg, who with the others had witnessed this meeting
with deep interest, "an' the babby has kep' the lighten' goin' ever
since, though he's dropped the thunder, for he's an electrician no
less--a manufacturer of lightnin' an' a director of it too."

The sailor wass good deal puzzled by this remark, but when its purport
was explained to him, he gave vent to a vigorous chuckle,
notwithstanding Sam's stern order to "lie still."

"Didn't I say so?" he exclaimed.  "Didn't I say distinctly, that night,
to the stooard--Thomson was his name--`Stooard,' said I, `that there
babby what has just bin born will make his mark some'ow an'
somew'eres.'"

"Well, but I have not made my mark yet," said Robin, laughing, "so
you're not a true prophet, at least time has not yet proved your title."

"Not yet proved it!" cried Johnson with vehemence, "why, how much proof
do you want?  Here you are, not much more than a babby yet--any'ow
hardly a man--and, besides havin' bin born in thunder, lightnin', wind,
an' rain, you've laid the Atlantic Cable, you've took up lightnin' as a
profession--or a plaything,--you've helped to save the life of John
Johnson, an' you've got comfortably located in a pirate's island!  If
you on'y go on as you've begun, you'll make your mark so deep that it'll
never be rubbed out to the end of time.  A prophet, indeed!  Why, I'm
shuperior to Mahomet, an' beat Nebuchadnezzar all to sticks."

"But you haven't finished your story, Johnson," said Jim Slagg.

"That's true--where was I?  Ah, dreamin' in the hold of the pirate-ship.
Well, I woke up with a start all of a suddent, bent on doin' suthin', I
scarce knew what, but I wriggled away at the rope that bound me till I
got my hands free; then I freed my legs; then I loosed some o' the
boldest fellows among the slaves, and got handspikes and bits o' wood to
arm 'em with.  They was clever enough to understand signs, an' I
couldn't speak to 'em, not knowin' their lingo, but I signed to 'em to
keep quiet as mice.  Then I crep' to the powder-magazine, which the
reckless reptiles fastened very carelessly, and got a bit paper and made
a slow match by rubbin' some wet powder on it, and laid it all handy,
for I was determined to escape and put an end to their doin's all at
once.  My plan was to attack and overpower the guard, free and arm all
the slaves, blow up the ship, escape on shore, an' have a pitched battle
with the pirate crew.  Unfortunately there was a white-livered traitor
among us--a sort o' half-an'-half slave--very likely he was a spy.
Anyhow, when he saw what I was about, he slipped over the side and swam
quietly ashore.  Why he didn't alarm the guards I don't know--p'r'aps he
thought we might be too many for 'em, and that if we conquered he stood
but a small chance.  Anyhow he escaped the sharks, and warned the crew
in good time, for we was in the very middle of the scrimmage when they
suddintly turned up, as you saw, an' got the better of us.  Hows'ever I
managed to bolt below and fire the slow match, before they saw what I
was after.  Then I turned and fought my way on deck again, so that they
didn't find out.  And when they was about to throw me overboard, the
thought of the surprise in store for 'em indooced me to give vent to a
hearty cheer.  It warn't a right state o' mind, I confess, and I was
properly punished, for, instead o' killin' me off quick an' comfortable,
they tied me hand and futt, took me below, an' laid me not two yards
from the slowly burnin' match.  I felt raither unhappy, I assure you;
an' the reptiles never noticed the match because o' the smoke o' the
scrimmage.  I do believe it was being so near it as saved me, for when
the crash came, I was lifted bodily wi' the planks on which I lay, and,
comin' down from the sky, as it appeared to me, I went clean into the
sea without damage, except the breakin' o' one o' the ropes, which,
fortunately, set my right arm free."

"Come now, Johnson, you must go to sleep after that," said Sam.  "You're
exciting yourself too much; remember that I am your doctor, and
obedience is the first law of nature--when one is out of health."

"Very good, sir," returned the seaman; "but before I turn over Mr
Wright must read me a few verses out o' that bible his mother gave him."

"Why, how do you know that my mother gave me a bible?" asked Robin in
great surprise.

"Didn't I know your mother?" replied the sailor with a flush of
enthusiasm; "an' don't I know that she would sooner have let you go to
sea without her blessing than without the Word of God?  She was the
first human bein' as ever spoke to me about my miserable soul, and the
love of God in sendin' His Son to save it.  Many a one has asked me
about my health, and warned me to fly from drink, and offered to help me
on in life, but she was the first that ever asked after my soul, or
tried to impress on me that Eternity and its affairs were of more
importance than Time.  I didn't say much at the time, but the seed that
your mother planted nigh twenty years ago has bin watered, thank God an'
kep' alive ever since."

There was a tone of seriousness and gratitude in this off-hand seaman's
manner, while speaking of his mother, which touched Robin deeply.
Without a moment's hesitation he pulled out his bible and read a chapter
in the Gospel of John.

"Now you'll pray," said the sailor, to Robin's surprise and
embarrassment, for he had never prayed in public before, though
accustomed from a child to make known his wants to God night and
morning.

But our hero was morally as well as physically courageous--as every hero
should be!  He knelt at once by the sailor's couch, while the others
followed his example, and, in a few simple sentences, asked for pardon,
blessing, help, and guidance in the name of Jesus Christ.

Thus peculiarly was bible-reading and family worship established on the
pirates' island in the year eighteen hundred and sixty-eight.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

AN EXPLORATION AND AN ACCIDENT.

For the first few days of their stay on what they styled Pirate Island,
our castaways were too much taken up with the wondrous and varied
contents of the robbers' cave, and the information Meerta and Letta had
to give, to pay much regard to the island itself, or the prospect they
had of quitting it.  But when their interest and curiosity began to
abate, and the excitement to decrease, they naturally bethought them of
the nature and resources of their now home.

Of course they did not for a moment regard it in the light of _home_.
It was merely a resting-place,--a refuge, where, after their escape from
the sea, they should spend a few weeks, perhaps months, until a passing
vessel should take them off.  They did not know, at that time, that the
islet was far removed from the usual track of ships, and that, like the
Pitcairn Islanders, they might be doomed to spend many years, perchance
a lifetime, on it.  Indeed, a considerable time elapsed before they
would admit to themselves that there was a possibility of such a fate,
although they knew, both from Meerta and Letta, that no ship of any
kind, save that of the pirates, had been seen for the last eighteen
months, and the few sails that did chance to appear, were merely seen
for a few hours like sea-gulls on the horizon, from which they arose and
into which they vanished.

Having then, as we have said, bethought them of examining the resources
and nature of the island, they one morning organised an expedition.  By
that time the sailor, although by no means fit for it, insisted that he
was sufficiently restored to accompany them.  Letta, who was active and
strong like a small gazelle, besides being acquainted with the whole
region, agreed to act as guide.  Stumps, having sprained his ankle
slightly, remained at the cave, for the purpose, as he said, of helping
Meerta with the garden, but Jim Slagg gave him credit for laziness.

"You see," said Sam Shipton, as Letta led them down the rugged
mountain-side, "we may as well make ourselves comfortable while we
remain here, and I'm inclined to think that a hut, however rough, down
in one of these charming valleys, will be more agreeable than the gloomy
cavern on the mountain-top."

"Not so sure o' that, doctor," said Johnson; "the cave is at all events
dry, and a good stronghold in case of a visit from pirates."

"But pirates what have bin blow'd to atoms," said Slagg, "ain't likely
to turn up again, are they?"

"That's so, lad; but some of their friends might pay us a visit, you
know."

"I think not," rejoined Sam; "there is honour among thieves here, no
doubt, as elsewhere.  I daresay it is well-known among the fraternity
that the island belongs to a certain set, and the rest will therefore
let it alone.  What think you, Robin?"

"I'm inclined to agree with you, Sam, but perhaps Letta is the best
authority on that point.  Did you ever see any other set of pirates land
here, little one, except your--your own set?"

"Only once," answered the child, "another set came, but they only stayed
one day.  They looked at everything, looked at me an' Meerta an' laughed
very much.  An' they ate and drank a good deal, and fought a little; but
they took nothing away, and never came back."

"I thought so," rejoined Sam; "now, all we've got to do is to hoist a
flag on the highest peak of the mountain, and when a vessel comes to
take us off, load her with as much of the booty as she can carry--and
then, hurrah for old England!"

"Hooray!" echoed Jim Slagg, "them's exactly my sentiments."

"But the booty is not ours to take," objected Robin.

"Whose is it, then?" asked Sam; "the rightful owners we don't know, and
the wrongful owners are defunct."

"I tell 'ee what it is, mates," said Johnson, "the whole o' the booty is
mine, 'cause why? it was me as blowed up the owners, so I'm entitled to
it by conquest, an' you needn't go to fightin' over it.  If you behave
yourselves, I'll divide it equally among us, share an' share alike."

"It seems to me, Johnson," said Robin, "that in strict justice the booty
belongs to Letta, Meerta, and blind Bungo, as the natural heirs o' the
pirates."

"But they're not the heirs, they are part of the booty," said the
seaman, "and, as sitch, falls to be divided among us."

"If that's so," said Slagg, "then I claim Letta for my share, and you,
Johnson, can have your pick of Meerta and blind Bungo."

"Nay, Letta is mine, because I was the first to discover her," said
Robin.  "Whom will you go with, Letta?"

"With you, of course," replied the child quite earnestly.  "Haven't you
promised to take me back to mamma?"

"Indeed I have, little one, and if I ever get the chance, assuredly I
will," said Robin, with equal earnestness.

"I say, doctor," said Johnson to Sam, sitting down on a mossy bank,
"I'll stop here and wait for you.  That rib ain't all square yet."

"Wilful man," said Sam, "didn't I advise you not to come?  There, lie
down and take it easy.  We'll bring you some fruit on our return."

By this time the party had reached the valley in which the lakelet lay,
and beautiful indeed was the scene which presented itself as they passed
under the grateful shade of the palm-trees.  Everywhere, rich tropical
vegetation met their gaze, through the openings in which the sunshine
poured like streams of fire.  On the little lake numerous flocks of
ducks and other fowl were seen swimming in sportive mood, while an
occasional splash told of fish of some sort below the surface.

Leaving the sailor in a position whence he could observe them for a long
distance, the rest of the party pushed on.  During their rambles they
found the valley to be much richer in vegetation, and more beautiful,
than the distant view from the mountain-top had led them to expect.
Small though the valley was, it contained, among other trees, the
cocoa-nut palm, the bread-fruit, banana, and sandal-wood.  There were
also pine-apples, wild rice, and custard-apples, some of which latter
delicious fruit, being ripe, was gathered and carried back to Johnson,
whom they found sound asleep and much refreshed on their return.

The expedition proved that, barren though the island appeared from the
sea, it contained quite enough of the good things of this life to render
it a desirable abode for man.

On the coast, too, where the raft had been cast ashore, were discovered
a variety of shell-fish, some of which, especially the oysters, were
found to be excellent food.  And some of the sea-fowl turned out to be
very good eating, though a little fishy, while their eggs were as good
as those of the domestic fowl.

"It seems to me," said Robin to Letta one day when they were out on a
ramble together, "that this is quite a little paradise."

"I don't know what paradise is like," said the child.

"Well, no more do I," returned Robin, with a laugh, "but of course
everybody understands that it is the place where everything is perfect,
and where happiness is complete."

"It cannot be like paradise without mamma," said Letta, shaking her
pretty head sadly.  "I would not go to heaven unless mamma was there."

Robin was silent for some time, as he thought of his own mother and the
talks he used to have with her on this same subject.

"Letta," he said at length, earnestly, "Jesus will be in heaven.  It was
His Spirit who taught you to love mamma--as you do, so you are sure to
meet her there with Him."

"Nobody _taught_ me to love mamma," returned the child quietly; "I
