
"Oh--oh!" she moaned, clasping her knees with distressed little palms,
and swaying back and forth, "why didn't I remember what Mamsie has
always told us--that no insult can do us harm if only we do not say or
do anything in return. Why--why couldn't I have remembered it?"

How long she stayed there she never knew. But at last, realizing that
every moment there was only making matters worse, she dragged herself
up from the little heap on the floor, and trying to put a bit of
cheerfulness into a face she knew must frighten Mamsie, she went slowly
out, and down the stairs.

But no one looked long enough at her face to notice its change of
expression. Polly, the moment she turned towards the household life
again, could feel that the air was charged with some intense
excitement. Hortense met her on the lower stairs; the maid was startled
out of her usual nonchalance, and was actually in a hurry.

"What is the matter?" cried Polly.

"Oh! the Madame is eel," said the maid; "the doctaire says it is not a
lie dees time," and she swept past Polly.

Polly clung to the stair-railing, her face whitening, and her gaze
fastened upon Mrs. Chatterton's door, where Hortense was now
disappearing. Inside, was a sound of voices, and that subdued stir that
gives token of a sick room.

"I have killed her!" cried Polly's heart. For one wild moment she was
impelled to flight; anywhere, she did not care where, to shake off by
motion in the free air this paralysis of fear. But the next she started
and, rushing down the stairs and into Mr. King's room, cried out, "Oh!
dear Grandpapa, will Mrs. Chatterton die?"

"No, no, I think not," replied the old gentleman, surprised at her
feeling. "Cousin Eunice never did show much self-control; but then, I
don't believe this piece of bad news will kill her."

"Bad news?" gasped Polly, hanging to the table where Mr. King was
writing letters. "Oh, Grandpapa! what do you mean?"

"Bless me! where have you been, Polly Pepper," said Mr. King, settling
his eyeglass to regard her closely, "not to hear the uproar in this
house? Yes, Mrs. Chatterton received a telegram a half-hour since that
her nephew, the only one that she was very fond of among her relatives,
was drowned at sea, and she has been perfectly prostrated by it, till
she really is quite ill."

Polly waited to hear no more, but on the wings of the wind, flew out
and up the stairs once more.

"Where have you been, Polly?" cried Jasper, coming out of a side
passage in time to catch a dissolving view of her flying figure.
"Polly--Polly!" and he took three steps to her one, and gained her side.

"Oh! don't stop me," begged Polly, flying on, "don't, Jasper."

He took a good look at her face. "Anything I can help you about?" he
asked quickly.

She suddenly stopped, her foot on the stair above. "Oh, Jasper!" she
cried, with clasped hands, "you don't know--she may die, and I said
horribly cruel things to her."

"Who--Mrs. Chatterton?" said the boy, opening his dark eyes; "why, you
couldn't have said cruel things to her, Polly. Don't be foolish,
child." He spoke as he would to Phronsie's terror, and smiled into her
face. But it did not reassure Polly.

"Jasper, you don't know; you can't guess what dreadful things I said,"
cried poor overwhelmed Polly, clasping her hands tightly together at
the mere thought of the words she had uttered.

"Then she must have said dreadful things to you," said the boy.

"She--but, oh, Jasper! that doesn't make it any better for me," said
Polly. "Don't stop me; I am going to see if they won't let me do
something for her."

"There are ever so many people up there now," said Jasper. "Your
mother, and Hortense, and two or three maids. What in the world could
you do, Polly? Come down into the library, and tell us all about it."

But Polly broke away from him with an "Oh! I must do something for
her," speeding on until she softly worked her way into the sick room.

Mrs. Pepper was busy with the doctor in the further part of the room,
and Polly stood quite still for a moment, wishing she were one of the
maids, to whom a bit of active service was given. She could not longer
endure her thoughts in silence, and gently going up to her mother's
side, with a timorous glance at the bed, as she passed it, she begged,
"Mamsie, can't I do something for her?"

Mrs. Pepper glanced up quickly. "No--yes, you can; take this
prescription down to Oakley's to be prepared."

Polly seized the bit of paper from Dr. Valentine's hand, and hurried
out. Again she glanced fearfully at the bed, but the curtain on that
side was drawn so that only the outline of the figure could be seen.
She was soon out on the street, the movement through the fresh air
bringing back a little color to her cheek and courage to her heart.
Things did not seem quite so bad if she only might do something for the
poor sick woman that could atone for the wretched work she had done; at
least it would be some comfort if the invalid could be helped by her
service.

Thus revolving everything in her mind, Polly did not hear her name
called, nor rapid footsteps hurrying after.

"Wait!" at last cried a voice; "O, dear me! what is the matter, Polly?"
Alexia Rhys drew herself up flushed and panting at Polly's side.

"I'm on the way to the apothecary's," said Polly, without looking
around.

"So I should suppose," said Alexia; "O, dear! I'm so hot and tired. Do
go a bit slower, Polly."

"I can't," said Polly. "She's very sick, and I must get this just as
soon as I can." She waved the prescription at her, and redoubled her
speed.

"Who?" gasped Alexia, stumbling after as best she could.

"Mrs. Chatterton," said Polly, a lump in her throat as she uttered the
name.

"O, dear me! that old thing," cried Alexia, her enthusiasm over the
errand gone.

"Hush!" said Polly hoarsely; "she may die. She has had bad news."

"What?" asked Alexia; the uncomfortable walk might be enlivened by a
bit of stray gossip; "what is it, Polly? What news?"

"A telegram," said Polly. "Her favorite nephew was drowned at sea."

"Oh! I didn't know she had any favorite nephew. Doesn't she fight with
everybody?"

"Do be quiet," begged Polly. "No; that is, perhaps, other people are
not kind to her."

"Oh!" said Alexia, in a surprised voice. "Well, I think she's perfectly
and all-through-and-through horrid, so! Don't race like this through
the streets, Polly. You'll get there soon enough."

But Polly turned a deaf ear, and at last the prescription was handed
over the counter at Oakley's, and after what seemed an endless time to
Polly, the medicine was given to her.

"Now as soon as you carry that thing home," observed Alexia, glancing
at the white parcel in Polly's hand, "I hope you'll come with us girls.
That's what I ran after you for."

"What girls?" asked Polly.

"Why, Philena and the Cornwalls; we are going to have a sleighing party
to-night, and a supper at Lilly Drexell's. Mrs. Cornwall chaperones the
thing."

Polly was surprised to feel her heart bound. It hadn't seemed as if it
could ever be moved by any news of girlish frolics, but that its dull
ache must go on forever.

"Oh! I can't," she cried the next moment. "I must stay at home, and
help take care of Mrs. Chatterton."

"Nonsense!" exclaimed Alexia in a provoked tone; "you are not wanted
there, Polly Pepper; the idea, with that great house full of servants."

"Well, I shall not go," declared Polly sharply; "you needn't ask me,
Alexia. I shall stay home till she gets well."

"You little idiot!" cried Alexia, thoroughly out of temper. But as this
produced no effect on Polly, she began to wheedle and coax. "Now,
Polly, do be reasonable. You know we can't go without you; you wouldn't
spoil the whole thing; you know you wouldn't. I shall just tell the
Cornwalls that you are coming," and she turned off to the corner of the
avenue.

"Indeed you will not," called Polly after her. "Don't you dare do that,
Alexia Rhys," she said, with flashing eyes.

"You are the most uncomfortable girl I ever saw," cried Alexia,
stopping, to come slowly back. "You spoil every bit of fun with your
absurd notions. I'm quite, quite put out with you, Polly."

"I'm sorry," said poor Polly, fairly longing for the snow-revel, and
dismayed at disappointing the girls.

"No, you're not," pouted Alexia, "and I shall tell them all so," and
she broke away and ran off in the opposite direction.

Polly was met at the door by Mrs. Pepper, who grasped the packet of
medicine quickly.

"Isn't there anything else I can do, Mamsie?" begged Polly.

"No; sit down and rest; you're hot and tired, you've run so."

"I'm not tired," said Polly, not daring to ask "Is she better?"

"Well, you must be," said Mrs. Pepper, hurrying off, "going all the way
down to Oakley's."

So Polly had nothing to do but to sit out in the hall, and listen and
watch all the movements in the sick room, every one of which but
increased her terror. At least she could bear it no longer, and as Dr.
Valentine came out, putting on his gloves, she rushed after him.

"Oh! will she die?" she begged; "please do tell me, sir?"

"Die? no indeed, I hope not," said Dr. Valentine. "She has had a severe
shock to her nerves and her age is against her, but she is coming
around all right, I trust. Why, Polly, I thought better things of you,
my girl." He glanced down into the distressed face with professional
disfavor.

"I'm so glad she won't die," breathed Polly, wholly lost to his opinion
of her; and her face gleamed with something of her old brightness.

"I didn't know you were so fond of her," observed Dr. Valentine grimly;
"indeed, to speak truthfully, I have yet to learn that anybody is fond
of her, Polly."

"Now if you really want to help her," he continued thoughtfully,
pulling his beard, as Polly did not answer, "I can give you one or two
hints that might be of use."

"Oh! I do, I do," cried Polly with eagerness.

"It will be tiresome work," said Dr. Valentine, "but it will be a piece
of real charity, and perhaps, Polly, it's as well for you to begin now
as to wait till you can belong to forty charity clubs, and spend your
time going to committee meetings." And he laughed not altogether
pleasantly. How was Polly to know that Mrs. Valentine was immersed up
to her ears in a philanthropic sea with the smallest possible thought
for the doctor's home? "Now that maid," said the physician, dropping
his tone to a confidential one, "is as well as the average, but she's
not the one who is to amuse the old lady. It's that she needs more than
medicine, Polly. She actually requires diversion."

Poor Polly stood as if turned to stone. Diversion! And she had thrown
away all chance of that.

"She is suffering for the companionship of some bright young nature,"
Dr. Valentine proceeded, attributing the dismay written all over the
girl's face to natural unwillingness to do the service. "After she gets
over this attack she needs to be read to for one thing; to be told the
news; to be made to forget herself. But of course, Polly," he said
hastily, buttoning his top coat, and opening the outer door, "it's too
much to ask of you; so think no more about it, child."




XII

NEW WORK FOR POLLY


It was Saturday morning, and Polly ran upstairs with a bright face, the
morning Journal in her hand. "I'm going to stay with Mrs. Chatterton,
Hortense," she announced to that functionary in the dressing-room.

"And a comfairte may it gif to you," said Hortense, with a vicious
shake of the silk wrapper in her hand, before hanging it in its place.
"Madame has the tres diablerie, cross as de two steeks, what you call
it, dis morning."

Polly went softly into the room, closing the door gently after her. In
the shadow of one corner of the large apartment, sat Mrs. Chatterton
under many wrappings in the depths of an invalid's chair. Polly went up
to her side.

"Would you like to have me read the news, Mrs. Chatterton?" she asked
gently.

Mrs. Chatterton turned her head and looked at her. "No," she was about
to say shortly, just as she had repulsed many little offers of Polly's
for the past few days; but somehow this morning the crackling of the
fresh sheet in the girl's hand, suggestive of crisp bits of gossip, was
too much for her to hear indifferently, especially as she was in a
worse state of mind than usual over Hortense and her bad temper.

"You may sit down and read a little, if you like," she said
ungraciously. So Polly, happy as a queen at the permission, slipped
into a convenient chair, and began at once. She happened fortunately on
just the right things for the hungry ears; a description of a large
church wedding, the day before; two or three bits about society people
that Mrs. Chatterton had lost sight of, and a few other items just as
acceptable.

Polly read on and on, from one thing to another, not daring to look up
to see the effect, until at last everything in the way of gossip was
exhausted.

"Is that all?" asked Mrs. Chatterton hungrily.

Polly, hunting the columns for anything, even a murder account if it
was but in high life, turned the paper again disconsolately, obliged to
confess it was.

"Well, do put it by, then," said Mrs. Chatterton sharply, "and not
whirl it before my face; it gives me a frightful headache."

"I might get the Town Talk" suggested Polly, as a bright thought struck
her. "It came yesterday. I saw it on the library table."

"So it is Saturday." Mrs. Chatterton looked up quickly. "Yes, you may,
Polly," her mouth watering for the revel she would have in its contents.

So Polly ran over the stairs with delighted feet, and into the library,
beginning to rummage over the papers and magazines on the reading table.

"Where is it?" she exclaimed, turning them with quick fingers. "O dear!
it was right here last evening."
