"Religious symbol," said Janus. He looked around, one hand on his gun.
"We'd better keep an eye out--maybe we've landed on sacred ground or
something."

"A totem _hole_, perhaps," Allenby suggested.

"Oh. I don't know," Randolph said--to Janus, not Allenby. As I've
mentioned, we always ignored Allenby's puns. "Note the lack of
ornamentation. Not at all typical of religious articles."

"On Earth," Gonzales reminded him. "Besides, it might be utilitarian,
not symbolic."

"Utilitarian, how?" asked Janus.

"An altar for snakes," Burton said dryly.

"Well," said Allenby, "you can't deny that it has its _holy_ aspects."

"Get your hand away, will you, Peters?" asked Janus.

I did. When Janus's camera had clicked, I bent again and peered through
the hole. "It sights on that low ridge over there," I said. "Maybe it's
some kind of surveying setup. I'm going to take a look."

"Careful," warned Janus. "Remember, it may be sacred."

As I walked away, I heard Allenby say, "Take some scrapings from the
inside of the hole, Gonzales. We might be able to determine if anything
is kept in it...."

One of the stumpy, purplish, barrel-type cacti on the ridge had a long
vertical bite out of it ... as if someone had carefully carved out a
narrow U-shaped section from the top down, finishing the bottom of the U
in a neat semicircle. It was as flat and cleancut as the inside surface
of a horseshoe magnet.

I hollered. The others came running. I pointed.

"Oh, my God!" said Allenby. "Another one."

The pulp of the cactus in and around the U-hole was dried and
dead-looking.

Silently Burton used his tape-measure. The hole measured four and
three-eighths inches across. It was eleven inches deep. The semicircular
bottom was about a foot above the ground.

"This ridge," I said, "is about three feet higher than where we landed
the ship. I bet the hole in the rock and the hole in this cactus are on
the same level."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gonzales said slowly, "This was not done all at once. It is a result of
periodic attacks. Look here and here. These overlapping depressions
along the outer edges of the hole--" he pointed--"on this side of the
cactus. They are the signs of repeated impact. And the scallop effect on
_this_ side, where whatever made the hole emerged. There are juices
still oozing--not at the point of impact, where the plant is desiccated,
but below, where the shock was transmitted--"

A distant shout turned us around. Burton was at the rock, beside the
ship. He was bending down, his eye to the far side of the mysterious
hole.

He looked for another second, then straightened and came toward us at a
lope.

"They line up," he said when he reached us. "The bottom of the hole in
the cactus is right in the middle when you sight through the hole in the
rock."

"As if somebody came around and whacked the cactus regularly," Janus
said, looking around warily.

[Illustration]

"To keep the line of sight through the holes clear?" I wondered. "Why
not just remove the cactus?"

"Religious," Janus explained.

The gauntlet he had discarded lay ignored on the ground, in the shadow
of the cactus. We went on past the ridge toward an outcropping of rock
about a hundred yards farther on. We walked silently, each of us
wondering if what we half-expected would really be there.

It was. In one of the tall, weathered spires in the outcropping, some
ten feet below its peak and four feet above the ground, was a round
four-inch hole.

Allenby sat down on a rock, nursing his ankle, and remarked that anybody
who believed this crazy business was really happening must have holes in
the rocks in his head.

[Illustration]

Burton put his eye to the hole and whistled. "Sixty feet long if it's
an inch," he said. "The other end's just a pinpoint. But you can see it.
The damn thing's perfectly straight."

I looked back the way we had come. The cactus stood on the ridge, with
its U-shaped bite, and beyond was the ship, and beside it the perforated
rock.

"If we surveyed," I said, "I bet the holes would all line up right to
the last millimeter."

"But," Randolph complained, "why would anybody go out and bore holes in
things all along a line through the desert?"

"Religious," Janus muttered. "It doesn't _have_ to make sense."

       *       *       *       *       *

We stood there by the outcropping and looked out along the wide, red
desert beyond. It stretched flatly for miles from this point, south
toward Mars' equator--dead sandy wastes, crisscrossed by the "canals,"
which we had observed while landing to be great straggly patches of
vegetation, probably strung along underground waterflows.

_BLONG-G-G-G- ... st-st-st- ..._

We jumped half out of our skins. Ozone bit at our nostrils. Our hair
stirred in the electrical uproar.

"L-look," Janus chattered, lowering his smoking gun.

About forty feet to our left, a small rabbity creature poked its head
