is remitted, you are still under arrest.  I have seen your captain,
however, and you will find matters made very light for you.
The sentry will bring you food and drink."

He stopped, for Tristram had fallen on one knee and was passionately
kissing his hand.

"How ill you must think of me!" he murmured; "and how can I thank
you?"

"By keeping one tender thought or two for a father who held aloof
from you, while it was for your good, and came to you when, for the
first time, you wanted him.  Mine has been a hard life, Tristram, and
not altogether a good one.  By asking you to share it, I had done you
Heaven knows what injury."

This was true enough, and it struck the speaker as so pathetic that
he managed even to squeeze up a tear.

"But come," he went on, with a sudden change to vivacity, "tell me
how you happened into this scrape?"

And so, with the lantern between them casting long spokes of light on
the ship's timbers, the rafters and the two drunken sleepers in the
corner, father and son sat and talked for the better part of an hour;
at the end of which time Captain Salt, who dexterously managed to do
nine-tenths of the listening, was pretty well posted in the affairs
of the Blue Pavilions and their inmates, and knew almost as much of
Tristram's past history as if he had spent a day with the
thirty-seven green volumes.  It was past two in the morning when he
arose to return to his own ship.

At parting he kissed Tristram on both cheeks.  "Farewell, dear lad!"
he said, with a manner that was admirably paternal.  "We shall not
meet again till the ships cast anchor in the Maese.  Meanwhile steel
your heart and look forward to a better fortune."

He picked up the lantern and, climbing the ladder, nodded back
reassuringly as he lifted the hatch.  At the same time he was
secretly a good deal perplexed; for in all that he had learnt there
was nothing to throw light on the Earl's words.  "Now, why the devil
is the lad to be looked after?" he wondered.  For in fact Tristram
had said nothing of the inheritance.  And the reason for this was the
very simple one that he himself knew nothing about it, Captain Barker
and Captain Runacles having long ago agreed to keep it a secret from
him until he should come of age.  They had arrived at this resolution
after many weeks of discussion, and beyond a doubt their wisdom had
been justified in the course of the last hour.

There was no perplexity visible, however, in the kindly smile which
Tristram beheld and returned with interest.  A moment after he was
left in blank darkness.  But, being by this time tired out, as well
as greatly comforted, he curled himself up on the bare floor, and
within five minutes had dropped off into a dreamless sleep.

It was morning when he awoke, though he could not tell the hour; for
the only light that reached his prison was filtered through the hatch
above, which somebody had kindly tilted open.  The sounds that woke
him were those of feet moving to and fro in the captain's cabin
overhead, and, far forward in the ship, the clatter of boots as the
soldiers turned out.  He looked about him and made two discoveries.
In the first place, his two drunken companions had vanished, or had
been removed; and secondly, their place was taken by a loaf and a tin
pannikin.

He reached out a hand for these, and began without hesitation the
first meal in his life of which the green volumes were to keep no
record.  With less hunger he might have found it nauseous; for the
bread was incredibly mouldy and had been gnawed all round the crust
by rats, while the liquor in the pannikin was a mixture of fiery rum
and unclean water.  The first gulp fetched the tears; but, after
sputtering a bit, he managed to swallow a good half of it.  As he
breakfasted he heard a deal of muffled shouting above, and then a
distant clanking sound that was unfamiliar.  The _Good Intent_ was
weighing anchor.

These noises, however, did not trouble Tristram, who was minded by
this time to bear his fortune with hardihood.  Only the thought of
Sophia vexed him while he ate, and he sighed once or twice with a
violence that set the rats scampering.  Then it struck him that his
morning prayers were unsaid, and, scrambling on his knees, he
committed himself to the care of Heaven, and afterwards felt still
easier at heart.  Also, being a prudent youth in some respects, he
decided to reserve half of the loaf in case no more should be brought
for the day; and, because his hunger was excessive, it took some time
to decide on the amount to be set aside.  Indeed, he was still
discussing this with himself when the _Good Intent_ shook with the
roar of the royal salute.

For the moment Tristram imagined that he must be in the midst of a
sea-fight at the very leat.  But his apprehensions were presently
distracted by the motions of the ship under him--motions which at
length became erratic and even alarming.  For the _Good Intent_ was
not only heaving up and down, but seemed to be tearing forward in a
series of vehement rushes, with intervals of languid indecision.
Tristram's stomach soon began to abhor these intervals, and in a
little while he found himself wondering to what end he had set aside
half a loaf from his breakfast.  For, as it seemed to him, he was
going to die, and the sooner the better.

"Decidedly,"  he thought, "my breakfast was poisoned, else I could
never feel like this."

The _Good Intent_ took another lurch forward, and a clammy sweat
broke out on both sides of his forehead.

"If I have enemies so wicked," sighed he, "may God forgive them!"
And, uttering this Christian wish, he fell forward with his forehead
against the boards.

A little past noon the sentry brought him a fresh loaf, with a plate
of fat bacon and another pannikin.  The sea being choppy, by this
time the vessel echoed from end to end with groans and lamentations.

"Is it a massacre?"  Tristram asked, sitting up and regarding the man
with wild eyes.  But the sight of the bacon, which was plentifully
doused with vinegar, conquered him afresh.  The sentry chuckled and
went away.

To be short, our hero passed two-and-twenty hours in this extremity
of wretchedness, and was only aroused, early next morning, by a
corporal who thrust his head in at the hatchway and bade him arise
and come on deck with all speed, as the regiment was about to
disembark.  And, as a matter of fact, when Tristram tottered up the
ladder into the fresh air which swept the deck, he found that, though
he had been beyond remarking any difference in the ship's motion, she
was now lying at anchor, and within a cable's length from a desolate
shore, which began in sandhills and ended in mist.

The rain was pouring perpendicularly from a leaden sky and drenching
the decks.  The soldiers, in their great-coats, huddled together as
they waited for the boats, and shrugged their shoulders to keep the
drops from trickling down the napes of their necks.  Somebody gave
Tristram a great-coat and knapsack, and pointed out the group to
which he was to attach himself.  He obeyed, though scarcely aware of
what he did: for his head was light, his hunger was ravenous, and his
legs were trembling beneath him.  A soldier cursed close by, and he
cursed too, echoing the man's words without knowing why.  Another man
slapped him on the back, mistaking him for a crony, and begged his
pardon.  "It really makes no difference," said Tristram politely, and
at once fell to wondering if this remark were absurd or no.  Beyond
the grey veils of rain he spied, now and then, a cluster of red roofs
and a steeple close beside the shore.

"What place is that yonder?" he asked the man who stood at his elbow.

"Vlaardingen," said the fellow gruffly.  It was Sergeant Klomp, and
Tristram turned it over in his mind whether to offer an apology or
no.  While he was still debating, a brisk young officer came along
and called out:

"Get ready, boys.  This is our turn."

In less than a minute after, for no apparent reason, the crowd around
Tristram surged forward to the bulwarks, and he was carried along
with the rush.  Then he found himself swaying unsteadily down a
flight of steps and calling to the men behind not to hustle and
precipitate him into one or other of the two longboats that lay
below.  Into the nearer of these his company swept him, and poured in
at his heels until the gunwale was nearly level with the water.
The rowers pushed off in the nick of time, and pulled their freight
slowly across the sullen tide, while the rain beat down relentlessly.

As they neared the shore, a landing-stage, or low jetty, of sunk
piles disengaged itself from the mist.  This was the sole object that
diversified the melancholy line of sandbanks, and towards it they
were steered, Tristram looking eagerly out under the peak of his cap,
from which a rivulet of water was by this time coursing down his
nose.

Half a dozen grey figures were standing on the jetty, and, as the
soldiers scrambled up its dripping steps, one of them advanced and
touched Tristram by the elbow.  It was his father.

"Safe and sound, my boy?  _Parbleu!_ but it's easy to see you're no
accomplished sailor; but that's all the better."

Tristram was feeling too faint to contest this, though it appeared to
him to be disputable.

"Let us get ahead of this mob," his father went on.  "Come, use your
best foot--it's no great distance."

He struck off the sodden track and dived into the mist, Tristram
following close at his heels.  Their way lay over hillocks and
hollows of sand in which they sank ankle-deep at every step.
In two minutes they lost sight of the regiment, and were walking with
their faces set, as it seemed, towards a wall of grey atmosphere,
impenetrable by the eye.  After five minutes of this Tristram
groaned.  He had eaten nothing for twenty-four hours, and his limbs
were weak as water.

"Courage, my son! A few paces more."

Almost as he spoke a building loomed out of the mist, and they found
themselves before a doorway, over which hung the sign of "The Four
Seasons."  A sentry, who stood beside the entrance, presented arms
and let them pass.  Captain Salt led the way indoors and up a rickety
staircase to the right, on the first landing of which they found two
pages in waiting.

"Say that Captain Salt desires to see his Majesty."

One of the pages tapped at the door, and, having delivered the
message, commanded them to enter.  The place in which Tristram now
found himself was a low-browed room, smelling highly of sawdust and
stale tobacco.  It was bisected by a long table of clean white deal,
at the end of which were seated three gentlemen whose attire bespoke
a considerable estate.  All three looked up as the pair entered, and
in the centre our hero at once recognised his Majesty, with the Earl
of Marlborough upon his left hand, and upon his right a general of a
plain but shrewd and honest countenance, who glanced at Captain Salt
for a moment and resumed the writing upon which he was engaged.

King Willliam set down the bundle of papers that he had been conning
with a sour expression, as if tasting bad wine, and ordered the
Captain to come forward, which he did, with a profound salute.

"I have examined the lists, Captain Salt.  They tally with other
information which my admirals and generals have been able to give me;
though, as they have not your advantages, their knowledge is of
necessity scantier."

Beneath his words there lurked a contempt which made the Captain
wince.

"Your Majesty, I have endeavoured to do my duty--such as it is."

"You say well.  The disgrace lies with those who make it necessary."

"I am glad your Majesty should regard it in that light."

"Rest assured that I do, and admit the magnitude of the service you
have done us.  I understand you have come for your reward."

"Say rather that I have brought it."

"Explain yourself."

"I ask no reward, your Majesty, but the discharge of this young
recruit." As he spoke Captain Salt drew Tristram forward from the
doorway, where he was standing awkwardly.

"This is very extraordinary.  I expected some request for money, I
will confess."

"There are some things which rank above money," said the Captain with
feeling.

"We are told so," replied William drily.  "But might I ask for an
instance or two?"

"There is paternal love.  Your Majesty, this young man is my son."
The Captain, at this point, brushed away a tear with the back of his
hand.

"Why--but surely I remember his face?"

"That is probable: for you yourself, sire, did him the honour to
enlist him, no longer ago than last Friday."

"I remember the occasion.  But it did not then appear--at least, to
my recollection--that he was a son of yours, Captain Salt."

"Will your Majesty be good enough to note the likeness between us?"

"I do not doubt your word.  I merely remark that the two gentlemen
who then interceded for him omitted to mention his parentage."

"Their names, I believe--"

"They were two gallant but wrong-headed gentlemen of his late
Majesty's navy--Captain John Barker and Captain Jeremiah Runacles."

"It is to those gentlemen, who have guarded him from his infancy,
that I would restore this young man."

"This is very magnanimous conduct."

"A father, sire, may for his son's good disregard his own yearnings.
I would, with permission, escort him back to Harwich and assure
myself of his happiness.  Your Majesty need have no doubt of my
return with the next transport."

"Indeed, Captain Salt, I myself should advise you, for your own
safety, to be out of the way until this small storm has blown over.
Present yourself as soon as you return.  Sir," he continued,
addressing Tristram, "you are discharged from my service, which, I
must say, has not bettered your looks.  Return to your guardians and,
if they will allow you, cultivate some small amount of loyalty."

"I thank your Majesty very heartily," Tristram replied ingenuously,
"and I regret if the plant has, until now, found no place in our
garden."

"The squadron will sail again for England at midnight," said William
with a faint smile; then, turning to the Earl of Marlborough, "My
lord, will you write out the order?"

At this moment one of the pages entered with a note for the King.

"Let him come in," said William, after opening it and running his eye
over the contents; then, addressing Captain Salt, "I fear this puts
