have been decided; and they are (now) in negligence and they do not
believe.

019.040
Y: It is We Who will inherit the earth, and all beings thereon: to Us
will they all be returned.

P: Lo! We, only We, inherit the earth and all who are thereon, and unto
Us they are returned.

S: Surely We inherit the earth and all those who are on it, and to Us
they shall be returned.

019.041
Y: (Also) mention in the Book (the story of) Abraham: He was a man of
Truth, a prophet.

P: And make mention (O Muhammad) in the Scripture of Abraham. Lo! he was
a saint, a prophet.

S: And mention Ibrahim in the Book; surely he was a truthful man, a
prophet.

019.042
Y: Behold, he said to his father: "O my father! why worship that which
heareth not and seeth not, and can profit thee nothing?"

P: When he said unto his father: O my father! Why worshippest thou that
which heareth not nor seeth, nor can in aught avail thee?

S: When he said to his father; O my father! why do you worship what
neither hears nor sees, nor does it avail you in the least:

019.043
Y: "O my father! to me hath come knowledge which hath not reached thee:
so follow me: I will guide thee to a way that is even and straight."

P: O my father! Lo! there hath come unto me of knowledge that which came
not unto thee. So follow me, and I will lead thee on a right path.

S: O my father! truly the knowledge has come to me which has not come to
you, therefore follow me, I will guide you on a right path:

019.044
Y: "O my father! serve not Satan: for Satan is a rebel against (Allah)
Most Gracious."

P: O my father! Serve not the devil. Lo! the devil is a rebel unto the
Beneficent.

S: O my father! serve not the Shaitan, surely the Shaitan is disobedient
to the Beneficent Allah:

019.045
Y: "O my father! I fear lest a Penalty afflict thee from (Allah) Most
Gracious, so that thou become to Satan a friend."

P: O my father! Lo! I fear lest a punishment from the Beneficent
overtake thee so that thou become a comrade of the devil.

S: O my father! surely I fear that a punishment from the Beneficent
Allah should afflict you so that you should be a friend of the Shaitan.

019.046
Y: (The father) replied: "Dost thou hate my gods, O Abraham? If thou
forbear not, I will indeed stone thee: Now get away from me for a good
long while!"

P: He said: Rejectest thou my gods, O Abraham? If thou cease not, I
shall surely stone thee. Depart from me a long while!

S: He said: Do you dislike my gods, O Ibrahim? If you do not desist I
will certainly revile you, and leave me for a time.

019.047
Y: Abraham said: "Peace be on thee: I will pray to my Lord for thy
forgiveness: for He is to me Most Gracious."

P: He said: Peace be unto thee! I shall ask forgiveness of my Lord for
thee. Lo! He was ever gracious unto me.

S: He said: Peace be on you, I will pray to my Lord to forgive you;
surely He is ever Affectionate to me:

019.048
Y: "And I will turn away from you (all) and from those whom ye invoke
besides Allah: I will call on my Lord: perhaps, by my prayer to my
Lord, I shall be not unblest."

P: I shall withdraw from you and that unto which ye pray beside Allah,
and I shall pray unto my Lord. It may be that, in prayer unto my Lord,
I shall not be unblest.

S: And I will withdraw from you and what you call on besides Allah, and
I will call upon my Lord; may be I shall not remain unblessed in
calling upon my Lord.

019.049
Y: When he had turned away from them and from those whom they worshipped
besides Allah, We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, and each one of them
We made a prophet.

P: So, when he had withdrawn from them and that which they were
worshipping beside Allah, We gave him Isaac and Jacob. Each of them We
made a prophet.

S: So when he withdrew from them and what they worshipped besides Allah,
We gave to him Ishaq and Yaqoub, and each one of them We made a
prophet.

019.050
Y: And We bestowed of Our Mercy on them, and We granted them lofty
honour on the tongue of truth.

P: And we gave them of Our mercy, and assigned to them a high and true
renown.

S: And We granted to them of Our mercy, and We left (behind them) a
truthful mention of eminence for them.

019.051
Y: Also mention in the Book (the story of) Moses: for he was specially
chosen, and he was a messenger (and) a prophet.

P: And make mention in the Scripture of Moses. Lo! he was chosen, and he
was a messenger (of Allah), a prophet.

S: And mention Musa in the Book; surely he was one purified, and he was
a messenger, a prophet.

019.052
Y: And we called him from the right side of Mount (Sinai), and made him
draw near to Us, for mystic (converse).

P: We called him from the right slope of the Mount, and brought him nigh
in communion.

S: And We called to him from the blessed side of the mountain, and We
made him draw nigh, holding communion (with Us).

019.053
Y: And, out of Our Mercy, We gave him his brother Aaron, (also) a
prophet.

P: And We bestowed upon him of Our mercy his brother Aaron, a prophet
(likewise).

S: And We gave to him out of Our mercy his brother Haroun a prophet.

019.054
Y: Also mention in the Book (the story of) Isma'il: He was (strictly)
true to what he promised, and he was a messenger (and) a prophet.

P: And make mention in the Scripture of Ishmael. Lo! he was a keeper of
his promise, and he was a messenger (of Allah), a prophet.

S: And mention Ismail in the Book; surely he was truthful in (his)
promise, and he was a messenger, a prophet.

019.055
Y: He used to enjoin on his people Prayer and Charity, and he was most
acceptable in the sight of his Lord.

P: He enjoined upon his people worship and almsgiving, and was
acceptable in the sight of his Lord.

S: And he enjoined on his family prayer and almsgiving, and was one in
whom his Lord was well pleased.

019.056
Y: Also mention in the Book the case of Idris: He was a man of truth
(and sincerity), (and) a prophet:

P: And make mention in the Scripture of Idris. Lo! he was a saint, a
prophet;

S: And mention Idris in the Book; surely he was a truthful man, a
prophet,

019.057
Y: And We raised him to a lofty station.

P: And We raised him to high station.

S: And We raised him high in Heaven.

019.058
Y: Those were some of the prophets on whom Allah did bestow His Grace,-
of the posterity of Adam, and of those who We carried (in the Ark) with
Noah, and of the posterity of Abraham and Israel of those whom We
guided and chose. Whenever the Signs of (Allah) Most Gracious were
rehearsed to them, they would fall down in prostrate adoration and in
tears.

P: These are they unto whom Allah showed favour from among the prophets,
of the seed of Adam and of those whom We carried (in the ship) with
Noah, and of the seed of Abraham and Israel, and from among those whom
We guided and chose. When the revelations of the Beneficent were
recited unto them, they fell down, adoring and weeping.

S: These are they on whom Allah bestowed favors, from among the prophets
of the seed of Adam, and of those whom We carried with Nuh, and of the
seed of Ibrahim and Israel, and of those whom We guided and chose; when
the communications of the Beneficent Allah were recited to them, they
fell down making obeisance and weeping.

019.059
Y: But after them there followed a posterity who missed prayers and
followed after lusts soon, then, will they face Destruction,-

P: Now there hath succeeded them a later generation whom have ruined
worship and have followed lusts. But they will meet deception.

S: But there came after them an evil generation, who neglected prayers
and followed and sensual desires, so they win meet perdition,

019.060
Y: Except those who repent and believe, and work righteousness: for
these will enter the Garden and will not be wronged in the least,-

P: Save him who shall repent and believe and do right. Such will enter
the Garden, and they will not be wronged in aught -

S: Except such as repent and believe and do good, these shall enter the
garden, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly in any way:

019.061
Y: Gardens of Eternity, those which (Allah) Most Gracious has promised
to His servants in the Unseen: for His promise must (necessarily) come
to pass.

P: Gardens of Eden, which the Beneficent hath promised to His slaves in
the unseen. Lo! His promise is ever sure of fulfilment -

S: The gardens of perpetuity which the Beneficent Allah has promised to
His servants while unseen; surely His promise shall come to pass.

019.062
Y: They will not there hear any vain discourse, but only salutations of
Peace: And they will have therein their sustenance, morning and
evening.

P: They hear therein no idle talk, but only Peace; and therein they have
food for morn and evening.

S: They shall not hear therein any vain discourse, but only: Peace, and
they shall have their sustenance therein morning and evening.

019.063
Y: Such is the Garden which We give as an inheritance to those of Our
servants who guard against Evil.

P: Such is the Garden which We cause the devout among Our bondmen to
inherit.

S: This is the garden which We cause those of Our servants to inherit
who guard (against evil).

019.064
Y: (The angels say:) "We descend not but by command of thy Lord: to Him
belongeth what is before us and what is behind us, and what is between:
and thy Lord never doth forget,"-

P: We (angels) come not down save by commandment of thy Lord. Unto Him
belongeth all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that
is between those two, and thy Lord was never forgetful -

S: And we do not descend but by the command of your Lord; to Him belongs
whatever is before us and whatever is behind us and whatever is between
these, and your Lord is not forgetful.

019.065
Y: "Lord of the heavens and of the earth, and of all that is between
them; so worship Him, and be constant and patient in His worship:
knowest thou of any who is worthy of the same Name as He?"

P: Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them!
Therefor, worship thou Him and be thou steadfast in His service.
Knowest thou one that can be named along with Him?

S: The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, so
serve Him and be patient in His service. Do you know any one equal to
Him?

019.066
Y: Man says: "What! When I am dead, shall I then be raised up alive?"

P: And man saith: When I am dead, shall I forsooth be brought forth
alive?

S: And says man: What! when I am dead shall I truly be brought forth
alive?

019.067
Y: But does not man call to mind that We created him before out of
nothing?

P: Doth not man remember that We created him before, when he was naught?

S: Does not man remember that We created him before, when he was
nothing?

019.068
Y: So, by thy Lord, without doubt, We shall gather them together, and
(also) the Evil Ones (with them); then shall We bring them forth on
their knees round about Hell;

P: And, by thy Lord, verily We shall assemble them and the devils, then
We shall bring them, crouching, around hell.

S: So by your Lord! We will most certainly gather them together and the
Shaitans, then shall We certainly cause them to be present round hell
on their knees.

019.069
Y: Then shall We certainly drag out from every sect all those who were
worst in obstinate rebellion against (Allah) Most Gracious.

P: Then We shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most
stubborn in rebellion to the Beneficent.

S: Then We will most certainly draw forth from every sect of them him
who is most exorbitantly rebellious against the Beneficent Allah.

019.070
Y: And certainly We know best those who are most worthy of being burned
therein.

P: And surely We are Best Aware of those most worthy to be burned
therein.

S: Again We do certainly know best those who deserve most to be burned
therein.

019.071
Y: Not one of you but will pass over it: this is, with thy Lord, a
Decree which must be accomplished.

P: There is not one of you but shall approach it. That is a fixed
ordinance of thy Lord.

S: And there is not one of you but shall come to it; this is an
unavoidable decree of your Lord.

019.072
Y: But We shall save those who guarded against evil, and We shall leave
the wrong-doers therein, (humbled) to their knees.

P: Then We shall rescue those who kept from evil, and leave the
evil-doers crouching there.

S: And We will deliver those who guarded (against evil), and We will
leave the unjust therein on their knees.

019.073
Y: When Our Clear Signs are rehearsed to them, the Unbelievers say to
those who believe, "Which of the two sides is best in point of
position? Which makes the best show in council?"

P: And when Our clear revelations are recited unto them, those who
disbelieve say unto those who believe: Which of the two parties (yours
or ours) is better in position, and more imposing as an army?

S: And when Our clear communications are recited to them, those who
disbelieve say to those who believe: Which of the two parties is best
in abiding and best in assembly?

019.074
Y: But how many (countless) generations before them have we destroyed,
who were even better in equipment and in glitter to the eye?

P: How many a generation have We destroyed before them, who were more
imposing in respect of gear and outward seeming!

S: And how many of the generations have We destroyed before them who
were better in respect of goods and outward appearance!

019.075
Y: Say: "If any men go astray, (Allah) Most Gracious extends (the rope)
to them, until, when they see the warning of Allah (being fulfilled) -
either in punishment or in (the approach of) the Hour,- they will at
length realise who is worst in position, and (who) weakest in forces!"

P: Say: As for him who is in error, the Beneficent will verily prolong
his span of life until, when they behold that which they were promised,
whether it be punishment (in the world), or the Hour (of doom), they
will know who is worse in position and who is weaker as an army.

S: Say: As for him who remains in error, the Beneficent Allah will
surely prolong his length of days, until they see what they were
threatened with, either the punishment or the hour; then they shall
know who is in more evil plight and weaker in forces.

019.076
Y: "And Allah doth advance in guidance those who seek guidance: and the
things that endure, Good Deeds, are best in the sight of thy Lord, as
rewards, and best in respect of (their) eventual return."

P: Allah increaseth in right guidance those who walk aright, and the
good deeds which endure are better in thy Lord's sight for reward, and
better for resort.

S: And Allah increases in guidance those who go aright; and ever-abiding
good works are with your Lord best in recompense and best in yielding
fruit.

019.077
Y: Hast thou then seen the (sort of) man who rejects Our Signs, yet
says: "I shall certainly be given wealth and children?"

P: Hast thou seen him who disbelieveth in Our revelations and saith:
Assuredly I shall be given wealth and children?

S: Have you, then, seen him who disbelieves in Our communications and
says: I shall certainly be given wealth and children?

019.078
Y: Has he penetrated to the Unseen, or has he taken a contract with
(Allah) Most Gracious?

P: Hath he perused the Unseen, or hath he made a pact with the
Beneficent?

S: Has he gained knowledge of the unseen, or made a covenant with the
Beneficent Allah?

019.079
Y: Nay! We shall record what he says, and We shall add and add to his
punishment.

P: Nay, but We shall record that which he saith and prolong for him a
span of torment.

S: By no means! We write down what he says, and We will lengthen to him
the length of the chastisement,

019.080
Y: To Us shall return all that he talks of and he shall appear before Us
bare and alone.

P: And We shall inherit from him that whereof he spake, and he will come
unto Us, alone (without his wealth and children).

S: And We will inherit of him what he says, and he shall come to Us
alone.

019.081
Y: And they have taken (for worship) gods other than Allah, to give them
power and glory!

P: And they have chosen (other) gods beside Allah that they may be a
power for them.

S: And they have taken gods besides Allah, that they should be to them a
source of strength;

019.082
Y: Instead, they shall reject their worship, and become adversaries
against them.

P: Nay, but they will deny their worship of them, and become opponents
unto them.

S: By no means! They shall soon deny their worshipping them, and they
shall be adversaries to them.

019.083
Y: Seest thou not that We have set the Evil Ones on against the
unbelievers, to incite them with fury?

P: Seest thou not that We have set the devils on the disbelievers to
confound them with confusion?

S: Do you not see that We have sent the Shaitans against the
unbelievers, inciting them by incitement?

019.084
Y: So make no haste against them, for We but count out to them a
(limited) number (of days).

P: So make no haste against them (O Muhammad). We do but number unto
them a sum (of days).

S: Therefore be not in haste against them, We only number out to them a
number (of days).

019.085
Y: The day We shall gather the righteous to (Allah) Most Gracious, like
a band presented before a king for honours,

P: On the day when We shall gather the righteous unto the Beneficent, a
goodly company.

S: The day on which We will gather those who guard (against evil) to the
Beneficent Allah to receive honors,

019.086
Y: And We shall drive the sinners to Hell, like thirsty cattle driven
down to water,-

P: And drive the guilty unto hell, a weary herd,

S: And We will drive the guilty to hell thirsty

019.087
Y: None shall have the power of intercession, but such a one as has
received permission (or promise) from (Allah) Most Gracious.

P: They will have no power of intercession, save him who hath made a
covenant with his Lord.

S: They shall not control intercession, save he who has made a covenant
with the Beneficent Allah.

019.088
Y: They say: "(Allah) Most Gracious has begotten a son!"

P: And they say: The Beneficent hath taken unto Himself a son.

S: And they say: The Beneficent Allah has taken (to Himself) a son.

019.089
Y: Indeed ye have put forth a thing most monstrous!

P: Assuredly ye utter a disastrous thing

S: Certainly you have made an abominable assertion

019.090
Y: At it the skies are ready to burst, the earth to split asunder, and
the mountains to fall down in utter ruin,

P: Whereby almost the heavens are torn, and the earth is split asunder
and the mountains fall in ruins,

S: The heavens may almost be rent thereat, and the earth cleave asunder,
and the mountains fall down in pieces,

019.091
Y: That they should invoke a son for (Allah) Most Gracious.

P: That ye ascribe unto the Beneficent a son,

S: That they ascribe a son to the Beneficent Allah.

019.092
Y: For it is not consonant with the majesty of (Allah) Most Gracious
that He should beget a son.

P: When it is not meet for (the Majesty of) the Beneficent that He
should choose a son.

S: And it is not worthy of the Beneficent Allah that He should take (to
Himself) a son.

019.093
Y: Not one of the beings in the heavens and the earth but must come to
(Allah) Most Gracious as a servant.

P: There is none in the heavens and the earth but cometh unto the
Beneficent as a slave.

S: There is no one in the heavens and the earth but will come to the
Beneficent Allah as a servant.

019.094
Y: He does take an account of them (all), and hath numbered them (all)
exactly.

P: Verily He knoweth them and numbereth them with (right) numbering.

S: Certainly He has a comprehensive knowledge of them and He has
numbered them a (comprehensive) numbering.

019.095
Y: And everyone of them will come to Him singly on the Day of Judgment.

P: And each one of them will come unto Him on the Day of Resurrection,
alone.

S: And every one of them will come to Him on the day of resurrection
alone.

019.096
Y: On those who believe and work deeds of righteousness, will (Allah)
Most Gracious bestow love.

P: Lo! those who believe and do good works, the Beneficent will appoint
for them love.

S: Surely (as for) those who believe and do good deeds for them will
Allah bring about love.

019.097
Y: So have We made the (Qur'an) easy in thine own tongue, that with it
thou mayest give Glad Tidings to the righteous, and warnings to people
given to contention.

P: And We make (this Scripture) easy in thy tongue, (O Muhammad) only
that thou mayst bear good tidings therewith unto those who ward off
(evil), and warn therewith the froward folk.

S: So We have only made it easy in your tongue that you may give good
news thereby to those who guard (against evil) and warn thereby a
vehemently contentious people.

019.098
Y: But how many (countless) generations before them have We destroyed?
Canst thou find a single one of them (now) or hear (so much as) a
whisper of them?

P: And how many a generation before them have We destroyed! Canst thou
(Muhammad) see a single man of them, or hear from them the slightest
sound?

S: And how many a generation have We destroyed before them! Do you see
any one of them or hear a sound of them?

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 20:

                               TA-HA (TA-HA)
 Total Verses: 135 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

020.001
Y: Ta-Ha.

P: Ta. Ha.

S: Ta Ha.

020.002
Y: We have not sent down the Qur'an to thee to be (an occasion) for thy
distress,

P: We have not revealed unto thee (Muhammad) this Qur'an that thou
shouldst be distressed,

S: We have not revealed the Quran to you that you may be unsuccessful.

020.003
Y: But only as an admonition to those who fear (Allah),-

P: But as a reminder unto him who feareth,

S: Nay, it is a reminder to him who fears:

020.004
Y: A revelation from Him Who created the earth and the heavens on high.

P: A revelation from Him Who created the earth and the high heavens,

S: A revelation from Him Who created the earth and the high heavens.

020.005
Y: (Allah) Most Gracious is firmly established on the throne (of
authority).

P: The Beneficent One, Who is established on the Throne.

S: The Beneficent Allah is firm in power.

020.006
Y: To Him belongs what is in the heavens and on earth, and all between
them, and all beneath the soil.

P: Unto Him belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in
the earth, and whatsoever is between them, and whatsoever is beneath
the sod.

S: His is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth and what is
between them two and what is beneath the ground.

020.007
Y: If thou pronounce the word aloud, (it is no matter): for verily He
knoweth what is secret and what is yet more hidden.

P: And if thou speakest aloud, then lo! He knoweth the secret (thought)
and (that which is yet) more hidden.

S: And if you utter the saying aloud, then surely He knows the secret,
and what is yet more hidden.

020.008
Y: Allah! there is no god but He! To Him belong the most Beautiful
Names.

P: Allah! There is no God save Him. His are the most beautiful names.

S: Allah-- there is no god but He; His are the very best names.

020.009
Y: Has the story of Moses reached thee?

P: Hath there come unto thee the story of Moses?

S: And has the story of Musa come to you?

020.010
Y: Behold, he saw a fire: So he said to his family, "Tarry ye; I
perceive a fire; perhaps I can bring you some burning brand therefrom,
or find some guidance at the fire."

P: When he saw a fire and said unto his folk: Lo! Wait! I see a fire
afar off. Peradventure I may bring you a brand therefrom or may find
guidance at the fire.

S: When he saw fire, he said to his family: Stop, for surely I see a
fire, haply I may bring to you therefrom a live coal or find a guidance
at the fire.

020.011
Y: But when he came to the fire, a voice was heard: "O Moses!"

P: And when he reached it, he was called by name: O Moses!

S: So when he came to it, a voice was uttered: O Musa:

020.012
Y: "Verily I am thy Lord! therefore (in My presence) put off thy shoes:
thou art in the sacred valley Tuwa."

P: Lo! I, even I, am thy Lord. So take off thy shoes, for lo! thou art
in the holy valley of Tuwa.

S: Surely I am your Lord, therefore put off your shoes; surely you are
in the sacred valley, Tuwa,

020.013
Y: "I have chosen thee: listen, then, to the inspiration (sent to thee)."

P: And I have chosen thee, so hearken unto that which is inspired.

S: And I have chosen you, so listen to what is revealed:

020.014
Y: "Verily, I am Allah: There is no god but I: So serve thou Me (only),
and establish regular prayer for celebrating My praise."

P: Lo! I, even I, am Allah, There is no God save Me. So serve Me and
establish worship for My remembrance.

S: Surely I am Allah, there is no god but I, therefore serve Me and keep
up prayer for My remembrance:

020.015
Y: "Verily the Hour is coming - My design is to keep it hidden - for
every soul to receive its reward by the measure of its Endeavour."

P: Lo! the Hour is surely coming. But I will to keep it hidden, that
every soul may be rewarded for that which it striveth (to achieve).

S: Surely the hour is coming-- I am about to make it manifest-- so that
every soul may be rewarded as it strives:

020.016
Y: "Therefore let not such as believe not therein but follow their own
lusts, divert thee therefrom, lest thou perish!"..

P: Therefor, let not him turn thee aside from (the thought of) it who
believeth not therein but followeth his own desire, lest thou perish.

S: Therefore let not him who believes not in it and follows his low
desires turn you away from it so that you should perish;

020.017
Y: "And what is that in the right hand, O Moses?"

P: And what is that in thy right hand, O Moses?

S: And what is this in your right hand, O Musa!

020.018
Y: He said, "It is my rod: on it I lean; with it I beat down fodder for
my flocks; and in it I find other uses."

P: He said: This is my staff whereon I lean, and wherewith I bear down
branches for my sheep, and wherein I find other uses.

S: He said: This is my staff: I recline on it and I beat the leaves with
it to make them fall upon my sheep, and I have other uses for it.

020.019
Y: (Allah) said, "Throw it, O Moses!"

P: He said: Cast it down, O Moses!

S: He said: Cast it down, O Musa!

020.020
Y: He threw it, and behold! It was a snake, active in motion.

P: So he cast it down, and lo! it was a serpent, gliding.

S: So he cast it down; and lo! it was a serpent running.

020.021
Y: (Allah) said, "Seize it, and fear not: We shall return it at once to
its former condition"..

P: He said: Grasp it and fear not. We shall return it to its former
state.

S: He said: Take hold of it and fear not; We will restore it to its
former state:

020.022
Y: "Now draw thy hand close to thy side: It shall come forth white (and
shining), without harm (or stain),- as another Sign,"-

P: And thrust thy hand within thine armpit, it will come forth white
without hurt. (That will be) another token.

S: And press your hand to your side, it shall come out white without
evil: another sign:

020.023
Y: "In order that We may show thee (two) of our Greater Signs."

P: That We may show thee (some) of Our greater portents,

S: That We may show you of Our greater signs:

020.024
Y: "Go thou to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds."

P: Go thou unto Pharaoh! Lo! he hath transgressed (the bounds).

S: Go to Firon, surely he has exceeded all limits.

020.025
Y: (Moses) said: "O my Lord! expand me my breast;"

P: (Moses) said: My Lord! relieve my mind

S: He said: O my Lord! Expand my breast for me,

020.026
Y: "Ease my task for me;"

P: And ease my task for me;

S: And make my affair easy to me,

020.027
Y: "And remove the impediment from my speech,"

P: And loose a knot from my tongue,

S: And loose the knot from my tongue,

020.028
Y: "So they may understand what I say:"

P: That they may understand my saying.

S: (That) they may understand my word;

020.029
Y: "And give me a Minister from my family,"

P: Appoint for me a henchman from my folk,

S: And give to me an aider from my family:

020.030
Y: "Aaron, my brother;"

P: Aaron, my brother.

S: Haroun, my brother,

020.031
Y: "Add to my strength through him,"

P: Confirm my strength with him

S: Strengthen my back by him,

020.032
Y: "And make him share my task:"

P: And let him share my task,

S: And associate him (with me) in my affair,

020.033
Y: "That we may celebrate Thy praise without stint,"

P: That we may glorify Thee much

S: So that we should glorify Thee much,

020.034
Y: "And remember Thee without stint:"

P: And much remember Thee.

S: And remember Thee oft.

020.035
Y: "For Thou art He that (ever) regardeth us."

P: Lo! Thou art ever Seeing us.

S: Surely, Thou art seeing us.

020.036
Y: (Allah) said: "Granted is thy prayer, O Moses!"

P: He said: Thou art granted thy request, O Moses.

S: He said: You are indeed granted your petition, O Musa

020.037
Y: "And indeed We conferred a favour on thee another time (before)."

P: And indeed, another time, already We have shown thee favour,

S: And certainly We bestowed on you a favor at another time;

020.038
Y: "Behold! We sent to thy mother, by inspiration, the message:"

P: When we inspired in thy mother that which is inspired,

S: When We revealed to your mother what was revealed;

020.039
Y: "'Throw (the child) into the chest, and throw (the chest) into the
river: the river will cast him up on the bank, and he will be taken up
by one who is an enemy to Me and an enemy to him': But I cast (the
garment of) love over thee from Me: and (this) in order that thou
mayest be reared under Mine eye."

P: Saying: Throw him into the ark, and throw it into the river, then the
river shall throw it on to the bank, and there an enemy to Me and an
enemy to him shall take him. And I endued thee with love from Me that
thou mightest be trained according to My will,

S: Saying: Put him into a chest, then cast it down into the river, then
the river shall throw him on the shore; there shall take him up one who
is an enemy to Me and enemy to him, and I cast down upon you love from
Me, and that you might be brought up before My eyes;

020.040
Y: "Behold! thy sister goeth forth and saith, 'shall I show you one who
will nurse and rear the (child)?' So We brought thee back to thy
mother, that her eye might be cooled and she should not grieve. Then
thou didst slay a man, but We saved thee from trouble, and We tried
thee in various ways. Then didst thou tarry a number of years with the
people of Midian. Then didst thou come hither as ordained, O Moses!"

P: When thy sister went and said: Shall I show you one who will nurse
him? and we restored thee to thy mother that her eyes might be
refreshed and might not sorrow. And thou didst kill a man and We
delivered thee from great distress, and tried thee with a heavy trial.
And thou didst tarry years among the folk of Midian. Then camest thou
(hither) by (My) providence, O Moses,

S: When your sister went and said: Shall I direct you to one who will
take charge of him? So We brought you back to your mother, that her eye
might be cooled and she should not grieve and you killed a man, then We
delivered you from the grief, and We tried you with (a severe) trying.
Then you stayed for years among the people of Madyan; then you came
hither as ordained, O Musa.

020.041
Y: "And I have prepared thee for Myself (for service)"..

P: And I have attached thee to Myself.

S: And I have chosen you for Myself:

020.042
Y: "Go, thou and thy brother, with My Signs, and slacken not, either of
you, in keeping Me in remembrance."

P: Go, thou and thy brother, with My tokens, and be not faint in
remembrance of Me.

S: Go you and your brother with My communications and be not remiss in
remembering Me;

020.043
Y: "Go, both of you, to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all
bounds;"

P: Go, both of you, unto Pharaoh. Lo! he hath transgressed (the bounds).

S: Go both to Firon, surely he has become inordinate;

020.044
Y: "But speak to him mildly; perchance he may take warning or fear
(Allah)."

P: And speak unto him a gentle word, that peradventure he may heed or
fear.

S: Then speak to him a gentle word haply he may mind or fear.

020.045
Y: They (Moses and Aaron) said: "Our Lord! We fear lest he hasten with
insolence against us, or lest he transgress all bounds."

P: They said: Our Lord! Lo! we fear that he may be beforehand with us or
that he may play the tyrant.

S: Both said: O our Lord! Surely we fear that he may hasten to do evil
to us or that he may become inordinate.

020.046
Y: He said: "Fear not: for I am with you: I hear and see (everything)."

P: He said: Fear not. Lo! I am with you twain, Hearing and Seeing.

S: He said: Fear not, surely I am with you both: I do hear and see.

020.047
Y: "So go ye both to him, and say, 'Verily we are messengers sent by thy
Lord: Send forth, therefore, the Children of Israel with us, and
afflict them not: with a Sign, indeed, have we come from thy Lord! and
peace to all who follow guidance!"

P: So go ye unto him and say: Lo! we are two messengers of thy Lord. So
let the children of Israel go with us, and torment them not. We bring
thee a token from thy Lord. And peace will be for him who followeth
right guidance.

S: So go you both to him and say: Surely we are two messengers of your
Lord; therefore send the children of Israel with us and do not torment
them! Indeed we have brought to you a communication from your Lord, and
peace is on him who follows the guidance;

020.048
Y: "'Verily it has been revealed to us that the Penalty (awaits) those
who reject and turn away.'"

P: Lo! it hath been revealed unto us that the doom will be for him who
denieth and turneth away.

S: Surely it has been revealed to us that the chastisement will surely
come upon him who rejects and turns back.

020.049
Y: (When this message was delivered), (Pharaoh) said: "Who, then, O
Moses, is the Lord of you two?"

P: (Pharaoh) said: Who then is the Lord of you twain, O Moses?

S: (Firon) said: And who is your Lord, O Musa?

020.050
Y: He said: "Our Lord is He Who gave to each (created) thing its form
and nature, and further, gave (it) guidance."

P: He said: Our Lord is He Who gave unto everything its nature, then
guided it aright.

S: He said: Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its creation, then
guided it (to its goal).

020.051
Y: (Pharaoh) said: "What then is the condition of previous generations?"

P: He said: What then is the state of the generations of old?

S: He said: Then what is the state of the former generations?

020.052
Y: He replied: "The knowledge of that is with my Lord, duly recorded: my
Lord never errs, nor forgets,"-

P: He said: The knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a Record. My Lord
neither erreth nor forgetteth,

S: He said: The knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a book, my Lord
errs not, nor does He forget;

020.053
Y: "He Who has, made for you the earth like a carpet spread out; has
enabled you to go about therein by roads (and channels); and has sent
down water from the sky." With it have We produced diverse pairs of
plants each separate from the others.

P: Who hath appointed the earth as a bed and hath threaded roads for you
therein and hath sent down water from the sky and thereby We have
brought forth divers kinds of vegetation,

S: Who made the earth for you an expanse and made for you therein paths
and sent down water from the cloud; then thereby We have brought forth
many species of various herbs.

020.054
Y: Eat (for yourselves) and pasture your cattle: verily, in this are
Signs for men endued with understanding.

P: (Saying): Eat ye and feed your cattle. Lo! herein verily are portents
for men of thought.

S: Eat and pasture your cattle; most surely there are signs in this for
those endowed with understanding.

020.055
Y: From the (earth) did We create you, and into it shall We return you,
and from it shall We bring you out once again.

P: Thereof We created you, and thereunto We return you, and thence We
bring you forth a second time.

S: From it We created you and into it We shall send you back and from it
will We raise you a second time.

020.056
Y: And We showed Pharaoh all Our Signs, but he did reject and refuse.

P: And We verily did show him all Our tokens, but he denied them and
refused.

S: And truly We showed him Our signs, all of them, but he rejected and
refused.

020.057
Y: He said: "Hast thou come to drive us out of our land with thy magic,
O Moses?"

P: He said: Hast come to drive us out from our land by thy magic, O
Moses?

S: Said he: Have you come to us that you should turn us out of our land
by your magic, O Musa?

020.058
Y: "But we can surely produce magic to match thine! So make a tryst
between us and thee, which we shall not fail to keep - neither we nor
thou - in a place where both shall have even chances."

P: But we surely can produce for thee magic the like thereof; so appoint
a tryst between us and you, which neither we nor thou shall fail to
keep, at a place convenient (to us both).

S: So we too will produce before you magic like it, therefore make
between us and you an appointment, which we should not break, (neither)
we nor you, (in) a central place.

020.059
Y: Moses said: "Your tryst is the Day of the Festival, and let the
people be assembled when the sun is well up."

P: (Moses) said: Your tryst shall be the day of the feast, and let the
people assemble when the sun hath risen high.

S: (Musa) said: Your appointment is the day of the Festival and let the
people be gathered together in the early forenoon.

020.060
Y: So Pharaoh withdrew: He concerted his plan, and then came (back).

P: Then Pharaoh went and gathered his strength, then came (to the
appointed tryst).

S: So Firon turned his back and settled his plan, then came.

020.061
Y: Moses said to him: "Woe to you! Forge not ye a lie against Allah, lest
He destroy you (at once) utterly by chastisement: the forger must
suffer frustration!"

P: Moses said unto them: Woe unto you! Invent not a lie against Allah,
lest He extirpate you by some punishment. He who lieth faileth
miserably.

S: Musa said to them: Woe to you! do not forge a lie against Allah, lest
He destroy you by a punishment, and he who forges (a lie) indeed fails
to attain (his desire).

020.062
Y: So they disputed, one with another, over their affair, but they kept
their talk secret.

P: Then they debated one with another what they must do, and they kept
their counsel secret.

S: So they disputed with one another about their affair and kept the
discourse secret.

020.063
Y: They said: "These two are certainly (expert) magicians: their object
is to drive you out from your land with their magic, and to do away
with your most cherished institutions".

P: They said: Lo! these are two wizards who would drive you out from
your country by their magic, and destroy your best traditions;

S: They said: These are most surely two magicians who wish to turn you
out from your land by their magic and to take away your best
traditions.

020.064
Y: "Therefore concert your plan, and then assemble in (serried) ranks:
He wins (all along) today who gains the upper hand."

P: So arrange your plan, and come in battle line. Whoso is uppermost
this day will be indeed successful.

S: Therefore settle your plan, then come standing in ranks and he will
prosper indeed this day who overcomes.

020.065
Y: They said: "O Moses! whether wilt thou that thou throw (first) or
that we be the first to throw?"

P: They said: O Moses! Either throw first, or let us be the first to
throw?

S: They said: O Musa! will you cast, or shall we be the first who cast
down?

020.066
Y: He said, "Nay, throw ye first!" Then behold their ropes and their
rods-so it seemed to him on account of their magic - began to be in
lively motion!

P: He said: Nay, do ye throw! Then lo! their cords and their staves, by
their magic, appeared to him as though they ran.

S: He said: Nay! cast down. Then lo! their cords and their rods-- it was
imaged to him on account of their magic as if they were running.

020.067
Y: So Moses conceived in his mind a (sort of) fear.

P: And Moses conceived a fear in his mind.

S: So Musa conceived in his mind a fear.

020.068
Y: We said: "Fear not! for thou hast indeed the upper hand:"

P: We said: Fear not! Lo! thou art the higher.

S: We said: Fear not, surely you shall be the uppermost,

020.069
Y: "Throw that which is in thy right hand: Quickly will it swallow up
that which they have faked what they have faked is but a magician's
trick: and the magician thrives not, (no matter) where he goes."

P: Throw that which is in thy right hand! It will eat up that which they
have made. Lo! that which they have made is but a wizard's artifice,
and a wizard shall not be successful to whatever point (of skill) he
may attain.

S: And cast down what is in your right hand; it shall devour what they
have wrought; they have wrought only the plan of a magician, and the
magician shall not be successful wheresoever he may come from.

020.070
Y: So the magicians were thrown down to prostration: they said, "We
believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses".

P: Then the wizards were (all) flung down prostrate, crying: We believe
in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.

S: And the magicians were cast down making obeisance; they said: We
believe in the Lord of Haroun and Musa.

020.071
Y: (Pharaoh) said: "Believe ye in Him before I give you permission?
Surely this must be your leader, who has taught you magic! be sure I
will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I will have you
crucified on trunks of palm-trees: so shall ye know for certain, which
of us can give the more severe and the more lasting punishment!"

P: (Pharaoh) said: Ye put faith in him before I give you leave. Lo! he
is your chief who taught you magic. Now surely I shall cut off your
hands and your feet alternately, and I shall crucify you on the trunks
of palm trees, and ye shall know for certain which of us hath sterner
and more lasting punishment.

S: (Firon) said: You believe in him before I give you leave; most surely
he is the chief of you who taught you enchantment, therefore I will
certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, and I
will certainly crucify you on the trunks of the palm trees, and
certainly you will come to know which of us is the more severe and the
more abiding in chastising.

020.072
Y: They said: "Never shall we regard thee as more than the Clear Signs
that have come to us, or than Him Who created us! so decree whatever
thou desirest to decree: for thou canst only decree (touching) the life
of this world."

P: They said: We choose thee not above the clear proofs that have come
unto us, and above Him Who created us. So decree what thou wilt decree.
Thou wilt end for us only this life of the world.

S: They said: We do not prefer you to what has come to us of clear
arguments and to He Who made us, therefore decide what you are going to
decide; you can only decide about this world's life.

020.073
Y: "For us, we have believed in our Lord: may He forgive us our faults,
and the magic to which thou didst compel us: for Allah is Best and Most
Abiding."

P: Lo! we believe in our Lord, that He may forgive us our sins and the
magic unto which thou didst force us. Allah is better and more lasting.

S: Surely we believe in our Lord that He may forgive us our sins and the
magic to which you compelled us; and Allah is better and more abiding.

020.074
Y: Verily he who comes to his Lord as a sinner (at Judgment),- for him
is Hell: therein shall he neither die nor live.

P: Lo! whoso cometh guilty unto his Lord, verily for him is hell. There
he will neither die nor live.

S: Whoever comes to his Lord (being) guilty, for him is surely hell; he
shall not die therein, nor shall he live.

020.075
Y: But such as come to Him as Believers who have worked righteous
deeds,- for them are ranks exalted,-

P: But whoso cometh unto Him a believer, having done good works, for
such are the high stations;

S: And whoever comes to Him a believer (and) he has done good deeds
indeed, these it is who shall have the high ranks,

020.076
Y: Gardens of Eternity, beneath which flow rivers: they will dwell
therein for aye: such is the reward of those who purify themselves
(from evil).

P: Gardens of Eden underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide
for ever. That is the reward of him who groweth.

S: The gardens of perpetuity, beneath which rivers flow, to abide
therein; and this is the reward of him who has purified himself.

020.077
Y: We sent an inspiration to Moses: "Travel by night with My servants,
and strike a dry path for them through the sea, without fear of being
overtaken (by Pharaoh) and without (any other) fear."

P: And verily We inspired Moses, saying: Take away My slaves by night
and strike for them a dry path in the sea, fearing not to be overtaken,
neither being afraid (of the sea).

S: And certainly We revealed to Musa, saying: Travel by night with My
servants, then make for them a dry path in the sea, not fearing to be
overtaken, nor being afraid.

020.078
Y: Then Pharaoh pursued them with his forces, but the waters completely
overwhelmed them and covered them up.

P: Then Pharaoh followed them with his hosts and there covered them that
which did cover them of the sea.

S: And Firon followed them with his armies, so there came upon them of
the sea that which came upon them.

020.079
Y: Pharaoh led his people astray instead of leading them aright.

P: And Pharaoh led his folk astray, he did not guide them.

S: And Firon led astray his people and he did not guide (them) aright.

020.080
Y: O ye Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, and We
made a Covenant with you on the right side of Mount (Sinai), and We
sent down to you Manna and quails:

P: O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, and we made a
covenant with you on the holy mountain's side, and sent down on you the
manna and the quails,

S: O children of Israel! indeed We delivered you from your enemy, and We
made a covenant with you on the blessed side of the mountain, and We
sent to you the manna and the quails.

020.081
Y: (Saying): "Eat of the good things We have provided for your
sustenance, but commit no excess therein, lest My Wrath should justly
descend on you: and those on whom descends My Wrath do perish indeed!"

P: (Saying): Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you, and
transgress not in respect thereof lest My wrath come upon you: and he
on whom My wrath cometh, he is lost indeed.

S: Eat of the good things We have given you for sustenance, and be not
inordinate with respect to them, lest My wrath should be due to you,
and to whomsoever My wrath is due be shall perish indeed.

020.082
Y: "But, without doubt, I am (also) He that forgives again and again, to
those who repent, believe, and do right, who,- in fine, are ready to
receive true guidance."

P: And lo! verily I am Forgiving toward him who repenteth and believeth
and doeth good, and afterward walketh aright.

S: And most surely I am most Forgiving to him who repents and believes
and does good, then continues to follow the right direction.

020.083
Y: (When Moses was up on the Mount, Allah said:) "What made thee hasten
in advance of thy people, O Moses?"

P: And (it was said): What hath made thee hasten from thy folk, O Moses?

S: And what caused you to hasten from your people, O Musa?

020.084
Y: He replied: "Behold, they are close on my footsteps: I hastened to
thee, O my Lord, to please thee."

P: He said: They are close upon my track. I hastened unto Thee, my Lord,
that Thou mightest be well pleased.

S: He said: They are here on my track and I hastened on to Thee, my
Lord, that Thou mightest be pleased.

020.085
Y: (Allah) said: "We have tested thy people in thy absence: the Samiri
has led them astray."

P: He said: Lo! We have tried thy folk in thine absence, and As-Samiri
hath misled them.

S: He said: So surely We have tried your people after you, and the
Samiri has led them astray.

020.086
Y: So Moses returned to his people in a state of indignation and sorrow.
He said: "O my people! did not your Lord make a handsome promise to
you? Did then the promise seem to you long (in coming)? Or did ye
desire that Wrath should descend from your Lord on you, and so ye broke
your promise to me?"

P: Then Moses went back unto his folk, angry and sad. He said: O my
people! Hath not your Lord promised you a fair promise? Did the time
appointed then appear too long for you, or did ye wish that wrath from
your Lord should come upon you, that ye broke tryst with me?

S: So Musa returned to his people wrathful, sorrowing. Said he: O my
people! did not your Lord promise you a goodly promise: did then the
time seem long to you, or did you wish that displeasure from your Lord
should be due to you, so that you broke (your) promise to me?

020.087
Y: They said: "We broke not the promise to thee, as far as lay in our
power: but we were made to carry the weight of the ornaments of the
(whole) people, and we threw them (into the fire), and that was what
the Samiri suggested."

P: They said: We broke not tryst with thee of our own will, but we were
laden with burdens of ornaments of the folk, then cast them (in the
fire), for thus As-Samiri proposed.

S: They said: We did not break (our) promise to you of our own accord,
but we were made to bear the burdens of the ornaments of the people,
then we made a casting of them, and thus did the Samiri suggest.

020.088
Y: "Then he brought out (of the fire) before the (people) the image of a
calf: It seemed to low: so they said: This is your god, and the god of
Moses, but (Moses) has forgotten!"

P: Then he produced for them a calf, of saffron hue, which gave forth a
lowing sound. And they cried: This is your god and the god of Moses,
but he hath forgotten.

S: So he brought forth for them a calf, a (mere) body, which had a
mooing sound, so they said: This is your god and the god of Musa, but
he forgot.

020.089
Y: Could they not see that it could not return them a word (for answer),
and that it had no power either to harm them or to do them good?

P: See they not, then, that it returneth no saying unto them and
possesseth for them neither hurt nor use?

S: What! could they not see that it did not return to them a reply, and
(that) it did not control any harm or benefit for them?

020.090
Y: Aaron had already, before this said to them: "O my people! ye are
being tested in this: for verily your Lord is (Allah) Most Gracious; so
follow me and obey my command."

P: And Aaron indeed had told them beforehand: O my people! Ye are but
being seduced therewith, for lo! your Lord is the Beneficent, so follow
me and obey my order.

S: And certainly Haroun had said to them before: O my people! you are
only tried by it, and surely your Lord is the Beneficent Allah,
therefore follow me and obey my order.

020.091
Y: They had said: "We will not abandon this cult, but we will devote
ourselves to it until Moses returns to us."

P: They said: We shall by no means cease to be its votaries till Moses
return unto us.

S: They said: We will by no means cease to keep to its worship until
Musa returns to us.

020.092
Y: (Moses) said: "O Aaron! what kept thee back, when thou sawest them
going wrong,"

P: He (Moses) said: O Aaron! What held thee back when thou didst see
them gone astray,

S: (Musa) said: O Haroun! what prevented you, when you saw them going
astray,

020.093
Y: "From following me? Didst thou then disobey my order?"

P: That thou followedst me not? Hast thou then disobeyed my order?

S: So that you did not follow me? Did you then disobey my order?

020.094
Y: (Aaron) replied: "O son of my mother! Seize (me) not by my beard nor
by (the hair of) my head! Truly I feared lest thou shouldst say, 'Thou
has caused a division among the children of Israel, and thou didst not
respect my word!'"

P: He said: O son of my mother! Clutch not my beard nor my head! I
feared lest thou shouldst say: Thou hast caused division among the
Children of Israel, and hast not waited for my word.

S: He said: O son of my mother! seize me not by my beard nor by my head;
surely I was afraid lest you should say: You have caused a division
among the children of Israel and not waited for my word.

020.095
Y: (Moses) said: "What then is thy case, O Samiri?"

P: (Moses) said: And what hast thou to say, O Samiri?

S: He said: What was then your object, O Samiri?

020.096
Y: He replied: "I saw what they saw not: so I took a handful (of dust)
from the footprint of the Messenger, and threw it (into the calf): thus
did my soul suggest to me."

P: He said: I perceived what they perceive not, so I seized a handful
from the footsteps of the messenger, and then threw it in. Thus my soul
commended to me.

S: He said: I saw (Jibreel) what they did not see, so I took a handful
(of the dust) from the footsteps of the messenger, then I threw it in
the casting; thus did my soul commend to me.

020.097
Y: (Moses) said: "Get thee gone! but thy (punishment) in this life will
be that thou wilt say, 'touch me not'; and moreover (for a future
penalty) thou hast a promise that will not fail: Now look at thy god,
of whom thou hast become a devoted worshipper: We will certainly (melt)
it in a blazing fire and scatter it broadcast in the sea!"

P: (Moses) said: Then go! and lo! in this life it is for thee to say:
Touch me not! and lo! there is for thee a tryst thou canst not break.
Now look upon thy god of which thou hast remained a votary. Verily we
will burn it and will scatter its dust over the sea.

S: He said: Begone then, surely for you it will be in this life to say,
Touch (me) not; and surely there is a threat for you, which shall not
be made to fail to you, and look at your god to whose worship you kept
(so long); we will certainly burn it, then we will certainly scatter it
a (wide) scattering in the sea.

020.098
Y: But the god of you all is the One Allah: there is no god but He: all
things He comprehends in His knowledge.

P: Your God is only Allah, than Whom there is no other God. He
embraceth all things in His knowledge.

S: Your God is only Allah, there is no god but He; He comprehends all
things in (His) knowledge.

020.099
Y: Thus do We relate to thee some stories of what happened before: for
We have sent thee a Message from Our own Presence.

P: Thus relate We unto thee (Muhammad) some tidings of that which
happened of old, and We have given thee from Our presence a reminder.

S: Thus do We relate to you (some) of the news of what has gone before;
and indeed We have given to you a Reminder from Ourselves.

020.100
Y: If any do turn away therefrom, verily they will bear a burden on the
Day of judgment;

P: Whoso turneth away from it, he verily will bear a burden on the Day
of Resurrection,

S: Whoever turns aside from it, he shall surely bear a burden on the day
of resurrection,

020.101
Y: They will abide in this (state): and grievous will the burden be to
them on that Day,-

P: Abiding under it - an evil burden for them on the Day of
Resurrection,

S: Abiding in this (state), and evil will it be for them to bear on the
day of resurrection;

020.102
Y: The Day when the Trumpet will be sounded: that Day, We shall gather
the sinful, blear-eyed (with terror).

P: The day when the Trumpet is blown. On that day we assemble the guilty
white-eyed (with terror),

S: On the day when the trumpet shall be blown, and We will gather the
guilty, blue-eyed, on that day;

020.103
Y: In whispers will they consult each other: "Yet tarried not longer
than ten (Days);"

P: Murmuring among themselves: Ye have tarried but ten (days).

S: They shall consult together secretly: You did tarry but ten
(centuries).

020.104
Y: We know best what they will say, when their leader most eminent in
conduct will say: "Ye tarried not longer than a day!"

P: We are Best Aware of what they utter when their best in conduct say:
Ye have tarried but a day.

S: We know best what they say, when the fairest of them in course would
say: You tarried but a day.

020.105
Y: They ask thee concerning the Mountains: say, "My Lord will uproot
them and scatter them as dust;"

P: They will ask thee of the mountains (on that day). Say: My Lord will
break them into scattered dust.

S: And they ask you about the mountains. Say: My Lord will carry them
away from the roots.

020.106
Y: "He will leave them as plains smooth and level;"

P: And leave it as an empty plain,

S: Then leave it a plain, smooth level

020.107
Y: "Nothing crooked or curved wilt thou see in their place."

P: Wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness.

S: You shall not see therein any crookedness or unevenness.

020.108
Y: On that Day will they follow the Caller (straight): no crookedness
(can they show) him: all sounds shall humble themselves in the Presence
of (Allah) Most Gracious: nothing shalt thou hear but the tramp of
their feet (as they march).

P: On that day they follow the summoner who deceiveth not, and voices
are hushed for the Beneficent, and thou hearest but a faint murmur.

S: On that day they shall follow the inviter, there is no crookedness in
him, and the voices shall be low before the Beneficent Allah so that
you shall not hear aught but a soft sound.

020.109
Y: On that Day shall no intercession avail except for those for whom
permission has been granted by (Allah) Most Gracious and whose word is
acceptable to Him.

P: On that day no intercession availeth save (that of) him unto whom the
Beneficent hath given leave and whose word He accepteth.

S: On that day shall no intercession avail except of him whom the
Beneficent Allah allows and whose word He is pleased with.

020.110
Y: He knows what (appears to His creatures as) before or after or behind
them: but they shall not compass it with their knowledge.

P: He knoweth (all) that is before them and (all) that is behind them,
while they cannot compass it in knowledge.

S: He knows what is before them and what is behind them, while they do
not comprehend it in knowledge.

020.111
Y: (All) faces shall be humbled before (Him) - the Living, the
Self-Subsisting, Eternal: hopeless indeed will be the man that carries
iniquity (on his back).

P: And faces humble themselves before the Living, the Eternal. And he
who beareth (a burden of) wrongdoing is indeed a failure (on that day).

S: And the faces shall be humbled before the Living, the Self-subsistent
Allah, and he who bears iniquity is indeed a failure.

020.112
Y: But he who works deeds of righteousness, and has faith, will have no
fear of harm nor of any curtailment (of what is his due).

P: And he who hath done some good works, being a believer, he feareth
not injustice nor begrudging (of his wage).

S: And whoever does good works and he is a believer, he shall have no
fear of injustice nor of the withholding of his due.

020.113
Y: Thus have We sent this down - an Arabic Qur'an - and explained
therein in detail some of the warnings, in order that they may fear
Allah, or that it may cause their remembrance (of Him).

P: Thus we have revealed it as a Lecture in Arabic, and have displayed
therein certain threats, that peradventure they may keep from evil or
that it may cause them to take heed.

S: And thus have We sent it down an Arabic Quran, and have distinctly
set forth therein of threats that they may guard (against evil) or that
it may produce a reminder for them.

020.114
Y: High above all is Allah, the King, the Truth! Be not in haste with
the Qur'an before its revelation to thee is completed, but say, "O my
Lord! advance me in knowledge."

P: Then exalted be Allah, the True King! And hasten not (O Muhammad)
with the Qur'an ere its revelation hath been perfected unto thee, and
say: My Lord! Increase me in knowledge.

S: Supremely exalted is therefore Allah, the King, the Truth, and do not
make haste with the Quran before its revelation is made complete to you
and say: O my Lord! increase me in knowledge.

020.115
Y: We had already, beforehand, taken the covenant of Adam, but he
forgot: and We found on his part no firm resolve.

P: And verily We made a covenant of old with Adam, but he forgot, and We
found no constancy in him.

S: And certainly We gave a commandment to Adam before, but he forgot;
and We did not find in him any determination.

020.116
Y: When We said to the angels, "Prostrate yourselves to Adam", they
prostrated themselves, but not Iblis: he refused.

P: And when We said unto the angels: Fall prostrate before Adam, they
fell prostrate (all) save Iblis; he refused.

S: And when We said to the angels: Make obeisance to Adam, they made
obeisance, but Iblis (did it not); he refused.

020.117
Y: Then We said: "O Adam! verily, this is an enemy to thee and thy wife:
so let him not get you both out of the Garden, so that thou art landed
in misery."

P: Therefor we said: O Adam! This is an enemy unto thee and unto thy
wife, so let him not drive you both out of the Garden so that thou come
to toil.

S: So We said: O Adam! This is an enemy to you and to your wife;
therefore let him not drive you both forth from the garden so that you
should be unhappy;

020.118
Y: "There is therein (enough provision) for thee not to go hungry nor to
go naked,"

P: It is (vouchsafed) unto thee that thou hungerest not therein nor art
naked,

S: Surely it is (ordained) for you that you shall not be hungry therein
nor bare of clothing;

020.119
Y: "Nor to suffer from thirst, nor from the sun's heat."

P: And that thou thirstest not therein nor art exposed to the sun's
heat.

S: And that you shall not be thirsty therein nor shall you feel the heat
of the sun.

020.120
Y: But Satan whispered evil to him: he said, "O Adam! shall I lead thee
to the Tree of Eternity and to a kingdom that never decays?"

P: But the devil whispered to him, saying: O Adam! Shall I show thee the
tree of immortality and power that wasteth not away?

S: But the Shaitan made an evil suggestion to him; he said: O Adam!
Shall I guide you to the tree of immortality and a kingdom which decays
not?

020.121
Y: In the result, they both ate of the tree, and so their nakedness
appeared to them: they began to sew together, for their covering,
leaves from the Garden: thus did Adam disobey his Lord, and allow
himself to be seduced.

P: Then they twain ate thereof, so that their shame became apparent unto
them, and they began to hide by heaping on themselves some of the
leaves of the Garden. And Adam disobeyed his Lord, so went astray.

S: Then they both ate of it, so their evil inclinations became manifest
to them, and they both began to cover themselves with leaves of the
garden, and Adam disobeyed his Lord, so his life became evil (to him).

020.122
Y: But his Lord chose him (for His Grace): He turned to him, and gave
him Guidance.

P: Then his Lord chose him, and relented toward him, and guided him.

S: Then his Lord chose him, so He turned to him and guided (him).

020.123
Y: He said: "Get ye down, both of you,- all together, from the Garden,
with enmity one to another: but if, as is sure, there comes to you
Guidance from Me, whosoever follows My Guidance, will not lose his way,
nor fall into misery."

P: He said: Go down hence, both of you, one of you a foe unto the other.
But when there come unto you from Me a guidance, then whoso followeth
My guidance, he will not go astray nor come to grief.

S: He said: Get forth you two therefrom, all (of you), one of you (is)
enemy to another. So there will surely come to you guidance from Me,
then whoever follows My guidance, he shall not go astray nor be
unhappy;

020.124
Y: "But whosoever turns away from My Message, verily for him is a life
narrowed down, and We shall raise him up blind on the Day of Judgment."

P: But he who turneth away from remembrance of Me, his will be a narrow
life, and I shall bring him blind to the assembly on the Day of
Resurrection.

S: And whoever turns away from My reminder, his shall be a straitened
life, and We will raise him on the day of resurrection, blind.

020.125
Y: He will say: "O my Lord! why hast Thou raised me up blind, while I
had sight (before)?"

P: He will say: My Lord! Wherefor hast Thou gathered me (hither) blind,
when I was wont to see?

S: He shall say: My Lord! why hast Thou raised me blind and I was a
seeing one indeed?

020.126
Y: (Allah) will say: "Thus didst Thou, when Our Signs came unto thee,
disregard them: so wilt thou, this day, be disregarded."

P: He will say: So (it must be). Our revelations came unto thee but thou
didst forget them. In like manner thou art forgotten this Day.

S: He will say: Even so, Our communications came to you but you
neglected them; even thus shall you be forsaken this day.

020.127
Y: And thus do We recompense him who transgresses beyond bounds and
believes not in the Signs of his Lord: and the Penalty of the Hereafter
is far more grievous and more enduring.

P: Thus do We reward him who is prodigal and believeth not the
revelations of his Lord; and verily the doom of the Hereafter will be
sterner and more lasting.

S: And thus do We recompense him who is extravagant and does not believe
in the communications of his Lord, and certainly the chastisement of
the hereafter is severer and more lasting.

020.128
Y: Is it not a warning to such men (to call to mind) how many
generations before them We destroyed, in whose haunts they (now) move?
Verily, in this are Signs for men endued with understanding.

P: Is it not a guidance for them (to know) how many a generation We
destroyed before them, amid whose dwellings they walk? Lo! therein
verily are signs for men of thought.

S: Does it not then direct them aright how many of the generations in
whose dwelling-places they go about We destroyed before them? Most
surely there are signs in this for those endowed with understanding.

020.129
Y: Had it not been for a Word that went forth before from thy Lord,
(their punishment) must necessarily have come; but there is a Term
appointed (for respite).

P: And but for a decree that had already gone forth from thy Lord, and a
term already fixed, the judgment would have been inevitable (in this
world).

S: And had there not been a word (that had) already gone forth from your
Lord and an appointed term, it would surely have been made to cleave
(to them).

020.130
Y: Therefore be patient with what they say, and celebrate (constantly)
the praises of thy Lord, before the rising of the sun, and before its
setting; yea, celebrate them for part of the hours of the night, and at
the sides of the day: that thou mayest have (spiritual) joy.

P: Therefor (O Muhammad), bear with what they say, and celebrate the
praise of thy Lord ere the rising of the sun and ere the going down
thereof. And glorify Him some hours of the night and at the two ends of
the day, that thou mayst find acceptance.

S: Bear then patiently what they say, and glorify your Lord by the
praising of Him before the rising of the sun and before its setting,
and during hours of the night do also glorify (Him) and during parts of
the day, that you may be well pleased.

020.131
Y: Nor strain thine eyes in longing for the things We have given for
enjoyment to parties of them, the splendour of the life of this world,
through which We test them: but the provision of thy Lord is better and
more enduring.

P: And strain not thine eyes toward that which We cause some wedded
pairs among them to enjoy, the flower of the life of the world, that We
may try them thereby. The provision of thy Lord is better and more
lasting.

S: And do not stretch your eyes after that with which We have provided
different classes of them, (of) the splendor of this world's life, that
We may thereby try them; and the sustenance (given) by your Lord is
better and more abiding.

020.132
Y: Enjoin prayer on thy people, and be constant therein. We ask thee not
to provide sustenance: We provide it for thee. But the (fruit of) the
Hereafter is for righteousness.

P: And enjoin upon thy people worship, and be constant therein. We ask
not of thee a provision: We provided for thee. And the sequel is for
righteousness.

S: And enjoin prayer on your followers, and steadily adhere to it; We do
not ask you for subsistence; We do give you subsistence, and the (good)
end is for guarding (against evil).

020.133
Y: They say: "Why does he not bring us a sign from his Lord?" Has not a
Clear Sign come to them of all that was in the former Books of
revelation?

P: And they say: If only he would bring us a miracle from his Lord! Hath
there not come unto them the proof of what is in the former scriptures?

S: And they say: Why does he not bring to us a sign from his Lord? Has
not there come to them a clear evidence of what is in the previous
books?

020.134
Y: And if We had inflicted on them a penalty before this, they would
have said: "Our Lord! If only Thou hadst sent us a messenger, we should
certainly have followed Thy Signs before we were humbled and put to
shame."

P: And if we had destroyed them with some punishment before it, they
would assuredly have said: Our Lord! If only Thou hadst sent unto us a
messenger, so that we might have followed Thy revelations before we
were (thus) humbled and disgraced!

S: And had We destroyed them with chastisement before this, they would
certainly have said: O our Lord! why didst Thou not send to us a
messenger, for then we should have followed Thy communications before
that we met disgrace and shame.

020.135
Y: Say: "Each one (of us) is waiting: wait ye, therefore, and soon shall
ye know who it is that is on the straight and even way, and who it is
that has received Guidance."

P: Say: Each is awaiting; so await ye! Ye will come to know who are the
owners of the path of equity, and who is right.

S: Say: Every one (of us) is awaiting, therefore do await: So you will
come to know who is the follower of the even path and who goes aright.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 21:

                          AL-ANBIYA (THE PROPHETS)
 Total Verses: 112 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

021.001
Y: Closer and closer to mankind comes their Reckoning: yet they heed not
and they turn away.

P: Their reckoning draweth nigh for mankind, while they turn away in
heedlessness.

S: Their reckoning has drawn near to men, and in heedlessness are they
turning aside.

021.002
Y: Never comes (aught) to them of a renewed Message from their Lord, but
they listen to it as in jest,-

P: Never cometh there unto them a new reminder from their Lord but they
listen to it while they play,

S: There comes not to them a new reminder from their Lord but they hear
it while they sport,

021.003
Y: Their hearts toying as with trifles. The wrong-doers conceal their
private counsels, (saying), "Is this (one) more than a man like
yourselves? Will ye go to witchcraft with your eyes open?"

P: With hearts preoccupied. And they confer in secret. The wrong-doers
say: Is this other than a mortal like you? Will ye then succumb to
magic when ye see (it)?

S: Their hearts trifling; and those who are unjust counsel together in
secret: He is nothing but a mortal like yourselves; what! will you then
yield to enchantment while you see?

021.004
Y: Say: "My Lord knoweth (every) word (spoken) in the heavens and on
earth: He is the One that heareth and knoweth (all things)."

P: He saith: My Lord knoweth what is spoken in the heaven and the earth.
He is the Hearer, the Knower.

S: He said: My Lord knows what is spoken in the heaven and the earth,
and He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

021.005
Y: "Nay," they say, "(these are) medleys of dream! - Nay, He forged it!
- Nay, He is (but) a poet! Let him then bring us a Sign like the ones
that were sent to (Prophets) of old!"

P: Nay, say they, (these are but) muddled dreams; nay, he hath but
invented it; nay, he is but a poet. Let him bring us a portent even as
those of old (who were Allah's messengers) were sent (with portents).

S: Nay! say they: Medleys of dreams; nay! he has forged it; nay! he is a
poet; so let him bring to us a sign as the former (prophets) were sent
(with).

021.006
Y: (As to those) before them, not one of the populations which We
destroyed believed: will these believe?

P: Not a township believed of those which We destroyed before them
(though We sent them portents): would they then believe?

S: There did not believe before them any town which We destroyed, will
they then believe?

021.007
Y: Before thee, also, the messengers We sent were but men, to whom We
granted inspiration: If ye realise this not, ask of those who possess
the Message.

P: And We sent not (as Our messengers) before thee other than men, whom
We inspired. Ask the followers of the Reminder if ye know not?

S: And We did not send before you any but men to whom We sent
revelation, so ask the followers of the reminder if you do not know.

021.008
Y: Nor did We give them bodies that ate no food, nor were they exempt
from death.

P: We gave them not bodies that would not eat food, nor were they
immortals.

S: And We did not make them bodies not eating the food, and they were
not to abide (forever).

021.009
Y: In the end We fulfilled to them Our Promise, and We saved them and
those whom We pleased, but We destroyed those who transgressed beyond
bounds.

P: Then we fulfilled the promise unto them. So we delivered them and
whom We would, and We destroyed the prodigals.

S: Then We made Our promise good to them, so We delivered them and those
whom We pleased, and We destroyed the extravagant.

021.010
Y: We have revealed for you (O men!) a book in which is a Message for
you: will ye not then understand?

P: Now We have revealed unto you a Scripture wherein is your Reminder.
Have ye then no sense?

S: Certainly We have revealed to you a Book in which is your good
remembrance; what! do you not then understand?

021.011
Y: How many were the populations We utterly destroyed because of their
iniquities, setting up in their places other peoples?

P: How many a community that dealt unjustly have We shattered, and
raised up after them another folk!

S: And how many a town which was iniquitous did We demolish, and We
raised up after it another people!

021.012
Y: Yet, when they felt Our Punishment (coming), behold, they (tried to)
flee from it.

P: And, when they felt Our might, behold them fleeing from it!

S: So when they felt Our punishment, lo! they began to fly

021.013
Y: Flee not, but return to the good things of this life which were given
you, and to your homes in order that ye may be called to account.

P: (But it was said unto them): Flee not, but return to that (existence)
which emasculated you and to your dwellings, that ye may be questioned.

S: Do not fly (now) and come back to what you were made to lead easy
lives in and to your dwellings, haply you will be questioned.

021.014
Y: They said: "Ah! woe to us! We were indeed wrong-doers!"

P: They cried: Alas for us! we were wrong-doers.

S: They said: O woe to us! surely we were unjust.

021.015
Y: And that cry of theirs ceased not, till We made them as a field that
is mown, as ashes silent and quenched.

P: And this their crying ceased not till We made them as reaped corn,
extinct.

S: And this ceased not to be their cry till We made them cut

021.016
Y: Not for (idle) sport did We create the heavens and the earth and all
that is between!

P: We created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them
in play.

S: And We did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between
them for sport.

021.017
Y: If it had been Our wish to take (just) a pastime, We should surely
have taken it from the things nearest to Us, if We would do (such a
thing)!

P: If We had wished to find a pastime, We could have found it in Our
presence - if We ever did.

S: Had We wished to make a diversion, We would have made it from before
Ourselves: by no means would We do (it).

021.018
Y: Nay, We hurl the Truth against falsehood, and it knocks out its
brain, and behold, falsehood doth perish! Ah! woe be to you for the
(false) things ye ascribe (to Us).

P: Nay, but We hurl the true against the false, and it doth break its
head and lo! it vanisheth. And yours will be woe for that which ye
ascribe (unto Him).

S: Nay! We cast the truth against the falsehood, so that it breaks its
head, and lo! it vanishes; and woe to you for what you describe;

021.019
Y: To Him belong all (creatures) in the heavens and on earth: Even those
who are in His (very) Presence are not too proud to serve Him, nor are
they (ever) weary (of His service):

P: Unto Him belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and the earth. And
those who dwell in His presence are not too proud to worship Him, nor
do they weary;

S: And whoever is in the heavens and the earth is His; and those who are
with Him are not proud to serve Him, nor do they grow weary.

021.020
Y: They celebrate His praises night and day, nor do they ever flag or
intermit.

P: They glorify (Him) night and day; they flag not.

S: They glorify (Him) by night and day; they are never languid.

021.021
Y: Or have they taken (for worship) gods from the earth who can raise
(the dead)?

P: Or have they chosen gods from the earth who raise the dead?

S: Or have they taken gods from the earth who raise (the dead).

021.022
Y: If there were, in the heavens and the earth, other gods besides
Allah, there would have been confusion in both! but glory to Allah, the
Lord of the Throne: (High is He) above what they attribute to Him!

P: If there were therein gods beside Allah, then verily both (the
heavens and the earth) had been disordered. Glorified be Allah, the
Lord of the Throne, from all that they ascribe (unto Him).

S: If there had been in them any gods except Allah, they would both have
certainly been in a state of disorder; therefore glory be to Allah, the
Lord of the dominion, above what they attribute (to Him).

021.023
Y: He cannot be questioned for His acts, but they will be questioned
(for theirs).

P: He will not be questioned as to that which He doeth, but they will be
questioned.

S: He cannot be questioned concerning what He does and they shall be
questioned.

021.024
Y: Or have they taken for worship (other) gods besides him? Say,
"Bring your convincing proof: this is the Message of those with me and
the Message of those before me." But most of them know not the Truth,
and so turn away.

P: Or have they chosen other gods beside Him? say: Bring your proof (of
their godhead). This is the Reminder of those with me and those before
me, but most of them know not the Truth and so they are averse.

S: Or, have they taken gods besides Him? Say: Bring your proof; this is
the reminder of those with me and the reminder of those before me. Nay!
most of them do not know the truth, so they turn aside.

021.025
Y: Not a messenger did We send before thee without this inspiration sent
by Us to him: that there is no god but I; therefore worship and serve
Me.

P: And We sent no messenger before thee but We inspired him, (saying):
There is no God save Me (Allah), so worship Me.

S: And We did not send before you any messenger but We revealed to him
that there is no god but Me, therefore serve Me.

021.026
Y: And they say: "(Allah) Most Gracious has begotten offspring." Glory
to Him! they are (but) servants raised to honour.

P: And they say: The Beneficent hath taken unto Himself a son. Be He
Glorified! Nay, but (those whom they call sons) are honoured slaves;

S: And they say: The Beneficent Allah has taken to Himself a son.
Glory be to Him. Nay! they are honored servants;

021.027
Y: They speak not before He speaks, and they act (in all things) by His
Command.

P: They speak not until He hath spoken, and they act by His command.

S: They do not precede Him in speech and (only) according to His
commandment do they act.

021.028
Y: He knows what is before them, and what is behind them, and they offer
no intercession except for those who are acceptable, and they stand in
awe and reverence of His (Glory).

P: He knoweth what is before them and what is behind them, and they
cannot intercede except for him whom He accepteth, and they quake for
awe of Him.

S: He knows what is before them and what is behind them, and they do not
intercede except for him whom He approves and for fear of Him they
tremble.

021.029
Y: If any of them should say, "I am a god besides Him", such a one We
should reward with Hell: thus do We reward those who do wrong.

P: And one of them who should say: Lo! I am a god beside Him, that one
We should repay with hell. Thus We Repay wrong-doers.

S: And whoever of them should say: Surely I am a god besides Him, such a
one do We recompense with hell; thus do, We recompense the unjust.

021.030
Y: Do not the Unbelievers see that the heavens and the earth were joined
together (as one unit of creation), before we clove them asunder? We
made from water every living thing. Will they not then believe?

P: Have not those who disbelieve known that the heavens and the earth
were of one piece, then We parted them, and we made every living thing
of water? Will they not then believe?

S: Do not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were
closed up, but We have opened them; and We have made of water
everything living, will they not then believe?

021.031
Y: And We have set on the earth mountains standing firm, lest it should
shake with them, and We have made therein broad highways (between
mountains) for them to pass through: that they may receive Guidance.

P: And We have placed in the earth firm hills lest it quake with them,
and We have placed therein ravines as roads that haply they may find
their way.

S: And We have made great mountains in the earth lest it might be
convulsed with them, and We have made in it wide ways that they may
follow a right direction.

021.032
Y: And We have made the heavens as a canopy well guarded: yet do they
turn away from the Signs which these things (point to)!

P: And we have made the sky a roof withheld (from them). Yet they turn
away from its portents.

S: And We have made the heaven a guarded canopy and (yet) they turn
aside from its signs.

021.033
Y: It is He Who created the Night and the Day, and the sun and the moon:
all (the celestial bodies) swim along, each in its rounded course.

P: And He it is Who created the night and the day, and the sun and the
moon. They float, each in an orbit.

S: And He it is Who created the night and the day and the sun and the
moon; all (orbs) travel along swiftly in their celestial spheres.

021.034
Y: We granted not to any man before thee permanent life (here): if then
thou shouldst die, would they live permanently?

P: We appointed immortality for no mortal before thee. What! if thou
diest, can they be immortal!

S: And We did not ordain abiding for any mortal before you. What! Then
if you die, will they abide?

021.035
Y: Every soul shall have a taste of death: And We test you by evil and
by good by way of trial: To Us must ye return.

P: Every soul must taste of death, and We try you with evil and with
good, for ordeal. And unto Us ye will be returned.

S: Every soul must taste of death and We try you by evil and good by way
of probation; and to Us you shall be brought back.

021.036
Y: When the Unbelievers see thee, they treat thee not except with
ridicule. "Is this," (they say), "the one who talks of your gods?" and
they blaspheme at the mention of (Allah) Most Gracious!

P: And when those who disbelieve behold thee, they but choose thee out
for mockery, (saying): Is this he who maketh mention of your gods? And
they would deny all mention of the Beneficent.

S: And when those who disbelieve see you, they do not take you but for
one to be scoffed at: Is this he who speaks of your gods? And they are
deniers at the mention of the Beneficent Allah.

021.037
Y: Man is a creature of haste: soon (enough) will I show you My Signs;
then ye will not ask Me to hasten them!

P: Man is made of haste. I shall show you My portents, but ask Me not to
hasten.

S: Man is created of haste; now will I show to you My signs, therefore
do not ask Me to hasten (them) on.
