this I rode. It was the house of the priest--a snuffy and ill-favoured
old man who had not a civil answer to any of our questions. An uglier
fellow I never met, but, my faith, it was very different with his only
daughter, who kept house for him. She was a brunette, a rare thing in
Russia, with creamy skin, raven hair, and a pair of the most glorious
dark eyes that ever kindled at the sight of a Hussar. From the first
glance I saw that she was mine. It was no time for love-making when
a soldier's duty had to be done, but still, as I took the simple meal
which they laid before me, I chatted lightly with the lady, and we were
the best of friends before an hour had passed. Sophie was her first
name, her second I never knew. I taught her to call me Etienne, and I
tried to cheer her up, for her sweet face was sad and there were tears
in her beautiful dark eyes. I pressed her to tell me what it was which
was grieving her.

"How can I be otherwise," said she, speaking French with a most adorable
lisp, "when one of my poor countrymen is a prisoner in your hands? I saw
him between two of your Hussars as you rode into the village."

"It is the fortune of war," said I. "His turn to-day; mine, perhaps,
to-morrow."

"But consider, Monsieur--" said she.

"Etienne," said I.

"Oh, Monsieur----"

"Etienne," said I.

"Well, then," she cried, beautifully flushed and desperate, "consider,
Etienne, that this young officer will be taken back to your army and
will be starved or frozen, for if, as I hear, your own soldiers have a
hard march, what will be the lot of a prisoner?"

I shrugged my shoulders.

"You have a kind face, Etienne," said she; "you would not condemn this
poor man to certain death. I entreat you to let him go."

Her delicate hand rested upon my sleeve, her dark eyes looked
imploringly into mine.

A sudden thought passed through my mind. I would grant her request, but
I would demand a favour in return.

At my order the prisoner was brought up into the room.

"Captain Barakoff," said I, "this young lady has begged me to release
you, and I am inclined to do so. I would ask you to give your parole
that you will remain in this dwelling for twenty-four hours, and take no
steps to inform anyone of our movements."

"I will do so," said he.

"Then I trust in your honour. One man more or less can make no
difference in a struggle between great armies, and to take you back as
a prisoner would be to condemn you to death. Depart, sir, and show your
gratitude not to me, but to the first French officer who falls into your
hands."

When he was gone I drew my paper from my pocket.

"Now, Sophie," said I, "I have done what you asked me, and all that I
ask in return is that you will give me a lesson in Russian."

"With all my heart," said she.

"Let us begin on this," said I, spreading out the paper before her. "Let
us take it word for word and see what it means."

She looked at the writing with some surprise. "It means," said she, "if
the French come to Minsk all is lost." Suddenly a look of consternation
passed over her beautiful face. "Great Heavens!" she cried, "what is it
that I have done? I have betrayed my country! Oh, Etienne, your eyes are
the last for whom this message is meant. How could you be so cunning as
to make a poor, simple-minded, and unsuspecting girl betray the cause of
her country?"

I consoled my poor Sophie as best I might, and I assured her that it was
no reproach to her that she should be outwitted by so old a campaigner
and so shrewd a man as myself. But it was no time now for talk. This
message made it clear that the corn was indeed at Minsk, and that there
were no troops there to defend it. I gave a hurried order from the
window, the trumpeter blew the assembly, and in ten minutes we had left
the village behind us and were riding hard for the city, the gilded
domes and minarets of which glimmered above the snow of the horizon.
Higher they rose and higher, until at last, as the sun sank toward the
west, we were in the broad main street, and galloped up it amid the
shouts of the moujiks and the cries of frightened women until we found
ourselves in front of the great town-hall. My cavalry I drew up in the
square, and I, with my two sergeants, Oudin and Papilette, rushed into
the building.

Heavens! shall I ever forget the sight which greeted us? Right in front
of us was drawn up a triple line of Russian Grenadiers. Their muskets
rose as we entered, and a crashing volley burst into our very faces.
Oudin and Papilette dropped upon the floor, riddled with bullets.

For myself, my busby was shot away and I had two holes through my
dolman. The Grenadiers ran at me with their bayonets. "Treason!" I
cried. "We are betrayed! Stand to your horses!" I rushed out of the
hall, but the whole square was swarming with troops.

From every side street Dragoons and Cossacks were riding down upon us,
and such a rolling fire had burst from the surrounding houses that half
my men and horses were on the ground. "Follow me!" I yelled, and sprang
upon Violette, but a giant of a Russian Dragoon officer threw his arms
round me and we rolled on the ground together.

He shortened his sword to kill me, but, changing his mind, he seized
me by the throat and banged my head against the stones until I was
unconscious. So it was that I became the prisoner of the Russians.

When I came to myself my only regret was that my captor had not beaten
out my brains. There in the grand square of Minsk lay half my troopers
dead or wounded, with exultant crowds of Russians gathered round them.

The rest in a melancholy group were herded into the porch of the
town-hall, a sotnia of Cossacks keeping guard over them. Alas! what
could I say, what could I do? It was evident that I had led my men into
a carefully-baited trap. They had heard of our mission and they had
prepared for us. And yet there was that despatch which had caused me to
neglect all precautions and to ride straight into the town. How was I to
account for that? The tears ran down my cheeks as I surveyed the ruin of
my squadron, and as I thought of the plight of my comrades of the Grand
Army who awaited the food which I was to have brought them. Ney had
trusted me and I had failed him. How often he would strain his eyes over
the snow-fields for that convoy of grain which should never gladden his
sight! My own fate was hard enough. An exile in Siberia was the best
which the future could bring me. But you will believe me, my friends,
that it was not for his own sake, but for that of his starving comrades,
that Etienne Gerard's cheeks were lined by his tears, frozen even as
they were shed.

"What's this?" said a gruff voice at my elbow; and I turned to face the
huge, black-bearded Dragoon who had dragged me from my saddle. "Look at
the Frenchman crying! I thought that the Corsican was followed by brave
men and not by children."

"If you and I were face to face and alone, I should let you see which is
the better man," said I.

For answer the brute struck me across the face with his open hand. I
seized him by the throat, but a dozen of his soldiers tore me away from
him, and he struck me again while they held my hands.

"You base hound," I cried, "is this the way to treat an officer and a
gentleman?"

"We never asked you to come to Russia," said he. "If you do you must
take such treatment as you can get. I would shoot you off-hand if I had
my way."

"You will answer for this some day," I cried, as I wiped the blood from
my moustache.

"If the Hetman Platoff is of my way of thinking you will not be alive
this time to-morrow," he answered, with a ferocious scowl. He added some
words in Russian to his troops, and instantly they all sprang to their
saddles.

Poor Violette, looking as miserable as her master, was led round and
I was told to mount her. My left arm was tied with a thong which was
fastened to the stirrup-iron of a sergeant of Dragoons. So in most sorry
plight I and the remnant of my men set forth from Minsk.

Never have I met such a brute as this man Sergine, who commanded the
escort. The Russian army contains the best and the worst in the world,
but a worse than Major Sergine of the Dragoons of Kieff I have never
seen in any force outside of the guerillas of the Peninsula.

He was a man of great stature, with a fierce, hard face and a bristling
black beard, which fell over his cuirass.

I have been told since that he was noted for his strength and his
bravery, and I could answer for it that he had the grip of a bear, for
I had felt it when he tore me from my saddle. He was a wit, too, in his
way, and made continual remarks in Russian at our expense which set all
his Dragoons and Cossacks laughing. Twice he beat my comrades with his
riding-whip, and once he approached me with the lash swung over his
shoulder, but there was something in my eyes which prevented it from
falling.

So in misery and humiliation, cold and starving, we rode in a
disconsolate column across the vast snow-plain. The sun had sunk, but
still in the long northern twilight we pursued our weary journey. Numbed
and frozen, with my head aching from the blows it had received, I was
borne onward by Violette, hardly conscious of where I was or whither I
was going. The little mare walked with a sunken head, only raising it to
snort her contempt for the mangy Cossack ponies who were round her.

But suddenly the escort stopped, and I found that we had halted in the
single street of a small Russian village.

There was a church on one side, and on the other was a large stone
house, the outline of which seemed to me to be familiar. I looked around
me in the twilight, and then I saw that we had been led back to Dobrova,
and that this house at the door of which we were waiting was the same
house of the priest at which we had stopped in the morning. Here it
was that my charming Sophie in her innocence had translated the unlucky
message which had in some strange way led us to our ruin. To think that
only a few hours before we had left this very spot with such high hopes
and all fair prospects for our mission, and now the remnants of us
waited as beaten and humiliated men for whatever lot a brutal enemy
might ordain! But such is the fate of the soldier, my friends--kisses
to-day, blows to-morrow. Tokay in a palace, ditch-water in a hovel, furs
or rags, a full purse or an empty pocket, ever swaying from the best to
the worst, with only his courage and his honour unchanging.

The Russian horsemen dismounted, and my poor fellows were ordered to
do the same. It was already late, and it was clearly their intention
to spend the night in this village. There were great cheering and joy
amongst the peasants when they understood that we had all been taken,
and they flocked out of their houses with flaming torches, the women
carrying out tea and brandy for the Cossacks. Amongst others the old
priest came forth--the same whom we had seen in the morning. He was all
smiles now, and he bore with him some hot punch on a salver, the reek of
which I can remember still. Behind her father was Sophie. With horror
I saw her clasp Major Sergine's hand as she congratulated him upon the
victory he had won and the prisoners he had made. The old priest, her
father, looked at me with an insolent face and made insulting remarks
at my expense, pointing at me with his lean and grimy hand. His fair
daughter Sophie looked at me also, but she said nothing, and I could
read her tender pity in her dark eyes. At last she turned to Major
Sergine and said something to him in Russian, on which he frowned and
shook his head impatiently.

She appeared to plead with him, standing there in the flood of light
which shone from the open door of her father's house. My eyes were fixed
upon the two faces, that of the beautiful girl and of the dark, fierce
man, for my instinct told me that it was my own fate which was under
debate. For a long time the soldier shook his head, and then, at last
softening before her pleadings, he appeared to give way. He turned to
where I stood with my guardian sergeant beside me.

"These good people offer you the shelter of their roof for the night,"
said he to me, looking me up and down with vindictive eyes. "I find
it hard to refuse them, but I tell you straight that for my part I had
rather see you on the snow. It would cool your hot blood, you rascal of
a Frenchman!"

I looked at him with the contempt that I felt.

"You were born a savage and you will die one," said I.

My words stung him, for he broke into an oath, raising his whip as if he
would strike me.

"Silence, you crop-eared dog!" he cried. "Had I my way some of the
insolence would be frozen out of you before morning." Mastering his
passion, he turned upon Sophie with what he meant to be a gallant
manner. "If you have a cellar with a good lock," said he, "the fellow
may lie in it for the night, since you have done him the honour to take
an interest in his comfort. I must have his parole that he will not
attempt to play us any tricks, as I am answerable for him until I hand
him over to the Hetman Platoff to-morrow."

His supercilious manner was more than I could endure.

He had evidently spoken French to the lady in order that I might
understand the humiliating way in which he referred to me.

"I will take no favour from you," said I. "You may do what you like, but
I will never give you my parole."

The Russian shrugged his great shoulders, and turned away as if the
matter were ended.

"Very well, my fine fellow, so much the worse for your fingers and toes.
We shall see how you are in the morning after a night in the snow."

"One moment, Major Sergine," cried Sophie. "You must not be so hard upon
this prisoner. There are some special reasons why he has a claim upon
our kindness and mercy."

The Russian looked with suspicion upon his face from her to me.

"What are the special reasons? You certainly seem to take a remarkable
interest in this Frenchman," said he.

"The chief reason is that he has this very morning of his own accord
released Captain Alexis Barakoff, of the Dragoons of Grodno."

"It is true," said Barakoff, who had come out of the house. "He captured
me this morning, and he released me upon parole rather than take me back
to the French army, where I should have been starved."

"Since Colonel Gerard has acted so generously you will surely, now
that fortune has changed, allow us to offer him the poor shelter of our
cellar upon this bitter night," said Sophie. "It is a small return for
his generosity."

But the Dragoon was still in the sulks.

"Let him give me his parole first that he will not attempt to escape,"
said he. "Do you hear, sir? Do you give me your parole?"

"I give you nothing," said I.

"Colonel Gerard," cried Sophie, turning to me with a coaxing smile, "you
will give me your parole, will you not?"

"To you, mademoiselle, I can refuse nothing. I will give you my parole,
with pleasure."

"There, Major Sergine," cried Sophie, in triumph, "that is surely
sufficient. You have heard him say that he gives me his parole. I will
be answerable for his safety."

In an ungracious fashion my Russian bear grunted his consent, and so I
was led into the house, followed by the scowling father and by the
big, black-bearded Dragoon. In the basement there was a large and roomy
chamber, where the winter logs were stored. Thither it was that I was
led, and I was given to understand that this was to be my lodging for
the night. One side of this bleak apartment was heaped up to the ceiling
with fagots of firewood. The rest of the room was stone-flagged and
bare-walled, with a single, deep-set window upon one side, which was
safely guarded with iron bars. For light I had a large stable lantern,
which swung from a beam of the low ceiling. Major Sergine smiled as he
took this down, and swung it round so as to throw its light into every
corner of that dreary chamber.

"How do you like our Russian hotels, monsieur?" he asked, with his
hateful sneer. "They are not very grand, but they are the best that we
can give you. Perhaps the next time that you Frenchmen take a fancy to
travel you will choose some other country where they will make you more
comfortable." He stood laughing at me, his white teeth gleaming through
his beard. Then he left me, and I heard the great key creak in the lock.

For an hour of utter misery, chilled in body and soul, I sat upon a pile
of fagots, my face sunk upon my hands and my mind full of the saddest
thoughts. It was cold enough within those four walls, but I thought of
the sufferings of my poor troopers outside, and I sorrowed with their
sorrow. Then I paced up and down, and I clapped my hands together and
kicked my feet against the walls to keep them from being frozen. The
lamp gave out some warmth, but still it was bitterly cold, and I had had
no food since morning. It seemed to me that everyone had forgotten me,
but at last I heard the key turn in the lock, and who should enter but
my prisoner of the morning, Captain Alexis Barakoff. A bottle of wine
projected from under his arm, and he carried a great plate of hot stew
in front of him.

"Hush!" said he; "not a word! Keep up your heart! I cannot stop to
explain, for Sergine is still with us. Keep awake and ready!" With these
hurried words he laid down the welcome food and ran out of the room.

"Keep awake and ready!" The words rang in my ears. I ate my food and
I drank my wine, but it was neither food nor wine which had warmed the
heart within me. What could those words of Barakoff mean?

Why was I to remain awake? For what was I to be ready? Was it possible
that there was a chance yet of escape? I have never respected the man
who neglects his prayers at all other times and yet prays when he is in
peril. It is like a bad soldier who pays no respect to the colonel save
when he would demand a favour of him. And yet when I thought of the
salt-mines of Siberia on the one side and of my mother in France upon
the other, I could not help a prayer rising, not from my lips, but from
my heart, that the words of Barakoff might mean all that I hoped. But
hour after hour struck upon the village clock, and still I heard nothing
save the call of the Russian sentries in the street outside.

Then at last my heart leaped within me, for I heard a light step in the
