weight-arm.(86)

Examining Fig. 116, it is seen that the distances moved by the power and
weight vary as their respective distances from the fulcrum. That is to
say, if the weight is twice as far from the fulcrum as the power, it will
move through twice the distance, and if three times as far, through three
times the distance. Thus the muscles, by acting through short distances
(on the short arms of levers), are able to move portions of the body
(located on the long arms) through long distances. Can all three classes
of levers be used in this way in the body?

                                [Fig. 116]


Fig. 116--*Motion producing levers.* Diagrams show relative distances moved
by the power and weight in levers having the power nearer the fulcrum than
      is the weight. _F._ Fulcrum. _P, P'._ Power. _W, W'._ Weight.


*Classes of Levers found in the Body.*--Practically all of the levers of
the body belong either to the first class or the third class. In both of
these the muscle power can be applied to the short arm of the lever,
thereby moving the body weight through a longer distance than the muscle
contracts (Fig. 116). In the levers of the second class, however, the
weight occupies this position, being situated _between_ the power and
fulcrum (Fig. 117). The weight, therefore, _cannot_ move farther than the
power in this lever. It must always move a shorter distance. While such a
lever is of great advantage in lifting heavy weights outside of the body,
it cannot be used for increasing the motion of the muscles. For this
reason no well-defined levers of the second class are present in the
body.(87)

                                [Fig. 117]


 Fig. 117--*Weight lifting levers.* Diagrams show relative distances moved
  by the power and weight in levers having the weight nearer the fulcrum
    than is the power. _F._ Fulcrum. _P, P'._ Power. _W, W'._ Weight.


                                [Fig. 118]


 Fig. 118--*Diagram of the foot lever.* _F._ Fulcrum at ankle joint. _W._
  Body weight expressed as pressure against the earth. While the muscle
power acts through the distance _ab_, the fulcrum support (body) is forced
                        through the distance _FE_.


*Loss of Muscular Force.*--Using a small spring balance for measuring the
power, a light stick for a lever, and a small piece of metal for a weight,
and arranging these to represent some lever of the body (as the forearm),
it is easily shown that the gain in motion causes a corresponding loss in
muscular power. (See Practical Work.) If, for example, the balance is
attached two inches from the fulcrum and the weight twelve inches, the
pull on the balance is found to be six times greater than the weight that
is being lifted. If other positions are tried, it is found that the power
exerted in each case is as many times greater than the weight as the
weight-arm is times longer than the power-arm.

Applying this principle to the levers of the body, it is seen that the
gain in motion is at the expense of muscular force, or, as we say,
_muscular force is exchanged for motion_. This exchange is greatly to the
advantage of the body; for while the ability to lift heavy weights is
important, the ability to move portions of the body rapidly and through
long distances is much more to be desired.

*Important Muscles.*--There are about five hundred separate muscles in the
body. These vary in size, shape, and plan of attachment, to suit their
special work. Some of those that are prominent enough to be felt at the
surface are as follows:

_Of the head_: The _temporal_, in the temple, and the _masseter_, in the
cheek. These muscles are attached to the lower jaw and are the chief
muscles of mastication.

_Of the neck_: The _sterno-mastoids_, which pass between the mastoid
processes, back of the ears, and the upper end of the sternum. They assist
in turning the head and may be felt at the sides of the neck (Fig. 119).

_Of the upper arm_: The _biceps_ on the front side, the _triceps_ behind,
and the _deltoid_ at the upper part of the arm beyond the projection of
the shoulder.

                                [Fig. 119]


           Fig. 119--Back and front views of important muscles.


_Of the forearm_: The _flexors_ of the fingers, on the front side, and the
_extensors_ of the fingers, on the back of the forearm (Fig. 119).

_Of the hand_: The _adductor pollicis_ between the thumb and the palm.

_Of the trunk_: The _pectoralis major_, between the upper front part of
the thorax and the shoulder; the _trapezius_, between the back of the
shoulders and the spine; the _rectus abdominis_, passing over the abdomen
from above downward; and the _erector spinae_, found in the small of the
back.

_Of the hips_: The _glutens maximus_, fastened between the lower back part
of the hips and the upper part of the femur.

_Of the upper part of the leg_: The _rectus femoris_, the large muscle on
the front of the leg which connects at the lower end with the kneepan.

_Of the lower leg_: The _tibialis anticus_ on the front side, exterior to
the tibia, and the _gastrocnemius_, the large muscle in the calf of the
leg. This is the largest muscle of the body, and is connected with the
heel bone by the _tendon of Achilles_ (Fig. 119).

The use of these muscles is, in most instances, easily determined by
observing the results of their contraction.



HYGIENE OF THE MUSCLES


The hygiene of the muscles is almost expressed by the one word _exercise_.
It is a matter of everyday knowledge that the muscles are developed and
strengthened by use, and that they become weak, soft, and flabby by
disuse. The effects of exercise are, however, not limited to the large
muscles attached to the skeleton, but are apparent also upon the
involuntary muscles, whose work is so closely related to the vital
processes. While it is true that exercise cannot be applied directly to
the involuntary muscles, it is also true that exercise of the voluntary
muscles causes a greater activity on the part of those that are
involuntary and is indirectly a means of exercising them.

*Exercise and Health.*--In addition to its effects upon the muscles
themselves, exercise is recognized as one of the most fundamental factors
in the preservation of the health. Practically every process of the body
is stimulated and the body as a whole invigorated by exercise properly
taken. On the other hand, a lack of exercise has an effect upon the entire
body somewhat similar to that observed upon a single muscle. It becomes
weak, lacks energy, and in many instances actually loses weight when
exercise is omitted. This shows exercise to supply an actual need and to
be in harmony with the nature and plan of the body.

*How Exercise benefits the Body.*--In accounting for the healthful effects
of exercise, it must be borne in mind that the body is essentially a
motion-producing structure. Furthermore, its plan is such that the
movements of its different parts aid indirectly the vital processes. The
student will recall instances of such aid, as, for example, the assistance
rendered by muscular contractions in the circulation of the blood and
lymph, due to the valves in veins and lymph vessels, and the assistance
rendered by abdominal movements in the propulsion of materials through the
food canal. A fact not as yet brought out, however, is that _exercise
stimulates nutritive changes in the cells_, thereby imparting to them new
vigor and vitality. While this effect of exercise cannot be fully
accounted for, two conditions that undoubtedly influence it are the
following:

1. Exercise causes the blood to circulate more rapidly.

2. Exercise increases the movement of the lymph through the lymph vessels.

The increase in the flow of the blood and the lymph causes changes to take
place more rapidly in the liquids around the cells, thereby increasing the
supply of food and oxygen, and hastening the removal of waste.

*One should plan for Exercise.*--Since exercise is demanded by the nature
and plan of the body, to neglect it is a serious matter. People do not
purposely omit exercise, but from lack of time or from its interference
with the daily routine of duties, the needed amount is frequently not
taken. Especially is this true of students and others who follow sedentary
occupations. People of this class should plan for exercise as they plan
for the other great needs of the body--food, sleep, clothing, etc. It is
only by making a sufficient amount of muscular work or play a regular part
of the daily program that the needs of the body for exercise are
adequately supplied.

*Amount and Kind of Exercise.*--The amount of exercise required varies
greatly with different individuals, and definite recommendations cannot be
made. For each individual also the amount should vary with the physical
condition and the other demands made upon the energy. One in health should
exercise sufficiently to keep the muscles firm to the touch and the body
in a vigorous condition.

Of the many forms of exercise from which one may choose, the question is
again one of individual adaptability and convenience. While the different
forms of exercise vary in their effects and may be made to serve different
purposes, the consideration of these is beyond the scope of an elementary
text. As a rule one will not go far wrong by following his inclinations,
observing of course the conditions under which exercise is taken to the
best advantage.

*General Rules for Healthful Exercise.*--That exercise may secure the best
results from the standpoint of health, a number of conditions should be
observed: 1. It should not be excessive or carried to the point of
exhaustion. Severe physical exercise is destructive to both muscular and
nervous tissues. 2. It should, if possible, be of an interesting nature
and taken in the open air. 3. It should be counter-active, that is,
calling into play those parts of the body that have not been used during
the regular work.(88) 4. It should be directed toward the weak rather than
toward the strong parts of the body. 5. When one is already tired from
study, or other work, it should be taken with moderation or omitted for
the time being. (For exercise of the heart muscle and the muscular coat of
the blood vessels see pages 55 and 57.)

*Massage.*--In lieu of exercise taken in the usual way, similar effects are
sometimes obtained by a systematic rubbing, pressing, stroking, or
kneading of the skin and the muscles by one trained in the art. This
process, known as massage, may be gentle or vigorous and is subject to a
variety of modifications. Massage is applied when one is unable to take
exercise, on account of disease or accident, and also in the treatment of
certain bodily disorders. A weak ankle, wrist, or other part of the body,
or even a bruise, may be greatly benefited by massage. The flow of blood
and lymph is stimulated, causing new materials to be passed to the
affected parts and waste materials to be removed. Massage, however, should
never be applied to a boil, or other infected sore. The effect in this
case would be to spread the infection and increase the trouble.

*Summary.*--Motion is provided for in the body mainly through the muscle
cells. These are grouped into working parts, called muscles, which in turn
are attached to the movable parts of the body. The striated muscles, as a
rule, are attached to the mechanical devices found in the skeleton, and
bring about the voluntary, movements. The non-striated muscles surround
the parts on which they act, and produce involuntary movements. Both,
however, are under the control of the nervous system. To bring about the
opposing movements of the body, the striated muscles are arranged in
pairs; and to increase their motion, the bones are used as levers.
Physical exercise is necessary both for the development of the muscles and
for the health and vigor of the entire body.

*Exercises.*--1. Compare the striated and non-striated muscles with
reference to structure, location, and method of work.

2. In what respects is the muscular tissue of the heart like the striated,
and in what respects like the non-striated, muscular tissue?

3. If muscles could push as well as pull, would so many be needed in the
body? Why?

4. Locate muscles that work to some extent against elasticity and gravity.

5. Locate five muscles that act as flexors; five that act as extensors;
two that act as adductors; and two as abductors. Locate sphincter and
radiating muscles.

6. By what means does the nervous system control the muscles?

7. Give proofs of the change of potential into kinetic energy during
muscular contraction.

8. Define the essential properties of muscular tissue and state the
purpose served by each.

9. Describe a lever. For what general purpose are levers used in the body?
What other purpose do they serve outside of the body?

10. Why are levers of the second class not adapted to the work of the
body?

11. Name the class of lever used in bending the elbow; in straightening
the elbow; in raising the knee; in elevating the toes; and in biting. Why
is one able to bite harder with the back teeth than with the front ones
when the same muscles are used in both cases?

12. Measure the distance from the middle of the palm of the hand to the
center of the elbow joint. Find the attachment of the tendon of the biceps
muscle to the radius and measure its distance to the center of the elbow
joint. From these distances calculate the force with which the biceps
contracts in order to support a weight of ten pounds on the palm of the
hand.

13. How does exercise benefit the health? How does a short walk "clear the
brain" and enable one to study to better advantage?

14. When exercisers taken for its effects upon the health, what conditions
should be observed?



PRACTICAL WORK


The reddish muscle found in a piece of beef is a good example of striated
muscle. The clear ring surrounding the intestine of a cat (shown by cross
section) and the outer portion of the preparation from the cow's stomach,
sold at the butcher shop under the name of _tripe_, are good examples of
non-striated muscular tissue. The heart of any animal, of course, shows
the heart muscle.

*To show the Structure of Striated Muscle.*--Boil a tough piece of beef, as
a cut from the neck, until the connective tissue has thoroughly softened.
Then with some pointed instrument, separate the main piece into its fiber
bundles and these in turn into their smallest divisions. The smallest
divisions obtainable are the muscle cells or fibers.

*To show Striated Fibers.*--Place a small muscle from the leg of a frog in
a fifty-per-cent solution of alcohol and leave it there for half a day or
longer. Then cover with water on a glass slide, and with a couple of fine
needles tease out the small muscle threads. Protect with a cover glass and
examine with a microscope, first with a low and then with a high power.
The striations, sarcolemma, and sometimes the nuclei and nerve plates, may
be distinguished in such a preparation.

*To show Non-striated Cells.*--Place a clean section of the small intestine
of a cat in a mixture of one part of nitric acid and four parts of water
and leave for four or five hours. Thoroughly wash out the acid with water
and separate the muscular layer from the mucous membrane. Cover a small
portion of the muscle with water on a glass slide and tease out, with
needles, until it is as finely divided as possible. Examine with a
microscope, first with a low and then with a high power. The cells appear
as very fine, spindle-shaped bodies.

*To illustrate Muscular Stimulus and Contraction.*--Separate the muscles at
the back of the thigh of a frog which has just been killed and draw the
large sciatic nerve to the surface. Cut this as high up as possible and,
with a sharp knife and a small pair of scissors, dissect it out to the
knee. Now cut out entirely the large muscle of the calf of the leg (the
gastrocnemius), but leave attached to it the nerve, the lower tendon, and
the bones of the knee. Mount on an upright support, as shown in Fig. 120,
and fasten the tendon to a lever below by a thread or small wire hook:

                                [Fig. 120]


      Fig. 120--*Apparatus* for demonstrating properties of muscles.


1. Lay the nerve over the ends of the wires from a small battery which are
attached to the support at _A_, and arrange a second break in the circuit
at _B_. At this place the battery circuit is made and broken either by a
telegraph key or by simply touching and separating the wires. Note that
the muscle gives a single contraction, or twitch, both when the current is
made and when it is broken.

2. Remove the current and pinch the end of the nerve, noting the result.
With very fine wires, connect the battery directly to the ends of the
muscle. Stimulate by making and breaking the current as before. In this
experiment the muscle cells are stimulated by the direct action of the
current and not by the current acting on the nerve.

3. With the wires attached to either the muscle or the nerve, make and
break the current in rapid succession. This causes the muscle to enter
into a second contraction before it has relaxed from the first, and if the
shocks follow in rapid succession, to continue in the contracted state.
This condition, which represents the method of contraction of the muscles
in the body, is called _tetanus_.

NOTE.--In these experiments a twitching of the muscle is frequently
observed when no stimulus is being applied. This is due to the drying out
of the nerve and is prevented by keeping it wet with a physiological salt
solution. (See footnote, page 38.)

*To show the Action of Levers.*--With a light but stiff wooden bar, a
spring balance, and a wedge-shaped fulcrum, show:

1. The position of the weight, the fulcrum, and the power in the different
classes of levers, and also the weight-arm and the power-arm in each case.

2. The direction moved by the power and the weight respectively in the use
of the different classes of levers.

3. That when the power-arm and weight-arm are equal, the power equals the
weight and moves through the same distance.

4. That when the power-arm is longer than the weight-arm, the weight is
greater, but moves through a shorter distance than the power.

5. That when the weight-arm is longer than the power-arm, the power is
greater and moves through a shorter distance than the weight.

*To show the Loss of Power in the Use of the Body Levers.*--Construct a
frame similar to, but larger than, that shown in Fig. 120, (about 12
inches high), and hang a small spring balance (250 grams capacity) at the
place where the muscle is attached. Fasten the end of a lever to the
upright piece, at a point on a level with the end of the balance hook.
(The nail or screw used for this purpose must pass loosely through the
lever, and serve as a pivot upon which it can turn.) The lever should
consist of a light piece of wood, and should have a length at least three
times as great as the distance from the hook to the turning point. Connect
the balance hook with the lever by a thread or string, and then hang upon
it a small body of known weight. Note the amount of force exerted at the
balance in order to support the weight at different places on the lever.
At what point is the force just equal to the weight? Where is it twice as
great? Where three times? Show that the force required to support the
weight increases proportionally as the weight-arm and as the distance
through which the weight may be moved by the lever. Apply to the action of
the biceps muscle in lifting weights on the forearm.

*A Study of the Action of the Biceps Muscle.*--Place the fingers upon the
tendon of the biceps where it connects with the radius of the forearm.
With the forearm resting upon the table, note that the tendon is somewhat
loose and flaccid, but that with the slightest effort to raise the forearm
it quickly tightens. Now transfer the fingers to the body of the muscle,
and sweep the forearm through two or three complete movements, noting the
changes in the length and thickness of the muscle. Lay the forearm again
on the table, back of hand down, and place a heavy weight (a flatiron or a
hammer) upon the hand. Note the effort required to raise the weight, and
then shift it along the arm. Observe that the nearer it approaches the
elbow the lighter it seems. Account for the difference in the effort
required to raise the weight at different places. Does the effort vary as
the distance from the tendon?




CHAPTER XVI - THE SKIN


Protective coverings are found at all the exposed surfaces of the body.
These vary considerably at different places, each being adapted to the
conditions under which it serves. The most important ones are the _skin_,
which covers the entire external surface of the body; the _mucous
membrane_, which lines all the cavities that communicate by openings with
the external surface; and the _serous membrane_, which, including the
synovial membranes, lines all the closed cavities of the body. In addition
to the protection which it affords, the skin is one of the means by which
the body is brought into proper relations with its surroundings. It is
because of this function that we take up the study of the skin at this
time.

*The Skin* is one of the most complex structures of the body, and serves
several distinct purposes. It is estimated to have an area of from 14 to
16 square feet, and to have a thickness which varies from less than one
eighth to more than one fourth of an inch. It is thickest on the palms of
the hands and the soles of the feet, the places where it is most subject
to wear. It is made up of two distinct layers--an outer layer called the
_epidermis_, or cuticle, and an inner layer called the _dermis_, or cutis
vera (Fig. 121).

*The Dermis.*--This is the thicker and heavier of the two layers, and is
made up chiefly of connective tissue. The network of tough fibers which
this tissue supplies,  forms the essential body of the dermis and gives to
it its power of resistance. It is on account of the connective tissue that
the skins of animals can be converted into leather by tanning. A variety
of structures, including blood and lymph vessels, oil and perspiratory
glands, hair follicles, and nerves, are found embedded in the connective
tissue (Fig. 122). These aid in different ways in the work of the skin.

                                [Fig. 121]


  Fig. 121--*Section of skin* magnified, _a, b._ Epidermis, _b._ Pigment
  layer. _c._ Papillae, _d._ Dermis. _e._ Fatty tissue. _f, g, h._ Sweat
        gland and duct. _i, k._ Hair and follicle. _l._ Oil gland.


On the outer surface of the dermis are numerous elevations, called
_papillae_. These average about one one-hundredth of an inch in height, and
one two hundred and fiftieth of an inch in diameter. They are most
numerous on the palms of the hands, the soles of the feet, and the under
surfaces of the fingers and toes. At these places they are larger than in
other parts of the body, and are closely grouped, forming the parallel
curved ridges which cover the surfaces. Each papilla contains a loop of
capillaries and a small nerve, and many of them are crowned with touch
corpuscles (page 342).

                                [Fig. 122]


 Fig. 122--*Diagram* of section of skin showing its different structures.


*The Epidermis* is much thinner than the dermis. It is made up of several
layers of cells which are flat and scale-like at the surface, but are
rounded in form where the epidermis joins the dermis. The epidermis has
the appearance of being _moulded onto_ the dermis, filling up the
depressions between the papillae and having corresponding irregularities
(Fig. 121). No blood vessels are found in the epidermis, its nourishment
being derived from the lymph which reaches it from the dermis. Only the
part next to the dermis is made up of _living_ cells. These are active,
however, in the formation of new cells, which take the place of those that
are worn off at the surface. Some of the cells belonging to the inner
layer of epidermis contain _pigment granules_, which give the skin its
color (Fig. 121). The epidermis contains no nerves and is therefore
non-sensitive. The hair and the nails are important modifications of the
epidermis.

*A Hair* is a slender cylinder, formed by the union of epidermal cells,
which grows from a kind of pit in the dermis, called the _hair follicle_.
The oval and somewhat enlarged part of the hair within the follicle is
called the _root_, or _bulb_, and the uniform cylinder beyond the follicle
is called the _shaft_. Connected with the sides of the follicles are the
_oil_, or _sebaceous, glands_ (Figs. 121 and 122). These secrete an oily
liquid which keeps the hair and cuticle soft and pliable. Attached to the
inner ends of the follicles are small, involuntary muscles whose
contractions cause the roughened condition of the skin that occurs on
exposure to cold.

*A Nail* is a tough and rather horny plate of epidermal tissue which grows
from a depression in the dermis, called the _matrix_. The back part of the
nail is known as the _root_, the middle convex portion as the _body_, and
the front margin as _the free edge_ (Fig. 123). Material for the growth of
the nail is derived from the matrix, which is lined with active epidermal
cells and is richly supplied with blood vessels. Cells added to the root
cause the nail to grow in length (forward) and cells added to the under
surface cause it to grow in thickness. The cuticle adheres to the nail
around its entire circumference so that the covering over the dermis is
complete.

                                [Fig. 123]


      Fig. 123--*Section of end of finger* showing nail in position.


*Functions of the Skin.*--The chief function of the skin is that of
protection. It is able to protect the body on account of the tough
connective tissue in the dermis, the non-sensitive cells of the epidermis,
and also by the touch corpuscles and their connecting nerve fibers. This
protection is of at least three kinds, as follows:

1. _From mechanical injuries_ such as might result from contact with hard,
rough, or sharp objects. The main quality needed for resisting mechanical
injuries is _toughness_, and this is supplied both by the epidermis and by
the connective tissue of the dermis.

2. _From chemical injuries_ caused by contact with various chemical
agents, as acids, alkalies, and the oxygen of the air. The epidermis,
being of such a nature as to resist to a considerable extent the action of
chemical agents, affords protection from these substances. (89)

3. _From disease germs_ which are everywhere present. The epidermis is the
main protective agent against attacks of germs, but should the epidermis
be broken, they meet with further resistance from the fluids of the dermis
and the white corpuscles of the blood.

4. _From an excessive evaporation of liquid from the surface of the body_.
In the performance of this function, the skin is an important means of
keeping the tissues soft and the blood and lymph from becoming too
concentrated.

*Other Functions of the Skin.*--Through the perspiratory glands the skin is
an _organ of excretion_. While the secretion from a single gland is small,
the waste that leaves the body through all of the perspiratory glands is
considerable (90) (page 206). By means of the nerves terminating in the
touch corpuscles, the skin serves as the _organ of touch_, or feeling
(Chapter XX). To a slight extent also the skin may absorb liquid
substances, these being taken up by the blood and lymph vessels, and
perform a respiratory function, throwing off carbon dioxide. But the most
important function of the skin, in addition to protection, is that of
serving as

*An Organ of Adaptation.*--Forming, as it does, the boundary between the
body and its physical environment, the skin is perhaps the most important
agent through which the body is adapted to its immediate surroundings.
Evidence of this is found in the great variety of influences which are
