
"Now, Malchus, tell us your story," Hannibal said. "It seems strange to
me that you should have said nought to your father or me of what you
had learned, and left us to take such measures as might seem fit to us,
instead of taking the matter into your own hands."

"Had I had certainties to go upon I should assuredly have done so, but,
as you will see when I tell you all I had learned, I had nothing but
suspicions, and those of the vaguest, and for aught I knew I might be
altogether in the wrong."

Malchus then gave the full details of the manner in which his suspicions
had been first excited, and in which on the previous night he had taken
steps to ascertain whether there were any foundation for them.

"You see," he concluded, "there was no sort of certainty, nothing to
prove that the money was not paid for the purchase of a horse or slave.
It was only the one fact that one of the party was a servant here that
rendered what I discovered serious. Had it not been for the fate of
Hasdrubal I should never have given the matter a second thought; but,
knowing that he was assassinated by a trusted servant, and seeing two
men whose families I knew belonged to Hanno's faction engaged in secret
talk with one of your attendants, the suspicion struck me that a similar
deed might again be attempted. The only words I had to go upon were,
'Tomorrow night, then, without fail.' This was not enough for me to
bring an accusation against two men of noble family; and, had I told
you the tale without the confirmation it has now received, you would
probably have treated it but lightly. I resolved, therefore, to wait
and see, taking such precaution that no harm could come of my secrecy. I
concealed in my room ten of my Numidians, with my lieutenant Trebon--an
ample force whatever might betide.

"If, as I suspected, this man intended, with two or three others, to
steal into your chamber and slay you while you slept, we could at once
have stopped the attempt; should he come with a larger force, we could,
as is proved, resist them until the guard arrived on the spot. If, on
the other hand, night passed off quietly and my suspicions proved to be
altogether erroneous, I should escape the ridicule which would certainly
have been forthcoming had I alarmed you without cause."

"You have acted very wisely and well, my son," Hamilcar said, "and
Carthage owes you the life of our beloved Hannibal. You indeed reasoned
with great wisdom and forethought. Had you informed us of what you had
discovered we should have taken precautions which would doubtless have
effected the object; but they would probably have become known to the
plotters, and the attempt would have been postponed and attempted some
other time, and perhaps with success. What say you, Hannibal, have I not
reason to be proud of this young son of mine?"

"You have indeed, Hamilcar, and deeply am I indebted to him. It is not
my life I care for, although that now is precious to me for the sake
of my beloved Imilce, but had I fallen now all the plans which we have
thought of together would have been frustrated, and the fairest chance
which Carthage ever had of fighting out the quarrel with her rival would
have been destroyed. Truly it has been a marvellous escape, and it seems
to me that the gods themselves must have inspired Malchus to act as he
did on such slight grounds as seeing two Carthaginians of the guard in
company with three or four natives at a late hour of the evening."

"What do you think will be best to do with the traitors who have plotted
against your life, Hannibal? Shall we try and execute them here, or send
them to Carthage to be dealt with?"

Hannibal did not answer for a minute.

"I think, Hamilcar, the best plan will be to keep silent altogether as
to the danger I have run. The army would be furious but would at the
same time be dispirited were it known in Carthage that two of her nobles
had been executed for an attempt on my life. It would only cause a fresh
outbreak of animosity and an even deadlier feud than before between
Hanno's friends and ours. Therefore, I say, let the men taken tonight be
executed in the morning without question asked, and let no word be said
by them or by us that they were bribed by Carthaginians. All in the
palace now know that a party of natives have broken in, and will guess
that my life was their object; there is no need that they should know
more. As to the two men, I will call them before me tomorrow, with none
but you present, and will let them know that I am aware that they are
the authors of this attempt, and will bid them resign their places in
the guard and return at once to Carthage."

"It grieves me that they should go unpunished," Hamilcar said; "but
doubtless your plan is the wisest."

"Then," Hannibal said, rising, "we will to bed again. Malchus, acquaint
Trebon of our determination that silence is to be kept; tell him that I
shall bear him in mind, and not forget his share in this night's work.
As for you, Malchus, henceforth you are more than my cousin; you have
saved my life, and I shall never forget it. I shall tell Imilce in the
morning of the danger which has passed, for it is sure to come to her
ears, and she will know better than I do how to thank you."

Accordingly in the morning Hannibal's orders were carried out; the
twelve natives taken prisoners were beheaded without any of the usual
tortures which would have been inflicted upon a similar occasion.
No less than fourteen others had been killed in the fight. The two
Carthaginian nobles were sent for by Hannibal. They came prepared to
die, for they knew already by rumour that the attempt had failed, and
doubted not when the summons reached them that Carpadon had denounced
them as his accomplices. But they went to their certain doom with the
courage of their class--pale, perhaps, but otherwise unmoved. Hannibal
was alone with Hamilcar when they entered.

"That assassination is not an altogether unknown crime in Carthage," he
said quietly, "I was well aware, but I did not before think that nobles
in the Carthaginian horse would stoop to it. I know that it was you who
provided the gold for the payment of the men who made an attempt upon my
life, that you personally paid my attendant Carpadon to hire assassins,
and to lead them to my chamber. Were I to denounce you, my soldiers
would tear you in pieces. The very name of your families would be held
accursed by all honest men in Carthage for all time. I do not ask you
whether I have given you cause for offence, for I know that I have not
done so; you acted simply for the benefit of Hanno. Whether you were
instructed by him I do not deign to ask. I shall not harm you. The tale
of your infamy is known to but four persons, and none others will ever
know it. I am proud of the honour of the nobles of Carthage, and would
not that the scum of the people should bandy the name of your families
on their lips as guilty of so foul an act of treason. You will, of
course, at once resign your positions in the Carthaginian horse. Make
what pretext you will--illness or private affairs. Tomorrow sail for
Carthage, and there strive by efforts for the good of your country to
efface the remembrance of this blow which you would have struck her."

So saying, with a wave of the hand he dismissed them.

They went without a word, too astonished at his clemency, too humiliated
by their own disgrace even to utter a word of thanks. When they were
fairly beyond the palace they looked at each other as men awakened from
a dream.

"What a man!" one of them exclaimed. "No wonder the soldiers adore him!
He has given us our lives--more, he has saved our names from disgrace.
Henceforth, Pontus, we, at least, can never again take part against
him."

"It is almost too much to bear," the other said; "I feel that I would
rather that he had ordered us to instant execution."

"Ay, for our own sakes, Pontus, but not for those of others. For myself
I shall retire to the country; it seems to me that never again shall I
be able to mix with others; they may know nothing of it, but it will be
ever on my mind. How they would shrink back in horror were what we have
done whispered to them! Truly, were it not for my family, I would prefer
death with the worst torture to life as it will be now."

The excitement in the army was intense when it became known that a
body of Iberians had attempted to break into Hannibal's palace with the
design of murdering him, and many of the soldiers, seizing their arms,
hurried towards the city, and had not an officer ridden with the news to
Hannibal, they would assuredly have fallen upon the native inhabitants,
and a general massacre would have taken place.

Hannibal at once mounted and rode out to meet the soldiers. He was
received with enthusiastic acclamations; at length he raised his arm to
restore silence, and then addressed the troops, telling them how deeply
he valued the evidence of their affection, but that he prayed them to
return to their camps and lay by their arms.

"We must not," he said, "confound the innocent with the guilty. Those
who were concerned in the attempt have paid the penalty with their
lives; it is not because a handful of Spaniards have plotted against me
that you are to swear hatred against the whole race; were you to punish
the innocent for the guilty you would arouse the fury of the Iberians
throughout the whole peninsula, and all our work would have to be done
over again. You know that above all things I desire the friendship and
goodwill of the natives. Nothing would grieve me more than that, just as
we are attaining this, our efforts should be marred by a quarrel between
yourselves and the people here. I pray you, therefore, as a personal
favour to me, to abstain from all tumult, and go quietly back to your
camp. The attack upon my palace was made only by some thirty or forty of
the scum of the inhabitants, and the attempt was defeated by the wisdom
and courage of my young cousin Malchus, whom you must henceforth regard
as the saviour of my life."

The soldiers at once acceded to the request of their general, and after
another outburst of cheering they returned quietly to their camp.

The result of this affair was to render Malchus one of the most
popular personages in the army, and the lad was quite abashed by the
enthusiastic reception which the soldiers gave him when he passed among
them. It removed, too, any feeling of jealousy which might have existed
among his former comrades of the Carthaginian horse, for although it
was considered as a matter of course in Carthage that generals should
appoint their near relatives to posts of high command, human nature was
then the same as now, and men not possessed of high patronage could not
help grumbling a little at the promotion of those more fortunate than
themselves. Henceforth, however, no voice was ever raised against the
promotion of Malchus, and had he at once been appointed to a command of
importance none would have deemed such a favour undeserved by the youth
who had saved the life of Hannibal.



CHAPTER IX: THE SIEGE OF SAGUNTUM


A few days later the Carthaginian army were astonished by the issue
of an order that the whole were to be in readiness to march upon the
following day. The greatest excitement arose when the news got abroad.
None knew against whom hostilities were to be directed. No one had heard
aught of the arrival of messengers announcing fresh insurrection among
the recently conquered tribes, and all sorts of surmises were indulged
in as to the foe against whom this great force, the largest which had
ever been collected by Carthage, were about to get in motion.

The army now gathered around Carthagena amounted, indeed, to a hundred
and fifty thousand men, and much surprise had for some time existed
at the continual arrival of reinforcements from home, and at the large
number of troops which had during the winter been raised and disciplined
from among the friendly tribes.

Simultaneously with the issue of the order long lines of wagons, laden
with military stores, began to pour out from the arsenals, and all day
long a procession of carts moved across the bridge over the canal in the
isthmus to the mainland. The tents were struck at daylight, the baggage
loaded up into the wagons told off to accompany the various bodies of
soldiers, and the troops formed up in military order.

When Hannibal rode on to the ground, surrounded by his principal
officers, a shout of welcome rose from the army; and he proceeded to
make a close inspection of the whole force. The officers then placed
themselves at the head of their respective commands, the trumpets gave
the signal, and the army set out on a march, as to whose direction and
distance few present had any idea, and from which few, indeed, were ever
destined to return.

There was no longer any occasion for secrecy as to the object of the
expedition. The generals repeated it to their immediate staffs, these
informed the other officers, and the news speedily spread through the
army that they were marching against Saguntum. The importance of the
news was felt by all. Saguntum was the near ally of Rome, and an attack
upon that city could but mean that Carthage was entering upon another
struggle with her great rival.

Saguntum lay about 140 miles north of Carthagena, and the army had to
cross the range of mountains now known as the Sierra Morena, which
run across the peninsula from Cape St. Vincent on the west to Cape St.
Martin on the east. The march of so large an army, impeded as it was
by a huge train of wagons with stores and the machines necessary for a
siege, was toilsome and arduous in the extreme. But all worked with the
greatest enthusiasm and diligence; roads were made with immense labour
through forests, across ravines, and over mountain streams.

Hannibal himself was always present, encouraging the men by his praises,
and sharing all their hardships.

At last the mountains were passed, and the army poured down into
the fertile plains of Valencia, which town, however, was not then in
existence. Passing over the site where it is now situated they continued
their march north until Saguntum, standing on its rocky eminence, came
into view.

During the march Malchus and his company had led the way, guided by
natives, who pointed out the easiest paths. As there were no enemies to
be guarded against, they had taken their full share in the labours of
the army.

The Saguntines were already aware of the approach of the expedition. No
sooner had it crossed the crest of the mountains than native runners
had carried the news of its approach, and the inhabitants had spent the
intervening time in laying in great stores of provisions, and in making
every preparation for defence. The garrison was small in comparison with
the force marching against it, but it was ample for the defence of the
walls, for its position rendered the city well nigh impregnable against
the machines in use at the time, and was formidable in the extreme even
against modern artillery, for 2000 years afterwards Saguntum, with a
garrison of 3000 men, resisted for a long time all the efforts of a
French army under General Suchet. As soon as his force arrived near the
town Hannibal rode forward, and, in accordance with the custom of the
times, himself summoned the garrison to surrender. Upon their refusal
he solemnly declared war by hurling his javelin against the walls. The
troops at once advanced to the assault, and poured flights of arrows,
masses of stones from their machines, javelins, and missiles of all
descriptions into the city, the defenders replying with equal vigour
from the walls. At the end of the first day's fighting Hannibal
perceived that his hopes of carrying the place by assault were vain--for
the walls were too high to be scaled, too thick to be shaken by any
irregular attack--and that a long siege must be undertaken.

This was a great disappointment to him, as it would cause a long
delay that it would be scarce possible to commence the march which he
meditated that summer. As to advancing, with Saguntum in his rear, it
was not to be thought of, for the Romans would be able to land their
armies there and to cut him off from all communication with Carthagena
and Carthage. There was, then, nothing to be done but to undertake the
siege in regular order.

The army formed an encampment in a circle round the town. A strong force
was left to prevent the garrison from making a sortie, and the whole of
the troops were then marched away in detachments to the hills to fell
and bring down the timber which would be required for the towers and
walls, the bareness of the rock rendering it impossible to construct the
approaches as usual with earth. In the first place, a wall, strengthened
by numerous small towers, was erected round the whole circumference
of the rock; then the approaches were begun on the western side, where
attack was alone possible.

This was done by lines of wooden towers, connected one with another by
walls of the same material; movable towers were constructed to be pushed
forward against the great tower which formed the chief defence of the
wall, and on each side the line of attack was carried onward by portable
screens covered with thick hide. In the meantime the Saguntines were
not idle. Showers of missiles of all descriptions were hurled upon the
working parties, great rocks from the machines on the walls crashed
through the wooden erections, and frequent and desperate sorties were
made, in which the Carthaginians were almost always worsted. The nature
of the ground, overlooked as it was by the lofty towers and walls, and
swept by the missiles of the defenders, rendered it impossible for any
considerable force to remain close at hand to render assistance to the
workers, and the sudden attacks of the Saguntines several times drove
them far down the hillside, and enabled the besieged, with axe and fire,
to destroy much of the work which had been so labouriously carried out.

In one of these sorties Hannibal, who was continually at the front,
overlooking the work, was seriously wounded by a javelin in the thigh.
Until he was cured the siege languished, and was converted into a
blockade, for it was his presence and influence alone which encouraged
the men to continue their work under such extreme difficulties,
involving the death of a large proportion of those engaged. Upon
Hannibal's recovery the work was pressed forward with new vigour, and
the screens and towers were pushed on almost to the foot of the walls.
The battering rams were now brought up, and--shielded by massive
screens, which protected those who worked them from the darts and stones
thrown down by the enemy, and by lofty towers, from whose tops the
Carthaginian archers engaged the Saguntines on the wall--began their
work.

The construction of walls was in those days rude and primitive, and they
had little of the solidity of such structures in succeeding ages.
The stones were very roughly shaped, no mortar was used, and the
displacement of one stone consequently involved that of several others.
This being the case it was not long before the heavy battering rams of
the Carthaginians produced an effect on the walls, and a large breach
was speedily made. Three towers and the walls which connected them fell
with a mighty crash, and the besiegers, believing that the place was
won, advanced to the assault. But the Saguntines met them in the breach,
and for hours a desperate battle raged there.

The Saguntines hurled down upon the assailants trunks of trees bristling
with spearheads and spikes of iron, blazing darts and falariques--great
blocks of wood with projecting spikes, and covered thickly with a mass
of pitch and sulphur which set on fire all they touched. Other species
of falariques were in the form of spindles, the shaft wrapped round with
flax dipped in pitch. Hannibal fought at the head of his troops with
desperate bravery, and had a narrow escape of being crushed by an
enormous rock which fell at his feet; but in spite of his efforts
and those of his troops they were unable to carry the breach, and at
nightfall fell back to their camp, having suffered very heavy losses.

Singularly enough the French columns were repulsed in an effort to
carry a breach at almost the same spot, the Spaniards hurling among them
stones, hand grenades of glass bottles and shells, and defending the
breach with their long pikes against all the efforts of Suchet's troops.

Some days passed before the attack was renewed, as the troops were worn
out by their labours. A strong guard in the meantime held the advanced
works against any sorties of the Saguntines.

These, on their side, worked night and day, and by the time the
Carthaginians again advanced the wall was rebuilt and the breach closed.
But Hannibal had also been busy. Seeing that it was impossible for
his troops to win an entrance by a breach, as long as the Saguntines
occupied every point commanding it, he caused a vast tower to be built,
sufficiently lofty to overlook every point of the defences, arming each
of its stages with catapults and ballistas. He also built near the walls
a great terrace of wood higher than the walls themselves, and from this
and from the tower he poured such torrents of missiles into the town
that the defenders could no longer remain upon the walls. Five hundred
Arab miners now advanced, and these, setting to work with their
implements, soon loosened the lower stones of the wall, and this again
fell with a mighty crash and a breach was opened.

The Carthaginians at once swarmed in and took possession of the wall;
but while the besiegers had been constructing their castle and terrace,
the Saguntines had built an interior wall, and Hannibal saw himself
confronted with a fresh line of defences.

As preparations were being made for the attack of the new defences
messengers arrived saying that the Carpatans and Orotans, furious at the
heavy levies of men which had been demanded from them for the army, had
revolted. Leaving Maharbal to conduct the siege in his absence, Hannibal
hurried away with a portion of his force, and returned in two months,
having put down the revolt and severely punished the tribesmen.

While the siege had been continuing the Romans had been making vain
efforts to induce the Carthaginians to desist. No sooner had the
operations commenced than agents from the Roman senate waited on
Hannibal and begged him to abandon the siege. Hannibal treated their
remonstrance with disdain, at the same time writing to Carthage to say
that it was absolutely necessary that the people of Saguntum, who were
insolent and hostile, relying on the protection of Rome, should be
punished. The envoys then went to Carthage, where they made an animated
protest against what they regarded as an unprovoked attack upon their
allies. Rome, in fact, was anxious at this moment to postpone the
struggle with Carthage for the same reason that Hannibal was anxious to
press it on.

She had but just finished a long struggle with the Gaulish tribes of
Northern Italy, and was anxious to recover her strength before she
engaged in another war. It was for this very reason that Hannibal
desired to force on the struggle. His friends at Carthage persuaded the
