
"I know what you are going to say; but there is no need of saying it,"
interrupted the magician. "I judge from your face, which is an honest
one. I have traveled about a good deal, and I am a good judge of faces."

"You shall not be disappointed, sir."

"I know that, in advance. Now, tell me if you are at work, or do you
attend school?"

"I have been at work in a shoe shop in this village, sir."

"Not now?"

"No, sir; business is dull, and work has given out."

"What are you going to do next?"

"Anything by which I can earn an honest living."

"That's the way to talk. I'll take you into my employ, if you have no
objection to travel."

Objection to travel! Who ever heard of a boy of fifteen who had an
objection to travel?

"But will your parents consent? That is the next question. I don't want
to entice any boys away from home against their parents' consent."

"My parents do not live here. They live farther north, in the town of
Granton."

"Granton? I never was there. Is it a large place?"

"No, sir, it is a very small place. My father consented to have me leave
home and he will have no objection to my earning my living in any honest
way."

"Well, my young friend, I can assure you that my way is an honest one,
though I frankly confess I do my best to deceive the people who come to
my entertainments."

"What is it you want me to do, sir?"

"Partly what you are going to do to-night--take tickets at the door; but
that is not all. I have to carry about considerable apparatus and I need
help about arranging it. Sometimes, also, I need help in my experiments.
I had a young man with me; but he is taken down with a fever and obliged
to go home. It is not likely, as his health is delicate, that he will
care to resume his position. I must have somebody in his place. I have
no doubt you will answer my purpose."

"How much pay do you give, sir?"

"A practical question," said the professor, smiling.

"To begin with, of course I pay traveling expenses, and I can offer you
five dollars a week besides. Will that be satisfactory?"

"Yes, sir," said Harry, his heart giving a great throb of exultation as
he realized that his new business would give him two dollars week more
than his work in the shop, besides being a good deal more agreeable,
since it would give him a chance to see a little of the world.

"Can you start with me to-morrow morning?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then it is settled. But it is time you were at the hall. I will give
you a supply of small bills and, change, as you may have to change some
bills."

He drew from his side pocket a wallet, which he placed in the hands of
our hero.

"This wallet contains twenty dollars," he said: "Of course you will
bring me back that amount, in addition to what you take at the door this
evening."

"Very well, sir."

"You can wait for me at the close of the evening, and hand me all
together. Now go over to the hall, as the doors are to be open at half
past seven o'clock."

When Frank Heath and his companion went over to the Town Hall they found
Harry making change.

"Hello, Walton!" said Frank. "Are you the treasurer of this concern?"

"It seems so," said Harry.

"You'll let in your friends for nothing, won't you?"

"Not much. I charge them double price."

"Well here's our money. I say, Tom, I wonder the old fellow didn't take
me instead of Walton."

"That's easily told. You don't look honest enough."

"Oh, if it comes to that, he passed over you, too, Tom."

"He wouldn't insult a gentleman of my dignity. Come on; there's room on
the front seat."

Harry was kept busy till ten minutes after eight. By that time about
all who intended to be present were in the hall and the magician was
gratified by seeing that it was crowded. He was already well known in
the village, having been in the habit of visiting it every for years
and his reputation for dexterity, and especially for ventriloquism, had
called out this large audience.

The professor's tricks excited great wonder in the younger spectators. I
will only dwell slightly on his ventriloquism. When he came to this part
of the entertainment, he said: "Will any young gentleman assist me?"

Frank Heath immediately left his seat and took up his position beside
the professor.

"Now, sir," said the professor, "I want to ask you a question or two.
Will you answer me truly?"

A gruff voice appeared to proceed from Frank's mouth, saying: "Yes,
sir."

"Are you married, sir?"

Again the same gruff voice answered: "Yes, sir; I wish I wasn't;" to the
great delight of the small boys.

"Indeed, sir! I hope your wife doesn't make it uncomfortable for you."

"She licks me," Frank appeared to answer.

"I am sorry. What does she lick you with?"

"With a broomstick."

Frank looked foolish and there was a general laugh.

"I hope she doesn't treat you so badly very often, sir."

"Yes, she does, every day," was the answer. "If she knowed I was up here
telling you, she'd beat me awful."

"In that case, sir, I won't be cruel enough to keep you here any longer.
Take my advice, sir, and get a divorce."

"So I will, by hokey!"

And Frank, amid hearty laughter, resumed his seat, not having uttered a
word, the professor being responsible for the whole conversation.





CHAPTER XXIV. HARRY'S LETTER


During Harry's absence, the little household at Granton had got along
about as usual. They lived from hand to mouth. It required sharp
financiering to provide food and clothes for the little family.

There was one neighbor who watched their progress sharply and this was
Squire Green. It will be remembered that he had bound Mr. Walton to
forfeit ten dollars, if, at the end of six months, he was not prepared
to pay the forty dollars and interest which he had agreed to pay for the
cow. It is a proof of the man's intense meanness that, though rich while
his neighbor was poor, he was strongly in hopes that the latter would
incur the forfeit and be compelled to pay it.

One morning Squire Green accosted Mr. Walton, the squire being at work
in his own front yard.

"Good morning, neighbor Walton," he said.

"Good morning, squire."

"How is that cow a-doin'?"

"Pretty well."

"She's a good cow."

"Not so good as the one I lost."

"You're jokin' now, neighbor. It was my best cow. I wouldn't have sold
her except to obleege."

"She doesn't give as much milk as my old one."

"Sho! I guess you don't feed her as well as I did."

"She fares just as well as the other one did. Of course, I don't know
how you fed her."

"She allers had her fill when she was with me. Le' me see, how long is
it since I sold her to ye?"

Though the squire apparently asked for information, he knew the time to
a day and was not likely to forget.

"It's between four and five months, I believe."

"Jus'so. You was to be ready to pay up at the end of six months."

"That was the agreement."

"You'd better be a-savin' up for it."

"There isn't much chance of my saving. It's all I can do to make both
ends meet."

"You don't say so," said the squire, secretly pleased.

"My farm is small and poor, and doesn't yield much."

"But you work out, don't you?"

"When I get a chance. You don't want any help, do you, squire? I might
work off part of the debt that way."

"Mebbe next spring I'd like some help."

"That will be too late to meet my note, unless you'll renew."

"I'll see about it," said the squire, evasively. "What do you hear from
that boy of yours? Is he doin' well?"

"He's at work in a shoe shop."

"Does it pay well?"

"He doesn't get much just at first."

"Then he won't be able to pay for the cow," thought the squire. "That's
what I wanted to know."

"He'd better have gone to work for me," he said

"No, I think he will do better away from home. He will get a good trade
that he can fall back upon hereafter, even if he follows some other
business."

"Wal, I never learned no trade but I've got along middlin' well," said
the squire, in a complacent tone. "Farmin's good enough for me."

"I would say the same if I had your farm, squire. You wouldn't exchange,
would you?"

"That's a good joke, neighbor Walton. When I make up my mind to do it.
I'll let you know."

"What a mean old curmudgeon he is!" thought Hiram Walton, as he kept
on his way to the village store. "He evidently intends to keep me to my
agreement and will exact the ten dollars in case I can't pay for the cow
at the appointed time. It will be nothing but a robbery."

This was not the day for a letter from Harry but it occurred to Mr.
Walton to call at the post office. Contrary to his anticipations, a
letter was handed him.

"I won't open it till I get home," he said to himself.

"I've got a letter from Harry," he said, as he entered the house.

"A letter from Harry? It isn't his day for writing," said Mrs. Walton.
"What does he say?"

"I haven't opened the letter yet. Here, Tom, open and read it aloud."

Tom opened the letter and read as follows:


"Dear Father:--I must tell you, to begin with, that I have been
compelled to stop work in the shoe shop. The market is overstocked and
trade has become very dull.

"Of course, I felt quite bad when Mr. Leavitt told me this, for I feared
it would prevent my helping you pay for the cow, as I want so much to
do. I went round to several other shops, hoping to get in, but I found
it impossible. Still, I have succeeded in getting something to do that
will pay me better than work in the shop. If you were to guess all day,
I don't believe you would guess what business it is. So, to relieve your
suspense, I will tell you that I have engaged as assistant to Professor
Henderson, the famous magician and ventriloquist and am to start
to-morrow on a tour with him."


"Assistant to a magician!" exclaimed Mrs. Walton

"What does the boy know about magic?"

"It's a bully business," said Tom, enthusiastically. "I only wish I was
in Harry's shoes. I'd like to travel round with a magician first-rate."

"You're too thick-headed, Tom," said Marry.

"Shut up!" said Tom. "I guess I'm as smart as you, any day."

"Be quiet, both of you!" said Mr. Walton. "Now, Tom, go on with your
brother's letter."

Tom proceeded: "I am to take money at the door. We are going about
in the southern part of the State and shall visit some towns in
Massachusetts, the professor says. You know I've never been round any
and I shall like traveling and seeing new places. Professor Henderson
is very kind and I think I shall like him. He pays my traveling expenses
and five dollars a week, which is nearly twice as much money as I got
from Mr. Leavitt. I can't help thinking I am lucky in getting so good a
chance only a day after I lost my place in the shoe shop. I hope, yet,
to be able to pay for the cow when the money comes due.

"Love to all at home.

"Harry."


"Harry's lucky," said Mary. "He can get along."

"He is fortunate to find employment at once," said his father; "though
something which he can follow steadily is better. But the pay is good
and I am glad he has it."

"How long it seems since Harry was at home," said his mother. "I wish I
could see him."

"Yes, it would be pleasant," said Mr. Walton; "but the boy has his own
way to make, so we will be thankful that he is succeeding so well."





CHAPTER XXV. A STRANGE COMPANION


At ten o'clock the next day, Harry presented himself at the hotel. He
carried in his hand a carpetbag lent him by Mr. Leavitt, which contained
his small stock of under-clothing. His outside suits he left at Mr.
Leavitt's, not wishing to be encumbered with them while traveling.

"I see you are on time," said the professor.

"Yes, sir; I always mean to be."

"That's well; now if you'll jump into my buggy with me, we will ride
round to the Town Hall and take in my apparatus. I have to keep a
carriage," said the magician, as they rode along. "It saves me a great
deal of trouble by making me independent of cars and stages."

The apparatus was transferred to a trunk in the back part of the buggy
and securely locked.

"Now we are all ready," said Professor Henderson,

"Would you like to drive?"

"Yes, sir," answered Harry, with alacrity.

"I am going to give an entertainment in Holston this evening," said his
new employer. "Were you ever there?"

"No, sir."

"It is a smart little place and although the population is not large, I
always draw a full house."

"How far is it, sir?"

"About six miles."

Harry was sorry it was not farther, as he enjoyed driving. His companion
leaned back at his ease and talked on various subjects. He paused a
moment and Harry was startled by hearing a stifled child's voice just
behind him: "Oh, let me out! Don't keep me locked up here!"

The reins nearly fell from his hands. He turned and heard the voice
apparently proceeding from the trunk.

"What's the matter?" asked Professor Henderson.

"I thought I heard a child's voice."

"So you did," said the voice again.

The truth flashed upon Harry. His companion was exerting some of his
powers as a ventriloquist.

"Oh, it is you, sir," he said, smiling.

His companion smiled.

"You are right," he said.
