of a planet, _v_ its velocity, _r_ the radius of its orbit, and _T_ the
time of describing it; 2[pi]_r_ = _vT_, and the centripetal force
needed to hold it in its orbit is

       mv^2        4[pi]^2_mr_
     --------  or  -----------
       _r_             T^2

Now the force of gravitative attraction between the planet and the sun
is

  _VmS_
  -----,
   r^2

where _v_ is a fixed quantity called the gravitation-constant, to be
determined if possible by experiment once for all. Now, expressing the
fact that the force of gravitation _is_ the force holding the planet in,
we write,

  4[pi]^2_mr_    _VmS_
  ----------- = ---------,
     T^2          r^2

whence, by the simplest algebra,

   r^3      _VS_
  ------ = ---------.
   T^2      4[pi]^2

The mass of the planet has been cancelled out; the mass of the sun
remains, multiplied by the gravitation-constant, and is seen to be
proportional to the cube of the distance divided by the square of the
periodic time: a ratio, which is therefore the same for all planets
controlled by the sun. Hence, knowing _r_ and _T_ for any single planet,
the value of _VS_ is known.

No. 4. So by knowing the length of year and distance of any planet from
the sun, the sun's mass can be calculated, in terms of that of the
earth.

No. 5. For the satellites, the force acting depends on the mass of
_their_ central body, a planet. Hence the mass of any planet possessing
a satellite becomes known.

The same argument holds for any other system controlled by a central
body--for instance, for the satellites of Jupiter; only instead of _S_
it will be natural to write _J_, as meaning the mass of Jupiter. Hence,
knowing _r_ and _T_ for any one satellite of Jupiter, the value of _VJ_
is known.

Apply the argument also to the case of moon and earth. Knowing the
distance and time of revolution of our moon, the value of _VE_ is at
once determined; _E_ being the mass of the earth. Hence, _S_ and _J_,
and in fact the mass of any central body possessing a visible satellite,
are now known in terms of _E_, the mass of the earth (or, what is
practically the same thing, in terms of _V_, the gravitation-constant).
Observe that so far none of these quantities are known absolutely. Their
relative values are known, and are tabulated at the end of the Notes
above, but the finding of their absolute values is another matter, which
we must defer.

But, it may be asked, if Kepler's third law only gives us the mass of a
_central_ body, how is the mass of a _satellite_ to be known? Well, it
is not easy; the mass of no satellite is known with much accuracy. Their
mutual perturbations give us some data in the case of the satellites of
Jupiter; but to our own moon this method is of course inapplicable. Our
moon perturbs at first sight nothing, and accordingly its mass is not
even yet known with exactness. The mass of comets, again, is quite
unknown. All that we can be sure of is that they are smaller than a
certain limit, else they would perturb the planets they pass near.
Nothing of this sort has ever been detected. They are themselves
perturbed plentifully, but they perturb nothing; hence we learn that
their mass is small. The mass of a comet may, indeed, be a few million
or even billion tons; but that is quite small in astronomy.

But now it may be asked, surely the moon perturbs the earth, swinging it
round their common centre of gravity, and really describing its own
orbit about this point instead of about the earth's centre? Yes, that is
so; and a more precise consideration of Kepler's third law enables us to
make a fair approximation to the position of this common centre of
gravity, and thus practically to "weigh the moon," i.e. to compare its
mass with that of the earth; for their masses will be inversely as their
respective distances from the common centre of gravity or balancing
point--on the simple steel-yard principle.

Hitherto we have not troubled ourselves about the precise point about
which the revolution occurs, but Kepler's third law is not precisely
accurate unless it is attended to. The bigger the revolving body the
greater is the discrepancy: and we see in the table preceding Lecture
III., on page 57, that Jupiter exhibits an error which, though very
slight, is greater than that of any of the other planets, when the sun
is considered the fixed centre.

     Let the common centre of gravity of earth and moon be displaced a
     distance _x_ from the centre of the earth, then the moon's distance
     from the real centre of revolution is not _r_, but _r-x_; and the
     equation of centrifugal force to gravitative-attraction is strictly

   4[pi]^2             _VE_
  --------- (_r-x_) = ------,
     T^2               r^2

     instead of what is in the text above; and this gives a slightly
     modified "third law." From this equation, if we have any distinct
     method of determining _VE_ (and the next section gives such a
     method), we can calculate _x_ and thus roughly weigh the moon,
     since

  _r-x_     E
  ----- = -----,
   _r_     E+M

     but to get anything like a reasonable result the data must be very
     precise.

No. 6. The force constraining the moon in her orbit is the same gravity
as gives terrestrial bodies their weight and regulates the motion of
projectiles.

Here we come to the Newtonian verification already several times
mentioned; but because of its importance I will repeat it in other
words. The hypothesis to be verified is that the force acting on the
moon is the same kind of force as acts on bodies we can handle and
weigh, and which gives them their weight. Now the weight of a mass _m_
is commonly written _mg_, where _g_ is the intensity of terrestrial
gravity, a thing easily measured; being, indeed, numerically equal to
twice the distance a stone drops in the first second of free fall. [See
table p. 205.] Hence, expressing that the weight of a body is due to
gravity, and remembering that the centre of the earth's attraction is
distant from us by one earth's radius (R), we can write

         _Vm_E
  _mg_ = ------,
          R^2

or

_V_E = gR^2 = 95,522 cubic miles-per-second per second.

But we already know _v_E, in terms of the moon's motion, as

  4[pi]^2r^3
  -----------
      T^2

approximately, [more accurately, see preceding note, this quantity is
_V_(E + M)]; hence we can easily see if the two determinations of this
quantity agree.[20]

All these deductions are fundamental, and may be considered as the
foundation of the _Principia_. It was these that flashed upon Newton
during that moment of excitement when he learned the real size of the
earth, and discovered his speculations to be true.

The next are elaborations and amplifications of the theory, such as in
ordinary times are left for subsequent generations of theorists to
discover and work out.

Newton did not work out these remoter consequences of his theory
completely by any means: the astronomical and mathematical world has
been working them out ever since; but he carried the theory a great way,
and here it is that his marvellous power is most conspicuous.

It is his treatment of No. 7, the perturbations of the moon, that
perhaps most especially has struck all future mathematicians with
amazement. No. 7, No. 14, No. 15, these are the most inspired of the
whole.

No. 7. The moon is attracted not only by the earth, but by the sun also;
hence its orbit is perturbed, and Newton calculated out the chief of
these perturbations.

Now running through the perturbations (p. 203) in order:--The first is
in parenthesis, because it is mere excentricity. It is not a true
perturbation at all, and more properly belongs to Kepler.

(_a_) The first true perturbation is what Ptolemy called "the evection,"
the principal part of which is a periodic change in the ellipticity or
excentricity of the moon's orbit, owing to the pull of the sun. It is a
complicated matter, and Newton only partially solved it. I shall not
attempt to give an account of it.

(_b_) The next, "the variation," is a much simpler affair. It is caused
by the fact that as the moon revolves round the earth it is half the
time nearer to the sun than the earth is, and so gets pulled more than
the average, while for the other fortnight it is further from the sun
than the earth is, and so gets pulled less. For the week during which
it is changing from a decreasing half to a new moon it is moving in the
direction of the extra pull, and hence becomes new sooner than would
have been expected. All next week it is moving against the same extra
pull, and so arrives at quadrature (half moon) somewhat late. For the
next fortnight it is in the region of too little pull, the earth gets
pulled more than it does; the effect of this is to hurry it up for the
third week, so that the full moon occurs a little early, and to retard
it for the fourth week, so that the decreasing half moon like the
increasing half occurs behind time again. Thus each syzygy (as new and
full are technically called) is too early; each quadrature is too late;
the maximum hurrying and slackening force being felt at the octants, or
intermediate 45 deg. points.

(_c_) The "annual equation" is a fluctuation introduced into the other
perturbations by reason of the varying distance of the disturbing body,
the sun, at different seasons of the year. Its magnitude plainly depends
simply on the excentricity of the earth's orbit.

Both these perturbations, (_b_) and (_c_), Newton worked out completely.

(_d_) and (_e_) Next come the retrogression of the nodes and the
variation of the inclination, which at the time were being observed at
Greenwich by Flamsteed, from whom Newton frequently, but vainly, begged
for data that he might complete their theory while he had his mind upon
it. Fortunately, Halley succeeded Flamsteed as Astronomer-Royal [see
list at end of notes above], and then Newton would have no difficulty in
gaining such information as the national Observatory could give.

The "inclination" meant is the angle between the plane of the moon's
orbit and that of the earth. The plane of the earth's orbit round the
sun is called the ecliptic; the plane of the moon's orbit round the
earth is inclined to it at a certain angle, which is slowly changing,
though in a periodic manner. Imagine a curtain ring bisected by a sheet
of paper, and tilted to a certain angle; it may be likened to the moon's
orbit, cutting the plane of the ecliptic. The two points at which the
plane is cut by the ring are called "nodes"; and these nodes are not
stationary, but are slowly regressing, _i.e._ travelling in a direction
opposite to that of the moon itself. Also the angle of tilt is varying
slowly, oscillating up and down in the course of centuries.

(_f_) The two points in the moon's elliptic orbit where it comes nearest
to or farthest from the earth, _i.e._ the points at the extremity of the
long axis of the ellipse, are called separately perigee and apogee, or
together "the apses." Now the pull of the sun causes the whole orbit to
slowly revolve in its own plane, and consequently these apses
"progress," so that the true path is not quite a closed curve, but a
sort of spiral with elliptic loops.

But here comes in a striking circumstance. Newton states with reference
to this perturbation that theory only accounts for 1-1/2 deg. per annum,
whereas observation gives 3 deg., or just twice as much.

This is published in the _Principia_ as a fact, without comment. It was
for long regarded as a very curious thing, and many great mathematicians
afterwards tried to find an error in the working. D'Alembert, Clairaut,
and others attacked the problem, but were led to just the same result.
It constituted the great outstanding difficulty in the way of accepting
the theory of gravitation. It was suggested that perhaps the inverse
square law was only a first approximation; that perhaps a more complete
expression, such as

   A       B
  ---- + -----,
  r^2     r^4

must be given for it; and so on.

Ultimately, Clairaut took into account a whole series of neglected
terms, and it came out correct; thus verifying the theory.

But the strangest part of this tale is to come. For only a few years
ago, Prof. Adams, of Cambridge (Neptune Adams, as he is called), was
editing various old papers of Newton's, now in the possession of the
Duke of Portland, and he found manuscripts bearing on this very point,
and discovered that Newton had reworked out the calculations himself,
had found the cause of the error, had taken into account the terms
hitherto neglected, and so, fifty years before Clairaut, had completely,
though not publicly, solved this long outstanding problem of the
progression of the apses.

(_g_) and (_h_) Two other inequalities he calculated out and predicted,
viz. variation in the motions of the apses and the nodes. Neither of
these had then been observed, but they were afterwards detected and
verified.

A good many other minor irregularities are now known--some thirty, I
believe; and altogether the lunar theory, or problem of the moon's exact
motion, is one of the most complicated and difficult in astronomy; the
perturbations being so numerous and large, because of the enormous mass
of the perturbing body.

The disturbances experienced by the planets are much smaller, because
they are controlled by the sun and perturbed by each other. The moon is
controlled only by the earth, and perturbed by the sun. Planetary
perturbations can be treated as a series of disturbances with some
satisfaction: not so those of the moon. And yet it is the only way at
present known of dealing with the lunar theory.

To deal with it satisfactorily would demand the solution of such a
problem as this:--Given three rigid spherical masses thrown into empty
space with any initial motions whatever, and abandoned to gravity: to
determine their subsequent motions. With two masses the problem is
simple enough, being pretty well summed up in Kepler's laws; but with
three masses, strange to say, it is so complicated as to be beyond the
reach of even modern mathematics. It is a famous problem, known as that
of "the three bodies," but it has not yet been solved. Even when it is
solved it will be only a close approximation to the case of earth, moon,
and sun, for these bodies are not spherical, and are not rigid. One may
imagine how absurdly and hopelessly complicated a complete treatment of
the motions of the entire solar system would be.

No. 8. Each planet is attracted not only by the sun but by the other
planets, hence their orbits are slightly affected by each other.

The subject of planetary perturbation was only just begun by Newton.
Gradually (by Laplace and others) the theory became highly developed;
and, as everybody knows, in 1846 Neptune was discovered by means of it.

No. 9. He recognized the comets as members of the solar system, obedient
to the same law of gravity and moving in very elongated ellipses; so
their return could be predicted.

It was a long time before Newton recognized the comets as real members
of the solar system, and subject to gravity like the rest. He at first
thought they moved in straight lines. It was only in the second edition
of the _Principia_ that the theory of comets was introduced.

Halley observed a fine comet in 1682, and calculated its orbit on
Newtonian principles. He also calculated when it ought to have been seen
in past times; and he found the year 1607, when one was seen by Kepler;
also the year 1531, when one was seen by Appian; again, he reckoned
1456, 1380, 1305. All these appearances were the same comet, in all
probability, returning every seventy-five or seventy-six years. The
period was easily allowed to be not exact, because of perturbing
planets. He then predicted its return for 1758, or perhaps 1759, a date
he could not himself hope to see. He lived to a great age, but he died
sixteen years before this date.

As the time drew nigh, three-quarters of a century afterwards,
astronomers were greatly interested in this first cometary prediction,
and kept an eager look-out for "Halley's comet." Clairaut, a most
eminent mathematician and student of Newton, proceeded to calculate out
more exactly the perturbing influence of Jupiter, near which it had
passed. After immense labour (for the difficulty of the calculation was
extreme, and the mass of mere figures something portentous), he
predicted its return on the 13th of April, 1759, but he considered that
he might have made a possible error of a month. It returned on the 13th
of March, 1759, and established beyond all doubt the rule of the
Newtonian theory over comets.

[Illustration: FIG. 71.--Well-known model exhibiting the oblate
spheroidal form as a consequence of spinning about a central axis. The
brass strip _a_ looks like a transparent globe when whirled, and bulges
out equatorially.]

No. 10. Applying the idea of centrifugal force to the earth considered
as a rotating body, he perceived that it could not be a true sphere, and
calculated its oblateness, obtaining 28 miles greater equatorial than
polar diameter.

Here we return to one of the more simple deductions. A spinning body of
any kind tends to swell at its circumference (or equator), and shrink
along its axis (or poles). If the body is of yielding material, its
shape must alter under the influence of centrifugal force; and if a
globe of yielding substance subject to known forces rotates at a
definite pace, its shape can be calculated. Thus a plastic sphere the
size of the earth, held together by its own gravity, and rotating once a
day, can be shown to have its equatorial diameter twenty-eight miles
greater than its polar diameter: the two diameters being 8,000 and 8,028
respectively. Now we have no guarantee that the earth is of yielding
material: for all Newton could tell it might be extremely rigid. As a
matter of fact it is now very nearly rigid. But he argued thus. The
water on it is certainly yielding, and although the solid earth might
decline to bulge at the equator in deference to the diurnal rotation,
that would not prevent the ocean from flowing from the poles to the
equator and piling itself up as an equatorial ocean fourteen miles deep,
leaving dry land everywhere near either pole. Nothing of this sort is
observed: the distribution of land and water is not thus regulated.
Hence, whatever the earth may be now, it must once have been plastic
enough to accommodate itself perfectly to the centrifugal forces, and to
take the shape appropriate to a perfectly plastic body. In all
probability it was once molten, and for long afterwards pasty.

Thus, then, the shape of the earth can be calculated from the length of
its day and the intensity of its gravity. The calculation is not
difficult: it consists in imagining a couple of holes bored to the
centre of the earth, one from a pole and one from the equator; filling
these both with water, and calculating how much higher the water will
stand in one leg of the gigantic V tube so formed than in the other. The
answer comes out about fourteen miles.

The shape of the earth can now be observed geodetically, and it accords
with calculation, but the observations are extremely delicate; in
Newton's time the _size_ was only barely known, the _shape_ was not
observed till long after; but on the principles of mechanics, combined
with a little common-sense reasoning, it could be calculated with
certainty and accuracy.

No. 11. From the observed shape of Jupiter or any planet the length of
its day could be estimated.

Jupiter is much more oblate than the earth. Its two diameters are to one
another as 17 is to 16; the ellipticity of its disk is manifest to
simple inspection. Hence we perceive that its whirling action must be
more violent--it must rotate quicker. As a matter of fact its day is ten

[Illustration: FIG. 72.--Jupiter.]

hours long--five hours daylight and five hours night. The times of
rotation of other bodies in the solar system are recorded in a table
above.

No. 12. The so-calculated shape of the earth, in combination with
centrifugal force, causes the weight of bodies to vary with latitude;
and Newton calculated the amount of this variation. 194 lbs. at pole
balance 195 lbs. at equator.

But following from the calculated shape of the earth follow several
interesting consequences. First of all, the intensity of gravity will
not be the same everywhere; for at the equator a stone is further from
the average bulk of the earth (say the centre) than it is at the poles,
and owing to this fact a mass of 590 pounds at the pole; would suffice
to balance 591 pounds at the equator, if the two could be placed in the
pans of a gigantic balance whose beam straddled along an earth's
quadrant. This is a _true_ variation of gravity due to the shape of the
earth. But besides this there is a still larger _apparent_ variation due
to centrifugal force, which affects all bodies at the equator but not
those at the poles. From this cause, even if the earth were a true
sphere, yet if it were spinning at its actual pace, 288 pounds at the
pole could balance 289 pounds at the equator; because at the equator the
true weight of the mass would not be fully appreciated, centrifugal
force would virtually diminish it by 1/289th of its amount.

In actual fact both causes co-exist, and accordingly the total variation
of gravity observed is compounded of the real and the apparent effects;
the result is that 194 pounds at a pole weighs as much as 195 pounds at
the equator.
