The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 1178,
June 25, 1898, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 1178, June 25, 1898

Author: Various

Release Date: April 27, 2006 [EBook #18265]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Stacy Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at www.pgdp.net





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 1178




NEW YORK, JUNE 25, 1898.

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XLV., No. 1178.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.

       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


I.    ARCHAEOLOGY.--Tombs of the First Egyptian Dynasty--By
      LUDWIG BORCHARDT                                         18767

II.   ANTHROPOLOGY.--The Milestones of Human Progress          18766

III.  BIOGRAPHY.--The Queen Regent and Alfonzo XIII.--1
      illustration                                             18755

IV.   BOTANY AND HORTICULTURE.--Rose Psyche--1 illustration    18768

V.    CIVIL ENGINEERING.--The Lock of the Dortmund-Ems Canal
      at Henrichenburg.--1 illustration                        18776

VI.   ELECTRICITY.--The Development of the Central Station--By
      SAMUEL INSULL                                            18774

VII.  MARINE ENGINEERING.--Steering Gear of North German
      Lloyd Steamers "Coblentz," "Mainz" and "Trier."--2
      illustrations                                            18777

VIII. MEDICINE AND HYGIENE.--Sleep and the Theories of its
      Cause                                                    18768

IX.   MISCELLANEOUS:
      Engineering Notes.                                       18771
      Electrical Notes.                                        18771
      Selected Formulae.                                        18771

X.    NATURAL HISTORY--Wild and Domestic Sheep in the Berlin
      Zoological Garden.--8 illustrations                      18772

XI.   PATENTS.--Patents.--By JAMES W. SEE                      18773

XII.  PHOTOGRAPHY.--Amateur Chronophotographic Apparatus.--2
      illustrations                                            18769

XIII. STEAM ENGINEERING.--Combined Steam Pumping and
      Motive Power Engine.--1 illustration                     18778

XIV.  TECHNOLOGY.--The Reclaiming of Old Rubber.--By HAWTHORNE
      HILL                                                     18769

XV.   WARFARE.--The American "Regular."--By the English
      correspondent of the London Times on board the United
      States transport "Gussie."                               18776

       *       *       *       *       *




THE QUEEN REGENT AND ALFONZO XIII.


[Illustration: THE QUEEN REGENT AND HER SON, KING ALFONSO XIII.
OF SPAIN.]

In the present war between the United States and Spain, the Queen
Regent is an impressive figure, and it is entirely owing to her charm
and fortitude that the present dynasty of Spain is maintained. Since
his earliest youth she has constantly made efforts to fit her son to
wear the crown. The Queen Regent came from the great historic house of
Hapsburg, which has done much to shape the destinies of the world. All
the fortitude that has distinguished its members is represented in
this lady, who is the widow of Alfonzo XII. and the mother of the
present king. Her father was the late Archduke Karl Ferdinand and she
is the cousin of Emperor Franz Joseph. She has had a sad history. Her
husband died before the young king was born, and from the hour of his
birth she has watched and cared for the boy. She is the leader in all
good works in Spain, and her sympathy for the distressed is
proverbial. She gives freely from her private purse wherever there is
need, whether it be for the relief of misery or, as recently, when the
state is in peril. The young king has been carefully educated. By a
curious fate, his birth deposed from the throne his sister Maria de
las Mercedes, who as a little girl was queen for a few months. The boy
has been brought up under the influence of family life and has a warm
affection for his mother and sisters. He has never had the full
delights of childhood, for he has been educated in that false,
punctilious and thoroughly artificial atmosphere of the court of
Spain, in which every care has been taken to fit him for his royal
position. His health is far from robust, though the military education
he has received has done much to strengthen his constitution. He has
been taught to interest himself especially in the naval and military
affairs, and the study of the models of ships and military discipline
has been one of the principal occupations of his childhood. It is the
earnest wish of Spain that he should prove worthy of his mother.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MILESTONES OF HUMAN PROGRESS.[1]

    [Footnote 1: A lecture delivered by Prof. Daniel G. Brinton at
    the Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia.]


The subject pertains directly to the advancement of the race. Indeed,
it is to the measure of this advancement I shall ask your attention.
There is no doubt about the advancement. There are some people who
believed and believe that man began in a state of high development and
has since then degenerated into his present condition. The belief in
some period of Arcadian simplicity and human perfection is still to be
found in some remote nooks and crannies of the learned world; but
those minds who have been trained in archaeological studies and in
ethnographic observations know well that when we go back to the most
ancient deposits, in which we find any sign of man at all on the
globe, we find also the proofs that man then lived in the rudest
possible condition of savagery. He has, little by little, through long
centuries and millenniums of painful struggle, survived in made his
weapons and his most effective tools for the time being would be a
good criterion to go by, because these weapons and tools enabled him
to conquer not only the wild beasts around him and his fellow man
also, but nature as well. These materials are three in number. They
particularly apply to European archaeology, but, in a general way, to
the archaeology of all continents. The one is stone, which gave man
material for the best cutting edge which he could make for very many
millenniums of his existence. After that, for a comparatively short
period, he availed himself of bronze--of the mixture of copper and tin
called bronze--an admixture giving a considerable degree of hardness
and therefore allowing polish and edge making. The bronze age was not
long anywhere. It was succeeded by that metal which, beyond all
others, has been of signal utility to man--iron. We live in the iron
age, and it is from iron in some of its forms and products that all
our best weapons and materials for implements, etc., are derived. We
have, therefore, the ages of stone, of bronze and of iron. These are
the measures, from an artistic source, of the advancement of human
culture; and they certainly bear a distinct relation to all man's
other conditions at the time. A tribe which had never progressed
beyond the stone age--which had no better material for its weapons and
implements than stone--could never proceed beyond a very limited point
of civilization. Bronze or any metal which can be moulded, hammered
and sharpened of course gives a nation vast superiority over one which
uses stone only; and the value of iron and steel for the same purposes
I need not dwell upon.

To be sure, we have here several measures; and it would seem more
desirable, if we could, to obtain one single measure--one single
material or object of which we could say that the tribe that uses or
does not use that to an equal degree is certainly lower or, in the
other respects, higher than another; but I believe that there has been
no single material which has been suggested as of sufficient use and
value in this direction to serve as a criterion; but, yes! I remember
there was one and, on the whole, not a bad one. It was suggested by
Baron Liebig, the celebrated chemist, who said: "If you wish a single
material by which to judge of the amount of culture that any nation,
or, for that matter, any individual, possesses, compared to another
one, find out how much soap they use. Nothing," he said, "more than
personal cleanliness and general cleanliness differentiates the
cultured man from the savage;" and as for that purpose he probably had
in view a soap, he recognized that as the one criterion. It is not
amiss, but open, also, to serious objections; because there are tribes
who live in such conditions that they can get neither water nor soap;
and the Arabs, distinctly clean, are not by any means at the highest
pinnacle of civilization.

The Germans, therefore, as a rule, have sought some other means than
all those above mentioned. Almost all the German writers on
ethnography divide the people and nations of the world into two great
classes--the one they call the "wild peoples," the other the "cultured
peoples"--the "Natur-Voelker" and the "Kultur-Voelker." The
distinction which they draw between these two great classes is largely
psychological. Man, they say, in the condition of the "wild
people"--of the "Natur-Voelker"--is subject to nature; therefore, they
call them "nature people." The "Kultur-Voelker," on the other hand,
have emancipated themselves, in great measure, from the control of
nature.

Furthermore, the man in the condition of the "wild people" is
in a condition of practically unconscious life: he has not yet
arrived at self-consciousness--he does not know and recognize his
individuality--the "Ego"--"das ich;" that is a discovery which comes
with the "Kultur-Voelker"--with the "cultured people;" and just in
proportion as an individual (or a nation) achieves a completely clear
idea of his own self-existence, his self-consciousness, his
individuality, to that extent he is emancipated from the mere control
of nature around him and rises in the scale of culture.

Again, to make this difference between the two still more apparent, it
is the conflict between the instinctive desires and the human heart
and soul and the intelligent desires--those desires which we have by
instinct, which we have by heredity and which have been inculcated
into us wholly by our surroundings, which we drink in and accept
without any internal discussion of them: those are instinctive in
character. We go about our business, we transact the daily affairs of
life, we accept our religion and politics, not from any internal
conviction of our own or positive examination, but from our
surroundings. To that extent people are acting instinctively; and, as
such, they are on a lower stage of culture than those who arrive at
such results for themselves through intelligent personal effort. This
is a real distinction also, although somewhat more subtle, perhaps,
than the ones previously given. Therefore, the differentiation made by
the German ethnographers between wild people and the cultured peoples
is, in the main, right; but it does not admit of any sharp line of
distinction between the two. We cannot draw a fixed line and say, "On
this side are the cultured people and on that the wild," because there
are many tribes and nations who are about that line, in some respects
on one side of it, in others on the other; but in a broad, general way
this distinction (which is now universally adopted by the German
writers) is one we should keep in our minds as being based upon
careful studies and real distinctions.

Usually the writers in the English tongue prefer a different basis
than any of these which I have mentioned; they prefer the basis as to
whence is derived the food supply of a nation, or a tribe; and on the
source of that food supply they divide nations and tribes into the
more or less cultured. In earliest times (and among the rudest tribes
to-day) the food supply is furnished entirely by natural means; there
is little or no agriculture known to speak of; there is nothing in the
way of preserving domestic animals for food; hunting the wild beasts
of the forests and fishing in the streams are the two sources.
Therefore, we call that last condition the hunting and fishing stage
of human development. You will observe that when that prevails there
can be no congregation of men into large bodies. Such a thing as a
city would be unknown. The food supply is eminently precarious. It
depends upon the season and upon a thousand matters not under the
control of man in any way. Moreover, inasmuch as the supply at the
best is uncertain, it allows but a very limited population in a
district; nor does it permit any permanent or stable inhabitations.
The towns, such as they are, must be movable; they must go to one part
of the country in the summer and another in the winter; they must
follow the game and the fruits; and in that condition, therefore, of
unstable life it is not possible for a nation or a tribe to gain any
great advance. You observe, therefore, that when the food supply is
drawn from this source it does entail a general depravity of culture
everywhere.

Above that would come the food supply which is obtained from other
sources. There is one which is not universal but still widely
extended, and that is the pastoral life. There are many tribes (as,
for instance, in southern Africa and in India and throughout the
steppes of Tartary and elsewhere) who live on their herds and drive
their herds from one pasture to another in order to obtain the best
forage. This nomadic and pastoral life extended very widely over the
old world in ancient times, but existed nowhere in the new world, for
the simple reason that they had no domesticated animals. Our own
remote ancestors--both the Aryans and the Semites--all the early
ancestors of the white race so far as known, were pastoral or nomadic;
and the Aryans of central Europe remained so until after the fall of
Rome, when, for the first time, they became practically sedentary.
This nomadic and pastoral life is a very great advance over the mere
hunting and fishing stage. It requires considerable care and attention
to domesticate the wild animals in any sufficient quantity to form a
reliable source of food. Moreover, the attention which it was
necessary to give to the rearing and training and the looking after
domestic animals was to a certain extent, humanizing. When a man found
that it was necessary to be careful about his animals, he would also
be careful about his neighbors. We would say that the same sense which
enabled him, or directed him, to look after the welfare of the herd
would justify and, in fact, impel him to look after that of man also;
so that the nomadic and pastoral life, although not stable nor
favorable to the development of cities, nor the great extension of
commerce, was nevertheless a decided advance over the ruder hunting
and fishing stage. So far as we know, neither Aryan nor Semite ever
depended upon a hunting and fishing stage. They doubtless did, but not
in the time of any history that we know. The Bedouins, etc., wandering
tribes to-day, and, among the Semitic, the Tuaregs of the Sahara, are
a purely nomadic or pastoral race; yet are very much above the negroes
of the south, who depend upon hunting and fishing.

Above it, however, and a very great improvement upon it, is the
agricultural stage, where the main source of the food supply is the
harvests. You observe, at once, that that means a sedentary life. When
a man sows corn, he must wait thereabout and tend it and till it and
finally reap it and store it and thrash it and then preserve the grain
and build granaries for it; and it involves, in fact, the remaining in
one place all the whole year; and then the regularity of that life led
very distinctly to making men regular, generally, in their habits.
They wanted to defend their homes--defend these grain fields of
theirs, or starvation would result; therefore, they built towers and
strong-walled cities; and they took great care in the selection of the
best men among them to do the fighting, while others looked after the
crop. We find that agriculture began at a very, very early period in
both continents. In our own continent we cannot tell when agriculture
was first in use--the main crop being the maize, or Indian corn. It
was raised by the more advanced tribes from the extreme north, where
its profitable culture invited, to the extreme south, from about the
northern line of Wisconsin in North America to the latitude of
southern Chile in South--extending, therefore, over some seven to
eight thousand miles of linear distance.

In the old world (going back to the time of the lake dwellers) we know
they had barley, rye and a species of millet; and later on they were
introduced to oats and wheat and a variety of others. Rice was of the
very earliest of our cereals, in the extreme east of the old world.
Wherever we find a very ancient civilization we also find that it is
intimately connected with some important cereal, and it has been said
that all you have to do is to study botany--the history of botany--and
you will find the history of human culture; and much there is that
could be said for that.

Fourth, and finally, those who divide human culture according to the
food supply consider that the highest stage is reached through
commerce. Commerce brings to all the great centers of human life the
food essential to their sustenance. It would be absolutely
impossible--obviously so--to have a city like Philadelphia in
existence for a month without constant and ceaseless commerce brought
here the food for its inhabitants. It is quite likely that, were
Philadelphia shut off at once from all connection with the world,
within ten days there would be an absolute famine here--so closely do
we depend upon our commercial supplies for our subsistence. These
supplies are not drawn from any one locality; were we to draw a radius
of five hundred miles around our great city of a million inhabitants,
we should still find that the greater part of our food supply comes
from a wider distance from us than that; and there is no one of us
that will go to his table this evening but will see upon that table
food products drawn from every quarter of the world. Thus it is that
commerce enables man to reach an indefinite degree of consolidation;
and it is through consolidation--through the more and more intimate
relationship, and the closer and closer juxtaposition of man--that his
real benefit and progress may be derived.

These, therefore, are the four stages of culture, as depending upon
food supply: the hunting and fishing stage, the nomadic or pastoral,
the agricultural and the commercial. These have been generally adopted
by English writers, and they are so adopted to-day; and you will
probably find them in many of the text books.

The American writers have, in many instances, followed the principles
laid down and defined most clearly by Mr. Lewis H. Morgan, a
distinguished ethnologist of the last generation. He divides (or
accepted the division and largely defined it) the progress of man into
a series of stages: beginning at the lowest point with savagery; then
barbarism, semi-civilization, civilization, and fifth, enlightenment.

I may briefly refer to what he would include in these and the main
criteria which he gives for each of them. He would place the savage
condition as being that of the lowest tribes known to us. They have
little or no agriculture; their commerce is very inchoate and rude:
they have no knowledge of the metals as such; their best weapon is the
bow and arrow, or the throwing stick; and their best tool is the stone
hatchet and the stone spade. This is very much like the lowest
condition of the "wild people" to whom I referred.

Above that he would place the condition of barbarism. In the stage of
developed barbarism he would place such inventions as, for instance,
pottery, the art of weaving (which is a very primitive art) and the
taming of a certain number of domestic animals, some for food, some
