'Umph! I am not quite sure that I understand,' I said.

'That is precisely what I don't do--understand!' he retorted, in a tone
of surly triumph. 'Before I came on this duty, I was told that there was
a gentleman here, bearing sealed orders from the Cardinal to arrest M.
de Cocheforet; and I was instructed to avoid collision with him so far
as might be possible. At first I took you for the gentleman. But the
plague take me if I understand the matter now.'

'Why not?' I said coldly.

'Because--well, the question is in a nutshell!' he answered impetuously.
'Are you here on behalf of Madame de Cocheforet, to shield her husband?
Or are you here to arrest him? That is what I do not understand, M. de
Berault.'

'If you mean, am I the Cardinal's agent--I am!' I answered sternly.

'To arrest M. de Cocheforet?'

'To arrest M. de Cocheforet.'

'Well--you surprise me,' he said.

Only that; but he spoke so drily that I felt the blood rush to my face.

'Take care, Monsieur,' I said severely. 'Do not presume too far on the
inconvenience to which your death might put me.'

He shrugged his shoulders.

'No offence,' he said. 'But you do not seem, M. de Berault, to
comprehend the difficulty. If we do not settle things now, we shall be
bickering twenty times a day.'

'Well, what do you want?' I asked impatiently.

'Simply to know how you are going to proceed. So that our plans may not
clash.'

'But surely, M. le Capitaine, that is my affair,' I said.

'The clashing?' he answered bitterly. Then he waved aside my wrath
'Pardon,' he said, 'the point is simply this. How do you propose to find
him if he is here?'

'That again is my affair,' I answered. He threw up his hands in despair;
but in a moment his place was taken by an unexpected disputant.

The Lieutenant, who had stood by all the time, listening and tugging at
his grey moustache, suddenly spoke.

Look here, M. de Berault,' he said, confronting me roughly, 'I do not
fight duels. I am from the ranks. I proved my courage at Montauban in
'21, and my honour is good enough to take care of itself. So I say what
I like, and I ask you plainly what M. le Capitaine doubtless has in his
mind, but does not ask: Are you running with the hare, and hunting
with the hounds in this matter? In other words, have you thrown up
Monseigneur's commission in all but name, and become Madame's ally;
or--it is the only other alternative--are you getting at the man through
the women?'

'You villain!' I cried, glaring at him in such a rage and fury that
I could scarcely get the words out. This was plain speaking with a
vengeance! How dare you? How dare you say that I am false to the hand
that pays me?'

I thought that he would blench, but he did not. He stood up stiff as a
poker.

'I do not say; I ask!' he replied, facing me squarely, and slapping his
fist into his open hand to drive home his words the better. 'I ask you
whether you are playing the traitor to the Cardinal, or to these two
women? It is a simple question.'

I fairly choked. 'You impudent scoundrel!' I said.

'Steady, steady!' he replied. 'Pitch sticks where it belongs, and
nowhere else. But that is enough. I see which it is, M. le Capitaine;
this way a moment, by your leave.'

And in a very cavalier fashion he took his officer by the arm, and drew
him into a sidewalk, leaving me to stand in the sun, bursting with anger
and spleen. The gutter-bred rascal! That such a man should insult me,
and with impunity! In Paris, I might have made him fight, but here it
was impossible.

I was still foaming with rage when they returned.

'We have come to a determination,' the Lieutenant said, tugging his grey
moustachios, and standing like a ramrod. 'We shall leave you the
house and Madame, and you can take your own line to find the man, for
ourselves, we shall draw off our men to the village, and we shall take
our line. That is all, M. le Capitaine, is it not?'

'I think so,' the Captain muttered, looking anywhere but at me.

'Then we bid you good-day, Monsieur,' the Lieutenant added, and in a
moment he turned his companion round, and the two retired up the walk
to the house, leaving me to look after them in a black fit of rage and
incredulity.

At the first flush, there was something so offensive in the manner of
their going that anger had the upper hand. I thought of the Lieutenant's
words, and I cursed him to hell with a sickening consciousness that I
should not forget them in a hurry.

'Was I playing the traitor to the Cardinal or to these women--which?'
MON DIEU! if ever question--but there, some day I would punish him. And
the Captain? I could put an end to his amusement, at any rate; and I
would. Doubtless among the country bucks of Auch he lorded it as a chief
provincial bully, but I would cut his comb for him some fine morning
behind the barracks.

And then as I grew cooler I began to wonder why they were going, and
what they were going to do. They might be already on the track, or
have the information they required under hand; in that case I could
understand the movement. But if they were still searching vaguely,
uncertain whether their quarry were in the neighbourhood or not, and
uncertain how long they might have to stay, it seemed incredible that
soldiers should move from good quarters to bad without motive.

I wandered down the garden, thinking sullenly of this, and pettishly
cutting off the heads of the flowers with my sheathed sword. After all,
if they found and arrested the man, what then? I should have to make my
peace with the Cardinal as I best might. He would have gained his point,
but not through me, and I should have to look to myself. On the other
hand, if I anticipated them--and, as a fact, I believed that I could lay
my hand on the fugitive within a few hours--there would come a time when
I must face Mademoiselle.

A little while back that had not seemed so difficult a thing. From the
day of our first meeting--and in a higher degree since that afternoon
when she had lashed me with her scorn-my views of her, and my feelings
towards her, had been strangely made up of antagonism and sympathy; of
repulsion, because in her past and present she was so different from me;
of yearning because she was a woman and friendless. Later I had duped
her and bought her confidence by returning the jewels, and so in a
measure I had sated my vengeance; then, as a consequence, sympathy had
again got the better of me, until now I hardly knew my own mind, or what
I felt, or what I intended. I DID NOT KNOW, in fact, what I intended.
I stood there in the garden with that conviction suddenly newborn in my
mind; and then, in a moment, I heard her step, and I turned to find her
behind me.

Her face was like April, smiles breaking through her tears. As she
stood with a tall hedge of sunflowers behind her, I started to see how
beautiful she was.

'I am here in search of you, M. de Barthe,' she said, colouring
slightly, perhaps because my eyes betrayed my thought; 'to thank you.
You have not fought, and yet you have conquered. My woman has just been
with me, and she tells me that they are going.'

'Going?' I said, 'Yes, Mademoiselle, they are leaving the house.'

She did not understand my reservation.

'What magic have you used?' she said almost gaily; it was wonderful how
hope had changed her. 'Besides, I am curious to learn how you managed to
avoid fighting.'

'After taking a blow?' I said bitterly.

'Monsieur, I did not mean that,' she said reproachfully.

But her face clouded. I saw that, viewed in this light--in which,
I suppose, she had not hitherto--the matter perplexed her more than
before.

I took a sudden resolution.

'Have you ever heard, Mademoiselle,' I said gravely, plucking off while
I spoke the dead leaves from a plant beside me, 'of a gentleman by name
De Berault? Known in Paris, I have heard, by the sobriquet of the Black
Death?'

'The duellist?' she answered, looking at me in wonder. 'Yes, I have
heard of him. He killed a young gentleman of this province at Nancy two
years back. 'It was a sad story,' she continued, shuddering slightly,
'of a dreadful man. God keep our friends from such!'

'Amen!' I said quietly. But, in spite of myself, I could not meet her
eyes.

'Why?' she answered, quickly taking alarm at; my silence. 'What of him,
M. de Barthe? Why have you mentioned him?'

'Because he is here, Mademoiselle.'

'Here?' she exclaimed. 'At Cocheforet?'

'Yes, Mademoiselle,' I answered soberly. 'I am he.'



CHAPTER X. CLON

'You!' she cried, in a voice which pierced my heart. 'You are M. de
Berault? It is impossible!' But, glancing askance at her--I could not
face her I saw that the blood had left her cheeks.

'Yes, Mademoiselle,' I answered in a low tone. 'De Barthe was my
mother's name. When I came here, a stranger, I took it that I might
not be known; that I might again speak to a good woman, and not see
her shrink. That, and--but why trouble you with all this?' I continued
rebelling, against her silence, her turned shoulder, her averted face.
'You asked me, Mademoiselle, how I could take a blow and let the striker
go. I have answered. It is the one privilege M. de Berault possesses.'

'Then,' she replied almost in a whisper, 'if I were M. de Berault, I
would avail myself of it, and never fight again.'

'In that event, Mademoiselle,' I answered coldly, 'I should lose my men
friends as well as my women friends. Like Monseigneur the Cardinal, rule
by fear.'

She shuddered, either at the name or at the idea my words called up;
and, for a moment, we stood awkwardly silent. The shadow of the sundial
fell between us; the garden was still; here and there a leaf fluttered
slowly down. With each instant of that silence, of that aversion, I
felt the gulf between us growing wider, I felt myself growing harder;
I mocked at her past which was so unlike mine; I mocked at mine, and
called it fate. I was on the point of turning from her with a bow--and
with a furnace in my breast--when she spoke.

'There is a last rose lingering there,' she said, a slight tremor in her
voice. 'I cannot reach it. Will you pluck it for me, M. de Berault?'

I obeyed her, my hand trembling, my face on fire. She took the rose from
me, and placed it in the bosom of her dress, And I saw that her hand
trembled too, and that her cheek was dark with blushes.

She turned without more ado, and began to walk towards the house.
'Heaven forbid that I should misjudge you a second time!' she said in a
low voice. 'And, after all, who am I, that I should judge you at all? An
hour ago I would have killed that man had I possessed the power.'

'You repented, Mademoiselle,' I said huskily. I could scarcely speak.

'Do you never repent?' she said.

'Yes. But too late, Mademoiselle.'

'Perhaps it is never too late,' she answered softly.

'Alas, when a man is dead--'

'You may rob a man of worse than life!' she replied with energy,
stopping me by a gesture. 'If you have never robbed a man--or a
woman--of honour! If you have never ruined boy or girl, M. de Berault!
If you have never pushed another into the pit and gone by it yourself!
If--but, for murder? Listen. You are a Romanist, but I am a Huguenot,
and have read. "Thou shall not kill!" it is written; and the penalty,
"By man shall thy blood be shed!" But, "If you cause one of these little
ones to offend, it were better for you that a mill-stone were hanged
about your neck, and that you were cast into the depths of the sea."'

'Mademoiselle, you are merciful,' I muttered.

'I need mercy myself,' she answered, sighing. 'And I have had few
temptations. How do I know what you have suffered?'

'Or done!' I said, almost rudely.

'Where a man has not lied, nor betrayed, nor sold himself or others,'
she answered in a low tone, 'I think I can forgive all else. I can
better put up with force,' she added smiling sadly, 'than with fraud.'

Ah, Dieu! I turned away my face that she might not see how pale it grew;
that she might not guess how her words, meant in mercy, stabbed me to
the heart. And yet, then, for the first time, while viewing in all its
depth and width the gulf which separated us, I was not hardened; I
was not cast back upon myself. Her gentleness, her pity, her humility
softened me, while they convicted me. My God, how, after this, could I
do that which I had come to do? How could I stab her in the tenderest
part, how could I inflict on her that rending pang, how could I meet her
eyes, and stand before her, a Caliban, a Judas, the vilest, lowest thing
she could conceive?

I stood, a moment, speechless and disordered; overcome by her words,
by my thoughts. I have seen a man so stand when he has lost all at the
tables. Then I turned to her; and for an instant I thought that my tale
was told already, I thought that she had pierced my disguise. For her
face was changed--stricken as with fear. The next moment, I saw that
she was not looking at me, but beyond me; and I turned quickly and saw
a servant hurrying from the house to us. It was Louis. His eyes were
staring, his hair waved, his cheeks were flabby with dismay, He breathed
as if he had been running.

'What is it?' Mademoiselle cried, while he was still some way off.
'Speak, man. My sister? Is she--'

'Clon,' he gasped.

The name changed her to stone.

'Clon? What of him?' she muttered.

'In the village!' Louis panted, his tongue stuttering with terror. 'They
are flogging him. They are killing him! To make him tell!'

Mademoiselle grasped the sundial and leant against it, her face
colourless; and, for an instant, I thought that she was fainting.

'Tell?' I said mechanically. 'But he cannot tell. He is dumb, man.'

'They will make him guide them,' Louis groaned, covering his ears with
his shaking hands, his face the colour of paper. 'And his cries! Oh,
Monsieur, go, go!' he continued, in a thrilling tone. 'Save him. All
through tie wood I heard his cries. It was horrible! horrible!'

Mademoiselle uttered a moan of pain; and I turned to support her,
thinking each second to see her fall. But with a sudden movement she
straightened herself, and, quickly slipping by me, with eyes that seemed
to see nothing, she set off swiftly down the walk towards the meadow
gate.

I ran after her; but, taken by surprise as I was, it was only by a great
effort I reached the gate before her, and thrusting myself in the road,
barred the way.

'Let me pass!' she panted, striving to thrust me on one side. 'Out of my
way, sir! I am going to the village.'

'You are not going to the village,' I said sternly. 'Go back; to the
house, Mademoiselle, and at once.'

'My servant!' she wailed. 'Let me go! Let me go! Do you think I can rest
here while they torture him? He cannot speak, and they--they--'

'Go back, Mademoiselle,' I said, with decision. 'Your presence would
only make matters worse! I will go myself, and what one man can do
against many, I will! Louis, give your mistress your arm and take her to
the house. Take her to Madame.'

'But you will go?' she cried. And before I could stay her--I swear I
would have stopped her if I could--she raised my hand and carried it
to her trembling lips. 'You will go! Go and stop them! Stop them, and
Heaven reward you, Monsieur!'

I did not answer; nay, I did not once look back, as I crossed the
meadow; but I did not look forward either. Doubtless it was grass I
trod, and the wood was before me with the sun shining aslant on it;
doubtless the house rose behind me with a flame here and there in the
windows. But I went in a dream, among shadows; with a racing pulse, in
a glow from head to heel; conscious of nothing but the touch of
Mademoiselle's warm lips on my hand, seeing neither meadow nor house,
nor even the dark fringe of wood before me, but only Mademoiselle's
passionate face. For the moment I was drunk: drunk with that to which I
had been so long a stranger, with that which a man may scorn for years,
to find it at last beyond his reach drunk with the touch of a good
woman's lips.

I passed the bridge in this state; and my feet were among the brushwood
before the heat and fervour in which I moved found on a sudden their
direction. Something began to penetrate to my veiled senses--a hoarse
inarticulate cry, now deep, now shrilling horribly, that of itself
seemed to fill the wood. It came at intervals of half a minute or so,
and made the flesh creep, it rang so full of dumb pain, of impotent
wrestling, of unspeakable agony. I am a man and have seen things. I
saw the Concini beheaded, and Chalais ten years later--they gave him
thirty-four blows; and when I was a boy I escaped from the college and
viewed from a great distance Ravaillac torn by horses--that was in the
year ten. But the horrible cries I now heard, filled me, perhaps because
I was alone and fresh from the sight of Mademoiselle, with loathing
inexpressible. The very wood, though the sun had not yet set, seemed to
grow dark. I ran on through it, cursing, until the hovels of the village
came in sight. Again the shriek rose, a pulsing horror, and this time I
could hear the lash fall on the sodden flesh, I could see in fancy the
dumb man, trembling, quivering, straining against his bonds. And then,
in a moment, I was in the street, and, as the scream once more tore the
air, I dashed round the corner by the inn, and came upon them.

