life, save, only, in the favour and love of God.

There were some on board the "Trident," however, who knew the danger of
their position full well, but who were too considerate of the feelings
of the women and children to let their knowledge appear even in their
looks.  The sailors knew the danger of a lee-shore; but sailors are to a
large extent a reckless and hopeful class of men, whose equanimity is
not easily upset.  The captain, too, and the pilot, were alive to their
critical position, but both were sanguine and hoped to get into the
Downs before the storm should break.

A few of the male passengers also seemed to be aware of the fact that
approaching the Downs on such a night was anything but matter of
gratulation.  One in particular, a tall strong man of about forty, with
a bushy black beard and a stern aspect, walked about the quarterdeck
with a frown on his countenance that betokened a mind ill at ease.

Going up to the captain, who stood near the wheel, this man asked him
what he thought of the weather.

"It don't look well; we shall have a dirty night, I fear," replied the
captain.

"Do you expect to make the Downs before the storm breaks?" inquired the
passenger.

"Well, I _hope_ so," said the Captain.

"Supposing you do," continued the dark man, "do you consider your cables
and ground-tackle strong enough to hold the ship in the face of an
easterly gale?"

"Why do you ask that?" said the Captain in surprise.

"Because," replied the passenger, "I have my doubts on the point."

"Well, to tell you the truth," said the other, in a low tone, "I confess
that my mind is more uneasy on that score than on any other.  The cables
are fit enough to hold her in ordinary weather; but if we were obliged
to anchor off a lee-shore in a heavy gale on an exposed coast like this
I would be somewhat anxious."

"Why is the ground tackle _not_ strong enough?" asked the passenger.

"Well, it's not easy to answer that," replied the Captain, with a smile,
"and yet it ain't difficult to conceive that it would cost a good deal
to supply new and heavier chains and anchors to the ship."

"Ay, the old story--_economy_!" said the passenger bitterly, almost
fiercely; "a set of selfish land-lubbers who know nothing whatever about
the sea, and care for nothing on earth but their own pockets and
bellies, are allowed by the Government of this land to send ships loaded
with human beings to sea in such a state that it almost calls for the
performance of a miracle to secure their safe arrival in port.  This is
pointed out again and again to them without effect.  The sea throws its
dead by dozens on our shores every gale that blows, crying out, `Look
here at the result of economy and selfishness!'  Goods to the extent of
thousands of pounds are destroyed annually, and the waves that swallow
them belch out the same complaint.  Even the statistics that stare in
the face of our legislators, and are published by their own authority,
tell the same tale,--yet little or nothing is done to prevent misers
from sending ships to sea in a totally unfit condition to face even
ordinary dangers.  Bah! the thing is past remedy, for the men who should
act are deaf and blind.  Mark my words, Captain; if we don't weather the
South Foreland before ten o' the clock this night, the `Trident' will be
a total wreck before morning."

The passenger turned on his heel with an angry fling and went below,
while the Captain, who was somewhat overawed by his vehemence, walked
aft to converse with the pilot.

The gale soon burst on the ship, sending nearly all the passengers
below, and compelling the Captain to reduce sail.  Darkness overspread
the scene, and as the night wore on, the gale increased to such a degree
that the ship laboured heavily.  Soon the lights on the South Foreland
were descried and passed in safety.

"Get the anchors clear," said the pilot.  "Ready about there!"

No one ever knew the reason of the order given at that time.  Perhaps
the pilot thought he was a little too near the land, and meant to haul
off a little; but whatever the reason might have been, the command was
only half carried out when the sheet of the jib gave way; the loosened
sail flapped itself to shreds in a second, and the ship, missing stays,
fell off towards the shore.

"Better wear ship," cried the Captain, springing in alarm to the pilot's
side.

"Too late for that.  Shore's close under our lee.  Let go the anchors!"

The shout with which the command was given proved the necessity of its
being instantly obeyed; but the men needed no urging, for at that moment
a temporary lull in the furious blast allowed them to hear the roaring
of the breakers at the foot of the cliffs.

Two anchors were at once let go, and the ship was brought up with a
tremendous shock.

And now commenced that prolonged struggle for life which is, alas! too
often the lot of those who venture out upon the stormy sea.  Yet it was
some time before the passengers of the "Trident" could be brought fully
to realise their danger.  It was hard to believe that, after weathering
the cyclones of the southern seas, and the gales of the Atlantic, they
had reached home at last to be cast a wreck upon their own threshold,
and to perish within hail almost of relatives and friends.

For a long time they refused to credit the appalling truth that their
case was all but hopeless,--anchored as they were close to a lee shore,
with inadequate ground tackle, and an increasing gale.  When the chain
of the smaller anchor snapped, and the Captain ordered the minute-gun to
be fired, and rockets to be thrown up, then the wail of terror began:--

  "Then shrieked the timid, and stood still the brave."

"You'd better order the boats to be lowered," said the dark passenger to
the Captain, with a sneer that seemed unnatural as well as unfeeling in
the circumstances.

The Captain, who was standing by the starboard mizzen shrouds at the
time, glanced angrily at him for a moment, and said:--

"Ha!  You know well enough that there ain't boats enough in the ship to
carry all the passengers, and if there were, they could not live for a
moment in such a sea."

"Yes," replied the dark man, vehemently, "I know that well enough; and I
know, too, that there's no lifeboat of any kind aboard, nor
life-jackets, nor life-buoys, beyond what would suffice to float some
half dozen men; and the owners knew this before sending their ship to
sea, and, knowing it, they cared not a rap, because they had insured
ship and cargo to the full value.  Human life, not being counted part of
the cargo, is of no value whatever to _them_."

"Come, Mr Clelland," said the Captain, reproachfully, "is this a time
for a Christian man to encourage bitter feelings against his fellows
because of systems and customs, bad or good?"

"Ay, it _is_ the time," answered the other; "at least if I don't let out
my mind now, it's not likely I'll find a fitter time to do it in this
world."

He said this somewhat sadly, and turned away, just as the Captain gave
orders to throw up another rocket.

Far along that stormy coast the rocket was seen by hundreds who knew
well what the signal meant, and many of whom, no doubt, offered up
prayer to God for those who were in danger.  Most of them, however, felt
that they could do nothing in the way of affording aid.  Our friend Bax
and his companions were not of this mind, as we have seen.

Some of the stout-hearted boatmen of Deal also thought that something
might be done, and launched their luggers, but were in some cases
obliged to desist owing to the ever-increasing fury of the storm.

The rockets were seen also by another party of seamen, who stood grouped
under the lee of a boat-house far away to the southward.  This was the
crew of a small lifeboat which stood ready to be launched.  The boat was
quickly run out of its house by command of its coxswain, and the crew
hastily equipped themselves for their dangerous work.

They put on life-jackets made of a number of pieces of cork sewed on
canvas, in such a way as to cover their bodies from shoulder to waist
without interfering with the play of the arms.  Some of the men objected
to put these on at first, feeling afraid lest their courage should be
called in question, in consequence of their using a contrivance which
was not in such general use at that time as it is now.  Their objections
were overcome, however, except in the case of one young man, who
exclaimed, "No, no, none o' yer floats for me.  When my time comes I
must go, and them things won't save me."

The poor man did not see that the same argument, if correct, would have
justified his going off in a coble instead of a lifeboat.  The want of
perception on this point, and false pride, cost him his life.

Several young women, wives of some of the men, had assembled there to
dissuade their husbands from going out on such a terrible night.  These
were so alarmed at the terrific thunder of the surf on the shores of the
little bay, and the howling of the wind, that they clung to the men and
entreated them with tears not to venture.  Is it a matter of wonder that
these bold fellows, who could not be appalled by the storm, found it
difficult to resist the power of woman's tears?  They wavered for a few
seconds; but when the coxswain, who was a cool, intrepid old
man-of-war's man, cried in a hearty voice, "Now then, lads, look alive;
shove off and jump in!" every man sprang to his post, and the lifeboat
was afloat in an instant.  Through some mismanagement, however, she
turned broadside to the sea, was overturned instantly, and rolled over
on the beach.  The women shrieked; the men on shore ran to the rescue,
and fortunately saved every man with the exception of the one who had
refused to put on the life-jacket, and who being less able to support
himself than his companions when washed back into deep water by each
retiring wave, became at length exhausted and ceased to struggle for
life.  When he was at last laid hold of and dragged ashore, he was dead.

While some of the men were engaged in fruitless efforts to save this
man, the rest of the crew, having suffered little, were about to launch
the boat a second time, when the women again rushed forward and clung to
them with such eager entreaties, that they began at last to entertain
the idea of the storm being too wild for them to venture off.

Lest the reader should unjustly censure these men, we must remind him of
the fact that the self-righting principle not having at that time been
discovered, the danger incurred in case of an upset was very great, and
the boat about which we are writing, being small, ran considerable risk
of being capsized by the heavy seas.  In fact, almost the only
difference between lifeboats and ordinary boats, at this time, was the
incapacity of the former to sink when filled with water, owing to the
buoyancy of the air-chambers fitted round their sides.  If filled by a
sea, much valuable time had to be lost in baling out the water before
the oars could be effectively resumed, and if overturned it was a matter
of the greatest difficulty for the men in the water to right them again;
in some cases it had proved impossible.  All these defects are remedied
now-a-days; but more on this head hereafter.

While the men were in this undecided state of mind, regardless alike of
the commands and the taunts of the coxswain, two men were seen to leap
down the slope that lay between the cliffs and the sea, and make for the
group of boatmen at full speed.  As they drew near they were recognised
to be Mr Hamilton, a young midshipman, then on leave of absence, and
his friend Thompson, an old college companion.

They ran straight to the boat, the former shouting, as he came up:--

"Ho! get her off, lads; a large ship ashore in Saint Margaret's Bay; now
then, all together, and with a will!"

So powerful was the influence of the young middy's clear voice and
prompt action, that the men with one accord shoved the lifeboat into the
sea; succeeded in keeping her stern to the waves until they were beyond
the roughest of the breakers; and then, laying to their oars manfully,
pulled away for the scene of the wreck.

They were soon lost in darkness, and the poor women returned weeping to
their homes, there to throw on some additional covering, and hasten
towards the same spot by land.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

SAVING THE PASSENGERS AND CREW--OUR HEROES DISTINGUISH THEMSELVES.

When Bax and his party arrived at Saint Margaret's Bay, the scene of
wreck and death had already begun.

The vessel was just discernible in the midst of the turmoil of warring
elements that filled the dark air with misty spray.  A boat had tried to
reach the shore with a number of passengers--chiefly men--in her.  Her
fate was quickly sealed.  A huge breaker upset her, and six of the dead
bodies of her crew had already been plucked from the sea, and laid on
the shingle.  The rest were being hurled on the land and swept back by
the force of the returning waves, until the people assembled there
caught and dragged them also beyond their reach.

Messengers had already been sent to the nearest lifeboat stations, and
the people who remained behind were either occupied in attempting to
recover the bodies of the drowned, as above described, or in suggesting
impossible plans for conveying a line on board the ill-fated vessel.

"Ha! here comes the man as'll tell us wot's to be done, and do it too!"
cried one of the boatmen, "wot say, Bax, can we git a line off, think
'ee?"

Bax stood on the edge of the roaring sea, silent and motionless, with
his arms crossed on his broad chest, and his bold gaze directed to the
wreck.

"No," said he, after standing a few moments thus, "it can't be done.  No
mortal man could cross the surf on the inner rocks; but there's a point
o' rocks not far to the nor'ard; does any one know how far the tide may
cover 'em just now?"

"About half," answered several voices eagerly.

"Ay, so't does," observed a coast-guard-man, "but with sich a surf
beatin' on 'em there ain't a rock on the whole pint above water this
minute."

"Come, let's go see," cried Bax, snatching a coil of light rope from the
hand of a man who stood close by, and hastening away with it in the
direction of the rocky point referred to.

In a few seconds he stood on its outer extremity, with Guy Foster,
Coleman, and a few of the more courageous men at his side.

The point on which Bax stood was indeed a position of great danger.
Besides being whelmed in driving spray, so that it was a matter of
extreme difficulty to see more than a few yards in any direction, the
waves at times rushed up to and over them with such violence as to reach
the knees of those who stood there, and threatened to wash them off.
Nevertheless, from this point Bax thought it possible that the end of
the line might be conveyed on board the "Trident," which could be seen
looming high and black in the murky air, lifting and falling with a
heavy crash as each successive billow broke under and over her, carrying
on with irresistible violence the work of destruction.  Both chains had
given way, and she was now rolling a helpless wreck on the rocks.

"D'ye mean to try it?" said Guy, anxiously, as he observed his friend
fastening the line round his waist.

"Hold the end of it, Guy, and pay out," said Bax, "mind you don't haul
in unless you're _sure_ I'm goin' down."

With this caution, Bax plunged into the surf, and struck out for the
wreck, having previously placed an open clasp-knife between his teeth.

A cheer broke from the nearest group on the rocks when they witnessed
this bold act.  It was taken up and re-echoed by those farther up the
beach, who knew that some hopeful effort was being made, although they
were unable to perceive the precise nature of it.  The people on the
wreck also heard the cheer, and looked eagerly landward.  But to them
all was shrouded in darkness.  Even Guy quickly lost sight of his
friend, and was only made aware of his safety and onward progress by the
continued running out of the line.  Suddenly it stopped.

"He's a-board," cried Coleman.

"He would jerk on it if he was," said Guy, with a doubtful shake of the
head.

"He's sunk," cried one of those who stood by and held the slack of the
rope.

A panic seemed to seize the others who stood by.  "Haul 'im in!" cried
one.  "Look alive!" shouted another, "he's a gone man."  Before Guy
could interfere, they acted on the impulse, and drew in two or three
fathoms.

Twisting his left arm suddenly round the rope, Guy planted his foot on a
rock and stopped it; at the same time he raised his right hand, and
threatened to fell the man nearest to him.  The result was that the men
desisted from hauling, but when the rope was again felt it became
evident that there was no weight at the farther end of it.  Guy's heart
sank with horror as the empty line was drawn in.  For a moment he felt
all the agony of despair; but a gleam of hope rushed in upon him on
observing that the end of the rope was _cut_, as if with a sharp knife,
not by the edge of a rock.

