where regularity of features is not sufficient. Do you comprehend my
idea?"

"I believe I do," said the young man, "and hope to be able to satisfy
you."

The young artist went home, and at once set to work upon the task he
had undertaken. He had conceived that it would be an easy one, but found
himself mistaken. Whether because his fancy was not sufficiently lively,
or his mind was not in tune, he was unable to produce the effect he
desired. The faces which he successively outlined were all stiff, and
though perhaps sufficiently regular in feature, lacked the great charm
of being expressive and life-like.

"What is the matter with me?" he exclaimed, impatiently, throwing
down his pencil. "Is it impossible for me to succeed? Well, I will be
patient, and make one trial more."

He made another trial, that proved as unsatisfactory as those preceding.

"It is clear," he decided, "that I am not in the vein. I will go out and
take a walk, and perhaps while I am in the street something will strike
me."

He accordingly donned his coat and hat, and, descending, emerged into
the great thoroughfare, where he was soon lost in the throng. It was
only natural that, as he walked, with his task still in his thoughts, he
should scrutinize carefully the faces of such young girls as he met.

"Perhaps," it occurred to him, "I may get a hint from some face I may
see. That will be better than to depend upon my fancy. Nothing, after
all, is equal to the masterpieces of Nature."

But the young artist was fastidious. "It is strange," he thought, "how
few there are, even in the freshness of childhood, that can be called
models of beauty. That child, for example, has beautiful eyes but a
badly-cut mouth, Here is one that would be pretty, if the face was
rounded out; and here is a child, Heaven help it! that was designed to
be beautiful, but want and unfavorable circumstances have pinched and
cramped it."

It was at this point in the artist's soliloquy that, in turning the
corner of a street, he came upon Peg and Ida.

Henry Bowen looked earnestly at the child's face, and his own lighted up
with pleasure, as one who stumbles upon success just as he has despaired
of it.

"The very face I have been looking for!" he exclaimed to himself. "My
flower-girl is found at last!"

He turned round, and followed Ida and her companion. Both stopped at a
shop-window to examine some articles which were exhibited there. This
afforded a fresh opportunity to examine Ida's face.

"It is precisely what I want," he murmured. "Now the question comes up,
whether this woman, who, I suppose, is the girl's attendant, will permit
me to copy her face."

The artist's inference that Peg was merely Ida's attendant, was natural,
since the child was dressed in a style quite superior to her companion.
Peg thought that in this way she should be more likely to escape
suspicion when occupied in passing spurious coin.

The young man followed the strangely-assorted pair to the apartments
which Peg occupied. From the conversation which he overheard he learned
that he had been mistaken in his supposition as to the relation between
the two, and that, singular as it seemed, Peg had the guardianship of
the child. This made his course clearer. He mounted the stairs, and
knocked at the door.

"What do you want?" said a sharp voice from within.

"I should like to see you a moment," was the reply.

Peg opened the door partially, and regarded the young man suspiciously.

"I don't know you," she said, shortly. "I never saw you before."

"I presume not," said the young man. "We have never met, I think. I am
an artist."

"That is a business I don't know anything about," said Peg, abruptly.
"You've come to the wrong place. I don't want to buy any pictures. I've
got plenty of other ways to spend my money."

Certainly, Mrs. Hardwick, to give her the name she once claimed, did not
look like a patron of the arts.

"You have a young girl, about eight or nine years old, living with you,"
said the artist.

"Who told you that?" queried Peg, her suspicions at once roused.

"No one told me. I saw her with you in the street."

Peg at once conceived the idea that her visitor was aware of the fact
that that the child was stolen--possibly he might be acquainted with the
Crumps, or might be their emissary. She therefore answered, shortly,--

"People that are seen walking together don't always live together."

"But I saw the child entering this house with you."

"What if you did?" demanded Peg, defiantly.

"I was about," said the artist, perceiving that he was misapprehended,
and desiring to set matters right, "I was about to make a proposition
which might prove advantageous to both of us."

"Eh!" said Peg, catching at the hint. "Tell me what it is, and perhaps
we may come to terms."

"It is simply this," said Bowen, "I am, as I told you, an artist. Just
now I am employed to sketch a flower-girl, and in seeking for a face
such as I wished to sketch from, I was struck by that of your child."

"Of Ida?"

"Yes, if that is her name. I will pay you five dollars for the privilege
of copying it."

Peg was fond of money, and the prospect of earning five dollars through
Ida's instrumentality, so easily, blinded her to the possibility that
this picture might prove a means of discovery to her friends.

"Well," said she, more graciously, "if that's all you want, I don't know
as I have any objections. I suppose you can copy her face here as well
as anywhere."

"I should prefer to have her come to my studio."

"I sha'n't let her come," said Peg, decidedly.

"Then I will consent to your terms, and come here."

"Do you want to begin now?"

"I should like to do so."

"Come in, then. Here, Ida, I want you."

"Yes, Peg."

"This young man wants to copy your face."

Ida looked surprised.

"I am an artist," said the young man, with a reassuring smile. "I will
endeavor not to try your patience too much. Do you think you can stand
still for half an hour, without much fatigue?"

Ida was easily won by kindness, while she had a spirit which was roused
by harshness. She was prepossessed at once in favor of the young man,
and readily assented.

He kept her in pleasant conversation while with a free, bold hand, he
sketched the outlines of her face and figure.

"I shall want one more sitting," he said. "I will come to-morrow at this
time."

"Stop a minute," said Peg. "I should like the money in advance. How do I
know that you will come again?"

"Certainly, if you prefer it," said the young man, opening his
pocket-book.

"What strange fortune," he thought, "can have brought these two
together? Surely there can be no relationship."

The next day he returned and completed his sketch, which was at once
placed in the hands of the publisher, eliciting his warm approval.



CHAPTER XVII. JACK OBTAINS INFORMATION.



JACK set out with that lightness of heart and keen sense of enjoyment
that seem natural to a young man of eighteen on his first journey.
Partly by cars, partly by boat, he traveled, till in a few hours he was
discharged, with hundreds of others, at the depot in Philadelphia.

Among the admonitions given to Jack on leaving home, one was prominently
in his mind, to beware of imposition, and to be as economical as
possible.

Accordingly he rejected all invitations to ride, and strode along, with
his carpet-bag in hand, though, sooth to say, he had very little idea
whether he was steering in the right direction for his uncle's shop.
By dint of diligent and persevering inquiry he found it at length, and,
walking in, announced himself to the worthy baker as his nephew Jack.

"What, are you Jack?" exclaimed Mr. Abel Crump, pausing in his labor;
"well, I never should have known you, that's a fact. Bless me, how
you've grown! Why, you're most as big as your father, ain't you?"

"Only half an inch shorter," returned Jack, complacently.

"And you're--let me see, how old are you?"

"Eighteen, that is, almost; I shall be in two months."

"Well, I'm glad to see you, Jack, though I hadn't the least idea of your
raining down so unexpectedly. How's your father and mother and Rachel,
and your adopted sister?"

"Father and mother are pretty well," answered Jack, "and so is Aunt
Rachel," he added, smiling; "though she ain't so cheerful as she might
be."

"Poor Rachel!" said Abel, smiling also, "all things look upside down
to her. I don't suppose she's wholly to blame for it. Folks differ
constitutionally. Some are always looking on the bright side of things,
and others can never see but one side, and that's the dark one."

"You've hit it, uncle," said Jack, laughing. "Aunt Rachel always looks
as if she was attending a funeral."

"So she is, my boy," said Abel Crump, gravely, "and a sad funeral it
is."

"I don't understand you, uncle."

"The funeral of her affections,--that's what I mean. Perhaps you mayn't
know that Rachel was, in early life, engaged to be married to a young
man whom she ardently loved. She was a different woman then from what
she is now. But her lover deserted her just before the wedding was to
have come off, and she's never got over the disappointment. But that
isn't what I was going to talk about. You haven't told me about your
adopted sister."

"That's what I've come to Philadelphia about," said Jack, soberly. "Ida
has been carried off, and I've been sent in search of her."

"Been carried off!" exclaimed his uncle, in amazement. "I didn't know
such things ever happened in this country. What do you mean?"

In answer to this question Jack told the story of Mrs. Hardwick's
arrival with a letter from Ida's mother, conveying the request that the
child might, under the guidance of the messenger, be allowed to pay her
a visit. To this, and the subsequent details, Abel Crump listened with
earnest attention.

"So you have reason to think the child is in (sic) Phildelphia?" he
said, musingly.

"Yes," said Jack, "Ida was seen in the cars, coming here, by a boy who
knew her in New York."

"Ida!" repeated his Uncle Abel, looking up, suddenly.

"Yes. You know that's my sister's name, don't you?"

"Yes, I dare say I have known it; but I have heard so little of
your family lately, that I had forgotten it. It is rather a singular
circumstance."

"What is singular!"

"I will tell you," said his uncle. "It may not amount to anything,
however. A few days since, a little girl came into my shop to buy
a small amount of bread. I was at once favorably impressed with her
appearance. She was neatly dressed, and had a very sweet face."

"What was her name?" inquired Jack.

"That I will tell you by and by. Having made the purchase, she handed me
in payment a silver dollar. 'I'll keep that for my little girl,' thought
I at once. Accordingly, when I went home at night, I just took the
dollar out the till, and gave it to her. Of course she was delighted
with it, and, like a child, wanted to spend it at once. So her mother
agreed to go out with her the next day. Well, they selected some
nicknack or other, but when they came to pay for it the dollar proved to
be spurious."

"Spurious!"

"Yes, bad. Got up, no doubt, by a gang of coiners. When they told me of
this I thought to myself, 'Can it be that this little girl knew what she
was about when she offered me that money?' I couldn't think it possible,
but decided to wait till she came again."

"Did she come again?"

"Yes, only day before yesterday. This time she wanted some gingerbread,
so she said. As I thought likely, she offered me another dollar just
like the other. Before letting her know that I had discovered the
imposition I asked her one or two questions, with the idea of finding
out as much as possible about her. When I told her the coin was a bad
one, she seemed very much surprised. It might have been all acting,
but I didn't think so then. I even felt pity for her and let her go on
condition that she would bring me back a good dollar in place of the bad
one the next day. I suppose I was a fool for doing so, but she looked so
pretty and innocent that I couldn't make up my mind to speak or harshly
to her. But I'm afraid that I was deceived, and that she is an artful
character, after all."

"Then she didn't come back with the good money?" said Jack.

"No, I haven't seen her since; and, what's more, I don't think it very
likely she will venture into my shop at present."

"What name did she give you?" asked Jack.

"Haven't I told you? It was the name that made me think of telling you.
It was Ida Hardwick."

"Ida Hardwick!" exclaimed Jack, bounding from his chair, somewhat to his
uncle's alarm.

"Yes, Ida Hardwick. But that hasn't anything to do with your Ida, has
it?"

"Hasn't it, though?" said Jack. "Why, Mrs. Hardwick was the woman that
carried her away."

"Mrs. Hardwick--her mother!"

