Do you swim?
Do you play baseball?   What position?
Do you play an instrument? What?
Will you bring it (unless piano) and music to camp?
Have you won any athletic or aquatic events? What?
Will you bring your school or college pennant with you?
Have you ever taken part in minstrel show, dramatics, or any kind
of entertainment; if so, what?
What is your hobby? (If tennis, baseball, swimming, nature study,
hiking, photography, athletics, etc., whatever it is, kindly tell
about it in order to help in planning the camp activities.)

[Illustration: A Leader's Pulpit--Sunday Morning in  the
"Chapel-by-the-Lake"--Camp Becket.]

Leaders should not be chosen in order to secure a baseball team, or an
athletic team. Select men of diverse gifts. One should know something
about nature study, another about manual training, another a good
story-teller, another a good athlete or baseball player, another a good
swimmer, another a musician, etc. Always remember, however, that the chief
qualification should be moral worth.

Before camp opens it is a wise plan to send each leader a letter
explaining in detail the purpose and program of the camp. A letter like
the following is sent to the leaders of Camps Durrell and Becket.

SUGGESTIONS TO CAMP LEADERS.
READ AND RE-READ.

The success of a boys' camp depends upon the hearty cooperation of each
leader with the superintendent. The boys will imitate you. A smile is
always better than a frown. "Kicking" in the presence of boys breeds
discontent. Loyalty to the camp and its management is absolutely necessary
if there is to be harmony in the camp life.

Personal

Your personal life will either be a blessing or a hindrance to the boys in
your tent. Study each boy in your tent. Win his confidence. Determine to
do your best in being a genuine friend of each boy. Remember in prayer
daily each boy and your fellow leaders. Emphasize the camp motto, "Each
for all, and all for each." Study the "tests" on pages 8 and 9 of the
booklets, and be helpful to the boys in your tent who are ambitious to
improve and win the honor emblems.

Tents

Neatness and cleanliness must be the watchword of each tent. Sweets draw
ants. Decayed material breeds disease. Insist upon the observance of
sanitary rules.

It is unwise to have all the boys from one town or city in one tent. The
tendency is to form clans, which destroy camp spirit. Get the fellows
together the first thing and choose a tent name and tent yells.

Appoint a boy who will be responsible for the boys and the tent when you
are not present.

Too much attention cannot be given to the matter of ventilation. When it
rains, use a forked stick to hold the flaps open in the form of a diamond.
In clear weather, tie one flap back at each end (flap toward the feet),
allowing a free draft of air at all times. On rainy days encourage the
boys to spend their time in the pavillion. Whenever possible, insist upon
tent and blankets being thoroughly aired each morning.

Three inspectors will be appointed for each day; fifteen minutes' notice
will be given and boys will not be allowed in or around their tents during
the period of inspection. Leaders may suggest but not participate in
arranging the tent.

The Honor Banner is to be given to the tent showing the best condition and
held as long as marks are highest.

Swimming

The U. S. V. L. S. C.[1] crews' in boats will patrol whenever the boys are
in swimming, and the leader of swimming must give the signal before boys
go into the water. Boys who cannot swim should be encouraged to learn. The
morning dip must be a dip and not a swim.

[Transcriber's Note 1: United States Volunteer Life Saving Corps.]

Boats

No boats are to be taken unless an order has been issued by the tent
leader (or by the superintendent). The man at the wharf always has power
to veto orders at his discretion.

Order of Day

It is the leader's part to see that the order of the day is carried out
and on time, including the setting up drill. (See Camp Booklet.) "Follow
the leader" is an old game which is still influencing boys.

Work

Three tents and their leaders are responsible for the work at camp, and
will be expected to report to the assistant superintendent after breakfast
for assignment of work. These tents are changed each day, so that the boys
and leaders come on duty only one day in seven.

Each tent is under its respective leader in doing the following work:

Tent 1. Sanitary work, such as policing the campus, emptying garbage cans,
sweeping the pavillion, disinfecting, etc.

Tent 2. Preparing vegetables for the cook, drying dishes, pots, pans,
cleaning up the kitchen, piazza, etc.

Tent 3. Cleaning the boats, supplying wood for the kitchen, putting ice in
the refrigerator, etc.

The next day tents 4, 5 and 6 will come on duty, and so on until each tent
has been on duty during the week.

Leaders for the day will call the squad together after breakfast and
explain the day's plans. Encourage the boys to do this work cheerfully.
Lead, do not drive the boys when working. Not more than three hours should
be consumed in camp work.

Sports and Pastimes

Bring rule books on athletics. Study up group games. Bring any old clothes
for costumes; tambourines and bones for minstrel show, grease paint, and
burnt cork--in fact, anything that you think will add to the fun of the
camp. Good stories and jokes are always in demand. Bring something
interesting to read to your boys on rainy days. Think out some stunt to do
at the social gatherings. If you play an instrument, be sure to bring it
along with you.

Bank

Encourage the boys to turn their money and railroad tickets over to the
camp banker instead of depositing them with you.

Camp Council

Meetings of the leaders will be held at the call of the superintendent.
Matters talked over at the council meeting should not be talked over with
the boys. All matters of discipline or anything that deals with the
welfare of the camp should be brought up at this meeting. Printed report
blanks will be given to each leader to be filled out and handed to the
assistant superintendent each Thursday morning. Do not show these reports
to the boys.

Bible Study

Each leader will be expected to read to the boys in his tent a chapter
from the Bible and have prayers before "taps" each night, also to take his
turn in leading the morning devotions at breakfast table. Groups of boys
will meet for occasional Bible study at sunset under various leaders. Each
session will continue twenty minutes--no longer. Sunday morning service
will be somewhat formal in character, with an address. The sunset vesper
service will be informal.

Praying that the camp may prove a place where leaders and boys may grow in
the best things of life and anticipating an outing of pleasure and profit
to you, I am Your friend, (signature)

Opportunities

In securing men for leadership, impress upon them the many opportunities
for the investment of their lives in the kind of work that builds
character. In reading over a small folder, written by George H. Hogeman of
Orange, N .J., I was so impressed with his excellent presentation of this
theme of opportunities of leadership that the following is quoted in
preference to anything I could write upon the subject:

"The opportunity of the boys' camp leader is, first, to engage in the
service that counts most largely in securing the future welfare of those
who will soon be called upon to carry on the work that we are now engaged
in. Most people are so busy with their own present enjoyment and future
success that they pay little heed to the future of others. They may give
some thought to the present need of those around them because it more or
less directly affects themselves, but the work of character building in
boys' camps is one that shows its best results in the years to come rather
than in the immediate present.

"In the second place, the opportunity comes to the camp leader to know
boys as few other people know them, sometimes even better than their own
parents know them. When you live, eat, sleep with a boy in the open, free
life of camp for a month or so, you come in contact with him at vastly
more points than you do in the more restrained home life, and you see
sides of his nature that are seldom seen at other times.

"Finally, the opportunity is given to the man who spends his vacation in
camp to make the time really count for something in his own life and in
the lives of others. To how many does vacation really mean a relaxation, a
letting down of effort along one line, without the substitution of
anything definite in its place! But he must be a dull soul, indeed, who
can come to the right kind of boys' camp and not go away with his muscles
harder, his eye brighter, his digestion better, and his spirit more awake
to the things that pertain to the Kingdom of God.

"Then again the camp leader must have the ability to forget himself in
others. Nowhere can the real play spirit be entered into more completely
than in camp life. A watchman is the last thing he must be. That spirit of
unselfishness which forgets its own personal pleasure in doing the most
for the general good, is the ideal camp spirit. As Lowell puts it in the
Vision of Sir Launfal, it is:

Not what we give, but what we share,
For the gift without the giver is bare.

"The results of all these points which I have mentioned are some very
positive things. One is the very best kind of a vacation that it is
possible to have. How frequently we hear in response to the question about
enjoying a vacation, 'Oh, yes, I had a good enough time, but I'll never go
back there again.' To my mind that indicates either that the person does
not know what a really good time is, or that his surroundings made a good
time impossible.

"Another result of camp is the real friendships that last long after
camping days are over. Of these I need not speak. You and I know of many
such and what they mean in the development of Christian character in the
lives of our men and boys. And, after all, there is the greatest result of
all, the sense of confidence in the ultimate outcome that comes with
having a share in the work of bringing others to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ."

"The ideal life for a boy is not in the city. He should know of animals,
rivers, plants, and that great out-of-door life that lays for him the
foundation of his later years."
--G. Stanley.

[Illustration: Camp Becket]



CHAPTER III--LOCATION AND SANITATION

DIRTY DIRT VS. CLEAN DIRT
AVOID SWAMPS
SELECTING A SITE
LAYING OUT THE CAMP GROUND
THE LATRINES
GARBAGE
DISH WATER
WASTE BARRELS
WATER SUPPLY
AN INDIAN METHOD
INDIVIDUAL DRINKING CUPBOARD OF HEALTH
MAXIMS

Dirt

Clean camps are most easily kept by not allowing them to become dirty.

"Cleanliness is next to Godliness. Godliness means a right relation to
things spiritual, cleanliness a right relation to things material. An old
definition says that 'Dirt is merely misplaced matter.' Of all the
vehicles of disease, the most important perhaps is dirt. The word dirt in
its strict sense comes from the Anglo-Saxon 'drit,' or excrement. 'Dirt,'
then, is not earth or clean sand--not clean dirt, but dirty dirt, that is,
matter soiled by some of the excreta of the human or animal body.
Cleanliness must be insisted upon in a boys' Camp--not the cleanliness
that makes a boy squeamish about working with his hands upon some
necessary job, but cleanliness that makes him afraid of sharing his tooth
brush or table utensils or his clothes.

Cleanliness is not the shunning of good, clean dirt, but a recognition of
the fact that to pass anything from one mouth to another is a possible
source of death and destruction." [1] "Death to dirt" should be the
watchword of the camp. The camp should be a model of cleanliness. Every
boy should be taught the value of good sanitation and encouraged to
cooperate in making proper sanitation effective.

[Footnote 1: Dr. Chas. E. A. Winslow--"Camp Conference," p. 58.]

Avoid Swamps

The location chosen for a camp should be away from swamps. Avoid swampy
and low places as you would a plague. Damp places where there are
mosquitoes, should be well drained, and open to an abundance of sunshine.
Mosquitoes breed only in water, but a very little water is sufficient if
it is dirty and stagnant. Two inches of water standing in an old tin can
will breed an innumerable horde. These "diminutive musicians" are not only
a nuisance, but dangerous, as malaria and typhoid spreaders by their
poisonous stings.

The Site

In selecting a camp site bear in mind these things: (1) A sandy sub-soil,
with good drainage. Avoid very sandy soil; sand provides but little hold
for tent pegs, and there is grave risk of damage should there come a gale.
(2) An open campus surrounded by hills or sheltering trees, and facing the
water.  (3) Plenty of good drinking water and water for swimming. (4) Base
from which supplies and provisions are to be drawn should be within
convenient distance, not more than four miles away. (5) Camp should be
away from civilization, far enough to be free from visitors and the
temptation to "go to town" on the part of the boys. Nothing demoralizes a
boys' camp so quickly as proximity to a summer resort.

Arrangement

Before opening the camp much thought and care should be given to its
sanitary arrangement. First of all, the dryest section of the camp ground
should be selected for the erection of the sleeping tents. Locate them
where they will have the full benefit of the sunshine. Tents erected under
trees are liable to mildew, for the want of sunshine, and the contents of
the tent will soon get musty. Next in importance to the location of
"quarters" is the location of the kitchen. This should be near the dining
tent, so that the serving of food may be quick, and yet far enough away to
insure that disagreeable odors will not destroy the pleasure of eating. If
it is very near the sleeping tents the campers will be awakened too early
by the chopping of wood and the necessary noises made in preparation of
the morning meal. It should be near water. This is very essential for
cooking and cleaning. In some of the large camps water is carried to the
kitchen in pipes from near-by springs or pumped from wells of pure water.
The dining quarters naturally should be located near the kitchen so that
food may be served warm. Provision should be made for the protection of
the boys from cold, wind, rain, and dampness while eating. The toilet
should be located rather far away from the camp, and not in the direction
from which the prevailing wind comes toward the camp. Make sure that it is
on the line of opposite drainage from the water used by the camp. The
details of laying out a camp, erection of tents, etc., are given in
another chapter.

Latrines

Particular precaution should be exercised in location and care of the
toilets or latrines, even in a one-night camp. Neglect of this will mean
disease. When on a one-night camp, dig a small pit which can be filled in
again after use. If the camp is to be continued for a week or longer, dig
a pit or trench about two or three feet deep and about eighteen inches
wide, plant posts on each side of the trench, and eighteen inches above
the ground level. Nail shaped seating on these posts. The number of seats
will be determined by the size of the camping party. It is desirable to
erect a six-foot canvas screen with an opening around the toilet. Dry
earth should be sprinkled freely in the trench each time it is used. Also
each morning sprinkle plenty of chloride of lime or some good, reliable
disinfectant in the trench. Do not permit the throwing of paper about the
toilet. Have a box in which paper is to be kept. Flies should be excluded
by boxing up the sides of the seats and fastening a hinged lid upon the
seats (see illustration). It is an advantage to admit the direct sunlight
about the middle of the day because of its bactericidal action on disease
germs. In a permanent camp regular wooden closets should be built, with
covered roof for protection from rain and wind. The back of the closet
should be arranged either by a hinged door or some other method so that
the contents may be removed as often as once a week. A wooden box on
rollers placed beneath the seats will facilitate removal. The seats should
be scrubbed with hot water, sulpho-naphthol, or soap, daily. "Springfield
Oval" type of toilet paper prevents unnecessary waste. In one camp the
water from a near-by brook is dammed and thus by gravity made to flow by a
system of modern plumbing through the urinals and flush closets. This is
ideal. Insist upon cleanliness. The cutting of initials and names upon the
seats and woodwork should be considered a disgrace as well as a
misdemeanor.

[Illustration: Pit Toilet; seat, hinged cover, hinged door at back.]

Taboo the taking of books and papers to the toilet to read. It should be
an imperative rule that no other place be used. A little carelessness will
cause disagreeable as well as dangerous results. By way of reiteration:
First, rigid prohibition of the pollution of the surface of the ground by
the strictest rules, diligently enforced. Second, the provision of toilets
or latrines of adequate size with proper precaution to prevent the
dispersal of excreta by wind, flies, or other agencies. The latrines
should be located a distance from camp but not so far as to offer
temptation to pollution of the ground. Third, boys should be educated when
on hikes or tramps in the old Mosaic Rule laid down in Deuteronomy 23:
12-14. [1]

[Transcriber's Footnote 1: "Thou shalt have a place also without the camp,
whither thou shalt go forth abroad: And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy
weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou shalt
dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh from thee:
For the LORD thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee,
and to give up thine enemies before thee; therefore shall thy camp be
holy: that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee."]

Garbage

Garbage, consisting chiefly of trimmings of meat and vegetables and the
waste from the table, if stored in open buckets soon becomes offensive and
is an ideal breeding place in warm weather for flies "that drink of
cesspools, dine at privy vaults, eat sputum and are likely to be the most
familiar guests at the dinner table, sampling every article of food upon
which they walk, leaving in their tracks disease-producing germs which
have adhered to their sticky feet where they have previously dined."
Declare war upon the "fly who won't wipe his feet" by keeping the garbage
in a covered galvanized-iron pail and dispose of it before decomposition
takes place. Wash and dry the pail after emptying. If the camp is located
near a farm, give the garbage to the farmer. It is the natural food of
swine or poultry. Where this is not possible, the garbage should be buried
every day in the earth and covered with three or four inches of dirt.
Another and better plan, especially in a large camp, is the burning of the
garbage and human excreta in an incinerator, such as the McCall. This is
the method of the United States Army.

Exercise caution in throwing aside tin cans. The vegetable matter
remaining in the cans soon decays and attracts flies. Have a place where
these cans may be buried or burned with other refuse each day. Keep the
ground surrounding the kitchen free from all kinds of garbage or refuse.

Do not throw dirty dish water promiscuously upon the ground. Dig a trench
and put the water in this trench. Sprinkle chloride of lime or a
disinfectant upon it each day. In a permanent camp a waste water well
should be dug and lined with stone. The drain pipe should be laid from the
kitchen to the well. This water soon disappears in the soil and does not
become a nuisance. Make sure that the well is not in line with the water
supply of the camp. A little potash or some washing soda dissolved in the
sink will help to keep the drain clean.

Place barrels in different parts of the camp for refuse and scraps. A coat
of whitewash or white paint will make them conspicuous. In one camp the
following suggestive bit of verse was painted on the waste barrels:

Ravenous Barrel

I am all mouth and vacuum
  I never get enough,
So cram me full of fruit peels,
  Old papers, trash and stuff.

Epicurean Barrel

O, how sorry I feel for a boy
  Who litters clean places with trash,
Who throws away papers and fruit peels
  Which form my favorite hash.

Waste Barrels

These barrels should be set upon two strips of wood placed parallel. This
permits the air to pass beneath the barrel and keeps its bottom from
decaying by contact with the ground. The barrels should be emptied daily
and the trash burned.

A dirty, carelessly kept, untidy camp will make discipline and order very
difficult to attain and the influence will soon be noticed in the careless
personal habits of the boys. There is an educational and moral value in
cleanliness which is second only to that of good health.

Water Supply

Dr. Charles E. A. Winslow, the noted biologist, is authority for the
following statement; [Camp Conference, p.61] "The source of danger in
water is always human or animal pollution. Occasionally we find water
which is bad to drink on account of minerals dissolved on its way through
