Galileo imprisoned; Kepler reviled, and Newton bitterly attacked. In
this manner has religion aided astronomy!




CHAPTER IX

RELIGION AND GEOGRAPHY


The ancient Greeks, especially the Pythagoreans, Plato, and Aristotle,
had evolved theories of the earth's sphericity, which, while vague, were
basic for subsequent accurate ideas that developed later.

When Christianity sprang into existence Eusebius, St. John Chrysostom,
and Cosmos evolved a complete description of the earth. They considered
the earth as a parallelogram, flat, and surrounded by four seas, as a
kind of house, with heaven as its upper story and the earth as its
ground floor. To the north of the earth was a great mountain; at night
the sun was pushed into a pit and pulled out again in the morning, with
heaven as a loft and hell as a cellar. In the Atlantic Ocean, at some
unknown distance from Europe, was one of the openings into hell, into
which a ship sailing to this point, would tumble. The terror of this
conception was one of the chief obstacles of the great voyage of
Columbus. Luther, Melanchthon, Calvin, and Zwingli held to the opinion
that a great firmament, or floor, separated the heavens from the earth;
that above it were the waters and angels, and below it, the earth and
man.

During the time that the sphericity of the earth was still undecided,
another question arose that was considered of far greater importance,
namely, the conception of the antipodes and the problem of deciding
whether human beings existed on the earth's opposite side. It was
Lactantius who asked, "Is there any one so senseless as to believe that
there are men whose footsteps are higher than their heads? That the
crops and trees grow downward? That the rains and snow and hail fall
upwards toward the earth? I am at a loss as to what to say of those,
who, when they have once erred, steadily persevere in their folly, and
defend one vain thing by another."

St. Augustine insisted that men could not be allowed by the Almighty to
live there, since, if they did, they could not see Christ at His second
coming, descending through the air.

In the eighth century, a Bishop Virgil of Salzburg dared to assert that
there were men living in the antipodes. He was strongly attacked by St.
Boniface of Germany, who appealed to Pope Zachary for a decision. The
Pope, as the infallible teacher of Christendom, made the following
response: He declared it, "Perverse, iniquitous, and against Virgil's
soul." And again another infallible statement by the infallible Pope
Zachary became a doctrine of the Church.

In Italy, in 1316, Peter of Abano, famous as a physician, promulgated
the opposite view to that of the Church, for which he was persecuted by
the Inquisition, and barely escaped with his life. In 1327, Cecco
d'Ascoli, an astronomer, was burned alive at Florence for daring to
assert that men lived in the antipodes.

The difficulties that beset Columbus are well known. How he was hounded
both in Portugal and in Spain by the clergy; and even after his
discovery of America, the Papacy still maintained its theory of the
flatness of the earth and the nonsense of the antipodes. Pope Alexander
VI and Pope Julius II attempted to settle the disputes between Spain and
Portugal by drawing some remarkable maps that may still be found; but no
one dares to disturb the quiet of the ridiculous bulls that the popes
issued on this dispute.

In 1519 Magellan made his famous voyage and proved the earth to be round
and that men actually lived in the antipodes. But the force of
ecclesiastical stultification was so great, as it is today, that men
still believed the opposite view for two hundred years after the voyage
of Magellan.




CHAPTER X

RELIGION AND CHEMISTRY AND PHYSICS


The establishment of Christianity, beginning a new evolution of
theology, arrested the normal development of the physical sciences for
more than 1500 years. The work begun by Aristotle and carried on to such
a high state of relative perfection by Archimedes, was stifled by the
early Christians. An atmosphere was then created in which physical
science could not grow. The general belief derived from the New
Testament was that the end of the world was at hand, and the early
Church Fathers poured contempt upon all investigators of the science of
nature.

Then, too, for science there was established an insurmountable barrier,
in that the most careful inductions of science from ascertained facts
must conform to the view of nature given in the myth and legends of the
Bible. For 1500 years science was forced to confine itself to a system
of deducing scientific truth from scriptural texts. It was the accepted
word of the clergy that science was futile and dangerous which led to
the discrediting of Roger Bacon's works.

In 1163 Pope Alexander III forbade the study of physics to all
ecclesiastics, which of course, in that age, meant prohibition of all
such scientific studies to the only persons likely to follow them.

Roger Bacon was first to practice extensively the experimental method of
science. Through his researches the inventions of clocks, lenses, and
the formula for extracting phosphorus, manganese, and bismuth were
brought to light. Bitterly attacked by the clergy, he attempted to
defend himself by stating that much which was ascribed to demons
resulted from natural means. This statement but added fuel to the flame.
For in 1278 the authorities of the Franciscan Order assembled at Paris,
solemnly condemned Bacon's teachings, and the general of the
Franciscans, Jerome of Ascoli, afterwards Pope, threw him into prison,
where he remained for fourteen years. At the age of eighty, he was
released from prison declaring, "Would that I had not given myself so
much trouble for the love of science."

"Sad is it to think of what this great man might have given to the world
had ecclesiasticism allowed the gift. He held the key to treasures which
would have freed mankind from ages of error and misery. With his
discoveries as a basis, with his method as a guide, what might not the
world have gained! Nor was the wrong done to that age alone; it was done
to this age also.... Thousands of precious lives shall be lost, tens of
thousands shall suffer discomfort, privations, sickness, poverty,
ignorance, for lack of discoveries and methods which, but for this
mistaken dealing with Roger Bacon and his compeers, would now be
blessing the earth." (_White: "Warfare of Science."_)

Centuries afterwards, for stating the same claim, namely, that much
which was attributed to demons, resulted from natural causes, Cornelius
Agrippa, Weyer, Flade, Loos, Bekker, and a multitude of other
investigators and thinkers, suffered confiscation of property, loss of
position, and even torture and death.

In the latter half of the sixteenth century, John Baptist Porta, who was
the first to show how to reduce the metallic oxides and thus laid the
foundation of several important industries, was summoned to Rome by
Pope Paul II, and forbidden to continue his researches.

Both in Protestant and Catholic countries instruction in chemistry and
physics was discouraged by Church authorities, and in England the
theologians strenuously opposed the Royal Society and the Association
for the Advancement of Science.

Francis Bacon and Boyle were denounced by the clergy, and Lavoisier was
sent to the scaffold by the Parisian mob. Priestley had his home, his
library, instruments, and papers containing the results of long years of
scientific research burned by a Birmingham mob that had been instigated
by Anglican clergymen. He was driven into exile, and the mob would have
murdered him if they could have laid their hands upon him.

Yet, in spite of the opposition of the clergy, an opposition of such
force that one may well wonder how these tender embryonic sciences could
have withstood the terrific ecclesiastical onslaughts, the truths of
chemistry and physics continued to diffuse themselves among the
intelligent observers. The value to humanity of these two sciences is
now established as inestimable.




CHAPTER XI

RELIGION AND GEOLOGY, PHILOLOGY AND EVOLUTION

_The human race has suffered three grave humiliations: when Copernicus
showed that the earth was not the center of the universe; when Darwin
proved that man's origin was not the result of direct creation; when
Freud explained that man was not the master of his own thoughts or
actions_.

  LLEWELYN POWYS.


In the writings of the Greek and Roman philosophers are found the
germinal concepts of geological truths. But as Christianity took control
of the world instead of a steady progression of knowledge in this field
there was a distinct retrogression. According to the prevailing belief
the earth was soon to be destroyed and the collecting of knowledge was
futile and any study of its nature was vain.

St. Jerome stated that the broken and twisted crust of the earth
exhibited the wrath of God against sin. Tertullian asserted that fossils
resulted from the flood of Noah. A scientific explanation of fossil
remains was attempted by De Clave, Bitaud, and De Villon in the
seventeenth century. The theological faculty of Paris protested against
the scientific doctrine as unscriptural, destroyed their treatises, and
banished their authors from Paris.

In the middle of the eighteenth century Buffon, in France, produced a
thesis attempting to state simple geological truths. The theological
faculty of the Sorbonne dismissed him from his high position and forced
him to print a recantation stating, "I declare that I had no intention
to contradict the text of the Scripture; that I believe most firmly all
therein related about the creation, both as to order of time and matter
of fact. I abandon everything in my book respecting the formation of the
earth and generally all which may be contrary to the narrative of
Moses!"

The doctrine which Buffon abandoned is now as firmly established as that
of the earth's rotation upon its axis. Yet, in his day, it was heatedly
asserted by ecclesiastics that the scientific doctrine that fossils
represent animals which died before Adam contradicts the theological
doctrine of Adam's fall, and the statement that death entered the world
by sin--and this objection was further strengthened when the
ecclesiastics became cognizant that geology had proved that the earth
was vastly older than the 6000 years determined by Archbishop Ussher's
interpretation of the Old Testament.

About 1580, there was published by authority of Pope Gregory XIII, the
Roman Martyrology, revised in 1640 under Pope Urban VIII, which declared
that the creation of man took place 5199 years before Christ. In 1650,
Archbishop Ussher announced after careful study that man was created
4004 years before the Christian era. But, this proving too vague, Dr.
John Lightfoot, vice-chancellor of the University of Cambridge, assured
the world that, "Heaven and earth, centre and circumference, were
created together, in the same instant, and clouds full of water ... and
this work took place and man was created by the Trinity on the 23d of
October, 4004 B.C. at nine o'clock in the morning."

When the Egyptologists, Assyriologists, archeologists, and
anthropologists showed that man had reached a far advanced stage of
civilization long before the 6000 years given as the age of the earth,
their efforts were ridiculed by the clergy, and these scientists were
forced to bring their findings before the world in the face of the well
known methods of ecclesiastical opposition.

At a very early period in the evolution of civilization men began to ask
questions regarding language, and the answers to these questions were
naturally embodied in the myths, legends, and chronicles of their sacred
books. Language was considered God-given and complete. The diversity of
language was firmly held to be explained by the story of the Tower of
Babel; and since the writers of the Bible were merely pens in the hand
of God the conclusion was reached that not only the sense, but the
words, letters, and even the punctuation proceeded from the Holy Spirit.

At the end of the seventeenth century, the ecclesiastical contention
that the Hebrew punctuation was divinely inspired seemed to be generally
disproven. The great orthodox body of "religiosa dementia" fell back
upon the remainder of the theory that the Hebrew language was the first
of all languages which was spoken by the Almighty, given by Him to Adam,
transmitted through Noah to the world after the deluge, and that the
confusion of tongues was the origin of all other tongues.

It has only been in comparatively recent time, and in spite of the
opposition of the clergy, that language has been accepted as the result
of evolutionary processes in obedience to laws more or less clearly
ascertained. Babel thus takes its place quietly among the other myths of
the Bible.

In a purely civil matter, the infallible Church from its inception had
displayed a marked hostility to loans at interest. From the earliest
period the whole weight of the Church was brought to bear against the
taking of interest for money. Pope Leo the Great solemnly adjudged it a
sin worthy of severe punishment. In the thirteenth century, Pope Gregory
IX dealt an especially severe blow at commerce by his declaration that
even to advance on interest the money necessary in maritime trade was
damnable usury. The whole evolution of European civilization was greatly
hindered by this policy.


RELIGION AND EVOLUTION

Darwinism, which at first was declared by the clergy to be brutal,
degrading, atheistic, and anti-Christian, is now included as part of the
Bible teaching.

In a similar manner, the Copernican theory, the theory of gravitation,
the nebular hypothesis, the theory of uniformity in geology, and every
scientific advance has been opposed on the same grounds; that is, that
these are against the teachings of the Christian Church. And how many
Galileos, Brunos, and Darwins, and other would-be benefactors to the
human race have died mute because of this opposition and fear of
persecution by the Church?

In 1877, an eminent French Catholic physician, Dr. Constantin James,
published an elaborate answer to Darwin's book. He called it, "On
Darwinism, or the Ape Man." A copy was sent to Pope Pius IX, who was so
pleased with it that he sent the author a reply in which he stated that
it "refutes so well the aberrations of Darwinism, a system which is
repugnant at once to history, to the traditions of all peoples, to exact
science, to observed facts, and even to reason itself, would seem to
need no refutation did not alienation from God and the leaning toward
materialism, due to depravity, eagerly seek support in all this tissue
of fables."

The Protestant clergy were no less vigorous in their opposition. In our
own country it was opposed by Dr. Noah Porter, president of Yale
College, and most bitterly by the Rev. Dr. Hodge and the Rev. Dr.
Duffield, both leading authorities at Princeton University.

Fundamentalism in the United States furnished the spectacle of the
trial, in 1925, of a school teacher named Scopes, for teaching the
theory of evolution. Dayton, Tennessee, became the laughingstock of the
educated world, and the derision with which this effort to obstruct
knowledge at this late date was met with by the comments of the press in
this country and abroad is at least encouraging. But it is an excellent
example of what effect religious obscurantism may exert in backward
sections of our country.

Dr. Max Carl Otto, considering the implications of evolution, calls
attention to the following: "Take the evolution of living forms. The
more we learn about biological history the clearer it becomes that the
process has been, from the human point of view, incredibly bungling and
wasteful. There have been futile experiments without number; highly
successful achievements have been thrown aside; one type of life after
another has arisen and has pushed up a blind alley to extinction. If
there is a God whose method has been Evolution, then seemingly his
slogan was 'We'll fight it out along this line if it takes a billennium'
but, unlike Grant, he has always surrendered. In this maelstrom, the
human species, as Thomas Huxley said--'plashed and floundered amid the
general stream of evolution, keeping its head above water as best it
might, and thinking neither of whence nor whither.' Many volumes have
been written to give a purposive interpretation of the rise and
evolutionary ramifications of living forms. The course of evolution
itself is their refutation."

When the Churches could no longer ignore the rising tide of secular
opinion, they resorted to compromise and called to their aid a certain
number of intellectually dishonest scientists. The attempt to harmonize
Christianity and Evolution can only be accounted for in terms of either
dishonesty or stupidity.

"And that is true of the whole range of science. Science is, in fact,
atheistic or nothing. It knows nothing of God, it does not bother about
God, its triumphs are achieved by leaving God out of account." (_C.
