Lactic Acid.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety minims of one part
to 437 of water.  After 48 m. there was no inflection, but the
surrounding fluid was coloured pink; after 8 hrs.  30 m. one leaf alone
was a little inflected, and almost all the glands on all three leaves
were of a very pale colour. The leaves were then washed and placed in a
solution (1 gr. to 20 oz.) of phosphate of ammonia; after about 16 hrs.
there was only a trace of inflection. They were left in the phosphate
for 48 hrs., and remained in the same state, with almost all their
glands discoloured. The protoplasm within the cells was not aggregated,
except in a very few tentacles, the glands of which were not much
discoloured. I believe, therefore, that almost all the glands and
tentacles had been killed by the acid so suddenly that hardly any
inflection was caused. Four leaves were next immersed in 120 minims of
a weaker solution, of one part to 875 of water; after 2 hrs. 30 m. the
surrounding fluid was quite pink; the glands were pale, but [page 194]
there was no inflection; after 7 hrs. 30 m. two of the leaves showed
some inflection, and the glands were almost white; after 21 hrs. two of
the leaves were considerably inflected, and a third slightly; most of
the glands were white, the others dark red. After 45 hrs. one leaf had
almost every tentacle inflected; a second a large number; the third and
fourth very few; almost all the glands were white, excepting those on
the discs of two of the leaves, and many of these were very dark red.
The leaves appeared dead. Hence lactic acid acts in a very peculiar
manner, causing inflection at an extraordinarily slow rate, and being
highly poisonous. Immersion in even weaker solutions, viz. of one part
to 1312 and 1750 of water, apparently killed the leaves (the tentacles
after a time being bowed backwards), and rendered the glands white, but
caused no inflection.

Gallic, Tannic, Tartaric, and Citric Acids.--One part to 437 of water.
Three or four leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of these four
solutions, so that each leaf received 1/16 of a grain, or 4.048 mg. No
inflection was caused in 24 hrs., and the leaves did not appear at all
injured. Those which had been in the tannic and tartaric acids were
placed in a solution (1 gr. to 20 oz.) of phosphate of ammonia, but no
inflection ensued in 24 hrs. On the other hand, the four leaves which
had been in the citric acid, when treated with the phosphate, became
decidedly inflected in 50 m. and strongly inflected after 5 hrs., and
so remained for the next 24 hrs.

Malic Acid.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety minims of a solution
of one part to 437 of water; no inflection was caused in 8 hrs. 20 m.,
but after 24 hrs. two of them were considerably, and the third
slightly, inflected--more so than could be accounted for by the action
of water. No great amount of mucus was secreted. They were then placed
in water, and after two days partially re-expanded. Hence this acid is
not poisonous.

Oxalic Acid.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety minims of a solution
of 1 gr. to 437 of water; after 2 hrs. 10 m. there was much inflection;
glands pale; the surrounding fluid of a dark pink colour; after 8 hrs.
excessive inflection. The leaves were then placed in water; after about
16 hrs. the tentacles were of a very dark red colour, like those of the
leaves in acetic acid. After 24 additional hours, the three leaves were
dead and their glands colourless.

Benzoic Acid.--Five leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a
solution of 1 gr. to 437 of water. This solution was so weak that it
only just tasted acid, yet, as we shall see, was highly poisonous to
Drosera. After 52 m. the submarginal [page 195] tentacles were somewhat
inflected, and all the glands very pale-coloured; the surrounding fluid
was coloured pink. On one occasion the fluid became pink in the course
of only 12 m., and the glands as white as if the leaf had been dipped
in boiling water. After 4 hrs. much inflection; but none of the
tentacles were closely inflected, owing, as I believe, to their having
been paralysed before they had time to complete their movement. An
extraordinary quantity of mucus was secreted. Some of the leaves were
left in the solution; others, after an immersion of 6 hrs. 30 m., were
placed in water. Next morning both lots were quite dead; the leaves in
the solution being flaccid, those in the water (now coloured yellow) of
a pale brown tint, and their glands white.

Succinic Acid.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety minims of a
solution of 1 gr. to 437 of water; after 4 hrs. 15 m. considerable and
after 23 hrs. great inflection; many of the glands pale; fluid coloured
pink. The leaves were then washed and placed in water; after two days
there was some re-expansion, but many of the glands were still white.
This acid is not nearly so poisonous as oxalic or benzoic.

Uric Acid.--Three leaves were immersed in 180 minims of a solution of 1
gr. to 875 of warm water, but all the acid was not dissolved; so that
each received nearly 1/16 of a grain. After 25 m. there was some slight
inflection, but this never increased; after 9 hrs. the glands were not
discoloured, nor was the solution coloured pink; nevertheless much
mucus was secreted.  The leaves were then placed in water, and by next
morning fully re-expanded. I doubt whether this acid really causes
inflection, for the slight movement which at first occurred may have
been due to the presence of a trace of albuminous matter. But it
produces some effect, as shown by the secretion of so much mucus.

Hippuric Acid.--Four leaves were immersed in 120 minims of a solution
of 1 gr. to 437 of water. After 2 hrs. the fluid was coloured pink;
glands pale, but no inflection. After 6 hrs.  some inflection; after 9
hrs. all four leaves greatly inflected; much mucus secreted; all the
glands very pale. The leaves were then left in water for two days; they
remained closely inflected, with their glands colourless, and I do not
doubt were killed.

Hydrocyanic Acid.--Four leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of
one part to 437 of water; in 2 hrs. 45 m. all the tentacles were
considerably inflected, with many of the glands pale; after 3 hrs. 45
m. all strongly inflected, and the surrounding fluid coloured pink;
after 6 hrs. all closely inflected. After [page 196] an immersion of 8
hrs. 20 m. the leaves were washed and placed in water; next morning,
after about 16 hrs., they were still inflected and discoloured; on the
succeeding day they were evidently dead. Two leaves were immersed in a
stronger mixture, of one part to fifty of water; in 1 hr. 15 m. the
glands became as white as porcelain, as if they had been dipped in
boiling water; very few of the tentacles were inflected; but after 4
hrs. almost all were inflected. These leaves were then placed in water,
and next morning were evidently dead.  Half-minim drops of the same
strength (viz. one part to fifty of water) were next placed on the
discs of five leaves; after 21 hrs. all the outer tentacles were
inflected, and the leaves appeared much injured. I likewise touched the
secretion round a large number of glands with minute drops (about 1/20
of a minim, or .00296 ml.) of Scheele's mixture (6 per cent.); the
glands first became bright red, and after 3 hrs. 15 m. about two-thirds
of the tentacles bearing these glands were inflected, and remained so
for the two succeeding days, when they appeared dead.]

Concluding Remarks on the Action of Acids.--It is evident that acids
have a strong tendency to cause the inflection of the tentacles;* for
out of the twenty-four acids tried, nineteen thus acted, either rapidly
and energetically, or slowly and slightly. This fact is remarkable, as
the juices of many plants contain more acid, judging by the taste, than
the solutions employed in my experiments. From the powerful effects of
so many acids on Drosera, we are led to infer that those naturally
contained in the tissues of this plant, as well as of others, must play
some important part in their economy. Of the five cases in which acids
did not cause the tentacles to be inflected, one is doubtful; for uric
acid did act slightly, and caused a copious secretion of mucus. Mere
sourness to the taste is no

* According to M. Fournier ('De la Fcondation dans les Phanrogames.'
1863, p. 61) drops of acetic, hydrocyanic, and sulphuric acid cause the
stamens of Berberis instantly to close; though drops of water have no
such power, which latter statement I can confirm; [page 197]

criterion of the power of an acid on Drosera, as citric and tartaric
acids are very sour, yet do not excite inflection. It is remarkable how
acids differ in their power. Thus, hydrochloric acid acts far less
powerfully than hydriodic and many other acids of the same strength,
and is not poisonous. This is an interesting fact, as hydrochloric acid
plays so important a part in the digestive process of animals. Formic
acid induces very slight inflection, and is not poisonous; whereas its
ally, acetic acid, acts rapidly and powerfully, and is poisonous. Malic
acid acts slightly, whereas citric and tartaric acids produce no
effect. Lactic acid is poisonous, and is remarkable from inducing
inflection only after a considerable interval of time. Nothing
surprised me more than that a solution of benzoic acid, so weak as to
be hardly acidulous to the taste, should act with great rapidity and be
highly poisonous; for I am informed that it produces no marked effect
on the animal economy. It may be seen, by looking down the list at the
head of this discussion, that most of the acids are poisonous, often
highly so. Diluted acids are known to induce negative osmose,* and the
poisonous action of so many acids on Drosera is, perhaps, connected
with this power, for we have seen that the fluids in which they were
immersed often became pink, and the glands pale-coloured or white. Many
of the poisonous acids, such as hydriodic, benzoic, hippuric, and
carbolic (but I neglected to record all the cases), caused the
secretion of an extraordinary amount of mucus, so that long ropes of
this matter hung from the leaves when they were lifted out of the
solutions. Other acids, such as hydrochloric and malic, have no such
ten-

* Miller's 'Elements of Chemistry,' part i. 1867, p. 87.  [page 198]

dency; in these two latter cases the surrounding fluid was not coloured
pink, and the leaves were not poisoned. On the other hand, propionic
acid, which is poisonous, does not cause much mucus to be secreted, yet
the surrounding fluid became slightly pink. Lastly, as in the case of
saline solutions, leaves, after being immersed in certain acids, were
soon acted on by phosphate of ammonia; on the other hand, they were not
thus affected after immersion in certain other acids. To this subject,
however, I shall have to recur.  [page 199]


                          CHAPTER IX.

 THE EFFECTS OF CERTAIN ALKALOID POISONS, OTHER SUBSTANCES AND
                            VAPOURS.

Strychnine, salts of--Quinine, sulphate of, does not soon arrest the
movement of the protoplasm--Other salts of
quinine--Digitaline--Nicotine--Atropine--Veratrine--Colchicine--
Theine--Curare--Morphia--Hyoscyamus--Poison of the cobra, apparently
accelerates the movements of the protoplasm--Camphor, a powerful
stimulant, its vapour narcotic--Certain essential oils excite
movement--Glycerine--Water and certain solutions retard or prevent the
subsequent action of phosphate of ammonia--Alcohol innocuous, its
vapour narcotic and poisonous--Chloroform, sulphuric and nitric ether,
their stimulant, poisonous, and narcotic power--Carbonic acid narcotic,
not quickly poisonous--Concluding remarks.

AS in the last chapter, I will first give my experiments, and then a
brief summary of the results with some concluding remarks.

[Acetate of Strychnine.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437
of water were placed on the discs of six leaves; so that each received
1/960 of a grain, or .0675 mg. In 2 hrs. 30 m. the outer tentacles on
some of them were inflected, but in an irregular manner, sometimes only
on one side of the leaf. The next morning, after 22 hrs. 30 m. the
inflection had not increased. The glands on the central disc were
blackened, and had ceased secreting. After an additional 24 hrs. all
the central glands seemed dead, but the inflected tentacles had
re-expanded and appeared quite healthy. Hence the poisonous action of
strychnine seems confined to the glands which have absorbed it;
nevertheless, these glands transmit a motor impulse to the exterior
tentacles. Minute drops (about 1/20 of a minim) of the same solution
applied to the glands of the outer tentacles occasionally caused them
to bend. The poison does not seem to act quickly, for having applied to
several glands similar drops of a rather stronger solution, of one part
to 292 of water, this did not prevent the tentacles bending, when their
glands [page 200] were excited, after an interval of a quarter to three
quarters of an hour, by being rubbed or given bits of meat. Similar
drops of a solution of one part to 218 of water (2 grs. to 1 oz.)
quickly blackened the glands; some few tentacles thus treated moved,
whilst others did not.  The latter, however, on being subsequently
moistened with saliva or given bits of meat, became incurved, though
with extreme slowness; and this shows that they had been injured.
Stronger solutions (but the strength was not ascertained) sometimes
arrested all power of movement very quickly; thus bits of meat were
placed on the glands of several exterior tentacles, and as soon as they
began to move, minute drops of the strong solution were added.  They
continued for a short time to go on bending, and then suddenly stood
still; other tentacles on the same leaves, with meat on their glands,
but not wetted with the strychnine, continued to bend and soon reached
the centre of the leaf.

Citrate of Strychnine.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of six leaves; after 24 hrs. the outer
tentacles showed only a trace of inflection. Bits of meat were then
placed on three of these leaves, but in 24 hrs. only slight and
irregular inflection occurred, proving that the leaves had been greatly
injured. Two of the leaves to which meat had not been given had their
discal glands dry and much injured. Minute drops of a strong solution
of one part to 109 of water (4 grs. to 1 oz.) were added to the
secretion round several glands, but did not produce nearly so plain an
effect as the drops of a much weaker solution of the acetate. Particles
of the dry citrate were placed on six glands; two of these moved some
way towards the centre, and then stood still, being no doubt killed;
three others curved much farther inwards, and were then fixed; one
alone reached the centre. Five leaves were immersed, each in thirty
minims of a solution of one part to 437 of water; so that each received
1/16 of a grain; after about 1 hr. some of the outer tentacles became
inflected, and the glands were oddly mottled with black and white.
These glands, in from 4 hrs. to 5 hrs., became whitish and opaque, and
the protoplasm in the cells of the tentacles was well aggregated. By
this time two of the leaves were greatly inflected, but the three
others not much more inflected than they were before. Nevertheless two
fresh leaves, after an immersion respectively for 2 hrs. and 4 hrs. in
the solution, were not killed; for on being left for 1 hr. 30 m. in a
solution of one part of carbonate of ammonia to 218 of water, their
tentacles became more inflected, and there was much aggregation. The
glands [page 201] of two other leaves, after an immersion for 2 hrs. in
a stronger solution, of one part of the citrate to 218 of water, became
of an opaque, pale pink colour, which before long disappeared, leaving
them white. One of these two leaves had its blade and tentacles greatly
inflected; the other hardly at all; but the protoplasm in the cells of
both was aggregated down to the bases of the tentacles, with the
spherical masses in the cells close beneath the glands blackened. After
24 hrs. one of these leaves was colourless, and evidently dead.

Sulphate of Quinine.--Some of this salt was added to water, which is
said to dissolve 1/1000 part of its weight. Five leaves were immersed,
each in thirty minims of this solution, which tasted bitter. In less
than 1 hr. some of them had a few tentacles inflected. In 3 hrs. most
of the glands became whitish, others dark-coloured, and many oddly
mottled. After 6 hrs. two of the leaves had a good many tentacles
inflected, but this very moderate degree of inflection never increased.
One of the leaves was taken out of the solution after 4 hrs., and
placed in water; by the next morning some few of the inflected
tentacles had re-expanded, showing that they were not dead; but the
glands were still much discoloured. Another leaf not included in the
above lot, after an immersion of 3 hrs. 15 m., was carefully examined;
the protoplasm in the cells of the outer tentacles, and of the short
green ones on the disc, had become strongly aggregated down to their
bases; and I distinctly saw that the little masses changed their
positions and shapes rather rapidly; some coalescing and again
separating. I was surprised at this fact, because quinine is said to
arrest all movement in the white corpuscles of the blood; but as,
according to Binz,* this is due to their being no longer supplied with
oxygen by the red corpuscles, any such arrestment of movement could not
be expected in Drosera. That the glands had absorbed some of the salt
was evident from their change of colour; but I at first thought that
the solution might not have travelled down the cells of the tentacles,
where the protoplasm was seen in active movement. This view, however, I
have no doubt, is erroneous, for a leaf which had been immersed for 3
hrs. in the quinine solution was then placed in a little solution of
one part of carbonate of ammonia to 218 of water; and in 30 m. the
glands and the upper cells of the tentacles became intensely black,
with the protoplasm presenting a very unusual appearance; for it

* 'Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science,' April 1874, p. 185.
[page 202]

had become aggregated into reticulated dingy-coloured masses, having
rounded and angular interspaces. As I have never seen this effect
produced by the carbonate of ammonia alone, it must be attributed to
the previous action of the quinine. These reticulated masses were
watched for some time, but did not change their forms; so that the
protoplasm no doubt had been killed by the combined action of the two
salts, though exposed to them for only a short time.

Another leaf, after an immersion for 24 hrs. in the quinine solution,
became somewhat flaccid, and the protoplasm in all the cells was
aggregated. Many of the aggregated masses were discoloured, and
presented a granular appearance; they were spherical, or elongated, or
still more commonly consisted of little curved chains of small
globules. None of these masses exhibited the least movement, and no
doubt were all dead.

Half-minims of the solution were placed on the discs of six leaves;
after 23 hrs. one had all its tentacles, two had a few, and the others
none inflected; so that the discal glands, when irritated by this salt,
do not transmit any strong motor impulse to the outer tentacles. After
48 hrs. the glands on the discs of all six leaves were evidently much
injured or quite killed. It is clear that this salt is highly
poisonous.*

Acetate of Quinine.--Four leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims
of a solution of one part to 437 of water. The solution was tested with
litmus paper, and was not acid. After only 10 m. all four leaves were
greatly, and after 6 hrs. immensely, inflected. They were then left in
water for 60 hrs., but never re-expanded; the glands were white, and
the leaves evidently dead. This salt is far more efficient than the
sulphate in causing inflection, and, like that salt, is highly
poisonous.

Nitrate of Quinine.--Four leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims
of a solution of one part to 437 of water. After 6 hrs. there was
hardly a trace of inflection; after 22 hrs. three of the leaves were
moderately, and the fourth slightly inflected; so that this salt
induces, though rather slowly, well-marked inflection. These leaves, on
being left in water for 48 hrs., almost

*Binz found several years ago (as stated in 'The Journal of Anatomy and
Phys.' November 1872, p. 195) that quinia is an energetic poison to low
vegetable and animal organisms. Even one part added to 4000 parts of
blood arrests the movements of the white corpuscles, which become
"rounded and granular." In the tentacles of Drosera the aggregated
masses of protoplasm, which appeared killed by the quinine, likewise
presented a granular appearance.  A similar appearance is caused by
very hot water.  [page 203]

completely re-expanded, but the glands were much discoloured. Hence
this salt is not poisonous in any high degree. The different action of
the three foregoing salts of quinine is singular.

Digitaline.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of water were
placed on the discs of five leaves. In 3 hrs. 45 m. Some of them had
their tentacles, and one had its blade, moderately inflected. After 8
hrs. three of them were well inflected; the fourth had only a few
tentacles inflected, and the fifth (an old leaf) was not at all
affected. They remained in nearly the same state for two days, but the
glands on their discs became pale. On the third day the leaves appeared
much injured. Nevertheless, when bits of meat were placed on two of
them, the outer tentacles became inflected. A minute drop (about 1/20
of a minim) of the solution was applied to three glands, and after 6
hrs. all three tentacles were inflected, but next day had nearly
re-expanded; so that this very small dose of 1/28800 of a grain (.00225
mg.) acts on a tentacle, but is not poisonous. It appears from these
several facts that digitaline causes inflection, and poisons the glands
which absorb a moderately large amount.

Nicotine.--The secretion round several glands was touched with a minute
drop of the pure fluid, and the glands were instantly blackened; the
tentacles becoming inflected in a few minutes. Two leaves were immersed
in a weak solution of two drops to 1 oz., or 437 grains, of water. When
examined after 3 hrs. 20 m., only twenty-one tentacles on one leaf were
closely inflected, and six on the other slightly so; but all the glands
were blackened, or very dark-coloured, with the protoplasm in all the
cells of all the tentacles much aggregated and dark-coloured. The
leaves were not quite killed, for on being placed in a little solution
of carbonate of ammonia (2 grs. to 1 oz.) a few more tentacles became
inflected, the remainder not being acted on during the next 24 hrs.

Half-minims of a stronger solution (two drops to 1/2 oz. of water) were
placed on the discs of six leaves, and in 30 m. all those tentacles
became inflected; the glands of which had actually touched the
solution, as shown by their blackness; but hardly any motor influence
was transmitted to the outer tentacles. After 22 hrs. most of the
glands on the discs appeared dead; but this could not have been the
case, as when bits of meat were placed on three of them, some few of
the outer tentacles were inflected in 24 hrs. Hence nicotine has a
great tendency to blacken the glands and to induce aggregation [page
204] of the protoplasm, but, except when pure, has very moderate power
of inducing inflection, and still less power of causing a motor
influence to be transmitted from the discal glands to the outer
tentacles. It is moderately poisonous.

Atropine.--A grain was added to 437 grains of water, but was not all
dissolved; another grain was added to 437 grains of a mixture of one
part of alcohol to seven parts of water; and a third solution was made
by adding one part of valerianate of atropine to 437 of water.
Half-minims of these three solutions were placed, in each case, on the
discs of six leaves; but no effect whatever was produced, excepting
that the glands on the discs to which the valerianate was given were
slightly discoloured. The six leaves on which drops of the solution of
atropine in diluted alcohol had been left for 21 hrs. were given bits
of meat, and all became in 24 hrs. fairly well inflected; so that
atropine does not excite movement, and is not poisonous. I also tried
in the same manner the alkaloid sold as daturine, which is believed not
to differ from atropine, and it produced no effect. Three of the leaves
on which drops of this latter solution had been left for 24 hrs. were
likewise given bits of meat, and they had in the course of 24 hrs. a
good many of their submarginal tentacles inflected.

Veratrine, Colchicine, Theine.--Solutions were made of these three
alkaloids by adding one part to 437 of water. Half-minims were placed,
in each case; on the discs of at least six leaves, but no inflection
was caused, except perhaps a very slight amount by the theine.
Half-minims of a strong infusion of tea likewise produced, as formerly
stated, no effect. I also tried similar drops of an infusion of one
part of the extract of colchicum, sold by druggists, to 218 of water;
and the leaves were observed for 48 hrs., without any effect being
produced. The seven leaves on which drops of veratrine had been left
for 26 hrs. were given bits of meat, and after 21 hrs. were well
inflected. These three alkaloids are therefore quite innocuous.

Curare.--One part of this famous poison was added to 218 of water, and
three leaves were immersed in ninety minims of the filtered solution.
In 3 hrs. 30 m. some of the tentacles were a little inflected; as was
the blade of one; after 4 hrs. After 7 hrs. the glands were wonderfully
blackened, showing that matter of some kind had been absorbed. In 9
hrs. two of the leaves had most of their tentacles sub-inflected, but
the inflection did not increase in the course of 24 hrs. One of these
leaves, after being immersed for 9 hrs. in the solution, was placed in
water, and by next morning had largely re-expanded; [page 205] the
other two, after their immersion for 24 hrs., were likewise placed in
water, and in 24 hrs.  were considerably re-expanded, though their
glands were as black as ever. Half-minims were placed on the discs of
six leaves, and no inflection ensued; but after three days the glands
on the discs appeared rather dry, yet to my surprise were not
blackened. On another occasion drops were placed on the discs of six
leaves, and a considerable amount of inflection was soon caused; but as
I had not filtered the solution, floating particles may have acted on
the glands. After 24 hrs. bits of meat were placed on the discs of
three of these leaves, and next day they became strongly inflected. As
I at first thought that the poison might not have been dissolved in
pure water, one grain was added to 437 grains of a mixture of one part
of alcohol to seven of water, and half-minims were placed on the discs
of six leaves. These were not at all affected, and when after a day
bits of meat were given them, they were slightly inflected in 5 hrs.,
and closely after 24 hrs. It follows from these several facts that a
solution of curare induces a very moderate degree of inflection, and
this may perhaps be due to the presence of a minute quantity of
albumen. It certainly is not poisonous. The protoplasm in one of the
leaves, which had been immersed for 24 hrs., and which had become
slightly inflected, had undergone a very slight amount of
aggregation--not more than often ensues from an immersion of this
length of time in water.

Acetate of Morphia.--I tried a great number of experiments with this
substance, but with no certain result. A considerable number of leaves
were immersed from between 2 hrs. and 6 hrs. in a solution of one part
to 218 of water, and did not become inflected. Nor were they poisoned;
for when they were washed and placed in weak solutions of phosphate and
carbonate of ammonia, they soon became strongly inflected, with the
protoplasm in the cells well aggregated. If, however, whilst the leaves
were immersed in the morphia, phosphate of ammonia was added,
inflection did not rapidly ensue. Minute drops of the solution were
applied in the usual manner to the secretion round between thirty and
forty glands; and when, after an interval of 6 m:, bits of meat, a
little saliva, or particles of glass, were placed on them, the movement
of the tentacles was greatly retarded. But on other occasions no such
retardation occurred. Drops of water similarly applied never have any
retarding power.  Minute drops of a solution of sugar of the same
strength (one part to 218 of water) sometimes retarded the subsequent
action of meat and of particles of glass, and [page 206] sometimes did
not do so. At one time I felt convinced that morphia acted as a
narcotic on Drosera, but after having found in what a singular manner
immersion in certain non-poisonous salts and acids prevents the
subsequent action of phosphate of ammonia, whereas other solutions have
no such power, my first conviction seems very doubtful.

Extract of Hyoscyamus.--Several leaves were placed, each in thirty
minims of an infusion of 3 grs. of the extract sold by druggists to 1
oz. of water. One of them, after being immersed for 5 hrs. 15 m., was
not inflected, and was then put into a solution (1 gr. to 1 oz.) of
carbonate of ammonia; after 2 hrs. 40 m. it was found considerably
inflected, and the glands much blackened. Four of the leaves, after
being immersed for 2 hrs. 14 m., were placed in 120 minims of a
solution (1 gr. to 20 oz.) of phosphate of ammonia; they had already
become slightly inflected from the hyoscyamus, probably owing to the
presence of some albuminous matter, as formerly explained, but the
inflection immediately increased, and after 1 hr. was strongly
pronounced; so that hyoscyamus does not act as a narcotic or poison.

Poison from the Fang of a Living Adder.--Minute drops were placed on
the glands of many tentacles; these were quickly inflected, just as if
saliva had been given them, Next morning, after 17 hrs. 30 m., all were
beginning to re-expand, and they appeared uninjured.

Poison from the Cobra.--Dr. Fayrer, well known from his investigations
on the poison of this deadly snake, was so kind as to give me some in a
dried state. It is an albuminous substance, and is believed to replace
the ptyaline of saliva.* A minute drop (about 1/20 of a minim) of a
solution of one part to 437 of water was applied to the secretion round
four glands; so that each received only about 1/38400 of a grain (.0016
mg.). The operation was repeated on four other glands; and in 15 m.
several of the eight tentacles became well inflected, and all of them
in 2 hrs. Next morning, after 24 hrs., they were still inflected, and
the glands of a very pale pink colour. After an additional 24 hrs. they
were nearly re-expanded, and completely so on the succeeding day; but
most of the glands remained almost white.

Half-minims of the same solution were placed on the discs of three
leaves, so that each received 1/960 of a grain (.0675 mg.); in

*Dr. Fayrer, 'The Thanatophidia of India,' 1872, p. 150.  [page 207]

4 hrs. 15 m. the outer tentacles were much inflected; and after 6 hrs.
30 m. those on two of the leaves were closely inflected and the blade
of one; the third leaf was only moderately affected. The leaves
remained in the same state during the next day, but after 48 hrs.
re-expanded.

Three leaves were now immersed, each in thirty minims of the solution,
so that each received 1/16 of a grain, or 4.048 mg. In 6 m. there was
some inflection, which steadily increased, so that after 2 hrs. 30 m.
all three leaves were closely inflected; the glands were at first
somewhat darkened, then rendered pale; and the protoplasm within the
cells of the tentacles was partially aggregated. The little masses of
protoplasm were examined after 3 hrs., and again after 7 hrs., and on
no other occasion have I seen them undergoing such rapid changes of
form. After 8 hrs. 30 m. the glands had become quite white; they had
not secreted any great quantity of mucus. The leaves were now placed in
water, and after 40 hrs. re-expanded, showing that they were not much
or at all injured. During their immersion in water the protoplasm
within the cells of the tentacles was occasionally examined, and always
found in strong movement.

Two leaves were next immersed, each in thirty minims of a much stronger
solution, of one part to 109 of water; so that each received 1/4 of a
grain, or 16.2 mg; After 1 hr. 45 m. the sub-marginal tentacles were
strongly inflected, with the glands somewhat pale; after 3 hrs. 30 m.
both leaves had all their tentacles closely inflected and the glands
white. Hence the weaker solution, as in so many other cases, induced
more rapid inflection than the stronger one; but the glands were sooner
rendered white by the latter. After an immersion of 24 hrs.  some of
the tentacles were examined, and the protoplasm, still of a fine purple
colour, was found aggregated into chains of small globular masses.
