divinity and of His imparted life are deep, but the condition of
receiving that life is plain. If we will trust Jesus, we shall live;
if not, we are dead. Trusting Him is trusting the Father that sent
Him, and that Father becomes accessible to our trust when we 'hear'
Christ's 'word.'

The effects of faith are immediate, and the poor present may be
enriched and clothed in celestial light for each of us, if we will.
For Jesus does not point first to the mysteries of the resurrection of
the dead, and the tremendous solemnities of the final judgment, but to
what we may each enter upon at any moment. The believing man '_hath_
eternal life,' and 'cometh not into judgment.' That life is not
reserved to be entered on in the blessed future, but is a present
possession. True, it will blossom into unexampled nobleness when it is
transported into its native country, like some exotic in our colder
climates if it were carried back to the tropics. But it is a present
possession, and heaven is not different in kind from the Christian
life on earth, but differs mainly in degree and in circumstances. And
he that has the life here and now is, by its moulding of his outward
life, preserved from the sins which would bring him into judgment, and
the merciful judgment to which he is still subject is that for which
his truest self longs. And that blessed condition carries in it the
pledge that, at the last great day, which is to others a 'day of
wrath, a dreadful day,' he whom Christ has quickened by His own
indwelling life shall have 'boldness before Him.'

Obviously, in these verses the present effects of faith are in view,
since Jesus emphatically declares that the 'hour now is' when they can
be realised. Once more He states in the strongest terms, and as the
reason for the assurance that faith secures to us life, His possession
of the two divine prerogatives of quickening and judging. What a
paradox it is to say that it is '_given_' to Him to have 'life in
_Himself_'! And when was that gift given? In the depths of eternity.

He 'sits on no precarious throne, nor borrows leave to be,' and hence
He can impart life and lose none. Inseparably connected with that
given, and yet self-inherent, life, is the capacity for executing
judgment which belongs to Him as 'a Son of man.' It has been as 'the
Son' of the Father that it has been considered, in the previous
verses, as belonging to Him; but now it is as a true man that He is
fitted to bear, and actually is clothed with, that judicial power. No
doubt He is Judge of all, because by His incarnation and earthly life
He presents to all the offer of eternal life, by their attitude to
which offer men are judged. But the connection of thought seems rather
to be that Christ's Manhood, inextricably intertwined with His
divinity, is equally needed with the latter to constitute Him our
Judge. He 'knoweth our frame,' from the inside, as it were, and the
participation in our nature which fits Him to 'be a merciful and
faithful High Priest' also fits Him to be the Judge of mankind.




THE FOURTH MIRACLE IN JOHN'S GOSPEL

'And Jesus took the loaves; and when He had given thanks, He
distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set
down; and likewise of the fishes as much as they would.'--JOHN vi. 11.

This narrative of the miraculous feeding of the five thousand is
introduced into John's Gospel with singular abruptness. We read in the
first verse of the chapter: 'After these things Jesus went over the
Sea of Galilee,' _i.e._ from the western to the eastern side. But the
Evangelist does not tell us how or when He got to the western side.
'These things,' which are recorded in the previous chapter, are the
healing of the impotent man at the Pool of Bethesda, the consequent
outburst of Jewish hostility, and the profound and solemn discourse of
our Lord, in which He claims filial relationship to the Father. So
that we must insert between the chapters a journey from Jerusalem to
Galilee, and a lapse at all events of some months--or, if the feast
referred to in the previous chapter be, as it may be, the Passover, an
interval of nearly a year. So little care for the mere framework of
events has this fourth Gospel; so entirely would the Evangelist have
us see that his reason for narrating this miracle is mainly its
spiritual lessons and the revelation which it makes of Christ as
Himself the Bread of Life.

Similarly, he has no care to tell us anything about the reasons for
our Lord's retirement with His disciples from Galilee to the eastern
bank. These we have to learn from the other Evangelists. They give us
several concurrent motives--the news of the death of John the Baptist;
and of the desire of the bloody tyrant to see Jesus, which foreboded
evil; also the return of the twelve Apostles from their trial journey,
which involved the necessity of rest for them; and, perhaps, the
approach of the Passover, which our Lord did not purpose to observe in
Jerusalem because of the Jewish hostility, and which, therefore,
suggested the withdrawal to temporary retirement.

All these reasons concurring, He and His disciples would seek for a
brief space of seclusion and repose. But the hope of securing such was
vain. The people followed in crowds so eagerly, so hastily, in such
enormous numbers, that no natural or ordinary provision for their
wants could be thought of. Hence the occasion for the miracle before
us.

Now I think that this narrative, with which I wish to deal, falls
mainly into two portions, both of which suggest for us some important
lessons. There is, first, the preparations for the sign; and then
there is the sign itself. Let us look at these two points in
succession.

I. First, then, the preparations for the sign.

Now it is to be observed that this is the only incident before our
Lord's last journey to Jerusalem which is recorded by all four
Evangelists; therefore the variations between the narratives are of
especial interest, and these variations are very considerable. We
find, for instance, that in John's account the question as to how the
bread was to be provided came from Christ; in the other Evangelists'
accounts that question is discussed first amongst the Apostles
privately. We find from John's narrative that the question was
suggested even before the multitudes had come to Jesus. We find in the
Synoptic Gospels that it arose at the close of a long day of teaching
and of healing.

Now it is possible that this diversity of time may be the solution of
the diversity of the person proposing. That is to say, it is quite
legitimate to conclude that John's account takes up the incident at an
earlier period than the other Evangelists do, and that the full order
of events was this; that, privately, at the beginning of the day,
whilst the people were yet flocking to our Lord, He, to one of the
disciples alone, suggests the question, 'Whence shall we buy bread
that these may eat?' and that the answer, 'Two hundred pennyworth of
bread is not sufficient that every one of them may take a little,'
explains for us the suggestion of the same amount at a subsequent part
of the day, by the Apostles when they asked our Lord the question,
'Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread that these may
eat?'

Be that as it may, we may pause for a moment upon this question of our
Lord's, 'Whence shall we buy bread that these may eat?'

Now notice what a lovely glimpse we get there into the quick-rising
sympathy of the Saviour with all forms of human necessity. He had gone
away to snatch a brief moment of rest. The rest is denied Him; the
hurrying crowds come pressing with their vulgar curiosity--for it was
nothing better--after Him. No movement of impatience passes across His
mind; no reluctance as He turns away from the vanishing prospect of a
quiet afternoon with His friends. He looks upon them, and the first
thought is a quick, instinctive movement of a divine and yet most
human sympathy. The question rises in His mind of how He was to
provide for them; they were not hungry yet; they had not thought where
their bread was to come from. But He cared for the careless, and His
heart was prophetic of their necessities, and quick to determine 'what
He should do' to supply them. So is it ever. Before we call, He
answers. Thy mercy, O loving Christ! needs no more than the sight of
human necessities, or even the anticipation of them, swiftly to bestir
itself for their satisfaction and their supply.

But, farther, He selects for the question Philip, a man who seems to
have been what is called--as if it were the highest praise--an
'intensely practical person'; who seems to have had little faith in
anything that he could not get hold of by his senses, and who lived
upon the low level of 'common sense.' He always lays stress upon
'seeing.' His answer to Nathanael when he said, 'Can any good thing
come out of Nazareth?' was, 'Come and see.' A very good answer, and
yet one that relies only on the external manifestation of Christ to
the senses. Then, on another occasion, he breaks in upon the lofty
spiritualities of our Lord's final discourse to His disciples, with
the _malapropos_ request, 'Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth
us.' And so here, to the man who believed in his eyesight, and did not
easily apprehend much else, Jesus puts this question, 'Where is the
bread to come from for all these people? This He said to prove him.'
He hoped that the question might have shaped itself in the hearer's
mind into a promise, and that he might have been able to say in
answer, 'Thou canst supply; we need not buy.'

So Christ does still. He puts problems before us, too, to settle;
takes us, as it were, into His confidence with interrogations that try
us, whether we can rise above the level of the material and visible,
or whether all our conceptions of possibilities are bounded by these.
And sometimes, even though the question at first sight seems to evoke
only such a response as it did here, it works more deeply down below
afterwards, and we are helped by the very difficulty to rise to a
clear faith.

Philip's answer is very significant. 'Two hundred pennyworth of bread
are not sufficient.' He casts his eye over the multitude, he makes a
rough, rapid calculation, one does not exactly see the data on which
it was based; and he comes to the conclusion, 'Two hundred pennyworth'
(in our English money some L. 7 or L. 8 worth) would give them each a
morsel. And no doubt he thought himself very practical. He was a man
of figures; he believed in what could be put into tables and
statistics. Yes; and like a great many other people of his sort, he
left out one small element in his calculation, and that was Jesus
Christ, and so his answer went creeping along the low levels, dragging
itself like a half-wounded snake, when it might have risen on the
wings of faith into the empyrean, and soared and sung.

So learn that when we have to deal with Christ's working--and when
have we not to deal with Christ's working?--perhaps probabilities that
can be tabulated are not altogether the best bases upon which to rest
our calculations. Learn that the audacity of a faith that expects
great things, though there be nothing visible upon which to build, is
wiser and more prudent than the creeping common-sense that adheres to
facts which are shadows, and forgets that the chief fact is that we
have an Almighty Helper and Friend at our sides.

Still further, among these preliminaries, let us point to the
exhibition of the inadequate resources which Christ, according to the
fuller narrative in the other Evangelists, desired to know. 'There is
a little lad here with five barley loaves'--one per thousand--'and two
small fishes'--insufficient in quantity and very, very common in
quality, for barley bread was the food of the poorest. 'But what are
they among so many?' And Christ says, 'Bring them to Me.'

Christ's preparation for making our poor resources adequate for
anything is to drive home into our hearts the consciousness of their
insufficiency. We need, first of all, to be brought to this, 'All that
I have is this wretched little stock; and what is that measured
against the work that I have to do, and the claims upon me?' Only when
we are brought to that can His great power pour itself into us and
fill us with rejoicing and overcoming strength. The old mystics used
to say, and they said truly: 'You must be emptied of yourself before
you can be filled by God.' And the first thing for any man to learn,
in preparation for receiving a mightier power than his own into his
opening heart, is to know that all his own strength is utter and
absolute weakness. 'What are they among so many?' When we have once
gone right down into the depths of felt impotence, and when our work
has risen before us, as if it were far too great for our poor
strengths which are weaknesses, then we are brought, and only then,
into the position in which we may begin to hope that power equal to
our desire will be poured into our souls.

And so the last of the preparations that I will touch upon is that
majestic preparation for blessing by obedience. 'And Jesus said, Make
the men sit down.' And there they sat themselves, as Mark puts it in
his picturesque way, like so many garden plots--the rectangular
oblongs in a garden in which pot-herbs are grown--on the green grass,
below the blue sky, by the side of the quiet lake. Cannot you fancy
how some of them seated themselves with a scoff, and some with a quiet
smile of incredulity; and some half sheepishly and reluctantly; and
some in mute expectancy; and some in foolish wonder; and yet all of
them with a partial obedience? And says John in the true translation:
'So the men sat down, therefore Jesus took the loaves.' Sit you down
where He bids you, and your mouths will not be long empty. Do the
things He tells you, and you will get the food that you need. Our
business is to obey and to wait, and His business is, when we are
seated, to open His hand and let the mercy drop. So much for the
preparations for this great miracle.

II. Now, in the next place, a word as to the sign itself.

I take two lessons, and two only, out of it. I see in it, first, a
revelation of Christ, as continually through all the ages sustaining
men's physical life. And I see in it, second, a symbol of Christ as
Himself the Bread of Life.

As to the first, there is here, I believe, a revelation of the law of
the universe, of Christ as being through all the ages the Sustainer of
the physical life of men. What was done then once, with the
suppression of certain links in the chain, is done always, with the
introduction of those links. The miraculous moment in the narrative is
not described to us. We do not know where or when there came in the
supernatural power which multiplied the loaves--probably as they
passed from the hand of the Master. But be that as it may, it was
Christ's will that made the provision which fed all these five
thousand. And I believe that the teaching of Scripture is in
accordance with the deepest philosophy, that the one cause of all
physical phenomena is the will of a present God; howsoever that may
usually conform to the ordinary method of working which people
generalise and call laws. The reason why anything is, and the reason
why all things change, is the energy there and then of the indwelling
God who is in all His works, and who is the only Will and Power in the
physical world.

And I believe, further, that Scripture teaches us that that continuous
will, which is the cause of all phenomena and the underlying
subsistence on which all things repose, is all managed and mediated by
Him who from of old was named the Word; 'in whom was life, and without
whom was not anything made that was made.' Our Christ is Creator, our
Christ is Sustainer, our Christ moves the stars and feeds the
sparrows. He was 'before all things, and in Him all things consist.'
He opens His hand--and there is the print of a nail in it--and
'satisfies the desire of every living thing.'

So learn how to think of second causes, and see in this story a
transient manifestation, in unusual form, of an eternal and permanent
fact. Jesus took the loaves and distributed to them that were set
down.

And so, secondly, the miracle is a _sign_--a symbol of Him as the true
Bread and Food of the world. That is the explanation and commentary
which He Himself appends to it in the subsequent part of the chapter,
in the great discourse which is founded upon this miracle.

'I am the Bread of Life.' There is a triple statement by our Lord upon
this subject in the remaining portion of the chapter. He says, 'I am
the Bread of Life.' My personality is that which not only sustains
life when it is given, but gives life to them that feed upon it. But
more than that, 'the bread which I will give,' pointing to some future
'giving' beyond the present moment, and therefore something more than
His life and example, 'is My flesh, which'--in some as yet unexplained
way--'I give for the life of the world.' And that there may be no
misunderstanding, there is a third, deeper, more mysterious statement
still: 'My flesh is meat indeed, and My blood is drink indeed.'
Repulsive and paradoxical, but in its very offensiveness and paradox,
proclaiming that it covers a mighty truth, and the truth, brother, is
this, the one Food that gives life to will, affections, conscience,
understanding, to the whole spirit of a man, is that great Sacrifice
of the Incarnate Lord who gave upon the Cross His flesh, and on the
Cross shed His blood, for the life of the world that was 'dead in
trespasses and sins.' Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed for us, and
we feed on the sacrifice. Let your conscience, your heart, your
desires, your anticipations, your understanding, your will, your whole
being feed on Him. He will be cleansing, He will be love, He will be
fruition, He will be hope, He will be truth, He will be righteousness,
He will be all. Feed upon Him by that faith which is the true eating
of the true Bread, and your souls shall live.

And notice finally here, the result of this miracle as transferred to
the region of symbol. 'They did all eat and were filled'; men, women,
children, both sexes, all ages, all classes, found the food that they
needed in the bread that came from Christ's hands. If any man wants
dainties that will tickle the palates of Epicureans, let him go
somewhere else. But if he wants bread, to keep the life in and to stay
his hunger, let him go to this Christ who is 'human nature's daily
food.'

The world has scoffed for nineteen centuries at the barley bread that
the Gospel provides; coarse by the side of its confectionery, but it
is enough to give life to all who eat it. It goes straight to the
primal necessities of human nature. It does not coddle a class, or
pander to unwholesome, diseased, or fastidious appetites. It is the
food of the world, and not of a section. All men can relish it, all
men need it. It is offered to them all.

And more than that; notice the inexhaustible abundance. 'They did all
eat, and were filled.' And then they took up--not 'of the fragments,'
as our Bible gives it, conveying the idea of the crumbs that littered
the grass after the repast was over, but of the 'broken pieces'--the
portions that came from Christ's hands--twelve baskets full, an
immensely greater quantity than they had to start with. 'The gift doth
stretch itself as 'tis received.' Other goods and other possessions
perish with the using, but this increases with use. The more one eats,
the more there is for him to eat. And all the world may live upon it
for ever, and there will be more at the end than there was at the
beginning.

Brethren, why do ye 'spend your money for that which is not bread'?
There is no answer worthy of a rational soul, no answer that will
stand either the light of conscience or the clearer light of the Day
of Judgment. I come to you now, and although my poor words may be but
like the barley bread and the two fishes--nothing amongst all this
gathered audience--I come with Christ in my hands, and I say to you,
'Eat, and your souls shall live.' He will spread a table for you in
the wilderness, and take you to sit at last at His table in His
Kingdom.




'FRAGMENTS' OR 'BROKEN PIECES'

'When they were filled, He said unto His disciples, Gather up the
fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.'--JOHN vi. 12.

The Revised Version correctly makes a very slight, but a very
significant change in the words of this verse. Instead of 'fragments'
it reads 'broken pieces.' The change seems very small, but the effect
of it is considerable. It helps our picture of the scene by correcting
a very common misapprehension as to what it was which the Apostles are
bid to gather up. The general notion, I suppose, is that the
'fragments' are the crumbs that fell from each man's hands, as he ate,
and the picture before the imagination of the ordinary reader is that
of the Apostles' carefully collecting the _debris_ of the meal from
the grass where it had dropped. But the true notion is that the
'broken pieces which remain over' are the unused portions into which
our Lord's miracle-working hand had broken the bread, and the true
picture is that of the Apostles carefully putting away in store for
future use the abundant provision which their Lord had made, beyond
the needs of the hungry thousands. And that conception of the command
teaches far more beautiful and deeper lessons than the other.

For if the common translation and notion be correct, all that is
taught us, or at least what is principally taught us, is the duty of
thrift and careful economy; whereas the other shows more clearly that
what is taught us is that Jesus Christ always gets ready for His
people something over and above the exact limits of their bare need at
the moment, that He prepares for His poor and hungry dependants in
royal fashion, leaving ever a wide margin of difference between what
would be just enough to keep the life in them, and His liberal
housekeeping. Further, we are taught a lesson of wise husbandry and
economy in the use of that overplus of grace which Christ ministers,
and are instructed that the laws of prudent thrift have as honoured a
place in the management of spiritual as of temporal wealth. 'Gather
up,' says our Lord, 'the pieces which I broke, the large provision
which I made for possible wants. My gifts are in excess of the
requirements of the moment. Take care of them till you need them.'
That is a worthier interpretation of His command than one which merely
sees in it an exhortation to thrifty taking care of the crumbs that
fell from the lips of the hungry eaters.

Looking at this command, then, with this slight alteration of
rendering, and consequent widening of scope, we may briefly try to
gather up the lessons which it obviously suggests.

I. We have that thought, to which I have already referred, as more
strikingly brought out by the slight alteration of translation, which,
by the use of '_broken_ pieces,' suggests the connection with Christ's
_breaking_ the loaves and fishes. We are taught to think of the large
surplus in Christ's gifts over and above our need. Our Lord has
Himself given us a commentary upon this miracle. All Christ's miracles
are parables, for all teach us, on the level of natural and outward
things, lessons that are true in regard to the spiritual world; but
this one is especially symbolical, as indeed are all these recorded in
John's Gospel. And here we have Christ, on the day after the miracle,
commenting upon it in His long and profound discourse upon the Bread
of Life, which plainly intimates that He meant His office of feeding
the hungry crowds, with bread supernaturally increased by the touch of
His hand, to be but a picture and a guide which might lead to the
apprehension of the higher view of Himself as the 'bread of God which
came down from heaven,' feeding and 'giving life to the world' by His
broken body and shed blood.

So that we are not inventing a fanciful interpretation of an incident
not meant to have any meaning deeper than shows on the surface, when
we say that the abundance far beyond what the eaters could make use of
at the moment really represented the large surplus of inexhaustible
resources and unused grace which is treasured for us all in Christ
Jesus. Whom He feeds He feasts. His gifts answer our need, and
over-answer it, for He is 'able to do exceeding abundantly above that
which we ask or think,' and neither our conceptions, nor our
petitions, nor our present powers of receiving, are the real limits of
the illimitable grace that is laid up for us in Christ, and which,
potentially, we have each of us in our hands whenever we lay our hands
on Him.

Oh, dear friends! what you and I have ever had and felt of Christ's
power, sweetness, preciousness, and love is as nothing compared with
the infinite depths of all those which lie in Him. The sea fills the
little creeks along its shore, but it rolls in unfathomed depths,
boundless to the horizon away out there in the mid-Atlantic. And all
the present experience of all Christian people, of what Christ is, is
like the experience of the first settlers in some great undiscovered
continent; who timidly plant a little fringe of population round its
edge and grow their scanty crops there, whilst the great prairies of
miles and miles, with all their wealth and fertility, are lying
untrodden and unknown in the heart of the untraversed continent. The
most powerful telescope leaves nebulae unresolved, which, though they
seem but a dim dust of light, are all ablaze with mighty suns. The
'goodness' which He has 'wrought before the sons of men for them that
fear' Him is, as the Psalmist adoringly exclaims, wondrously 'great,'
but still greater is that which the same verse of the Psalm
celebrates--the goodness which He has 'laid up for them that fear
Him.' The gold which is actually coined and passing from hand to hand,
is but a fraction, a mere scale, as it were, off the surface of the
great uncoined mass of bullion that lies stored in the vaults there.
Christ is a great deal more than any man, or than all men, have yet
found Him to be. 'Gather up the broken pieces'; and see that nothing
of that infinite preciousness of His be lost by us.

II. Then there is another very simple lesson which I draw. This
command suggests for us Christ's thrift (if I may use the word) in the
employment of His miraculous power.

Surely they might have said: 'If thou canst multiply five loaves into
all this abundance, why should we be trudging about, each with a
basket on his back full of bread, when we have with us He whose word
can make it for us at any moment?' Yes, but a law which characterises
all the miraculous, in both the Old and the New Testament, and which
broadly distinguishes Christ's miracles from all the false miracles of
false religions is this, that the miraculous is pared down to the
smallest possible amount, that not one hairsbreadth beyond the
necessity shall be done by miracle; that whatever men can do they
shall do; that their work shall stop as late, and begin again as soon
as possible. Thus, though Christ was going to raise Lazarus, men's
hands had to roll away the stone; and when Christ had raised Lazarus,
men's hands had to loose the napkins from his face. And though Christ
was able to say to the daughter of Jairus, '_Talitha cumi!_' (damsel,
arise!) His next word was: 'Give her something to eat.' Where the
miraculous was needed it was used, and not a hairsbreadth beyond
absolute necessity did it extend.

And so here Christ multiplies the bread, and yet each of the Apostles
has to take a basket, probably some kind of woven wicker-work article
which they would carry for holding their little necessaries in their
peregrinations; each Apostle has to take his basket, and perhaps
emptying it of some of his humble apparel, to fill it with these bits
of bread; for Christ was not going to work miracles where men's thrift
and prudence could be employed.

Nor does He do so now. We live by faith, and our dependence on Him can
never be too absolute. Only laziness sometimes dresses itself in the
garb and speaks with the tongue of faith, and pretends to be truthful
when it is only slothful. 'Why criest thou unto Me?' said God to
Moses, 'speak unto the children of Israel that they go forward.' True
faith sets us to work. It is not to be perverted into idle and false
depending upon Him to work for us, when by the use of our own ten
fingers and our own brains, guided and strengthened by His working in
us, we can do the work that is set before us.

III. Still further, there is another lesson here. Not only does the
injunction show us Christ's thrift in the employment of the
supernatural, but it teaches us our duty of thrift and care in the use
of the spiritual grace bestowed upon us.

These men had given to them this miraculously made bread; but they had
to exercise ordinary thrift in the preservation of the supernatural
gift. Christ has been given to you by the most stupendous miracle that
ever was or can be wrought, and if you are Christian people, you have
the Spirit of Christ given to you, to dwell in your hearts, to make
you wise and fair, gentle and strong, and altogether Christlike. But
you have to take care of these gifts. You have to exercise the common
virtues of economy and thrift in your use of the divine gifts as in
your use of the common things of daily life. You have to use wisely
and not waste the Bread of God that came down from heaven, or that
Bread of God will not feed you. You have to provide the basket in
which to carry the unexhausted residue of the divine gift, or you may
stand hungry in the very midst of plenty, and whilst within arm's
length of you there is bread enough and to spare to feed the whole
world.

The lesson of my text, which is most eminently brought out if we adopt
the translation which I have referred to at the beginning of these
remarks, is, then, just this: Christian men, be watchful stewards of
that great gift of a living Christ, the food of your souls, that has
been by miracle bestowed upon you. Such gathering together for future
need of the unused residue of grace may be accomplished by three ways.
First, there must be a diligent use of the grace given. See that you
use to the very full, in the measure of your present power of
absorbing and your present need, the gift bestowed upon you. Be sure
that you take in as much of Christ as you can contain before you begin
to think of what to do with the overplus. If we are not careful to
take what we can, and to use what we need, of Christ, there is little
chance of our being faithful stewards of the surplus. The water in a
mill-stream runs over the trough in great abundance when the wheel is
not working, and one reason why so many Christians seem to have so
much more given to them in Christ than they need is because they are
doing no work to use up the gift.

A second essential to such stewardship is the careful guarding of the
grace given from whatever would injure it. Let not worldliness,
business, cares of the world, the sorrows of life, its joys, duties,
anxieties or pleasures--let not these so come into your hearts that
they will elbow Christ out of your hearts, and dull your appetite for
the true Bread that came down from heaven.

And lastly, not only by use and by careful guarding, but also by
earnest desire for larger gifts of the Christ who is large beyond all
measure, shall we receive more and more of His sweetness and His
preciousness into our hearts, and of His beauty and glory into our
transfigured characters. The basket that we carry, this recipient
heart of ours, is elastic. It can stretch to hold any amount that you
like to put into it. The desire for more of Christ's grace will
stretch its capacity, and as its capacity increases the inflowing gift
greatens, and a larger Christ fills the larger room of my poor heart.

So the lesson is taught us of our prudence in the care and use of the
grace bestowed on us, and we are bidden to cherish a happy confidence
in the inexhaustible resources of Christ, and the continual gift in
the future of even larger measures of grace, which are all ours
already, given to us at the first reception of Him into our hearts,
and only needing our faithfulness to be growingly ours in experience
as they are ours from the first in germ.

IV. Finally, a solemn warning is implied in this command, and its
reason 'that nothing be lost.'

Then there is a possibility of losing the gift that is freely given to
us. We may waste the bread, and so, sometime or other when we are
hungry, awake to the consciousness that it has dropped out of our
slack hands. The abundance of Christ's grace may, so far as you are
profited or enriched by it, be like the unclaimed millions of money
which nobody asks for and that is of use to no living soul. You may be
paupers while all God's riches in glory are at your disposal, and
starving while baskets full of bread broken for us by Christ lie
unused at our sides. Some of us have never tasted the sweetness or
been fed by the nutritiousness of that Bread of God which came down
from heaven. And more marvellous still, there may be some of us, who
having come to Christ hungry and been fed by Him, have ceased to care
for the pure nourishment and taste for the manna, and are turning
again with gross appetite to the husks in the swine's trough.
Negligent Christians! worldly Christians! you who care more for money
and other dainties and delights which perish with the using--backsliding
Christians, who once hungered and thirsted for more of
Christ, and now have no longing for Him--awake to the danger in which
you stand of letting all your spiritual wealth slip through your
fingers; behold the treasures, yet unreached, within your grasp, and
seek to garner and realise them. Gather up the broken pieces which
remain over, lest everything be lost.




THE FIFTH MIRACLE IN JOHN'S GOSPEL

'So when they had rowed about five-and-twenty or thirty furlongs, they
see Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the ship: and they
were afraid. 20. But He said unto them, It is I; be not afraid.'--JOHN
vi. 19,20.

There are none of our Lord's parables recorded in this Gospel, but all
the miracles which it narrates are parables. Moral and religious truth
is communicated by the outward event, as in the parable it is
communicated by the story. The mere visible fact becomes more than
semi-transparent. The analogy between the spiritual and the natural
world which men instinctively apprehend, of which the poet and the
orator and the religious teacher have always made abundant use, and
which it has sometimes been attempted, unsuccessfully as I think, to
elevate to the rank of a scientific truth, underlies the whole series
of these miracles. It is the principal if not the only key to the
meaning of this one before us.

The symbolism which regards life under the guise of a voyage, and its
troubles and difficulties under the metaphor of storm and tempest, is
especially natural to nations that take kindly to the water, like us
Englishmen. I do not know that there is any instance, either in the
Old or in the New Testament, of the use of that to us very familiar
metaphor; but the emblem of the sea as the symbol of trouble, unrest,
rebellious power, is very familiar to the writers of the Old
Testament. And the picture of the divine path as in the waters, and of
the divine prerogative as being to 'tread upon the heights of the
sea,' as Job has it, is by no means unknown. So the natural symbolism,
and the Old Testament use of the expressions, blend together, as I
think, in suggesting the one point of view from which this miracle is
to be regarded.

It is found in two of the other Evangelists, and the condensed account
of it which we have in this Gospel, by its omission of Peter's walking
on the water, and of some other smaller but graphic details that the
other Evangelists give us, serves to sharpen the symbolical meaning of
the whole story, and to bring that as its great purpose and
signification into prominence.

We shall, I think, then, best gain the lessons intended to be drawn if
we simply follow the points of the narrative in their order as they
stand here.

I. We have here, first of all, then, the struggling toilers.

The other Evangelists tell us that after the feeding of the five
thousand our Lord 'constrained' His disciples to get into the ship,
and to pass over to the other side. The language implies
unwillingness, to some extent, on their part, and the exercise of
authority upon His. Our Evangelist, who does not mention the
constraint, supplies us with the reason for it. The preceding miracle
had worked up the excitement of the mob to a very dangerous point.
Crowds are always the same, and this crowd thought, as any other crowd
anywhere and in any age would have done, that the prophet that could
make bread at will was the kind of prophet whom they wanted. So they
determined to take Him by force, and make Him a king; and Christ,
seeing the danger, and not desiring that His Kingdom should be
furthered by such unclean hands and gross motives, determined to
withdraw Himself into the loneliness of the bordering hills. It was
wise to divide the little group; it would distract attention; it might
lead some of the people, as we know it did lead them, to follow the
boat when they found it was gone. It would save the Apostles from
being affected by the coarse, smoky enthusiasm of the crowd. It would
save them from revealing the place of His retirement. It might enable
Him to steal away more securely unobserved; so they are sent across to
the other side of the lake, some five or six miles. An hour or two
might have done it, but for some unknown reason they seem to have
lingered. Perhaps they had no special call for haste. The Paschal
moon, nearly full, would be shining down upon the waters; their hearts
and minds would be busy with the miracle which they had just seen. And
so they may have drifted along, not caring much when they reached
their destination. But suddenly one of the gusts of wind which are
frequently found upon mountain lakes, especially towards nightfall,
rose and soon became a gale with which they could not battle. Our
Evangelist does not tell us how long it lasted, but we get a note of
time from St. Mark, who says it was 'about the fourth watch of the
night'; that is between the hours of three and six in the morning of
the subsequent day. So that for some seven or eight hours at least
they had been tugging at the useless oars, or sitting shivering, wet
and weary, in the boat.

Is it not the history of the Church in a nutshell? Is it not the
symbol of life for us all? The solemn law under which we live demands
persistent effort, and imposes continual antagonism upon us; there is
no reason why we should regard that as evil, or think ourselves hardly
used, because we are not fair-weather sailors. The end of life is to
make men; the meaning of all events is to mould character. Anything
that makes me stronger is a blessing, anything that develops my
_morale_ is the highest good that can come to me. If therefore
antagonism mould in me

  'The wrestling thews that throw the world,'

and give me good, strong muscles, and put tan and colour into my
cheek, I need not mind the cold and the wet, nor care for the
whistling of the wind in my face, nor the dash of the spray over the
bows. Summer sailing in fair weather, amidst land-locked bays, in blue
seas, and under calm skies, may be all very well for triflers, but

  'Blown seas and storming showers'

are better if the purpose of the voyage be to brace us and call out
our powers.

And so be thankful if, when the boat is crossing the mouth of some
glen that opens upon the lake, a sudden gust smites the sheets and
sends you to the helm, and takes all your effort to keep you from
sinking. Do not murmur, or think that God's Providence is strange,
because many and many a time when 'it is dark, and Jesus is not yet
come to us,' the storm of wind comes down upon the lake and threatens
to drive us from our course. Let us rather recognise Him as the Lord
who, in love and kindness, sends all the different kinds of weather
which, according to the old proverb, make up the full-summed year.

And then notice how, in this first picture of our text, the symbolism
so naturally lends itself to spiritual meanings, not only in regard to
the tempest that caught the unthinking voyagers, but also in regard to
other points; such as the darkness amidst which they had to fight the
tempest, and the absence of the Master. Once before, they had been
caught in a similar storm on the lake, but it was daylight then, and
Jesus was with them, and that made all the difference. This time it
was night, and they looked up in vain to the green Eastern hills, and
wondered where in their folds He was lurking, so far from their help.
Mark gives us one sweet touch when he tells us that Christ on the
hillside there _saw_ them toiling in rowing, but they did not see Him.
No doubt they felt themselves deserted, and sent many a wistful glance
of longing towards the shore where He was. Hard thoughts of Him may
have been in some of their minds. 'Master, carest Thou not?' would be
springing to some of their lips with more apparent reason than in the
other storm on the lake. But His calm and loving gaze looked down
pitying on all their fear and toil. The darkness did not hide from
Him, nor His own security on the steadfast land make Him forget, nor
his communion with the Father so absorb Him as to exclude thoughts of
them.

It is a parable and a prophecy of the perpetual relation between the
absent Lord and the toiling Church. He is on the mountain while we are
on the sea. The stable eternity of the Heavens holds Him; we are
tossed on the restless mutability of time, over which we toil at His
command. He is there interceding for us. Whilst He prays He beholds,
and He beholds that He may help us by His prayer. The solitary crew
were not so solitary as they thought. That little dancing speck on the
waters, which held so much blind love and so much fear and trouble,
was in His sight, as on the calm mountain-top He communed with God. No
wonder that weary hearts and lonely ones, groping amidst the darkness,
and fighting with the tempests and the sorrows of lift, have ever
found in our story a symbol that comes to them with a prophecy of hope
and an assurance of help, and have rejoiced to know that they on the
sea are beheld of the Christ in the sky, and that 'the darkness hideth
not from' His loving eye.

II. And now turn to the next stage of the story before us. We have the
approaching Christ.

'When they had rowed about five-and-twenty or thirty furlongs,' and so
were just about the middle of the lake, 'they see Jesus walking on the
sea and drawing nigh unto the ship.' They were about half-way across
the lake. We do not know at what hour in the fourth watch the Master
came. But probably it was towards daybreak. Toiling had endured for a
night. It would be in accordance with the symbolism that joy and help
should come with the morning.

If we look for a moment at the miraculous fact, apart from the
symbolism, we have a revelation here of Christ as the Lord of the
material universe, a kingdom wider in its range and profounder in its
authority than that which that shouting crowd had sought to force upon
Him. His will consolidated the yielding wave, or sustained His
