that the motions from sensation as well as those from volition are
suspended; in a quarter or half an hour the sensorial power becomes
restored, and if no pain, or irritation producing pain, recurs, the fit of
epilepsy ceases; if the pain recurs, or the irritation, which used to
produce it, a new fit of convulsion takes place, and is succeeded again by
a syncope. See Epilepsy, Class III. 1. 1. 7.

16. _Apoplexia._ Apoplexy may be termed an universal palsy, or a permanent
sleep. In which, where the pulse is weak, copious bleeding must be
injurious; as is well observed by Dr. Heberden, Trans. of the College.

Mr. ----, about 70 years of age, had an apoplectic seizure. His pulse was
strong and full. One of the temporal arteries was opened, and about ten
ounces of blood suddenly taken from it. He seemed to receive no benefit
from this operation; but gradually sunk, and lived but a day or two.

If apoplexy arises from the pressure of blood extravasated on the brain,
one moderate venesection may be of service to prevent the further effusion
of blood; but copious venesection must be injurious by weakening the
patient; since the effused blood must have time, as in common vibices or
bruises, to undergo a chemico-animal process, so to change its nature as to
fit it for absorption; which may take two or three weeks, which time a
patient weakened by repeated venesection or arteriotomy may not survive.

Mrs. ----, about 40 years old, had an apoplectic seizure after great
exertion from fear; she had lain about 24 hours without speech, or having
swallowed any liquid. She was then forcibly raised in bed, and a spoonful
of solution of aloes in wine put into her mouth, and the end of the spoon
withdrawn, that she might more easily swallow the liquid.--This was done
every hour, with broth, and wine and water intervening, till evacuations
were procured; which with other means had good effect, and she recovered,
except that a considerable degree of hemiplegia remained, and some
imperfection of her speech.

Many people, who have taken so much vinous spirit as to acquire the
temporary apoplexy of intoxication, and are not improperly said to be
dead-drunk, have died after copious venesection, I suppose in consequence
of it. I once saw at a public meeting two gentlemen in the drunken
apoplexy; they were totally insensible with low pulse, on this account they
were directed not to lose blood, but to be laid on a bed with their heads
high, and to be turned every half hour; as soon as they could swallow, warm
tea was given them, which evacuated their stomachs, and they gradually
recovered, as people do from less degrees of intoxication.

M. M. Cupping on the occiput. Venesection once in moderate quantity. Warm
fomentations long continued and frequently repeated on the shaved head.
Solution of aloes. Clysters with solution of aloe and oil of amber. A
blister on the spine. An emetic. Afterwards the bark, and small doses of
chalybeates. Small electric shocks through the head. Errhines. If small
doses of opium?

17. _Mors a frigore._ Death from cold. The unfortunate travellers, who
almost every winter perish in the snow, are much exhausted by their efforts
to proceed on their journey, as well as benumbed by cold. And as much
greater exercise can be borne without fatigue in cold weather than in warm;
because the excessive motions of the cutaneous vessels are thus prevented,
and the consequent waste of sensorial power; it may be inferred, that the
fatigued traveller becomes paralytic from violent exertion as well as by
the application of cold.

Great degrees of cold affect the motions of those vessels most, which have
been generally excited into action by irritation; for when the feet are
much benumbed by cold, and painful, and at the same time almost insensible
to the touch of external objects, the voluntary muscles retain their
motions, and we continue to walk on; the same happens to the fingers of
children in throwing snow-balls, the voluntary motions of the muscles
continue, though those of the cutaneous vessels are benumbed into
inactivity.

Mr. Thompson, an elderly gentleman of Shrewsbury, was seized with
hemiplegia in the cold bath; which I suppose might be owing to some great
energy of exertion, as much as to the coldness of the water. As in the
instance given of Mr. Nairn, who, by the exertion to save his relation,
perished himself. See Sect. XXXIV. 1. 7.

Whence I conclude, that though heat is a fluid necessary to muscular
motion, both perhaps by its stimulus, and by its keeping the minute
component parts of the ultimate fibrils of the muscles or organs of sense
at a proper distance from each other; yet that paralysis, properly so
called, is the consequence of exhaustion of sensorial power by exertion.
And that the accumulations of it during the torpor of the cutaneous vessels
by exposure to cold, or of some internal viscus in the cold fits of agues,
are frequently instrumental in recovering the use of paralytic limbs, or of
the motions of other paralytic parts of the system. See Spec. 4. of this
genus.

Animal bodies resist the power of cold probably by their exertions in
consequence of the pain of cold, see Botan. Gard. V. 1. additional note
xii. But if these increased exertions be too violent, so as to exhaust the
sensorial power in producing unnecessary motions, the animal will probably
sooner perish. Thus a moderate quantity of wine or spirit repeated at
proper intervals of time might be of service to those, who are long exposed
to excessive cold, both by increasing the action of the capillary vessels,
and thus producing heat, and perhaps by increasing in some degree the
secretion of sensorial power in the brain. But the contrary must happen
when taken immoderately, and not at due intervals. A well attested history
was once related to me of two men, who set out on foot to travel in the
snow, one of whom drank two or three glasses of brandy before they began
their journey, the other contented himself with his usual diet and
potation; the former of whom perished in spite of any assistance his
companion could afford him; and the other performed his journey with
safety. In this case the sensorial power was exhausted by the unnecessary
motions of incipient intoxication by the stimulus of the brandy, as well as
by the exertions of walking; which so weakened the dram-drinker, that the
cold sooner destroyed him; that is, he had not power to produce sufficient
muscular or arterial action, and in consequence sufficient heat, to supply
the great expenditure of it. Hence the capillaries of the skin first cease
to act, and become pale and empty; next those which are immediately
associated with them, as the extremities of the pulmonary artery, as
happens on going into the cold bath. By the continued inaction of these
parts of the vascular system the blood becomes accumulated in the internal
arteries, and the brain is supposed to be affected by its compression;
because these patients are said to sleep, or to become apoplectic, before
they die. I overtook a fishman asleep on his panniers on a very cold frosty
night, but on waking him he did not appear to be in any degree of stupor.
See Class I. 2. 2. 1.

When travellers are benighted in deep snow, they might frequently be saved
by covering themselves in it, except a small aperture for air; in which
situation the lives of hares, sheep, and other animals, are so often
preserved. The snow, both in respect to its component parts, and to the air
contained in its pores, is a bad conductor of heat, and will therefore well
keep out the external cold; and as the water, when part of it dissolves, is
attracted into the pores of the remainder of it, the situation of an animal
beneath it is perfectly dry; and, if he is in contact with the earth, he is
in a degree of heat between 48, the medium heat of the earth, and 32, the
freezing point; that is, in 40 degrees of heat, in which a man thus covered
will be as warm as in bed. See Botan. Garden, V. II. notes on Anemone,
Barometz, and Muschus. If these facts were more generally understood, it
might annually save the lives of many.

After any part of the vascular system of the body has been long exposed to
cold, the sensorial power is so much accumulated in it, that on coming into
a warm room the pain of hotach is produced, and inflammation, and
consequent mortification, owing to the great exertion of those vessels,
when again exposed to a moderate degree of warmth. See Sect. XII. 5. Whence
the propriety of applying but very low degrees of heat to limbs benumbed
with cold at first, as of snow in its state of dissolving, which is at 32
degrees of heat, or of very cold water. A French writer has observed, that
if frozen apples be thawed gradually by covering them with thawing snow, or
immersing them in very cold water, that they do not lose their taste; if
this fact was well ascertained, it might teach us how to preserve other
ripe fruits in ice-houses for winter consumption.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO II.

_Decreased Volition._

GENUS II.

_With decreased Actions of the Organs of Sense._

SPECIES.

1. _Recollectionis jactura._ Loss of recollection. This is the defect of
memory in old people, who forget the actions of yesterday, being incapable
of voluntary recollection, and yet remember those of their youth, which by
frequent repetition are introduced by association or suggestion. This is
properly the paralysis of the mind; the organs of sense do not obey the
voluntary power; that is, our ideas cannot be recollected, or acted over
again by the will.

After an apoplectic attack the patients, on beginning to recover, find
themselves most at a loss in recollecting proper names of persons or
places; as those words have not been so frequently associated with the
ideas they stand for, as the common words of a language. Mr. ----, a man of
strong mind, of a short necked family, many of whom had suffered by
apoplexy, after an apoplectic fit on his recovering the use of speech,
after repeated trials to remember the name of a person or place, applauded
himself, when he succeeded, with such a childish smile on the partial
return of his sagacity, as very much affected me.--Not long, alas! to
return; for another attack in a few weeks destroyed the whole.

I saw a child after the small-pox, which was left in this situation; it was
lively, active, and even vigorous; but shewed that kind of surprise, which
novelty excites, at every object it viewed; and that as often as it viewed
it. I never heard the termination of the case.

2. _Stultitia voluntaria._ Voluntary folly. The absence of voluntary power
and consequent incapacity to compare the ideas of present and future good.
Brute animals may be said to be in this situation, as they are in general
excited into action only by their present painful or pleasurable
sensations. Hence though they are liable to surprise, when their passing
trains of ideas are dissevered by violent stimuli; yet are they not
affected with wonder or astonishment at the novelty of objects; as they
possess but in a very inferior degree, that voluntary power of comparing
the present ideas with those previously acquired, which distinguishes
mankind; and is termed analogical reasoning, when deliberatively exerted;
and intuitive analogy, when used without our attention to it, and which
always preserves our hourly trains of ideas consistent with truth and
nature. See Sect. XVII. 3. 7.

3. _Credulitas._ Credulity. Life is short, opportunities of knowledge rare;
our senses are fallacious, our reasonings uncertain, mankind therefore
struggles with perpetual error from the cradle to the coffin. He is
necessitated to correct experiment by analogy, and analogy by experiment;
and not always to rest satisfied in the belief of facts even with this
two-fold testimony, till future opportunities, or the observations of
others, concur in their support.

Ignorance and credulity have ever been companions, and have misled and
enslaved mankind; philosophy has in all ages endeavoured to oppose their
progress, and to loosen the shackles they had imposed; philosophers have on
this account been called unbelievers: unbelievers of what? of the fictions
of fancy, of witchcraft, hobgobblins, apparitions, vampires, fairies; of
the influence of stars on human actions, miracles wrought by the bones of
saints, the flights of ominous birds, the predictions from the bowels of
dying animals, expounders of dreams, fortune-tellers, conjurors, modern
prophets, necromancy, cheiromancy, animal magnetism, with endless variety
of folly? These they have disbelieved and despised, but have ever bowed
their hoary heads to Truth and Nature.

Mankind may be divided in respect to the facility of their belief or
conviction into two classes; those, who are ready to assent to single facts
from the evidence of their senses, or from the serious assertions of
others; and those, who require analogy to corroborate or authenticate them.

Our first knowledge is acquired by our senses; but these are liable to
deceive us, and we learn to detect these deceptions by comparing the ideas
presented to us by one sense with those presented by another. Thus when we
first view a cylinder, it appears to the eye as a flat surface with
different shades on it, till we correct this idea by the sense of touch,
and find its surface to be circular; that is, having some parts gradually
receding further from the eye than others. So when a child, or a cat, or a
bird, first sees its own image in a looking-glass, it believes that another
animal exists before it, and detects this fallacy by going behind the glass
to examine, if another tangible animal really exists there.

Another exuberant source of error consists in the false notions, which we
receive in our early years from the design or ignorance of our instructors,
which affect all our future reasoning by their perpetual intrusions; as
those habits of muscular actions of the face or limbs, which are called
tricks, when contracted in infancy continue to the end of our lives.

A third great source of error is the vivacity of our ideas of imagination,
which perpetually intrude themselves by various associations, and compose
the farrago of our dreams; in which, by the suspension of volition, we are
precluded from comparing the ideas of one sense with those of another, or
the incongruity of their successions with the usual course of nature, and
thus to detect their fallacy. Which we do in our waking hours by a
perpetual voluntary exertion, a process of the mind above mentioned, which
we have termed intuitive analogy. Sect. XVII. 3. 7.

This analogy presupposes an acquired knowledge of things, hence children
and ignorant people are the most credulous, as not possessing much
knowledge of the usual course of nature; and secondly, those are most
credulous, whose faculty of comparing ideas, or the voluntary exertion of
it, is slow or imperfect. Thus if the power of the magnetic needle of
turning towards the north, or the shock given by touching both sides of an
electrized coated jar, was related for the first time to a philosopher, and
to an ignorant person; the former would be less ready to believe them, than
the latter; as he would find nothing similar in nature to compare them to,
he would again and again repeat the experiment, before he would give it his
entire credence; till by these repetitions it would cease to be a single
fact, and would therefore gain the evidence of analogy. But the latter, as
having less knowledge of nature, and less facility of voluntary exertion,
would more readily believe the assertions of others, or a single fact, as
presented to his own observation. Of this kind are the bulk of mankind;
they continue throughout their lives in a state of childhood, and have thus
been the dupes of priests and politicians in all countries and in all ages
of the world.

In regard to religious matters, there is an intellectual cowardice
instilled into the minds of the people from their infancy; which prevents
their inquiry: credulity is made an indispensable virtue; to inquire or
exert their reason in religious matters is denounced as sinful; and in the
catholic church is punished with more severe penances than moral crimes.
But in respect to our belief of the supposed medical facts, which are
published by variety of authors; many of whom are ignorant, and therefore
credulous; the golden rule of David Hume may be applied with great
advantage. "When two miraculous assertions oppose each other, believe the
less miraculous." Thus if a person is said to have received the small-pox a
second time, and to have gone through all the stages of it, one may thus
reason: twenty thousand people have been exposed to the variolous contagion
a second time without receiving the variolous fever, to every one who has
been said to have thus received it; it appears therefore less miraculous,
that the assertor of this supposed fact has been deceived, or wishes to
deceive, than that it has so happened contrary to the long experienced
order of nature.

M. M. The method of cure is to increase our knowledge of the laws of
nature, and our habit of comparing whatever ideas are presented to us with
those known laws, and thus to counteract the fallacies of our senses, to
emancipate ourselves from the false impressions which we have imbibed in
our infancy, and to set the faculty of reason above that of imagination.

       *       *       *       *       *


_The Orders and Genera of the Fourth Class of Diseases._

CLASS IV.

DISEASES OF ASSOCIATION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Associate Motions._

GENERA.

  1. Catenated with irritative motions.
  2. Catenated with sensitive motions.
  3. Catenated with voluntary motions.
  4. Catenated with external influences.

ORDO II.

_Decreased Associate Motions._

GENERA.

  1. Catenated with irritative motions.
  2. Catenated with sensitive motions.
  3. Catenated with voluntary motions.
  4. Catenated with external influences.

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Associate Motions._

GENERA.

  1. Catenated with irritative motions.
  2. Catenated with sensitive motions.
  3. Catenated with voluntary motions.
  4. Catenated with external influences.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Orders, Genera, and Species, of the Fourth Class of Diseases._

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS IV.

DISEASES OF ASSOCIATION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Associate Motions._

GENUS I.

_Catenated with Irritative Motions._

SPECIES.

  1. _Rubor vultus pransorum._           Flushing of the face after dinner.
  2. _Sudor stragulis immersorum._       Sweat from covering the face
                                         in bed.
  3. _Cessatio aegritudinis cute_        Cure of sickness by stimulating
     _excitata._                         the skin.
  4. _Digestio aucta frigore cutaneo._   Digestion increased by coldness of
                                         the skin.
  5. _Catarrhus a frigore cutaneo._      Catarrh from cold skin.
  6. _Absorptio cellularis aucta_        Cellular absorption increased by
     _vomitu._                           vomiting.
  7. _Syngultus nephriticus._            Nephritic hiccough.
  8. _Febris irritativa._                Irritative fever.

GENUS II.

_Catenated with Sensitive Motions._

SPECIES.

   1. _Lacrymarum fluxus_              Sympathetic tears.
      _sympatheticus._
   2. _Sternutatio a lumine._          Sneezing from light.
   3. _Dolor dentium a Stridore._      Tooth-edge from grating sounds.
   4. _Risus sardonicus._              Sardonic smile.
   5. _Salivae fluxus cibo viso._      Flux of saliva at sight of food.
   6. _Tensio mamularum viso puerulo._ Tension of the nipples of lactescent
                                       women at sight of the child.
   7. _Tensio penis in hydrophobia._   Tension of the penis in hydrophobia.
   8. _Tenesmus calculosus._           Tenesmus from stone.
   9. _Polypus narium ex ascaride._    Polypus of the nose from ascarides.
  10. _Crampus surarum in diarrhoea._  Cramp from diarrhoea.
  11. _Zona ignea nephritica._         Nephritic shingles.
  12. _Eruptio variolarum._            Eruption of small-pox.
  13. _Gutta rosea stomatica._         Stomatic rosy drop.
  14. ---- _hepatica._                 Hepatic rosy drop.
  15. _Podagra._                       Gout.
  16. _Rheumatismus._                  Rheumatism.
  17. _Erysipelas._                    Erysipelas.
  18. _Testium tumor in gonorrhoea._   Swelled testis in gonorrhoea.
  19. ---- _in parotitide._            ---- in mumps.

GENUS III.

_Catenated with Voluntary Motions._

SPECIES.

  1. _Deglutitio invita._               Involuntary deglutition.
  2. _Nictitatio invita._               ---- nictitation.
  3. _Risus invitus._                   ---- laughter.
  4. _Lusus digitorum invitus._         ---- actions with the fingers.
  5. _Unguium morsiuncula invita._      ---- biting the nails.
  6. _Vigilia invita._                  ---- watchfulness.

GENUS IV.

_Catenated with External Influences._

SPECIES.

  1. _Vita ovi._                         Life of an egg.
  2. _Vita hiemi-dormientium._           Life of winter-sleepers.
  3. _Pullulatio arborum._               Budding of trees.
  4. _Orgasmatis venerei periodus._      Periods of venereal desire.
  5. _Brachii concussio electrica._      Electric shock through the arm.
  6. _Oxygenatio sanguinis._             Oxygenation of the blood.
  7. _Humectatio corporis._              Humectation of the body.

ORDO II.

_Decreased Associate Motions._

GENUS I.

_Catenated with Irritative Motions._

SPECIES.

   1. _Cutis frigida pransorum._          Chillness after dinner.
   2. _Pallor urinae pransorum._          Pale urine after dinner.
   3. ---- _a frigore cutaneo._           ---- from cold skin.
   4. _Pallor ex aegritudine._            Paleness from sickness.
   5. _Dyspnoea a balneo frigido._        Shortness of breath from cold
                                          bathing.
   6. _Dyspepsia a pedibus frigidis._     Indigestion from cold feet.
   7. _Tussis a pedibus frigidis._        Cough from cold feet.
   8. ---- _hepatica._                    Liver-cough.
   9. ---- _arthritica._                  Gout-cough.
  10. _Vertigo rotatoria._                Vertigo rotatory.
  11. ---- _visualis._                    ---- visual.
  12. ---- _ebriosa._                     ---- inebriate.
  13. ---- _febriculosa._                 ---- feverish.
  14. ---- _cerebrosa._                   ---- from the brain.
  15. _Murmur aurium vertiginosum._       Noise in the ears.
  16. _Tactus, gustus, olfactus_          Vertiginous touch, taste, smell.
      _vertiginosi._
  17. _Pulsus mollis a vomitione._        Soft pulse in vomiting.
  18. ---- _intermittens a ventriculo._   Intermittent pulse from the
                                          stomach.
  19. _Febris inirritativa._              Inirritative fever.

GENUS II.

_Catenated with Sensitive Motions._

SPECIES.

  1.  _Torpor genae a dolore dentis._ Coldness of the cheek from tooth-ach.
  2.  _Stranguria a dolore vesicae._  Strangury from pain of the bladder.
  3.  ---- _convulsiva._              Convulsive strangury.
  4.  _Dolor termini ductus_          Pain of the end of the bile-duct.
      _choledochi._
  5.  _Dolor pharyngis ab acido_      Pain of the throat from gastric acid.
      _gastrico._
  6.  _Pruritus narium a vermibus._   Itching of the nose from worms.
  7.  _Cephalaea._                    Head-ach.
  8.  _Hemicrania et otalgia._        Partial head-ach, and ear-ach.
  9.  _Dolor humeri in hepatitide._   Pain of shoulder in hepatitis.
  10. _Torpor pedum variola_          Cold feet in eruption of small-pox.
      _erumpente._
  11. _Testium dolor nephriticus._    Nephritic pain of testis.
  12. _Dolor digiti minimi_           Pain of little finger from sympathy.
      _sympatheticus._
  13. _Dolor brachii in hydrope_      Pain of the arm in dropsy of the
      _pectoris._                     chest.
  14. _Diarrhoea a dentitione._       Diarrhoea from toothing.

GENUS III.

_Catenated with Voluntary Motions._

SPECIES.

   1. _Titubatio linguae._        Impediment of speech.
   2. _Chorea sancti viti._       St. Vitus' dance.
   3. _Risus._                    Laughter.
   4. _Tremor ex ira._            Trembling from anger.
   5. _Rubor ex ira._             Redness from anger.
   6. ---- _criminati._           Blush of guilt.
   7. _Tarditas paralytica._      Slowness from palsy.
   8. ---- _senilis._             ---- of age.

GENUS IV.

_Catenated with External Influences._

SPECIES.

   1. _Somni periodus._                     Periods of sleep.
   2. _Studii inanis periodus._             ---- of reverie.
   3. _Hemicraniae periodus._               ---- of head-ach.
   4. _Epilepsiae dolorificae periodus._    ---- of painful epilepsy.
   5. _Convulsionis dolorificae periodus._  ---- of painful convulsion.
   6. _Tussis periodicae periodus._         ---- of periodic cough.
   7. _Catameniae periodus._                ---- of catamenia.
   8. _Haemorrhoidis periodus._             ---- of the piles.
   9. _Podagrae periodus._                  ---- of the gout.
  10. _Erysipelatis periodus._              ---- of erysipelas.
  11. _Febrium periodus._                   ---- of fevers.

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Associate Motions._

GENUS I.

_Catenated with Irritative Motions._

SPECIES.

  1. _Diabaetes irritata._              Diabetes from irritation.
  2. _Sudor frigidus in asthmate._      Cold sweat in asthma.
  3. _Diabaetes a timore._              Diabetes from fear.
  4. _Diarrhoea a timore._              Diarrhoea from fear.
  5. _Pallor et tremor a timore._       Paleness and trembling from fear.
  6. _Palpitatio cordis a timore._      Palpitation of the heart from fear.
  7. _Abortio a timore._                Abortion from fear.
  8. _Hysteria a timore._               Hysterics from fear.

GENUS II.

_Catenated with Sensitive Motions._

SPECIES.

  1. _Nausea idealis._                  Nausea from ideas.
  2. ---- _a conceptu._                 Nausea from conception.
  3. _Vomitio vertiginosa._             Vomiting from vertigo.
  4. ---- _a calculo in uretere._       ---- from stone in the ureter.
  5. ---- _ab insultu paralytico._      ---- from stroke of palsy.
  6. ---- _a titilatione faucium._      ---- from tickling the throat.
  7. ---- _cute sympathetica._          ---- from sympathy with the skin.

GENUS III.

_Catenated with Voluntary Motions._

SPECIES.

  1. _Ruminatio._                 Rumination.
  2. _Vomitio voluntaria._        Voluntary vomiting.
  3. _Eructatio voluntaria._      ---- eructation.

GENUS IV.

_Catenated with External Influences._

SPECIES.

  1. _Catarrhus periodicus._      Periodical catarrh.
  2. _Tussis periodica._          Periodic cough.
  3. _Histeria a frigore._        Hysterics from cold.
  4. _Nausea pluvialis._          Sickness against rain.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS IV.

DISEASES OF ASSOCIATION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Associate Motions._

GENUS I.

_Catenated with Irritative Motion._

The importance of the subsequent class not only consists in its elucidating
all the sympathetic diseases, but in its opening _a road to the knowledge
of fever_. The difficulty and novelty of the subject must plead in excuse
for the present imperfect state of it. The reader is entreated previously
to attend to the following circumstances for the greater facility of
investigating their intricate connections; which I shall enumerate under
the following heads.

  A. Associate motions distinguished from catenations.
  B. Associate motions of three kinds.
  C. Associations affected by external influences.
  D. Associations affected by other sensorial motions.
  E. Associations catenated with sensation.
  F. Direct and reverse sympathy.
  G. Associations affected four ways.
  H. Origin of associations.
  I. Of the action of vomiting.
  K. Tertian associations.

A. _Associate Motions distinguished from Catenations._

Associate motions properly mean only those, which are caused by the
sensorial power of association. Whence it appears, that those fibrous
motions, which constitute the introductory link of an associate train of
motions, are excluded from this definition, as not being themselves caused
by the sensorial power of association, but by irritation, or sensation, or
volition. I shall give for example the flushing of the face after dinner;
the capillary vessels of the face increase their actions in consequence of
their catenation, not their association, with those of the stomach; which
latter are caused to act with greater energy by the irritation excited by
the stimulus of food. These capillaries of the face are associated with
each other reciprocally, as being all of them excited by the sensorial
power of association; but they are only catenated with those of the
stomach, which are not in this case associate motions but irritative ones.
The common use of the word association for almost every kind of connection
has rendered this subject difficult; from which inaccuracy I fear some
parts of this work are not exempt.

B. _Associate Motions of three Kinds._

Those trains or tribes of associate motions, whose introductory link
consists of an irritative motion, are termed irritative associations; as
when the muscles of the eyelids close the eye in common nictitation. Those,
whose introductory link consists of a sensitive motion, are termed
sensitive associations; as when the pectoral and intercostal muscles act in
sneezing. And lastly, those, whose introductory link consists of a
voluntary motion, are termed voluntary associations; as when the muscles of
the lower limbs act in concert with those of the arm in fencing.

C. _Associations affected by external Influences._

Circles of associate motions, as well as trains and tribes of them, are
liable to be affected by external influences, which consist of etherial
fluids, and which, by penetrating the system, act upon it perhaps rather as
a causa sine qua non of its movements, than directly as a stimulus; except
when they are accumulated in unusual quantity. We have a sense adapted to
the perception of the excess or defect of one of these fluids; I mean that
of elementary heat; in which all things are immersed. See Class IV. 1. 4.
7. But there are others of them, which as we have no power to evade their
influence, so we have no sense to perceive it; these are the solar, and
lunar, and terrestrial gravitation, in which also all things are immersed;
the electric aura, which pervades us, and is perpetually varying, See Class
IV. 1. 4. 5; the magnetic fluid, Class IV. 1. 4. 5; and lastly, the great
life-preserver oxygen gas, and the aqueous vapour of the atmosphere, see
Class IV. 1. 4. 6. and 7. and 2.

Of these external influences those of heat, and of gravity, have diurnal
periods of increase and decrease; besides their greater periods of monthly
or annual variation. The manner in which they act by periodical increments
on the system, till some effect is produced, is spoken of in Sect. XXXII.
3. and 6.

D. _Associations affected by other Sensorial Motions._

Circles and trains of associate motions are also liable to be affected by
their catenations with other sensorial powers, as of irritation, or
sensation, or volition; which other sensorial powers either thus simply
form some of the links of the catenation, or add to the energy of the
associated motions. Thus when vomiting is caused by the stimulus of a stone
in the ureter, the sensation of pain seems to be a link of the catenation
rather than an efficient cause of the vomiting. But when the capillary
vessels of the skin increase their action from the influence of external
heat, they are excited both by the stimulus of unusual heat, as well as by
the stimulus of the blood, and by their accustomed association with the
actions of the heart and arteries. And lastly, in the blush of anger the
sensorial power of volition is added to that of association, and
irritation, to excite the capillaries of the face with increased action.
See Class IV. 2. 3. 5.

E. _Associations catenated with Sensation._

Pain frequently accompanies associate trains or circles of motion without
its being a cause, or a link, of them, but simply an attendant symptom;
though it frequently gives name to the disease, as head-ach. Thus in the
cramp of the calves of the legs in diarrhoea, the increased sensorial power
of association is the proximate cause; the preceding increased action of
the bowels is the remote cause; and the proximate effect is the violent
contractions of the musculi gastrocnemii; but the pain of these muscles is
only an attendant symptom, or a remote effect. See Sect. XVIII. 15. Other
sensitive associations are mentioned in Class IV. 1. 2. and IV. 1. 2. 15.

Thus, if the flushing of the face above mentioned after dinner be called a
disease, the immediate or proximate cause is the increased power of
association, the remote cause is the increased irritative motions of the
stomach in consequence of the stimulus of food and wine. The disease or
proximate effect consists in the increased actions of the cutaneous vessels
of the face; and the sensation of heat, the existence of heat, and the red
colour, are attendants or symptoms, or remote effects, of the increased
actions of these cutaneous vessels.

F. _Direct and reverse Sympathy._

The increased actions of the primary part of the trains of associated
motions are sometimes succeeded by increased actions of the secondary part
of the train; and sometimes by decreased actions of it. So likewise the
decreased actions of the primary part of a train of associate motions are
sometimes succeeded by decreased actions of the secondary part, and
sometimes by increased actions of it. The former of these situations is
called direct sympathy, and the latter reverse sympathy. In general I
believe, where the primary part of the train of associated motions is
exerted more than natural, it produces direct sympathy in strong people,
and reverse sympathy in weak ones, as a full meal makes some people hot,
and others chill. And where the primary part of the train is exerted less
than natural, it produces direct sympathy in weak people, and reverse
sympathy in strong ones, as on being exposed for a certain length of time
on horseback in a cold day gives indigestion and consequent heart-burn to
weak people, and strengthens the digestion, and induces consequent hunger
in strong ones. See Sect. XXXV. 1.

This may perhaps be more easily understood, by considering strength and
weakness, when applied to animal bodies, as consisting in the quantity of
sensorial power residing in the contracting fibres, and the quantity of
stimulus applied, as shewn in Sect. XII. 2. 1. Now when defective stimulus,
within certain limits, is partially applied to parts subject to perpetual
motion, the expenditure of sensorial power is for a while lessened, but not
its general production in the brain, nor its derivation into the
weakly-stimulated part. Hence in strong people, or such whose fibres abound
with sensorial power, if the first tribe of an associate train of motions
be deprived in part of its accustomed stimulus, its action becomes
diminished; and the sensorial power becomes accumulated, and by its
superabundance, or overflowing as it were, increases the action of the
second tribe of the associate actions by reverse sympathy. As exposing the
warm skin for a moderate time to cold air increases the action of the
stomach, and thus strengthens the power of digestion.

On the reverse, when additional stimulus within certain limits is partially
applied to parts, which are deficient in respect to the natural quantity of
sensorial power, the expenditure of sensorial power is increased, but in a
less degree than the increased production of it in the brain, or its
increased derivation into the strongly-stimulated organ. Hence in weak
people, or such whose fibres are deficient of sensorial power, if the first
tribe of an associate train of motions be subjected for a while to greater
stimulus than usual, a greater production of sensorial power, or a greater
derivation of it into the stimulated parts occurs; which by its excess, or
overflowing as it were, increases the actions of the second tribe of the
associate motions by direct sympathy. Thus when vomiting occurs with cold
extremities, a blister on the back in a few hours occasions universal
warmth of the skin, and stops the vomiting. And when a diarrhoea occurs
with pale skin and cold extremities, the pricking of the points of a
flannel shirt, worn next the skin, occasions universal warmth of it, and
checks or cures the diarrhoea.

In some associate trains of action nevertheless reverse sympathies more
frequently occur than direct ones, and in others direct ones more
frequently than reverse ones. Thus in continued fever with debility there
appears to be a reverse sympathy between the capillary vessels of the
stomach and those of the skin; because there exists a total aversion to
solid food, and constant heat on the surface of the body. Yet these two
systems of vessels are at other times actuated by direct sympathy, as when
paleness attends sickness, or cold feet induces indigestion. This subject
requires to be further investigated, as it probably depends not only on the
present or previous plus or minus of the sensorial power of association,
but also on the introduction of other kinds of sensorial power, as in Class
IV. 1. 1. D; or the increased production of it in the brain, or the greater
mobility of one part of a train of actions than another.

Thus when much food or wine is taken into the stomach, if there be no
superfluity of sensorial power in the system, that is, none to be spared
from the continual actions of it, a paleness and chillness succeeds for a
time; because now the expenditure of it by the increased actions of the
stomach is greater than the present production of it. In a little time
however the stimulus of the food and wine increases the production of
sensorial power in the brain, and this produces a superfluity of it in the
system; in consequence of which the skin now becomes warm and florid, which
was at first cold and pale; and thus the reverse sympathy is shortly
converted into a direct one; which is probably owing to the introduction of
a second sensorial power, that of pleasurable sensation.

On the contrary, when an emetic drug produces sickness, the skin is at
first pale for a time by direct sympathy with the capillaries of the
stomach; but in a few minutes, by the accumulation of sensorial power in
the stomach during its less active state in sickness, the capillaries of
the skin, which are associated with those of the stomach, act with greater
energy by reverse sympathy, and a florid colour returns. Where the quantity
of action is diminished in the first part of a train of motions, whether by
previous diminution of sensorial power, or present diminution of stimulus,
the second part of the train becomes torpid by direct sympathy. And when
the quantity of action of the first part becomes increased by the
accumulation of sensorial power during its previous torpor, or by increase
of stimulus, the actions of the second part of it likewise become increased
by direct sympathy.

In moderate hunger the skin is pale, as before dinner, and in moderate
sickness, as no great accumulation of sensorial power has commenced; but in
violent hunger, and in greater torpor of the stomach, as from contagious
matter, the accumulation of sensorial power becomes so great as to affect
the arterial and capillary system, and fever is produced in both cases.

In contagious fevers with arterial debilities commencing with torpor of the
stomach, why is the action of the heart weakened, and that of the
capillaries increased? Is it because the mobility of the heart is less than
that of the stomach, and the mobility of the capillaries greater? Or is it
because the association between the muscular fibres of the stomach and
those of the heart have been uniformly associated by direct sympathy; and
the capillaries of the stomach and those of the skin have been more
frequently associated by reverse sympathy?

Where the actions of the stomach have been previously exhausted by long
stimulus, as on the day after intoxication, little or no accumulation of
sensorial power occurs, during the torpor of the organ, beyond what is
required to replace the deficiency of it, and hence fever seldom follows
intoxication. And a repetition of the stimulus sometimes becomes necessary
even to induce its natural action, as in dram-drinkers.

Where there has been no previous exhaustion of sensorial power, and the
primary link of associate motions is violently actuated by the sensorial
power of sensation, the secondary link is also violently actuated by direct
sympathy, as in inflammatory fevers. Where however the sensorial power of
the system is less than natural, the secondary link of associated motions
becomes torpid by reverse sympathy, as in the inoculated small-pox during
the eruption on the face the feet are frequently cold.

G. _Associations affected four Ways._

Hence associated trains or circles of motions may be affected four
different ways. 1. By the greater or less energy of action of the first
link with which they are catenated, and from which they take their names;
as irritative, sensitive, or voluntary associations. 2. By being excited by
two or more sensorial powers at the same time, as by irritation and
association, as in the instance of the application of the stimulus of
increased external heat to the cutaneous capillaries. 3. By catenation with
other sensorial powers, as with pain or pleasure, which are in this case
not the proximate cause of motion, but which, by becoming a link of
catenation, excites the sensorial power of association into action; as the
pain at the neck of the gall-bladder occasioned by a gall-stone is
transferred to the other end of that canal, and becomes a link of
catenation between the action of the two extremities of it. 4. The
influence of ethereal fluids, as of heat and gravitation. To which last
perhaps might be added moisture and oxygen gas as constituting necessary
parts of the system, rather than stimuli to excite it into action.

H. _The Origin of Associations._

Some trains or circles of associate motions must have been formed before
our nativity, as those of the heart, arteries, and capillaries; others have
been associated, as occasion required them, as the muscles of the diaphragm
and abdomen in vomiting; and others by perpetual habit, as those of the
stomach with the heart and arteries directly, as in weak pulse during
sickness; with the capillaries directly, as in the flushed skin after
dinner; and lastly, with the cellular absorbents reversely, as in the
increased absorption in anasarca during sickness; and with the irritative
motions of the organs of sense reversely, as in vertigo, or sea-sickness.
Some of these associations shall be here shortly described to facilitate
the investigation of others.

First, other congeries of glands occupy but a particular part of the
system, or constitute a particular organ, as the liver, or kidneys; but
those glands, which secrete the mucus, and perspirable matter, which are
called capillaries, are of very great extent; they receive the blood from
the arteries, separate from it the mucus, which lines every cell, and
covers every cavity of body; and the perspirable matter, which softens and
