
The man said, "You are Mrs. Christopher Nest?"

There was a trace of anxiety in her voice as she answered. "Yes. And you
are...?"

"My name is Maxwell Hanstark. As you may already know, I am the official
psychiatrist for this district. My appointment will last until the end
of this year."

Mrs. Nest invited him in. They stepped into a clean living-room. At one
end was the television set, at the other end were several chairs. There
was nothing between the set and the chairs except a large grey rug
which stretched from wall to wall. They walked to the chairs and sat
down.

"Now, just what is the matter with your husband, Mrs. Nest?"

Mrs. Nest reached into a large bowl and absently picked up a piece of
stale popcorn. She daintily placed it in her mouth and chewed
thoughtfully before she answered.

"I wish I knew. All he does all day long is sit in the backyard and
stare at the grass. He insists that he is standing on top of a cliff."

Hanstark took out a small pad and a short ball-point pen. He wrote
something down before he spoke again. "Is he violent? Did he get angry
when you told him there was no cliff?"

Mrs. Nest was silent for a moment. A second piece of popcorn joined the
first. Hanstark's pen was poised above the pad. "No. He didn't get
violent."

Hanstark wrote as he asked the next question. "Just what _was_ his
reaction?"

"He said _I_ must be crazy."

"Were those his exact words?"

"No. He said that I was"-- She thought for a moment--"loco. Yes, that
was the word."

"Loco?"

"Yes. He said it just like those cowboys on the television."

Hanstark looked puzzled. "Perhaps you had better tell me more about
this. When did he first start acting this way?"

Mrs. Nest glanced up at the television set, then back at Hanstark. "It
was right after Texas Week. You remember--they showed all of those old
cowboy pictures."

Hanstark nodded.

"Well, he stayed up every night watching them. Some nights he didn't
even go to sleep. Even after the set was off, he sat in one of the
chairs, just staring at the screen. This morning, when I got up, he
wasn't in the house. I looked all over but I couldn't find him. I was
just about ready to phone the police when I glanced out the window into
the backyard. And I saw him."
