destroyed; and that was also, he believed, to satisfy an enemy.

The dream was a part of it. But who or what could set a man dreaming and
so take over his body, make him in fact betray himself? But then, what
had made Thorvald maroon him here? For the first time, Shann guessed a
new, if wild, explanation for the officer's desertion. Dreams--and the
disk which had worked so strangely on Thorvald. Suppose everything the
other had surmised was the truth! Then that disk _had_ been found on
this very island, and here somewhere must lie a clue to the riddle.

Shann licked his lips. Suppose that Thorvald had been sent away under
just such a strong compulsion as the one which had ruled Shann last
night? Why was he left behind if the other had been moved away to
protect some secret? Was it that Shann himself was wanted here, wanted
so much that when he at last found a means of escape he was set to
destroy it? That act might have been forced upon him for two reasons: to
keep him here, and to impress upon him how powerless he was.

Powerless! A flicker of stubborn will stirred to respond to that implied
challenge. All right, the mysterious _they_ had made him do this. But
they had underrated him by letting him learn, almost contemptuously, of
their presence by that revelation. So warned, he was in a manner armed;
he could prepare to fight back.

He squatted by the wreckage as he thought that through, turning over
broken pieces. And, Shann realized, he must present at the moment a
satisfactory picture of despondency to any spy. A spy, that was it!
Someone or something must have him under observation, or his activities
of the day before would not have been so summarily countered. And if
there was a spy, then there was his answer to the riddle. To trap the
trapper. Such action might be a project beyond his resources, but it was
his own counterattack.

So now he had to play a role. Not only must he search the island for the
trace of his spy, but he must do it in such a fashion that his purpose
would not be plain to the enemy he suspected. The wolverines could help.
Shann arose, allowed his shoulders to droop, slouching to the slope with
all the air of a beaten man which he could assume, whistling for Taggi
and Togi.

When they came, his exploration began. Ostensibly he was hunting for
lengths of drift or suitable growing saplings to take the place of those
he had destroyed under orders. But he kept a careful watch on the animal
pair, hoping by their reactions to pick up a clue to any hidden watcher.

The larger of the two beaches marked the point where the Terrans had
first landed and where the shell thing had been killed. The smaller was
more of a narrow tongue thrust out into the lagoon, much of it choked
with sizable boulders. On earlier visits there Taggi and Togi had poked
into the hollows among these with their usual curiosity. But now both
animals remained upslope, showing no inclination to descend to the water
line.

Shann caught hold of Taggi's scruff, pulling him along. The wolverine
twisted and whined, but he did not fight for freedom as he would have
upon scenting Throg. Not that the Terran had ever believed one of those
aliens was responsible for the happenings on the island.

Taggi came down under Shann's urging, but he was plainly ill at ease.
And at last he snarled a warning when the man would have drawn him
closer to two rocks which met overhead in a crude semblance of an arch.
There was a stick of drift protruding from that hollow affording Shann a
legitimate excuse to venture closer. He dropped his hold on the
wolverines, stooped to gather in the length of wood, and at the same
time glanced into the pocket.

Water lay just beyond, making this a doorway to the lagoon. The sun had
not yet penetrated into the shadow, if it ever did. Shann reached for
the wood, at the same time drawing his finger across the flat rock which
would furnish a steppingstone for anything using that door as an
entrance to the island.

Wet! Which might mean his visitor had recently arrived, or else merely
that a splotch of spray had landed there not too long before. But in his
mind Shann was convinced that he had found the spy's entrance. Could he
turn it into a trap? He added a piece of drift to his bundle and picked
up two more before he returned to the cliff ahead.

A trap.... He revolved in his mind all the traps he knew which could be
used here. He already had decided upon the bait--his own work. And if
his plans went through--and hope does not die easily--then this time he
would not waste his labor either.

So he went back to the same job he had done the day before, making do
with skin strips he had considered second-best before, smoothing,
cutting. Only the trap occupied his mind, and close to sunset he knew
just what he was going to do and how.

Though the Terran did not know the nature of the unseen opponent, he
thought he could guess two weaknesses which might deliver the other into
his hands. First, the enemy was entirely confident of success in this
venture. No being who was able to control Shann as completely and ably
as had been done the night before would credit any prey with the power
to strike back in force.

Second, such a confident enemy would be unable to resist watching the
manipulation of a captive. The Terran was certain that his opponent
would be on the scene somewhere when he was led, dreaming, to destroy
his work once more.

He might be wrong on both of those counts, but inwardly he didn't
believe so. However, he had to wait until the dark to set up his own
answer, one so simple he was certain the enemy would not suspect it at
all.




11. THE WITCH


There were patches of light in the inner valley marking the
phosphorescent plants, some creeping at ground level, others tall as
saplings. On other nights Shann had welcomed that wan radiance, but now
he lay in as relaxed a position as possible, marking each of those
potential betrayers as he tried to counterfeit the attitude of sleep and
at the same time plan out his route.

He had purposely settled in a pool of shadow, the wolverines beside him.
And he thought that the bulk of the animal's bodies would cover his own
withdrawal when the time came to move. One arm lying limply across his
middle was in reality clutching to him an intricate arrangement of small
hide straps which he had made by sacrificing most of the remainder of
his painfully acquired thongs. The trap must be set in place soon!

Now that he had charted a path to the crucial point avoiding all light
plants, Shann was ready to move. The Terran pressed his hand on Taggi's
head in the one imperative command the wolverine was apt to obey--the
order to stay where he was.

Shann sat up and gave the same voiceless instruction to Togi. Then he
inched out of the hollow, a worm's progress to that narrow way along the
cliff top--the path which anyone or anything coming up from that sea
gate on the beach would have to pass in order to witness the shoreline
occupied by the half-built outrigger.

So much of his plan was based upon luck and guesses, but those were all
Shann had. And as he worked at the stretching of his snare, the Terran's
heart pounded, and he tensed at every sound out of the night. Having
tested all the anchoring of his net, he tugged at a last knot, and then
crouched to listen not only with his ears, but with all his strength of
mind and body.

Pound of waves, whistle of wind, the sleepy complaint of some bird.... A
regular splashing! One of the fish in the lagoon? Or what he awaited?
The Terran retreated as noiselessly as he had come, heading for the
hollow where he had bedded down.

He reached there breathless, his heart pumping, his mouth dry as if he
had been racing. Taggi stirred and thrust a nose inquiringly against
Shann's arm. But the wolverine made no sound, as if he, too, realized
that some menace lay beyond the rim of the valley. Would that other come
up the path Shann had trapped? Or had he been wrong? Was the enemy
already stalking him from the other beach? The grip of his stunner was
slippery in his damp hand; he hated this waiting.

The canoe ... his work on it had been a careless botching. Better to
have the job done right. Why, it was perfectly clear now how he had been
mistaken! His whole work plan was wrong; he could see the right way of
doing things laid out as clear as a blueprint in his mind. A picture in
his mind!

Shann stood up and both wolverines moved uneasily, though neither made a
sound. A picture in his mind! But this time he wasn't asleep; he wasn't
dreaming a dream--to be used for his own defeat. Only (that other could
not know this) the pressure which had planted the idea of new work to be
done in his mind--an idea one part of him accepted as fact--had not
taken warning from his move. He was supposed to be under control; the
Terran was sure of that. All right, so he would play that part. He must
if he would entice the trapper into his trap.

He holstered his stunner, walked out into the open, paying no heed now
to the patches of light through which he must pass on his way to the
path his own feet had already worn to the boat beach. As he went, Shann
tried to counterfeit what he believed would be the gait of a man under
compulsion.

Now he was on the rim fronting the downslope, fighting against his
desire to turn and see for himself if anything had climbed behind. The
canoe was all wrong, a bad job which he must make better at once so that
in the morning he would be free of this island prison.

The pressure of that other's will grew stronger. And the Terran read
into that the overconfidence which he believed would be part of the
enemy's character. The one who was sending him to destroy his own work
had no suspicion that the victim was not entirely malleable, ready to be
used as he himself would use a knife or a force ax. Shann strode
steadily downslope. With a small spurt of fear he knew that in a way
that unseen other was right; the pressure was taking over, even though
he was awake this time. The Terran tried to will his hand to his
stunner, but his fingers fell instead on the hilt of his knife. He drew
the blade as panic seethed in his head, chilling him from within. He had
underestimated the other's power....

And that panic flared into open fight, making him forget his careful
plans. Now he _must_ wrench free from this control. The knife was moving
to slash a hide lashing, directed by his hand, but not his will.

A soundless gasp, a flash of dismay rocked him, but neither was his gasp
nor his dismay. That pressure snapped off; he was free. But the other
wasn't! Knife still in fist, Shann turned and ran upslope, his torch in
his other hand. He could see a shape now writhing, fighting, outlined
against a light bush. And, fearing that the stranger might win free and
disappear, the Terran spotlighted the captive in the beam, reckless of
Throg or enemy reinforcements.

The other crouched, plainly startled by the sudden burst of light. Shann
stopped abruptly. He had not really built up any mental picture of what
he had expected to find in his snare, but this prisoner was as weirdly
alien to him as a Throg. The light on the torch was reflected off a
skin which glittered as if scaled, glittered with the brilliance of
jewels in bands and coils of color spreading from the throat down the
chest, spiraling about upper arms, around waist and thighs, as if the
stranger wore a treasure house of gems as part of a living body. Except
for those patterned loops, coils, and bands, the body had no clothing,
though a belt about the slender middle supported a pair of pouches and
some odd implements held in loops.

Roughly the figure was more humanoid than the Throgs. The upper limbs
were not too unlike Shann's arms, though the hands had four digits of
equal length instead of five. But the features were nonhuman, closer to
saurian in contour. It had large eyes, blazing yellow in the dazzle of
the flash, with vertical slits of green for pupils. A nose united with
the jaw to make a snout, and above the domed forehead a sharp V-point of
raised spiky growth extended back and down until behind the shoulder
blades it widened and expanded to resemble a pair of wings.

The captive no longer struggled, but sat quietly in the tangle of the
snare Shann had set, watching the Terran steadily as if there were no
difficulty in seeing through the brilliance of the beam to the man who
held it. And, oddly enough, Shann experienced no repulsion toward its
reptilian appearance as he had upon first sighting the beetle-Throg. On
impulse he put down his torch on a rock and walked into the light to
face squarely the thing out of the sea.

Still eying Shann, the captive raised one limb and gave an absent-minded
tug to the belt it wore. Shann, noting that gesture, was struck by a
wild surmise, leading him to study the prisoner more narrowly. Allowing
for the alien structure of bone, the nonhuman skin; this creature was
delicate, graceful, in its way beautiful, with a fragility of limb which
backed up his suspicions. Moved by no pressure from the other, but by
his own will and sense of fitness, Shann stooped to cut the control line
of his snare.

The captive continued to watch as Shann sheathed his blade and then
held out his hand. Yellow eyes, never blinking since his initial
appearance, regarded him, not with any trace of fear or dismay, but with
a calm measurement which was curiosity based upon a strong belief in its
own superiority. He did not know how he knew, but Shann was certain that
the creature out of the sea was still entirely confident, that it made
no fight because it did not conceive of any possible danger from him.
And again, oddly enough, he was not irritated by this unconscious
arrogance; rather he was intrigued and amused.

"Friends?" Shann used the basic galactic speech devised by Survey and
the Free Traders, semantics which depended upon the proper inflection of
voice and tone to project meaning when the words were foreign.

The other made no sound, and the Terran began to wonder if his captive
had any audible form of speech. He withdrew a step or two then pulled at
the snare, drawing the cords away from the creature's slender ankles.
Rolling the thongs into a ball, he tossed the crude net back over his
shoulder.

"Friends?" he repeated again, showing his empty hands, trying to give
that one word the proper inflection, hoping the other could read his
peaceful intent in his features if not by his speech.

In one lithe, flowing movement the alien arose. Fully erect, the
Warlockian had a frail appearance. Shann, for his breed, was not tall.
But the native was still smaller, not more than five feet, that stiff V
of head crest just topping Shann's shoulder. Whether any of those
fittings at its belt could be a weapon the Terran had no way of telling.
However, the other made no move to draw any of them.

Instead, one of the four-digit hands came up. Shann felt the feather
touch of strange finger tips on his chin, across his lips, up his cheek,
to at last press firmly on his forehead at a spot just between the
eyebrows. What followed was communication of a sort, not in words or in
any describable flow of thoughts. There was no feeling of enmity--at
least nothing strong enough to be called that. Curiosity, yes, and then
a growing doubt, not of the Terran himself, but of the other's
preconceived ideas concerning him. Shann was other than the native had
judged him, and the stranger was disturbed, that self-confidence a
little ruffled. And also Shann was right in his guess. He smiled, his
amusement growing--not aimed at his companion on this cliff top, but at
himself. For he was dealing with a woman, a very young woman, and
someone as fully feminine in her way as any human girl could be.

"Friends?" he asked for the third time.

But the other still exuded a wariness, a wariness mixed with surprise.
And the tenuous message which passed between them then astounded Shann.
To this Warlockian out of the night he was not following the proper
pattern of male behaviour at all; he should have been in awe of the
other merely because of her sex. A diffidence rather than an assumption
of equality should have colored his response, judged by her standards.
At first, he caught a flash of anger at this preposterous attitude of
his; then her curiosity won, but there was still no reply to his
question.

The finger tips no longer made contact between them. Stepping back, her
hands now reached for one of the pouches at her belt. Shann watched that
movement carefully. And because he did not trust her too far, he
whistled.

Her head came up. She might be dumb, but plainly she was not deaf. And
she gazed down into the hollow as the wolverines answered his summons
with growls. Her profile reminded Shann of something for an instant; but
it should have been golden-yellow instead of silver with two jeweled
patterns ringing the snout. Yes, that small plaque he had seen in the
cabin of one of the ship's officers. A very old Terran legend--"Dragon,"
the officer had named the creature. Only that one had possessed a
serpent's body, a lizard's legs and wings.

Shann gave a sudden start, aware his thoughts had made him careless, or
had she in some way led him into that bypath of memory for her own
purposes? Because now she held some object in the curve of her curled
fingers, regarding him with those unblinking yellow eyes. Eyes ...
eyes.... Shann dimly heard the alarm cry of the wolverines. He tried to
snap draw his stunner, but it was too late.

There was a haze about him hiding the rocks, the island valley with its
radiant plants, the night sky, the bright beam of the torch. Now he
moved through that haze as one walks through a dream approaching
nightmare, striding with an effort as if wading through a deterring
flood. Sound, sight--one after another those senses were taken from him.
Desperately Shann held to one thing, his own sense of identity. He was
Shann Lantee, Terran breed, out of Tyr, of the Survey Service. Some part
of him repeated those facts with vast urgency against an almost
overwhelming force which strove to defeat that awareness of self, making
him nothing but a tool--or a weapon--for another's use.

The Terran fought, soundlessly but fiercely, on a battleground which was
within him, knowing in a detached way that his body obeyed another's
commands.

"I am Shann--" he cried without audible speech. "I am myself. I have two
hands, two legs.... I think for myself! I am a _man_----"

And to that came an answer of sorts, a blow of will striking at his
resistance, a will which struggled to drown him before ebbing, leaving
behind it a faint suggestion of bewilderment, of a dawn of concern.

"I am a _man_!" he hurled that assertion as he might have thrust deep
with one of the crude spears he had used against the Throgs. For against
what he faced now his weapons were as crude as spears fronting blasters.
"I am Shann Lantee, Terran, man...." Those were facts; no haze could
sweep them from his mind or take away that heritage.

And again there was the lightening of the pressure, the slight recoil,
which could only be a prelude to another assault upon his last
stronghold. He clutched his three facts to him as a shield, groping for
others which might have afforded a weapon of rebuttal.

Dreams, these Warlockians dealt in and through dreams. And the opposite
of dreams are facts! His name, his breed, his sex--these were facts.
And Warlock itself was a fact. The earth under his boots was a fact. The
water which washed around the island was a fact. The air he breathed was
a fact. Flesh, blood, bones--facts, all of them. Now he was a struggling
identity imprisoned in a rebel body. But that body was real. He tried to
feel it. Blood pumped from his heart, his lungs filled and emptied; he
struggled to feel those processes.

With a terrifying shock, the envelope which had held him vanished. Shann
was choking, struggling in water. He flailed out with his arms, kicked
