give, but if rejected, they were to believe that their very message would
return to them with added force. Thus our Lord signified that no word
spoken for his sake is really wasted. Vs. 5, 6.

They were to continue in the home which received them, content with what
was given, offering relief to those in distress and using every
opportunity to proclaim the message of grace. Vs. 7-9.

Where their message was refused, and they were not received by city or
town, they were to turn away, shaking off the dust of their feet, thus
intimating by an Oriental symbol that they had no connection with the
enemies of Christ. At no time is the reception of the gospel message
universal. There are always some who refuse to accept its gracious offer.
Vs. 10-12.

The thought of those who would surely reject his messengers reminded Jesus
of the cities which had already rejected him, and he paused for a moment
to speak solemnly of their guilty unbelief. He referred to Chorazin and
Bethsaida, declaring that in the Day of Judgment it would be more
tolerable for Tyre and Sidon than for these cities, for even the heathen
world would have repented in the face of such evidence of his divine
mission as Jesus had given to the cities of Israel. He referred
particularly to Capernaum, to its peculiar privileges and to its
consequently greater condemnation. Jesus was stating the abiding principle
that unusual opportunities involve unusual responsibilities. He emphasized
the seriousness of rejecting his messengers by stating that in despising
them men are really despising himself and that those who reject Jesus are
rejecting his Father who sent him., vs. 13-16.

In order to complete the story of the Seventy, Luke proceeds at once to
describe their return. They came back elated, with the report that even
the demons were subject to them. Our Lord replied by a statement that in
the overthrow of these messengers of Satan he saw the ultimate defeat of
the Prince of darkness and of all the forces of evil, and he declared that
he was giving to his messengers power over all that might oppose or might
threaten to destroy them. Yet, he added, their chief joy should not be in
their ability to perform these works of wonder, but rather in their having
a part in his triumphant cause and in receiving his salvation. Vs. 17-20.

At this time our Lord himself shared in the exultation of his followers
and returned thanks to the Father for what he was accomplishing through
the humble messengers whom Jesus had chosen, so that the results were a
manifestation of divine power. He added a striking claim which indicates
that the ideal Man is likewise the true Son of God who alone can reveal
the Father to men. Then lastly, as he turned to his disciples, he
congratulated them upon their great privilege, assuring them that "many
prophets and kings" desired to see the things which they were seeing as
his servants and as the instruments of his power. He intimated something
of the exalted joy which through all the coming years his followers would
feel as they realized their privilege of serving such a Master, and of
revealing him to men. Vs. 21-24.



4. The Good Samaritan. Ch. 10:25-37


    25 And behold, a certain lawyer stood up and made trial of him,
    saying, Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? 26 And
    he said unto him, What is written in the law? how readest thou? 27
    And he answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
    thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and
    with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself. 28 And he said
    unto him, Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt live.
    29 But he, desiring to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who
    is my neighbor? 30 Jesus made answer and said, A certain man was
    going down from Jerusalem to Jericho; and he fell among robbers,
    who both stripped him and beat him, and departed, leaving him half
    dead. 31 And by chance a certain priest was going down that way:
    and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. 32 And in
    like manner a Levite also, when he came to the place, and saw him,
    passed by on other side. 33 But a certain Samaritan, as he
    journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he was moved
    with compassion, 34 and came to him, and bound up his wounds,
    pouring on _them_ oil and wine; and he set him on his own beast,
    and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. 35 And on the
    morrow he took out two shillings, and gave them to the host, and
    said, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, I, when
    I come back again, will repay thee. 36 Which of these three,
    thinkest thou, proved neighbor unto him that fell among the
    robbers? 37 And he said, He that showed mercy on him. And Jesus
    said unto him, Go, and do thou likewise.


The parable of the Good Samaritan was spoken to a certain lawyer who,
trusting to his knowledge of the Old Testament, and of its subtle
interpretations by the rabbis, came to Jesus hoping to dispute with him
and to defeat him in debate. He asked Jesus this question, "Teacher, what
shall I do to inherit eternal life?" He evidently thought that Jesus would
prescribe some new rites or ceremonies or would in some other way
disparage the Law. He was startled, then, to have Jesus reply, "What is
written in the law?" This answer robbed the enemy of his own weapon. He,
however, made a skillful reply, and declared that the Law is summarized in
the requirement to love God and man. Jesus again replied, "Thou hast
answered right: this do, and thou shalt live." There was no shadow of
evasion or deception in the statement of Jesus. Perfect love to God and to
man is surely the way of life; but who can show such perfect love? Jesus
came not to destroy this requirement of the Law but to reveal its complete
fulfillment, to secure pardon for those who were guilty of its infraction,
and to give power to those who felt their need.

The reply of Jesus not only defeated the lawyer; it smote his conscience.
He realized that he himself had never fulfilled the requirement of the Law
he knew so well. He therefore attempted to justify himself by limiting the
sphere to which the law of love applies. This is always the experience of
those who seek to save themselves while rejecting the salvation of Christ.
No one in his own power can fulfill the demands of this perfect law;
either we must secure aid outside ourselves and trust in a loving Saviour,
or else we must in some way lessen the demands which the law makes. The
lawyer suggested that it is impossible to love everyone, even though it be
required to love our neighbors, and to justify himself he asked the
question, "And who is my neighbor?" Jesus replied by the story of the man,
evidently a Jew, who went down the steep road from Jerusalem to Jericho
and, as he passed through the narrow gorge, was beset by robbers who
stripped him of his garments and his possessions and left him half dead.
The first to approach this pitiful sufferer was a priest, a man whose
profession and task in life would induce him to perform a deed of mercy,
but in fear of thieves or in blind oblivion to the need of the wounded
man, he passed by on the other side. Next came a Levite, one whose office
was that of a helper to the priests, a man who supposedly would be less
burdened by official duties and would have more time to extend relief; but
he likewise passed by. At last came a Samaritan, a man of an alien race
and of a despised religion, but he showed compassion; he bound up the
wounds of the sufferer and placed him on his beast and brought him to an
inn and paid for his entertainment. He showed the spirit of love. Thus
Jesus indicated that our neighbor is not only one who "lives near" but one
who needs our help, as well as one who helps our need. He demonstrated the
truth that the law of love is not limited by rank or station or race or
creed. Nor is it limited to man. One must likewise love God with all the
heart, and thus he will surely love and serve the Son in whom the love of
God is made perfect.



5. Martha and Mary. Ch. 10:38-42


    38 Now as they went on their way, he entered into a certain
    village: and a certain woman named Martha received him into her
    house. 39 And she had a sister called Mary, who also sat at the
    Lord's feet, and heard his word. 40 But Martha was cumbered about
    much serving; and she came up to him, and said, Lord, dost thou
    not care that my sister did leave me to serve alone? bid her
    therefore that she help me. 41 But the Lord answered and said unto
    her, Martha, Martha, thou art anxious and troubled about many
    things: 42 but one thing is needful: for Mary hath chosen the good
    part, which shall not be taken away from her.


The unfailing human interest of Luke is nowhere more perfectly expressed
than by this exquisite scene in the home at Bethany. It is to be regretted
that it has become the occasion for endless debate as to the relative
merits of Martha and Mary. Some imagine that the former was unloving but
energetic and efficient, and that the latter was affectionate, but
sentimental and indolent. In reality both sisters had admirable qualities;
both loved the Master and longed to please him; but on this occasion
Martha, in her very eagerness to serve, had overburdened herself in the
preparation of an elaborate meal, while Mary, with truer intuition of what
Jesus wished, "sat at the Lord's feet, and heard his word." She knew that
he desired, not for his own sake, but for theirs, to reveal himself and to
deliver his heavenly message, and thus according to the fine art of
hospitality, she considered first the wish of her guest and was thus doing
more to entertain the Master than was her sister.

"Martha was cumbered about much serving;" she was distracted by the many
things she was trying to do. It is possible for a follower of Christ to
attempt too much; sometimes this is due to a sense of self-importance and
of pride. It may result in such a mood of irritation and temper as was
shown by Martha when in criticizing her sisters he humiliated her by
rebuking her in the presence of their Guest, and by addressing the remark
to him rebuked him as well, "Lord, dost thou not care that my sister did
leave me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me." In his reply
Jesus showed his affection by tenderly repeating her name, but he rebuked
her spirit and revealed its cause, "Martha, Martha, thou art anxious and
troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: for Mary hath chosen
the good part, which shall not be taken away from her." There was no need
for an elaborate meal; but few things or one would have sufficed; yet one
thing was needful, and that Mary had chosen, for while the Master does
appreciate all that we undertake for him, he knows that our first need is
to sit at his feet and learn his will; then in our tasks we shall be calm
and peaceful and kindly, and at last our service may attain the
perfectness of that of Mary when in a later scene she poured upon the feet
of Jesus the ointment, the perfume of which still fills the world.



6. Jesus' Teaching Concerning Prayer. Ch. 11:1-13


    1 And it came to pass, as he was praying in a certain place, that
    when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us
    to pray, even as John also taught his disciples. 2 And he said
    unto them, When ye pray, say, Father, Hallowed be thy name. Thy
    kingdom come. 3 Give us day by day our daily bread. 4 And forgive
    us our sins; for we ourselves also forgive every one that is
    indebted to us. And bring us not into temptation.


    5 And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and
    shall go unto him at midnight, and say to him, Friend, lend me
    three loaves; 6 for a friend of mine is come to me from a journey,
    and I have nothing to set before him; 7 and he from within shall
    answer and say, Trouble me not: the door is now shut, and my
    children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee? 8 I say
    unto you, Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his
    friend, yet because of his importunity he will arise and give him
    as many as he needeth. 9 And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be
    given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened
    unto you. 10 For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that
    seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. 11
    And of which of you that is a father shall his son ask a loaf, and
    he give him a stone? or a fish, and he for a fish give him a
    serpent? 12 Or _if_ he shall ask an egg, will he give him a
    scorpion? 13 If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts
    unto your children, how much more shall _your_ heavenly Father
    give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?


When the disciples came to the Master with the request, "Lord, teach us to
pray," they had already, for some time, been with Christ in the school of
prayer, and they had been impressed by that most valuable of object
lessons, namely, the example of Christ himself. If in our minds doubt ever
arises as to the reality and efficacy of prayer, we need only turn to the
Gospel of Luke to be reminded that our Lord spent long hours in
intercession and that he prayed at every crisis in his life. Surely we
shall not be misled if we follow in his steps!

What the disciples wished, however, was some special form or formula for
prayer, such as John the Baptist seems to have given his followers. Jesus
replied by granting them a matchless model and then by encouraging them in
the assurance that prayer will surely be heard. This "Lord's Prayer," more
fully recorded by Matthew, was not intended as a form which must be used
rigidly on all occasions, but as a type which should mold all prayer,
however free and varied and spontaneous it may be.

The first word, "Father," suggests the filial spirit in which all
believers should draw near to God, and it intimates much of the
encouragement which Jesus gave his disciples in the verses which
immediately follow this prayer.

The prayer contains five petitions, two relating to the cause of God in
the world, and three to personal needs of the petitioners. The first is a
request that the "name" of God, his revelation, or our conception of God,
be so reverenced, or so exalted, on earth as it is in heaven. The second
is a parallel request, namely, that his Kingdom may come. This Kingdom is
to be external, visible, glorious; it depends upon the inward
transformation of individuals, but it will yet appear in a perfected
social order, and in the universal reign of Christ. The next petition is
for "bread sufficient for our needs," and it implies our right to pray for
all that concerns our physical welfare. We are then taught to pray for
pardon, as we come to God in a spirit of forgiveness toward others; and
lastly, to ask for continual protection from the snares of the Adversary
and from all the powers of evil.

To encourage his disciples in such petitions Jesus gave them the story of
the man whose ceaseless, almost shameless, asking secured for him the
answer to his request for needed bread. Jesus implied, however, that there
is, on the part of God, no such reluctance to be overcome, so that all who
"ask" of him will receive what they need; if they "seek" relief he will
grant it, if they "knock," even at "midnight," he will open the door
without delay.

Further still Jesus encouraged prayer by again reminding his hearers that
they were praying to a Father. Human parents reply to the requests of
their children, not by mocking them or with injurious gifts, not by giving
a stone when bread is asked, or a serpent for a fish, or a scorpion
instead of an egg. If then, with all our imperfections and limitations, we
know how to give good gifts to our children, much more can we expect our
heavenly Father to give his Holy Spirit, and so all other good if lesser
gifts, to them that ask him. Thus again we see that the blessed name of
"Father" is the key to the lesson. If we approach him as children it will
be with confidence, but also with submission, as we know that, whether he
gives or withholds, his reply will be an expression of infinite mercy and
of fatherly love.



7. Jesus Rebuking Blasphemy and Unbelief. Ch. 11:14-36


    14 And he was casting out a demon _that was_ dumb. And it came to
    pass, when the demon was gone out, the dumb man spake; and the
    multitudes marvelled. 15 But some of them said, By Beelzebub the
    prince of the demons casteth he out demons. 16 And others, trying
    _him_, sought of him a sign from heaven. 17 But he, knowing their
    thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is
    brought to desolation; and a house _divided_ against a house
    falleth. 18 And if Satan also is divided against himself, how
    shall his kingdom stand? because ye say that I cast out demons by
    Beelzebub. 19 And if I by Beelzebub cast out demons, by whom do
    your sons cast them out? therefore shall they be your judges. 20
    But if I by the finger of God cast out demons, then is the kingdom
    of God come upon you. 21 When the strong _man_ fully armed
    guardeth his own court, his goods are in peace: 22 but when a
    stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he taketh
    from him his whole armor wherein he trusted, and divideth his
    spoils. 23 He that is not with me is against me; and he that
    gathereth not with me scattereth. 24 The unclean spirit when he is
    gone out of the man, passeth through waterless places, seeking
    rest; and finding none, he saith, I will turn back unto my house
    whence I came out. 25 And when he is come, he findeth it swept and
    garnished. 26 Then goeth he, and taketh _to him_ seven other
    spirits more evil than himself; and they enter in and dwell there:
    and the last state of that man becometh worse than the first.


    27 And it came to pass, as he said these things, a certain woman
    out of the multitude lifted up her voice, and said unto him,
