"Yes," Jayjay cut in. "But what kind? The boys on Pluto? The asteroid
slicers? No. There are four billion people on Earth and less than five
million in space. The market is Earth.

"Also, most writers have never been any farther off the surface of
Earth than the few miles up that an intercontinental cruiser takes
them.

"And yet, the modern 'adventure' novel invariably takes place in
space.

"I can read Westerns because I neither know nor care what the Old
American West was _really_ like. I can sit back and sink into the
never-never land that the Western tells about and enjoy myself because
I am not forced to compare it with reality.

"But a 'space novel' written by an Earthside hugger is almost as much
a never-never land, and I have to keep comparing it with what is
actually going on around me. And it irritates me."

"But, aren't some of them pretty well researched?" Hull asked.

"Obviously, you haven't read many of them," Jayjay said. "Sure, some
of them are well researched. Say one half of one per cent, to be
liberal. The rest don't know what they're talking about!"

"But--"

"For instance," Jayjay continued heatedly, "you take a look at every
blasted one of them that has anything to do with a spacecraft having
trouble. They have to have an accident in space in order to disable
the spaceship so that the hairy-chested hero can show what a great guy
he is. So what does the writer do? He has the ship hit by a meteor! A
meteor!"

Hull thought that over for a second. "Well," he said tentatively, "a
ship _could_ get hit by a meteor, couldn't it?"

Jayjay closed his eyes in exasperation. "Of course it could! And an
air-ship can run into a ruby-throated hummingbird, too. But how often
does it happen?

"Look: We're hitting it up at about one-fortieth of the velocity of
light right now. What do you think would happen if we got hit by a
meteor? We'd be gone before we knew what had happened.

"Why doesn't it happen? Because we can spot any meteor big enough to
hurt us long before it contacts us, and we can dodge it or blast it
out of the way, depending on the size.

"You've seen the outer hull of this ship. It's an inch thick shell of
plastic, supported a hundred feet away from the steel hull by long
booms. Anything small enough to get by the detectors will be small
enough to burn itself out on that hull before it reaches the ship.
The--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Jayjay Kelvin was not ordinarily a man to make long speeches,
especially when he knew he was telling someone something that they
already knew. But this time, he was beating one of his favorite drums,
and he went on with his tirade in a fine flush of fury.

Alas ... poor Jayjay.

Actually, Jayjay Kelvin can't be blamed for his attitude. All he was
saying was that it was highly improbable that a spaceship would be hit
by a meteor. In one way, he was perfectly right, and, in another, he
was dead wrong.

How small must a piece of matter be before it is no longer a meteor?

Fortunately, the big hunks rarely travel at more than about two times
ten to the sixth centimeters per second, relative to Sol, in the Solar
System. But there are little meteors--_very_ tiny ones--that come in,
hell-bent-for-leather, at a shade less than the velocity of light.
They're called cosmic rays, but they're not radiation in the strict
sense of the word. A stripped hydrogen atom, weighing on the order of
three point three times ten to the minus twenty-second grams, rest
mass, can come galumping along at a velocity so close to that of light
that the kinetic energy is something colossal for so small a particle.
Protons with a kinetic energy of ten to the nineteenth electron volts,
while statistically rare, are not unusual.

Now, ten million million million electron volts may be a wee bit
meaningless to the average man, so let's look at it from another
angle.

Consider. According to the well-known formula E = mc^2, a single gram
of matter, if converted _completely_ into energy, would yield some
nine hundred million million million ergs of energy. An atomic bomb
yields only a fraction of that energy, since only a small percentage
of the mass is converted into energy.

If _all_ of the mass of an atomic bomb were converted into energy, the
test in Alamogordo, New Mexico, 'way back in 1945, would probably have
been the last such test on Earth; there wouldn't have been anyone
around to make a second test.

So what does this have to do with cosmic ray particle? Well, if that
atomic bomb had been moving at the velocity with which our
ten-to-the-nineteenth-electron-volts proton is moving, it could have
been made of sand instead of U^235. It would have produced ten
thousand million times as much energy as the total disintegration of
the rest mass would have produced!

Kinetic energy, my children, has a great deal more potential than
atomic energy.

But we digress.

What has all this to do with Jayjay Kelvin?

If Jayjay had been a detective story addict instead of a Western story
addict, he would have heard of the HIBK or "Had I But Known" school of
detective writing. You know: "Had I But Known that, at that moment, in
the dismal depths of a secret underground meeting place, the evil
Chuman-Fu was plotting...."

If Jayjay Kelvin had known what was going on a few million miles away
from the Pluto-bound _Persephone_, he would have kept his mouth shut.

       *       *       *       *       *

The cargo-ship _Mordred_ was carrying a cargo of heavy metals sunward.
In her hold were tightly-packed ingots of osmium-iridium-platinum
alloy, gold-copper-silver-mercury alloy, and small percentages of
other of the heavy metals. The cargo was to be taken to the Asteroid
Belt for purification and then shipped Earthward for final
disposition. The fact that silver had replaced copper for electrical
purposes on Earth was due to the heavy-metals industry on Pluto.
Because of Pluto, the American silver bloc had been broken at last.

The _Mordred_ was approaching turnover.

Now, with a gravito-inertial drive, there is really no need to turn a
ship over end-for-end as she approaches the mid-point of her
trajectory. Since there is no rocket jet to worry about, all that is
really necessary is to put the engine in reverse. In fact, the patrol
ships of the Interplanetary Police do just that.

But the IP has been trained to take up to five standard gees in an
end-to-end flip, and the ships are built to take the stress in both
directions. An ordinary cargo ship finds it a lot easier to simply
flip the ship over; that way, the stresses remain the same, and the
ceiling-floor relationship is constant.

The _Mordred_ had been having a little trouble with her Number Three
drive engine, so the drive was cut off at turnover, while the engineer
replaced a worn bearing. At the same time, the maintenance officer
decided he'd take a look at the meteor-bumper--the plastic outer hull.
Since the ship was in free fall, all he had to do was pull himself
along one of the beams that supported the meteor-bumper away from the
main hull. The end of one of the beams had cracked a part of the
bumper hull--fatigue from stress, nothing more, but the hull might as
well be patched while the drive was off.

It was a one-man job; the plastic was dense, but under null-gee
conditions it was easy to maneuver. The maintenance officer repaired
the slight crack easily, wiped the sticky pre-polymer from the fingers
of his spacesuit gloves, and tossed the gooey rag off into space. Then
he pushed himself back across the vacuum that separated the outer hull
from the inner, entered the air lock, and reported that the job was
finished. Five minutes later, the _Mordred_ began decelerating toward
the distant Asteroid Belt.

Forget the _Mordred_. The ship is no longer important. Keep your eyes
