The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Boy Hunters, by Captain Mayne Reid

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Boy Hunters

Author: Captain Mayne Reid

Illustrator: Unknown

Release Date: April 27, 2007 [EBook #21236]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOY HUNTERS ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England





The Boy Hunters
Adventures in Search of a White Buffalo

By Captain Mayne Reid
________________________________________________________________________
This book was written after Mayne Reid discovered that writing books in
which not too many people died, and there was not too much violence, was
better business than writing as he did at first.  There are three boys
living with their father, now just a little disabled, but an avid
collector of natural-history specimens.  The father says he would give
almost anything for the hide of a white buffalo, and that such a beast
exists cannot be disputed.  The boys volunteer to get up an expedition
to bring back the much-desired hide, and off they go.

This book is the story of their quest.  But it is also an interesting
exposition of the animals and plants that inhabit the great prairies of
America.  The only real fault is that we are inevitably given the Latin
name of the plant or animal.  I don't know why I should object to this,
but I do.  I don't think it sits well within speech.

Still, the story is really interesting, and I greatly enjoyed
transcribing it.  I am sure I will read it many more times before my
days are numbered, if I can. NH
________________________________________________________________________

THE BOY HUNTERS
ADVENTURES IN SEARCH OF A WHITE BUFFALO

BY CAPTAIN MAYNE REID


CHAPTER ONE.

THE HOME OF THE HUNTER-NATURALIST.

Go with me to the great river Mississippi.  It is the longest river in
the world.  A line that would measure it would just reach to the centre
of the earth,--in other words, it is four thousand miles in length.  Go
with me to this majestic river.

I do not wish you to travel to its source; only as far up as Point
Coupee, about three hundred miles from its mouth.  There we shall stop
for a while--a very short while--for we have a long journey to make.
Our route lies to the far west--over the great prairies of Texas; and
from Point Coupee we shall take our departure.

There is a village at Point Coupee--a quaint, old, French-looking
village built of wood.  In point of fact it _is_ a French village; for
it was one of the earliest settlements of that people, who, with the
Spaniards, were the first colonists of Western America.  Hence we find,
to this day, French and Spanish people, with French and Spanish names
and customs, all through the Mississippi valley and the regions that lie
west of it.

We have not much to do with these things at present, and very little to
say of Point Coupee, more than we have already said.  Our subject is an
odd-looking house that, many years ago, stood upon the western bank of
the river, about a mile below the village.  I say it stood there many
years ago; but it is very likely that it is still standing, as it was a
firm, well-built house, of hewn logs, carefully chinked, and plastered
between the chinks with run-lime.  It was roofed with cedar shingles
that projected at the eaves, so as to cast off the rain, and keep the
walls dry.  It was what in that country is called a "double house,"--
that is, a large passage ran across the middle of it, through which you
might have driven a wagon loaded with hay.  This passage was roofed and
ceiled, like the rest of the house, and floored with strong planks.  The
flooring, elevated a foot above the surface of the ground, projected
several feet in front of the passage, where carved uprights of
cedar-wood supported a light roof, forming a porch or verandah.  Around
these uprights, and upon the railing that shut in the verandah, clung
vines, rose-bushes, and convolvulus plants, that at certain seasons of
the year were clustered over with beautiful flowers.

The house faced the river, standing, as I have said, on its western
bank--on the same side with Point Coupee.  In front was a lawn, some two
hundred yards in length, that stretched toward the river, and ended on
the low bluff forming its bank.  This lawn was enclosed by high
rail-fences, and variegated with clumps of shrubbery and ornamental
trees.  Most of them were indigenous to the country; but there were
exotics as well.  Among the trees you could not fail to notice the
large-flowered magnolia (_Magnolia grandiflora_), the red mulberry
(_Morus rubra_), the pale-green leaves of the catalpa, the tall
tulip-tree (_liriodendron_), and the shining foliage of the orange.

In contrast with the brighter frondage of these were dark cone-shaped
cedars, and spire-like forms of the yew.  There were date-trees and
weeping willows growing upon the river bank, and drooping gracefully
over its current.  Other plants and trees might be distinguished--the
natives of a southern clime--such as the great Mexican aloe (_Agave
Americana_), the bayonet blades of the yucca, and the fan-like leaves of
the palmetto.  Beautiful birds of many varieties might be seen among the
copses, or moving over the grassy sward of the lawn.

In the great hall or passage, already mentioned, a singular picture
presented itself.  Along the walls, on both sides, were suspended
various implements of the chase, such as rifles, shot guns, pouches,
flasks, hunting-knives, and, in short, every species of trap, net, or
implement, that could be devised for capturing the wild denizens of the
earth, air, and water.  Horns of the stag and elk were fastened to the
hewn logs; and upon their branching antlers hung hair-bridles, and
high-peaked saddles of the Mexican or Spanish fashion.  In addition to
these were skins of rare birds and quadrupeds, artistically preserved by
stuffing, and placed on pedestals around the wooden walls.  There were
glass cases, too, containing moths, butterflies, and other insects,
impaled upon pins, and arranged in systematic order.  In short, this
hall resembled a little museum.

Were we to enter and examine the inside of the house, we should find
three or four good-sized rooms, comfortably furnished, and all stocked
with subjects of natural history, and implements of the chase.  In one
of the rooms we should see a barometer and thermometer hanging against
the wall, an old clock over the mantel-piece, a sabre and pistols, and a
book-case containing many choice and valuable books.

To the rear of the house we should find a small kitchen built of logs,
and containing the usual culinary utensils.  Still farther back we
should meet with an enclosed yard, having a storehouse and stable at one
end.  In the stables we should find four horses, and several mules might
be observed in the enclosure.  A large reddish dog with long ears, and
having the appearance of a hound, might be seen straying about the yard,
and would not fail to attract our attention.

An observer, viewing this house from a distance, would take it for the
residence of a wealthy planter; on a nearer inspection, however, it
would not pass for that.  There were no rows of negro cabins, no great
sugar-mills, nor tobacco-warehouses, such as are always to be seen near
the planter's dwelling.  Nothing of the sort; nor was there any very
large tract of cultivated land contiguous to the house.  The dark
cypress forest in the background cast its shadow almost up to the walls.
Plainly it was not the dwelling of a planter.  What then was it, and
who were its inmates?  It was the home of a _Hunter-Naturalist_.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE HUNTER-NATURALIST AND HIS FAMILY.

In 1815 was fought the famous battle of Waterloo, and in the same year
Napoleon Bonaparte was exiled to the island-rock of Saint Helena.  Many
French officers, who had followed the fortunes of the great adventurer,
at that time emigrated to America.  Most of these, as was very natural,
sought the French settlements on the Mississippi, and there made their
homes for life.  Among them was one named Landi, who had been a colonel
of chasseurs in Napoleon's army.  He was by birth a Corsican; and it was
through his being a friend and early acquaintance of one of the
Bonaparte family that he had been induced to become an officer in the
French army--for in his youth he had been fonder of science than
soldiering.

While campaigning in Spain, Landi had married a Basque lady, by whom he
had three children, all sons.  Their mother died before the battle of
Waterloo was fought; so that when Landi emigrated to America his family
consisted of his three sons alone.

He first went to Saint Louis, but after a while moved down the river to
Point Coupee, in Louisiana, where he purchased the house we have just
described, and made it his home.

Let me tell you that he was not in any circumstances of necessity.
Previous to his departure for America, he had sold his patrimonial
estates in Corsica for a sum of money--enough to have enabled him to
live without labour in any country, but particularly in that free land
of cheap food and light taxation--the land of his adoption.  He was,
therefore, under no necessity of following any trade or profession in
his new home--and he followed none.  How then did he employ his time?  I
will tell you.  He was an educated man.  Previous to his entering the
French army he had studied the natural sciences.  He was a _naturalist_.
A naturalist can find employment anywhere--can gather both instruction
and amusement where others would die of _ennui_ and idleness.  Remember!
there are "sermons in stones, and books in running brooks."  He was not
a closet naturalist either.  Like the great Audubon he was fond of the
outside world.  He was fond of drawing his lessons from Nature herself.
He combined a passion for the chase with his more delicate taste for
scientific pursuits; and where could he have better placed himself to
indulge in these than in the great region of the Mississippi valley,
teeming with objects of interest both to the hunter and the naturalist?
In my opinion, he made good choice of his home.

Well, between hunting, and fishing, and stuffing his birds, and
preserving the skins of rare quadrupeds, and planting and pruning his
trees, and teaching his boys, and training his dogs and horses, Landi
was far from being idle.  His boys, of course, assisted him in these
occupations, as far as they were able.  But he had another assistant--
Hugot.

Who was Hugot?  I shall describe Hugot for your benefit.

Hugot was a Frenchman--a very small Frenchman, indeed--not over five
feet four inches in height.  He was dapper and tidy--had a large
aquiline nose, and, notwithstanding his limited stature, a pair of
tremendous moustachios, that curved over his mouth so as almost to hide
it.  These gave him a somewhat fierce aspect, which, combined with his
upright carriage, and brisk mechanical-like movements, told you at once
what Hugot had been--a French soldier.  He was, in fact, a _ci-devant_
corporal of chasseurs.  Landi had been his colonel.  The rest you will
easily guess.  He had followed his old leader to America, and was now
his man for everything.  It was not often that you could see the
naturalist without also seeing Hugot's great moustachios close by his
elbow.  It would have killed Hugot to have been separated for any length
of time from his old colonel.

Of course Hugot accompanied his master in all his hunting expeditions.
So, too, did the boys, as soon as they were able to sit upon a horse.
On these occasions the house would be shut up, for there was no
housekeeper nor any other domestic about the establishment.  It would
remain thus for days, sometimes for weeks together--for the naturalist
with his party often made distant excursions into the surrounding
forests.  They would return laden with spoils--skins of birds and
beasts, plants, and rare geological specimens.  Then whole days would be
spent in the arrangement of these new acquisitions.  Thus did Landi and
his family pass their time.

Hugot was cook, valet, groom, butler, and errand boy.  I have already
stated that no other domestic, male or female, lived in the house:
Hugot, therefore, was chambermaid as well.  His manifold occupations,
however, were not so difficult to fulfil as might at first appear.  The
Colonel was a man of simple habits.  He had learned these when a
soldier, and he brought up his sons to live like himself.  He ate plain
food, drank only water, and slept upon a camp-bed with a buffalo-robe
and a blanket.  A laundress in Point Coupee kept the linen clean; and
Hugot was not near so busy with house affairs as you might suppose.  He
made daily journeys to the village--to the market, and the post-office,
from which he often brought letters, many of them with large seals, and
the arms of a prince upon them!  Sometimes, too, after a steamer had
called at the landing, parcels arrived containing books--scientific
books they were--or curious instruments.  Notwithstanding all this,
there was nothing mysterious about the life of the hunter-naturalist.
He was no misanthrope.  He often visited the village, and would gossip
with old hunters and others who lived there.  The villagers knew him as
the "old Colonel," and respected him.  They only wondered at his tastes
as a naturalist, which to them seemed strange.  They wondered, too, how
he managed to keep house without a maid-servant.  But the Colonel did
not trouble his head about their conjectures.  He only laughed at their
curious inquiries, and remained on as good terms as ever.  His boys,
too, as they grew up became great favourites with all.  They were the
best shots of their age, could ride a horse with any, could swim the
Mississippi, paddle a canoe, fling a lasso, or spear a catfish, as
though they had been full-grown men.  They were, in fact, boy-men; and
as such were regarded by the simple villagers, who instinctively felt
the superiority which education and training had given to these youths
over their own uneducated minds.  The boys, notwithstanding these
advantages, were affable with the villagers; hence the respect in which
they were universally held.

None of his neighbours ever visited the Colonel, except on matters of
business.  Indeed he had no visitors of any sort, if we except one or
two of his former military associates, who lived at New Orleans, and
came up to his house about once a-year to talk over old times, and taste
his venison.  On such occasions "Napoleon le Grand" was of course the
main subject of conversation.  Like all old soldiers of the Empire,
Landi worshipped Napoleon; but there was one of the Bonaparte family for
whom the naturalist entertained a still higher feeling of regard,
amounting in fact to sincere friendship.  This was Charles Lucien,
prince of Musignano.

Not all the Bonapartes have been bad.  Some of the members of that
remarkable family have given evidence to the world that they were the
possessors of noble virtue.  The quiet researches of the Prince of
Musignano as a student of natural history, may be looked upon as so many
conquests in the kingdom of Nature; and though they have been eclipsed
by the more brilliant and sanguinary triumphs of the Emperor, yet do
they far more entitle him to the gratitude and respect of men.  He was
the true hero of the hunter-naturalist Landi.

For many years did Colonel Landi lead the life we have described.  An
event at length happened that was near proving fatal to him.  He had
been wounded in the leg during his campaigns in the Peninsula.  A fall
from his horse reopened this wound, and amputation became necessary.
This saved his life, but he could no longer partake of the amusements of
the chase, although still able to indulge in the more delicate pursuits
of the naturalist.  With his wooden leg he was able to hobble about the
house and lawn, prune the trees, and attend to his pets that had grown
to be quite numerous, while Hugot at all times followed him about like
his shadow.  The boys, however, went abroad on hunting expeditions, and
collected specimens as formerly; and the life of all went on pretty much
as usual.

Thus it was when I first became acquainted with the naturalist, his man
Hugot, and his three sons--the _Boy Hunters_, the heroes of our little
book.

Young reader, permit me to introduce you to a more intimate acquaintance
with them.  I fancy you will like them--all three--and be happy for some
time in their society.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE PRINCE'S LETTER.

It is a lovely morning in Spring as we approach their dwelling.  We
enter the lawn by a side-gate.  We need not go into the house, for there
is no one within doors.  The weather is too fine for that, but they are
all at home notwithstanding.  They are in the lawn in front, and the
