    you a packet; you will give him a dollar, and drive on to Cape
    Canaveral, and you will do what is to be done there. From
    there to Fort Kissimmee, to Okeechobee, traversing the lake to
    the Rita River, where I have marked the trail to Little
    Sprite.

    "At Little Sprite I shall await you; beyond that point a
    merciful Providence alone can know what awaits us.

          "Yours fraternally,

          "FARRAGO.

    "P.S.--I think that you had better make your will, and suggest
    the same idea to the stenographer who is to accompany you.

              F."

And that was the letter I received while seated comfortably on the
floor of my work-room, surrounded by innocent isopods, all patiently
awaiting scientific investigation.

And this is what I did: Within twenty-four hours I had assembled the
supplies required--the cage, the woman's clothing, tank, arms and
ammunition, and the chemicals; I had secured accommodations, for that
evening, on the Florida, Volusia, and Fort Lauderdale Railway as far
as Citron City; and I had been interviewing stenographers all day
long, the result of an innocently worded advertisement in the daily
newspapers.

It was now very close to the time when I must summon a cab and drive
to the ferry; and yet I was still shy one stenographer.

I had seen scores; they simply would not listen to the proposition.
"Why does a gentleman in the backwoods of Florida want a
stenographer?" they demanded; and as I had not the faintest idea, I
could only say so. I think the majority interviewed concluded I had
escaped from a State institution.

As the time for departure approached I became desperate, urging and
beseeching applicants to accompany me; but neither sympathy for my
instant need nor desire for salary moved them.

I waited until the last moment, hoping against hope. Then, with a
groan of despair, I seized luggage and raincoat, made for the door and
flung it open, only to find myself face to face with an attractive
young girl, apparently on the point of pressing the electric button.

"I'm sorry," I said, "but I have a train to catch."

She was noticeably attractive in her storm-coat and pretty hat, and I
really was sorry--so sorry that I added:

"I have about twenty-seven seconds to place at your service before I
go."

"Twenty will be sufficient," she replied, pleasantly. "I saw your
advertisement for a stenographer--"

"We require a man," I interposed, hastily.

"Have you engaged him?"

"N-no."

We looked at each other.

"You wouldn't accept, anyway," I began.

"How do you know?"

"You wouldn't leave town, would you?"

"Yes, if you required it."

"What? Go to Florida?"

"Y-yes--if I must."

"But think of the alligators! Think of the snakes--big, bitey snakes!"

"Gracious!" she exclaimed, eyes growing bigger.

"Indians, too!--unreconciled, sulky Seminoles! Fevers! Mud-puddles!
Spiders! And only fifty dollars a week--"

"I--I'll go," she stammered.

"Go?" I repeated, grimly; "then you've exactly two and three-quarter
seconds left for preparations."

Instinctively she raised her little gloved hand and patted her hair.
"I'm ready," she said, unsteadily.

"One extra second to make your will," I added, stunned by her
self-possession.

"I--I have nothing to leave--nobody to leave it to," she said,
smiling; "I am ready."

I took that extra second myself for a lightning course in reflection
upon effects and consequences.

"It's silly, it's probably murder," I said, "but you're engaged! Now
we must run for it!"

And that is how I came to engage the services of Miss Helen Barrison
as stenographer.




XIV


At noon on the second day I disembarked from the train at Citron City
with all paraphernalia--cage, chemicals, arsenal, and stenographer; an
accumulation of very dusty impedimenta--all but the stenographer. By
three o'clock our hotel livery-rig was speeding along the beach at
False Cape towards the tall lighthouse looming above the dunes.

The abode of a gentleman named Slunk was my goal. I sat brooding in
the rickety carriage, still dazed by the rapidity of my flight from
New York; the stenographer sat beside me, blue eyes bright with
excitement, fair hair blowing in the sea-wind.

Our railway companionship had been of the slightest, also absolutely
formal; for I was too absorbed in conjecturing the meaning of this
journey to be more than absent-mindedly civil; and she, I fancy, had
had time for repentance and perhaps for a little fright, though I
could discover traces of neither.

I remember she left the train at some city or other where we were held
for an hour; and out of the car-window I saw her returning with a
brand-new grip sack.

She must have bought clothes, for she continued to remain cool and
fresh in her summer shirt-waists and short outing skirt; and she
looked immaculate now, sitting there beside me, the trace of a smile
curving her red mouth.

"I'm looking for a personage named Slunk," I observed.

After a moment's silent consideration of the Atlantic Ocean she said,
"When do my duties begin, Mr. Gilland?"

"The Lord alone knows," I replied, grimly. "Are you repenting of your
bargain?"

"I am quite happy," she said, serenely.

Remorse smote me that I had consented to engage this frail,
pink-and-ivory biped for an enterprise which lay outside the suburbs
of Manhattan. I glanced guiltily at my victim; she sat there, the
incarnation of New York piquancy--a translated denizen of the
metropolis--a slender spirit of the back offices of sky-scrapers. Why
had I lured her hither?--here where the heavy, lavender-tinted
breakers thundered on a lost coast; here where above the dune-jungles
vultures soared, and snowy-headed eagles, hulking along the sands,
tore dead fish and yelped at us as we passed.

Strange waters, strange skies--a strange, lost land aquiver under an
exotic sun; and there she sat with her wise eyes of a child,
unconcerned, watching the world in perfect confidence.

"May I pay a little compliment to your pluck?" I asked, amused.

"Certainly," she said, smiling as the maid of Manhattan alone knows
how to smile--shyly, inquiringly--with a lingering hint of laughter in
the curled lips' corners. Then her sensitive features fell a trifle.
"Not pluck," she said, "but necessity; I had no chance to choose, no
time to wait. My last dollar, Mr. Gilland, is in my purse!"

With a gay little gesture she drew it from her shirt-front, then,
smiling, sat turning it over and over in her lap.

The sun fell on her hands, gilding the smooth skin with the first tint
of sunburn. Under the corners of her eyes above the rounded cheeks a
pink stain lay like the first ripening flush on a wild strawberry.
That, too, was the mark left by the caress of wind and sun. I had had
no idea she was so pretty.

"I think we'll enjoy this adventure," I said; "don't you?"

"I try to make the best of things," she said, gazing off into the
horizon haze. "Look," she added; "is that a man?"

A spot far away on the beach caught my eye. At first I thought it was
a pelican--and small wonder, too, for the dumpy, waddling,
goose-necked individual who loomed up resembled a heavy bottomed bird
more than a human being.

"Do you suppose that could be Mr. Slunk?" asked the stenographer, as
our vehicle drew nearer.

He looked as though his name ought to be Slunk; he was digging coquina
clams, and he dug with a pecking motion like a water-turkey mastering
a mullet too big for it.

His name was Slunk; he admitted it when I accused him. Our negro
driver drew rein, and I descended to the sand and gazed on Mr. Slunk.

He was, as I have said, not impressive, even with the tremendous
background of sky and ocean.

"I've come something over a thousand miles to see you," I said,
reluctant to admit that I had come as far to see such a specimen of
human architecture.

A weather-beaten grin stretched the skin that covered his face, and he
shoved a hairy paw into the pockets of his overalls, digging deeply
into profound depths. First he brought to light a twist of South
Carolina tobacco, which he leisurely inserted in his mouth--not,
apparently, for pleasure, but merely to get rid of it.

The second object excavated from the overalls was a small packet
addressed to me. This he handed to me; I gravely handed him a silver
dollar; he went back to his clam-digging, and I entered the carriage
and drove on. All had been carried out according to the letter of my
instructions so far, and my spirits brightened.

"If you don't mind I'll read my instructions," I said, in high
good-humor.

"Pray do not hesitate," she said, smiling in sympathy.

So I opened the little packet and read:

    "Drive to Cape Canaveral along the beach. You will find a gang
    of men at work on a government breakwater. The superintendent
    is Mr. Rowan. Show him this letter.

                "FARRAGO."

Rather disappointed--for I had been expecting to find in the packet
some key to the interesting mystery which had sent Professor Farrago
into the Everglades--I thrust the missive into my pocket and resumed a
study of the immediate landscape. It had not changed as we progressed:
ocean, sand, low dunes crowned with impenetrable tangles of wild bay,
sparkleberry, and live-oak, with here and there a weather-twisted
palmetto sprawling, and here and there the battered blades of cactus
and Spanish-bayonet thrust menacingly forward; and over all the
vultures, sailing, sailing--some mere circling motes lost in the blue
above, some sheering the earth so close that their swiftly sweeping
shadows slanted continually across our road.

"I detest a buzzard," I said, aloud.

"I thought they were crows," she confessed.

"Carrion-crows--yes.

    "'The carrion-crows
      Sing, Caw! caw!'

--only they don't," I added, my song putting me in good-humor once
more. And I glanced askance at the pretty stenographer.

"It is a pleasure to be employed by agreeable people," she said,
innocently.

"Oh, I can be much more agreeable than that," I said.

"Is Professor Farrago--amusing?" she asked.

"Well--oh, certainly--but not in--in the way I am."

Suddenly it flashed upon me that my superior was a confirmed hater of
unmarried women. I had clean forgotten it; and now the full import of
what I had done scared me silent.

"Is anything the matter?" asked Miss Barrison.

"No--not yet," I said, ominously.

How on earth could I have overlooked that well-known fact. The hurry
and anxiety, the stress of instant preparation and departure, had
clean driven it from my absent-minded head.

Jogging on over the sand, I sat silent, cudgelling my brains for a
solution of the disastrous predicament I had gotten into. I pictured
the astonished rage of my superior--my probable dismissal from
employment--perhaps the general overturning and smash-up of the entire
expedition.

A distant, dark object on the beach concentrated my distracted
thoughts; it must be the breakwater at Cape Canaveral. And it was the
breakwater, swarming with negro workmen, who were swinging great
blocks of coquina into cemented beds, singing and whistling at their
labor.

I forgot my predicament when I saw a thin white man in sun-helmet and
khaki directing the work from the beach; and as our horses plodded up,
I stepped out and hailed him by name.

"Yes, my name is Rowan," he said, instantly, turning to meet me. His
sharp, clear eyes included the vehicle and the stenographer, and he
lifted his helmet, then looked squarely at me.

"My name is Gilland," I said, dropping my voice and stepping nearer.
"I have just come from Bronx Park, New York."

He bowed, waiting for something more from me; so I presented my
credentials.

His formal manner changed at once. "Come over here and let us talk a
bit," he said, cordially--then hesitated, glancing at Miss
Barrison--"if your wife would excuse us--"

The pretty stenographer colored, and I dryly set Mr. Rowan
right--which appeared to disturb him more than his mistake.

"Pardon me, Mr. Gilland, but you do not propose to take this young
girl into the Everglades, do you?"

"That's what I had proposed to do," I said, brusquely.

Perfectly aware that I resented his inquiry, he cast a perplexed and
troubled glance at her, then slowly led the way to a great block of
sun-warmed coquina, where he sat down, motioning me to do the same.

"I see," he said, "that you don't know just where you are going or
just what you are expected to do."

"No, I don't," I said.

"Well, I'll tell you, then. You are going into the devil's own country
to look for something that I fled five hundred miles to avoid."

"Is that so?" I said, uneasily.

"That is so, Mr. Gilland."

"Oh! And what is this object that I am to look for and from which you
fled five hundred miles?"

"I don't know."

"You don't know what you ran away from?"

"No, sir. Perhaps if I had known I should have run a thousand miles."
