
"It's not that," Blalok said. "It's just--"

"Oh, don't make excuses. You know and I know the Boss-man is
suspicious." Kennon shrugged. "Normally I wouldn't blame him but it's
a damned nuisance with things the way they are. All we have is one more
bay and a hall to finish--but if--"

"Now wait a minute," Blalok said. "Get the kink out of your neck and
simmer down. Sure--the Boss-man told us to keep an eye on you--but
that's not why I'm here this time."

"Well?"

"Douglas came back this morning."

"What for?"

"I don't know." Blalok's face wore the noncommittal look it always wore
when he was taking liberties with the truth.

"You're probably the worst liar in the galaxy," Kennon chuckled. "He's
here to breathe down my neck, isn't he?"

Blalok nodded.

"Keep him off my back for another week and he can breathe all he wants
to. I'll be done then."

"I can't promise a thing."

Kennon shrugged. "It's too much to ask, I guess."

"But I can try," Blalok added.

"That's enough for me." Kennon grinned. "Has he turned Alexandria into a
shambles yet?"

"Not yet, but everyone's uneasy."

"I can't blame them. That young fellow's undiluted poison. By the way,
how does he look?"

"About the same."

"The medics must have done a good job," Kennon said.

"The Boss-man shipped him to Beta for treatment," Blalok said. "He
didn't trust the docs out here."

"That figures. At any rate Douglas couldn't have gone to a better
place."

"What happened to him?"

"He stuck his nose where he shouldn't," Kennon said pointedly.

Blalok stiffened.

"I'm sorry, Evald. Even if you knew, I couldn't talk about it. What I
know about Douglas is classified!"

"Well--Douglas is doing plenty of talking. Claims his stay in the
hospital was all your fault."

Kennon shrugged. "That's his opinion. And as long as he stays out of my
way he's welcome to it."

Blalok looked at Kennon's haggard face with mild concern, "Doc," he
said, "you'd better take it easy. You're going to pieces."

"I'll be through here in another week, I'll have this all wrapped up."

"Providing you're not wrapped up first."

"Eh?"

"In a shroud. You look like a walking corpse."

Kennon chuckled wearily. "Sometimes I feel like one. But I'd like to get
this job finished."

"Well, I'll do what I can," Blalok said. "I'll try to keep him down at
Alexandria for a few days."

"It'll be enough," Kennon said. More than enough--he added mentally.
The coils of fuel wire were ready to load, and the power slugs for the
ship's reactor were already stored in the power plant building here at
Olympus. Three more days and the old spacer would be as ready to fly as
she would ever be. And after that, it was in the lap of fate.

He ushered Blalok to his jeep and watched until he disappeared.

"I'm getting to be a first-class liar," he remarked wryly to himself
as he turned back to the temporary quarters he was occupying at the
station. "And the bad thing about it is that I'm actually enjoying it."

A few weeks ago an admission like that would have been inconceivable.
It was odd, he thought, how one thing led to another and produced an
end that could not be foreseen. Now he could lie and dissemble with the
best. He had no compunction about falsifying a requisition, or stealing
what he could not obtain with apparent honesty. His character had sunk
to an all-time low, he reflected with grim humor as he walked into the
shadow of the main building. Neither Blalok's nor Jordan's frequent
visits bothered him. Both men were creatures of habit and both were
married. They stayed home at night--and it was nighttime that he worked
on the spacer. The project afforded him a perfect cover and it was only
minutes by jeep away from the crater.

Even so, the double duty was an appalling task. And it would have been
impossible if it wasn't for Copper. Her quick fingers, keen eyesight,
and uncanny memory made the work seem simple, and neither the
tediousness of repairing miles of circuitry nor the depressing
environment of Olympus Station seemed to bother her. While he worked
with the men on the project she restored and reassembled circuits in
his quarters and at night they replaced them in the old ship. And the
God-Egg was rapidly becoming operational.

Kennon wondered what it was about Copper that made her so different from
the rest. Olympus didn't bother her at all. In fact she seemed to thrive
on the depressing atmosphere that filled the Station. Perhaps it was
because she had violated the tabu about the God-Egg so often that
ordinary superstition had no effect upon her. He shrugged. He had
troubles enough without worrying about Copper's motivations, and not the
least of these was taking the God-Egg into space.

Kennon looked forward to blast-off with distinct misgivings. There was
too much about the ancient spacer that was strange--and too much that
was terrifying.

Basically the ship was an ion-jet job with atomic primaries and a
spindizzy converter that might possibly take her up as high as middle
yellow Cth--far enough to give her a good turn of speed, but not enough
to compensate for timelag. Her screens were monstrosities, double
polyphase lattices that looked about as spacetight as so many sieves.
There were no acceleration dampers, no temporal compensators, no
autopilot, no four-space computer, and the primaries operated on nuclear
rather than binding energy. The control chairs weren't equipped with
forcefields, but instead had incredibly primitive safety webs that held
one in place by sheer tensile strength. Taking a ship like that into
space was an open invitation to suicide. A man needed a combination of
foolhardy bravery and incredible fatalism to blast off in a can like
this. He had the stimulus, but the knowledge of what he would face
troubled him more than he cared to admit. More and more, as he
understood the ship, he was amazed at the courage of the ancients who
had blithely leaped into hyperspace in these flying coffins with no more
motivation than to see what was beyond the nearest star. And in ships
more primitive than this men had swept through the star systems nearest
Earth in the outward expansion of the First Millennium.

He sighed. The breed of man must have been tough in the old days--and
he'd soon be finding out if any of that ancient toughness remained.

He opened the door to his quarters.

Copper was sitting in his favorite chair, a pile of completed assemblies
neatly stacked beside her, and a disorderly file of crumpled cloth at
her feet. Her face was sullen as she looked up at him. "I've had about
all of this I'm going to take," she said mutinously as she stirred the
heap of cloth with a bare foot. "Not even you are going to make me wear
those--things!"

Kennon sighed. It was the same old story. For months he had been trying
patiently to indoctrinate Copper with a minimum of civilized habits, but
she was quite literally a savage. In her entire lifetime she had never
worn clothing, and to encase her body in hose, kilts, blouse, and
sandals was a form of torture. She scratched, wiggled, and twisted at
the garments until she looked as bad as she felt, and would usually
finish a session by tearing off the offending clothes and sulking. She
was doing it now.

"You must act like a civilized human being," Kennon said mildly. "You're
simply going to have to learn to wear these clothes properly."

"Why? I'm more comfortable as I am."

"That's not the point. You are going to be living in human society and
you must act human. The only planet where you could get away with nudity
is Santos, and we're not going there."

"Why not?"

"I've explained it time and again. We'll have to go to Beta. That's the
only place I know where you'll have a fair hearing. And on Beta people
wear clothes. They have to. It's cold, even in summer, and in the
wintertime, there's snow."

"What's snow?"

"Ice crystals that fall like rain, but I've told you this before."

"And I still don't believe it."

"Believe it or not you're going to wear those things. Now put them on!"

She looked at him with mutiny on her face. "All right, slave driver,"
she muttered as she picked up the clothing, "but I hope you'll itch
someday and be unable to scratch."

"And try to wear those garments more gracefully. You make them look like
a sack."

"They feel like one. I keep thinking that all I need is a tag around my
neck."

"You haven't much time to get used to them," Kennon said. "We're leaving
this week."

"So soon?"

"Yes--and you'll wear those things to the ship, into the ship, and all
the time we're on the ship. You'll keep wearing clothing until it looks
right."

"Slave driver!" Copper hissed.

"Slave," Kennon answered equably.

Copper giggled. The sound was utterly unexpected, and completely
incongruous. That was the wonder of her, Kennon reflected. Her mercurial
temperament made life something that was continually exciting She was a
never-ending delight.



CHAPTER XVII

It was the last trip. Kennon loaded the jeep with the last-minute items
he would need. The four reactor cores in their lead cases went aboard
last and were packed inside a pile of lead-block shielding.

He helped Copper in and looked back without regret as the bulk of
Olympus Station vanished below him in the dusk. The last of the work
crew had left that afternoon. The station was ready for occupancy.
His assignment had been completed. He felt an odd pleasure at having
finished the job. Alexander might not be happy about his subsequent
actions, but he could have no complaint about what he did while he was
here.

"Well--say good-bye to Flora," he said to Copper.

"I don't want to," she said. "I don't want to leave."

"You can't stay. You know that."

She nodded. "But that doesn't make me any less regretful."

"Regretful?"

"All right--scared. We're going to try to make the God-Egg fly again.
Not only is it sacrilege, but as you've often said, it's dangerous. I
have no desire to die."

"You have two courses--"

"I know--you've pointed them out often enough," Copper said. "And since
you decided to go I'd go with you even though I knew the Egg would blow
up."

"You're quite a girl," Kennon said admiringly. "Did I ever tell you that
I love you?"

"Not nearly often enough," Copper said. "You could do it every day and
I'd never get tired of hearing it."

The jeep settled over the lava wall. "We'll leave it in the passageway
when we're through," Kennon said. "Maybe it will survive blast-off."

"Why worry about it?" Copper asked.

"I hate destroying anything needlessly," Kennon said.

"And since we have plenty of time, we might as well be neat about our
departure."

He was wrong, of course, but he didn't know that.

* * *

Douglas Alexander checked the radarscope and whistled in surprise at
the picture it revealed. "So that's where he's going," he said softly
to himself. "Cousin Alex was right as usual." He grimaced unpleasantly.
"He's up to something--that's for sure." His face twisted into an
expression that was half sneer, half triumph. "This is going to be
fun." He moved the control, and his airboat, hovering silently at five
thousand meters, dropped toward the ground in free fall as Douglas
loosened the Burkholtz in the holster at his waist. "But what is he
doing?" he muttered. The question hung unanswered in the still air of
the cabin as the airboat dropped downward.

Douglas hadn't been impressed with Blalok's attempt at a delaying
action. Normally he might have been, but his fear of his cousin was
greater than his respect for Blalok. The superintendent had only
succeeded in accomplishing something he had not intended when he had
tried to dissuade Douglas from visiting Kennon. He had made Douglas
cautious. The airboat and long-range surveillance had been the result.
For the past two nights Douglas had hung over Olympus Station, checking
the place--to leave at dawn when the new day's work began. For two
nights Kennon had been lucky. He had departed for the Egg shortly before
Douglas took up his station, and had returned after the watcher had
called it a night and had returned home. But this last night, Kennon
left late--and his departure was noted.

"Wonder who's the girl with him?" Douglas said as the boat plunged down.
"Well, I'll be finding out in a minute."

Kennon's head jerked upward at the sound of air whistling past the
airboat's hull, and a wave of icy coldness swept through his chest.
There was no question that he was discovered. His shoulders sagged.

"Well--it was a good try," he said bitterly as Copper looked at him with
sudden terror on her face.

"I don't want to die," she wailed.

"You won't--not if I can help it," Kennon said. "Move away from
me--quickly!"

"But--"

"Do as I say!" Kennon's voice was sharp. "And keep that hood over your
face."

The airboat settled softly on the ash in front of him, the door snapped
open and Douglas dropped to the ground, Burkholtz jutting from his pudgy
fist.

"My, my," Douglas said, "what have we here? Dr. Kennon and a woman!
I thought better of you than that, Doctor. And all dressed up in
antiradiation suits. This is interesting. Just what are you doing up
here on the mountain so late at night--prospecting?"

"You might call it that," Kennon said. His body sagged with relief.
Douglas thank Ochsner it was Douglas! He was running true to
form--talking when he should have been shooting.

Douglas jerked his head toward Copper, standing a few feet to his left.
"Who is she?"

"None of your business," Kennon snapped, hoping that his outburst
covered Copper's gasp of surprise and fear, and knowing that it didn't.

"I'm making it my business. There's something funny going on around
here."

Kennon blinked. Could it be that Douglas didn't know? Had he been
watching them on radar? Durilium was radar-transparent. It absorbed
and dissipated electromagnetic waves rather than reflecting them. For a
second he felt a tiny surge of hope.

"Stand where you are," Douglas said as he stepped over to the
half-paralyzed Copper and jerked the hood back from her face. For a
moment he looked puzzled. "Just who are you?" he demanded. "I don't
recall seeing you before." And then recognition dawned. "Old Doc's
Lani!" he gasped.

"She works for me now," Kennon said.

Douglas laughed. It wasn't a nice sound. "All dressed up?" he asked.
"Nice work."

"That's my fault," Kennon said.

"You know the rules," Douglas said. "I could blast you both."

"Go ahead," Kennon said, "but if you do, you'll never find out what
we're doing up here."

Douglas hesitated. Kennon's voice was flat and filled with utter
conviction.

"There's a reason why Copper's wearing that suit," Kennon continued,
"and you won't know that either."

The Burkholtz swiveled around to point at Kennon's belly. "I've had
about enough of this. Let's have it. Tell me what you're doing here!"

"I'll do better than that," Kennon said promptly. "I'll show you. You'll
be surprised at what we've uncovered." He made his muscles relax, and
forced himself to speak naturally. Copper, he noted, was still rigid
with terror. The Alexanders--any of them--were everything he had said
they were. They were the masters here. And despite Copper's boast, she
was as susceptible to their influence as any other Lani.

"All right," Douglas said, "show me this thing I'd never be able to
find without your help." He half turned to Copper. "Stay where you are,
Lani," he said. "Don't move until I come back."

"Yes, Man Douglas," Copper replied. Her voice was flat, colorless, and
submissive.

Kennon shuddered. He had never heard precisely that tone from her
before. One word from Douglas and she had become a zombie--a mindless
muscle preparation that existed only to obey. Anger filled him--anger
that one he loved could be ordered by someone who wasn't worth a
third of her--anger that she obeyed--anger at his own impotence and
frustration. It wasn't a clean anger. It was a dark, red-splashed thing
that struggled and writhed inside him, a fierce unreasoning rage that
seethed and bubbled yet could not break free. For an instant, with
blinding clarity, Kennon understood the feelings of the caged male Lani
on Otpen One. And he sympathized.

"Follow me," he said and started around the ship.

"Stay--no--go ahead," Douglas said, "but remember, I'm right behind
you."

Kennon walked straight up to the pit and pointed down at the dark bulk
of the Egg., concealed in the shadows of the bottom.
