Another boat followed the first. The third was in mid channel when,
suddenly, she seemed to rise bodily in the air, and then to fall
into pieces. A mighty column of water, a hundred feet high, rose
into the air; mingled with fragments of wood, and human bodies. A
deep, low report was heard; and the brig shook, as if she had come
into collision with some floating body.

Although they were nearly a mile away, the yell of astonishment,
and fright, of the Malays reached the ship. The prahus still inside
the reef were seen to turn round, and row away along the coast at
the top of their speed; while those which had passed the channel,
after rowing wildly for some distance, lay on their oars--the crews
apparently stupefied at what had taken place. The craft which had
been injured the day before still lay seaward, on watch; but now
turned her head, and rowed towards the shore to join her consorts.

The Sea Belle left the coast. The Malays attempted no pursuit but,
so long as they could be seen, remained inactive near the scene of
the sudden and--to them--inexplicable catastrophe which had
befallen their consort.

Once fairly freed from all fear of pursuit, the captain invited the
two lads into his cabin; and there heard from them an account of
all the adventures through which they had passed. When they had
finished, he questioned them as to their plans.

Hans said that he intended to take the first ship bound for
Holland.

"And you?" he asked Will.

"I have no particular plan," Will said. "I am in no hurry to return
to England, having no relatives there. After being so long
absent--for it is now a year since I sailed from Yarmouth--I should
not care to return and take up my apprenticeship as a fisherman."

"Will you ship regularly on board the Sea Belle?" the captain
asked.

"Thank you, sir, I think I would rather not decide upon anything
until we get to Calcutta. I have thirty pounds in money--fifteen
pounds of which were given me on board the Dutch ship, and the rest
I received as wages for the voyage from England to Java. I carried
the money in a belt round my waist, and have kept it ever since. So
I need not be in any great hurry to settle upon what I shall do;
but certainly, after a regular sea life, I should not like to go
back to being a fisherman. I am now past sixteen and, in another
three years, shall be able to earn more wages.

"I should have taken you for at least two years older," the captain
said; "you are as big and strong as many lads of eighteen."

"I have done a good lot of hard work, in the last two years," Will
said; "for on board the Dutch ship--although, of course, I was only
rated as a boy--I used to do man's work, aloft."

Other people would have been deceived, as well as the captain. Hard
work and exposure to the air had done much to age the boy. He had
been tall and slight for his age when he left the workhouse and,
while he had not ceased growing in height, he had widened out
considerably and, had he asserted himself to be eighteen years of
age, few would have questioned the statement.

The Sea Belle for some time kept south, touching at some of the
islands where a trade was done with the Papuans; then her head was
turned north and, after an eventful voyage, she reached Calcutta,
where the captain had been ordered to fill up with cotton, or
grain, for England. The captain at once landed, and proceeded to
the office of the agent of the firm who owned the Sea Belle. He was
shown into that gentleman's private room where, at the time, two
gentlemen were seated, chatting. The agent was personally
acquainted with the captain, and asked him to sit down and smoke a
cigar.

"This is Captain Mayhew, of the Sea Belle," he said to his friends.
"He has been trading, for the last three months, down among the
islands.

"These gentlemen, Captain Mayhew, are Major Harrison and Captain
Edwards, who have just arrived from China, with their regiment, in
the Euphrates.

"Has your voyage been a pleasant one, captain?"

"Pleasant enough, sir, on the whole; but we were attacked by the
Malay pirates, and I should certainly not be here to tell the tale,
at present, had it not been for the quickness and shrewdness of a
lad, who had been shipwrecked on the coast."

"How is that, Mayhew? Tell us all about it."

Captain Mayhew related the whole story of the fight with the
pirates; saying that, unquestionably, had it not been for Will's
pointing out the passage through the reef, in the first place, and
his idea of burying a submarine mine, in the second, the Sea Belle
would have fallen into the hands of the pirates.

"But where did the boy spring from? How on earth came he to be
there?"

Captain Mayhew then related the story of William Gale's adventures,
as he had them from his own lips.

"He must be a cool and plucky young fellow, indeed," Major Harrison
exclaimed. "I should like to see him.

"What style and type is he, captain? A rough sort of chap?"

"By no means," the captain answered. "He is surprisingly well
mannered. Had I met him elsewhere, and in gentleman's clothes, I do
not think that I should have suspected that he was not what he
appeared. His features, too, somehow or other, strike one as being
those of a gentleman; which is all the more singular when, as a
fact, he told me he had been brought up in a workhouse.

"In a workhouse!" Major Harrison repeated. "Then I suppose his
parents were farm laborers."

"No," the captain answered; "he was left at the door, on a stormy
night, by a tramp who was found drowned, next morning, in a ditch
near. He had, when found, a gold trinket of some kind round his
neck; and he tells me that, from that and other circumstances, it
was generally supposed by the workhouse authorities that he did not
belong to the tramp, but that he had been stolen by her; and that
he belonged, at least, to a respectable family."

"All this is very interesting," Captain Edwards said. "I should
like much to see the boy. Will you come and dine with us this
evening on board the Euphrates--Mr. Reynolds, here, is coming--and
have the boy sent on board--say, at nine o'clock--when we can have
him in, and have a chat with him?"

Captain Mayhew readily agreed. William was even then waiting
outside for him, having landed with him; and the captain, when he
entered the office, had told him to walk about for an hour and
amuse himself with the sights of Calcutta, and then return and wait
for him. He said nothing about his being close at hand, as he did
not wish the officers to see him in the rough outfit which had been
furnished him on board ship; intending to surprise them by his
appearance in decent clothes. Accordingly, on leaving Mr. Reynolds'
office he took him to one of the numerous shops, in the town, where
clothes of any kind can be procured.

"Now, Will," he said, "I want you to get a suit of shore-going
clothes. You can get your sea outfit tomorrow, at your leisure; but
I want you to show up well at the mess, this evening, and a suit of
good clothes will always be useful to you."

Captain Mayhew had intended to pay for the outfit, himself, but
this Will would not hear of; and Captain Mayhew was the less
reluctant to let the lad have his own way as he had, in the course
of the interview with the agent, agreed that the lad's services
deserved a handsome recognition from the firm; and that the sum of
one hundred guineas should be given to him, at once. The agent
felt, no doubt, that the firm would thoroughly approve of the
payment. Twenty pounds were to be given to Hans, for his share of
the services; but the two suggestions which had saved the Sea Belle
had both originated with Will.

By Captain Mayhew's advice, Will purchased a suit of dark-colored
tweed, a black tie, and some white shirts and collars. At other
shops, he bought some boots and a Panama straw hat. Having
completed their purchases, they walked for some hours about
Calcutta; Will being delighted with the variety of the native
costumes, and the newness and singularity of everything which met
his eye.

On their return to the ghaut--as the landing stage is called--they
found their various purchases already stowed in the Sea Belle's
boat; which had, about an hour before, come to shore to fetch them
off. At seven o'clock Captain Mayhew went off to the Euphrates,
leaving orders that the boat was to bring Will over, at nine. At
that hour the lad was dressed in his new clothes which,
fortunately, fitted him well.

"By jingo, Will," the first mate said, as he entered the cabin,
"you look a tip-topper, and no mistake."

The mate was right. The lad, with his sunburnt face, quiet manner,
and easy carriage, looked thoroughly at home in his attire.

"I don't know who your parents were, but I would bet a month's pay
that the old tramp you were telling us of had nothing to do with
it; for you look every inch a gentleman, from head to foot."

Will found, on gaining the deck of the Euphrates, that orders had
been left by the officer in command that he was to be shown into
the saloon cabin upon his giving his name to the sergeant, who came
up at the sentry's call. He was at once conducted below. For a
moment he felt almost bewildered as he entered; the size of the
cabin, the handsomeness of its fittings, the well-laid table decked
with fragrant flowers, so far surpassed anything he had ever seen,
or thought of.

He was conducted to the head of the table, where Major Harrison,
with Mr. Reynolds on one hand and Captain Mayhew on the other, sat
near the colonel commanding the regiment. Captain Mayhew, who had
already told the outline of the story, smiled quietly to himself at
the expression of surprise which crossed the faces of the major and
Mr. Reynolds, as well as of the other officers sitting near, at the
appearance of the lad he introduced to them. The colonel ordered a
chair to be placed next to himself, and told the servant to fill a
glass of wine for Will, and entered into conversation with him.

"I think, gentlemen," he said, after a minute or two, seeing that
the lad did not touch the wine that was poured out for him, "it
will be pleasanter on deck; for it is terribly hot here, and I see
that most of you have finished your wine."

An adjournment was at once made, to the deck. Here cigars were
lighted and, the colonel and senior officers taking their places in
some of the easy chairs--which were still all out--the rest
gathered round to hear the story, which Major Harrison had promised
them would be an interesting one.

Captain Mayhew first gave his account of the fight between the Sea
Belle and the pirates, beginning at the point when, as he was hotly
chased and despairing of making a successful defense, the canoe
with the two lads in it came out to him. Then Will was called upon
to explain how he came to be there, at that moment. He told briefly
how the fishing smack was sunk, how he had saved himself by
clinging to the bob stay of the Dutch Indianan, and how he had
sailed in this vessel to Java; and was on his way in her to China,
when wrecked in the cyclone.

Here his audience insisted upon his giving them full details; and
he accordingly told them the manner in which he and a few of the
crew had escaped; how, when they were building a boat, they had
been attacked by Malays, and all--except another lad and himself,
who were hiding in a tree--were massacred by the pirates; how they
had gone inland to a village where, having aided the natives when
attacked by a hostile tribe, they had been most kindly received;
how they had finally obtained a canoe, and spent their time in
fishing, in hopes of seeing a passing sail; until the Sea Belle,
chased by the Malay pirates, had appeared off the shore.

There was a genuine murmur of approval, from those thickly
clustered round, as the lad finished his story; and the colonel
warmly expressed his approval of his conduct, under such exciting
circumstances.

"What are you going to do, now?" he asked.

"I have not made up my mind, sir," the lad said. "I expect that I
shall ship in some vessel sailing for England, shortly."

"Major Harrison," the colonel said, "will you and Captain Mayhew
come with me to my cabin?

"I should like to have a few minutes' private chat with you," he
went on, putting his hand on Will's shoulder.

A minute or two later, the three gentlemen and Will were seated in
the private cabin.

"Look here, my boy," the colonel said; "I have heard, from Major
Harrison, what you had told Captain Mayhew concerning your birth
and, certainly, your appearance and manner go far to sustain the
belief that the tramp who left you was not your mother, and that
your parents were of gentle birth. I do not say that a man's birth
makes much difference to him; still, it does go for something and,
in nine cases out of ten, the difference both in face and figure is
unmistakable. Unless I am very wrong, your father was a gentleman.

"However, that is not to the point: it is your quickness and
activity, your coolness in danger, and the adventures which you
have gone through which interest us in you. Now I think it is a
pity that a lad, who has shown that there is so much in him, should
remain a sailor before the mast. You have not been so long at sea
as to become wedded to it, and to be unable to turn your hands to
anything else.

"Now, what do you say to enlisting? In the ranks are men of all
sorts--gentlemen, honest men, and blackguards. The steady,
respectable man is sure to rise. You can, the captain tells me,
read and write well. There is a chance of active service, at
present; and when there is active service, a man who distinguishes
himself gets rapid promotion. The regiment land, tomorrow; and go
straight through, by train, to the North. There is trouble in
Afghanistan; and an ultimatum has just been sent, to the Ameer,
that if he does not comply with our terms it will be war; and we
hope to be there in time for the beginning of it. I can only say
that, if you like to join, Major Harrison and myself will keep our
eyes upon you and, if you deserve it, you may be sure of rapid
promotion. You have greatly interested me in your story, and I
should be very glad to give a helping hand to so deserving a young
fellow.

"It is not usual, certainly, for a regiment to take recruits in
India; but I don't suppose that there can be any objection to it."

"Thank you very much," Will said, when the colonel ceased. "I am
greatly obliged to you for your kindness. I have never thought
about the army, but I am sure that I cannot possibly do better than
accept your kind offer.

"The only thing, sir, is about my age.

"Tut, tut!" the colonel interrupted, "I don't want to know anything
about your age. When you go up for attestment, you will say that
you are under nineteen, which will be strictly true. I will give a
hint, and no further questions will be asked. Neither I nor anyone
else know that you are not past eighteen and, in time of war, no
one is particular as to the age of recruits, as long as they are
fit to do their duty.

"You must work hard, to pick up enough knowledge of drill to enable
you to take your place in the ranks. There is neither parade work,
nor difficult maneuvering, in the face of an enemy; and you can
finish up, afterwards.

"Are you quite agreed?"

"Quite, sir," Will said, joyously, "and am, indeed, obliged to
you."

"Come on board, then, tomorrow at eight o'clock, and ask for
Sergeant Ringwood."

William Gale left the cabin with a new prospect of life before him.
He had, of late, rather shrunk from the thought of again taking his
place as a ship boy; and the prospect of adventures--to say nothing
of the advancement which might befall him, through the interest
taken in him by the colonel--was delightful to him.

The last words the colonel had said when he left the cabin were:

"Say nothing about the workhouse, and as little as possible of
anything which happened before you were wrecked on the island, in
the barrack room."

