the coach, to leave the barn and close the door, when he was stopped
by a hand which caught and held the long hair of his goatskin. He
recognized a pair of eyes the gentleness of which exercised a power of
magnetism over him, and he stood stock-still for a moment under their
spell. Francine sprang from the carriage, and said, in the nervous tone
of an excited woman: "Pierre, what news did you give to that lady and
her son on the road? What is going on here? Why are you hiding? I must
know all."

These words brought a look on the Chouan's face which Francine had never
seen there before. The Breton led his innocent mistress to the door;
there he turned her towards the blanching light of the moon, and
answered, as he looked in her face with terrifying eyes: "Yes, by my
damnation, Francine, I will tell you, but not until you have sworn on
these beads (and he pulled an old chaplet from beneath his goatskin)--on
this relic, which _you know well_," he continued, "to answer me truly
one question."

Francine colored as she saw the chaplet, which was no doubt a token
of their love. "It was on that," he added, much agitated, "that you
swore--"

He did not finish the sentence. The young girl placed her hand on the
lips of her savage lover and silenced him.

"Need I swear?" she said.

He took his mistress gently by the hand, looked at her for a moment and
said: "Is the lady you are with really Mademoiselle de Verneuil?"

Francine stood with hanging arms, her eyelids lowered, her head bowed,
pale and speechless.

"She is a strumpet!" cried Marche-a-Terre, in a terrifying voice.

At the word the pretty hand once more covered his lips, but this time he
sprang back violently. The girl no longer saw a lover; he had turned
to a wild beast in all the fury of its nature. His eyebrows were drawn
together, his lips drew apart, and he showed his teeth like a dog which
defends its master.

"I left you pure, and I find you muck. Ha! why did I ever leave you! You
are here to betray us; to deliver up the Gars!"

These sentences sounded more like roars than words. Though Francine
was frightened, she raised her angelic eyes at this last accusation and
answered calmly, as she looked into his savage face: "I will pledge my
eternal safety that that is false. That's an idea of the lady you are
serving."

He lowered his head; then she took his hand and nestling to him with a
pretty movement said: "Pierre, what is all this to you and me? I don't
know what you understand about it, but I can't make it out. Recollect
one thing: that noble and beautiful young lady has been my benefactress;
she is also yours--we live together like two sisters. No harm must ever
come to her where we are, you and I--in our lifetime at least. Swear it!
I trust no one here but you."

"I don't command here," said the Chouan, in a surly tone.

His face darkened. She caught his long ears and twisted them gently as
if playing with a cat.

"At least," she said, seeing that he looked less stern, "promise me to
use all the power you have to protect our benefactress."

He shook his head as if he doubted of success, and the motion made her
tremble. At this critical moment the escort was entering the courtyard.
The tread of the soldiers and the rattle of their weapons awoke the
echoes and seemed to put an end to Marche-a-Terre's indecision.

"Perhaps I can save her," he said, "if you make her stay in the house.
And mind," he added, "whatever happens, you must stay with her and keep
silence; if not, no safety."

"I promise it," she replied in terror.

"Very good; then go in--go in at once, and hide your fears from every
one, even your mistress."

"Yes."

She pressed his hand; he stood for a moment watching her with an almost
paternal air as she ran with the lightness of a bird up the portico;
then he slipped behind the bushes, like an actor darting behind the
scenes as the curtain rises on a tragedy.

"Do you know, Merle," said Gerard as they reached the chateau, "that
this place looks to me like a mousetrap?"

"So I think," said the captain, anxiously.

The two officers hastened to post sentinels to guard the gate and the
causeway; then they examined with great distrust the precipitous banks
of the lakes and the surroundings of the chateau.

"Pooh!" said Merle, "we must do one of two things: either trust
ourselves in this barrack with perfect confidence, or else not enter it
at all."

"Come, let's go in," replied Gerard.

The soldiers, released at the word of command, hastened to stack their
muskets in conical sheaves, and to form a sort of line before the litter
of straw, in the middle of which was the promised barrel of cider.
They then divided into groups, to whom two peasants began to distribute
butter and rye-bread. The marquis appeared in the portico to welcome
the officers and take them to the salon. As Gerard went up the steps he
looked at both ends of the portico, where some venerable larches spread
their black branches; and he called up Clef-des-Coeurs and Beau-Pied.

"You will each reconnoitre the gardens and search the bushes, and post a
sentry before your line."

"May we light our fire before starting, adjutant?" asked
Clef-des-Coeurs.

Gerard nodded.

"There! you see, Clef-des-Coeurs," said Beau-Pied, "the adjutant's
wrong to run himself into this wasp's-nest. If Hulot was in command we
shouldn't be cornered here--in a saucepan!"

"What a stupid you are!" replied Clef-des-Coeurs, "haven't you guessed,
you knave of tricks, that this is the home of the beauty our jovial
Merle has been whistling round? He'll marry her to a certainty--that's
as clear as a well-rubbed bayonet. A woman like that will do honor to
the brigade."

"True for you," replied Beau-Pied, "and you may add that she gives
pretty good cider--but I can't drink it in peace till I know what's
behind those devilish hedges. I always remember poor Larose and
Vieux-Chapeau rolling down the ditch at La Pelerine. I shall recollect
Larose's queue to the end of my days; it went hammering down like the
knocker of a front door."

"Beau-Pied, my friend; you have too much imagination for a soldier; you
ought to be making songs at the national Institute."

"If I've too much imagination," retorted Beau-Pied, "you haven't any; it
will take you some time to get your degree as consul."

A general laugh put an end to the discussion, for Clef-des-Coeurs found
no suitable reply in his pouch with which to floor his adversary.

"Come and make our rounds; I'll go to the right," said Beau-Pied.

"Very good, I'll take the left," replied his comrade. "But stop one
minute, I must have a glass of cider; my throat is glued together like
the oiled-silk of Hulot's best hat."

The left bank of the gardens, which Clef-des-Coeurs thus delayed
searching at once, was, unhappily, the dangerous slope where Francine
had seen the moving line of men. All things go by chance in war.

As Gerard entered the salon and bowed to the company he cast a
penetrating eye on the men who were present. Suspicions came forcibly to
his mind, and he went at once to Mademoiselle de Verneuil and said in a
low voice: "I think you had better leave this place immediately. We are
not safe here."

"What can you fear while I am with you?" she answered, laughing. "You
are safer here than you would be at Mayenne."

A woman answers for her lover in good faith. The two officers were
reassured. The party now moved into the dining-room after some
discussion about a guest, apparently of some importance, who had not
appeared. Mademoiselle de Verneuil was able, thanks to the silence which
always reigns at the beginning of a meal, to give some attention to the
character of the assemblage, which was curious enough under existing
circumstances. One thing struck her with surprise. The Republican
officers seemed superior to the rest of the assembly by reason of their
dignified appearance. Their long hair tied behind in a queue drew lines
beside their foreheads which gave, in those days, an expression of great
candor and nobleness to young heads. Their threadbare blue uniforms
with the shabby red facings, even their epaulets flung back behind their
shoulders (a sign throughout the army, even among the leaders, of a lack
of overcoats),--all these things brought the two Republican officers
into strong relief against the men who surrounded them.

"Oh, they are the Nation, and that means liberty!" thought Marie; then,
with a glance at the royalists, she added, "on the other side is a man,
a king, and privileges." She could not refrain from admiring Merle, so
thoroughly did that gay soldier respond to the ideas she had formed of
the French trooper who hums a tune when the balls are whistling,
and jests when a comrade falls. Gerard was more imposing. Grave and
self-possessed, he seemed to have one of those truly Republican spirits
which, in the days of which we write, crowded the French armies, and
gave them, by means of these noble individual devotions, an energy
which they had never before possessed. "That is one of my men with great
ideals," thought Mademoiselle de Verneuil. "Relying on the present,
which they rule, they destroy the past for the benefit of the future."

The thought saddened her because she could not apply it to her lover;
towards whom she now turned, to discard by a different admiration, these
beliefs in the Republic she was already beginning to dislike. Looking at
the marquis, surrounded by men who were bold enough, fanatical enough,
and sufficiently long-headed as to the future to give battle to
a victorious Republic in the hope of restoring a dead monarchy, a
proscribed religion, fugitive princes, and lost privileges, "He,"
thought she, "has no less an aim than the others; clinging to those
fragments, he wants to make a future from the past." Her mind, thus
grasped by conflicting images, hesitated between the new and the old
wrecks. Her conscience told her that the one was fighting for a man, the
other for a country; but she had now reached, through her feelings, the
point to which reason will also bring us, namely: to a recognition that
the king _is_ the Nation.

The steps of a man echoed in the adjoining room, and the marquis rose
from the table to greet him. He proved to be the expected guest, and
seeing the assembled company he was about to speak, when the Gars made
him a hasty sign, which he concealed from the Republicans, to take his
place and say nothing. The more the two officers analyzed the faces
about them, the more their suspicions increased. The clerical dress of
the Abbe Gudin and the singularity of the Chouan garments were so many
warnings to them; they redoubled their watchfulness, and soon discovered
many discrepancies between the manners of the guests and the topics of
their conversation. The republicanism of some was quite as exaggerated
as the aristocratic bearing of others was unmistakable. Certain glances
which they detected between the marquis and his guests, certain words
of double meaning imprudently uttered, but above all the fringe of
beard which was round the necks of several of the men and was very
ill-concealed by their cravats, brought the officers at last to a full
conviction of the truth, which flashed upon their minds at the same
instant. They gave each other one look, for Madame du Gua had cleverly
separated them and they could only impart their thoughts by their eyes.
Such a situation demanded the utmost caution. They did not know whether
they and their men were masters of the situation, or whether they had
been drawn into a trap, or whether Mademoiselle de Verneuil was the
dupe or the accomplice of this inexplicable state of things. But an
unforeseen event precipitated a crisis before they had fully recognized
the gravity of their situation.

The new guest was one of those solid men who are square at the base and
square at the shoulders, with ruddy skins; men who lean backward when
they walk, seeming to displace much atmosphere about them, and who
appear to think that more than one glance of the eye is needful to take
them in. Notwithstanding his rank, he had taken life as a joke from
which he was to get as much amusement as possible; and yet, although he
knelt at his own shrine only, he was kind, polite, and witty, after the
fashion of those noblemen who, having finished their training at court,
return to live on their estates, and never suspect that they have, at
the end of twenty years, grown rusty. Men of this type fail in tact with
imperturbable coolness, talk folly wittily, distrust good with extreme
shrewdness, and take incredible pains to fall into traps.

When, by a play of his knife and fork which proclaimed him a good
feeder, he had made up for lost time, he began to look round on the
company. His astonishment was great when he observed the two Republican
officers, and he questioned Madame du Gua with a look, while she, for
all answer, showed him Mademoiselle de Verneuil in the same way. When he
saw the siren whose demeanor had silenced the suspicions Madame du Gua
had excited among the guests, the face of the stout stranger broke into
one of those insolent, ironical smiles which contain a whole history of
scandal. He leaned to his next neighbor and whispered a few words, which
went from ear to ear and lip to lip, passing Marie and the two officers,
until they reached the heart of one whom they struck to death. The
leaders of the Vendeans and the Chouans assembled round that table
looked at the Marquis de Montauran with cruel curiosity. The eyes
of Madame du Gua, flashing with joy, turned from the marquis to
Mademoiselle de Verneuil, who was speechless with surprise. The
Republican officers, uneasy in mind, questioned each other's thoughts
as they awaited the result of this extraordinary scene. In a moment the
forks remained inactive in every hand, silence reigned, and every eye
was turned to the Gars. A frightful anger showed upon his face, which
turned waxen in tone. He leaned towards the guest from whom the rocket
had started and said, in a voice that seemed muffled in crape, "Death of
my soul! count, is that true?"

"On my honor," said the count, bowing gravely.

The marquis lowered his eyes for a moment, then he raised them and
looked fixedly at Marie, who, watchful of his struggle, knew that look
to be her death-warrant.

"I would give my life," he said in a low voice, "for revenge on the
spot."

Madame du Gua understood the words from the mere movement of the young
man's lips, and she smiled upon him as we smile at a friend whose
regrets are about to cease. The scorn felt for Mademoiselle de Verneuil
and shown on every face, brought to its height the growing indignation
of the two Republicans, who now rose hastily:--

"Do you want anything, citizens?" asked Madame du Gua.

"Our swords, _citoyenne_," said Gerard, sarcastically.

"You do not need them at table," said the marquis, coldly.

"No, but we are going to play at a game you know very well," replied
Gerard. "This is La Pelerine over again."

The whole party seemed dumfounded. Just then a volley, fired with
terrible regularity, echoed through the courtyard. The two officers
sprang to the portico; there they beheld a hundred or so of Chouans
aiming at the few soldiers who were not shot down at the first
discharge; these they fired upon as upon so many hares. The Bretons
swarmed from the bank, where Marche-a-Terre had posted them at the peril
of their lives; for after the last volley, and mingling with the cries
of the dying, several Chouans were heard to fall into the lake, where
they were lost like stones in a gulf. Pille-Miche took aim at Gerard;
Marche-a-Terre held Merle at his mercy.

"Captain," said the marquis to Merle, repeating to the Republican his
own words, "you see that men are like medlars, they ripen on the straw."
He pointed with a wave of his hand to the entire escort of the Blues
lying on the bloody litter where the Chouans were despatching those who
still breathed, and rifling the dead bodies with incredible rapidity. "I
was right when I told you that your soldiers will not get as far as La
Pelerine. I think, moreover, that your head will fill with lead before
mine. What say you?"

Montauran felt a horrible necessity to vent his rage. His bitter
sarcasm, the ferocity, even the treachery of this military execution,
done without his orders, but which he now accepted, satisfied in
some degree the craving of his heart. In his fury he would fain have
annihilated France. The dead Blues, the living officers, all innocent
of the crime for which he demanded vengeance, were to him the cards by
which a gambler cheats his despair.

"I would rather perish than conquer as you are conquering," said Gerard.
Then, seeing the naked and bloody corpses of his men, he cried out,
"Murdered basely, in cold blood!"

"That was how you murdered Louis XVI., monsieur," said the marquis.

"Monsieur," replied Gerard, haughtily, "there are mysteries in a king's
trial which you could never comprehend."

"Do you dare to accuse the king?" exclaimed the marquis.

"Do you dare to fight your country?" retorted Gerard.

"Folly!" said the marquis.

"Parricide!" exclaimed the Republican.

"Well, well," cried Merle, gaily, "a pretty time to quarrel at the
moment of your death."

"True," said Gerard, coldly, turning to the marquis. "Monsieur, if it is
your intention to put us to death, at least have the goodness to shoot
us at once."

"Ah! that's like you, Gerard," said Merle, "always in a hurry to finish
things. But if one has to travel far and can't breakfast on the morrow,
at least we might sup."

Gerard sprang forward without a word towards the wall. Pille-Miche
covered him, glancing as he did so at the motionless marquis, whose
silence he took for an order, and the adjutant-major fell like a tree.
Marche-a-Terre ran to share the fresh booty with Pille-Miche; like two
hungry crows they disputed and clamored over the still warm body.

"If you really wish to finish your supper, captain, you can come with
me," said the marquis to Merle.

The captain followed him mechanically, saying in a low voice: "It is
that devil of a strumpet that caused all this. What will Hulot say?"

"Strumpet!" cried the marquis in a strangled voice, "then she is one?"

The captain seemed to have given Montauran a death-blow, for he
re-entered the house with a staggering step, pale, haggard, and undone.

Another scene had meanwhile taken place in the dining-room, which
assumed, in the marquis's absence, such a threatening character that
Marie, alone without her protector, might well fancy she read her
death-warrant in the eyes of her rival. At the noise of the volley the
guests all sprang to their feet, but Madame du Gua remained seated.

"It is nothing," she said; "our men are despatching the Blues." Then,
seeing the marquis outside on the portico, she rose. "Mademoiselle whom
you here see," she continued, with the calmness of concentrated fury,
"came here to betray the Gars! She meant to deliver him up to the
Republic."

"I could have done so twenty times to-day and yet I saved his life,"
said Mademoiselle de Verneuil.

Madame du Gua sprang upon her rival like lightning; in her blind
excitement she tore apart the fastenings of the young girl's spencer,
the stuff, the embroidery, the corset, the chemise, and plunged her
savage hand into the bosom where, as she well knew, a letter lay hidden.
In doing this her jealousy so bruised and tore the palpitating throat
of her rival, taken by surprise at the sudden attack, that she left
the bloody marks of her nails, feeling a sort of pleasure in making
her submit to so degrading a prostitution. In the feeble struggle which
Marie made against the furious woman, her hair became unfastened and
fell in undulating curls about her shoulders; her face glowed with
outraged modesty, and tears made their burning way along her cheeks,
heightening the brilliancy of her eyes, as she quivered with shame
before the looks of the assembled men. The hardest judge would have
believed in her innocence when he saw her sorrow.

Hatred is so uncalculating that Madame du Gua did not perceive she
had overshot her mark, and that no one listened to her as she cried
triumphantly: "You shall now see, gentlemen, whether I have slandered
that horrible creature."

"Not so horrible," said the bass voice of the guest who had thrown the
first stone. "But for my part, I like such horrors."

"Here," continued the cruel woman, "is an order signed by Laplace, and
counter-signed by Dubois, minister of war." At these names several heads
were turned to her. "Listen to the wording of it," she went on.

  "'The military citizen commanders of all grades, the district
  administrators, the _procureur-syndics_, et cetera, of the
  insurgent departments, and particularly those of the localities in
  which the ci-devant Marquis de Montauran, leader of the brigands
