done. His method of fluxions was still unpublished; his optics was
published only imperfectly; a second edition of the _Principia_, with
additions and improvements, had yet to appear; but fame had now come
upon him, and with fame worries of all kinds.

By some fatality, principally no doubt because of the interest they
excited, every discovery he published was the signal for an outburst of
criticism and sometimes of attack. I shall not go into these matters:
they are now trivial enough, but it is necessary to mention them,
because to Newton they evidently loomed large and terrible, and
occasioned him acute torment.

[Illustration: FIG. 68.--Newton when young. (_From an engraving by B.
Reading after Sir Peter Lely._)]

No sooner was the _Principia_ put than Hooke put in his claims for
priority. And indeed his claims were not altogether negligible; for
vague ideas of the same sort had been floating in his comprehensive
mind, and he doubtless felt indistinctly conscious of a great deal more
than he could really state or prove.

By indiscreet friends these two great men were set somewhat at
loggerheads, and worse might have happened had they not managed to come
to close quarters, and correspond privately in a quite friendly manner,
instead of acting through the mischievous medium of third parties. In
the next edition Newton liberally recognizes the claims of both Hooke
and Wren. However, he takes warning betimes of what he has to expect,
and writes to Halley that he will only publish the first two books,
those containing general theorems on motion. The third book--concerning
the system of the world, _i.e._ the application to the solar system--he
says "I now design to suppress. Philosophy is such an impertinently
litigious lady that a man had as good be engaged in law-suits as have to
do with her. I found it so formerly, and now I am no sooner come near
her again but she gives me warning. The two books without the third will
not so well bear the title 'Mathematical Principles of Natural
Philosophy,' and therefore I had altered it to this, 'On the Free Motion
of Two Bodies'; but on second thoughts I retain the former title: 'twill
help the sale of the book--which I ought not to diminish now 'tis
yours."

However, fortunately, Halley was able to prevail upon him to publish the
third book also. It is, indeed, the most interesting and popular of the
three, as it contains all the direct applications to astronomy of the
truths established in the other two.

Some years later, when his method of fluxions was published, another and
a worse controversy arose--this time with Leibnitz, who had also
independently invented the differential calculus. It was not so well
recognized then how frequently it happens that two men independently
and unknowingly work at the very same thing at the same time. The
history of science is now full of such instances; but then the friends
of each accused the other of plagiarism.

I will not go into the controversy: it is painful and useless. It only
served to embitter the later years of two great men, and it continued
long after Newton's death--long after both their deaths. It can hardly
be called ancient history even now.

But fame brought other and less unpleasant distractions than
controversies. We are a curious, practical, and rather stupid people,
and our one idea of honouring a man is to _vote_ for him in some way or
other; so they sent Newton to Parliament. He went, I believe, as a Whig,
but it is not recorded that he spoke. It is, in fact, recorded that he
was once expected to speak when on a Royal Commission about some
question of chronometers, but that he would not. However, I dare say he
made a good average member.

Then a little later it was realized that Newton was poor, that he still
had to teach for his livelihood, and that though the Crown had continued
his fellowship to him as Lucasian Professor without the necessity of
taking orders, yet it was rather disgraceful that he should not be
better off. So an appeal was made to the Government on his behalf, and
Lord Halifax, who exerted himself strongly in the matter, succeeding to
office on the accession of William III., was able to make him ultimately
Master of the Mint, with a salary of some L1,200 a year. I believe he
made rather a good Master, and turned out excellent coins: certainly he
devoted his attention to his work there in a most exemplary manner.

But what a pitiful business it all is! Here is a man sent by Heaven to
do certain things which no man else could do, and so long as he is
comparatively unknown he does them; but so soon as he is found out, he
is clapped into a routine office with a big salary: and there is,
comparatively speaking, an end of him. It is not to be supposed that he
had lost his power, for he frequently solved problems very quickly which
had been given out by great Continental mathematicians as a challenge to
the world.

We may ask why Newton allowed himself to be thus bandied about instead
of settling himself down to the work in which he was so pre-eminently
great. Well, I expect your truly great man never realizes how great he
is, and seldom knows where his real strength lies. Certainly Newton did
not know it. He several times talks of giving up philosophy altogether;
and though he never really does it, and perhaps the feeling is one only
born of some temporary overwork, yet he does not sacrifice everything
else to it as he surely must had he been conscious of his own greatness.
No; self-consciousness was the last thing that affected him. It is for a
great man's contemporaries to discover him, to make much of him, and to
put him in surroundings where he may flourish luxuriantly in his own
heaven-intended way.

However, it is difficult for us to judge of these things. Perhaps if he
had been maintained at the national expense to do that for which he was
preternaturally fitted, he might have worn himself out prematurely;
whereas by giving him routine work the scientific world got the benefit
of his matured wisdom and experience. It was no small matter to the
young Royal Society to be able to have him as their President for
twenty-four years. His portrait has hung over the President's chair ever
since, and there I suppose it will continue to hang until the Royal
Society becomes extinct.

The events of his later life I shall pass over lightly. He lived a calm,
benevolent life, universally respected and beloved. His silver-white
hair when he removed his peruke was a venerable spectacle. A lock of it
is still preserved, with many other relics, in the library of Trinity
College. He died quietly, after a painful illness, at the ripe age of
eighty-five. His body lay in state in the Jerusalem Chamber, and he was
buried in Westminster Abbey, six peers bearing the pall. These things
are to be mentioned to the credit of the time and the country; for
after we have seen the calamitous spectacle of the way Tycho and Kepler
and Galileo were treated by their ungrateful and unworthy countries, it
is pleasant to reflect that England, with all its mistakes, yet
recognized _her_ great man when she received him, and honoured him with
the best she knew how to give.

[Illustration: FIG. 69.--Sir Isaac Newton.]

Concerning his character, one need only say that it was what one would
expect and wish. It was characterized by a modest, calm, dignified
simplicity. He lived frugally with his niece and her husband, Mr.
Conduit, who succeeded him as Master of the Mint. He never married, nor
apparently did he ever think of so doing. The idea, perhaps, did not
naturally occur to him, any more than the idea of publishing his work
did.

He was always a deeply religious man and a sincere Christian, though
somewhat of the Arian or Unitarian persuasion--so, at least, it is
asserted by orthodox divines who understand these matters. He studied
theology more or less all his life, and towards the end was greatly
interested in questions of Biblical criticism and chronology. By some
ancient eclipse or other he altered the recognized system of dates a few
hundred years; and his book on the prophecies of Daniel and the
Revelation of St. John, wherein he identifies the beast with the Church
of Rome in quite the orthodox way, is still by some admired.

But in all these matters it is probable that he was a merely ordinary
man, with natural acumen and ability doubtless, but nothing in the least
superhuman. In science, the impression he makes upon me is only
expressible by the words inspired, superhuman.

And yet if one realizes his method of work, and the calm, uninterrupted
flow of all his earlier life, perhaps his achievements become more
intelligible. When asked how he made his discoveries, he replied: "By
always thinking unto them. I keep the subject constantly before me, and
wait till the first dawnings open slowly by little and little into a
full and clear light." That is the way--quiet, steady, continuous
thinking, uninterrupted and unharassed brooding. Much may be done under
those conditions. Much ought to be sacrificed to obtain those
conditions. All the best thinking work of the world has been thus
done.[18] Buffon said: "Genius is patience." So says Newton: "If I have
done the public any service this way, it is due to nothing but industry
and patient thought." Genius patience? No, it is not quite that, or,
rather, it is much more than that; but genius without patience is like
fire without fuel--it will soon burn itself out.




NOTES FOR LECTURE IX

  The _Principia_ published 1687.
  Newton died               1727.


THE LAW OF GRAVITATION.--Every particle of matter attracts every other
particle of matter with a force proportional to the mass of each and to
the inverse square of the distance between them.


SOME OF NEWTON'S DEDUCTIONS.

1. Kepler's second law (equable description of areas) proves that each
planet is acted on by a force directed towards the sun as a centre of
force.

2. Kepler's first law proves that this central force diminishes in the
same proportion as the square of the distance increases.

3. Kepler's third law proves that all the planets are acted on by the
same kind of force; of an intensity depending on the mass of the
sun.[19]

4. So by knowing the length of year and distance of any planet from the
sun, the sun's mass can be calculated, in terms of that of the earth.

5. For the satellites, the force acting depends on the mass of _their_
central body, a planet. Hence the mass of any planet possessing a
satellite becomes known.

6. The force constraining the moon in her orbit is the same gravity as
gives terrestrial bodies their weight and regulates the motion of
projectiles. [Because, while a stone drops 16 feet in a second, the
moon, which is 60 times as far from the centre of the earth, drops 16
feet in a minute.]

*      *      *      *      *

7. The moon is attracted not only by the earth, but by the sun also;
hence its orbit is perturbed, and Newton calculated out the chief of
these perturbations, viz.:--

     (The equation of the centre, discovered by Hipparchus.)

     (_a_) The evection, discovered by Hipparchus and Ptolemy.

     (_b_) The variation, discovered by Tycho Brahe.

     (_c_) The annual equation, discovered by Tycho Brahe.

     (_d_) The retrogression of the nodes, then being observed at
     Greenwich by Flamsteed.

     (_e_) The variation of inclination, then being observed at
     Greenwich by Flamsteed.

     (_f_) The progression of the apses (with an error of one-half).

     (_g_) The inequality of apogee, previously unknown.

     (_h_) The inequality of nodes, previously unknown.

8. Each planet is attracted not only by the sun but by the other
planets, hence their orbits are slightly affected by each other. Newton
began the theory of planetary perturbations.

9. He recognized the comets as members of the solar system, obedient to
the same law of gravity and moving in very elongated ellipses; so their
return could be predicted (_e.g._ Halley's comet).

10. Applying the idea of centrifugal force to the earth considered as a
rotating body, he perceived that it could not be a true sphere, and
calculated its oblateness, obtaining 28 miles greater equatorial than
polar diameter.

11. Conversely, from the observed shape of Jupiter, or any planet, the
length of its day could be estimated.

12. The so-calculated shape of the earth, in combination with
centrifugal force, causes the weight of bodies to vary with latitude;
and Newton calculated the amount of this variation. 194 lbs. at pole
balance 195 lbs. at equator.

13. A homogeneous sphere attracts as if its mass were concentrated at
its centre. For any other figure, such as an oblate spheroid, this is
not exactly true. A hollow concentric spherical shell exerts no force on
small bodies inside it.

14. The earth's equatorial protuberance, being acted on by the
attraction of the sun and moon, must disturb its axis of rotation in a
calculated manner; and thus is produced the precession of the equinoxes.
[The attraction of the planets on the same protuberance causes a smaller
and rather different kind of precession.]

15. The waters of the ocean are attracted towards the sun and moon on
one side, and whirled a little further away than the solid earth on the
other side: hence Newton explained all the main phenomena of the tides.

16. The sun's mass being known, he calculated the height of the solar
tide.

17. From the observed heights of spring and neap tides he determined the
lunar tide, and thence made an estimate of the mass of the moon.

REFERENCE TABLE OF NUMERICAL DATA.

 +---------+---------------+----------------------+-----------------+
 |         |Masses in Solar| Height dropped by a  | Length of Day or|
 |         |    System.    |stone in first second.|time of rotation.|
 +---------+---------------+----------------------+-----------------+
 |Mercury  |         .065  |       7.0 feet       |   24    hours   |
 |Venus    |         .885  |      15.8  "         |   23-1/2  "     |
 |Earth    |        1.000  |      16.1  "         |   24      "     |
 |Mars     |         .108  |       6.2  "         |   24-1/2  "     |
 |Jupiter  |      300.8    |      45.0  "         |   10      "     |
 |Saturn   |       89.7    |      18.4  "         |   10-1/2  "     |
 |The Sun  |   316000.     |     436.0  "         |   608     "     |
 |The Moon |   about .012  |       3.7  "         |   702     "     |
 +---------+---------------+----------------------+-----------------+

The mass of the earth, taken above as unity, is 6,000 trillion tons.

_Observatories._--Uraniburg flourished from 1576 to 1597; the
Observatory of Paris was founded in 1667; Greenwich Observatory in 1675.

_Astronomers-Royal._--Flamsteed, Halley, Bradley, Bliss, Maskelyne,
Pond, Airy, Christie.




LECTURE IX

NEWTON'S "PRINCIPIA"


The law of gravitation, above enunciated, in conjunction with the laws
of motion rehearsed at the end of the preliminary notes of Lecture VII.,
now supersedes the laws of Kepler and includes them as special cases.
The more comprehensive law enables us to criticize Kepler's laws from a
higher standpoint, to see how far they are exact and how far they are
only approximations. They are, in fact, not precisely accurate, but the
reason for every discrepancy now becomes abundantly clear, and can be
worked out by the theory of gravitation.

We may treat Kepler's laws either as immediate consequences of the law
of gravitation, or as the known facts upon which that law was founded.
Historically, the latter is the more natural plan, and it is thus that
they are treated in the first three statements of the above notes; but
each proposition may be worked inversely, and we might state them
thus:--

1. The fact that the force acting on each planet is directed to the sun,
necessitates the equable description of areas.

2. The fact that the force varies as the inverse square of the distance,
necessitates motion in an ellipse, or some other conic section, with the
sun in one focus.

3. The fact that one attracting body acts on all the planets with an
inverse square law, causes the cubes of their mean distances to be
proportional to the squares of their periodic times.

Not only these but a multitude of other deductions follow rigorously
from the simple datum that every particle of matter attracts every other
particle with a force directly proportional to the mass of each and to
the inverse square of their mutual distance. Those dealt with in the
_Principia_ are summarized above, and it will be convenient to run over
them in order, with the object of giving some idea of the general
meaning of each, without attempting anything too intricate to be readily
intelligible.

[Illustration: FIG. 70.]

No. 1. Kepler's second law (equable description of areas) proves that
each planet is acted on by a force directed towards the sun as a centre
of force.

The equable description of areas about a centre of force has already
been fully, though briefly, established. (p. 175.) It is undoubtedly of
fundamental importance, and is the earliest instance of the serious
discussion of central forces, _i.e._ of forces directed always to a
fixed centre.

We may put it afresh thus:--OA has been the motion of a particle in a
unit of time; at A it receives a knock towards C, whereby in the next
unit it travels along AD instead of AB. Now the area of the triangle
CAD, swept out by the radius vector in unit time, is 1/2_bh_; _h_ being
the perpendicular height of the triangle from the base AC. (Fig. 70.)
Now the blow at A, being along the base, has no effect upon _h_; and
consequently the area remains just what it would have been without the
blow. A blow directed to any point other than C would at once alter the
area of the triangle.

One interesting deduction may at once be drawn. If gravity were a
radiant force emitted from the sun with a velocity like that of light,
the moving planet would encounter it at a certain apparent angle
(aberration), and the force experienced would come from a point a little
in advance of the sun. The rate of description of areas would thus tend
to increase; whereas in reality it is constant. Hence the force of
gravity, if it travel at all, does so with a speed far greater than that
of light. It appears to be practically instantaneous. (Cf. "Modern Views
of Electricity," Sec. 126, end of chap. xii.) Again, anything like a
retarding effect of the medium through which the planets move would
constitute a tangential force, entirely un-directed towards the sun.
Hence no such frictional or retarding force can appreciably exist. It
is, however, conceivable that both these effects might occur and just
neutralize each other. The neutralization is unlikely to be exact for
all the planets; and the fact is, that no trace of either effect has as
yet been discovered. (See also p. 176.)

The planets are, however, subject to forces not directed towards the
sun, viz. their attractions for each other; and these perturbing forces
do produce a slight discrepancy from Kepler's second law, but a
discrepancy which is completely subject to calculation.

No. 2. Kepler's first law proves that this central force diminishes in
the same proportion as the square of the distance increases.

To prove the connection between the inverse-square law of distance, and
the travelling in a conic section with the centre of force in one focus
(the other focus being empty), is not so simple. It obviously involves
some geometry, and must therefore be left to properly armed students.
But it may be useful to state that the inverse-square law of distance,
although the simplest possible law for force emanating from a point or
sphere, is not to be regarded as self-evident or as needing no
demonstration. The force of a magnetic pole on a magnetized steel scrap,
for instance, varies as the inverse cube of the distance; and the curve
described by such a particle would be quite different from a conic
section--it would be a definite class of spiral (called Cotes's spiral).
Again, on an iron filing the force of a single pole might vary more
nearly as the inverse fifth power; and so on. Even when the thing
concerned is radiant in straight lines, like light, the law of inverse
squares is not universally true. Its truth assumes, first, that the
source is a point or sphere; next, that there is no reflection or
refraction of any kind; and lastly, that the medium is perfectly
transparent. The law of inverse squares by no means holds from a prairie
fire for instance, or from a lighthouse, or from a street lamp in a fog.

Mutual perturbations, especially the pull of Jupiter, prevent the path
of a planet from being really and truly an ellipse, or indeed from being
any simple re-entrant curve. Moreover, when a planet possesses a
satellite, it is not the centre of the planet which ever attempts to
describe the Keplerian ellipse, but it is the common centre of gravity
of the two bodies. Thus, in the case of the earth and moon, the point
which really does describe a close attempt at an ellipse is a point
displaced about 3000 miles from the centre of the earth towards the
moon, and is therefore only 1000 miles beneath the surface.

No. 3. Kepler's third law proves that all the planets are acted on by
the same kind of force; of an intensity depending on the mass of the
sun.

The third law of Kepler, although it requires geometry to state and
establish it for elliptic motion (for which it holds just as well as it
does for circular motion), is very easy to establish for circular
motion, by any one who knows about centrifugal force. If _m_ is the mass
