"I just want to have something in my hand," he told her impatiently,
"while I look."

He took the spear she handed him, and sank once more. Again something
moved in the deeper part of the lagoon. It was a fretful motion, as if a
creature or creatures tried to burrow away from the light shining
through the water. Whatever moved, a thick cloud of debris from the
bottom floated all the way up to the surface.

Terry came up for air.

"There's something queer there," he said shortly. "I don't know what."

He went under and swam cautiously nearer to the disturbance. He was
within a few feet of the curling cloud of obscurity when something like
a gigantic worm came out of it. Or maybe it was like an elephant's
trunk, only no elephant ever had a trunk so huge. It was a dull and
glistening writhing object. Its end was rounded. The tip of the
worm-like thing must have been a foot in diameter, and it came out of
the mud cloud for four feet, then six, then, fifteen feet. It thickened
only slightly in that length. It groped blindly in the brightness.

Terry swam back quickly, and the object reared up and made a groping
sweep through the clear water. Some peculiar white disks suddenly
appeared on the underside of the long tentacle. They looked like
sucker-disks, able to grip anything at all. The monstrous tentacle
fumbled for Terry, as if guided by the pressure-waves his movements
generated.

Terry froze. Deirdre moved in the boat almost directly overhead.
Something clanked in the boat and he heard it. The boat was probably
rocking, making the pressure-waves that a creature from the abyss would
depend upon for guidance where eyes would not serve at all.

The thick, bulging tentacle reached toward the sound at the surface, now
ignoring Terry, though he was nearer. He was still. The white
sucker-disks on its under side had several rings of a horny, tooth-like
substance at their rims. The smallest were about four inches wide. The
fumbling object felt blindly in the water. Deirdre stirred again in the
boat. The visible portion of the groping monstrosity was already longer
than the boat. The whole creature would be enormous! If this groping arm
rested upon the gunwale of the boat, it could easily swamp it.

It groped for the boat, coming horribly out of a cloud of mud. It
reached out. In another instant it would touch....

Terry plunged his fish spear into the worm. It jerked violently. There
were enormous thrashings. Other similar white-disked arms thrust into
view, fumbling somehow angrily for the creature--Terry--which had dared
to attack it.

He darted for the surface. Something unspeakably horrible touched him,
but it was the smooth and not the suckered side of the groping worm.
Terry's head was now above water. He grasped the gunwale to pull himself
in, in a fever of haste. But the thing that had touched him before came
back. It grazed his leg, for just a second. Where it touched, his flesh
burned like fire.

"Start ... motor!" gasped Terry. "Get away!"

Something touched the stern-board of the boat. Deirdre pulled the
starter of the motor.

"Get in!" she said tensely. "Quickly!"

She saw him, straining every muscle by pure, agonized instinct against
the irresistible force of whatever clung to his skin. The horrible
tentacle stretched, and part of its length took a new grip. It crawled
upon him.... Deirdre saw the look on his face.

She snatched up the second spear and stabbed past him, into the crawling
beast. There was a most violent jerking. She stabbed again. She panted.
She gasped. She stabbed and stabbed, sobbing with fear and horror. And
Terry tumbled in over the gunwale, released. As soon as he fell onto the
floor-boards he painfully dragged himself toward the motor at the stern.
Something bumped the boat underneath. Terry pulled the starter and the
motor suddenly roared. But the boat didn't start immediately, and it
jerked once more. The whirling propeller-blades had touched one of the
groping tentacles and cut it. Tumult arose.

The boat surged into motion and Terry, with clenched teeth, sent it into
a crazy, skidding turn to avoid a surface swirl, and then another
frantic swerve when something showed momentarily above the surface. The
boat zig-zagged along. A grisly, writhing object rose above the water,
flailing, a fish-spear sticking in it. The small, skimming boat dodged
and twisted at its topmost speed.... It suddenly straightened out and
almost flew across the water toward the land.




_Eight_


Echoes of the outboard's roaring motor came back from the trunks of palm
trees that lined the lagoon's shore as the tiny boat raced across the
water. Deirdre was ashen-white. She turned her eyes from the water, and
they fell on the round raw places on Terry's leg where the sucker-disks
had bruised it horribly. She shuddered. She still had the sensation of
being pursued by the monster. Back where Deirdre's spear had finally
liberated Terry, startled and convulsive motions continued, followed by
a final gigantic splash. Terry drove the boat on at top speed.

The monster sank again in the spot where the lagoon was deepest. It had
come from depths where there was no light; from an abyss where blackness
was absolute. Now, having lost its victim, it returned peevishly to such
darkness as it could secure.

Terry said curtly, as the small boat raced for the _Esperance_ and the
wharf, "That creature was driven up from the Luzon Deep into the lagoon
to replace the gadget-carrying fish we speared!"

Deirdre stammered a little.

"Your l-leg.... You're bleeding...."

"I'm pretty well skinned in a couple of places," he said shortly.
"That's all."

"Could it be poisonous?"

"Poison," said Terry, "is a weapon for the weak. This thing's not weak!
I'm all right. And I'm lucky!"

"I'd have jumped over with my spear, if ..."

"Idiot!" said Terry gently. "Never think of such a thing! Never! Never!"

"I wouldn't want to l-live--"

A new reverberating quality came into the echoes from the shore. The
pilings of the wharf were nearby, now. They multiplied the sounds they
returned. The _Esperance_ loomed up. Terry cut off the motor, the little
boat drifted to contact, and Deirdre scrambled to the yacht's deck, and
then took the bow line and fastened it. This was absurdly commonplace.
It was exactly what would have been done on the return from any usual
ride.

"Go tell the others what we found," said Terry. "I'm going to see if
there's more than one of those things around."

"Not ..."

"No," he assured her. "I'm only going to use the fish-driving horn."

Deirdre looked at him in distress.

"Be careful! Please!" She kissed him suddenly, scrambled to the wharf,
and set off at a run toward the shore. Terry stared hungrily after her.
They'd come to a highly personal decision the night before on the
_Esperance_, but it still seemed unbelievable to him that Deirdre felt
about him the way he felt about her.

He went forward to set up the fish-driving combination. One part of him
thought vividly of Deirdre. The other faced the consequences that might
follow if the bolides were not bolides, and if the plastic gadgets and
the nasty-sounding underwater hums were products of an intelligence
which could make bolides change their velocity in space; which made them
fall in the Luzon Deep in the China Sea and nowhere else.

He set up the recorder with its loop of fish-driving hum. He put the
horn overboard, carefully oriented to spread its sound through all the
enclosed shallow water of the lagoon. He turned the extra amplifier to
maximum output, to increase the effectiveness of the noise, and turned
on the apparatus.

The glassy look of the lagoon-water vanished immediately. Fish leaped
crazily everywhere, from half-inch midgets to lean-flanked predators a
yard and more in length. There was no square foot in all the shallows
where a creature didn't struggle to escape the sensation of pins and
needles all over its body. And these pins and needles pricked deep.

Flying-fish soared crazily, and they were the most fortunate because so
long as they flew, the tormenting water-sound did not reach them. But
many of them landed on the beach, and even among the palms.

In the spot where blind and snakelike arms had tried to destroy Terry
and Deirdre, the lashing and swirling was of a different kind. Something
there used enormous strength to offer battle to a noise. The water was
whipped to froth. Twice Terry saw those rope-like arms rise above the
water and flail it.

This particular sort of tumult, however, appeared only in one spot. So
there was only one such creature in the lagoon.

When Davis and the others came down from the tracking station, Terry
turned off the horn. He was applying soothing ointment to the raw flesh
of his leg.

"There's a monstrous creature out there," he said evenly when a
white-faced Davis demanded information. "Heaven knows how big it is, but
it's something like a huge squid. It may be the kind that sperm whales
feed on, down in the depths."

Others from the tracking station arrived, panting.

"Oh! I'm tired of being conservative!" added Terry fiercely. "I'm going
to say what all of us think! There's something intelligent down at the
bottom of the sea, five miles down!"

He glared challengingly around him.

"Who doesn't believe that?" he demanded. "Well, the reporting gadgets
don't report any more. We killed the fish that carried them. So that
whatever-it-is down on the sea-bed has very cleverly sent up something
we ignorant savages wouldn't dare to meddle with! We would be terrified.
But we'll show _it_ what men are like!"

Dr. Morton said gently, "Perhaps we should notify the _Pelorus_. The
biologists on board there...."

"No!" said Terry grimly. "I have a private quarrel with this monster. It
might have killed Deirdre! And Davis already tried to tell those
biologists something! Tell them about this, and they'll want proofs they
wouldn't look at anyhow. We'll handle this ourselves! It's too important
for them!"

"Much too important," said Deirdre firmly. "The shooting stars aren't
shooting stars and there's something down in the depths just like Terry
says. He's right that we can't consider sharing our world with--beings
that come down from the sky, even if they only want our oceans and don't
care about the land. He says that we wouldn't get along with creatures
that know more than we do, and we would especially resent any space
ships coming uninvited to start colonies on our world while we're not
advanced enough to stop them! If that's what they're doing, they have to
be fought from the very first instant to the very last moment there's
one of them hiding in our seas! Terry's right!"

"I haven't heard him say any of those things, young lady," said Morton
drily, "but they're true. And I don't like the idea of a sea monster
being in the lagoon anyhow. Especially one that tries to kill people.
Still, fighting it...."

"There are a couple of bazookas on the _Esperance_," said Terry sharply.
He looked at Davis. "If you're willing to risk the yacht, we can drive
the beast aground, or at least to shallow water, with the submarine
horn. Then the bazookas should be able to destroy it. Will you take the
risk?"

"Of course you'll use the _Esperance_," said Davis. "Of course!"

"Then I'll want," said Terry, unconsciously taking command, "somebody at
the engine and somebody at the wheel. I'll run the horn. But, frankly,
if that monster lays one sucker-arm on the _Esperance_, it may be
good-bye. Any volunteers?"

In minutes the _Esperance_, her engine rumbling, pulled away from the
dock. She had on board all her original company except Deirdre--firmly
left ashore by her father and Terry--and in addition she carried Dr.
Morton and the most enthusiastic amateur photographer of the tracking
station staff. He was shaky but resolute, and was hanging about with an
imposing array of cameras, for both still and motion pictures. The
_Esperance's_ sails were furled and she went into battle under bare
poles. Davis was busy manufacturing improvised hand grenades for himself
and Morton.

The sun was nearly overhead. Terry asked Morton questions about the
lagoon. They finally chose a minor inlet as the place to which the
creature must be driven, if possible. There it could be immobilized by
the intolerable sound from the recorder. There it could be destroyed.

"I wonder," said Morton wryly, "if I can present a dead giant squid as
part of the explanation for my computed orbits for the last two
bolides!"

The _Esperance_ moved steadily toward the place where Terry had nearly
been killed.

The enterprise was risky. The _Esperance_ was sixty-five feet long. The
creature it was to attack was much larger, and if one of its kind had
crushed the bathyscaphe, it had sufficient strength and ferocity to make
a battle cruiser a much more suitable antagonist. But the true folly of
the effort was its purpose.

It all started when a fishing boat--_La Rubia_--went to sea and caught
remarkable quantities of fish, of which four specimens had had plastic
artefacts fastened to them. Then Terry began checking on certain noises
he heard in the sea which provoked an incomprehensible crowding of
millions of fish into a small area, from which they swam down to depths
where they could not survive. Now the killing of this squid was supposed
to cast a light on the mystery of the nine bolides which had fallen into
a particular part of the ocean.

Terry had the undersea horn turned vertically so that it would transmit
a blade of sound wherever he aimed it, instead of spreading all through
the lagoon. He turned it on.

The water before the _Esperance_ suddenly speckled and splashed from the
maddened leaps of fish of every possible size. He turned it off. He
aimed it where the ripples showed the presence of something huge beneath
the surface. He turned it on again.

There were convulsive writhings. A long tentacle emerged briefly and
then splashed under again. The writhings continued. Terry adjusted his
aim. Crazy leapings of smaller creatures showed the line of the
sound-beam, as tracer-bullets show the paths of bullets from a machine
gun. He cut off the sound for an instant and turned it on again at full
volume, pointed where the monster must be. There was explosive tumult
underwater. Huge arms flailed above the surface. But once again the
creature fled.

The _Esperance_ followed slowly, now. The monster had reacted to the
stinging sound-beam as if cowed. But it was a deep-sea creature. It did
not know how to move when squeezed into a shallow water which hampered
its movements. It seemed frightened to discover itself trapped between
the lagoon-bottom and the surface. And it was dazzled by the brightness
to which it had been driven. Left unattacked, even for an instant, it
tried to burrow away from the light, and again it made a dense cloud of
mud from the bottom. Then it became quiet, as if hiding.

Grimly, Terry lanced it with the painful noise. The water frothed.
Monstrous tentacles appeared and disappeared, and once part of the
creature's body itself emerged. It was cornered into a minor inlet, and
there the water grew more shallow and the monster did not want to go to
where its motions would be even more confined.
