
The aide reached Kinton and bent to hiss and cluck into the latter's ear
in what he presumably considered an undertone. The Terran laboriously
spelled out the message inscribed on the limp, satiny paper held before
his eyes. Then he rose and took one step toward the waiting group.

"I regret I shall have to conclude this discussion," he announced. "I
am informed that another ship from space has reached the surface of
Tepokt. My presence is requested in case the crew are of my own planet."

Klaft excitedly skipped down to lead the way up the aisle, but Kinton
hesitated. Those in the audience were scholars or officials to whom
attendance at one of Kinton's limited number of personal lectures was
awarded as an honor.

They would hardly learn anything from him directly that was not
available in recordings made over the course of years. The Tepoktan
scientists, historians, and philosophers had respectfully but eagerly
gathered every crumb of information Kinton knowingly had to offer--and
some he thought he had forgotten. Still ... he sensed the disappointment
at his announcement.

"I shall arrange for you to await my return here in town," Kinton said,
and there were murmurs of pleasure.

Later, aboard the jet helicopter that was basically like those Kinton
remembered using on Terra twenty light years away, he shook his head at
Klaft's respectful protest.

"But George! It was enough that they were present when you received the
news. They can talk about that the rest of their lives! You must not
waste your strength on these people who come out of curiosity."

Kinton smiled at his aide's earnest concern. Then he turned to look out
the window as he recalled the shadow that underlay such remonstrances.
He estimated that he was about forty-eight now, as nearly as he could
tell from the somewhat longer revolutions of Tepokt. The time would come
when he would age and die. Whose wishes would then prevail?

Maybe he was wrong, he thought. Maybe he shouldn't stand in the way of
their biologists and surgeons. But he'd rather be buried, even if that
left them with only what he could tell them about the human body.

       *       *       *       *       *

To help himself forget the rather preoccupied manner in which some of
the Tepoktan scientists occasionally eyed him, he peered down at the big
dam of the hydro-electric project being completed to Kinton's design.
Power from this would soon light the town built to house the staff of
scientists, students, and workers assigned to the institute organized
about the person of Kinton.

Now, there was an example of their willingness to repay him for whatever
help he had been, he reflected. They hadn't needed that for themselves.

In some ways, compared to those of Terra, the industries of Tepokt were
underdeveloped. In the first place, the population was smaller and had
different standards of luxury. In the second, a certain lack of drive
resulted from the inability to break out into interplanetary space.
Kinton had been inexplicably lucky to have reached the surface even in
a battered hulk. The shell of meteorites was at least a hundred miles
thick and constantly shifting.

"We do not know if they have always been meteorites," the Tepoktans had
told Kinton, "or whether part of them come from a destroyed satellite;
but our observers have proved mathematically that no direct path through
them may be predicted more than a very short while in advance."

Kinton turned away from the window as he caught the glint of Tepokt's
sun upon the hull of the spaceship they had also built for him. Perhaps
... would it be fair to encourage the newcomer to attempt the barrier?

For ten years, Kinton had failed to work up any strong desire to try it.
The Tepoktans called the ever-shifting lights the Dome of Eyes, after
a myth in which each tiny satellite bright enough to be visible was
supposed to watch over a single individual on the surface. Like their
brothers on Terra, the native astronomers could trace their science back
to a form of astrology; and Kinton often told them jokingly that he felt
no urge to risk a physical encounter with his own personal Eye.

       *       *       *       *       *

The helicopter started to descend, and Kinton remembered that the city
named in his message was only about twenty miles from his home. The
brief twilight of Tepokt was passing by the time he set foot on the
landing field, and he paused to look up.

The brighter stars visible from this part of the planet twinkled back at
him, and he knew that each was being scrutinized by some amateur or
professional astronomer. Before an hour had elapsed, most of them would
be obscured by the tiny moonlets, some of which could already be seen.
These could easily be mistaken for stars or the other five planets of
the system, but in a short while the tinier ones in groups would cause
a celestial haze resembling a miniature Milky Way.

Klaft, who had descended first, leaving the pilot to bring up the rear,
noticed Kinton's pause.

"Glory glitters till it is known for a curse," he remarked, quoting a
Tepoktan proverb often applied by the disgruntled scientists to the Dome
of Eyes.

Kinton observed, however, that his aide also stared upward for a long
moment. The Tepoktans loved speculating about the unsolvable. They had
even founded clubs to argue whether two satellites had been destroyed or
only one.

