direction through space, sowing the fine dust of their gilded wings upon
the fields of Heaven. They are born to die; their life is only a breath;
yet the impression which they make upon the imagination of mortals is of
the profoundest.

The young girl dreaming in the delicious tranquillity of the transparent
night smiles at this charming sister in the Heavens (Fig. 54). What can
not this adorable star announce to the tender and loving heart? Is it
the shy messenger of the happiness so long desired? Its unpremeditated
appearance fills the soul with a ray of hope and makes it tremble. It is
a golden beam that glides into the heart, expanding it in the thrills of
a sudden and ephemeral pleasure.... The radiant meteor seems to quit the
velvet of the deep blue sky to respond to the appeal of the imploring
voice that seeks its succor.

What secrets has it not surprised! And who bears malice against it? It
is the friend of the betrothed who invoke its passage to confide their
wishes, and associate it with their dreams. Tradition holds that if a
wish be formulated during the visible passage of a meteor it will
certainly be fulfilled before the year is out. Between ourselves,
however, this is but a surviving figment of the ancestral imagination,
for this celestial jewel takes no such active part in the doings of
Humanity.... Besides, try to express a wish distinctly in a second!

It is a curious fact that while comets have so often spread terror on
the Earth, shooting stars should on the contrary have been regarded with
benevolent feelings at all times. And what is a shooting star? These
dainty excursionists from the celestial shores are not, as is supposed,
true stars. They are atoms, nothings, minute fragments deriving in
general from the disintegration of comets. They come to us from a vast
distance, from millions on millions of miles, and circle in swarms
around the Sun, following a very elongated ellipse which closely
resembles that of the cometary orbit. Their flight is extremely rapid,
reaching sometimes more than 40 kilometers (25 miles) per second, a
cometary speed that is, as we have seen, greatly above that of our
terrestrial vehicle, which amounts to 29 to 30 kilometers (about 19
miles).

These little corpuscles are not intrinsically luminous; but when the
orbit of a swarm of meteors crosses our planet, a violent shock arises,
the speed of which may be as great as 72 kilometers (45 miles) in the
first second if we meet the star shower directly; the average rate,
however, does not exceed 30 to 40 kilometers (19 to 25 miles), for these
meteors nearly always cross our path obliquely. The height at which they
arrive is usually 110 kilometers (68 miles), and 80 kilometers (50
miles) at the moment of disappearance of the meteor; but shooting stars
have been observed at 300 kilometers (186 miles).

The friction caused by this collision high up in the atmosphere
transforms the motion into heat. The molecules incandesce, and burn like
true stars with a brilliancy that is often magnificent.

But their glory is of short duration. The excessive heat resulting from
the shock consumes the poor firefly; its remains evaporate, and drop
slowly to the Earth, where they are deposited on the surface of the soil
in a sort of ferruginous dust mixed with carbon and nickel. Some one
hundred and forty-six milliards of them reach us annually, as seen by
the unaided eye, and many more in the telescope; the effect of these
showers of meteoric matter is an insensible increase in the mass of our
globe, a slight lessening of its rotary motion, and the acceleration of
the lunar movements of revolution.

Although the appearance of shooting stars is a common enough phenomenon,
visible every night of the year, there are certain times when they
arrive in swarms, from different quarters of the sky. The most
remarkable dates in this connection are the night of August 10th and the
morning of November 14th. Every one knows the shooting stars of August
10th, because they arrive in the fine warm summer evenings so favorable
to general contemplation of the Heavens. The phenomenon lasts till the
12th, and even beyond, but the maximum is on the 10th. When the sky is
very clear, and there is no moon, hundreds of shooting stars can be
counted on those three nights, sometimes thousands. They all seem to
come from the same quarter of the Heavens, which is called the
_radiant_, and is situated for the August swarm in the constellation of
Perseus, whence they have received the name of _Perseids_. Our
forefathers also called them the tears of St. Lawrence, because the
feast of that saint is on the same date. These shooting stars describe a
very elongated ellipse, and their orbit has been identified with that of
the Great Comet of 1862.

The shower of incandescent asteroids on November 14th is often much more
abundant than the preceding. In 1799, 1833, and 1866, the meteors were
so numerous that they were described as showers of rain, especially on
the first two dates. For several hours the sky was furrowed with falling
stars. An English mariner, Andrew Ellicot, who made the drawing we
reproduce (Fig. 55), described the phenomenon as stupendous and alarming
(November 12, 1799, 3 A.M.). The same occurred on November 13, 1833. The
meteors that scarred the Heavens on that night were reckoned at 240,000.
These shooting stars received the name of _Leonids_, because their
radiant is situated in the constellation of the Lion.

[Illustration: FIG. 55.--Shooting Stars of November 12, 1799.

_From a contemporary drawing._]

This swarm follows the same orbit as the comet of 1866, which travels as
far as Uranus, and comes back to the vicinity of the Sun every
thirty-three years. Hence we were entitled to expect another splendid
apparition in 1899, but the expectations of the astronomers were
disappointed. All the preparations for the appropriate reception of
these celestial visitors failed to bring about the desired result. The
notes made in observatories, or in balloons, admitted of the
registration of only a very small number of meteors. The maximum was
thirteen. During that night, some 200 shooting stars were counted. There
were more in 1900, 1901, and, above all, in 1902. This swarm has become
displaced.

The night of November 27th again is visited by a number of shooting
stars that are the disaggregated remains of the Comet of Biela. This
comet, discovered by Biela in 1827, accomplished its revolution in six
and a half years, and down to 1846 it responded punctually to the
astronomers who expected its return as fixed by calculation. But on
January 13, 1846, the celestial wanderer broke in half: each fragment
went its own way, side by side, to return within sight from the Earth in
1852. It was their last appearance. That year the twin comets could
still be seen, though pale and insignificant. Soon they vanished into
the depths of night, and never appeared again. They were looked for in
vain, and were despaired of, when on November 27, 1872, instead of the
shattered comet, came a magnificent rain of shooting stars. They fell
through the Heavens, numerous as the flakes of a shower of snow.

The same phenomenon recurred on November 27, 1885, and confirmed the
hypothesis of the demolition and disaggregation of Biela's Comet into
shooting stars.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is an immense variety in the brilliancy of the shooting stars,
from the weak telescopic sparks that vanish like a flash of lightning,
to the incandescent _bolides_ or _fire-balls_ that explode in the
atmosphere.

Fig. 56 shows an example of these, and it represents a fire-ball
observed at the Observatory of Juvisy on the night of August 10, 1899.
It arrived from Cassiopeia, and burst in Cepheus.

This phenomenon may occur by day as well as by night. It is often
accompanied by one or several explosions, the report of which is
sometimes perceptible to a considerable distance, and by a shower of
meteorites. The globe of fire bursts, and splits up into luminous
fragments, scattered in all directions. The different parts of the
fire-ball fall to the surface of the Earth, under the name of aerolites,
or rather of uranoliths, since they arrive from the depths of space, and
not from our atmosphere.

From the most ancient times we hear of showers of uranoliths to which
popular superstitions were attached; and the Greeks even gave the name
of _Sideros_ to iron, the first iron used having been sidereal.

[Illustration: FIG. 56.--Fire-Ball seen from the Observatory at Juvisy,
August 10, 1899.]

[Illustration: FIG. 57.--Explosion of a Fire-Ball above Madrid,
February 10, 1896.]

No year passes without the announcement of several showers of
uranoliths, and the phenomenon sometimes causes great alarm to those who
witness it. One of the most remarkable explosions is that which occurred
above Madrid, February 10, 1896, a fragment from which, sent me by M.
Arcimis, Director of the Meteorological Institute, fell immediately in
front of the National Museum (Fig. 57). The phenomenon occurred at 9.30
A.M., in brilliant sunshine. The flash of the explosion was so dazzling
that it even illuminated the interior of the houses; an alarming clap of
thunder was heard seventy seconds after, and it was believed that an
explosion of dynamite had occurred. The fire-ball burst at a height of
fourteen miles, and was seen as far as 435 miles from Madrid!

In one of Raphael's finest pictures (_The Madonna of Foligno_) a
fire-ball may be seen beneath a rainbow (Fig. 58), the painter wishing
to preserve the remembrance of it, as it fell near Milan, on September
4, 1511. This picture dates from 1512.

The dimensions of these meteorites vary considerably; they are of all
sizes, from the impalpable dust that floats in the air, to the enormous
blocks exposed in the Museum of Natural History in Paris. Many of them
weigh several million pounds. That represented below fell in Mexico
during the shower of meteors of November 27, 1885. It weighed about four
pounds.

[Illustration: FIG. 58.--Raphael's Fire-Ball (_The Madonna of
Foligno_).]

These bolides and uranoliths come to us from the depths of space; but
they do not appear to have the same origin as the shooting stars. They
may arise from worlds destroyed by explosion or shock, or even from
planetary volcanoes. The lightest of them may have been expelled from
the volcanoes of the Moon. Some of the most massive, in which iron
predominates, may even have issued from the bowels of the Earth,
projected into space by some volcanic explosion, at an epoch when our
globe was perpetually convulsed by cataclysms of extraordinary violence.
They return to us to-day after being removed from the Earth to distances
proportional to the initial speed imparted to them. This origin seems
the more admissible as the stones that fall from the skies exhibit a
mineral composition identical with that of the terrestrial materials.

[Illustration: FIG. 59.--A Uranolith.]

In any case, these uranoliths bring us back at least by their fall to
our Earth, and from henceforward we will remain upon it, to study its
position in space, and to take account of the place it fills in the
Universe, and of the astronomical laws that govern our destiny.




CHAPTER VIII

THE EARTH


Our grand celestial journey lands us upon our own little planet, on this
globe that gravitates between Mars and Venus (between War and Love),
circulating like her brothers of the solar system, around the colossal
Sun.

The Earth! The name evokes in us the image of Life, and calls up the
theater of our activities, our ambitions, our joys and sorrows. Does it
not, in fact, to ignorant eyes, represent the whole of the universe?

And yet, what is the Earth?

The Earth is a star in the Heavens. We learned this much in our first
lesson. It is a globe of opaque material, similar to the planets
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, etc., as previously described. Isolated
on all sides in space, it revolves round the Sun, along a vast orbit
that it accomplishes in a year. And while it thus glides along the lines
of solar attraction, the terrestrial ball rotates rapidly upon itself in
twenty-four hours.

These statements may appear dubious at first sight, and contradictory to
the evidence of our senses.

Now that the surface of the Earth has been explored in all directions,
there is no longer room to doubt that it is a globe, a sort of ball that
we adhere to. A journey round the world is common enough to-day, and
always yields the most complete evidence of the spherical nature of the
Earth. On the other hand, the curvature of the seas is a no less certain
proof. When a ship reaches the dark-blue line that appears to separate
the sky from the ocean, it seems to be hanging on the horizon. Little by
little, however, as it recedes, it drops below the horizon line; the
tops of the masts being the last to disappear. The observer on board
ship witnesses the same phenomenon. The low shores are first to
disappear, while the high coasts and mountains are much longer visible.

The aspect of the Heavens gives another proof of the Earth's rotundity.
As one travels North or South, new stars rise higher and higher above
the horizon in the one direction or the other, and those which shine in
the latitude one is leaving, gradually disappear. If the surface of the
Earth were flat, the ships on the sea would be visible as long as our
sight could pierce the distance, and all the stars of the Heavens would
be equally visible from the different quarters of the world.

Lastly, during the eclipses of the Moon, the shadow projected by the
Earth upon our satellite is always round. This is another proof of the
spherical nature of the terrestrial globe.

We described the Earth as an orb in the Heavens, similar to all the
other planets of the great solar family. We see these sister planets of
our world circulating under the starry vault, like luminous points whose
brilliancy is sometimes dazzling. For us they are marvelous celestial
birds hovering in the ether, upheld by invisible wings. The Earth is
just the same. It is supported by nothing. Like the soap-bubble that
assumes a lovely iridescence in the rays of the Sun, or, better, like
the balloon rapidly cleaving the air, it is isolated from every kind of
support.

Some minds have difficulty in conceiving this isolation, because they
form a false notion of weight.

The astronomers of antiquity, who divined it, knew not how to prevent
the Earth from falling. They asked anxiously what the strong bands
capable of holding up this block of no inconsiderable weight could be.
At first they thought it floated on the waters like an island. Then they
postulated solid pillars, or even supposed it might turn on pivots
placed at the poles. But on what would all these imaginary supports have
rested? All these fanciful foundations of the Earth had to be given up,
and it was recognized as a globe, isolated in every part. This illusion
of the ancients, which still obtains for a great many citizens of our
globule, arises, as we said, from a false conception of weight.

Weight and attraction are one and the same force.

A body can only fall when it is attracted, drawn by a more important
body. Now, in whatever direction we may wander upon the globe, our feet
are always downward. _Down_ is therefore the _center_ of the Earth.

The terrestrial globe may be regarded as an immense ball of magnet, and
its attraction holds us at its surface. We weigh toward the center. We
may travel over this surface in all directions; our feet will always be
below, whatever the direction of our steps. For us, "below" is the
inside of our planet, and "above" is the immensity of the Heavens that
extend above our heads, right round the globe.

This once understood, where could the Earth fall to? The question is an
absurdity. "Below" being toward the center, it would have to fall out of
itself.

Let us then picture the Earth as a vast sphere, detached from all that
exists around it, in the infinity of the Heavens. A point diametrically
opposed to another is called its _antipodes_. New Zealand is
approximately the antipodes to France. Well, for the inhabitants of New
Zealand and of France the top is reciprocally opposed, and the bottom,
or the feet, are diametrically in opposition. And yet, for one as for
the other, the bottom is the soil they are held to, and the top is
space above their heads.

The Earth turns on itself in twenty-four hours. Whatever is above us,
_e.g._, at midday, we call high; twelve hours later, at midnight, we
give the same qualification to the part of space that was under our feet
at noon. What is in the sky, and over our heads, at a given hour, is
under our feet, and yet always in the sky, twelve hours later. Our
position, in relation to the space that surrounds us, changes from hour
to hour, and "top" and "bottom" vary also, relatively to our position.

Our planet is thus a ball, slightly flattened at the poles (by about
1/292). Its diameter, at the equator, is 12,742 kilometers (7,926
miles); from one pole to the other is a little less, owing to the
flattening of the polar caps. The difference is some 43 kilometers
(about 27 miles).

Its circumference is 40,000 kilometers (24,900 miles). This ball is
surrounded by an aerial envelope, the atmosphere, the height of which
can not be less than 300 kilometers (186 miles), according to the
observations made on certain shooting stars.

We all know that this layer of air, at the bottom of which we live, is a
beautiful azure blue that seems to separate us from the sidereal abyss,
spreading over our heads in a kind of vault that is often filled with
clouds, and giving the illusion of resting far off on the circle of the
horizon. But this is only an illusion. In reality, there is neither
vault nor horizon; space is open in all directions. If the atmosphere
did not exist, or if it were completely transparent, we should see the
stars by day as by night, for they are continually round us, at noon as
at midnight, and we can see them in the full daylight, with the help of
astronomical instruments. In fact, certain stars (the radiant Venus and
the dazzling Jupiter) pierce the veil of the atmosphere, and are visible
with the unaided eye in full daylight.

The terrestrial surface is 510,000,000 square kilometers (200,000,000
square miles). The waters of the ocean cover three-quarters of this
surface, _i.e._, 383,200,000 square kilometers (150,000,000 square
miles), and the continents only occupy 136,600,000 square kilometers
(55,000 square miles). France represents about the thousandth part of
the total superficies of the globe.

Despite the asperities of mountain ranges, and the abysses hollowed out
by the waters, the terrestrial globe is fairly regular, and in relation
to its volume its surface is smoother than that of an orange. The
highest summits of the Himalaya, the profoundest depths of the somber
ocean, do not attain to the millionth part of its diameter.

In weight, the Earth is five and a half times heavier than would be a
globe of water of the same dimensions. That is to say:

          6,957,930,000,000,000,000,000,000 kilograms
          (6,833,000,000,000,000,000,000 tons).

The atmospheric atmosphere with which it is surrounded represents.

          6,263,000,000,000,000,000 kilograms
          (6,151,000,000,000,000 tons).

Each of us carries an average weight of some 17,000 kilograms (16 tons)
upon his shoulders. Perhaps some one will ask how it is that we are not
crushed by this weight, which is out of all proportion with our
strength, but to which, nevertheless, we appear insensible. It is
because the aerial fluid enclosed within our bodies exerts a pressure
equal and opposite to the external atmospheric pressure, and these
pressures are at equilibrium.

The Earth is characterized by no essential or particular differences
relatively to the other worlds of our system. Like Venus of the limpid
rays, like the dazzling Jupiter, like all the planets, she courses
through space, carrying into Infinitude our hopes and destinies. Bigger
than Mercury, Venus, and Mars, she presents a very modest figure in
comparison with the enormous Jupiter, the strange system of Saturn, of
Uranus, and even of Neptune. For us her greatest interest is that she
serves as our residence, and if she were not our habitation we should
scarcely notice her. Dark in herself, she burns at a distance like a
star, returning to space the light she receives from the Sun. At the
distance of our satellite, she shines like an enormous moon, fourteen
times larger and more luminous than our gentle Phoebe. Observed from
Mercury or Venus, she embellishes the midnight sky with her sparkling
purity as Jupiter does for us. Seen from Mars, she is a brilliant
morning and evening star, presenting phases similar to those which Mars
and Venus show from here. From Jupiter, the terrestrial globe is little
more than an insignificant point, nearly always swallowed up in the
solar rays. As to the Saturnians, Uranians, and Neptunians, if such
people exist, they probably ignore our existence altogether. And in all
likelihood it is the same for the rest of the universe.

We must cherish no illusions as to the importance of our natal world. It
is true that the Earth is not wanting in charm, with its verdant plains
enameled in the delicious tones of a robust and varied vegetation, its
plants and flowers, its spring-time and its birds, its limpid rivers
winding through the meadows, its mountains covered with forests, its
vast and profound seas animated with an infinite variety of living
creatures. The spectacle of Nature is magnificent, superb, admirable
and marvelous, and we imagine that this Earth fills the universe, and
suffices for it. The Sun, the Moon, the stars, the boundless Heavens,
seem to have been created for us, to charm our eyes and thoughts, to
illumine our days, and shed a gentle radiance upon our nights. This is
an agreeable illusion of our senses. If our Humanity were extinguished,
the other worlds of the Heavens, Venus, Mars, etc., would none the less
continue to gravitate in the Heavens along with our defunct planet, and
the close of human life (for which everything seems to us to have been
created) would not even be perceived by those other worlds, that
nevertheless are our neighbors. There would be no revolution, no
cataclysm. The stars would go on shining in the firmament, just as they
do to-day, shedding their divine light over the immensity of the
Heavens. Nothing would be changed in the general aspect of the Universe.
The Earth is only a modest atom, lost in the innumerable army of the
worlds and suns that people the universe.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every morning the Sun rises in the East, setting fire with his ardent
rays to the sky, which is dazzling with his splendor. He ascends through
space, reaches a culminating point at noon, and then descends toward the
