The city now was out of control. But still the lagoon outside was
packed with boats--overloaded boats.... Screams of terror, choked into
silence ... boats with frenzied occupants leaping into the water to find
a quicker, happier death ... a woman with a babe in her arms on a
housetop across the lagoon--the infant already dead; the crazed mother
flinging it down into the water, herself following with a long, gasping
scream...

At last Georg pulled at me--no longer could we speak--pulled at me, and
with Maida between us, we fled. The air outside was worse. In the
dimness, our landing stage seemed _belans_ away. The flagged area
between us and the stage--a space of square-cut metal flagging,
bordering the lagoon--was littered with bodies. Dead--or dying. People
even now staggering from landed boats--staggering blindly, stumbling
over bodies, falling and lying always where they had fallen.

With our own senses fading, we groped our way forward. Soon we were
separated. I saw Maida fall and Georg pick her up, but I was powerless
to reach them.

The landing stage seemed so far away. The dead and dying beneath my feet
obstructed me as I staggered over them. A woman, reeling toward me,
flung her arms about my neck with an iron grip of despair. I stared into
her face, purple almost with its congested blood, her mouth gaping, her
blood-shot eyes bulging; and even with the terror distorting them, I saw
beneath it their look of despairing appeal...

Her arms clinging to me desperately; but with a curse I flung her to the
ground and reeled onward.

Without knowing it, I had come to the brink of the water's edge. The
flagging seemed to drop away. I fell. Dimly I heard the splash as I
struck the water; and felt a grateful cooling sense as it closed over
me.

I am a strong, instinctive swimmer. I did not breathe, and when I rose
to the surface, the single swift breath I took was purer than any I had
had for half an hour past. My head cleared a little; swimming
instinctively, and with cautious breaths, I found that I was able to go
on.

I know now that by some vagary of chance--of fate if you will--I had
struck a surface area where breathable air still remained. I swam,
striving to plan, to think where I might be swimming. Yet it was all a
phantasmagoria, with only the strength of my muscles and the instinct to
preserve my life remaining to direct me. Swimming endlessly ... swimming
... taking a half-gasp of breath ... swimming ... trying to think ... or
dreaming ... was it all a dream?...

When I came to myself I was lying upon a bank of ferns in the outskirts
of the city. It was still night; the black cloud of death had passed on;
the air was pure. Like a man for days bereft of water, I lay and drank
in the air, pure at last, as the Almighty distils it for us.

Bodies were lying around me on the bank. A dark, silent house stood
nearby; and a deserted boat. All darkness and silence--the brooding
silence of death. I was still dazed. Maida--Georg; they seemed like
people in a dream long faded. Industriana! They were going to the
_Rhaal_ City of Industriana. _I_ had been trying to get there. I must
get there now--join them. I climbed to my feet; the edge of a forest was
nearby and with wavering steps I started toward it.

Looking back on it now I realize that I was even then half crazed. In a
daze I must have stumbled through the forest for hours. Unreasoning,
with only that one idea--to get to Industriana; and in the background of
my consciousness the vague belief that Elza would be there to greet me.
Into the depths of the untrammeled forest with unguided steps I
wandered.

At last I found myself wondering if the dawn were coming; the tri-night
hour was long since passed; the auroral lights as I could sometimes see
them through the tangle of vegetation overhead, were low in the sky.
Insects--and sometimes larger beings--leaped and slithered unseen before
my advance. But I did not heed them. Eyes may have peered at me as I
stumbled through the blackness of the undergrowth; but if they did, I
did not notice them.

And then at last I was brought abruptly to full rationality and
consciousness. Stumbling through a tangle of low growth--a black thicket
which tore at my garments and scratched my flesh--I was transfixed by a
woman's scream. It came through the darkness from near at hand. A
crashing of the underbrush, and a woman's scream of terror. It stopped
my breath, turned me cold.

Elza!




CHAPTER XXX

_The Monster_


I stood frozen with horror; but as my brain cleared--awake at last to
full rationality and consciousness--beneath the horror came a surging
joy of the knowledge that at last Elza was near me. The scream was
repeated; inactive no longer, I dashed the thicket branches apart with
my arms and plunged forward through the darkness.

Ahead of me the thickets opened into a sort of clearing. I saw the sky,
the stars--paling stars with the first flush of dawn overpowering them.
I stood at the edge of an open space in the dim, flat-grey illumination
of morning twilight.

Elza! She was there, standing near a huge isolated tree; Elza, pale,
trembling, a hand pressed against her mouth in terror; disheveled, her
garments dirty and torn with her wanderings through the forest.

A swift glimpse as momentarily I paused; a second or two only, but the
scene was impressed upon my brain as actinic light upon a photo-screen.
Close by Elza, partially behind her, I saw something small, no taller
than Elza's waist. A naked thing of sleek, glistening skin. The
monstrosity of a human child; a bulging head, wavering upon a neck
incapable of supporting it; a thick round body; twisted, misshapen
limbs. A face ... human? It made my gorge rise with its gruesome
suggestion of humanity. Nostrils--no nose; a mouth, lipless, but red
like a curved gash with upturned corners to make the travesty of a grin;
a triangle of watery eyes, goggling. Senselessly, it stood watching Elza
with a dull, vacant curiosity. Not human, this thing! Yet monstrously
repulsive in its hideous suggestion of an idiot child.

Elza was not facing it; my gaze instinctively followed hers to the tree.
Crowning horror! The adult of this thing upon the ground hung swaying by
a thick hand and arm from a low limb; hung, then dropped. Growling,
mouthing as though it would try and form human words of menace, it
picked itself up and shambled toward Elza.

I leaped for them. Elza seemed too terrified to run. The thing reached
her, towered over her; seized her in its arms. She screamed--the agony
of revolt and terror; but over her voice rose my own shout of rage, and
abruptly the thing dropped her and turned to confront me. Snarling,
glaring with its three hideous blood-shot eyes; waving its thick, bent
arms.

I had no weapons save those with which nature had endowed me. The regret
of that came as a fleeting thought; and then I crashed into the thing;
my fist, passing its awkward guard, struck it full in the face. I
sickened. Even in the heat of combat a nausea swept me. For no solid
flesh and bone met my blow, like the shell of an egg, my fist crashed
into and through its face.

Warm, sticky moisture ... a stench ...

The thing had toppled backward, with me sprawling upon its bloated bulk.
It struggled, writhed ... Its arms gripped me, its huge fingers clutched
my throat ... I caught a glimpse of its smashed face ... so close, I
turned away ... a face of yellow-white pulp ...

My fist cracked and sank into its chest. I pounded, smashed; broke the
shell of its distended body ... noisome ... the revulsion, the nausea of
it all but overcame me.

At last the thing lay still; and from the wet, sticky foulness of it I
rose and stood shuddering. Elza lay on the ground; but she had risen
upon one elbow and I saw that she was unharmed save for the shock of
terror through which she had passed--a mitigated shock with the
knowledge now that I was with her, and that I too was uninjured.

The infant thing had vanished. I hastened forward.

"Elza! Elza, dear--"

Joy lighted her face.

"Jac!"

I would have lifted her up; but the consciousness of my own
foulness--the yellow-white slime streaked with red which smeared my
arms, splattered my clothing--gave me pause. In the growing light,
beyond the clearing, I caught the silver sheen of water. Without a word
I ran for it; a shimmering pool the existence of which no doubt had
drawn these grewsome beings of the forest into its vicinity. To the
cleansing water I ran, plunged in, purged myself of that horrible
foulness which human senses could not endure.

When I returned, Elza was upon her feet. Recovered at last she flung
herself into my arms. Impulsive; seeking protection as she clung to me;
fear; the let-down of overwrought nerves as she stood and clung and
sobbed upon my shoulder.

It was all of that; but oh! it was more than that as well. My Elza,
raising her tear-stained face and kissing me. Murmuring, "Jac, I love
you!" Murmuring her love: "Jac dear, you're safe! I've wanted so long to
be with you again--I've been so frightened--so frightened--"

Giving me back my kisses unreserved; holding me with eager
arms ... Tarrano? The memory of him came to me. How foolish my fears,
my jealousy! That man of genius ... conqueror of worlds ...

But my Elza loved _me_!...




CHAPTER XXXI

_Industriana_


It must have been two days later when at last we were rescued by the
_Rhaal_ patrol and taken to Industriana. Back there in the forest I had
suddenly remembered that the mate to the thing I had killed would
doubtless be lurking in the vicinity. We fled. Subsisting on what food
of the wilds we could find, at last we were picked up and taken to the
City of Work.

The Great City had been destroyed. Wanton capital of the Central State,
we learned now that it lay dead. To outward aspect, unharmed. Fair,
serene, alluring as ever it lay there on its shimmering waters; but the
life within it, was dead. Refugees--a quarter perhaps of the
inhabitants--had escaped; hourly the search patrols were picking them
up, bringing them to Industriana. Rescue parties were searching the
city, to find any who might still be alive.

And out in the forest lay a great pile of ashes, still exhaling a thin
wisp of its deadly breath--where Tarrano had created the Black Cloud;
lost his captive Elza, but doubtless had escaped himself back to his
City of Ice.

We found Georg and Maida safe at Industriana. Marvelous city! Elza had
never seen it before. She sat gazing breathless as from the air on the
patrol vessel, we approached it.

The land of this region was a black, rocky soil upon which vegetation
would not grow. A rolling land, grimly black, metallic; with
outcroppings of ore, red and white and with occasional patches of thin
white sand whereon a prickly blue grass struggled for life.

Rolling hills; and then places where nature had upheaved into a turmoil.
Huge naked black crags; buttes; hills with precipitous black sides of
sleek metal; narrow canyons with tumultuous water flowing through them.

In such a place stood Industriana. The City of Work! Set in an area
where nature lay scarred, twisted in convulsion, its buildings clung to
every conceivable slope and in every position. Many-storied
buildings--residences and factories indiscriminately intermingled. All
built in sober, solid rectangles of the forbidding black stone.

A long steep slope from an excavated quarry deep in the ground, ran
straight up to a commanding hilltop--the slope set with an orderly array
of buildings clinging to it in terraces. Buildings huge, or tiny huts;
all anchored in the rear to the ground, and set upon metal girders in
the front. Bisecting the slope was a vertical street--a broad escalator
of moving steps, one half going upward, the other down. Beside it, a
series of other escalators for the traffic of moving merchandise.

Cross streets on the hill were spider bridges, clinging with thin, stiff
legs. And at the summit of the hill stood a tremendous funnel belching
flame and smoke into the sky.

To one side of the hill lay a bowl-like depression with a single squat
building in its center--a low building of many funnels; and about it the
black yawning mouths of shafts down into the ground--mines vomiting ore,
broken chunks of the metallic rock coming up as though by the invisible
magic of magnetism, hunting through the air in an arc to fall with a
clatter into great bins above the smelter.

In another place, at the bottom of a canyon roared a surging torrent of
river. A harnessed river; plunging into turbines; emerging to tumble
over a cascade, its every drop caught by turning buckets spilled again
at the bottom. Water pursuing its surging course downward, its power
used again and again. The canyon dry at one place near the lower edge of
the city, the water all electrified, resolved into piped hydrogen and
oxygen. Like a tremendous clock ticking, the water, momentarily dammed
back, was released in a torrent to the electrolysis vats. The hissing
gases, under tremendous pressure, raised up the heavy-weighted tops of
two expanding tanks. Another tick of this giant clock--the gases
released, were merged again to water. The tops of the tanks lowered,
each in turn, one coming down as the other went up--hundreds of tons of
weight--their slow downward pull geared to scores of whirling
wheels--the power shifted to dynamos scattered throughout the city.

It was the twilight of nightfall when we arrived over Industriana. A
thousand funnels and chimneys belched their flame and smoke--the flame
tinting the sky with a lurid yellow-green glare, the smoke hanging like
a dim blue gauze through which everything seemed unreal, infernal.

From the city rose a roar--the myriad sounds of industry mingled by the
magic of distance. And as we got closer, the roar resolved into its
component parts; the grinding of gears; clicking of belts and chains;
whirring of dynamos and motors; shrill electrical screams; the
clattering of falling ore; clanking of swiftly moving merchandise, bound
in metal, magnetized to monorail cars shifting it to warehouses on the
nearby hills. And over it all flashed the brilliant signal lights of the
merchandise traffic directors whose stentorian electrical voices
broadcasting commands sounded above the city's noises.

An inferno of activity. A seeming confusion; yet the aspect of confusion
was a fallacy, for beneath it lay a precision--an orderly precision as
calm and exact as the mind of the Director of a Signal Tower counting
off the split seconds of his beams.

An orderly precision--the brain of one man guiding and dominating
everything; at his desk alone for long hours throughout the days and
nights. A quiet, grey-haired gentleman; unhurried, unharassed, seemingly
almost inactive; always seated at his empty desk smoking endless
arrant-cylinders. The dominating business brain of Industriana.




CHAPTER XXXII

_Departure_


Georg and Maida were very busy in Industriana; and now Elza and I were
admitted to their activities--Elza and I, with our new-found love and
happiness neglected for the greater thing, the welfare of the nation
upon which hinged the very safety of Venus itself; and Mars; and our own
fair Earth.

Industriana, greatest commercial and manufacturing center of Venus, had
been given over momentarily to the preparations for war. The _Rhaals_
had at last turned from industry to the conquest of Tarrano.
Preparations were almost completed; our armies were to start within a
very few times of sleep.

I had had no experience in warfare; but the history of our Earth had
told me much of it. The enlisting and training of huge armies of men;
arming them; artillery; naval and air forces; commissary and supplies; a
gigantic business organization to equip, move and maintain millions of
fighting men.

Ancient warfare! This--our modern way--was indeed dissimilar. It was,
from most aspects, simplicity itself. We had no need of men in great
numbers. I found something like a single thousand of men being organized
and trained. And equipped with weapons to outward aspects comparatively
simple.

On all the three worlds the age of explosives of the sort history
records, was long since passed. Electronic weapons--all basically the
same. And I found now that it was the power for them, developed,
transformed into its various characteristics and stored for individual
transportation and use, which was mainly engrossing Industriana.

I had opportunity, that first night, of meeting Geno-Rhaalton--the
present head of that famous Rhaalton line, for generations hereditary
leaders of their race.

We found him, this Geno-Rhaalton, in a secluded, somber little office of
black metallic walls, grey hangings and rug, a block of carved stone his
desk, and a few of the stiff-backed stone chairs, each with its single
prim cushion.

The office was beyond sight and sound of the busy city. His desk was
empty, save for the array of apparatus around its edges--the clicking
tabulators which recorded, sorted, analyzed and summarized for him every
minute detail with which the city was engaged.

Machines of business detail. We had them, of course, in the Inter-Allied
offices of Greater New York. I have seen our Divisional Director voice
into a mouthpiece the demand for some statistical summary computed up to
five minutes before, and covering his entire Atlantic Division. He would
have it, recorded in cold print before him, within a moment.

Yet, compared to the Rhaalton efficiency, our own methods seemed
antiquated indeed. This man was in touch with every transpiring detail
simultaneously; yet not confused by them, for every detail was also
combined into a whole--to be examined for itself if he wished. Visually
as well, the entire city lay before his gaze--the walls of the office
were lined with rows and tiers of small mirrors; receivers and
mouthpieces connected him with everything. Sights, sounds, and even
smells of the various factories were available to him--smells when his
sense of smell might be necessary for the testing of some elusive gas.

Without moving his physical body his presence was in effect transported
wherever throughout the city he wished to be. A man of tremendous
concentration, to handle but one thing at a time; with all the power of
his brain to give instant decision, and then to forget it utterly.

I found him a rather small man; smooth-shaven; grey-haired; a grave face
and demeanor, with dark eyes solemn with thought, yet twinkling often
when he spoke. A man of flabby muscles and gentle voice; seemingly
unforceful, and with a personality likable, but hardly dominating.

Instinctively I found myself comparing him to Tarrano. Tarrano's strong,
wiry body. The flash of his eye; his inscrutability, always suggesting
menace; the power, the genius of his personality--the force radiating
from him which no one could mistake. His intellectual power--his
concentration--certainly the equal of this little leader of the
_Rhaals_.

Tarrano the Conqueror! Tarrano--man of destiny--risen from nothing and
by the sheer genius of his will throwing three worlds into chaos, at one
stage combining two worlds into his self-created Empire; and menacing
the third. Surely Tarrano was a greater man than this Rhaalton. I knew
it; much as I hated Tarrano I was forced to admit it.

Yet as I stood there acknowledging the soft-spoken greeting of Rhaalton,
I had the swift premonition that Tarrano was going down into defeat. And
that this little man, without moving from his desk or raising his voice,
would be the main factor in bringing it about.

And I wondered why such a thing could be. I know why now. Tarrano, with
all his genius, lacked just one quality which this little man had in
abundance. The milk of human kindness--humanity--a radiating force the
essence of which paradoxically was the unforceful gentleness of him. The
Almighty--as we each of us in our hearts must envisage our God--is just,
but gentle, humane in His justness. And with all the genius in the
universe--the war-like power--the weapons--the cohorts--all the
wonderful armament of war--you cannot transgress the Will of the
Almighty. Against all human logic of what should be victory--you will
meet defeat....

The thoughts fled through my mind and vanished into the realities of the
present. Rhaalton was saying:

"We will be ready within another time of sleep. Jac Hallen, you wish, I
suppose, to go out with our forces?"

"Oh yes," I said.

He smiled. "The eagerness of youth for danger! And yet is very
necessary--very laudable--"

He passed a hand across his forehead with a weary gesture--a gesture
which seemed to me despondent. Could this be our vaunted leader? My
heart sank.

He added abruptly: "We shall conquer this Tarrano--but at what cost!"
