'Grandchild,' replied she, 'I fear to put your life in danger, and my
own too.'

'Oh, mistress, my life will not be lost, nor yours either; open, I pray
you.' So she opened the door.

'What is the news where you come from, my grandson,' asked she.

'Great lady, where I come from it is well, and with you it is well.'

'Ah, my son, here it is not well at all. If you seek a way to die, or if
you have not yet seen death, then is to-day the day for you to know what
dying is.'

'If I am to know it, I shall know it,' replied the gazelle; 'but tell
me, who is the lord of this house?'

And she said: 'Ah, father! in this house is much wealth, and much
people, and much food, and many horses. And the lord of it all is an
exceeding great and wonderful snake.'

'Oh!' cried the gazelle when he heard this; 'tell me how I can get at
the snake to kill him?'

'My son,' returned the old woman, 'do not say words like these; you risk
both our lives. He has put me here all by myself, and I have to cook his
food. When the great snake is coming there springs up a wind, and blows
the dust about, and this goes on till the great snake glides into the
courtyard and calls for his dinner, which must always be ready for him
in those big pots. He eats till he has had enough, and then drinks a
whole tankful of water. After that he goes away. Every second day he
comes, when the sun is over the house. And he has seven heads. How then
can you be a match for him, my son?'

'Mind your own business, mother,' answered the gazelle, 'and don't mind
other people's! Has this snake a sword?'

'He has a sword, and a sharp one too. It cuts like a dash of lightning.'

'Give it to me, mother!' said the gazelle, and she unhooked the sword
from the wall, as she was bidden. 'You must be quick,' she said, 'for
he may be here at any moment. Hark! is not that the wind rising? He has
come!'

They were silent, but the old woman peeped from behind a curtain, and
saw the snake busy at the pots which she had placed ready for him in
the courtyard. And after he had done eating and drinking he came to the
door:

'You old body!' he cried; 'what smell is that I smell inside that is not
the smell of every day?'

'Oh, master!' answered she, 'I am alone, as I always am! But to-day,
after many days, I have sprinkled fresh scent all over me, and it is
that which you smell. What else could it be, master?'

All this time the gazelle had been standing close to the door, holding
the sword in one of its front paws. And as the snake put one of
his heads through the hole that he had made so as to get in and out
comfortably, it cut it of so clean that the snake really did not feel
it. The second blow was not quite so straight, for the snake said to
himself, 'Who is that who is trying to scratch me?' and stretched out
his third head to see; but no sooner was the neck through the hole than
the head went rolling to join the rest.

When six of his heads were gone the snake lashed his tail with such fury
that the gazelle and the old woman could not see each other for the dust
he made. And the gazelle said to him, 'You have climbed all sorts of
trees, but this you can't climb,' and as the seventh head came darting
through it went rolling to join the rest.

Then the sword fell rattling on the ground, for the gazelle had fainted.

The old woman shrieked with delight when she saw her enemy was dead, and
ran to bring water to the gazelle, and fanned it, and put it where the
wind could blow on it, till it grew better and gave a sneeze. And
the heart of the old woman was glad, and she gave it more water, till
by-and-by the gazelle got up.

'Show me this house,' it said, 'from beginning to end, from top to
bottom, from inside to out.'

So she arose and showed the gazelle rooms full of gold and precious
things, and other rooms full of slaves. 'They are all yours, goods and
slaves,' said she.

But the gazelle answered, 'You must keep them safe till I call my
master.'

For two days it lay and rested in the house, and fed on milk and rice,
and on the third day it bade the old woman farewell and started back to
its master.

And when he heard that the gazelle was at the door he felt like a man
who has found the time when all prayers are granted, and he rose and
kissed it, saying: 'My father, you have been a long time; you have left
sorrow with me. I cannot eat, I cannot drink, I cannot laugh; my heart
felt no smile at anything, because of thinking of you.'

And the gazelle answered: 'I am well, and where I come from it is well,
and I wish that after four days you would take your wife and go home.'

And he said: 'It is for you to speak. Where you go, I will follow.'

'Then I shall go to your father-in-law and tell him this news.'

'Go, my son.'

So the gazelle went to the father-in-law and said: 'I am sent by my
master to come and tell you that after four days he will go away with
his wife to his own home.'

'Must he really go so quickly? We have not yet sat much together, I
and Sultan Darai, nor have we yet talked much together, nor have we yet
ridden out together, nor have we eaten together; yet it is fourteen days
since he came.'

But the gazelle replied: 'My lord, you cannot help it, for he wishes to
go home, and nothing will stop him.'

'Very good,' said the sultan, and he called all the people who were in
the town, and commanded that the day his daughter left the palace ladies
and guards were to attend her on her way.

And at the end of four days a great company of ladies and slaves and
horses went forth to escort the wife of Sultan Darai to her new home.
They rode all day, and when the sun sank behind the hills they rested,
and ate of the food the gazelle gave them, and lay down to sleep. And
they journeyed on for many days, and they all, nobles and slaves, loved
the gazelle with a great love--more than they loved the Sultan Darai.

At last one day signs of houses appeared, far, far off. And those who
saw cried out, 'Gazelle!'

And it answered, 'Ah, my mistresses, that is the house of Sultan Darai.'

At this news the women rejoiced much, and the slaves rejoiced much, and
in the space of two hours they came to the gates, and the gazelle bade
them all stay behind, and it went on to the house with Sultan Darai.

When the old woman saw them coming through the courtyard she jumped and
shouted for joy, and as the gazelle drew near she seized it in her arms,
and kissed it. The gazelle did not like this, and said to her: 'Old
woman, leave me alone; the one to be carried is my master, and the one
to be kissed is my master.'

And she answered, 'Forgive me, my son. I did not know this was our
master,' and she threw open all the doors so that the master might see
everything that the rooms and storehouses contained. Sultan Darai looked
about him, and at length he said:

'Unfasten those horses that are tied up, and let loose those people that
are bound. And let some sweep, and some spread the beds, and some cook,
and some draw water, and some come out and receive the mistress.'

And when the sultana and her ladies and her slaves entered the house,
and saw the rich stuffs it was hung with, and the beautiful rice that
was prepared for them to eat, they cried: 'Ah, you gazelle, we have seen
great houses, we have seen people, we have heard of things. But this
house, and you, such as you are, we have never seen or heard of.'

After a few days, the ladies said they wished to go home again. The
gazelle begged them hard to stay, but finding they would not, it brought
many gifts, and gave some to the ladies and some to their slaves. And
they all thought the gazelle greater a thousand times than its master,
Sultan Darai.

The gazelle and its master remained in the house many weeks, and one day
it said to the old woman, 'I came with my master to this place, and I
have done many things for my master, good things, and till to-day he has
never asked me: "Well, my gazelle, how did you get this house? Who is
the owner of it? And this town, were there no people in it?" All good
things I have done for the master, and he has not one day done me any
good thing. But people say, "If you want to do any one good, don't do
him good only, do him evil also, and there will be peace between you."
So, mother, I have done: I want to see the favours I have done to my
master, that he may do me the like.'

'Good,' replied the old woman, and they went to bed.

In the morning, when light came, the gazelle was sick in its stomach and
feverish, and its legs ached. And it said 'Mother!'

And she answered, 'Here, my son?'

And it said, 'Go and tell my master upstairs the gazelle is very ill.'

'Very good, my son; and if he should ask me what is the matter, what am
I to say?'

'Tell him all my body aches badly; I have no single part without pain.'

The old woman went upstairs, and she found the mistress and master
sitting on a couch of marble spread with soft cushions, and they asked
her, 'Well, old woman, what do you want?'

'To tell the master the gazelle is ill,' said she.

'What is the matter?' asked the wife.

'All its body pains; there is no part without pain.'

'Well, what can I do? Make some gruel of red millet, and give to it.'

But his wife stared and said: 'Oh, master, do you tell her to make
the gazelle gruel out of red millet, which a horse would not eat? Eh,
master, that is not well.'

But he answered, 'Oh, you are mad! Rice is only kept for people.'

'Eh, master, this is not like a gazelle. It is the apple of your eye. If
sand got into that, it would trouble you.'

'My wife, your tongue is long,' and he left the room.

The old woman saw she had spoken vainly, and went back weeping to the
gazelle. And when the gazelle saw her it said, 'Mother, what is it, and
why do you cry? If it be good, give me the answer; and if it be bad,
give me the answer.'

But still the old woman would not speak, and the gazelle prayed her to
let it know the words of the master. At last she said: 'I went upstairs
and found the mistress and the master sitting on a couch, and he asked
me what I wanted, and I told him that you, his slave, were ill. And his
wife asked what was the matter, and I told her that there was not a
part of your body without pain. And the master told me to take some
red millet and make you gruel, but the mistress said, 'Eh, master, the
gazelle is the apple of your eye; you have no child, this gazelle is
like your child; so this gazelle is not one to be done evil to. This
is a gazelle in form, but not a gazelle in heart; he is in all things
better than a gentleman, be he who he may.'

And he answered her, 'Silly chatterer, your words are many. I know its
price; I bought it for an eighth. What loss will it be to me?'

The gazelle kept silence for a few moments. Then it said, 'The elders
said, "One that does good like a mother," and I have done him good, and
I have got this that the elders said. But go up again to the master, and
tell him the gazelle is very ill, and it has not drunk the gruel of red
millet.'

So the old woman returned, and found the master and the mistress
drinking coffee. And when he heard what the gazelle had said, he cried:
'Hold your peace, old woman, and stay your feet and close your eyes,
and stop your ears with wax; and if the gazelle bids you come to me, say
your legs are bent, and you cannot walk; and if it begs you to listen,
say your ears are stopped with wax; and if it wishes to talk, reply that
your tongue has got a hook in it.'

The heart of the old woman wept as she heard such words, because she saw
that when the gazelle first came to that town it was ready to sell its
life to buy wealth for its master. Then it happened to get both life and
wealth, but now it had no honour with its master.

And tears sprung likewise to the eyes of the sultan's wife, and she
said, 'I am sorry for you, my husband, that you should deal so wickedly
with that gazelle'; but he only answered, 'Old woman, pay no heed to the
talk of the mistress: tell it to perish out of the way. I cannot sleep,
I cannot eat, I cannot drink, for the worry of that gazelle. Shall a
creature that I bought for an eighth trouble me from morning till night?
Not so, old woman!'

The old woman went downstairs, and there lay the gazelle, blood flowing
from its nostrils. And she took it in her arms and said, 'My son, the
good you did is lost; there remains only patience.'

And it said, 'Mother, I shall die, for my soul is full of anger and
bitterness. My face is ashamed, that I should have done good to my
master, and that he should repay me with evil.' It paused for a moment,
and then went on, 'Mother, of the goods that are in this house, what do
I eat? I might have every day half a basinful, and would my master be
any the poorer? But did not the elders say, "He that does good like a
mother!"'

And it said, 'Go and tell my master that the gazelle is nearer death
than life.'

So she went, and spoke as the gazelle had bidden her; but he answered,
'I have told you to trouble me no more.'

But his wife's heart was sore, and she said to him: 'Ah, master, what
has the gazelle done to you? How has he failed you? The things you do
to him are not good, and you will draw on yourself the hatred of the
people. For this gazelle is loved by all, by small and great, by women
and men. Ah, my husband! I thought you had great wisdom, and you have
not even a little!'

But he answered, 'You are mad, my wife.'

The old woman stayed no longer, and went back to the gazelle, followed
secretly by the mistress, who called a maidservant and bade her take
some milk and rice and cook it for the gazelle.

'Take also this cloth,' she said, 'to cover it with, and this pillow
for its head. And if the gazelle wants more, let it ask me, and not its
master. And if it will, I will send it in a litter to my father, and he
will nurse it till it is well.'

And the maidservant did as her mistress bade her, and said what her
mistress had told her to say, but the gazelle made no answer, but turned
over on its side and died quietly.

When the news spread abroad, there was much weeping among the people,
and Sultan Darai arose in wrath, and cried, 'You weep for that gazelle
as if you wept for me! And, after all, what is it but a gazelle, that I
bought for an eighth?'

But his wife answered, 'Master, we looked upon that gazelle as we looked
upon you. It was the gazelle who came to ask me of my father, it was the
gazelle who brought me from my father, and I was given in charge to the
gazelle by my father.'

And when the people heard her they lifted up their voices and spoke:

'We never saw you, we saw the gazelle. It was the gazelle who met with
trouble here, it was the gazelle who met with rest here.

So, then, when such an one departs from this world we weep for
ourselves, we do not weep for the gazelle.'

And they said furthermore:

'The gazelle did you much good, and if anyone says he could have done
more for you he is a liar! Therefore, to us who have done you no good,
what treatment will you give? The gazelle has died from bitterness of
soul, and you ordered your slaves to throw it into the well. Ah! leave
us alone that we may weep.'

But Sultan Darai would not heed their words, and the dead gazelle was
thrown into the well.

When the mistress heard of it, she sent three slaves, mounted on
donkeys, with a letter to her father the sultan, and when the sultan had
read the letter he bowed his head and wept, like a man who had lost his
mother. And he commanded horses to be saddled, and called the governor
and the judges and all the rich men, and said:

'Come now with me; let us go and bury it.'

Night and day they travelled, till the sultan came to the well where the
gazelle had been thrown. And it was a large well, built round a rock,
with room for many people; and the sultan entered, and the judges and
the rich men followed him. And when he saw the gazelle lying there he
wept afresh, and took it in his arms and carried it away.

When the three slaves went and told their mistress what the sultan had
done, and how all the people were weeping, she answered:

'I too have eaten no food, neither have I drunk water, since the day the
gazelle died. I have not spoken, and I have not laughed.'

The sultan took the gazelle and buried it, and ordered the people to
wear mourning for it, so there was great mourning throughout the city.

Now after the days of mourning were at an end, the wife was sleeping at
her husband's side, and in her sleep she dreamed that she was once more
in her father's house, and when she woke up it was no dream.

And the man dreamed that he was on the dust-heap, scratching. And when
he woke, behold! that also was no dream, but the truth.

(Swahili Tales.)




HOW A FISH SWAM IN THE AIR AND A HARE IN THE WATER.

Once upon a time an old man and his wife lived together in a little
village. They might have been happy if only the old woman had had the
sense to hold her tongue at proper times. But anything which might
happen indoors, or any bit of news which her husband might bring in when
he had been anywhere, had to be told at once to the whole village, and
these tales were repeated and altered till it often happened that much
mischief was made, and the old man's back paid for it.

One day, he drove to the forest. When he reached the edge of it he got
out of his cart and walked beside it. Suddenly he stepped on such a soft
spot that his foot sank in the earth.

'What can this be?' thought he. 'I'll dig a bit and see.'

So he dug and dug, and at last he came on a little pot full of gold and
