"Here is great merriment," said he, rising and holding aloft his silver
drinking horn. "And I propose that we shall find a new entertainment
which will long hereafter be remembered."

Sigvaldi answered, "We think it most becoming and best for the
entertainment, that you, lord, should make the first proposal, for we
all have to obey you and follow your example."

Then the king laughed and said: "I know it has always been customary at
great feasts and meetings that all present should make vows to perform
great and valorous deeds, and I am willing to try that now. For, as
you, Jomsvikings, are far more famous than all other men in this
northern half of the world, so the vows you will make here will be as
much more renowned than others, as you are greater than other men. And
to set you an example, I will myself begin."

He filled his drinking horn to the brim and held it high, while all
waited eagerly and silently to hear what vow he should make.

"This it is," said he in a loud voice which those at the farthest end
of the hall could clearly hear. "I vow that I will, before the third
winter nights hereafter have passed, have driven King Ethelred of
England out of his realm, or else have slain him, and thus have got his
kingdom to myself!"

And so saying he quaffed his deep horn.

All wondered at this great vow, for not many had heard even the name of
King Ethelred.

"Now it is thy turn, Sigvaldi," cried Sweyn, wiping his wet lips with
the back of his hand, "and make no less a vow than mine."

Then the drink bearers bore to the vikings the biggest horns of the
strongest drink that was there, and Sigvaldi rose to his feet. He first
proposed the memory of his dead father, and before raising the drink to
his lips added this oath:

"I swear," said he, "that before three winters are worn away I will
sail over to Norway and slay Earl Hakon, or else drive him from the
land."

Now, this was the selfsame oath that Olaf Triggvison had resolved to
swear when it should come to his turn, and he was annoyed that Earl
Sigvaldi had, as it were, snatched it from his lips. He now thought
over what other vow he could make in its stead. But it chanced that ere
his turn came round all the company were either asleep or so full of
strong drink that they could not listen, so in the end he made no vow
whatsoever. Yet to the last he was as sober as when he first entered
the hall, and he remembered ever afterwards the boastful oaths that had
been made. Many of his fellow vikings--as Thorkel the High, Bui the
Thick, and Vagn Akison--declared that they would but follow their chief
to Norway, while others of Sweyn's following in like manner vowed to
accompany the king to England; and once having made these promises,
none dared to go back from them.

On the morrow, when the vikings regained their senses, they thought
they had spoken big words enough, so they met and took counsel how they
should bring about this expedition against Earl Hakon, and the end of
it was that they determined to set about it as early as might be. For
the rest of that wintertide the men of Jomsburg accordingly bestirred
themselves in making preparations for the journey. They fitted out
their best warships and loaded them with weapons, and their warriors
were mustered to the number of eight thousand well trained men, with
eighty chosen battleships.

So, when the snows of that winter had melted in the vales and the seas
were clear of ice floes, Sigvaldi led his host north through the Eyr
Sound and lay for a time in Lyme Firth. There he divided his forces,
leaving twenty of Olaf Triggvison's longships in the firth, so that
they might perchance intercept Earl Hakon should he escape the main
fleet. This was an ill judged measure, but Sigvaldi was not aware that
the forces of Earl Hakon were vastly superior in number to his own.
Olaf's ships were left in the charge of Kolbiorn Stallare, while Olaf
himself went aboard the dragonship of Vagn Akison.

Earl Sigvaldi then sailed out into the main with sixty ships, and came
to Agdir, in the south of Norway. And there he fell to pillaging in the
dominion of Earl Hakon.



CHAPTER X: THE BATTLE OF JOMSVIKINGS.


The rumour of the bold vows that the Jomsvikings had made spread
quickly throughout the land, and tidings of the great war gathering
soon reached Norway. Earl Erik Hakonson heard them in good time at the
place where he abode in Raum realm, and he straightway gathered his
folk about him and fared to the Uplands, and so north over the fells to
Thrandheim to meet Earl Hakon, his father. Now Earl Hakon greatly
feared the vikings of Jomsburg, and on hearing this news he sent abroad
the war arrow all about the Thrandheim country, and to Mere and
Raumsdale, north also into Naumdale and Halogaland; and in answer to
this summons there assembled a vast fleet of warships to the number of
one hundred and eighty keels, and a force amounting to eleven thousand
men. So many vessels and warriors had never before been seen together
in the fiords.

Now there was a man named Giermund who was out sailing in a fishing
skiff among the Her isles. He fared north to Mere, and there he fell in
with Earl Hakon, and told the earl tidings of a host that had come to
the land from Denmark.

"How can I know that what you tell is true?" asked the earl. "And what
token have you to show?"

Giermund drew forth his right arm with the hand smitten off at the
wrist.

"By this token may you know that these ships have come," said he.

Then Earl Hakon questioned the man closely concerning this new come
enemy, and Giermund told him that the men were vikings of Jomsburg, and
that they had slain many people of the land, and had robbed far and
wide.

"Swiftly northward are they coming," said he, "and full eagerly, and no
long time will wear by ere they are come upon you."

So thereupon the earl rowed through the firths with his fleet to meet
his foes.

The Jomsvikings had sailed northward along the coast, plundering and
ravaging wherever they landed. They made great coast raids, and often
burned towns and hamlets. They were lying in Ulfasound, off Stad, when
they and Hakon Jarl heard of each other. They were in want of food at
this time, and Vagn Akison and Olaf Triggvison went on their skiff to
the island of Hoed, not knowing that the earl lay in the bay near the
island. Vagn and Olaf landed with their men, wishing to make a shore
raid if they could, and they happened to meet a shepherd driving three
cows and twelve goats.

Vagn cried to his men: "Take the cows and goats and slaughter them for
our ships."

The shepherd asked: "Who commands the men on board your ship?"

"Vagn Akison, of Jomsburg," was the answer.

"I think then, that there are not very far from you bigger cattle for
slaughter than my poor cows and goats," said the shepherd.

Vagn did not understand his meaning. But Olaf Triggvison looked at the
man with quick apprehension, and said:

"If you know anything about the journey of Hakon Jarl, tell us at once.
And if you can truthfully tell us where he is, then your cows and goats
are safe."

The shepherd did not speak for many moments, but at last he answered
calmly: "Jarl Hakon lay yesternight with one or two ships under shelter
of the island of Hoed, and you can slay him when you like, for he is
still anchored in the bay waiting for his men."

"Then your cattle are safe," rejoined Vagn. "And you shall have a good
reward if you will come aboard our ship and show us the way into the
bay."

Ulf--for such was the shepherd's name--went on board the skiff early in
the day, and Vagn Akison, as quickly as he could, returned to the
Jomsburg fleet and told the news, which spread speedily round the
ships. Earl Sigvaldi at once weighed anchor and rowed out north of the
island, giving word meanwhile to his vikings to make ready for battle.

Greatly did Olaf Triggvison rejoice at this immediate prospect of
attacking and vanquishing the proud man who had for sixteen years held
sovereign sway in Norway. If, as Ulf the shepherd had reported, Earl
Hakon had but one or two ships, then it would be a very easy matter for
the Jomsburgers to vanquish him, and who could tell what glorious
results might not follow? Despite the fact that he was not himself the
leader of this present expedition, Olaf was confident that the expected
victory must bring about the furtherance of his own personal plans. It
might indeed be that Earl Sigvaldi, on proving himself the easy
conqueror, would attempt to place himself in possession of the realm,
and to assume the name and dignity of King of Norway. But Olaf, ever
hopeful and buoyant, trusted that with very little trouble on his own
part, he could readily prove to the people that he, the direct
descendant of Harald Fairhair, had claims of which neither Sigvaldi nor
even the great Earl Hakon could justly boast.

In his passage with the viking ships up the coast of western Norway,
Olaf had looked for the first time upon the wild splendour of the
fiords, with their deep blue reaches of the sea penetrating far inland
between steep precipices braided with sparkling waterfalls. He had seen
the giant mountains rising high into the sky, with their rugged summits
capped with snow and their lower slopes covered with vast forests of
tall pine trees. Often some fertile valley had opened out before him,
with verdant pastures and narrow strips of arable land. This was the
country over which King Harald Fairhair had ruled, and now, for the
first time, Olaf had realized the greatness of his heritage. He
determined to fight boldly and fearlessly in this coming battle, so
that he might thus win his way nearer to the possession of his
birthright and the goal of his growing ambitions.

He had been placed in command of one of the largest dragonships, and
while the fleet was sailing round the island--his own vessel being side
by side with that of Vagn Akison--he went below and dressed himself in
his strongest armour, and took up his heavy battleaxe and the well
tempered sword that King Valdemar had given him. The weather was bright
and warm, and he wore no cloak, but only his closely knit coat of chain
mail, with his brass helmet, crested with a winged dragon, and his
bossed shield. His long fair hair that fell down over his broad
shoulders, his finely marked features, his beautiful blue eyes and
clear ruddy complexion were on this day more evident than ever before;
and his firm muscular limbs and stalwart figure distinguished him as
the noblest and handsomest man in all the company of the vikings.

When he returned on deck he went at once to his post at the tiller and
looked out over the blue sunlit sea. A lusty cry rose at this instant
from the prow of Sigvaldi's dragonship. The fleet was now abreast of a
low lying point of land at the inner coast of Hoed Isle, and it was now
seen that the wide bay beyond was crowded all over with vessels of war.
Ulf the shepherd had betrayed the vikings into the hands of their
awaiting foe. When his treachery was discovered he ran to the rail of
Vagn Akison's ship and leapt overboard, intending to swim to the shore
without waiting for his reward. Vagn threw a spear at him, but missed
his aim. Olaf Triggvison, who saw the shepherd swimming astern, caught
up a spear with his left hand and flung it at him. It hit him in the
middle and killed him.

The Jomsvikings rowed with their sixty ships into the great bay. They
were formed into three divisions, and Earl Sigvaldi laid his flagship
in the centre of the line of battle. To the north of him he arrayed
twenty ships under the command of Bui the Thick and Sigurd Kapa, while
Vagn Akison and Olaf Triggvison held the southern wing.

Earl Hakon determined which of his captains should fight against these
champions. It was customary in such battles for ship to fight against
ship and man against man; but in most cases Hakon, whose forces greatly
outnumbered those of his enemies, placed three of his longships against
one of the vikings'. He himself was not matched against any one, but
had to support the whole line and command it. His son Sweyn held the
chief position in the centre of battle, facing the leader of the
vikings. Against the division of Bui was placed a great Norwegian
warrior named Thorkel Leira. The wing held by Vagn Akison and Olaf
Triggvison was opposed by Earl Hakon's eldest son, Erik. Each chief had
his own banner in the shield burg at his prow.

War horns were sounded, arrows of challenge were fired over the
opposing fleets, the berserks on either side clashed their arms and bit
the rims of their shields, working themselves into a wild war fury.
Then the fleets closed in upon each other amid a storm of arrows, and
the grim battle began.

The ships of the vikings were higher in the hull than those of the
Norwegians, and this gave them an advantage, for, when the grapplings
were thrown out and the ships were lashed together, the Jomsburgers
could fire their arrows and spears down upon the heads of their foes.
The onset and attack were faultlessly made, and for a long while it
seemed uncertain which side was getting the better hand. But at length
Earl Hakon, who was supporting his son Sweyn against Sigvaldi, saw that
his northern wing was being forced backward, and he hastened to its
aid. Nevertheless, Bui the Thick still pressed the Norwegians back with
heavy blows and a ceaseless rain of arrows and spears, and it seemed
that at this point the vikings were quickly gaining the victory. On the
southern wing, however, the fight was more equal, and Earl Erik thought
that he would go to his brother's help. He went thither, accordingly,
but could do no more than set the wing in line again. Hakon then
returned to fight against Sigvaldi.

Now, by this short absence, Earl Erik had weakened the southern wing,
and, when he came back to defend his ships, he found that Vagn Akison
and Olaf Triggvison had broken through the line and made great havoc.
Erik was a brave warrior, however, and he did not hesitate to make a
bold attack upon the ships of these two champions. He encountered them
with four of his best longships against their two. The battle at this
point now grew furious, and the carnage on both sides was tremendous.
Vagn and Olaf, followed by their berserks, jumped on board Erik's ship,
and each went along either side of her, clearing his way, so that all
fell back before the mighty blows. Erik saw that these two warriors
were so fierce and mad that he would not long be able to withstand
them, and that Earl Hakon's help must be got as quickly as possible.
Yet he goaded his men on, and they made a brave resistance. Olaf was
often attacked by three or four berserks at once, but he guarded every
blow, and received but little hurt. He fought whiles with his sword and
whiles with his battleaxe, and at times even with both weapons, one in
either hand, dealing many hard and heavy blows, and slaying many a man.
And ever when the decks were cleared there came on board other hosts of
men from the neighbouring ships. Olaf wanted to come to a hand to hand
combat with Earl Erik, but Erik always avoided him.

In the midst of this conflict one of Erik's men went forward and cut
the lashings that bound the ships together, so that Olaf's dragonship
drifted apart. Olaf noticed this, and he fought his way across the deck
to where Vagn Akison was. At this moment there was a great onrush of
Norwegians, and Vagn and Olaf sought the safety of one of their own
ships. They jumped on board of her, and had her rowed some distance
away, so that they might rest themselves and make ready for a new
attack.

There was then a pause in the battle, and it was seen that Earl Hakon's
ship had been taken landward, out of reach of the Jomsvikings' arrows.
The legend tells that, seeing the battle going against him, he took
some men ashore with him, together with his little son Erling--a lad of
seven years of age. Entering a forest glade he prayed to the gods, and
offered to propitiate them by making human sacrifice. When he thought
that his vows and prayers were heard, he took young Erling and put him
to death. Then he returned to the battle, and there was a sudden change
in the weather. The sky began to darken in the north, and a heavy black
cloud glided up from the sea, spreading quickly. A shower of hailstones
followed at once, and the Jomsvikings had to fight with their faces
against the blinding storm, which was so terrible that some of the men
could do no more than stand against it, as they had previously taken
off their clothes on account of the heat. They began to shiver, though
for the most part they fought bravely enough.

