
Wilkesville was an inland city, of from fifteen to twenty thousand
inhabitants.

As Philip and the professor passed along the principal street, they saw
various stores of different kinds, with here and there a large,
high, plain-looking structure, which they were told was used for the
manufacture of shoes.

"Wilkesville will give us a large audience," he said, in a tone of
satisfaction.

"I hope so," said our hero.

"Hope so? I know so!" said the professor confidently. "The town is full
of young men, employed in shoe-making. They are fond of amusement,
and they will gladly seize an opportunity of patronizing a first-class
entertainment like ours."

The professor's reasoning seemed good, but logic sometimes fails, and
Philip was not quite so sanguine. He said nothing, however, to dampen
the ardor of his partner.

"Let me see," said the professor, pausing, "yonder stands the
Wilkesville Hotel. We had better put up there."

It was a brick structure of considerable size, and seemed to have some
pretensions to fashion.

"Do you know how much they charge?" asked Philip prudently.

"No; I neither know nor care," answered Professor Riccabocca loftily.

"But," said Philip, "I haven't much money."

"Nor I," admitted Riccabocca. "But it is absolutely necessary for us to
stop at a first-class place. We must not let the citizens suppose that
we are tramps or vagabonds. They will judge us by our surroundings."

"There is something in that," said Philip. "But suppose we don't
succeed!"

"Succeed? We must succeed!" said the professor, striking an attitude.
"In the vocabulary of youth, there's no such word as 'fail'! Away with
timid caution! Our watchword be success!"

"Of course, you have much more experience than I," said Philip.

"Certainly I have! We must keep up appearances. Be guided by me, and all
will come right."

Philip reflected that they could not very well make less than their
expenses, and accordingly he acceded to the professor's plans. They
entered the hotel, and Professor Riccabocca, assuming a dignified,
important step, walked up to the office. "Sir," said he, to the clerk,
"my companion and myself would like an apartment, one eligibly located,
and of ample size."

"You can be accommodated, sir," answered the young man politely. "Will
you enter your names?"

Opening the hotel register, the elocutionist, with various flourishes,
entered, this name: "Professor Lorenzo Riccabocca, Elocutionist and
Dramatic Reader."

"Shall I enter your name?" he asked of Philip.

"If you please."

This was the way Professor Riccabocca complied with his request: "Philip
de Gray, the Wonderful Boy-musician."

He turned the book, so that the clerk could see the entries.

"We propose to give an entertainment in Wilkesville," he said.

"I am glad to hear it," said the clerk politely.

"After dinner I will consult you as to what steps to take. Is there
anything in the way of amusement going on in town this evening?"

"Yes, there is a concert, chiefly of home-talent, in Music Hall. There
is nothing announced for to-morrow evening."

"Then we will fix upon to-morrow evening. It will give us more time to
get out hand-bills, etc. Is there a printing-office in town?"

"Oh, yes, sir. We have a daily paper."

"Is the office near at hand?"

"Yes, sir. It is on the corner of the next street."

"That will do for the present. We will go up to our apartment. Will
dinner be ready soon?"

"In half an hour."

Here the servant made his appearance, and the professor, with a wave of
his hand, said:

"Lead on, Mr. de Gray! I will follow."



CHAPTER XXVI. A PROMISING PLAN.



They were shown into a front room, of good size, containing two beds.
The servant handed them the key, and left them.

"This looks very comfortable, Mr. de Gray," said the professor, rubbing
his hands with satisfaction.

"Why do you call me Mr. de Gray?" asked Philip, thinking he had been
misunderstood. "It is plain Gray, without any de."

"I am only using your professional name," answered the professor. "Don't
you know people will think a great deal more of you if they suppose you
to be a foreigner?"

Philip laughed.

"Is Lorenzo Riccabocca your true or professional name, professor?" he
asked.

"Professional, of course. My real name--I impart it to you in the
strictest confidence--is Lemuel Jones. Think of it. How would that look
on a poster?"

"It would not be so impressive as the other."

"Of course not; and the public need to be impressed. I thank thee for
that word, Mr. de Gray. By the way, it's rather a pity I didn't give you
a Spanish or Italian name."

"But I can't speak either language. It would be seen through at once."

"People wouldn't think of asking. You'd be safe enough. They will
generally swallow all you choose to say."

They went down to dinner presently, and the professor--Philip could not
help thinking--ate as if he were half-starved. He explained afterward
that elocutionary effort taxes the strength severely, and makes hearty
eating a necessity.

After dinner was over the professor said:

"Are you content, Mr. de Gray, to leave me to make the necessary
arrangements?"

"I should prefer that you would," said Philip, and he spoke sincerely.
"Probably you understand much better than I what needs to be done."

"'Tis well! Your confidence is well placed," said the professor, with a
wave of his hand. "Shall you remain in the hotel?"

"No, I think I will walk about the town and see a little of it. I have
never been here before."

Philip took a walk through the principal streets, surveying with
curiosity the principal building's, for, though there was nothing
particularly remarkable about them, he was a young traveler, to whom
everything was new. He could not help thinking of his late home, and in
particular of Frank Dunbar, his special friend, and he resolved during
the afternoon to write a letter to Frank, apprising him of his luck
thus far. He knew that Frank would feel anxious about him, and would be
delighted to hear of his success as a musician.

He went into a book-store and bought a sheet of paper and an envelope.

He had just completed his letter, when his partner entered the
reading-room of the hotel with a brisk step.

"Mr. de Gray," he said, "I have made all necessary arrangements. I have
hired the hall for to-morrow evening--five dollars--ordered some tickets
and posters at the printing-office, and secured a first-class notice
in to-morrow morning's paper. Everybody in Wilkesville will know before
to-morrow night that they will have the opportunity of attending a
first-class performance at the Music Hall."

"It seems to me the necessary expenses are considerable," said Philip
uneasily.

"Of course they are; but what does that matter?"

"What is to be the price of tickets?"

"General admission, twenty-five cents; reserved seats, fifty cents, and
children under twelve, fifteen cents. How does that strike you!"

"Will anyone be willing to pay fifty cents to hear us?" asked Philip.

"Fifty cents! It will be richly worth a dollar!" said the professor
loftily.

"I suppose he knows best," thought Philip. "I hope all will come out
right. If it does we can try the combination in other places."



CHAPTER XXVII. UNEXPECTED HONORS.



The next morning at breakfast, Professor Riccabocca handed Philip a
copy of the Wilkesville Daily Bulletin. Pointing to a paragraph on the
editorial page, he said, in a tone of pride and satisfaction:

"Read that, Mr. de Gray."

It ran thus:

"We congratulate the citizens of Wilkesville on the remarkable
entertainment which they will have an opportunity of enjoying this
evening at the Music Hall. Professor Lorenzo Riccabocca, whose fame as
an elocutionist and dramatic reader has made his name a household word
throughout Europe and America, will give some of his choice recitals and
personations, assisted by Philip de Gray, the wonderful boy-musician,
whose talent as a violin-player has been greeted with rapturous applause
in all parts of the United States. It is universally acknowledged
that no one of his age has ever equaled him. He, as well as Professor
Riccabocca, will give but a limited series of entertainments in this
country, having received flattering inducements to cross the Atlantic,
and appear professionally in London, Paris, and the chief cities of the
Continent. Fifty cents is the pitiful sum for which our citizens will
have it put in their power to hear this wonderful combination of talent.
This secures a reserved seat."

Philip read this notice with increasing amazement.

"What do you think of that, Mr. de Gray?" asked the professor gleefully.
"Won't that make Wilkesville open its eyes, eh?"

"It has made me open my eyes, professor," said Philip.

"Ha, ha!" said the professor, appearing amused.

"How soon are we to sail for Europe?" asked Philip, smiling.

"When Queen Victoria sends our passage-money," answered Riccabocca,
laughing.

"I see that your name is a household word in Europe. Were you ever
there?"

"Never."

"Then how can that be?"

"Mr. de Gray, your performances have been greeted with applause in all
parts of the United States. How do you explain that?"

"I don't pretend to explain it. I wasn't aware that my name had ever
been heard of a hundred miles from here."

"It has not, but it will be. I have only been predicting a little.
The paragraph isn't true now, but it will be some time, if we live and
prosper."

"But I don't like to be looked upon as a humbug, professor," said Philip
uneasily.

"You won't be. You are really a fine player, or I wouldn't consent to
appear with you. The name of Riccabocca, Mr. de Gray, I may truthfully
say, is well known. I have appeared in the leading cities of America.
They were particularly enthusiastic in Chicago," he added pensively.
"I wish I could find a paragraph from one of their leading papers,
comparing my rendering of the soliloquy in 'Hamlet' to Edwin Booth's,
rather to the disadvantage of that tragedian."

"I would like to read the notice," said Philip, who had very strong
doubts as to whether such a paragraph had ever appeared in print.

"You shall see it. It will turn up somewhere. I laid it aside carefully,
for I confess, Mr. de Gray, it gratified me much. I have only one thing
to regret: I should myself have gone on the stage, and essayed leading
tragic roles. It may not be too late now. What do you think?"

"I can tell better after I have heard you, professor," answered Philip.

"True, you can. Mr. de Gray," continued the professor, lowering his
voice, "notice how much attention we are receiving from the guests
at the tables. They have doubtless read the notice of our evening
entertainment."

Philip looked round the room, which was of good size, and contained some
thirty or more guests, and he saw that the professor was right.

He met several curious glances, some fair ladies expressing interest as
well as curiosity, and his face flushed.

"Gratifying, isn't it?" said the professor, smiling.

"No, I don't think it is," answered our hero.

"Why not?" demanded Professor Riccabocca, appearing amazed.

"If all were true, it might be," replied Philip. "As it is, I feel like
a humbug."

"Humbug pays in this world," said the professor cheerfully. "By the way,
there's another little paragraph to which I will call your attention."

Philip read this additional item:

"We understand that Professor Riecabocca and Mr. Philip de Gray have
received a cable despatch from the Prince of Wales, inviting them to
instruct his sons in elocution and music, at a very liberal salary. They
have this proposal under consideration, though they are naturally rather
reluctant to give up the plaudits of the public, even for so honorable a
position."

"Professor Riccabocca," said Philip, considerably annoyed by this
audacious invention, "you ought to have consulted me before publishing
such a falsehood as this."

"Falsehood, Mr. de Gray? Really I'm shocked! Gentlemen don't use such
words, or make such charges."

"You don't mean to say it's true that we have received any such
telegram?"

"No; of course not."

"Then why didn't I use the right word?"

"It's an innocent little fiction, my young friend--a fiction that will
do no one any harm, but will cause us to be regarded with extraordinary
interest."

Here the thought occurred to Philip that he, the future instructor of
British royalty, had only just escaped from a poorhouse, and it seemed
to him so droll that he burst out laughing.

"Why do you laugh, Mr. de Gray?" asked the professor, a little
suspiciously.

"I was thinking of something amusing," said Philip.

"Well, well! We shall have cause to laugh when we play this evening to a
crowded house."

"I hope so. But, professor, if we keep together, you mustn't print any
more such paragraphs about me. Of course, I am not responsible for what
you say about yourself."

"Oh, it will be all right!" said Riccabocca. "What are you going to do
with yourself?"

"I shall practice a little in my room, for I want to play well to-night.
When I get tired I shall take a walk."

"Very wise--very judicious. I don't need to do it, being, as I may say,
a veteran reader. I wouldn't rehearse if I were to play this evening
before the president and all the distinguished men of the nation."

"I don't feel so confident of myself," said Philip.

"No, of course not. By the way, can you lend me fifty cents, Mr. de
Gray?"

"Certainly."

"I don't want to break a ten."

Professor Riccabocca didn't mention that the only ten he had was a
ten-cent piece.

Slipping Philip's half-dollar into his vest pocket, he said carelessly:

"We'll take this into the account when we divide the proceeds of the
entertainment."

"Very well," said Philip.

He went up to his room and played for an hour or more, rehearsing the
different pieces he had selected for the evening, and then, feeling the
need of a little fresh air, he took a walk.

In different parts of the town he saw posters, on which his name was
printed in large letters.

"It seems almost like a joke!" he said to himself.

Just then he heard his name called, and, looking up, he recognized
a young fellow, of sixteen or thereabouts, who had formerly lived in
Norton. It seemed pleasant to see a familiar face.

"Why, Morris Lovett," he exclaimed "I didn't know you were here!"

"Yes; I'm clerk in a store. Are you the one that is going to give an
entertainment tonight?"

"Yes," answered Philip, smiling.

"I didn't know you were such a great player," said Morris, regarding our
hero with new respect.

He had read the morning paper.

"Nor I," said Philip, laughing.

"Are you going to Europe soon?"

"It isn't decided yet!" Philip answered, laughing.

"I wish I had your chance."

"Come and hear me this evening, at any rate," said Philip. "Call at the
hotel, at six o'clock, and I'll give you a ticket."

"I'll be sure to come," said Morris, well pleased.



CHAPTER XXVIII. A TRIUMPHANT SUCCESS.


