in conversation. They were no longer indoors, but sat in the garden
on the shady side of the house; or, when the sky happened to be
clouded and the morning was cool, walked together out to Europa Point;
and would sit down there, looking over the sea, but always talking.
Sometimes it was history--Roman, English, or Spanish--sometimes Bob's
schooldays and life in London, sometimes general subjects. It mattered
little what they talked about, so that the conversation was kept up.

Sometimes, when it was found that topics failed them, the professor
would give Bob a Spanish book to glance through, and its subject
would serve as a theme for talk on, the following day; and as it
was five months since the lad had landed, he was now able to speak
in Spanish almost as fluently as in English. As he had learnt
almost entirely by ear, and any word mispronounced had had to be
gone over, again and again, until Don Diaz was perfectly satisfied,
his accent was excellent; and the professor had told him, a few
days before the breaking out of the war, that in another month or
two he should discontinue his lessons.

"It would be well for you to have one or two mornings a week, to
keep up your accent. You can find plenty of practice talking to the
people. I see you are good at making friends, and are ready to talk
to labourers at work, to boys, to the market women, and to anyone
you come across; but their accent is bad, and it would be well for
you to keep on with me. But you speak, at present, much better
Spanish than the people here and, if you were dressed up as a young
Spaniard, you might go about Spain without anyone suspecting you to
be English."

Indeed, by the professor's method of teaching--assisted by a
natural aptitude, and three hours' daily conversation, for five
months--Bob had made surprising progress, especially as he had
supplemented his lesson by continually talking Spanish with Manola,
with the Spanish woman and children living below them, and with
everyone he could get to talk to.

He had seen little of Jim, since the trouble began; as leave was,
for the most part, stopped--the ships of war being in readiness to
proceed to sea, at a moment's notice, to engage an enemy, or to
protect merchantmen coming in from the attacks of the Spanish ships
and gunboats, across at Algeciras.

Bob generally got up at five o'clock, now, and went out for two or
three hours before breakfast; for the heat had become too great for
exercise, during the day. He greatly missed the market, for it had
given him much amusement to watch the groups of peasant women--with
their baskets of eggs, fowls, vegetables, oranges, and fruit of
various kinds--bargaining with the townspeople, and joking and
laughing with the soldiers. The streets were now almost deserted,
and many of the little traders in vegetables and fruit had closed
their shops. The fishermen, however, still carried on their work,
and obtained a ready sale for their catch. There had, indeed, been
a much greater demand than usual for fish, owing to the falling off
in the fruit and vegetable supplies.

The cessation of trade was already beginning to tell upon the
poorer part of the population; but employment was found for all
willing to labour either at collecting earth for the batteries, or
out on the neutral ground--where three hundred of them were
employed by the Engineers in levelling sand hummocks, and other
inequalities in the ground, that might afford any shelter to an
enemy creeping up to assault the gates by the waterside.

Dr. Burke came in with Captain O'Halloran to dinner, ten days after
the gates had been closed.

"You are quite a stranger, Teddy," Mrs. O'Halloran said.

"I am that," he replied; "but you are going to be bothered with me
again, now; we have got everything in apple pie order, and are ready to
take half the garrison under our charge. There has been lots to do. All
the medical stores have been overhauled, and lists made out and sent
home of everything that can be required--medicines and comforts, and
lint and bandages, and splints and wooden legs; and goodness knows
what, besides. We hope they will be out in the first convoy.

"There is a privateer going to sail, tomorrow; so if you want to
send letters home, or to order anything to be sent out to you, you
had better take the opportunity. Have you got everything you want,
for the next two or three years?"

"Two or three years!" Carrie repeated, in tones of alarm. "You mean
two or three months."

"Indeed, and I don't. If the French and the Dons have made up their
mind to take this place, and once set to fairly to do it, they are
bound to stick to it for a bit. I should say you ought to provide
for three years."

"But that is downright nonsense, Teddy. Why, in three months there
ought to be a fleet here that would drive all the French and
Spaniards away."

"Well, if you say there ought to be, there ought," the doctor said,
"but where is it to come from? I was talking to some of the naval
men, yesterday; and they all say it will be a long business, if the
French and Spanish are in earnest. The French navy is as strong as
ours, and the Spaniards have got nearly as many ships as the
French. We have got to protect our coasts and our trade, to convoy
the East Indian fleets, and to be doing something all over the
world; and they doubt whether it would be possible to get together
a fleet that could hope to defeat the French and Spanish navies,
combined.

"Well, have you been laying in stores, Mrs. O'Halloran?"

"Yes, we have bought two sacks of flour, and fifty pounds of sugar;
ten pounds of tea, and a good many other things."

"If you will take my advice," the doctor said earnestly, "you will
lay in five times as much. Say ten sacks of flour, two hundred-weight
of sugar, and everything else in proportion. Those sort of things
haven't got up in price, yet; but you will see, everything will rise
as soon as the blockade begins in earnest."

"No, the prices of those things have not gone up much; but fruit is
three times the price it was, a fortnight ago, and chickens and
eggs are double, and vegetables are hardly to be bought."

"That is the worst of it," the doctor said. "It's the vegetables
that I am thinking of."

"Well, we can do without vegetables," Mrs. O'Halloran laughed, "as
long as we have plenty of bread."

"It is just that you can't do. You see, we shall be cut off from
Tangier--maybe tomorrow, maybe a fortnight hence--but we shall be
cut off. A ship may run in sometimes, at night, but you can't count
upon that; and it is salt meat that we are going to live upon and,
if you live on salt meat, you have got to have vegetables or fruit
to keep you in health.

"Now, I tell you what I should do, Gerald, and I am not joking with
you. In the first place, I would make an arrangement with the
people downstairs, and I would hire their garden from them. I don't
suppose they would want much for it, for they make no use of it,
except to grow a few flowers. Then I would go down the town, and I
would buy up all the chickens I could get. There are plenty of them
to be picked up, if you look about for them, for most of the people
who have got a bit of ground keep a few fowls. Get a hundred of
them, if you can, and turn them into the garden. Buy up twenty
sacks, if you like, of damaged biscuits. You can get them for an
old song. The commissariat have been clearing out their stores, and
there are a lot of damaged biscuits to be sold, by auction,
tomorrow. You would get twenty sacks for a few shillings.

"That way you will get a good supply of eggs, if the siege lasts
ever so long; and you can fence off a bit of the garden, and raise
fowls there. That will give you a supply of fresh meat, and any
eggs and poultry you can't eat yourselves you can sell for big
prices. You could get a chicken, three weeks ago, at threepence.
Never mind if you have to pay a shilling for them, now; they will
be worth five shillings, before long.

"If you can rent another bit of garden, anywhere near, I would take
it. If not, I would hire three or four men to collect earth, and
bring it up here. This is a good, big place; I suppose it is thirty
feet by sixty. Well, I would just leave a path from the door,
there, up to this end; and a spare place, here, for your chairs;
and I would cover the rest of it with earth, nine inches or a foot
deep; and I would plant vegetables."

"Do you mane we are to grow cabbages here, Teddy?" Captain
O'Halloran asked, with a burst of laughter.

"No, I wouldn't grow cabbages. I would just grow mustard, and
cress, and radishes. If you eat plenty of them, they will keep off
scurvy; and all you don't want for yourselves, I will guarantee you
will be able to sell at any price you like to ask for them and, if
nobody else will buy them, the hospitals will. They would be the
saving of many a man's life."

"But they would want watering," Captain O'Halloran said, more
seriously, for he saw how much the doctor was in earnest.

"They will that. You will have no difficulty in hiring a man to
bring up water, and to tend to them and to look after the fowls.
Men will be glad enough to work for next to nothing.

"I tell you, Gerald, if I wasn't in the service, I should hire
every bit of land I could lay hands on, and employ as many
labourers as it required; and I should look to be a rich man,
before the end of the siege. I was speaking to the chief surgeon
today about it; and he is going to put the convalescents to work,
on a bit of spare ground there is at the back of the hospital, and
to plant vegetables.

"I was asking down the town yesterday and I found that, at Blount's
store, you can get as much vegetable seed as you like. You lay in a
stock, today, of mustard and cress and radish. Don't be afraid of
the expense--get twenty pounds of each of them. You will be always
able to sell what you don't want, at ten times the price you give
for it now. If you can get a piece more garden ground, take it at
any price and raise other vegetables; but keep the top of the house
here for what I tell you.

"Well, I said nine inches deep of earth; that is more than
necessary. Four and a half will do for the radishes, and two is
enough for the mustard and cress. That will grow on a blanket--it
is really only water that it wants."

"What do you think, Carrie?" Captain O'Halloran asked.

"Well, Gerald, if you really believe the siege is going to last
like that, I should think that it would be really worth while to do
what Teddy Burke advises. Of course, you will be too busy to look
after things, but Bob might do so."

"Of course I would," Bob broke in. "It will give me something to
do."

"Well, we will set about it at once, then. I will speak to the man
downstairs. You know he has got two or three horses and traps down
in the town, and lets them to people driving out across the lines;
but of course he has nothing to do, now, and I should think that he
would be glad enough to arrange to look after the fowls and the
things up here.

"The garden is a good size. I don't think anything could get out
through that prickly pear hedge but, anyhow, any gaps there are can
be stopped up with stakes. I think it is a really good idea and, if
I can get a couple of hundred fowls, I will. I should think there
was plenty of room for them, in the garden. I will set up as a
poultry merchant."

"You might do worse, Gerald. I will bet you a gallon of whisky they
will be selling at ten shillings a couple, before this business is
over; and there is no reason in the world why you should not turn
an honest penny--it will be a novelty to you."

"Well, I will go down the town, at once," Gerald said, "and get the
seeds and the extra stores you advise, Teddy; and tomorrow I will
go to the commissariat sale, and buy a ton or two of those damaged
biscuits. We will take another room from them, downstairs, as a
storeroom for that and the eggs; and I will get a carpenter to come
up and put a fence, and make some runs and a bit of a shelter for
the sitting hens, and the chickens. Bob shall do the purchasing.

"You had better get a boy with a big basket to go with you, Bob;
and go round to the cottages, to buy up fowls. Mind, don't let them
sell you nothing but cocks--one to every seven or eight hens is
quite enough; and don't let them foist off old hens on you--the
younger they are, the better. I should say that, at first, you had
better take Manola with you, if Carrie can spare her; then you
won't get taken in, and you will soon learn to tell the difference
between an old hen and a young chicken."

"When you are buying the seed, O'Halloran," said Dr. Burke, "you
would do well to get a few cucumbers, and melons, and pumpkins.
They will grow on the roof, splendidly. And you can plant them near
the parapet, where they will grow down over the sides, so they
won't take up much room; and you can pick them with a ladder. The
pumpkin is a good vegetable, and the fowls will thank you for a bit
to pick, when you can spare one. They will all want manure, but you
get plenty of that, from the fowl yard."

"Why, Teddy, there seems no end to your knowledge," Mrs. O'Halloran
said. "First of all, you turn out to be a schoolmaster; and now you
are a gardener, and poultry raiser. And to think I never gave you
credit for knowing anything, except medicine."

"You haven't got to the bottom of it yet, Mrs. O'Halloran. My head
is just stored with knowledge, only it isn't always that I have a
chance of making it useful. I would be just the fellow to be cast
on a desert island. There is no saying what I wouldn't do towards
making myself comfortable there.

"But I do know about scurvy, for I made a voyage in a whaler,
before I got His Majesty's commission to kill and slay in the army;
and I know how necessary vegetables are. I only wish we had known
what the Spaniards were up to, a month since. We would have got a
cargo of oranges and lemons. They would have been worth their
weight in silver."

"But they wouldn't have kept, Teddy."

"No, not for long; but we would have squeezed them, and put sugar
into the juice, and bottled it off. If the general had consulted
me, that is what he would have been after, instead of seeing about
salt meat and biscuits. We shall get plenty of them, from ships
that run in--I have no fear of that--but it is the acids will be
wanting."

As soon as dinner was over, Captain O'Halloran went downstairs; and
had no difficulty in arranging, with the man below, for the entire
use of his garden. An inspection was made of the hedge, and the man
agreed to close up all gaps that fowls could possibly creep
through. He was also quite willing to let off a room for storage,
and his wife undertook to superintend the management of the young
broods, and sitting hens. Having arranged this, Captain O'Halloran
went down into the town to make his purchases.

A quarter of an hour later Bob started with Manola, carrying a
large basket, and both were much amused at their errand. Going
among the cottages scattered over the hill above the town, they had
no difficulty in obtaining chickens and fowls--the former at about
five pence apiece, the latter at seven pence--such prices being
more than double the usual rates. Manola's basket was soon full
and, while she was taking her purchases back to the house, Bob
hired two boys with baskets and, before evening, nearly a hundred
fowls were running in the garden.

The next day Bob was considered sufficiently experienced to
undertake the business alone and, in two more days, the entire
number of two hundred had been made up. Three of the natives had
been engaged in collecting baskets of earth among the rocks and, in
a week, the terrace was converted into a garden ready for the
seeds. As yet vegetables, although very dear, had not risen to
famine prices; for although the town had depended chiefly upon the
produce of the mainland, many of the natives had grown small
patches of vegetables in their gardens for their own use, and these
they now disposed of at prices that were highly satisfactory to
themselves.

O'Halloran's farm--as they called it, as soon as they heard, from
him, what he was doing--became quite a joke in the regiment; but
several of the other married officers, who had similar facilities
for keeping fowls, adopted the idea to some extent, and started
with a score or so of fowls.

"I wonder you didn't think of pigs, O'Halloran," one of the
captains said, laughing, as they were talking over the farm in the
mess anteroom; "pigs and potatoes. The idea of you and Burke, both
from the sod, starting a farm; and not thinking, first, of the two
chief national products."

"There is not room for praties, Sinclair; and as for pigs, there
are many reasons against it. In the first place, I doubt whether I
could buy any. In the second, there isn't room for them. In the
third, what should I give them to keep them alive? In the fourth,
pigs are illigant bastes but, in a hot country like this, I should
not care for a stye of them under my drawing room window. In the
fifth--"

"That will do, that will do, O'Halloran. We give way. We allow that
you could not keep pigs, but it is a pity."

"It is that, Sinclair. There is nothing would please me better than
to see a score of nice little pigs, with a nate stye, and a
magazine of food big enough to keep them, say, for a year."

"Three months, O'Halloran, would be ample."

"Well, we shall see, Sinclair. Teddy Burke says three years, but I
do hope it is not going to be as long as that."

"Begorra!" another Irish officer, Captain O'Moore, exclaimed; "if
it is three years we are going to be here, we had best be killed
and buried at once. I have been all the morning in the Queen's
Battery, where my company has been slaving like haythens, with the
sun coming down as if it would fry your brain in your skull pan;
and if that is to go on, day after day, for three years, I should
be dead in a month!"

"That is nothing, O'Moore. If the siege goes on, they say the
officers will have to help at the work."

"I shall protest against it. There is not a word in the articles of
war about officers working. I am willing enough to be shot by the
Spaniards, but not to be killed by inches. No, sir, there is not an
O'Moore ever did a stroke of work, since the flood; and I am not
going to demean myself by beginning.

"What are you laughing at, young Repton?"

"I was only wondering, Captain O'Moore, how your ancestors got
through the flood. Unless, indeed, Noah was an O'Moore."

"There is reason to believe that he was," the captain said,
seriously. "It must have been that, if he hadn't a boat of his own,
or found a mountain that the water didn't cover. I have got the
tree of the family at home; and an old gentleman who was learned in
these things came to the house, when I was a boy; and I remember
right well that he said to my father, after reckoning them up, that
the first of the house must have had a place there in Ireland
well-nigh a thousand years before Adam.

"I don't think my father quite liked it but, for the life of me, I
couldn't see why. It was just what I should expect from the
O'Moores. Didn't they give kings to Ireland, for generations? And
what should they want to be doing, out among those rivers in the
East, when there was Ireland, ready to receive them?"

Captain O'Moore spoke so seriously that Bob did not venture to
laugh, but listened with an air of gravity equal to that of the
officer.

"You will kill me altogether, Phelim!" Captain O'Halloran
exclaimed; amid a great shout of laughter, in which all the others
joined.

The O'Moore looked round, speechless with indignation.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I shall expect satisfaction for this insult.
The word of an O'Moore has never been doubted.

"Captain O'Halloran, my friend will call upon you, first."

"He may call as often as he likes, O'Moore, and I shall be happy to
converse with any friend of yours but, at present, that is all the
satisfaction you will get out of me. Duelling is strictly forbidden
on the Rock, and there is no getting across the Spanish lines to
fight--unless, indeed, you can persuade the governor to send out a
flag of truce with us. So we must let the matter rest, till the
siege is over; and then, if both of us are alive, and you have the
same mind, we will talk about it."

"I think, O'Moore," Dr. Burke, who had entered the room two or
three minutes before, said persuasively, "you will see that you are
the last man who ought to maintain that the first of your race
lived here, as far back as Adam. You see, we are all direct
descendants of Adam--I mean, all the rest of us."

"No doubt you are," Captain O'Moore said, stiffly.

"And one has just as much right as another to claim that he is the
heir, in a direct line."

"I suppose so, Burke," the officer said, "though, for the life of
me, I can't see what you are driving at."

"What I mean is this. Suppose Adam and the O'Moore started at the
same time, one in Ireland and the other in Eden; and they had an
equal number of children, as was likely enough. Half the people in
the world would be descendants of Adam, and the other half of the
O'Moore and, you see, instead of your being the O'Moore--the
genuine descendant, in the direct line, from the first of the
family--half the world would have an equal claim to the title."

Captain O'Moore reflected for a minute or two.

"You are right, Dr. Burke," he said. "I never saw it in that light.
It is clear enough that you are right, and that the less we say
about the O'Moores before the first Irish king of that name, the
better. There must have been some mistake about that tree I spoke
of.

"Captain O'Halloran, I apologize. I was wrong."

The two officers shook hands, and peace was restored; but Captain
O'Moore was evidently a good deal puzzled, and mortified, by the
problem the doctor had set before him and, after remaining silent
for some time, evidently in deep thought, he left the room. Some of
the others watched him from the window, until he had entered the
door of his own quarters; and then there was a general shout of
laughter.

"The O'Moore will be the death of me!" Teddy Burke exclaimed, as he
threw himself back in a chair, exhausted. "He is one of the best
fellows going, but you can lead him on into anything. I don't
suppose he ever gave a thought to the O'Moores, anywhere further
back than those kings. He had a vague idea that they must have been
going on, simply because it must have seemed to him that a world
without an O'Moore in it would be necessarily imperfect. It was Bob
Repton's questions, as to what they were doing at the time of the
flood, that brought him suddenly up; then he didn't hesitate for a
moment in taking them back to Adam, or before him. Just on the
ancestry of the O'Moores, Phelim has got a tile a little loose; but
on all other points, he is as sensible as anyone in the regiment."

"I wonder you didn't add, 'and that is not saying much,' doctor,"
one of the lieutenants said.

"I may have thought it, youngster; but you see, I must have made
exceptions in favour of myself and the colonel, so I held my
tongue. The fact that we are all here, under a sun hot enough to
cook a beefsteak; and that for the next two or three years we are
going to have to work like niggers, and to be shot at by the
Spaniards, and to be pretty well--if not quite--starved, speaks for
itself as to the amount of sense we have got between us.

"There go the drums! Now, gentlemen, you have got the pleasure of a
couple of hours' drill before you, and I am due at the hospital."


