The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rastignac the Devil, by Philip Jose Farmer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Rastignac the Devil

Author: Philip Jose Farmer

Release Date: February 12, 2010 [EBook #31262]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RASTIGNAC THE DEVIL ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Fantastic Universe May 1954. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


    _Here is high fidelity fiction at Philip Jose Farmer's
     story-telling best. It's a vibrant, distractingly different
     tale of three centuries into the future. And as you read
     you'll have a vague, uneasy feeling that it's all taking
     place somewhere in the unexplored parts of the universe, even
     today._


                         rastignac the devil


                     _by ... Philip Jose Farmer_


     Enslaved by a triangular powered despotism--one lone man
     sets his sights to the Six Bright Stars and eventual freedom
     of his world.

       *       *       *       *       *




_After the Apocalyptic War, the decimated remnants of the French
huddled in the Loire Valley were gradually squeezed between two new
and growing nations. The Colossus to the north was unfriendly and
obviously intended to absorb the little New France. The Colossus to
the south was friendly and offered to take the weak state into its
confederation of republics as a full partner._

_A number of proud and independent French citizens feared that even
the latter alternative meant the eventual transmutation of their
tongue, religion and nationality into those of their southern
neighbor. Seeking a way of salvation, they built six huge space-ships
that would hold thirty thousand people, most of whom would be in deep
freeze until they reached their destination. The six vessels then set
off into interstellar space to find a planet that would be as much
like Earth as possible._

_That was in the 22nd Century. Over three hundred and fifty years
passed before Earth heard of them again. However, we are not here
concerned with the home world but with the story of a man of that
pioneer group who wanted to leave the New Gaul and sail again to the
stars...._

       *       *       *       *       *

Rastignac had no Skin. He was, nevertheless, happier than he had been
since the age of five.

He was as happy as a man can be who lives deep under the ground.
Underground organizations are often under the ground. They are formed
into cells. Cell Number One usually contains the leader of the
underground.

Jean-Jacques Rastignac, chief of the Legal Underground of the Kingdom
of L'Bawpfey, was literally in a cell beneath the surface of the
earth. He was in jail.

For a dungeon, it wasn't bad. He had two cells. One was deep inside
the building proper, built into the wall so that he could sit in it
when he wanted to retreat from the sun or the rain. The adjoining cell
was at the bottom of a well whose top was covered with a grille of
thin steel bars. Here he spent most of his waking hours. Forced to
look upwards if he wanted to see the sky or the stars, Rastignac
suffered from a chronic stiff neck.

Several times during the day he had visitors. They were allowed to
bend over the grille and talk down to him. A guard, one of the King's
mucketeers,[1] stood by as a censor.

[Footnote 1: Mucketeer is the best translation of the 26th century
French noun _foutriquet_, pronounced _vfeutwikey_.]

When night came, Rastignac ate the meal let down by ropes on a
platform. Then another of the King's mucketeers stood by with drawn
epee until he had finished eating. When the tray was pulled back up
and the grille lowered and locked, the mucketeer marched off with the
turnkey.

Rastignac sharpened his wit by calling a few choice insults to the
night guard, then went into the cell inside the wall and lay down to
take a nap. Later, he would rise and pace back and forth like a caged
tiger. Now and then he would stop and look upwards, scan the stars,
hunch his shoulders and resume his savage circuit of the cell. But the
time would come when he would stand statue-still. Nothing moved except
his head, which turned slowly.

"Some day I'll ride to the stars with you."

He said it as he watched the Six Flying Stars speed across the night
sky--six glowing stars that moved in a direction opposite to the march
of the other stars. Bright as Sirius seen from Earth, strung out one
behind the other like jewels on a velvet string, they hurtled across
the heavens.

They were the six ships on which the original Loire Valley Frenchmen
had sailed out into space, seeking a home on a new planet. They had
been put into an orbit around New Gaul and left there while their
thirty thousand passengers had descended to the surface in
chemical-fuel rockets. Mankind, once on the fair and fresh earth of
the new planet, had never again ascended to re-visit the great ships.

For three hundred years the six ships had circled the planet known as
New Gaul, nightly beacons and glowing reminders to Man that he was a
stranger on this planet.

When the Earthmen landed on the new planet they had called the new
land _Le Beau Pays_, or, as it was now pronounced, _L'Bawpfey_--The
Beautiful Country. They had been delighted, entranced with the fresh
new land. After the burned, war-racked Earth they had just left, it
was like coming to Heaven.

They found two intelligent species living on the planet, and they
found that the species lived in peace and that they had no conception
of war or of poverty. And they were quite willing to receive the
Terrans into their society.

Provided, that is, they became integrated, or--as they phrased
it--natural. The Frenchmen from Earth had been given their choice.
They were told:

"You can live with the people of the Beautiful Land on our terms--war
with us, or leave to seek another planet."

The Terrans conferred. Half of them decided to stay; the other half
decided to remain only long enough to mine uranium and other
chemicals. Then they would voyage onwards.

But nobody from that group of Earthmen ever again stepped into the
ferry-rockets and soared up to the six ion-beam ships circling about
Le Beau Pays. All succumbed to the Philosophy of the Natural. Within a
few generations a stranger landing upon the planet would not have
known without previous information that the Terrans were not
aboriginal.

He would have found three species. Two were warm-blooded egglayers who
had evolved directly from reptiles without becoming mammals--the
Ssassarors and the Amphibs. Somewhere in their dim past--like all
happy nations, they had no history--they had set up their society and
been very satisfied with it since.

It was a peaceful quiet world, largely peasant, where nobody had to
scratch for a living and where a superb manipulation of biological
forces ensured very long lives, no disease, and a social lubrication
that left little to desire--from their viewpoint, anyway.

The government was, nominally, a monarchy. The Kings were elected by
the people and were a different species than the group each ruled.
Ssassaror ruled Human, and vice versa, each assisted by
foster-brothers and sisters of the race over which they reigned. These
were the so-called Dukes and Duchesses.

The Chamber of Deputies--_L'Syawp t' Tapfuti_--was half Human and half
Ssassaror. The so-called Kings took turns presiding over the Chamber
for forty day intervals. The Deputies were elected for ten-year terms
by constituents who could not be deceived about their representatives'
purposes because of the sensitive Skins which allowed them to
determine their true feelings and worth.

In one custom alone did the ex-Terrans differ from their neighbors.
This was in carrying arms. In the beginning, the Ssassaror had allowed
the Men to wear their short rapiers, so they would feel safe even
though in the midst of aliens.

As time went on, only the King's mucketeers--and members of the
official underground--were allowed to carry epees. These men, it might
be noticed, were the congenital adventurers, men who needed to
swashbuckle and revel in the name of individualist.

Like the egg-stealers, they needed an institution in which they could
work off anti-social steam.

From the beginning the Amphibians had been a little separate from the
Ssassaror and when the Earthmen came they did not get any more
neighborly. Nevertheless, they preserved excellent relations and they,
too, participated in the Changeling-custom.

This Changeling-custom was another social device set up millennia ago
to keep a mutual understanding between all species on the planet. It
was a peculiar institution, one that the Earthmen had found hard to
understand and ever more difficult to adopt. Nevertheless, once the
Skins had been accepted they had changed their attitude, forgot their
speculations about its origin and threw themselves into the custom of
stealing babies--or eggs--from another race and raising the children
as their own.

_You rob my cradle; I'll rob yours._ Such was their motto, and it
worked.

A Guild of Egg Stealers was formed. The Human branch of it guaranteed,
for a price, to bring you a Ssassaror child to replace the one that
had been stolen from you. Or, if you lived on the sea-shore, and an
Amphibian had crept into your nursery and taken your baby--always
under two years old, according to the rules--then the Guildsman would
bring you an Amphib or, perhaps, the child of a Human Changeling
reared by the Seafolk.

You raised it and loved it as your own. How could you help loving it?

Your Skin told you that it was small and helpless and needed you and
was, despite appearances, as Human as any of your babies. Nor did you
need to worry about the one that had been abducted. It was getting
just as good care as you were giving this one.

It had never occurred to anyone to quit the stealing and voluntary
exchange of babies. Perhaps that was because it would strain even the
loving nature of the Skin-wearers to give away their own flesh and
blood. But once the transfer had taken place, they could adapt.

Or perhaps the custom was kept because tradition is stronger than law
in a peasant-monarchy society and also because egg-and-baby stealing
gave the more naturally aggressive and daring citizens a chance to
work off anti-social behavior.

Nobody but a historian would have known, and there were no historians
in The Beautiful Land.

Long ago the Ssassaror had discovered that if they lived meatless,
they had a much easier time curbing their belligerency, obeying the
Skins and remaining cooperative. So they induced the Earthmen to put a
taboo on eating flesh. The only drawback to the meatless diet was that
both Ssassaror and Man became as stunted in stature as they did in
aggressiveness, the former so much so that they barely came to the
chins of the Humans. These, in turn, would have seemed short to a
Western European.

But Rastignac, an Earthman, and his good friend, Mapfarity, the
Ssassaror Giant, became taboo-breakers when they were children and
played together on the beach where they first ate seafood out of
curiosity, then continued because they liked it. And due to their
protein diet the Terran had grown well over six feet in height and the
