Project Gutenberg's Great Epochs in American History, Vol. II, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Great Epochs in American History, Vol. II
       The Planting Of The First Colonies: 1562--1733

Author: Various

Editor: Francis W. Halsey

Release Date: June 11, 2005 [EBook #16038]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT EPOCHS, AMERICAN ***




Produced by Carel Lyn Miske and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






GREAT EPOCHS IN AMERICAN HISTORY

DESCRIBED BY FAMOUS WRITERS
FROM COLUMBUS TO WILSON


Edited, with Introductions and Explanatory Notes

By FRANCIS W. HALSEY

_Associate Editor of "The World's Famous Orations"; Associate Editor
of "The Best of the World's Classics"; author of "The Old New York
Frontier"; Editor of "Seeing Europe With Famous Authors"_


IN TEN VOLUMES

ILLUSTRATED


VOL. II

THE PLANTING OF THE FIRST COLONIES: 1562--1733


Current Literature Publishing Company
New York

COPYRIGHT, 1912 AND 1916, by

FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY

[_Printed in the United States of America_]




    [Transcriber's Note: This text retains original spellings. Also,
    superscripted abbreviations or contractions are indicated by the
    use of a caret (^), such as w^th (with).]




INTRODUCTION

(_The Planting of the First Colonies_)


After the discoverers and explorers of the sixteenth century came
(chiefly in the seventeenth) the founders of settlements that grew
into States--French Huguenots in Florida and Carolina; Spaniards in
St. Augustine; English Protestants in Virginia and Massachusetts;
Dutch and English in New York; Swedes in New Jersey and Delaware;
Catholic English in Maryland; Quaker English and Germans in
Pennsylvania; Germans and Scotch-Irish in Carolina; French Catholics
in Louisiana; Oglethorpe's debtors in Georgia.

To some of these came disastrous failures--to the Huguenots and
Spaniards in Florida, to the English in Roanoke, Cuttyhunk and
Kennebee. Others who survived had stern and precarious first
years--the English in Jamestown and Plymouth, the Dutch in New York,
the French in New Orleans. Chief among leaders stand John Smith,
Bradford, Penn, Bienville and Oglethorpe, and chief among settlements,
Jamestown, Plymouth, New York, Massachusetts Bay, Wilmington,
Philadelphia, New Orleans and Savannah. The several movements, in
their failures as in their successes, were distributed over a century
and three-quarters, but since the coming of Columbus a much longer
period had elapsed. From the discovery to the arrival of Oglethorpe
lie 240 years, or a hundred years more than the period that separates
our day from the years when America gained her independence from
England.

Each center of settlement had been inspired by an impulse separate
from that of others. Alike as some of them were, in having as a moving
cause a desire to escape from persecution, religious or political, or
otherwise to better conditions, they were divided by years, if not by
generations, in time; the settlers came from lands isolated and remote
from one another; they were different as to race, form of government,
and religious and political ideals, and, once communities had been
founded, each expanded on lines of its own and knew little of its
neighbors.

The Spaniards who founded St. Augustine continued long to live there,
but of social and political growth in Spanish Florida there was none.
Spain, in those eventful European years, was fully absorbed elsewhere
in Continental wars which taxed all her strength, especially that
furious war, waged for forty years against Holland, and from which
Spain retired ultimately in failure. In those years also was
overthrown Philip's Armada, an event in which the scepter of
maritime-empire passed from Spain to England.

Of the French settlements the chief was New Orleans, French from the
beginning, and so to remain in racial preponderance, religious
beliefs, and political ideals, for a century and a half after
Bienville founded it--so, in fact, it still remains in our day. But
elsewhere the French gave to the United States no permanent
settlements. Numbers of them came to Florida, only to perish by the
sword; others in large numbers settled in South Carolina, only to
become merged with other races, among whom the English, with their
speech and their laws, became supreme.

On Manhattan Island and in the valleys of the Hudson and lower Mohawk
settled the Dutch a few years after the English at Jamestown. They
erected forts on Manhattan Island and at Albany, Hartford and near
Philadelphia; they partitioned vast tracts of fertile lands among
favorite patroons; they built up a successful trade in furs with the
Indians--and sent the profits home. Real settlements they did not
found--at least, not settlements that were infused with the spirit of
local enterprise, or animated by vital ambitions looking to growth in
population and industry. After forty years of prosperity in trade they
had failed to become a settled and well-ordered colonial state,
looking bravely forward to permanence, expansion and eventual
statehood. The first free school in America is credited to their
initiative, and they were tolerant of other religions than their own,
but they planted no other seeds from which a great State could grow.

As Coligny before him had sought to plant in Florida a colony of
French Huguenots, so Raleigh, who had served under that great captain
in the religious wars of the Continent, sought to found in Virginia a
Protestant state. Much private wealth and many of his best years were
given by Raleigh to the furtherance of a noble ambition, but all to
futile immediate results. Raleigh's work, however, like all good work
nobly done, was not lost. Out of his failure at Roanoke came English
successes in later years--John Smith at Jamestown, the Pilgrims at
Plymouth.

Oldest of permanent English settlements in America is Jamestown, but
the English failures at Cuttyhunk and Kennebec antedate it by a few
years, and the failure at Roanoke by a quarter of a century. At
Jamestown, ten years after the arrival of the first settlers, a
legislative assembly was organized--a minature parliament, modeled
after the English House of Commons, and the first legislative body the
new world ever knew. Here, too, in Jamestown began negro slavery in
the United States, and in the same, or the next, year. Thus
legislative freedom and human slavery had their beginning in America
at the same time and in the same place.

Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay, next among the English settlements,
followed in due time the failure of Gosnold at Cuttyhunk and the
description of New England John Smith wrote and printed in 1614 after
a voyage of exploration along her coast. After several years Plymouth
contained only about 300 souls, but the Bay colony, founded ten years
later, increased rapidly. By 1634 nearly 4,000 of Winthrop's followers
had arrived, many of them college graduates. From this great parent
colony went forth Roger Williams to Rhode Island, Hooker to Hartford,
Davenport to New Haven, so that by the middle of the seventeenth
century five English colonies had been planted within the borders of
New England.

Long after all these came the Maryland and Pennsylvania settlements,
founded by Lord Baltimore and William Penn as lords proprietor, owners
of vast tracts of land and possessing privileges more extensive than
ever before were bestowed on British subjects. In the new century
arrived Oglethorpe, with his insolvent debtors, soon to find Spaniards
from St. Augustine hostile to his enterprise. But Oglethorpe was a
soldier as well as a colonizer; he had served in Continental wars,
and, after laying siege to St. Augustine further aggressions from that
source ceased.

Thus at last, in the New World, the English race, their flag, their
language and their laws, had displaced the Spaniards in that
world-important contest for dominion and power, of which the second
issue was soon to be fought out on many bloody fields with France.

F.W.H.




CONTENTS

VOL. II--THE PLANTING OF THE FIRST COLONIES


INTRODUCTION. By the Editor

THE FOUNDING OF ST. AUGUSTINE AND THE MASSACRE BY MENENDEZ
(1562-1565):

    I. The Account by John A. Doyle

   II. Mendoza's Account

SIR WALTER RALEIGH'S VIRGINIA COLONIES (1584-1587):

    I. The Account by John A. Doyle

   II. The Return of the Colonists with Sir Francis Drake. By Ralph
       Lane

  III. The Birth of Virginia Dare. By John White

BARTHOLOMEW GOSNOLD'S DISCOVERY OF CAPE COD (1602):

    I. By Gabriel Archer, One of Gosnold's Companions

   II. Gosnold's Own Account

THE FOUNDING OF JAMESTOWN (1607). By Captain John Smith

THE FIRST AMERICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (1819). By John Twine, its
Secretary

THE ORIGIN OF NEGRO SLAVERY IN AMERICA:

    I. In the West Indies (1518). By Sir Arthur Helps

   II. Its Beginnings in the United States (1620). By John A. Doyle

NEW ENGLAND BEFORE THE PILGRIM FATHERS LANDED (1614). By Captain John
Smith

THE FIRST VOYAGE OF THE "MAYFLOWER" (1620). By Governor William
Bradford

THE FIRST NEW YORK SETTLEMENTS (1623-1628). By Nicolas Jean de
Wassenaer

THE SWEDES AND DUTCH IN NEW JERSEY (1627). By Israel Acrelius

THE BEGINNINGS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY COLONY (1627-1631). By
Governor Thomas Dudley

HOW THE BAY COLONY DIFFERED FROM PLYMOUTH. By John G. Palfrey

LORD BALTIMORE IN MARYLAND (1633). By Contemporary Writers

ROGER WILLIAMS IN RHODE ISLAND (1636). By Nathaniel Morton

THE FOUNDING OF CONNECTICUT (1633-1636). By Alexander Johnston

WITCHCRAFT IN NEW ENGLAND (1647-1696). By John G. Palfrey

THE ENGLISH CONQUEST OF NEW YORK (1664). By John H. Brodhead

BACON'S REBELLION IN VIRGINIA (1676). By an Anonymous Writer

KING PHILIP'S WAR (1676). By William Hubbarrd

THE FOUNDING OF PENNSYLVANIA:

    I. Penn's Account of the Colony (1684)

   II. Penn's Treaty with the Indians (1683). His Own Account

  III. The Reality of Penn's Treaty. By George E. Ellis

THE CHARTER OAK AFFAIR IN CONNECTICUT (1682). By Alexander Johnston

THE COLONIZATION OF LOUISIANA (1699). By Charles E.T. Gayarre

OGELETHORPE IN GEORGIA (1733). By Joel Chandler Harris




THE PLANTING OF THE FIRST COLONIES

1562-1733


THE FOUNDING OF ST. AUGUSTINE AND THE MASSACRE BY MENENDEZ

(1562-1565)

I.

THE ACCOUNT BY JOHN A. DOYLE[1]


In 1562 the French Huguenot party, headed by Coligny, made another
attempt[2] to secure themselves a refuge in the New World. Two ships
set sail under the command of Jean Ribault, a brave and experienced
seaman, destined to play a memorable and tragic part in the history of
America. Ribault does not seem to have set out with any definite
