
"Say, if you could only use your hands as well as you do your mouths,"
sneered Ted, "ten----"

"We do," announced Hi Martin, bounding over in front of Teall.

"Fight! Fight!" howled half a hundred boys gleefully.

Ted Teall was more than willing, and Hi looked as though he were afraid
only of soiling his hands in touching a South Grammar boy. Dick,
however, darted in between the pair, and Darrin, Reade and Dalzell
followed.

"Now, stop all this fooling, fellows," begged Dick. "We all know that
Ted and Hi can fight. What we want to find out is whether there are
brains and muscle enough in town to get three football elevens together.
Ted, put your hands in your pockets. Hi, you move back. We don't want
any fighting here."

"Then that cub will have to stop calling names," retorted Teall.

"You started it yourself," retorted Martin.

"You're another!"

"Fight! Fight!" yelled many of the young onlookers.

Ted was willing, and Martin not unwilling. Crowds surged forward,
threatening to push the North and South champions to close quarters.

"Let's go home, if nobody ain't going to do nuthing," remarked one South
disgustedly.

"Stop all this, fellows--please do," begged Dick once more. "Ted and Hi,
you two show your good sense by shaking hands."

"Shake hands with that?" demanded Hi scornfully, glaring at Teall.

"Shake hands with a high-collared dude?" muttered Ted. "I'd get mobbed
for disgracing my part of the town."

"You are a disgrace, anyway," snapped back Hi.

"Now, you get back, Martin, and let us get down to real football,"
directed Darrin, pushing Martin back several feet. "No; you needn't
glare at me. I won't fight you, at all events, until the football season
is over."

Dalzell was backing up Dave in an effort to keep Martin back. Reade and
Hazelton now placed themselves in front of young Teall.

"Now, come to order, please!" called Dick.

"Hey, Prescott! Who asked you to preside?" hailed a South Grammar boy.

"I don't know that I want to, either," Prescott answered, with a smile.
"But some one has to start the meeting. As soon as you come to order you
can choose any one you want for presiding officer. All I'm trying to do
is to get the thing started. Come to order, please."

"I'll meet you on Main Street any Saturday you like, Hi Martin!" called
Ted belligerently.

"I wouldn't go out of my way to meet anything like you," shot back
Martin.

"Order! Order!" insisted Dick. "Come to order, fellows!"

By the aid of his chums and a few other friends, and a great deal of
"sh! sh!" all through the crowd, Dick at last got the meeting into a
semblance of quiet.

"Now, as I said before," Prescott went on, "all the reason I had for
taking the chair----"

"Where is it?"

"What did you take it for?"

"----was to get the meeting started," Dick went on. "Now that we're at
least as quiet as some of the very small boys here will allow us to be,
suppose you nominate some one to preside over this meeting."

"Dick Prescott is good enough for us," sang out several Central Grammar
boys.

"Hi Martin!" came from the North squad.

"Ted Teall!" insisted the South boys.

"Well, whom do you want?" insisted Dick patiently.

"Dick Prescott!" "Hi Martin!" "Ted Teall!"

"Don't waste time trying to choose a chairman, Dick," advised Dave.
"Just hold on to the job yourself, and try to get something through the
meeting."

But a clamor went up on all sides that lasted fully a minute.

"Mr. Chairman!" shouted Tom Reade as soon as quiet came.

"Reade," acknowledged Prescott, with a bow in Tom's direction.

"Will you kindly state the object of the meeting?"

"The object of the meeting," Prescott went on, "is to see whether each
of the three Grammar Schools in this town is able and willing to
organize a football team. The object, further, is to see whether we can
form the three teams into a league and play off a series of games for
the championship this fall."

"Who's going to run the league?" demanded Ted Teall.

"That's for this meeting to decide," Dick answered. "I would suggest
that each school nominate a committee of three to represent it in a
council of nine made up from the three schools. That the council choose
a chairman and that the council have full charge of league
arrangements."

"Is Hi Martin going to be in that council?" called a South boy.

"I presume so, fellows," responded the chair. "Martin is already a
member of a committee of three chosen at the North Grammar."

"But we haven't any committee of three," objected a Central boy.

"We can soon straighten that out," piped up Tom Reade. "I'm going to
make a motion, and it's addressed only to the fellows of the Central
Grammar. I move that Dick Prescott, Dave Darrin and Greg Holmes
represent the Central."

"All in favor say 'aye,'" directed Prescott.

The motion was carried with a rush, there being no dissenting voices.

"I would now suggest," Dick continued, "that the South Grammar fellows
put forward their committee of three. Then the council can get together,
and soon be able to report back to the whole crowd."

But Ted Teall, who had been talking rapidly in undertones to several of
the Souths, now yelled back:

"No, sir-ree! That doesn't go. South Grammar wants the whole thing put
through in town-meeting style. Let every fellow here have his say."

"Will that be agreeable to the North Grammar?" asked Dick, glancing at
Martin.

"Not much," retorted Hi. "South Grammar has twice as many fellows here
as we have, and Central has a bigger crowd present than both other
schools put together. Let's have committees and organize 'em into a
council."

"We Souths won't stand for anything but town-meeting style," bawled Ted
Teall.

"But we haven't enough fellows for that," objected Hi strenuously.

"Why didn't you bring more?" jeered Ted. "Did the rest of your fellows
have to go home to put on clean collars and practise on the piano?"

"We shan't get anywhere unless the Souths put forward a more gentlemanly
fellow to speak for them," remarked Hi with stiff dignity.

"Fight!" yelled one boy hopefully.

The surging and pushing began all over again, but Dick managed to make
his voice carry over the hubbub.

"Fellows, what ails you all?" he cried. "Are we going to have it said
that the Grammar School fellows of Gridley haven't brains and manners
enough to get together and discuss an ordinary question or two?"

"What about uniforms?" spoke up a member of Hi's committee.

"Central hopes to have uniforms," replied Dick.

"North Grammar is going to have uniforms," shouted Hi Martin, "and we
want to make it plain, right now, that we won't play with any team that
isn't uniformed."

This cast a damper on the Souths, who knew, to a boy, that they couldn't
hope to raise money enough to buy football uniforms.

"Aw," retorted Ted Teall scornfully, "what's the use of playing football
with dudes that don't dare go on to the field if they haven't nifty
uniforms and clean collars?"

"That's our stand," retorted Hi with intense dignity. "North Grammar
will play no un-uniformed teams."

"And South Grammar won't play any dudes," shouted Ted defiantly. "We
want real meat to play against--no mush!"

"Let's hear what Central Grammar proposes on this question?" put in Hi
Martin hopefully. "Prescott, you said your school would be uniformed."

"Let's go home, fellows," proposed Ted, turning away and stalking off.
For a moment the other Souths hesitated. Then, with a yell, they started
off after their leader.

"Good riddance to muckers!" shouted a North boy derisively.

"Come to order, please," begged Dick. "Any one who calls names is out of
order. It's bad practice."

"Who asked you to run this meeting, anyway, Dick Prescott?" snapped
Martin.

"No one in particular, and I'm willing you should preside if you want
to, Martin."

"The Centrals ain't any better stuff than the Souths," observed one of
the Norths slightingly.

"Cut that out!" cried Dave, his eyes flashing. He stepped forward,
looking for the fellow who had made the remark.

"I call upon the North Grammar delegation to step aside and confer for a
few minutes," announced Hi. He led his own schoolmates some two hundred
feet away.

"Say, the whole scheme's gone to pieces," grumbled Tom Reade
disgustedly.

"Wait, and we'll see," answered Prescott hopefully.

The North Grammar boys talked matters over among themselves for two or
three minutes.

"There, see!" grumbled Greg. "Hi Martin is leading his crowd away.
They're all quitters!"

"That always seems to be the way with Grammar School fellows," sighed
Dick. "High School fellows do big things, but you can't ever get Grammar
School boys to stick together long enough to do anything!"

So Grammar School football died an almost painless death.




CHAPTER XIV

DICK STEPS INTO A DEATH-TRAP


"Hullo, Dave!"

"Hullo, Dick. I've been looking for you. My, but you're dressed up
to-night. Going to a party that I haven't heard about?"

"Not exactly," laughed Dick. "I'm going to call on Mrs. Dexter."

"Oho!"

"She sent a note that she'd like to have me call this evening. What it's
about I don't know."

"Then I can guess," offered Dave.

"What?"

"Mrs. Dexter was set on getting football uniforms for us. When the
league dropped out at the bottom that spoiled her chance. Mrs. Dexter
feels that she's under obligations, and so has sent for you in order to
find what she can do in the place of buying uniforms."

"Do you think that's it?" questioned young Prescott, looking bothered.

"I'm sure of it."

"Then I wish I weren't going up there to-night."

"Have you got to?" asked Darrin.

"It would hardly look polite if I didn't go. But I'll tell you what,
Dave."

"What?"

"You come along with me."

"Not much!"

"Why not?"

"First place, I'm not invited. Second place, I'm not dressed up, and you
are. Extra, I don't want to look as though I were trotting up there
after a reward."

"I'm not, either," Dick retorted with considerable spirit.

"I know you're not, but you can say 'no' for both of us, and for Greg
thrown in."

"Then you won't come with me?"

"I'll feel more comfortable down here on Main Street," laughed Dave. "If
you get back early enough you can tell me about it."

"If Mrs. Dexter doesn't want anything except to talk about rewarding
us," grunted Prescott, "I can promise you that I'll be back bright and
early."

"So long, then, and good luck!"

"What?"

"Good luck in getting away, I mean."

So Dick pursued his course alone, and feeling a good deal more
uncomfortable, now that he had a suspicion of Mrs. Dexter's business.

Up at the pretty little Dexter cottage things had been moving serenely
of late. Ab. Dexter had not been heard from, and his wife imagined that
the fellow had gone to other parts. For weeks she had kept a special
policeman in the house at night. On this particular evening the man
wanted to be away at a lodge meeting, and Mrs. Dexter had felt that it
was wholly safe to let him go, more especially, as resourceful Dick
Prescott would put in part of the evening there.

When the bell rang, Jane being upstairs with little Myra, Mrs. Dexter
herself opened the front door.

Then she sprang back suddenly, stifling a dismayed little scream, for
Abner Dexter stood facing her.

"Didn't expect me, did you?" jeered the fellow, pushing his way into the
hall. "Jennie, I'm at the end of my rope, and of my patience, too. I'm
broke--have hardly a dollar in the world, and now you've got to do your
duty and provide for me in the way that a rich wife should. In there
with you!"

Ab. pushed her into a little room just beyond the parlor, and stepped in
after her.

"Nice, comfortable place you have here, while I'm wondering where my
next meal is coming from!" sneered the fellow.

"Abner, I gave you ten thousand dollars, and you promised to leave me
alone," protested the woman, afraid of the evil look that she now saw in
her worthless husband's face.

"Well, I haven't any of that money, and I've got to have more," retorted
Dexter emphatically. "Jennie, I want twenty-five thousand dollars. Give
me that, and I'll leave the country for good."

"I--I couldn't trust you," she faltered.

"Don't talk that way to me!"

"I have good reason to, Abner, and you know it."

"You thought I had forgotten you, didn't you?" he sneered harshly.

"I hoped that you had at last made up your mind to let me alone,"
replied the woman, trying to summon a bravery that she did not feel.

"I haven't forgotten you. Jennie, you will have to find and turn over to
me the twenty-five thousand dollars that I want. You will never know any
peace until you do do it, and you will never see me again after you have
given me the money. Now, aren't you going to be sensible?"

"Yes," she flashed. "I'm going to be too sensible to listen to you any
longer. You have been watching this house, and you came to-night because
you knew I was alone. If you won't go, at least I shall not stay here to
listen to you."

"Oh, yes, you will," replied the man angrily, barring the doorway.

At that instant the telephone bell in a niche in the hallway sounded.

"Let me answer that call," cried Mrs. Dexter.

"No, I won't!"

Then both heard, with very different feelings, a voice speaking these
words:

"Central, I am Dick Prescott, at Mrs. Dexter's. I shall probably be
interfered with. Call up the police station in a hurry and say that
Dexter is here, threatening Mrs. Dexter, who is without defense. I----"

Slam! Dick felt himself seized by the collar. He was banged up roughly
against the wall.

"You young hound!" blazed Ab. Dexter.

"Don't hurt him!" screamed Mrs. Dexter.

"I'll do as I please with this young hound!" snarled Dexter hoarsely.
"What right has he interfering with me in this manner? Come along, you
meddling youngster!"

As the telephone connection was still open, the girl at central office
was able to hear every word.

Ab. Dexter, still gripping struggling Prescott by the collar, dragged
him down the hallway and into the same room where he had recently been
talking with his unfortunate wife. Mrs. Dexter followed, pleading.

"What are you doing here?" blazed Dexter, giving Dick a shaking that
