was committed about half past nine o'clock, and there was a bright moon
at the time?"

"Yes, sir," said the witness positively.

"Very well. That is all."

Then Lawyer Lincoln produced an almanac showing that there was no moon
that night till the early hours of the morning.

"This witness has perjured himself," he said, "and his whole story is a
lie."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Duff" Armstrong was promptly acquitted. The tears of that widowed
mother and the gratitude of the boy he had rocked were the best sort of
pay to Lawyer Lincoln for an act of kindness and life-saving.


"JUST WHAT'S THE MATTER WITH THE WHOLE WORLD!"

A Springfield neighbor used to say that it was almost a habit with Mr.
Lincoln to carry his children about on his shoulders. Indeed, the man
said he seldom saw the tall lawyer go by without one or both boys
perched on high or tugging at the tails of his long coat. This neighbor
relates that he was attracted to the door of his own house one day by a
great noise of crying children, and saw Mr. Lincoln passing with the two
boys in their usual position, and both were howling lustily.

"Why, Mr. Lincoln, what's the matter?" he asked in astonishment.

"Just what's the matter with the whole world," the lawyer replied
coolly. "I've got three walnuts, and each wants two."


THE "BUCKING" CHESS BOARD

Several years later Judge Treat, of Springfield was playing chess with
Mr. Lincoln in his law office when Tad came in to call his father to
supper. The boy, impatient at the delay of the slow and silent game,
tried to break it up by a flank movement against the chess board, but
the attacks were warded off, each time, by his father's long arms.

The child disappeared, and when the two players had begun to believe
they were to be permitted to end the game in peace, the table suddenly
"bucked" and the board and chessmen were sent flying all over the floor.

Judge Treat was much vexed, and expressed impatience, not hesitating to
tell Mr. Lincoln that the boy ought to be punished severely.

Mr. Lincoln replied, as he gently took down his hat to go home to
supper:

"Considering the position of your pieces, judge, at the time of the
upheaval, I think you have no reason to complain."


WHEN TAD GOT A SPANKING

Yet, indulgent as he was, there were some things Mr. Lincoln would not
allow even his youngest child to do. An observer who saw the
President-elect and his family in their train on the way to Washington
to take the helm of State, relates that little Tad amused himself by
raising the car window an inch or two and trying, by shutting it down
suddenly, to catch the fingers of the curious boys outside who were
holding themselves up by their hands on the window sill of the car to
catch sight of the new President and his family.

The President-elect, who had to go out to the platform to make a little
speech to a crowd at nearly every stop, noticed Tad's attempts to pinch
the boys' fingers. He spoke sharply to his son and commanded him to stop
that. Tad obeyed for a time, but his father, catching him at the same
trick again, leaned over, and taking the little fellow across his knee,
gave him a good, sound spanking, exclaiming as he did so:

"Why do you want to mash those boys' fingers?"


THE TRUE STORY OF BOB'S LOSING THE INAUGURAL ADDRESS

Mr. Lincoln was always lenient when the offense was against himself. The
Hon. Robert Todd Lincoln, the only living son of the great President,
tells how the satchel containing his father's inaugural address was lost
for a time. Some writers have related the story of this loss, stating
that it all happened at Harrisburg, and telling how the President-elect
discovered a bag like his own, and on opening it found only a pack of
greasy cards, a bottle of whisky and a soiled paper collar. Also that
Mr. Lincoln was "reminded" of a cheap, ill-fitting story--but none of
these things really took place.

Here is the true story, as related to the writer by Robert Lincoln
himself:

"My father had confided to me the care of the satchel containing his
inaugural address. It was lost for a little while during the stay of our
party at the old Bates House in Indianapolis. When we entered the hotel
I set the bag down with the other luggage, which was all removed to a
room back of the clerk's desk.

"As soon as I missed the valise I went right to father, in great
distress of mind. He ordered a search made. We were naturally much
alarmed, for it was the only copy he had of his inaugural address, which
he had carefully written before leaving Springfield. Of course, he added
certain parts after reaching Washington. The missing bag was soon found
in a safe place.

"Instead of taking out the precious manuscript and stuffing it into his
own pocket, father handed it right back to me, saying:

"'There, Bob, see if you can't take better care of it this time'--and
you may be sure I was true to the trust he placed in me. Why, I hardly
let that precious gripsack get out of my sight during my waking hours
all the rest of the long roundabout journey to Washington."


THE TERRIBLE LONELINESS AFTER WILLIE DIED

The death of Willie, who was nearly three years older than Tad, early in
1862, during their first year in the White House, nearly broke his
father's heart. It was said that Mr. Lincoln never recovered from that
bereavement. It made him yearn the more tenderly over his youngest son
who sadly missed the brother who had been his constant companion.

It was natural for a lad who was so much indulged to take advantage of
his freedom. Tad had a slight impediment in his speech which made the
street urchins laugh at him, and even cabinet members, because they
could not understand him, considered him a little nuisance. So Tad,
though known as "the child of the nation," and greatly beloved and
petted by those who knew him for a lovable affectionate child, found
himself alone in a class by himself, and against all classes of people.


TURNING THE HOSE ON HIGH OFFICIALS

He illustrated this spirit one day by getting hold of the hose and
turning it on some dignified State officials, several army officers, and
finally on a soldier on guard who was ordered to charge and take
possession of that water battery. Although that little escapade appealed
to the President's sense of humor, for he himself liked nothing better
than to take generals and pompous officials down "a peg or two," Tad got
well spanked for the havoc he wrought that day.


BREAKING INTO A CABINET MEETING

The members of the President's cabinet had reason to be annoyed by the
boy's frequent interruptions. He seemed to have the right of way
wherever his father happened to be. No matter if Senator Sumner or
Secretary Stanton was discussing some weighty matter of State or war, if
Tad came in, his father turned from the men of high estate to minister
to the wants of his little boy. He did it to get rid of him, for of
course he knew Tad would raise such a racket that no one could talk or
think till _his_ wants were disposed of.


AN EXECUTIVE ORDER ON THE COMMISSARY DEPARTMENT FOR TAD AND HIS BOY
FRIENDS

A story is told of the boy's interruption of a council of war. This
habit of Tad's enraged Secretary Stanton, whose horror of the boy was
similar to that of an elephant for a mouse. The President was giving his
opinion on a certain piece of strategy which he thought the general in
question might carry out--when a great noise was heard out in the hall,
followed by a number of sharp raps on the door of the cabinet room.

Strategy, war, everything was, for the moment forgotten by the
President, whose wan face assumed an expression of unusual pleasure,
while he gathered up his great, weary length from different parts of the
room as he had half lain, sprawling about, across and around his chair
and the great table.

"That's Tad," he exclaimed, "I wonder what that boy wants now." On his
way to open the door, Mr. Lincoln explained that those knocks had just
been adopted by the boy and himself, as part of the telegraph system,
and that he was obliged to let the lad in--"for it wouldn't do to go
back on the code now," he added, half in apology for permitting such a
sudden break in their deliberations.

When the door was opened, Tad, with flushed face and sparkling eyes,
sprang in and threw his arms around his father's neck. The President
straightened up and embraced the boy with an expression of happiness
never seen on his face except while playing with his little son.

Mr. Lincoln turned, with the boy still in his arms, to explain that he
and Tad had agreed upon this telegraphic code to prevent the lad from
bursting in upon them without warning. The members of the cabinet looked
puzzled or disgusted, as though they failed to see that several
startling raps could be any better than having Tad break in with a whoop
or a wail, as had been the boy's custom.


ISSUING THE EXECUTIVE ORDER ON PETER FOR PIE

The boy raised a question of right. He had besieged Peter, the colored
steward, demanding that a dinner be served to several urchins he had
picked up outside--two of whom were sons of soldiers. Peter had
protested that he "had other fish to fry" just then.

The President recognized at once that this was a case for diplomacy.
Turning to various members of the cabinet, he called on each to
contribute from his store of wisdom, what would be best to do in a case
of such vast importance. Tad looked on in wonder as his father set the
great machinery of government in motion to make out a commissary order
on black Peter, which would force that astonished servant to deliver
certain pieces of pie and other desired eatables to Tad, for himself and
his boy friends.

At last an "order" was prepared by the Chief Executive of the United
States directing "The Commissary Department of the Presidential
Residence to issue rations to Lieutenant Tad Lincoln and his five
associates, two of whom are the sons of soldiers in the Army of the
Potomac."

With an expression of deep gravity and a solemn flourish, the President
tendered this Commissary Order to the lieutenant, his son, saying as he
presented the document:

"I reckon Peter will _have_ to come to time now."




CHAPTER XXI

LIEUTENANT TAD LINCOLN, PATRIOT


There was no more sturdy little patriot in the whole country than
Lieutenant Tad Lincoln, "the child of the nation," nor had the President
of the United States a more devoted admirer and follower than his own
small son. A word from his father would melt the lad to tears and
submission, or bring him out of a nervous tantrum with his small round
face wreathed with smiles, and a chuckling in his throat of "Papa-day,
my papa-day!" No one knew exactly what the boy meant by papa-day. It was
his pet name for the dearest man on earth, and it was his only way of
expressing the greatest pleasure his boyish heart was able to hold. It
was the "sweetest word ever heard" by the war-burdened, crushed and
sorrowing soul of the broken-hearted President of the United States.

Mr. Lincoln took his youngest son with him everywhere--on his great
mission to Fortress Monroe, and they--"the long and the short of it,"
the soldiers said--marched hand in hand through the streets of fallen
Richmond. The understanding between the man and the boy was so complete
and sacred, that some acts which seemed to outsiders absurd and
ill-fitting, became perfectly right and proper when certain unknown
facts were taken into account.


WAVING THE "STARS AND BARS" OUT OF A WHITE HOUSE WINDOW

For instance, one night, during an enthusiastic serenade at the White
House, after a great victory of the northern armies, when the President
had been out and made a happy speech in response to the congratulations
he had received, everybody was horrified to see the Confederate "Stars
and Bars" waving frantically from an upper window with shouts followed
by shrieks as old Edward, the faithful colored servant, pulled in the
flag and the boy who was guilty of the mischief.

"That was little Tad!" exclaimed some one in the crowd. Many laughed,
but some spectators thought the boy ought to be punished for such a
treasonable outbreak on the part of a President's boy in a soldier's
uniform.

"If he don't know any better than that," said one man, "he should be
taught better. It's an insult to the North and the President ought to
stop it and apologize, too."


"BOYS IN BLUE" AND "BOYS IN GRAY"

But little Tad understood his father's spirit better than the crowd did.
He knew that the President's love was not confined to "the Boys in
Blue," but that his heart went out also to "the Boys in Gray." The
soldiers were all "boys" to him. They knew he loved them. They said
among themselves: "He cares for us. He takes our part. We will fight for
him; yes, we will die for him."

And a large part of the common soldier's patriotism was this
heart-response of "the boys" to the great "boy" in the White House. That
was the meaning of their song as they trooped to the front at his call:

        "We are coming, Father Abraham;
         Three hundred thousand more."

Little Tad saw plenty of evidences of his father's love for the younger
soldiers--the real boys of the army. Going always with the President, he
had heard his "Papa-day" say of several youths condemned to be shot for
sleeping at their post or some like offense:

"That boy is worth more above ground than under;" or, "A live boy can
serve his country better than a dead one."

"Give the boys a chance," was Abraham Lincoln's motto. He hadn't had
much of a chance himself and he wanted all other boys to have a fair
show. His own father had been too hard with him, and he was going to
make it up to all the other boys he could reach. This passion for doing
good to others began in the log cabin when he had no idea he could ever
be exercising his loving kindness in the Executive Mansion--the Home of
the Nation. "With malice toward none, with charity for all," was the
rule of his life in the backwoods as well as in the National Capital.

And "the Boys in Gray" were his "boys," too, but they didn't understand,
so they had wandered away--they were a little wayward, but he would win
them back. The great chivalrous South has learned, since those bitter,
ruinous days, that Abraham Lincoln was the best friend the South then
had in the North. Tad had seen his father show great tenderness to all
the "boys" he met in the gray uniform, but the President had few
opportunities to show his tenderness to the South--though there was a
secret pigeonhole in his desk stuffed full of threats of assassination.
He was not afraid of death--indeed, he was glad to die if it would do
his "boys" and the country any good. But it hurt him deep in his heart
to know that some of his beloved children misunderstood him so that they
were willing to kill him!

It was no one's bullet which made Abraham Lincoln a martyr. All his life
he had shown the spirit of love which was willing to give his very life
if it could save or help others.

All these things little Tad could not have explained, but they were
inbred into the deep understanding of the big father and the small son
who were living in the White House as boys together.


MR. LINCOLN'S LAST SPEECH AND HOW TAD HELPED

A few days after the war ended at Appomattox, a great crowd came to the
White House to serenade the President. It was Tuesday evening, April 11,
1865. Mr. Lincoln had written a short address for the occasion. The
times were so out of joint and every word was so important that the
President could not trust himself to speak off-hand.

A friend stepped out on the northern portico with him to hold the candle
by which Mr. Lincoln was to read his speech. Little Tad was with his
father, as usual, and when the President had finished reading a page of
his manuscript he let it flutter down, like a leaf, or a big white
butterfly, for Tad to catch. When the pages came too slowly the boy
pulled his father's coat-tail, piping up in a muffled, excited tone:

"Give me 'nother paper, Papa-day."

To the few in the front of the crowd who witnessed this little by-play
it seemed ridiculous that the President of the United States should
allow any child to behave like that and hamper him while delivering a
great address which would wield a national, if not world-wide influence.
But little Tad did not trouble his father in the least. It was a part of
