
It is not by human judgments that we are to stand or fall. It is happy
that this is the case; that the good man hath a judge more just and
candid than his fellow servants; one who knows and pities his
weakness, though he hath none of his own: "Let me fall into the hands
of the Lord, for his mercies are great; and let me not fall into the
hand of man."

But the apostle did not stop with a declaration that the judgment of
others did not move him; he brought it home to himself: _Yea, I judge
not mine own self. For I know nothing by myself, yet am I not hereby
justified; but he that judgeth me is the Lord_. St. Paul had a witness
in himself that he was sincere and upright before God--"Our rejoicing
is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and
Godly sincerity, not by fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we
have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly toward
you."

The same is the import of his declaration in the text--"_I know
nothing by myself_--am conscious of no allowed wickedness--of no
willful error, either in profession or practice." But he dared not to
assert that he had made no mistakes--_yet am I not hereby justified_.
He knew himself liable to error--did not "trust his own heart". _He
that judgeth me is the Lord_--"his judgment is according to truth--
that will determine my character, and fix my doom."

The apostle could remember a time in which he had conscientiously done
wrong. He had persecuted the church; killed Christ's disciples, and
thought he was doing right; verily believed that he was doing God
service!--Now he acted conscientiously in "preaching the faith he
had once destroyed"--in the manner of his preaching it; and
discharging every ministerial and Christian duty; though he was
censured and calumniated by some, and suspected by others. He followed
the light of his own mind, and determined to follow it; so to act as
not to be condemned of himself. But he knew that the standard of
rectitude did not follow his views, and vary with his judgment. "If
his heart did not condemn him, he had confidence toward God; yet he
knew God to be greater than his heart," and possessed of all
knowledge; dared not therefore affirm that his judge would approve of
all which he approved--_Yet am I not hereby justified--he that judgeth
me is the Lord_.

IMPROVEMENT.

I. We See that censure may be incurred without neglect of duty, When
Paul converted to Christianity, he was made an apostle, and ordered of
the Redeemer to preach the gospel. He obeyed. He was guided in his
work by the spirit of God; yet he was blamed by some, and suspected by
others.

That Christ's faithful servants are slandered and reproached is not a
new thing under the sun. It hath been common among men. And herein
they are only made like their Lord. And shall they think it strange?
"It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the
servant as his Lord. If they call the master of the house Beelzebub,
how much more them of his household?"

When opposition and reproaches come from those who profess friendship
to Christ they wound the deeper. This however, hath often happened. It
happened to the apostle at Corinth, and elsewhere. If we witness that
which is similar, we need not be surprized, as though some strange
thing had happened.

II. Are we unjustly censured by our fellow servants, or reproached
while in the way of our duty? We have here an example worthy our
imitation. St. Paul was chiefly concerned to approve himself to God.
We should be so too--should study to acquaint ourselves with the
divine rule, and to conform to it; not disobeying God to please men.

Great care is requisite to know our duty. Enveloped in darkness, and
biassed to error, it is often difficult to find out the right way. But
we are not left without instruction. A rule is given us by which we
may "judge of ourselves, what is right." Of that role we must judge
for ourselves, and by it try ourselves. "To our own master we stand or
fall." To obtain his approbation should be our chief concern. "If God
be with us, who can be against us?"

III. Knowing ourselves fallible, it becomes us to maintain a jealousy
over ourselves, and be constantly on our guard. We should consider,
that though we do not sin wilfully, and our own hearts do not condemn
us, _yet we are not hereby justified_. We are conscious that we have
often, erred, and made wrong conclusions, when we did not design to
leave the right way. We are liable to do the same again. Our eye
should therefore be to God for direction and guidance--"That which I
know not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more."

This is the more necessary, because "the light which is in us may have
become darkness." For there are those who "put darkness for light and
light for darkness." Those with whom this is the case know it not;
they flatter themselves and cry peace. "To the pure, all things are
pure; but to them that are defiled, and unbelieving, is nothing pure;
but even their mind and conscience is defiled." This often happens to
those who for a time yield to temptation and go in to the ways of sin;
they contract false principles, and judge by them, and probably
sometimes live and die under the deceptive influence of their
darkening power. None would dare to plead before the bar of Christ,
that they were his disciples, "and had eat and drank in his presence,"
had they not been deceived into false views of duty, and mistaken
apprehensions of the conditions of acceptance with him.

Judging well of ourselves doth not ensure justification at the bar of
heaven. Our judgments of ourselves may be erroneous. If they are so,
they will be reversed. We shall "be judged out of the books, according
to our works;" not according to our false and deceitful views. _I know
nothing by myself, yet, am I not hereby justified. For not he that
commandeth himself is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth_.



 * * * * * *



SERMON XVI.

Characters will be disclosed, and Justice awarded.

1 Corinthians iv. 5.

"--Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both wilt
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the counsels of the hearts; and then shall everyman have praise of
God."


St. Paul having professed himself a minister of Christ, and steward of
the mysteries of God, acknowledged the obligations of fidelity, and
disclaimed anxious concern respecting the opinion entertained of him
by his fellow men, because the Lord was his judge, here adds a
caution, reprehensive of the censorious spirit of the Corinthians, who
seem to have listened to his enemies, and given into their suspicions
of the apostle. _Therefore judge nothing before the time_--

In the text we observe a caution against rash judging the characters
of men--a declaration that they will be known when the Lord comes
--and that some things commendable will then be found in all--then
shall every man have praise of God. We observe--

I. A caution _against rash judging the characters of men--judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come_.

Civil judges may give judgment according to law and evidence, on those
brought before them for trial--so may the church on those arraigned at
her tribunal. These are necessary to the subsistence of civil and
ecclesiastical communities; therefore ordered of God. It is another
species of judging which is here forbidden; judging the characters of
men, especially such as profess Godliness, and appear to act
sincerely; pretending to determine their moral state, before the
motives which actuate them are disclosed. This is judging before the
time, and without evidence on which to ground a judgment; which the
wise man observes to be folly and a shame to him who doth it.

This had been done at Corinth, by the enemies of the apostle; and hath
been done by others in every age. There have ever been people who have
dared to scatter their censorious decisions at random, according to
the prevalence of humor, caprice, or prejudice; often to the wounding
of the faithful; and rending of the body of Christ.

This occasions temporary mischief; but the day is coming when all
those disorders will be rectified. The censurer, and the censured,
will stand at the same bar, and be tried by the same Judge. Every
wrong judgment will then be reversed, and every injurious suspicion be
removed. For,

II. Every _man's character will be known when the Lord comes--who will
bring to light the hidden sufferings of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts_.

Many things necessary to determine the moral characters of men are
hidden from mortal eyes. We are ignorant of _the counsels_ of the
hearts--do not know their purposes and views. Without this knowledge,
right judgment cannot be formed.

Our knowledge of ourselves is imperfect. For self knowledge we have
advantages which we have not for the knowledge of others. We can turn
inward, and contemplate the motives which govern, and the views which
actuate us. But pride, passion, prejudice, or the corrupt bias,
operating in ways unperceived, often blinds the mental eye, and
renders us strangers at home. "Whoso trusteth his own heart is a
fool.--The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, who can know it?" It requires great attention to form a just
judgment of ourselves--yea, to attain that self knowledge which is
necessary for us. With regard to the knowledge of others, the
difficulty is still greater. We can neither see the heart, nor know
the thoughts and designs.

We are often at a loss for the motives which occasion things which
fall under our observation. Other things which might cast light upon
them, are hidden from us. But when the Lord cometh, the veil spread
over secret matters will be removed. "There is nothing covered, that
shall not be revealed, or hid that shall not be known."
_The Lord will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make
manifest the counsels of the hearts_.

How hearts will be opened to view, we know not. Perhaps when the veil
of flesh is removed, minds may possess an intuitive knowledge of each
other--be able to look into one another, as while in the body, they
look into themselves. Here, this is mercifully prevented; but may be
no longer necessary in another state of existence. It may be
requisite, to that investigation of characters which we are taught to
expect at Christ's coming. For it is the language of the text, and
other Scriptures, that every impediment to the complete knowledge of
each other, will then be done away; that no person's character will
longer remain problematical. _The hidden works of darkness will be
brought to light, and the counsels of the hearts made manifest_.

Astonishing scenes of wickedness will then, no doubt, be disclosed.
Probably each one will discover things in himself which he had not
suspected--depravity, unfairness, disingenuity, the bare suspicion of
which by others, would be resented as affrontive.

When the prophet forewarned Hazael of the cruelties which he would
exercise when he should be king of Syria, his nature seemed to revolt
--he could not suspect himself capable of such enormities. "But
what! is thy servant a dog?" But all was verified when he had ascended
the throne!

But though a world of hidden iniquity will appear when the counsels of
the hearts shall be made manifest. Good things will also be opened to
view which had till that day been concealed--yea,

III. Some _things commendable will be found in all, Then shall every
man have praise of God_.

All are sinners. "There is none good but one, that is God." Some "are
sinners exceedingly." Some will continue such till they shall have
time no longer--die as they have lived, and be sentenced to "have
their part in the lake of fire--which is the second death."

But though numbers of this description will be found when the Lord
comes, it is presumed that there will be none among them in whom there
wilt be nothing commendable--who will never have done a praise worthy
action.

When "every work is brought into judgment and every secret thing,
whether it be good or evil," every thing commendable which hath been
done by the wicked, will come into the reckoning. Nothing will be
overlooked, because done by sinners. The prejudices inherent in
mankind often render them blind to what is commendable in an enemy,
and cause them to magnify his failings; but not so the Deity. God is
perfect. "The way of man will he render unto him," whatever may be
his general character.

The saints are not equal in virtue and the attainments of grace.
Therefore the differences which will be made among them. When they
shall stand before the Judge, their whole probation, with all its
circumstances, will be reviewed, and every praise worthy purpose,
desire and action will be considered and rewarded. On the other hand,
every neglect of duty and every deviation from it will come into the
account and make deduction from the weight of glory reserved for them.

And among the enemies of God, some will be found greater sinners than
others--to have sinned longer--against greater lights, and to have
been guilty of more and greater crimes. To such will be reserved the
greater weight of woe. In order to these discriminations their whole
probation will be considered. And in those on whom sentence of
condemnation will pass, the righteous judge will take due notice of
every pause which they shall have made in the ways of sin--of every
instance in which they may have denied themselves, out of regard to
the divine authority, though it may have been out of fear of God's
judgments, and of every act of kindness done by them, to a fellow
creature. Every thing of this nature, will be considered, and make
some deduction from the punishment which would otherwise have been
inflicted on them. The judge will pass nothing of this kind unnoticed,
condemning the sinner to the same degree of suffering, as though it
had not been found upon him. A cup of cold water given to a disciple
of Christ, will not lose its reward. *

* Matthew x. 42.

 "Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and
observed him; and when he heard him he did many things, and heard him
gladly." Herod's punishment will not be, in every respect, the same,
as though he had paid no attention to John's teaching. He will not be
punished for refusing to hear John, when he did hear him or for
refusing to do, what he did do, in compliance with his counsel: Though
he will be condemned as, eventually the murderer of that holy man. His
partial obedience might be extorted by fear; but this is preferable to
disobedience; otherwise fear would not be urged as a motive to
obedience. "Fear him who is able to destroy soul and body in hell."
If preferable to disobedience, a difference will be made between those
who obey from no higher principle, and those who disobey.

Here God certainly makes a difference between them. When Rehoboam
humbled himself in the time of his affliction, "the wrath of the Lord
turned from him that he would not destroy him: And also in Judah
things went well." But his repentance was not unto life. The character
given him at his death is that of a wicked man.

When Ahab, affrighted by the preaching of Elijah, as he was going to
take possession of the vineyard of murdered Naboth, "humbled himself
and walked softly:" God signified his approbation of his legal
repentance and partial amendment, in preference to his former course;
though he afterwards cut him off in his sins.

These are unequivocal evidences that partial obedience, though
dictated by the servile principle of fear, is preferable, in divine
estimation, to allowed disobedience. God makes a difference in his
treatment of people here, on this account: suspends his judgments, and
mitigates somewhat of their severity, where he sees this kind of
relenting in sinners. If God doth this here, is there not reason to
believe that he will do it hereafter: The rules of divine
administration are doubtless uniform in time and eternity. Where he
gives a comparative preference here, he will do the same hereafter.
So we observe our Savior noting things commendable in some who did
not belong to his kingdom. When the young ruler who came to inquire
what he should do to inherit eternal life, declared that he had kept
the commandments from his youth up, he was viewed with comparative
approbation.--"Then Jesus beholding him, loved him." It is not
conceivable that his partial conformity to the divine law had not made
him to differ from those who had allowedly disregarded it--that his
character was as bad as theirs--though he soon made it evident that
the one thing needful was not found upon him. *

* Mark x. 17, &c.

Some suppose that the unrenewed can do nothing but sin against God
_with all their might_--that every purpose of their hearts is
_necessarily_ enmity against him, and all their volitions and actions
determined opposition to his law and government: But we conceive that
neither Scripture, nor experience justify the supposition--that were
such their state, they would be in no degree, the subjects of moral
government, and would not be addressed of God as moral agents.

Were mankind wholly given up of God, and his Spirit withdrawn from
them, such might become their state; but this is not the case. The
Holy Spirit strives with them. They are empowered to resist the
Spirit, or cherish its influences. This is manifest from the divine
exhortations addressed to them, and from their conduct. Sometimes they
pause in the way to destruction--listen to counsels and warnings--do
things which God requires, and deny themselves gratifications which
are in their power, because God hath forbidden and threatened to
punish them. The person is not to be found who hath not a witness in
himself that this is the case.

Should we affirm that none, who are in a state of nature, can be
influenced by sense of duty to deny themselves, or attempt obedience
to God's law, it might give occasion to false hopes. Those, the
general course of whose lives is opposition to God, sure that they
sometimes deny themselves, and like Herod, do things enjoined from
above, might flatter themselves that they were children of God, while
belonging to another family, and that they should have peace, when
there was no peace to them. _Yet_ when _the Lord cometh, who will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness and make manifest the
counsels of the hearts, every man shall have praise of God_.

God will overlook nothing commendable which may have been done by the
vilest of the human race, while on probation; and some things
commendable will be found in the most degenerated; though in many, the
good will be found so low as to leave them on the whole, the servants
of sin, and consequently to take their portion among the workers of
iniquity.

REFLECTIONS,

I. The day is coming which will scatter the darkness or the present
state. Here many things confound us. "We see but we understand not."
We wonder sometimes at what God orders, and oftener at what be
permits. The time approaches in which all these mysteries will be
cleared up. We shall perceive wisdom and goodness in all the divine
administration. Our wonder at providential regulations will terminate.

Now we often wonder at things done by our fellow men--are unable to
discover the motives which actuate them--perhaps frequently mistake
them. But this uncertainty will not be perpetual. The veil spread over
these things will be removed when _the hidden things of darkness are
brought to light and the counsels of the hearts made manifest_. Then,
every hidden purpose will be laid open, and every secret counsel
