and cold, and measures the extent to which heat is concentrated in the
body. It is the amount of heat per molecule of the body. A barrel of
warm water contains more heat than the flame of a match, but its
temperature is not so high. Bearing in mind this distinction, we seek to
determine not the amount of heat contained in the sun but the sun's
temperature, and this involves the same difficulty as does the question,
What is the temperature of a locomotive? It is one thing in the fire box
and another thing in the driving wheels, and still another at the
headlight; and so with the sun, its temperature is certainly different
in different parts--one thing at the center and another at the surface.
Even those parts which we see are covered by a veil of gases which
produce by absorption the dark lines of the solar spectrum, and
seriously interfere both with the emission of energy from the sun and
with our attempts at measuring the temperature of those parts of the
surface from which that energy streams.

In view of these and other difficulties we need not be surprised that
the wildest discordance has been found in estimates of the solar
temperature made by different investigators, who have assigned to it
values ranging from 1,400° C. to more than 5,000,000° C. Quite recently,
however, improved methods and a better understanding of the problem have
brought about a better agreement of results, and it now seems probable
that the temperature of the visible surface of the sun lies somewhere
between 5,000° and 10,000° C., say 15,000° of the Fahrenheit scale.

118. DETERMINING THE SUN'S TEMPERATURE.--One ingenious method which has
been used for determining this temperature is based upon the principle
stated above, that every object, whether warm or cold, contains heat and
gives it off in the form of radiant energy. The radiation from a body
whose temperature is lower than 500° C. is made up exclusively of energy
whose wave length is greater than 7,600 tenth meters, and is therefore
invisible to the eye, although a thermometer or even the human hand can
often detect it as radiant heat. A brick wall in the summer sunshine
gives off energy which can be felt as heat but can not be seen. When
such a body is further heated it continues to send off the same kinds
(wave lengths) of energy as before, but new and shorter waves are added
to its radiation, and when it begins to emit energy of wave length 7,500
or 7,600 tenth meters, it also begins to shine with a dull-red light,
which presently becomes brighter and less ruddy and changes to white as
the temperature rises, and waves of still shorter length are thereby
added to the radiation. We say, in common speech, the body becomes first
red hot and then white hot, and we thus recognize in a general way that
the kind or color of the radiation which a body gives off is an index to
its temperature. The greater the proportion of energy of short wave
lengths the higher is the temperature of the radiating body. In sunlight
the maximum of brilliancy to the eye lies at or near the wave length,
5,600 tenth meters, but the greatest intensity of radiation of all kinds
(light included) is estimated to fall somewhere between green and blue
in the spectrum at or near the wave length 5,000 tenth meters, and if we
can apply to this wave length Paschen's law--temperature reckoned in
degrees centigrade from the absolute zero is always equal to the
quotient obtained by dividing the number 27,000,000 by the wave length
corresponding to maximum radiation--we shall find at once for the
absolute temperature of the sun's surface 5,400° C.

Paschen's law has been shown to hold true, at least approximately, for
lower temperatures and longer wave lengths than are here involved, but
as it is not yet certain that it is strictly true and holds for all
temperatures, too great reliance must not be attached to the numerical
result furnished by it.

[Illustration: FIG. 66.--The sun, August 11, 1894. Photographed at the
Goodsell Observatory.]

[Illustration: FIG. 67.--The sun, August 14, 1894. Photographed at the
Goodsell Observatory.]

119. THE SUN'S SURFACE.--A marked contrast exists between the faces of
sun and moon in respect of the amount of detail to be seen upon them,
the sun showing nothing whatever to correspond with the mountains,
craters, and seas of the moon. The unaided eye in general finds in the
sun only a blank bright circle as smooth and unmarked as the surface of
still water, and even the telescope at first sight seems to show but
little more. There may usually be found upon the sun's face a certain
number of black patches called _sun spots_, such as are shown in Figs.
66 to 69, and occasionally these are large enough to be seen through a
smoked glass without the aid of a telescope. When seen near the edge of
the sun they are quite frequently accompanied, as in Fig. 69, by vague
patches called _faculæ_ (Latin, _facula_ = a little torch), which look a
little brighter than the surrounding parts of the sun. So, too, a good
photograph of the sun usually shows that the central parts of the disk
are rather brighter than the edge, as indeed we should expect them to
be, since the absorption lines in the sun's spectrum have already taught
us that the visible surface of the sun is enveloped by invisible vapors
which in some measure absorb the emitted light and render it feebler at
the edge where it passes through a greater thickness of this envelope
than at the center. See Fig. 70, where it is shown that the energy
coming from the edge of the sun to the earth has to traverse a much
longer path inside the vapors than does that coming from the center.

[Illustration: FIG. 68.--The sun, August 18, 1894. Photographed at the
Goodsell Observatory.]

Examine the sun spots in the four photographs, Figs. 66 to 69, and note
that the two spots which appear at the extreme left of the first
photograph, very much distorted and foreshortened by the curvature of
the sun's surface, are seen in a different part of the second picture,
and are not only more conspicuous but show better their true shape.

[Illustration: PLATE II. THE EQUATORIAL CONSTELLATIONS]

120. THE SUN'S ROTATION.--The changed position of these spots shows that
the sun rotates about an axis at right angles to the direction of the
spot's motion, and the position of this axis is shown in the figure by a
faint line ruled obliquely across the face of the sun nearly north and
south in each of the four photographs. This rotation in the space of
three days has carried the spots from the edge halfway to the center of
the disk, and the student should note the progress of the spots in the
two later photographs, that of August 21st showing them just ready to
disappear around the farther edge of the sun.

[Illustration: FIG. 69.--The sun, August 21, 1894. Photographed at the
Goodsell Observatory.]

Plot accurately in one of these figures the positions of the spots as
shown in the other three, and observe whether the path of the spots
across the sun's face is a straight line. Is there any reason why it
should not be straight?

These four pictures may be made to illustrate many things about the sun.
Thus the sun's axis is not parallel to that of the earth, for the
letters _N S_ mark the direction of a north and south line across the
face of the sun, and this line, of course, is parallel to the earth's
axis, while it is evidently not parallel to the sun's axis. The group of
spots took more than ten days to move across the sun's face, and as at
least an equal time must be required to move around the opposite side of
the sun, it is evident that the period of the sun's rotation is
something more than 20 days. It is, in fact, rather more than 25 days,
for this same group of spots reappeared again on the left-hand edge of
the sun on September 5th.

[Illustration: FIG. 70.--Absorption at the sun's edge.]

121. SUN SPOTS.--Another significant fact comes out plainly from the
photographs. The spots are not permanent features of the sun's face,
since they changed their size and shape very appreciably in the few days
covered by the pictures. Compare particularly the photographs of August
14th and August 18th, where the spots are least distorted by the
curvature of the sun's surface. By September 16th this group of spots
had disappeared absolutely from the sun's face, although when at its
largest the group extended more than 80,000 miles in length, and several
of the individual spots were large enough to contain the earth if it had
been dropped upon them. From Fig. 67 determine in miles the length of
the group on August 14th. Fig. 71 shows an enlarged view of these spots
as they appeared on August 17th, and in this we find some details not so
well shown in the preceding pictures. The larger spots consist of a
black part called the _nucleus_ or _umbra_ (Latin, shadow), which is
surrounded by an irregular border called the _penumbra_ (partial
shadow), which is intermediate in brightness between the nucleus and
the surrounding parts of the sun. It should not be inferred from the
picture that the nucleus is really black or even dark. It shines, in
fact, with a brilliancy greater than that of an electric lamp, but the
background furnished by the sun's surface is so much brighter that by
contrast with it the nucleus and penumbra appear relatively dark.

[Illustration: FIG. 71.--Sun spots, August 17, 1894. Goodsell
Observatory.]

[Illustration: FIG. 72.--Sun spot of March 5, 1873.--From LANGLEY, The
New Astronomy. By permission of the publishers.]

The bright shining surface of the sun, the background for the spots, is
called the _photosphere_ (Greek, light sphere), and, as Fig. 71 shows,
it assumes under a suitable magnifying power a mottled aspect quite
different from the featureless expanse shown in the earlier pictures.
The photosphere is, in fact, a layer of little clouds with darker
spaces between them, and the fine detail of these clouds, their
complicated structure, and the way in which, when projected against the
background of a sun spot, they produce its penumbra, are all brought out
in Fig. 72. Note that the little patch in one corner of this picture
represents North and South America drawn to the same scale as the sun
spots.

[Illustration: FIG. 73.--Spectroheliograph, showing distribution of
faculæ upon the sun.--HALE.]

[Illustration: FIG. 74.--Eclipse of July 20, 1878.--TROUVELOT.]

122. FACULÆ.--We have seen in Fig. 69 a few of the bright spots called
faculæ. At the telescope or in the ordinary photograph these can be seen
only at the edge of the sun, because elsewhere the background furnished
by the photosphere is so bright that they are lost in it. It is
possible, however, by an ingenious application of the spectroscope to
break up the sunlight into a spectrum in such a way as to diminish the
brightness of this background, much more than the brightness of the
faculæ is diminished, and in this way to obtain a photograph of the
sun's surface which shall show them wherever they occur, and such a
photograph, showing faintly the spectral lines, is reproduced in Fig.
73. The faculæ are the bright patches which stretch inconspicuously
across the face of the sun, in two rather irregular belts with a
comparatively empty lane between them. This lane lies along the sun's
equator, and it is upon either side of it between latitudes 5° and 40°
that faculæ seem to be produced. It is significant of their connection
with sun spots that the spots occur in these particular zones and are
rarely found outside them.

[Illustration: FIG. 75.--Eclipse of April 16, 1893.--SCHAEBERLE.]

123. INVISIBLE PARTS OF THE SUN. THE CORONA.--Thus far we have been
dealing with parts of the sun that may be seen and photographed under
all ordinary conditions. But outside of and surrounding these parts is
an envelope, or rather several envelopes, of much greater extent than
the visible sun. These envelopes are for the most part invisible save at
those times when the brighter central portions of the sun are hidden in
a total eclipse.

[Illustration: FIG. 76.--Eclipse of January 21, 1898.--CAMPBELL.]

Fig. 74 is from a drawing, and Figs. 75 and 76 are from eclipse
photographs showing this region, in which the most conspicuous object
is the halo of soft light called the _corona_, that completely surrounds
the sun but is seen to be of differing shapes and differing extent at
the several eclipses here shown, although a large part of these apparent
differences is due to technical difficulties in photographing, and
reproducing an object with outlines so vague as those of the corona. The
outline of the corona is so indefinite and its outer portions so faint
that it is impossible to assign to it precise dimensions, but at its
greatest extent it reaches out for several millions of miles and fills a
space more than twenty times as large as the visible part of the sun.
Despite its huge bulk, it is of most unsubstantial character, an airy
nothing through which comets have been known to force their way around
the sun from one side to the other, literally for millions of miles,
without having their course influenced or their velocity checked to any
appreciable extent. This would hardly be possible if the density even at
the bottom of the corona were greater than that of the best vacuum which
we are able to produce in laboratory experiments. It seems odd that a
vacuum should give off so bright a light as the coronal pictures show,
and the exact character of that light and the nature of the corona are
still subjects of dispute among astronomers, although it is generally
agreed that, in part at least, its light is ordinary sunlight faintly
reflected from the widely scattered molecules composing the substance of
the corona. It is also probable that in part the light has its origin in
the corona itself. A curious and at present unconfirmed result announced
by one of the observers of the eclipse of May 28, 1900, is that _the
corona is not hot_, its effective temperature being lower than that of
the instrument used for the observation.

[Illustration: FIG. 77.--Solar prominence of March 25, 1895.--HALE.]

124. THE CHROMOSPHERE.--Between the corona and the photosphere there is
a thin separating layer called the _chromosphere_ (Greek, color sphere),
because when seen at an eclipse it shines with a brilliant red light
quite unlike anything else upon the sun save the _prominences_ which are
themselves only parts of the chromosphere temporarily thrown above its
surface, as in a fountain a jet of water is thrown up from the basin and
remains for a few moments suspended in mid-air. Not infrequently in such
a fountain foreign matter is swept up by the rush of the water--dirt,
twigs, small fish, etc.--and in like manner the prominences often carry
along with them parts of the underlying layers of the sun, photosphere,
faculæ, etc., which reveal their presence in the prominence by adding
their characteristic lines to the spectrum, like that of the
chromosphere, which the prominence presents when they are absent. None
of the eclipse photographs (Figs. 74 to 76) show the chromosphere,
because the color effect is lacking in them, but a great curving
prominence may be seen near the bottom of Fig. 75, and smaller ones at
other parts of the sun's edge.

[Illustration: FIG. 78.--A solar prominence.--HALE.]

125. PROMINENCES.--Fig. 77 shows upon a larger scale one of these
prominences rising to a height of 160,000 miles above the photosphere;
and another photograph, taken 18 minutes later, but not reproduced here,
showed the same prominence grown in this brief interval to a stature of
280,000 miles. These pictures were not taken during an eclipse, but in
full sunlight, using the same spectroscopic apparatus which was employed
in connection with the faculæ to diminish the brightness of the
background without much enfeebling the brilliancy of the prominence
itself. The dark base from which the prominence seems to spring is not
the sun's edge, but a part of the apparatus used to cut off the direct
sunlight.

Fig. 78 contains a series of photographs of another prominence taken
within an interval of 1 hour 47 minutes and showing changes in size and
shape which are much more nearly typical of the ordinary prominence than
was the very unusual change in the case of Fig. 77.

[Illustration: FIG. 79.--Contrasted forms of solar
prominences.--ZOELLNER.]

The preceding pictures are from photographs, and with them the student
may compare Fig. 79, which is constructed from drawings made at the
spectroscope by the German astronomer Zoellner. The changes here shown
are most marked in the prominence at the left, which is shaped like a
broken tree trunk, and which appears to be vibrating from one side to
the other like a reed shaken in the wind. Such a prominence is
frequently called an _eruptive_ one, a name suggested by its appearance
of having been blown out from the sun by something like an explosion,
while the prominence at the right in this series of drawings, which
appears much less agitated, is called by contrast with the other a
_quiescent_ prominence. These quiescent prominences are, as a rule, much
longer-lived than the eruptive ones. One more picture of prominences
(Fig. 80) is introduced to show the continuous stretch of chromosphere
out of which they spring.

[Illustration: FIG. 80.--Prominences and chromosphere.--HALE.]

Prominences are seen only at the edge of the sun, because it is there
alone that the necessary background can be obtained, but they must occur
at the center of the sun and elsewhere quite as well as at the edge, and
it is probable that quiescent prominences are distributed over all parts
of the sun's surface, but eruptive prominences show a strong tendency
toward the regions of sun spots and faculæ as if all three were
intimately related phenomena.

126. THE SUN AS A MACHINE.--Thus far we have considered the anatomy of
the sun, dissecting it into its several parts, and our next step should
be a consideration of its physiology, the relation of the parts to each
other, and their function in carrying on the work of the solar organism,
but this step, unfortunately, must be a lame one. The science of
astronomy to-day possesses no comprehensive and well-established theory
of this kind, but looks to the future for the solution of this the
greatest pending problem of solar physics. Progress has been made
toward its solution, and among the steps of this progress that we shall
have to consider, the first and most important is the conception of the
sun as a kind of heat engine.

In a steam engine coal is burned under the boiler, and its chemical
energy, transformed into heat, is taken up by the water and delivered,
through steam as a medium, to the engine, which again transforms and
gives it out as mechanical work in the turning of shafts, the driving of
machinery, etc. Now, the function of the sun is exactly opposite to that
of the engine and boiler: it gives out, instead of receiving, radiant
energy; but, like the engine, it must be fed from some source; it can
not be run upon nothing at all any more than the engine can run day
after day without fresh supplies of fuel under its boiler. We know that
for some thousands of years the sun has been furnishing light and heat
to the earth in practically unvarying amount, and not to the earth
alone, but it has been pouring forth these forms of energy in every
direction, without apparent regard to either use or economy. Of all the
radiant energy given off by the sun, only two parts out of every
thousand million fall upon any planet of the solar system, and of this
small fraction the earth takes about one tenth for the maintenance of
its varied forms of life and action. Astronomers and physicists have
sought on every hand for an explanation of the means by which this
tremendous output of energy is maintained century after century without
sensible diminution, and have come with almost one mind to the
conclusion that the gravitative forces which reside in the sun's own
mass furnish the only adequate explanation for it, although they may be
in some small measure re-enforced by minor influences, such as the fall
of meteoric dust and stones into the sun.

Every boy who has inflated a bicycle tire with a hand pump knows that
the pump grows warm during the operation, on account of the compression
of the air within the cylinder. A part of the muscular force (energy)
expended in working the pump reappears in the heat which warms both air
and pump, and a similar process is forever going on in the sun, only in
place of muscular force we must there substitute the tremendous
attraction of gravitation, 28 times as great as upon the earth. "The
matter in the interior of the sun must be as a shuttlecock between the
stupendous pressure and the enormously high temperature," the one
tending to compress and the other to expand it, but with this important
difference between them: the temperature steadily tends to fall as the
heat energy is wasted away, while the gravitative force suffers no
corresponding diminution, and in the long run must gain the upper hand,
causing the sun to shrink and become more dense. It is this progressive
shrinking and compression of its molecules into a smaller space which
supplies the energy contained in the sun's output of light and heat.
According to Lord Kelvin, each centimeter of shrinkage in the sun's
diameter furnishes the energy required to keep up its radiation for
something more than an hour, and, on account of the sun's great
distance, the shrinkage might go on at this rate for many centuries
without producing any measurable effect in the sun's appearance.

127. GASEOUS CONSTITUTION OF THE SUN.--But Helmholtz's dynamical theory
of the maintenance of the sun's heat, which we are here considering,
includes one essential feature that is not sufficiently stated above. In
order that the explanation may hold true, it is necessary that the sun
should be in the main a gaseous body, composed from center to
circumference of gases instead of solid or liquid parts. Pumping air
warms the bicycle pump in a way that pumping water or oil will not.

The high temperature of the sun itself furnishes sufficient reason for
supposing the solar material to be in the gaseous state, but the gas
composing those parts of the sun below the photosphere must be very
different in some of its characteristics from the air or other gases
with which we are familiar at the earth, since its average density is
1,000 times as great as that of air, and its consistence and mechanical
behavior must be more like that of honey or tar than that of any gas
with which we are familiar. It is worth noting, however, that if a hole
were dug into the crust of the earth to a depth of 15 or 20 miles the
air at the bottom of the hole would be compressed by that above it to a
density comparable with that of the solar gases.

128. THE SUN'S CIRCULATION.--It is plain that under the conditions which
exist in the sun the outer portions, which can radiate their heat freely
into space, must be cooler than the inner central parts, and this
difference of temperature must set up currents of hot matter drifting
upward and outward from within the sun and counter currents of cooler
matter settling down to take its place. So, too, there must be some
level at which the free radiation into outer space chills the hot matter
sufficiently to condense its less refractory gases into clouds made up
of liquid drops, just as on a cloudy day there is a level in our own
atmosphere at which the vapor of water condenses into liquid drops which
form the thin shell of clouds that hovers above the earth's surface,
while above and below is the gaseous atmosphere. In the case of the sun
this cloud layer is always present and is that part which we have
learned to call the photosphere. Above the photosphere lies the
