
"They'll have to prove him guilty, won't they?'' asked Scraps.

"I s'pose so."

"Well, they can't do that," declared the Patchwork Girl.

As it was nearly time for Dorothy to dine with Ozma, which she did
every evening, she rang for a servant and ordered the Woozy taken to a
nice room and given plenty of such food as he liked best.

"That's honey-bees," said the Woozy.

"You can't eat honey-bees, but you'll be given something just as nice,"
Dorothy told him. Then she had the Glass Cat taken to another room for
the night and the Patchwork Girl she kept in one of her own rooms, for
she was much interested in the strange creature and wanted to talk with
her again and try to understand her better.




Chapter Seventeen

Ozma and Her Friends


The Shaggy Man had a room of his own in the royal palace, so there he
went to change his shaggy suit of clothes for another just as shaggy
but not so dusty from travel. He selected a costume of pea-green and
pink satin and velvet, with embroidered shags on all the edges and
iridescent pearls for ornaments. Then he bathed in an alabaster pool
and brushed his shaggy hair and whiskers the wrong way to make them
still more shaggy. This accomplished, and arrayed in his splendid
shaggy garments, he went to Ozma's banquet hall and found the
Scarecrow, the Wizard and Dorothy already assembled there. The
Scarecrow had made a quick trip and returned to the Emerald City with
his left ear freshly painted.

A moment later, while they all stood in waiting, a servant threw open a
door, the orchestra struck up a tune and Ozma of Oz entered.

Much has been told and written concerning the beauty of person and
character of this sweet girl Ruler of the Land of Oz--the richest, the
happiest and most delightful fairyland of which we have any knowledge.
Yet with all her queenly qualities Ozma was a real girl and enjoyed the
things in life that other real girls enjoy. When she sat on her
splendid emerald throne in the great Throne Room of her palace and made
laws and settled disputes and tried to keep all her subjects happy and
contented, she was as dignified and demure as any queen might be; but
when she had thrown aside her jeweled robe of state and her sceptre,
and had retired to her private apartments, the girl--joyous,
light-hearted and free--replaced the sedate Ruler.

In the banquet hall to-night were gathered only old and trusted
friends, so here Ozma was herself--a mere girl. She greeted Dorothy
with a kiss, the Shaggy Man with a smile, the little old Wizard with a
friendly handshake and then she pressed the Scarecrow's stuffed arm and
cried merrily:

"What a lovely left ear! Why, it's a hundred times better than the old
one."

"I'm glad you like it," replied the Scarecrow, well pleased. "Jinjur
did a neat job, didn't she? And my hearing is now perfect. Isn't it
wonderful what a little paint will do, if it's properly applied?"

"It really is wonderful," she agreed, as they all took their seats;
"but the Sawhorse must have made his legs twinkle to have carried you
so far in one day. I didn't expect you back before to-morrow, at the
earliest."

"Well," said the Scarecrow, "I met a charming girl on the road and
wanted to see more of her, so I hurried back."

Ozma laughed.

"I know," she returned; "it's the Patchwork Girl. She is certainly
bewildering, if not strictly beautiful."

"Have you seen her, then?" the straw man eagerly asked.

"Only in my Magic Picture, which shows me all scenes of interest in the
Land of Oz."

"I fear the picture didn't do her justice," said the Scarecrow.

"It seemed to me that nothing could be more gorgeous," declared Ozma.
"Whoever made that patchwork quilt, from which Scraps was formed, must
have selected the gayest and brightest bits of cloth that ever were
woven."

"I am glad you like her," said the Scarecrow in a satisfied tone.
Although the straw man did not eat, not being made so he could, he
often dined with Ozma and her companions, merely for the pleasure of
talking with them. He sat at the table and had a napkin and plate, but
the servants knew better than to offer him food. After a little while
he asked: "Where is the Patchwork Girl now?"

"In my room," replied Dorothy. "I've taken a fancy to her; she's so
queer and--and--uncommon."

"She's half crazy, I think," added the Shaggy Man.

"But she is so beautiful!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, as if that fact
disarmed all criticism. They all laughed at his enthusiasm, but the
Scarecrow was quite serious. Seeing that he was interested in Scraps
they forbore to say anything against her. The little band of friends
Ozma had gathered around her was so quaintly assorted that much care
must be exercised to avoid hurting their feelings or making any one of
them unhappy. It was this considerate kindness that held them close
friends and enabled them to enjoy one another's society.

Another thing they avoided was conversing on unpleasant subjects, and
for that reason Ojo and his troubles were not mentioned during the
dinner. The Shaggy Man, however, related his adventures with the
monstrous plants which had seized and enfolded the travelers, and told
how he had robbed Chiss, the giant porcupine, of the quills which it
was accustomed to throw at people. Both Dorothy and Ozma were pleased
with this exploit and thought it served Chiss right.

Then they talked of the Woozy, which was the most remarkable animal any
of them had ever before seen--except, perhaps, the live Sawhorse. Ozma
had never known that her dominions contained such a thing as a Woozy,
there being but one in existence and this being confined in his forest
for many years. Dorothy said she believed the Woozy was a good beast,
honest and faithful; but she added that she did not care much for the
Glass Cat.

"Still," said the Shaggy Man, "the Glass Cat is very pretty and if she
were not so conceited over her pink brains no one would object to her
as a companion."

The Wizard had been eating silently until now, when he looked up and
remarked:

"That Powder of Life which is made by the Crooked Magician is really a
wonderful thing. But Dr. Pipt does not know its true value and he uses
it in the most foolish ways."

"I must see about that," said Ozma, gravely. Then she smiled again and
continued in a lighter tone: "It was Dr. Pipt's famous Powder of Life
that enabled me to become the Ruler of Oz."

"I've never heard that story," said the Shaggy Man, looking at Ozma
questioningly.

"Well, when I was a baby girl I was stolen by an old Witch named Mombi
and transformed into a boy," began the girl Ruler. "I did not know who
I was and when I grew big enough to work, the Witch made me wait upon
her and carry wood for the fire and hoe in the garden. One day she came
back from a journey bringing some of the Powder of Life, which Dr. Pipt
had given her. I had made a pumpkin-headed man and set it up in her
path to frighten her, for I was fond of fun and hated the Witch. But
she knew what the figure was and to test her Powder of Life she
sprinkled some of it on the man I had made. It came to life and is now
our dear friend Jack Pumpkinhead. That night I ran away with Jack to
escape punishment, and I took old Mombi's Powder of Life with me.
During our journey we came upon a wooden Sawhorse standing by the road
and I used the magic powder to bring it to life. The Sawhorse has been
with me ever since. When I got to the Emerald City the good Sorceress,
Glinda, knew who I was and restored me to my proper person, when I
became the rightful Ruler of this land. So you see had not old Mombi
brought home the Powder of Life I might never have run away from her
and become Ozma of Oz, nor would we have had Jack Pumpkinhead and the
Sawhorse to comfort and amuse us."

That story interested the Shaggy Man very much, as well as the others,
who had often heard it before. The dinner being now concluded, they all
went to Ozma's drawing-room, where they passed a pleasant evening
before it came time to retire.




Chapter Eighteen

Ojo is Forgiven


The next morning the Soldier with the Green Whiskers went to the prison
and took Ojo away to the royal palace, where he was summoned to appear
before the girl Ruler for judgment. Again the soldier put upon the boy
the jeweled handcuffs and white prisoner's robe with the peaked top and
holes for the eyes. Ojo was so ashamed, both of his disgrace and the
fault he had committed, that he was glad to be covered up in this way,
so that people could not see him or know who he was. He followed the
Soldier with the Green Whiskers very willingly, anxious that his fate
might be decided as soon as possible.

The inhabitants of the Emerald City were polite people and never jeered
at the unfortunate; but it was so long since they had seen a prisoner
that they cast many curious looks toward the boy and many of them
hurried away to the royal palace to be present during the trial.

When Ojo was escorted into the great Throne Room of the palace he found
hundreds of people assembled there. In the magnificent emerald throne,
which sparkled with countless jewels, sat Ozma of Oz in her Robe of
State, which was embroidered with emeralds and pearls. On her right,
but a little lower, was Dorothy, and on her left the Scarecrow. Still
lower, but nearly in front of Ozma, sat the wonderful Wizard of Oz and
on a small table beside him was the golden vase from Dorothy's room,
into which Scraps had dropped the stolen clover.

At Ozma's feet crouched two enormous beasts, each the largest and most
powerful of its kind. Although these beasts were quite free, no one
present was alarmed by them; for the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger
were well known and respected in the Emerald City and they always
guarded the Ruler when she held high court in the Throne Room. There
was still another beast present, but this one Dorothy held in her arms,
for it was her constant companion, the little dog Toto. Toto knew the
Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger and often played and romped with
them, for they were good friends.

Seated on ivory chairs before Ozma, with a clear space between them and
the throne, were many of the nobility of the Emerald City, lords and
ladies in beautiful costumes, and officials of the kingdom in the royal
uniforms of Oz. Behind these courtiers were others of less importance,
filling the great hall to the very doors.

At the same moment that the Soldier with the Green Whiskers arrived
with Ojo, the Shaggy Man entered from a side door, escorting the
Patchwork Girl, the Woozy and the Glass Cat. All these came to the
vacant space before the throne and stood facing the Ruler.

"Hullo, Ojo," said Scraps; "how are you?"

"All right," he replied; but the scene awed the boy and his voice
trembled a little with fear. Nothing could awe the Patchwork Girl, and
although the Woozy was somewhat uneasy in these splendid surroundings
the Glass Cat was delighted with the sumptuousness of the court and the
impressiveness of the occasion--pretty big words but quite expressive.

At a sign from Ozma the soldier removed Ojo's white robe and the boy
stood face to face with the girl who was to decide his punishment. He
saw at a glance how lovely and sweet she was, and his heart gave a
bound of joy, for he hoped she would be merciful.

Ozma sat looking at the prisoner a long time. Then she said gently:

"One of the Laws of Oz forbids anyone to pick a six-leaved clover. You
are accused of having broken this Law, even after you had been warned
not to do so."

Ojo hung his head and while he hesitated how to reply the Patchwork
Girl stepped forward and spoke for him.

"All this fuss is about nothing at all," she said, facing Ozma
unabashed. "You can't prove he picked the six-leaved clover, so you've
no right to accuse him of it. Search him, if you like, but you won't
find the clover; look in his basket and you'll find it's not there. He
hasn't got it, so I demand that you set this poor Munchkin boy free."

The people of Oz listened to this defiance in amazement and wondered at
the queer Patchwork Girl who dared talk so boldly to their Ruler. But
Ozma sat silent and motionless and it was the little Wizard who
answered Scraps.

"So the clover hasn't been picked, eh?" he said. "I think it has. I
think the boy hid it in his basket, and then gave the basket to you. I
also think you dropped the clover into this vase, which stood in
Princess Dorothy's room, hoping to get rid of it so it would not prove
the boy guilty. You're a stranger here, Miss Patches, and so you don't
know that nothing can be hidden from our powerful Ruler's Magic
Picture--nor from the watchful eyes of the humble Wizard of Oz. Look,
all of you!" With these words he waved his hands toward the vase on the
table, which Scraps now noticed for the first time.

From the mouth of the vase a plant sprouted, slowly growing before
their eyes until it became a beautiful bush, and on the topmost branch
appeared the six-leaved clover which Ojo had unfortunately picked.

The Patchwork Girl looked at the clover and said: "Oh, so you've found
it. Very well; prove he picked it, if you can."

Ozma turned to Ojo.

"Did you pick the six-leaved clover?" she asked.

"Yes," he replied. "I knew it was against the Law, but I wanted to save
Unc Nunkie and I was afraid if I asked your consent to pick it you
would refuse me."

"What caused you to think that?" asked the Ruler.

"Why, it seemed to me a foolish law, unjust and unreasonable. Even now
I can see no harm in picking a six-leaved clover. And I--I had not seen
the Emerald City, then, nor you, and I thought a girl who would make
such a silly Law would not be likely to help anyone in trouble."

Ozma regarded him musingly, her chin resting upon her hand; but she was
not angry. On the contrary she smiled a little at her thoughts and then
grew sober again.

"I suppose a good many laws seem foolish to those people who do not
understand them," she said; "but no law is ever made without some
purpose, and that purpose is usually to protect all the people and
guard their welfare. As you are a stranger, I will explain this Law
which to you seems so foolish. Years ago there were many Witches and
Magicians in the Land of Oz, and one of the things they often used in
making their magic charms and transformations was a six-leaved clover.
These Witches and Magicians caused so much trouble among my people,
often using their powers for evil rather than good, that I decided to
forbid anyone to practice magic or sorcery except Glinda the Good and
her assistant, the Wizard of Oz, both of whom I can trust to use their
arts only to benefit my people and to make them happier. Since I issued
that Law the Land of Oz has been far more peaceful and quiet; but I
learned that some of the Witches and Magicians were still practicing
magic on the sly and using the six-leaved clovers to make their potions
and charms. Therefore I made another Law forbidding anyone from
plucking a six-leaved clover or from gathering other plants and herbs
which the Witches boil in their kettles to work magic with. That has
almost put an end to wicked sorcery in our land, so you see the Law was
not a foolish one, but wise and just; and, in any event, it is wrong to
disobey a Law."

Ojo knew she was right and felt greatly mortified to realize he had
acted and spoken so ridiculously. But he raised his head and looked
Ozma in the face, saying:

"I am sorry I have acted wrongly and broken your Law. I did it to save
Unc Nunkie, and thought I would not be found out. But I am guilty of
this act and whatever punishment you think I deserve I will suffer
willingly."

Ozma smiled more brightly, then, and nodded graciously.

"You are forgiven," she said. "For, although you have committed a
serious fault, you are now penitent and I think you have been punished
enough. Soldier, release Ojo the Lucky and--"

"I beg your pardon; I'm Ojo the Unlucky," said the boy.

"At this moment you are lucky," said she. "Release him, Soldier, and
let him go free."

The people were glad to hear Ozma's decree and murmured their approval.
As the royal audience was now over, they began to leave the Throne Room
and soon there were none remaining except Ojo and his friends and Ozma
and her favorites.

The girl Ruler now asked Ojo to sit down and tell her all his story,
which he did, beginning at the time he had left his home in the forest
and ending with his arrival at the Emerald City and his arrest. Ozma
listened attentively and was thoughtful for some moments after the boy
had finished speaking. Then she said:

"The Crooked Magician was wrong to make the Glass Cat and the Patchwork
Girl, for it was against the Law. And if he had not unlawfully kept the
bottle of Liquid of Petrifaction standing on his shelf, the accident to
his wife Margolotte and to Unc Nunkie could not have occurred. I can
understand, however, that Ojo, who loves his uncle, will be unhappy
unless he can save him. Also I feel it is wrong to leave those two
victims standing as marble statues, when they ought to be alive. So I
propose we allow Dr. Pipt to make the magic charm which will save them,
and that we assist Ojo to find the things he is seeking. What do you
think, Wizard?"

"That is perhaps the best thing to do," replied the Wizard. "But after
the Crooked Magician has restored those poor people to life you must
take away his magic powers."

"I will," promised Ozma.

"Now tell me, please, what magic things must you find?" continued the
Wizard, addressing Ojo.

"The three hairs from the Woozy's tail I have," said the boy. "That is,
I have the Woozy, and the hairs are in his tail. The six-leaved clover
I--I--"

"You may take it and keep it," said Ozma. "That will not be breaking
the Law, for it is already picked, and the crime of picking it is
forgiven."

"Thank you!" cried Ojo gratefully. Then he continued: "The next thing I
must find is a gill of water from a dark well."

The Wizard shook his head. "That," said he, "will be a hard task, but
if you travel far enough you may discover it."

"I am willing to travel for years, if it will save Unc Nunkie,"
declared Ojo, earnestly.

"Then you'd better begin your journey at once," advised the Wizard.

Dorothy had been listening with interest to this conversation. Now she
turned to Ozma and asked: "May I go with Ojo, to help him?"

