cannot mean it, Simon!"

"There is no mistake about it, Martha. The lad came to me; and said
he thought that, with a small band, he could cause much trouble to
the Romans. So I told him he could go, not knowing whether he spoke
from the restlessness of youth, or because it was the will of the
Lord that he should go and fight for the country. Indeed, it seemed
to many that his marvelous escape from Jotapata showed that God had
need of him. So I did not withstand him. There were many from the
villages round who were ready to join themselves to him, and follow
him, for the fame of his escape had made him much talked of.

"So he went, with twenty-four followers and, of course, Jonas here;
and truly he did, as all men say, great things. And though he saved
not Gamala--as indeed could not have been done, save by a miracle
of God, with so small a band--he did much and, by the burning of
their camp, not only struck a heavy blow upon the Romans, but he
inspired the people with hope.

"Before, it seemed that to resist the Romans was to bring certain
destruction upon those who adventured it; now men see that with
prudence, united with bravery, much may be done and, in the spring,
John will be followed by a great gathering of fighting men, from
all the country round."

Martha sat, in speechless surprise, looking at her son.

"My dear mother," John said, "what I told you before, when you were
praising the unknown John, is equally true now that it is John your
son. We acted with common sense which, so far, no one seems to have
exercised in our struggle with the Romans. We just kept out of
their reach, and took good care never to come to actual blows with
them. We constantly threatened them; and compelled them, who knew
nothing of our numbers or strength, to cease working.

"As to the burning their camp, of course there was a certain amount
of danger in it, but one cannot make war without danger. We crept
through their sentries into the camp, in the night, and set it on
fire; and then made our escape, as best we could. As only one of
our number was killed; and he from falling over a precipice, and
not by the sword of the Romans, you see the peril could not have
been very great.

"It was just as I said, that because we did not throw away our
lives, but were prudent and cautious, we succeeded. People have
made a great fuss about it, because it is the only success, however
small, that we have gained over the Romans but, as my father says,
it has certainly had a good effect. It has excited a feeling of
hopefulness and, in the spring, many will take the field with the
belief that, after all, the Romans are not invincible; and that
those who fight against them are not merely throwing away their
lives."

It was some time before Martha could realize that the hero, of
which she had heard so much, was the quiet lad standing before
her--her own son John.

"Simon," she said, at last, "morning and night I have prayed God to
protect him of whom we heard so much, little thinking that it was
my own son I was praying for. Tonight, I will thank him that he has
so blessed me. Assuredly, God's hand is with him. The dangers he
has run and the success that he has gained may, as he says, be
magnified by report; nevertheless he has assuredly withstood the
Romans, even as David went out against Goliath. Tomorrow I will
hear more of this; but I feel shaken with the journey, and with
this strange news.

"Come, Mary, let us to bed!"

But Mary had already stolen away, without having said a single
word, after her first exclamation.

John was at work soon after daybreak, next morning, for there was
much to be done. The men were plowing up the stubble, ready for the
sowing, Jonas had gone off, with Isaac, to drive in some cattle
from the hills; and John set to work to dig up a patch of garden
ground, near the house. He had not been long at work, when he saw
Mary approaching. She came along quietly and slowly, with a step
altogether unlike her own.

"Why, Mary, is that you?" he said, as she approached. "Why, Miriam
herself could not walk slower.

"Are you ill this morning, child?" he asked, with a change of
voice, as he saw how pale she was looking.

Mary did not speak until she came quite close; then she stopped,
and looked at him with eyes full of tears.

"Oh, John," she began, "what can I say?"

"Why, my dear Mary, what on earth is the matter with you?" he said,
throwing down his spade, and taking her hands in his.

"I am so unhappy, John."

"Unhappy!" John repeated. "What is making you unhappy, child?"

"It is so dreadful," she said, "to think that I, who ought to have
known you so well--I, your betrothed wife--have been thinking that
you were so mean as to be jealous; for I did think it was that,
John, when you made light of the doings of the hero I had been
thinking about so much, and would not allow that he had done
anything particular. I thought that you were jealous, John; and now
I know what you have done, and why you spoke so, I feel I am
altogether unworthy of you."

"Well, Mary, I never thought you were a little goose, before. What
nonsense you are talking! It was only natural you should have
thought I was jealous; and I should have been jealous, if it had
been anyone else you were praising so much. It was my fault, for
not telling you at once. Concealments are always stupid; but I had
thought that it would give you a pleasant surprise, when you got
home, to hear about it; but instead of causing you pleasure, I have
caused you pain. I was not vexed, in the slightest; I was rather
amused, when you answered me so curtly."

"I think it was cruel of you, John, to let me go on thinking badly
of you, and showing yourself in so unworthy a light. That does not
make it any the less wrong of me. I ought to have believed in you."

"You are making a mountain out of a molehill, Mary, and I won't
hear any such nonsense. You heard an absurd story, as to what
someone had been doing, and you naturally made a hero of him. You
were hurt by my speaking slightingly of this hero of yours, and
naturally thought I was jealous at hearing such praises of another
from my betrothed wife. It was all perfectly natural. I was not in
the least offended with you, or put out in any way; except that I
was vexed with myself for not telling you, at once, that all these
fables related to your cousin John.

"Now, dry your eyes, and don't think any more about it. Go and pick
two of the finest bunches of grapes you can find, and we will eat
them together."

But it was some time before Mary recovered her brightness. The
changes which the last few months had made almost depressed her. It
was but a year ago that John and she had been boy and girl,
together; now he had become a man, had done great deeds, was looked
upon by many as one chosen for the deliverance of the nation. Mary
felt that she, too, had aged; but the change in her was as nothing
to that in her old playfellow. It was but a year ago she had been
gravely advising him; treating him, sometimes, as if she had been
the elder.

She would have treated him now, if he would have let her, with
something of the deference and respect which a Jewish maiden would
usually pay to a betrothed husband--one who was shortly to become
her lord. But the first time he detected this manner, John simply
laughed at her, and said:

"My dear Mary, do not let us have any nonsense of this sort. We
have been always equals, you and I; friends and companions. You
know, just as well as I do, that in all matters which we have had
in common, you have always had quite as much sense as I and, on a
great many matters, more sense.

"Nothing has occurred since then to alter that. I have grown into a
young man, you into a young woman; but we have advanced equally. On
matters concerning warfare, I have gained a good deal of knowledge;
in other matters, doubtless, you have gained knowledge. And if,
dear, it is God's will that I pass through the troubles and dangers
that lie before us, and we become man and wife, I trust that we
shall always be the friends and comrades that we have been, as boy
and girl together.

"It is all very well, when young men and maidens have seen nothing
of each other until their parents bring them together as man and
wife, for the bride to affect a deep respect--which I have not the
least doubt she is generally far from feeling, in her heart--for
the man to whom she is given. Happily, this has not been the way
with us. We have learned to know each other well; and to know that,
beyond the difference in strength which a man has over a woman,
there is no difference between us--that one will rule the house,
and the other will rule the farm, but that in all things, I trust,
we shall be companions and equals. I do hope, Mary, that there will
be no change in our ways, the few months we have to be together,
now.

"In the spring, I go up to help to defend Jerusalem; and it is no
use hiding the fact from ourselves that there is but little chance
of my returning. We know what has befallen those who have,
hitherto, defended cities against the Romans; and what has happened
at Jotapata, and Gamala, will probably happen at Jerusalem. But for
this reason, let us have no change; let us be as brother and sister
to one another, as we have been, all along. If God brings me back
safe to you, and you become my wife, there will be plenty of time
to settle exactly how much deference you shall pay me; but I shall
expect that, when the novelty of affecting the wifely obedience,
which is enjoined upon the females of our race, is past, you will
be quite ready to take up that equality which is, after all, the
rule in practice."

"I shall remember your words," Mary said, saucily, "when the time
comes. It may be you will regret your expressions about equality,
some day."

So, during the winter, Mary tried to be bright and cheerful; and
Martha, whose heart was filled with anxiety as to the dangers and
trials which lay before them--Jerusalem and the Temple threatened,
and John away, engaged in desperate enterprises--often wondered to
herself, when she heard the girl's merry laugh as she talked with
John, and saw how completely she seemed to put aside every sort of
anxiety; but she did not know how Mary often spent the entire night
in weeping and prayer, and how hard was her struggle to keep up the
brave appearance which was, she knew, a pleasure to John.

He was not much at home, being often absent for days together.
Strangers came and went, frequently. John had long conversations
with them; and sometimes went away with them, and did not return
for three or four days. No questions were asked, by his parents, as
to these visitors or his absence. They knew that they had reference
to what they considered his mission; and as, when he returned home,
he evidently wished to lay aside all thought of other things, and
to devote himself to his life with them, they asked no questions as
to what he was doing.

He spoke, sometimes, of these things to Mary, when they were
together alone. She knew that numbers of young men were only
waiting his signal to join him; that parties of them met him among
the hills, and were there organized into companies, each with
officers of their own choice over them; and that, unknown to the
Romans at Scythopolis, there were daily held, throughout the
country on both sides of the Jordan, meetings where men practiced
with their arms, improved their skill with the bow and arrow, and
learned to obey the various signals of the bugle, which John had
now elaborated.

John was resolute in refusing to accept any men with wives and
families. There were other leaders, he said, under whom these could
fight; he was determined to have none but men who were ready to
sacrifice their lives, and without the care of others dependent
upon them. He was ready to accept youths of fifteen, as well as men
of five-and-twenty; believing that, in point of courage, the one
were equal to the other. But each candidate had to be introduced by
others, who vouched for his activity, hardihood, and courage.

One of his objects was to avoid increasing his band to too great
dimensions. The number of those ready to go up to defend Jerusalem,
and eager to enroll themselves as followers of this new
leader--whose mission was now generally believed in, in that part
of the country--was very large; but John knew that a multitude
would be unwieldy; that he would find it impossible to carry out,
with thousands of men, tactics dependent for success upon celerity
of movement; and, moreover, that did he arrive in Jerusalem with so
great a following, he would at once become an object of jealousy to
the leaders of the factions there.

He therefore limited the number to four hundred men; urging upon
all others who presented themselves, or sent messages to him, to
form themselves into similar bands; to choose leaders, and to act
as independent bodies, hanging upon the rear of the Romans,
harassing them with frequent night alarms, cutting off their
convoys, attacking their working parties; and always avoiding
encounters with strong bodies of the Romans, by retreating into the
hills. He said that, although he would not receive more men into
his own force than he thought could be easily handled, he should be
glad to act in concert with the other leaders so that, at times,
the bands might all unite in a common enterprise; and especially
that, if they entered Jerusalem, they might hold together, and thus
be enabled to keep aloof from the parties of John of Gischala, or
Eleazar, who were contending for the mastery of the city.

His advice was taken, and several bands similar to his own were
formed; but their leaders felt that they needed the prestige and
authority which John had gained, and that their followers would not
obey their orders with the faith which was inspired, in the members
of John's own band, by their belief in his special mission. Their
representations on this subject were so urgent that John, at their
request, attended a meeting at which ten of these chiefs were
present.

It was held in a farmhouse, not far from the spot where Gamala had
stood. John was embarrassed at the respect which these men, all of
them several years older than himself, paid him; but he accepted
the position quietly, for he felt that the belief that existed, as
to his having a special mission, added greatly to his power of
utility. He listened to their representations as to their want of
authority, and to the rivalries and jealousies which already
existed among those who had enrolled themselves. When they had
finished, he said:

"I have been thinking the matter well over. I am convinced that it
is absolutely necessary that none of the commands shall exceed the
numbers I have fixed upon--namely, four hundred men, divided into
eight companies, each with a captain--but at the same time, I do
not see any reasons why all our corps should not be nominally under
one leader. If, then, you think it will strengthen your position, I
am ready to accept the general leadership, and to appoint you each
as commanders of your troops. Then you will hold my commissions;
and I will support you, in your commands, with any authority I may
have.

"At the same time you will understand that you will, in reality,
act altogether independently of me; save and except when, it seems
to me, that we can unite in any enterprise. If we enter Jerusalem,
we will then hold together for mutual protection from the factions;
but even there you will each command independently for, did I
assume a general command, it would excite the jealousy of the
leaders of the factions, and we should be forced to take part in
the civil strife which is devastating the city."

A cordial consent to this proposition was given by the other
leaders, who said that the knowledge that they were John's officers
would add immensely to their authority; and would also raise the
courage and devotion of their men, who would not believe that they
were being led to victory, unless they were acting under the orders
of John, himself.

"Remember," John said, "that if misfortune befalls us, I have never
laid claim to any divine commission. We are all agents of God, and
it may be that he has specially chosen me as one of his
instruments; but this I cannot say, beyond the fact that, so far, I
have been carried safely through great dangers, and have been
enabled to win successes over the Romans. But I do not set up as a
specially-appointed leader.

"I say this for two reasons: in the first place, that you should
not think that I am claiming authority and command on grounds which
may not be justified; and in the second place that, if I should
fall early in the fighting, others should not be disheartened, and
believe that the Lord has deserted them.

"I am but a lad among you, and I recognize that it is God who has
so strangely brought me into eminence but, having done that much,
he may now choose some other instrument. If this should be so--if,
as may well be, one of you should obtain far greater success than
may attend me--I shall be only too glad to lay aside this authority
over the rest, with which you are willing to invest me, and to
follow him as cheerfully as you now propose to follow me."

The meeting soon afterwards broke up, and the news that John of
Gamala--as he was generally called, from the success he had gained
over the Romans before that town--had assumed the supreme command
of the various bands which were being raised, in eastern Galilee
and on the east of Jordan, spread rapidly; and greatly increased
the popular feeling of hope, and confidence. Fresh bands were
formed, the leaders all receiving their appointments from him.
Before the spring arrived, there were twenty bands formed and
organized, in readiness to march down towards Jerusalem, as soon as
the Roman legions got into motion.



Chapter 11: A Tale Of Civil Strife.


Towards the spring, Simon and his family were surprised by a visit
from the Rabbi Solomon Ben Manasseh. It was a year since they had
last seen him, when he called to take leave of them, on starting
for Jerusalem. They scarcely recognized him as he entered, so old
and broken did he look.

"The Lord be praised that I see you all, safe and well!" he said,
as they assisted him to dismount from the donkey that he rode. "Ah,
my friends, you are happy, indeed, in your quiet farm; free from
all the distractions of this terrible time! Looking round here, and
seeing you just as I left you--save that the young people have
grown, somewhat--I could think that I left you but yesterday, and
that I have been passing through a hideous nightmare.

"Look at me! My flesh has fallen away, and my strength has gone. I
can scarce stand upon my legs, and a young child could overthrow
me. I have wept, till my tears are dried up, over the misfortunes
of Jerusalem; and yet no enemy has come within sight of her walls,
or dug a trench against her. She is devoured by her own children.
Ruin and desolation have come upon her."

The old man was assisted into the house, and food and wine placed
before him. Then he was led into the guest chamber, and there slept
for some hours. In the evening, he had recovered somewhat of his
strength, and joined the party at their meal.

When it was concluded, and the family were alone, he told them what
had happened in Jerusalem during the past year. Vague rumors of
dissension, and civil war, had reached them; but a jealous watch
was set round the city, and none were suffered to leave, under the
pretext that all who wished to go out were deserters who sought to
join the Romans.

"I passed through, with difficulty," the rabbi said, "after bribing
John of Gischala, with all my worldly means, to grant me a pass
through the guards; and even then should not have succeeded, had he
not known me in old times, when I looked upon him as one zealous
for the defense of the country against the Romans--little thinking,
then, that the days would come when he would grow into an oppressor
of the people, tenfold as cruel and pitiless as the worst of the
Roman tribunes.

"Last autumn when, with the band of horsemen, with steeds weary
with hard riding, he arrived before the gates of Jerusalem--saying
that they had come to defend the city, thinking it not worth while
to risk their lives in the defense of a mere mountain town, like
Gischala--the people poured out to meet him, and do him honor.
Terrible rumors of slaughter and massacre, in Galilee, had reached
us, but none knew the exact truth. Moreover, John had been an enemy
of Josephus and, since Josephus had gone over to the Romans, his
name was hated and accursed among the people; and thus they were
favorably inclined towards John.

"I don't think anyone was deceived by the story he told, for it was
evident that John and his men had fled before the Romans. Still,
the tidings he brought were reassuring, and he was gladly received
in the city. He told us that the Romans had suffered very heavily
at the sieges of Jotapata and Gamala, that they were greatly
dispirited by the desperate resistance they had met with, that a
number of their engines of war had been destroyed, and that they
were in no condition to undertake the siege of a strong city like
Jerusalem. But though all outwardly rejoiced, many in their hearts
grieved at the news, for they thought that even an occupation by
the Romans would be preferable to the suffering they were
undergoing.

"For months, bands of robbers, who called themselves Zealots, had
ravaged the whole country; pillaging, burning, and slaying, under
the pretense that those they assaulted were favorable to the cause
of Rome. Thus, gradually, the country people all forsook their
homes, and fled to Jerusalem for refuge and, when the country was
left a desert and no more plunder was to be gained, these robber
bands gradually entered Jerusalem. As you know, the gates of the
holy city were always open to all the Jewish people; and none
thought of excluding the strangers who entered, believing that
every armed man would add to the power of resistance, when the
Romans appeared before it.

"The robbers, who came singly or in small parties from all parts of
the country, soon gathered themselves together in the city, and
established a sort of terror over the peaceable inhabitants. Men
were robbed, and murdered, openly in the street; houses were broken
open, and pillaged; none dare walk in the street, without the risk
of insult or assault. Antipas, Levias, and Saphias--all of royal
blood--were seized, thrown into prison, and there murdered; and
many others of the principal people were slain.

"Then the robbers proceeded to further lengths. They took upon
themselves to appoint a high priest; selected a family which had no
claim whatever to the distinction and, drawing lots among them,
chose as high priest one Phannias--a country priest, ignorant,
boorish, and wholly unable to discharge the function of the office.
Hitherto, the people had submitted to the oppression of the
Zealots, but this desecration of the holy office filled them with
rage and indignation; and Ananus--the oldest of the chief priests,
a man of piety and wisdom--was the head of the movement and,
calling the people together, exhorted them to resist the tyranny
which oppressed them, and which was now desecrating the Temple--for
