weapon, as was the habit of gentlemen of that day, was suddenly
interrupted.




CHAPTER XVIII

_Duty Wins the Game_

A booming roar came down upon them from the frigate, which had fired a
broadside, which was followed presently by the whistling of shot over
their heads.  Great rents were seen in the canvas, pieces of running
gear fell to the deck, there was a crashing, rending sound, and a part
of the rail, left standing abaft the mizzen shrouds, smashed into
splinters and drove inboard under the impact of a heavy shot.

One splinter struck the man at the helm in the side; he fell with a
shriek, and lay white and still by the side of the wheel, which, no
longer restrained by his hand, spun round madly.  Another splinter hit
the sword of Talbot, breaking the blade and sweeping it from his hands,
and the unlucky scrap of paper was blown into the sea.  The spanker
sheet was cut in two, and the boom swept out to windward, knocking one
of the men overboard.  There was neither time nor opportunity to pick
him up, and he went to his death unheeded.

Seymour dropped his sword, every instinct of a sailor aroused, and
sprang to the horse-block.  The ship, left to itself, fell off rapidly
before the wind.  Bentley jumped to seize the helm.

"Flow the head sheets there!" cried the lieutenant; "lively!  Aft here
and haul in the spanker!  Brail up the foresail!  Down, hard down with
the helm!"

There was another broadside from the heavy guns of the frigate.  Talbot
replied with his stern-chaser, and a cloud of splinters showed that the
shot took effect, whereat the men at the gun cheered and loaded, and
then crash went the mizzen topgallant mast above their heads!

"Lively, men!" shouted Seymour, "we must get on the wind again or we
are lost."

"Breakers on the starboard bow!" shrieked the lookout on the forecastle
suddenly.  "Breakers on the port bow!"  His voice ran aft in a shrill
scream, fraught with terror, "Breakers ahead!"

"Down, hard down with the helm, Bentley," said Seymour, himself
springing over to assist the old man at the wheel.

But Bentley raised his hand and kept the wheel steady.  "Too late, sir,
for that," he cried, "we are in the pass.  God help us now, sir.  Mr.
Seymour, look to the ship, sir, look to the ship!"

The young officer sprang back on the horse-block, his soul filled with
horror.  So fate had decided for him at last, and duty, not love, had
won the mighty game.  A third broadside passed harmlessly over the
ship, doing little damage, the rough weather making aiming uncertain.
Again the field-piece replied.  Seymour never turned his head in the
direction of the frigate.  He could not look upon the catastrophe;
besides, the exigency of the situation demanded that he give his whole
mind to conning the ship through the narrow pass.  Bentley himself,
assisted by a young sailor, kept the helm; the oldest seamen had charge
of the braces.  The wreck of the mizzen topgallant mast was allowed to
hang for the present.

The white water dashed about the ship in sheets of foam; they were well
in the breakers now, and the most ignorant eye could see the danger.
One false movement meant disaster for the ship for whose safety Seymour
had sacrificed so much.  He did not make it.  To his disordered fancy
Katharine's white face looked up at him from every breaking wave.  He
steeled his heart and gave his orders with as much ease and precision
as if it had been a practice cruise.  To the day of his death he could
not account for his ability to do so.  He made a splendid figure,
standing on the horse-block, his hair flowing out in the wind, his face
deadly pale; calm, cool, steady; his voice clear and even, but heard in
every part of the ship.  The heart of the old sailor at the helm
yearned toward him, and the seamen looked at him as if he had been a
demigod.  He never once looked back, but from the cries of the men he
could follow every motion of the frigate behind him.  The frigate, the
unsuspicious frigate, had followed the course of the transport exactly,
and was coming down to the deadly rocks like a hurricane.

Talbot, his quarrel forgotten for the moment, ceased firing, and stood,
with all of the men who could be spared from their stations, looking
aft at the tremendous drama being played.

"The frigate!  Look at the frigate!  She 's going to strike, sir!"
cried one of the seamen, excitedly,--old Thompson, who had sailed upon
her.  "See, they see the breakers.  Now there go the head yards.  It
won't do.  It's too late.  My God, she strikes, she strikes!  I 'll
have one more shot at her before she goes," he shrieked, taking hasty
aim over the loaded field-piece and touching the priming.  "Ay, and a
hit too.  Hurrah!  hurrah!  To h--l with ye, where you belong, ye--"

"Silence aft!" shouted Seymour, in a voice of thunder.  "Keep fast that
gun; and another cheer like that, and I put you in irons, Thompson."

The water in the front of the Mellish suddenly became darker, the
breakers disappeared, the ship was in deep water again; she had the
open sea before her, and was through the channel.

"We are through the pass, sir," said Bentley.

"I know it," answered Seymour, at last.  "I suppose there is no use
beating back around the shoal, Bentley?" he said tentatively.

"No, sir, no use; and besides in this wind we could not do it; and,
sir, you know nothing will live in such a sea.  Look at the Englishman
now, sir."

The captain turned at last.  The frigate was a hopeless wreck.  All
three of her masts had gone by the board; she had run full on the rocky
ledge of the shoal at the mouth of the channel.  The wind had risen
until it blew a heavy gale; no boat, no human being, could live in such
a sea.  The waters rushed over her at every sweep, and she was fast
breaking up before them.  Night had fallen, and darkness at last
enshrouded her as she faded out of view.  A drop of snow fell lightly
upon the cold cheek of the young sailor, and the men gazed into the
night in silence, appalled by the awful catastrophe.  Bentley,
understanding it all, laid his hand lightly on Seymour's arm, saying
softly,--

"Better clear the wreck and get the mizzen topsail and the fore and
main sail in, sir, and reef the fore and main topsails; the spars are
buckling fearfully.  She can't stand much more."

"Oh, Bentley," he said with a sob, and then, mastering himself, he gave
the necessary orders to clear away the wreck and take in the other
sails, and close reef the topsails, in order to put the ship in proper
trim for the rising storm; after which, the wind now permitting, the
ship was headed for Philadelphia.

As Seymour turned to go below, he came face to face with Talbot.  The
two men stood gazing at each other in silence.

"We still have an account to settle, Mr. Talbot," he said sternly.

"My God," said Talbot, hesitatingly, "was n't it awful?  How small,
Seymour, are our quarrels in the face of that!" pointing out into the
darkness,--"such a tremendous catastrophe as that is."

Seymour looked at him curiously; the man had not yet fathomed the depth
of the catastrophe to him, evidently.

"As for our quarrel," he continued in a manly, generous way,
"I--perhaps I was wrong, Mr. Seymour.  I know I was, but I have loved
her all my life.  I am sorry I spoke so, and I beg your pardon;
but--won't you tell me about the note now?"

A great pity for the young man filled Seymour's heart in spite of his
own sorrow.  "I loved her too," he said quietly.  "The note was sent to
me from Gwynn's Island, where they were confined.  I had offered myself
to her the night of the raid,--just before it, in fact,--and she
accepted me.  The note was mine.  Where is it?"

"Oh!" said Talbot, softly, lifting his hand to his throat, "and I loved
her too, and she is yours.  Forgive me, Seymour, you won her honorably.
I was too confident,--a fool.  The note is gone into the sea.  We
cannot quarrel about it now."

"There can be no quarrel between us now, Talbot.  She is mine no more
than she is yours.  She--she--"  He paused, choking.  "She--"

"Oh, what is it?  Speak, man," cried Talbot, in sudden fear which he
could not explain.  Philip Wilton had drawn near and was listening
eagerly.

"That ship there--the Radnor, you know--is lost, and all on board of
her must have perished long since."

"Yes, yes, it's awful; but what of that? what of Katharine?"

"Don't you remember the note?  Colonel Wilton and she were on the
Radnor."

The strain of the last hour had undermined the nervous strength of the
young soldier.  He looked at Seymour, half dazed.

"It can't be," he murmured.  "Why did you do it?  How could you?"  The
world turned black before him.  He reeled as if from a blow, and would
have fallen if Seymour had not caught him.  Philip strained his gaze
out over the dark water.

"Oh, my father, my father!" he cried.  "Mr. Seymour, is there no hope,
no chance?"

"None whatever, my boy; they are gone."

"Oh, Katharine, Katharine!  Why did you do it, Seymour?" said Talbot,
again.

Seymour turned away in silence.  He could not reply; now that it was
done, he had no reason.

The dim light from the binnacle lantern fell on the face of Bentley;
tears were standing in the old man's eyes as he looked at them, and he
said slowly, as if in response to Talbot's question,--

"For love of country, gentlemen."

And this, again, is war upon the sea!




BOOK III

THE LION AT BAY


CHAPTER XIX

_The Port of Philadelphia_

The day before Christmas, the warden of the port of Philadelphia,
standing glass in hand on one of the wharves, noticed a strange vessel
slowly coming up the bay.  This in itself was not an unusual sight.
Many vessels during the course of a year arrived at, or departed from,
the chief city of the American continent.  Not so many small traders or
coasting-vessels or ponderous East Indiamen, perhaps, as in the busy
times of peace before the war began; but their place was taken by
privateers and their prizes, or a ship from France, bringing large
consignments of war material from the famous house of Rodrigo Hortalez
& Co., of which the versatile and ingenuous [Transcriber's note:
ingenious?] M. de Beaumarchais was the _deus ex machina_; and once in a
while one of the few ships of war of the Continental navy, or some of
the galleys or gunboats of Commodore Hazelwood's Pennsylvania State
defence fleet.  But the approaching ship was evidently neither a
privateer nor a vessel of war, neither did she present the appearance
of a peaceful merchantman.  There was something curious and noteworthy
in her aspect which excited the attention of the port warden, and then
of the loungers along Front Street and the wharves, and speedily
communicated itself to the citizens of the town, so that they began to
hasten down to the river, in the cold of the late afternoon.  Finally,
no less a person than the military commander of the city himself
appeared, followed by one or two aids, and attended by various bewigged
and beruffled gentlemen of condition and substance; among whose finery
the black coat of a clergyman and the sober attire of many of the
thrifty Quakers were conspicuous.  Here and there the crowd was
lightened by the uniform of a militiaman or home guard, or the faded
buff and blue of some invalid or wounded Continental.  In the doorways
of some of the spacious residences facing the river, many of the fair
dames for which Philadelphia was justly famous noted eagerly the
approaching ship.  As she came slowly up against the ebb tide, it was
seen that her bulwarks had been cut away, all her boats but one
appeared to be lost, her mizzen topgallant mast was gone, several great
patches in her sails also attracted attention; there too was a
field-piece mounted and lashed on the quarter-deck as a stern-chaser.
The fore royal was furled, and two flags were hanging limply from the
masthead; the light breeze from time to time fluttering them a little,
but not sufficiently to disclose what they were, until just opposite
High Street, where she dropped her only remaining anchor, when a sudden
gust of wind lifted the two flags before the anxious spectators, who
saw that one was a British and the other their own ensign.  As soon as
the eager watchers grasped the fact that the red cross of St. George
was beneath the stars and stripes, they broke into spontaneous cheers
of rejoicing.  Immediately after, the field-gun on the quarterdeck was
fired, and the report reverberated over the water and across the island
on the one side, and through the streets of the town on the other, with
sufficient volume to call every belated and idle citizen to the
river-front at once.

Immediately after, a small boat was dropped into the water and manned
by four stout seamen, into which two officers rapidly descended,--one
in the uniform of a soldier, and the other in naval attire.  When they
reached the wharf at the foot of High Street, they found themselves
confronted by an excited, shouting mass of anxious men, eager to hear
the news they were without doubt bringing.

"It's Lieutenant Seymour!" cried one.

"Yes, he went off in the Ranger about two weeks ago," answered another.

"So he did.  I wonder where the Ranger is now?"

"Who is the one next to him?" said a third.

"That's the young Continental from General Washington's staff, who went
with them," answered a fourth voice.

"Back, gentlemen, back!"

"Way for the general commanding the town!"

"Here, men, don't crowd this way on the honorable committee of
Congress!" cried one and another, as a stout, burly, red-faced, honest,
genial-looking man, whose uniform of a general officer could not
disguise his plain farmer-like appearance, attended by two or three
staff-officers and followed by several white-wigged gentlemen of great
dignity, the rich attire and the evident respect in which they were
held proclaiming them the committee of Congress, slowly forced their
way through the crowd.

"Now, sir," cried the general officer to the two men who had stepped
out on the wharf, "what ship is that?  We are prepared for good news,
seeing those two flags, and the Lord knows we need it."

"That is the transport Mellish, sir; a prize of the American
Continental ship Ranger, Captain John Paul Jones."

"Hurrah! hurrah!" cried the crowd, which had eagerly pressed near to
hear the news.

"Good, good!" replied the general.  "I congratulate you.  How is the
Ranger?"

"We left her about one hundred leagues off Cape Sable about a week ago;
she had just sunk the British sloop of war Juno, twenty-two guns, after
a night action of about forty minutes.  We left the Ranger bound for
France, and apparently not much injured."

"What! what!  God bless me, young men, you don't mean it!  Sunk her,
did you say, and in forty minutes!  Gentlemen, gentlemen, do you hear
that?  Three cheers for Captain John Paul Jones!"

Just then one of the committee of Congress, and evidently its
chairman,--a man whose probity and honor shone out from his open
pleasant face,--interrupted,--

"But tell me, young sir,--Lieutenant Seymour of the navy, is it not?
Ah, I thought so.  What is her lading?  Is it the transport we have
hoped for?"

"Yes, sir.  Lieutenant Talbot here has her bills of lading and her
manifest also."

"Where is it, Mr. Talbot?" interrupted the officer; "let me see it,
sir.  I am General Putnam, in command of the city."

The general took the paper in his eagerness, but as he had neglected to
bring his glasses with him, he was unable to read it.

"Here, here," he cried impatiently, handing it back, "read it yourself,
or, better, tell us quickly what it is."

"Two thousand stand of arms, twenty field-pieces, powder, shot, and
other munitions of war, ten thousand suits of winter clothes, blankets,
shoes, Colonel Seaton and three officers and fifty men of the Seaforth
