"Dunno. One of the little machines maybe. Look."

Sherman peered cautiously round his side of the stump. In the valley
beneath them, shining brilliantly in the pure white light it had
released, was one of the metal fish--but a smaller one than the usual
fighting machine, and without the projecting trunk.

"We've been working on them for a while," the girl whispered. "I don't
know what they're for, but they aren't fighting machines."

Remembering how the vision plate of the fighting machine he had
controlled had reflected every object within range, Sherman made himself
small behind the stump. The machine below was probably trying to locate
them in the light it had released.

"Wonder they don't bring the birds out," he thought, and as if in answer
to this idea, one of the four-winged creatures strutted around the
machine, blinking in the light, then took off with a whir of wings, and
spiralled upward. The light went out, reappeared as a beam, pointing
down the valley and the machine moved off, slowly sweeping the sides of
the hills with its pencil of illumination. He could see the multiple
glow of the tubes at the stern, greenly phosphorescent, as the machine
progressed. High above the bird screamed shrilly.




CHAPTER XVII

Marta's Sacrifice


Progress up the hillside was slow. It had become completely dark; they
were without any means of making a light and would not have dared to
make one if they could. The mud was tenacious, the constant contact with
stumps and rocks both irritating and difficult. But at last in their
fumbling way, they reached a spot where the denudation gave place to a
line of trees, looming dark and friendly overhead against the skyline,
and after that they went faster. Where they were or what route to take
neither had any idea. That portion of the Catskills is still as wild as
in the days of the Iroquois, save for the few thin roads along the line
of the valleys and these they dared not seek.

They solved the difficulty by keeping to the hillcrest till it ran out
in a valley, then rapidly climbing the next hill and proceeding along
that in the shelter of the forest. Though they necessarily went slowly
they did not halt; neither felt the need of rest or sleep, their metal
limbs took no serious bruises, and the slip of the hill kept them from
running in circles as people usually do when lost in the woods.

Just as the eastern sky began to hold some faint promise of dawn they
came upon a farmhouse in a clearing at the top of a hill. It was an
unprepossessing affair with a sagging roof, but they burst in the door
and went through it in the hope of finding weapons and perhaps an
electric battery, for both were used to the bountiful electric meals of
the Lassans and were beginning to feel the lack.

The best the place afforded, however, was a rather ancient axe, of which
Sherman possessed himself, and a large pot of vaseline with which they
anointed themselves liberally, for the continued damp was making them
feel rusty in the joints.

They pressed on, and did not halt to consider the situation till full
day had come.

"Where do we go from here?" asked Marta, perching herself on a
tree-bole.

"South, I guess," offered Sherman. "They may be looking for us there,
but we got to find a city and get some things."

"There's Albany," she suggested.

"Yes, and Schenectady and they have a lot of electric power there we
could use. But I vote for New York. If we head in there I can pick up a
plane at one of the airports and walk right away from them."

"Well, it's a chance," she said, "but anything is. Come on...." and as
they forced their way through the underbrush, "You know, from what I
understood of those Lassans' thoughts, they've got something hot cooking
up. I'm almost sure there are other people in the world and they're
getting ready to fight them."

"Let 'em come," said Sherman grimly. "That light-ray won't stand the
chance of a whistle in a whirlwind when they get after them with heavy
artillery and airplane observation."

"That's just where you're all wet," replied the dancer. "They've been
figuring on that for a long time. They got a gun from somewhere, and
they've had all their fighting machines out, shooting it at them, and
then armoring up the fighting machines to stand it. And they're
building guns of their own to shoot those light-bombs. I ought to know.
I was on the job."

Sherman cursed himself inwardly. So that had been the result of his
exchange of information with the old Lassan who was so anxious to know
about guns.

"How do they get away from it?" he asked.

"Well, I don't know quite," she said. "I'm a sap about stuff like that.
All I know is what the guy that was controlling me thought about and let
me have without knowing it. But I got this much out of it--that the
outside of these fighting machines is coated with this 'substance of
life' they talk about some way, so it's a perfect mirror, and reflects
everything that hits it, even shells. The coating reflects their light
ray, too, but it has to have a lead backing for that. It's no good
without the lead. Seems like lead will stop that light-ray every time."

"I wonder how about big guns," murmured Sherman.

"Don't know. I didn't get anything like that in what the boss was
thinking. He seemed to imagine the gun he had was the biggest there
was."

They toiled on. As they progressed southward the thinning forest and the
increasing walls of the cliffs drove them farther and farther toward the
river, till they were forced to take to the main road willy-nilly. Along
it they could walk faster, but there was more danger. They watched the
heavens narrowly for any sign of the four-winged birds, but the skies
seemed deserted.

At Kingston they found a filling station, and kicking in the door,
located a couple of storage batteries that supplied them with a needed
meal. "What do you say to a car?" asked Sherman.

"Maybe yes, maybe no," said the dancer. "It's running a chance, isn't
it? Still, we're getting nowhere awful fast this way. Let's try it."

Finding a car in running order was a procedure of some difficulty, and
Kingston seemed a weaponless town, though Marta finally did locate one
little pearl-handled .25 calibre pop-gun. Sherman eyed it dubiously.

"That's a good thing to kill mosquitoes with," he remarked, "but I don't
think it will be much use for anything else."

"Boloney," she replied. "These Lassans are yellow from way back. If I
stuck this under the nose of one of them he'd throw a fit. Come on.
Let's go."

Eventlessly, the road flowed past under their wheels--Newburgh,
Haverstraw, Nyack--one, two, three hours. Then, just south of Chester
the dancer suddenly gripped Sherman's arm.

"What's that?" she said. "No, over there. Isn't it--?"

But in one swift glance he had seen as clearly as she. Like a living
thing, the car swerved from the road, dived across the ditch, and losing
speed, rolled to a halt on the green lawn of a suburban bungalow.
Sherman leaped out. "Come on, for God's sake," he cried. "It's a
fighting machine. If they've seen us they'll start shooting."

Dragging her after him, he dived around the house, through a seedy
flower-garden, down a path. As though to lend emphasis to his words
there came the familiar buzzing roar, and as Sherman dropped, pulling
the girl flat on her face after him, they saw the wall of the bungalow
cave in, and the roof tilt slowly over and drop into the burning mass
beneath. A vivid blue beam, brighter than the sunlight of the dark day,
swept across the sky, winked once or twice, and disappeared.

Marta would have risen, but "Take it easy," said Sherman. "If they see
us they'll pop another of those tokens at us."

He wriggled along on his stomach, picking up weeds in his body plates in
the process, and making for the shelter of an overgrown hedge that ran
behind the next bungalow.

"Look out," called the dancer suddenly. "Here come the birds."

She waved her hand up and back, and by screwing up his eyes Sherman
could just make out a black speck against the clouds, far north. They
rolled under the shelter of the hedge and lay still, scarcely daring to
whisper.

The Lassan in command of the fighting machine was evidently not
satisfied that he had hit them with his hasty shot. Peering through the
stems, they made out the shimmering form of the machine, sliding slowly
past the burning house, its snout moving hither and thither
questioningly. It passed through the garden, went on down the path. The
bird swung to and fro overhead. Nearer. Evidently it had noticed the
prints their feet left in the soft ground.

"Listen, partner," said Marta Lami, "get through and find some people,
then come and get me out of that hellhole up there. If they see me,
they'll let you alone."

"No!" cried Sherman, but she was already running out across the field.
The snout of the machine lifted toward her as though to deliver a blast,
then rose and discharged another beam of blue light. Sherman heard one
of the birds scream in answer, saw it sweep down on soaring pinions, and
in a single motion snap the dancer up and away. The shimmering fighting
machine swung round and turned back toward the road.

He lay still until he was sure it had gone, then, moving carefully for
fear of the terror from the skies, crawled to the next bungalow. It
yielded treasure-trove in the shape of a flashlight and a serviceable
revolver, and securing a sheet from one of the beds to wrap around him
as a loin-cloth, he set out to trudge to New York.

After a time it occurred to him that the disaster had taken place not
because they were in a car, but because it had been driven unreasonably
fast, and without precaution. He looked for and ultimately found another
one, and keeping to the back streets and driving slowly, worked his way
toward the city again. Then another idea came to him--Newark had an
airport as well as New York and it was far nearer. He changed the
direction of his advance, swinging west to avoid the long bridges over
the Passaic River. Bridges were focal points; the birds would surely
watch them, as intelligent as they were.

Late in the afternoon he spied one of them, far ahead and flying
southward, but took no chances. He drew his car up to the side of the
road and remained motionless for long after it had disappeared. When
evening came on, he had already reached the outskirts of the city and
could proceed without headlights.

Newark was a dead city, the diminished purr of the motor ringing
curiously loud in the silent streets. Their complication bothered him;
he was unfamiliar with the town and his flashlight gave out long before
he reached his destination. But he kept steadily on, certain that the
airport was somewhere at the south and east of the city. Toward the
later evening a fine, cold rain began to fall, congealing to ice on the
streets and on his metallic body.

The airport was just as he had remembered it on the first day of his
awakening--it now seemed uncountable ages in the past. The little sports
plane still stood on the platform, its torn wing dangling. The hangars
were all locked; he was an inefficient burglar and spent an hour or two
breaking one open and when he did, found nothing but a tri-motored
monster quite beyond his powers to get out, and a rocket-plane requiring
special fuel that he did not have. The next hangar yielded an autogiro
and a training machine. He had no watch, but was sure that the night was
passing fast, and not wishing to be abroad by daylight with an airplane,
decided to chance it on the autogiro. Luckily she was full of fuel, and
everything seemed tight. With some labor he removed the chocks and
managed to wheel the machine out.

Not till he had it in the air did the thought of what direction he was
to take occur to him. Boston--New York--Philadelphia--Chicago, he
canvassed the possibilities. What was it Marta Lami had said--something
about one of the fighting machines heading south? And he remembered how
the astronomers had predicted that the comet would fall, probably,
somewhere in New York State. If there were a borderline along which
Lassans were meeting humans in any kind of conflict it was most likely
to lie southward. With this thought in mind, he turned his plane to the
south, and keeping the white line of foam along the coast beneath him as
a guide, began to let her out.

The ceiling was low; between clouds and fitful squalls of rain flying
was difficult and the weight of Sherman's mechanical body seemed to make
the machine move loggily. It must have been all of an hour and three
quarters later that he saw beneath him the tossing whitecaps of Great
Bay, with the ribbon of Wading River running back into the distance.
Just beyond, he knew, lay Atlantic City. He was debating with himself
whether to land on the beach there or hop across to the Philadelphia
airport when, sharp and clear from somewhere ahead and below him, came
the sound of gunfire. He tried for altitude, but only ran into clouds.
Nevertheless the sound was unmistakable, and as he approached it became
clearer and more pronounced, a long intermittent beat, heavy guns and
light, mingled together, off to the right. There was fighting going on!

Exulting in his escape from the Lassans and in the fact that he could
take their opponents information that would be of value, he swung the
autogiro toward the sounds that became clearer every minute. He was
getting right over them now, he thought; he could see red flashes along
the horizon. Down there they were locked in battle--men and Lassans, his
own people and the invaders from far-away Rigel.

Suddenly a beam of the light-ray leaped from the ground. Sherman thought
it was directed at him; tried to loop the plane and cursed as he
remembered autogiros wouldn't loop; then saw that the light was after
all, not turned in his direction, but at some object on the ground. He
banked the plane over and swung lower. Undoubtedly a Lassan fighting
machine--and the beam was hitting things, things large and solid, for
they collapsed under the stabbing ray. A red flame rose over the wreck;
the roar of an explosion reached his ears. The battle-line!

He soared again. He must reach the headquarters of whatever men were
down there. The information he could bring and that Marta Lami had given
him might make all the difference between the loss of the world and its
salvation "... perfect mirror--reflects everything that hits it, even
shells, but they don't know about the big ones.... The lead will reflect
their light-rays, too ... no good against lead. Their armor is made of
the same stuff...."

In the darkness beneath him troops were moving. He could catch glimpses
of dark masses on the roads. Somewhere down there he distinctly heard
the call of one of the four-winged birds, quite near. Then with a rush,
it was suddenly upon him. He set the automatic pilot, and drew his
revolver, but the bird, unfamiliar with the machine it was attacking,
had dashed recklessly in. There was a rending screech as it came into
contact with the wings of the autogiro; Sherman got in one shot, and
then bird, man and plane tumbled toward the earth.




CHAPTER XVIII

The End of the Light-Ray


"The Lassans?" said General Grierson, in a puzzled tone, looking at the
sheet-clad apparition. "You mean these--mechanical monsters?"

Sherman winced. "Like myself? No, sir, those are their slaves. I thought
you were familiar with them. They are elephant-men and quite different."

[Illustration: This shows that Mr. Pratt's conception of the elephant-men
is not so far-fetched. This photo is Ganesha, a Hindu god, patron of art
and literature Ganesha symbolizes to the Hindus wisdom and knowledge.]

"I meant those damned, long, shining objects that shoot that light-ray
of theirs. Their guns shoot it out in packages, but we can understand
that and deal with them; our artillery is just as good. But if we can't
stop those shining things there will be no army left and that means no
men left on this planet. This army is our last resource. If you know of
anything, anything, that will stop them, for God's sake tell us! All
we've found that does any good so far are the twelve-inch railroad guns
and we have only four of them. One was knocked out by their shells this
afternoon."

"You mean their fighting-machines," Sherman replied. "Why, I'm not
absolutely certain. I only know what I picked up from them and what
Marta Lami"--he swallowed hard at the mention of her name--"the bravest
woman in the world, told me. But I think that a shell with a lead cap
would go through those fighting machines like a knife through a piece of
cheese."

There was a tiny silence in the room at this momentous announcement.
Then an artillery officer said, dreamily, "The armor-piercing shells the
railroad guns use have lead caps."

As though his words had released a spell there came a quick drumfire of
questions:

"What are they armored with?"

"What kind of a power-plant do they use?"

"Can you stop the light-ray?"

"What makes you think so?"

Sherman smiled. "Just a moment. One question at a time. I'm not sure I
can answer them all, anyway. As to what makes me think so and what
they're armored with, they have a coating of steel armor, but it isn't
very thick. It's plated on the outside with a coat of lead and outside
that with the substance they call 'pure light.' I don't know what it is,
but it's the same stuff they use in the light-ray and in their shells,
and I know that lead sheeting will stop it, even when the lead is very
thin."

General Grierson swung round in his chair. "Hartnett! write out an order
to General Hudson, Chief Quartermaster, at once. Tell him to remove
every piece of lead he can find in Atlantic City and get it melted down.
Also to set up a plant for tipping all shells with lead...."

Ben Ruby leaned forward. "Can we get into their city, their
headquarters, or whatever they call it?"

"My God, I hope so!" cried Sherman. "Marta Lami's in there."

"All right, young man, you'll have your chance for that," said General
Grierson. "Now suppose you tell us as much as you know about
these--things. Every bit of information we can get will be valuable....
Oh, by the way, Hartnett. Have an order made out to the infantry to cut
the points of their bullets with their knives. That will make them
dum-dum and bring the lead out. Also another one to evacuate as much
infantry as possible. They aren't going to be a great deal of use...."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the factory of the Atlantic City Packing Company men were toiling,
stripped to the waist, in an inferno of heat. The huge row of vats that
had once held clams, oysters and fish to grace a nation's palate, now
simmered with green-phosphorescent kettles of molten lead; the hand
trucks that once bore piles of canned goods to and fro now pushed by
blue-faced men in khaki, held long stacks of pointed shells. In at one
end of the building they came in ceaseless procession to pause before
the lead tanks where the workmen took each shell and dipped its tip
briefly in the lead, then returned it to the truck. Out the other end
they wheeled to be loaded in trucks, buses, limousines, everything that
had wheels and would move, to be rushed to the maw of the ceaselessly
crying guns.

For the offensive was on--the advance of the Lassans had been turned to
a retreat. Along the water's edge, with its back to the sea and the
steamers ready to pick up the survivors of the defeat of the last army
of man, the last army of man had rallied; rallied and stood as the new
lead-tipped shells began to come in and the artillery spouted them at
the Lassan fighting-machines, no longer invincible, invulnerable
monsters, but hittable and smashable pieces of mechanism.

It was Ben Ruby in a tank shining dully with the new lead plating who
led the charge against the Lassan fighting machines on the first day of
the battle, and who, with his little division of American tanks, had
encountered three of the huge Lassan monsters outside the city. For a
moment, as though dazed by the audacity of this attack, they had done
nothing at all. Then all three had turned the light-rays on him. Would
it hold?

The deadly rays glanced off, danced to the zenith in a shower of
coruscating sparks and the gun of the American tank spoke--once, twice.
A round hole, with a radiating star-pattern running out from it,
appeared in the nose of the nearest Lassan fighting-machine, and it sank
to the earth like a tired animal, rolling over and over, helpless. The
other two turned to flee, swinging their long bodies around. Surrounded
by shell-bursts, riddled by the lead-tipped weapons they too, struggled
