"No," responded the Englishman; "my coming here was not a matter of
choice: it was necessity.  Come, I will make a confidant of you and
relate my history.  Don't be alarmed, I won't keep you up all night with
prosy details.  My life, as you may see, has not yet been a long one,
and until this year it has been comparatively uneventful."

He paused a few moments as if to recall the past, while his companion,
picking his pipe with a mimosa thorn, settled himself to listen.

"Father, mother, brothers, and sisters I have none," began Considine as
he whittled a stick--a pastime, by the way, which is erroneously
supposed to be an exclusively American privilege.  "Neither have I
grandfathers, grandmothers, aunts, nephews, nieces, or anything else of
the sort.  They all died either before or soon after I was born.  My
only living relation is an uncle, who was my guardian.  He is a
sea-captain, and a good man, but tough.  I bear him no ill-will.  I
would not speak disrespectfully of him; but he is tough, and, I incline
to think, no better than he should be.  Infancy and boyhood with
squalling and schooling I pass over.  My uncle ordered me to study for
the medical profession, and I obeyed.  Wishing to see a little of the
world before finishing my course, I sailed in a vessel bound for
Australia.  We touched at Table Bay in passing.  Obtaining leave, I went
ashore at Capetown.  The ship also went ashore--without leave--in
company with six other ships, during a terrific gale which sprang up in
the night.  Our vessel became a total wreck.  The crew were saved, but
my effects went with the cargo to the bottom.  Fortunately, however, I
had carried ashore with me the little cash I possessed."

"I found the Capetown people very kind.  One of them took me by the hand
and offered me employment, but I preferred to proceed into the interior
with a trader and work or shoot my way, in order to save my money.  No
trader being about to start at that time, I was obliged to accept the
offer of a frontier farmer, who, for a small sum, agreed to allow me to
accompany his waggons, on condition that I should make myself generally
useful.  I grudged the cash, but closed with the offer, and next day
started on our journey of six hundred miles--such being the distance we
had to go, according to my employer or comrade, Jan Smit."

"Who?" exclaimed Hans, with sudden energy.

"Jan Smit," repeated Considine.  "Do you know him?"

"Ja--but go on," said Hans, with a nod and a smile.

"Well, I soon found that my Dutch comrade--"

"He's only half Dutch," interrupted Hans.  "His mother was Dutch, but
his father is English."

"Well, Dutch or English, he is the most unmitigated scoundrel I ever
met."

"Ja," muttered Hans, "he is."

"And I soon found that my trip of pleasure became a trip of torment.  It
is true we shot plenty of game--lions among the rest--but in camp the
man was so unbearable that disgust counterbalanced all the pleasure of
the trip.  I tried hard to get the better of him by good-humour and
jollity, but he became so insolent at last that I could not stand it.
Three days ago when I asked him how far we were from his farm, he
growled that it wasn't far off now; whereupon I could not refrain from
saying that I was glad to hear it, as we should soon have the pleasure
of parting company.  This put him in a rage.  He kicked over the pot
containing part of our breakfast, and told me I might part company then
and there if I pleased.  My temper does not easily go, but it went at
last.  I jumped up, saddled my horse, mounted, and rode away.  Of course
I lost myself immediately, and for two days have been trying to find
myself, without success, mourning over my fate and folly, and fasting
from necessity.  But for my opportune meeting with you, Mr Marais, it
might have gone hard with me and my poor horse, for the want of water
had well-nigh floored us both."

"You'll never make your fortune by doctoring on the frontier," said
Hans, after a few minutes' silence.  "Nobody gets ill in this splendid
climate--besides, we couldn't afford to waste time in that way.  People
here usually live to a great age, and then go off without the assistance
of a doctor.  What else can you turn your hand to?"

"Anything," replied Considine, with the overweening confidence of youth.

"Which means nothing, I suspect," said the Dutchman, "for
Jack-of-all-trades is proverbially master of none."

"It may be so," retorted the other, "nevertheless, without boasting, I
may venture to assert--because I can prove it--that I am able to make
tables, chairs, chests, and such-like things, besides knowing something
of the blacksmith's trade.  In regard to doctoring, I am not entitled to
practise for fees, not yet being full-fledged--only a third-year
student--but I may do a little in that way for love, you know.  If you
have a leg, for instance, that wants amputating, I can manage it for you
with a good carving-knife and a cross-cut saw.  Or, should a grinder
give you annoyance, any sort of pincers, small enough to enter your
mouth, will enable me to relieve you."

At this Hans smiled and displayed a set of brilliant "grinders," which
did not appear likely to give him annoyance for some time to come.

"Can you shoot?" asked Hans, laying his hand on his companion's
double-barrelled gun, which lay on the ground between them, and which,
with its delicate proportions and percussion-locks, formed a striking
contrast to the battered, heavy, flint-lock weapon of the Dutchman.

"Ay, to some extent, as the lions' skins in Jan Smit's waggon can
testify.--By the way," added Considine quickly, "you said that you knew
Smit.  Can you tell me where he lives? because I still owe him the half
of the money promised for permission to accompany him on this trip, and
should not like to remain his debtor."

"Ja, I know where he lives.  He's a bad specimen of a Dutch farmer in
every respect, except as to size.  He lives quite close to our farm--
more's the pity!--and is one of those men who do their best to keep up
bad feeling between the frontier-men and the Kafirs.  The evil deeds of
men such as he are represented in England, by designing or foolish
persons, as being characteristic of the whole class of frontier farmers,
hence we are regarded as a savage set, while, in my humble opinion, we
are no worse than the people of other colonies placed in similar
circumstances--perhaps better than some of them.  Do you know anything
of our past history?"

"Not much," replied Considine, throwing away the remnant of the stick he
had been whittling, and commencing on another piece.  "Of course I know
that the Cape was first doubled by the Portuguese commander Bartholomew
Diaz in, I think, 1486, and after him by Vasco de Gama, and that the
Dutch formed the first settlement on it under Van Riebeek in 1652, but
beyond this my knowledge of Cape history and dates is hazy and confused.
I know, however, that your forefathers mismanaged the country for about
a century and a half, after which it finally came into possession of the
British in 1806."

"Humph!" ejaculated Hans, while a shade of displeasure flitted for a
moment across his broad visage.  "'Tis a pity your reading had not
extended farther, for then you would have learned that from 1806 the
colony has been mismanaged by _your_ countrymen, and the last fruit of
their mismanagement has been a bloody war with the Kafirs, which has
only just been concluded.  Peace has been made only this year, and the
frontier is now at rest.  But who will rebuild the burned homesteads of
this desolated land? who will reimburse the ruined farmers? above all,
who will restore the lost lives?"

The young Dutchman's eyes kindled, and his stern face flushed as he
spoke, for although his own homestead had escaped the ruthless savage,
friends and kindred had suffered deeply in the irruption referred to,
which took place in 1819, and one or two of his intimate comrades had
found early graves in the wild karroo.

Considine, sympathising with his companion's feelings, said, "I doubt
not that you have much to complain of, for there is no colony under the
sun that escapes from the evil acts of occasional bad or incompetent
Governors.  But pray do not extend your indignation to me or to my
countrymen at large, for few of us know the true merits of your case.
And tell me, what was the origin of the war which has just ended?"

The young farmer's anger had passed away as quickly as it came.  Letting
his bulky frame sink back into the reclining position from which he had
partially risen, he replied--

"Just the old story--self-will and stupidity.  That domineering fellow
Lord Charles Somerset, intending to check the plundering of the colony
by Kafirs, chose to enter into treaties with Gaika as paramount chief of
Kafirland, although Gaika himself told him plainly that he was not
paramount chief.  Of course the other chiefs were indignant, and refused
to recognise such treaties.  They did more: they made war on Gaika, and
beat him, whereupon Somerset, instead of leaving the niggers to fight
their own battles, must needs send a great commando of military and
burghers to `restore' Gaika to his so-called supremacy.  This was done.
The chief T'slambi was driven from his villages, and no fewer than
11,000 head of cattle were handed over to Gaika.  While this was going
on at the eastern frontier, the Kafirs invaded the colony at other
points, drove in the small military posts, ravaged the whole land, and
even attacked the military headquarters at Grahamstown, where, however,
they were defeated with great slaughter.  After this a large force was
sent to drive them out of their great stronghold, the Fish River bush.
This was successfully accomplished, and then, at last, the right thing
was done.  The Governor met the Kafir chiefs, when it was agreed that
they should evacuate the country between the Great Fish River and the
Keiskamma, and that the territory so evacuated should form _neutral
ground_.  So matters stand at present, but I have no faith in Kafirs.
It is their pride to lie, their business to make war, and their delight
to plunder."

"But is it not the same with _all_ savages?" asked Considine.

"Doubtless it is, therefore _no_ savages ought to be trusted, as
civilised men are trusted, till they cease to be savages.  We trust them
too much.  Time will show.--By the way, I hear that a new move is about
to be attempted.  Rumour says that your Government is going to send out
a strong party of emigrants to colonise the eastern frontier.  Is this
true?"

"It is," replied Considine; "I wonder that you have not heard all about
it before now."

"Good reasons for that.  For one thing, I have just returned from a long
trip into the north-western districts, and I have not been in the way of
hearing news for some time.  Besides, we have no newspapers in the
colony.  Everything comes to us by word of mouth, and that slowly.  Tell
me about this matter."

"There is little to tell," returned Considine, replenishing the fire
with a thick branch, which sent up a magnificent display of sparks and
scared away a hyena and two jackals that had been prowling round the
camp-fence.  "The fact is that there is a great deal of distress in
England just now, and a redundant population of idlers, owing to the
cessation of continental wars.  This seems to have put it into the heads
of some people in power to encourage emigration to the eastern part of
this colony.  In the House of Commons 50,000 pounds have been voted in
aid of the plan, and it seems that when the proposal was first made
public, no fewer than 90,000 would-be emigrants applied for leave to
come out here.  Of these I believe 4000 have been selected, and
twenty-three vessels chartered to convey them out.  This is all I could
learn before I left England, but I suppose we shall have more light on
the subject ere many months have gone by."

"A good plan," said the Dutchman, with a grim smile, "but I pity the
emigrants!"

As Considine's head drooped at this point, and his eyes winked with that
owlish look which indicates the approach of irresistible sleep, Hans
Marais rose, and, spreading a large kaross or blanket of leopard skin on
the ground, invited his companion to lie down thereon.  The youth
willingly complied, stretched himself beside the Dutchman, and almost
instantly fell sound asleep.  Hans spread a lighter covering over
himself and his comrade, and, with his head on his saddle, lay for a
long time gazing tranquilly at the stars, which shone with an intensity
of lustre peculiar to that region of the southern hemisphere, while the
yelling cries of jackals and the funereal moaning of spotted hyenas,
with an occasional distant roar from the king of beasts, formed an
appropriate lullaby.



CHAPTER TWO.

INTRODUCES A CAPE DUTCHMAN AND HIS FAMILY, AND SHOWS THE UNCERTAINTY OF
HUMAN PLANS.

The break of day found Charlie Considine and Hans Marais galloping
lightly over the karroo towards a range of mountains which, on the
previous evening, had appeared like a faint line of blue on the horizon.

The sun was just rising in a blaze of splendour, giving promise of an
oppressive day, when the horsemen topped a ridge beyond which lay the
primitive buildings of a frontier farm.

Considine uttered an exclamation of surprise, and looked inquiringly at
his companion.

"My father's farm," said Hans, drawing rein and advancing at a
foot-pace.

"A lovely spot," returned his companion, "but I cannot say much for the
buildings."

"They are well suited to their purpose nevertheless," said Hans;
"besides, would it be wise to build fine houses for Kafirs to burn?"

"Is being burnt by Kafirs the necessary end of all frontier farms?"
asked Considine, with a smile.

"Not the necessary, but the probable end.  Many a one has been burnt in
times gone by, and many a one will be burnt again, if the Government and
people in England do not recognise and admit the two great facts, that
the interest as well as the main desire of the frontier settler is
_peace_, while the chief delight as well as business of the Kafir is
_war_.  But I suppose that you, being an Englishman, will not believe
that until conviction is forced on you by experience.--Come, I will
introduce you to one of those colonists who are supposed to be such
discontented fire-eaters; I think he will receive you hospitably."

The young farmer put spurs to his horse as he spoke, and dashed away
over the plain, closely followed by his new friend, who was not sorry to
drop the conversation, being almost entirely ignorant of the merits of
the question raised.

The style of the group of buildings to which they drew near was not
entirely unfamiliar to Considine, for he had passed one or two similar
farms, belonging to Cape Dutchmen, on his trip from the sea-coast to the
interior.  There were about this farm, however, a few prominent points
of difference.  The cottages, being built of sun-dried bricks, were
little better than mud-huts, but there were more of them than Considine
had hitherto seen on such farms, and the chief dwelling, in particular,
displayed some touches of taste which betokened superior refinement in
the inhabitants.  The group lay in a hollow on the margin of an
insignificant stream, whose course through the plain was marked by a
thick belt of beautiful mimosa-bushes.  Close to the houses, these
mimosas, large enough to merit the title of trees, formed a green
setting in which the farm appeared to nestle as if desirous of escaping
the sunshine.  A few cactus shrubs and aloes were scattered about in
rear of the principal dwelling, in the midst of which stood several
mud-huts resembling gigantic bee-hives.  In these dwelt some of the
Hottentot and other servants of the farm, while, a little to the right
of them, on a high mound, were situated the kraals or enclosures for
cattle and sheep.  About fifty yards farther off, a clump of tall trees
indicated the position of a garden, whose fruit-trees were laden with
the blossoms or beginnings of a rich crop of peaches, lemons, oranges,
apricots, figs, pears, plums, apples, pomegranates, and many other
fruits and vegetables.  This bright and fruitful gem, in the midst of
the brown and apparently barren karroo, was chiefly due to the existence
of a large enclosure or dam which the thrifty farmer had constructed
about half a mile from the homestead, and the clear waters of which
shimmered in the centre of the picture, even when prolonged drought had
quite dried up the bed of its parent stream.  The peaceful beauty of the
scene was completed by its grand background of blue mountains.

A tall, powerful, middle-aged man, in a coarse cloth jacket, leathern
trousers or "crackers," and a broad-brimmed home-made hat, issued from
the chief dwelling-house as the horsemen galloped up and drew rein.  The
sons of the family and a number of barking dogs also greeted them.  Hans
and Considine sprang to the ground, while two or three of the eleven
brothers, of various ages--also in leathern crackers, but without coats
or hats--came forward, kicked the dogs, and led the horses away.

"Let me introduce a stranger, father, whom I have found--lost in the
karroo," said Hans.

"Welcome to Eden!  Come in, come in," said Mynheer Conrad Marais
heartily, as he shook his visitor by the hand.

Considine suitably acknowledged the hospitable greeting and followed his
host into the principal room of his residence.

There was no hall or passage to the house.  The visitor walked straight
off the veldt, or plain, into the drawing-room--if we may so style it.
The house door was also the drawing-room door, and it was divided
transversely into two halves, whereby an open window could at any moment
be formed by shutting the lower half of the door.  There was no ceiling
to the room.  You could see the ridge-pole and rafters by looking up
between the beams, on one of which latter a swallow--taking advantage of
the ever open door and the general hospitality of the family--had built
its nest.  The six-foot sons almost touched the said nest with their
heads; as to the smaller youths it was beyond the reach of most of them,
but had it been otherwise no one would have disturbed the lively little
intruder.

The floor of the apartment was made of hard earth, without carpet.  The
whitewashed walls were graced with various garments, as well as
implements and trophies of the chase.

From the beams hung joints of meat, masses of dried flesh, and various
kinds of game, large whips--termed sjamboks (pronounced _shamboks_)--
made of rhinoceros or hippopotamus hide, leopard and lion skins, ostrich
eggs and feathers, dried fruit, strings of onions, and other
miscellaneous objects; on the floor stood a large deal table, and chairs
of the same description--all home-made,--two waggon chests, a giant
churn, a large iron pot, several wooden pitchers hooped with brass, and
a side-table on which were a large brass-clasped Dutch Bible, a set of
Dutch tea-cups, an urn, and a brass tea-kettle heated like a
chafing-dish.  On the walls and in corners were several flint-lock guns,
and one or two of the short light javelins used by the Kafirs for
