and still contends that God will not, it is elevating his goodness far
above the goodness of God. And for any man to come forward with this
acknowledgment on his lips, and yet address the benignant Parent of
all, and, in prayer, acknowledge him to be the best of all beings, is
only using words without propriety or meaning. There is no sense, no
reason in such logic. It completely contradicts itself, and what is
contradictory cannot be true.

Would you save all men from sin and its attendant misery if you could?
O yes, is the answer, I would, and carry them all in the arms of
unbounded benevolence to glory. Well, has God the power to do it? Yes,
is the reply. But do you believe that he will exert his power so as to
accomplish it? No says the objector, I believe that he will sentence a
large portion of his erring offspring to endless and inconceivable wo.
Very well; then you are the best being of the two. And it is a
melancholy circumstance to these unfortunate beings, that you are not
on the throne of the universe. If this be so, then our text ought to
be reversed. God ought to copy your tenderness, and forgive men as you
do! We are certainly called upon to conform our conduct to the best
standard, and to imitate the _best_ being. If you are the _best_, then
God and man ought to be called upon, and _entreated_ to imitate you!
No; says the objector, God is superlatively the best being in the
universe. You may talk, and tell me so, till the morning sun sinks
beyond the western hills, and yet your _creed_ will contradict every
word you utter. What you have just acknowledged, unchangeably stares
you in the face. You say, that you would forgive all, save them from
sin, and raise them to a blessed eternity, if you had the power. This
power, you say, God possesses, and yet you _believe_, and that he will
not do it. It is certainly an unfortunate circumstance to the human
family, if their Father in heaven is destitute of that goodness which
you feel! From whom did you receive all those compassionate feelings
of heart? Why says the objector, God gave them to me. But how can God
give you what he has not himself? If you possess more benevolence than
God, you could not have received it from him; because on this
principal he did not have it in possession to give. Surely he could
not communicate to you, or any other being, what he did not originally
possess. From what source, then, did you derive so much tenderness and
love? There must, certainly, be some being in the universe in whose
bosom is rooted as much benevolence and love as you feel, or how could
it have been communicated to you from another? Now, where did you get
it? God gave it to me, says the objector. This cannot be, because your
doctrine proves, that you have more love than the God who made you! If
you insist that he has given it to you, has he not in such case, given
you more than he originally possessed? He has. If so, endless misery
may be true; for on this principle he has none left!

The scriptures teach that "God is love"; and all his works speak the
same language--saying, "the Lord is good, and his mercies endure
forever." But how good is he? The doctrine of endless wrath says, he
is not as good as you. You are but a small stream from an infinite
ocean of love; and yet this little stream is greater than the ocean
from which it issues, and rises far above its fountain head! Can this
be true? Impossible. O, do you not perceive how your own feelings,
which you daily experience, contradict your creed! You feel, desire,
and pray for the salvation of all men, and if you had the power, all
your feelings, prayers and desires would be carried into execution.
And yet your doctrine denies, that God, the fountain, in which all
your affections originate and live, will do it;--and at the same time
you say, that you have no love only what he gave you! What
inconsistencies, contradictions and blindness are here! Man, a small
drop, from the benevolent fountain God, is willing to do, what the
source from whence he came is unwilling to do! Then a drop of love, in
the human bosom, is more tender and benevolent than an ocean in the
God, who placed it there!

We all know, that the fountain must be more extensive than the stream
it sends forth--yea, larger, than all its running streams put
together. This we know to be correct, as well as we know, that the sun
enlightens the world. Let us then collect these little streams into
one. Bring, if you please, into one body, the love and benevolence of
men and angels, of cherubim and seraphim--stretch your thoughts to
unnumbered worlds, extract the love from countless bosoms, and
condense the whole into one being. How great, lovely, and adorable,
would that creature be! Then, let the question be put to him--from
whence did you derive all those noble qualities of love, mercy and
goodness? He replies, _from my Father God_! Now, we must grant, that
God far exceeds him in goodness, because this noble creature is but an
emanation from him--and the good desires of this creature would be
equal to the good desires of the countless millions of men and angels
in all worlds; and could have no other intentions only those, which
goodness and mercy dictate--and goodness itself can do nothing
contrary to its own nature, any more than ice can burn or fire freeze.
This creature would desire the happiness of all; and yet even he is
but a small rivulet flowing from the crystal fountain of life and
being! This creature would institute a government _perfectly
merciful_; and mercy would, of course, require, that the _disobedient_
should be punished to bring them to _obedience_, and perfect them in
the same state of glorification and love with that being itself.

"God is _love_," and it, therefore, follows that he is _love_ to every
creature he has made, and it is utterly impossible that he can do any
thing contrary to his own nature. "He cannot deny himself." He will,
therefore, do all that love dictates. It is consistent with parental
love to punish for the good of its offspring, but not to punish
unmercifully. But inquires the objector, does God punish for the good
of his creatures? We will let Paul settle this question--Heb. Xii.
Chap. "For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son
whom he receiveth. But if ye be without chastisement, whereof _all_
are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons. Furthermore, we have
had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father
of spirits and live? For they verily for a few days chastened us after
their own pleasure, but he for our profit that we might be partakers
of his holiness. Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be
joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceably
fruit of righteousness unto them that are exercised thereby." Now show
us, if you can, any punishment which God inflicts, that contradicts
his paternal goodness. It cannot be done. He has threatened and
inflicted _everlasting punishment_ upon nations, as such, but not a
solitary passage can be produced from Genesis to Revelations, where he
has threatened any individual with _everlasting_ punishment.

God is the adorable fountain of all tenderness, love, and compassion,
and no mother's son was imbued in the fount of mercy like his, who was
"the brightness of his glory and the express image of his
perfections." True, her yearnings over the babe of her bosom are
great; still they bear but little comparison to him who breathed those
feelings there. God compares himself to the mother. "Can a woman
forget her sucking child"? Woman, being of a more delicate formation
than man, possesses a mind susceptible of more fine, deep, and lasting
impressions than his. The affections of her soul, when fully roused
into action, and fixed upon their object, are deeper than those of
man, extend far beyond the compass line of his, and nobly range those
sequestered haunts--those delightful fields of mental felicity, where
his finest affections never penetrated. Let her heart once become
fixed upon its darling object, and it is immaterial in what situation
in life we contemplate her--whether prosperous or adverse, we behold
the same unshaken constancy, the same bright and burning flame. Her
love to her children is pure as the dew-drops of the morning, high as
the heavens and unchanging as the sun. It scorns dictation, bids
defiance to oppression, and never for one moment loses sight of its
object. No disappointments that cross her path, no scenes of adverse
fortune that darken her sky, can wrench it from her grasp, obscure it
from her vision, or tear assunder the silken cord that binds it to her
heart.

The truth of these remarks we see verified in that unwearied
watchfulness and care, which she exercises over her children in
supplying their countless, and ever varied little wants; in allaying
their little griefs, in soothing their tender hearts by the soft
whispers of encouragement and love; in hushing them to repose and in
watching over the slumbers of their pillow. Are her children exposed
to danger, and full in her view? Then no devouring flame, that wraps
her dwelling in destruction--no rolling surges that lash the foaming
main, can, in such a moment of peril, over-awe her spirit, or deter
her from rushing into the very jaws of death to save them. Are they
sick? Sleepless she sits beside their bed, and watches every breath
they draw. Are they racked with pain? Her soul inhales the pang; and
freely drinks at the same fount of agony, and breathes over them the
prayer of mercy. Love is that _attribute_ in her nature to which all
the _others_ are subservient. It is the _shrine_ at which they all
bow, the _centre_ to which they all gravitate. If her children do
wrong, she freely forgives.

Has God given the mother all these noble affections, and does he feel
less to his helpless, sinful and erring children? Let God answer--"Can
a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion
on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget
thee."

[Concluded in our next.]

SERMON XVIII

"And be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." Ephesians iv. 32.

In our last, we showed that that compassion, tenderness, and love of
our Father in heaven, are the origin of all the sublime affections in
the human bosom, and from this acknowledged fact, have shown that he
is infinitely more regardful of the welfare of his offspring than the
tender mother, with whom he compares himself; is of the welfare of her
sucking child. We now resume the subject.

In our text, we are called upon to forgive one another, as God has
forgiven us. In examining this point, we are to be guided by what he
has revealed. The question here arises, how many does God command us
to forgive? He commands us to forgive _all_, even our enemies. This
then must be forgiving them as he does. He therefore forgives all. He
commands us to bless them that curse us, and to pray for them that
despitefully use us, and persecute us, that we may be the children of
our Father in heaven. Does God command us to do more than he is
willing to do himself? No, he lives up to his own command. If God
requires us to forgive, even as he does, and then commands us to love
and forgive _all_, then he loves, and forgives _all_, otherwise he
would violate his own command; and then there would be no resemblance
between his forgiveness and ours. Even as God, for Christ's sake hath
forgiven you, so ought ye also to forgive one another.

Would you forgive all, and bring them home to glory? Yes. Will God?
No, says the objector, he will not forgive his enemies, but his
friends only. Then you must not forgive all. Do you ask why not?
Because you are to forgive, _even_ as God. He is the standard you are
to imitate. If you forgive more than God, you are better than he. He
cannot command you to do different from himself. If God requires you
to love and forgive _all_, while he himself will forgive only a part,
then God acts contrary to his own command. We are exhorted in the text
_to be kind, tender-hearted and forgiving even as he is_. Do your
kindness, tenderness, and forgiveness extend to all, and desire the
happiness of the universe? Yes. Then also does that of God, or else
you are, in every sense of the word, better than he. You differ from,
instead of imitating God. If so, you are doing wrong, because you are
violating the text. He commands you to be kind, tender, and forgiving
_only as he is_;--and you contend that his kindness, tenderness and
forgiveness, extend to a part only, and that all the rest he will
torture world without end.

But, says the objector, God is now kind, tender, forgiving, and
merciful to all; but he will not be so, when they enter eternity, for
"the doors of mercy will then be shut." How do you know that--who told
you so? Will God change in some future day? If he change, he will not
be the same being, he is now. I thought, he was the same yesterday,
today, and forever, without variableness or even the shadow of
turning. I thought he was the same Jehovah in all worlds. Do you
intend to make him kind, tender, and forgiving _here_, but unkind,
unforgiving, and hard-hearted to a part of his offspring _hereafter_?
If you intend to change both the nature and character of the Almighty
in the future world, then you and myself are done arguing. That
doctrine is, certainly in a pitiful condition, which drives its
advocate to the necessity of changing the Almighty wholly into another
being to support it. "God so loved the world, even when dead in
trespasses and sins," as to deliver up his Son to "taste death for
every man." And being unchangeable, he could never hate them. In our
text, God commands us to forgive as he has forgiven. How many does God
forgive? Ans. As many as he commands you to forgive. How many is that?
_All, even your enemies--to bless and curse not_.

We will now introduce the question--If God has not forgiven a man
today, will he ever forgive him? I answer no, for he is unchangeable.
We are to apt to think that our Creator is altogether such an one as
ourselves--that he loves one day, and hates the next--that he is in
reality angry one hour, and pleased the next--or that he holds a
grudge one moment and forgives the next, if we will only ask him to do
so. But all such ideas are calculated for children--for babes in
Christ. The scriptures come down to the weakest capacity; but this is
no reason we should always continue children, but rise in knowledge to
the strength of manhood. We ought not to be "ever learning and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth." Paul said to his brethren
"when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one
teach you" &c. "When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood
as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away
childish things."

The Scriptures are calculated for every capacity--for a child as well
as a philosopher. We must rise from one degree of glory to another. We
are not to fasten our minds down on the inventions of men, and live
and die children. No--we must "forget the things that are behind, and
reach forward to those that are before." As full grown men, we are not
to suppose that prayer of any mortal can move the Almighty to pardon
him. But says the objector, if we sincerely ask God to do thus and so,
he will certainly grant our request. Very well, admit this for a
moment. God, you say, will answer every _sincere_ prayer. Now suppose
two armies are to meet in battle, one from France and the other from
Holland. The hour when the engagement is to commence is precisely one
month from tomorrow noon. Every day, there are millions of sincere
prayers offered to God to give them the day. Holland, with one voice,
prays for victory and for the preservation of her subjects; and
France, with united supplication, prays right the contrary. How, we
ask, are all those _sincere_ opposing petitions to be answered?
Impossible. Again--one denomination prays for the prosperity of its
cause, and the destruction of error. And as each believes all others
to be in error, of course pray for their downfall. If the Lord
answered their petitions, all denominations, of course, of course
would fall! One man prays far rain, and another, that it may not rain.
If God answered all these petitions, he would be as changeable, not as
_one man_, but as the whole human family together.

As it respects God's pardoning the human race, I contend that this
pardon existed from the beginning. Do not the Scriptures declare that
God chose us _in Christ_ before the foundation of the world? Yes, for
"he calleth those things which be not as though they were." Well,
could we be chosen _in Christ_ without being pardoned? No, for the
apostle says, "he that is _in Christ_ is a new creature;" and,
certainly, a man cannot be a new creature _in Christ_ without being
pardoned in the mind of Deity. If then in the omniscient mind of God,
to whom there is no future, they were chosen _in Christ_ before the
foundation of the world, then in his mind, they must also have been
pardoned before the world began. God never does a new act. By _pardon_
we are not to understand the clearing of a guilty man from deserved
punishment, but an entire deliverance from a disposition to sin. The
period, when we are to be released from sin, is through death, where
the earthly nature, with all its wants and temptations to sin, falls,
and the heavenly nature rises in incorruption and glory through a
resurrection from the dead. Is not this the day of redemption when we
are set free? Yes, so saith the Scripture. Well do not _redemption,
remission, and forgiveness_ mean the same thing? They do. Then our
_pardon, remission_ or redemption will be _realized_ through death and
the resurrection. We will produce the Scriptures "in whom we have
_redemption_ through his blood, even the _forgiveness_ of sins
according to the riches of his grace." Here forgiveness and redemption
are used synonymous, and are declared to be _through the blood of
Christ_--that is, through his death, as a sacrifice for sin. Sin
cannot exist beyond the sacrifice designed to take it away. He is
represented as taking away the sin of the world under the figure of a
_Lamb_. Sin will come to a finish, under the first covenant, exactly
where Christ said "it is finished," at which moment the vail,
concealing the "holy of holies," will be rent in twain, and the second
covenant be opened. If we step beyond what Christ has said, we may as
well give up the Scriptures, and trust to our own vain imaginations.
There sin will end; and that is _dismission_, pardon or redemption
from it. "O death! Where is thy sting? O grave! Where is thy victory?
The _sting_ of death is _sin_, and the _strength_ of sin is the _law_
--but thanks be to God, who giveth us the victory, through our Lord
