The Project Gutenberg EBook of Asteroid of Fear, by Raymond Zinke Gallun

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Asteroid of Fear

Author: Raymond Zinke Gallun

Release Date: June 12, 2010 [EBook #32780]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTEROID OF FEAR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            ASTEROID of FEAR

                          By RAYMOND Z. GALLUN

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Planet Stories March
1951. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _All space was electrified as that harsh challenge rang
out ... but John Endlich hesitated. For he saw beyond his own murder--saw
the horror and destruction his death would unleash--and knew he dared
not fight back!_]

The space ship landed briefly, and John Endlich lifted the huge
Asteroids Homesteaders Office box, which contained everything from a
prefabricated house to toothbrushes for his family, down from the
hold-port without help or visible effort.

In the tiny gravity of the asteroid, Vesta, doing this was no trouble at
all. But beyond this point the situation was--bitter.

His two kids, Bubs, seven, and Evelyn, nine--clad in space-suits that
were slightly oversize to allow for the growth of young bodies--were
both bawling. He could hear them through his oxygen-helmet radiophones.

Around him, under the airless sky of space, stretched desolation that
he'd of course known about beforehand--but which now had assumed that
special and terrible starkness of reality.

At his elbow, his wife, Rose, her heart-shaped face and grey eyes framed
by the wide face-window of her armor, was trying desperately to choke
back tears, and be brave.

"Remember--we've _got_ to make good here, Johnny," she was saying.
"Remember what the Homesteaders Office people told us--that with modern
equipment and the right frame of mind, life can be nice out here. It's
worked on other asteroids. What if we are the first farmers to come to
Vesta?... Don't listen to those crazy miners! They're just kidding us!
Don't listen to them! And don't, for gosh sakes, get sore...."

Rose's words were now like dim echoes of his conscience, and of his
recent grim determination to master his hot temper, his sensitiveness,
his wanderlust, and his penchant for poker and the social
glass--qualities of an otherwise agreeable and industrious nature, that,
on Earth, had always been his undoing. Recently, back in Illinois, he
had even spent six months in jail for all but inflicting murder with his
bare fists on a bullying neighbor whom he had caught whipping a horse.
Sure--but during those six months his farm, the fifth he'd tried to run
in scattered parts of North America, had gone to weeds in spite of
Rose's valiant efforts to take care of it alone....

Oh, yes--the lessons of all that past personal history should be strong
in his mind. But now will power and Rose's frightened tones of wisdom
both seemed to fade away in his brain, as jeering words from another
source continued to drive jagged splinters into the weakest portion of
his soul:

"Hi, you hydroponic pun'kin-head!... How yuh like your new claim?...
Nice, ain't it? How about some fresh turnips?... Good luck, yuh
greenhorn.... Hiyuh, papa! Tied to baby's diaper suspenders!... Let the
poor dope alone, guys.... Snooty.... Won't take our likker, hunh? Won't
take our money.... Wifey's boy! Let's make him sociable....
Haw-Haw-haw.... Hydroponic pun'kin-head!..."

It was a medley of coarse voices and laughter, matching the row of a
dozen coarse faces and grins that lined the view-ports of the ship.
These men were asteroid miners, space-hardened and space-twisted. They'd
been back to Earth for a while, to raise hell and freshen up, and spend
the money in their then-bulging pockets. Coming out again from Earth,
across the orbit of Mars to the asteroid belt, they had had the Endlichs
as fellow passengers.

John Endlich had battled valiantly with his feebler side, and with his
social inclinations, all through that long, dreary voyage, to keep clear
of the inevitable griefs that were sure to come to a chap like himself
from involvement with such characters. In the main, it had been a rather
tattered victory. But now, at the final moment of bleak anticlimax, they
took their revenge in guffaws and ridicule, hurling the noise at him
through the radiophones of the space-suit helmets that they held in
their laps--space-suits being always kept handy beneath the
traveler-seats of every interplanetary vessel.

"... Haw-haw-haw! Drop over to our camp sometime for a little drink, and
a little game, eh, pantywaist? Tain't far. Sure--just drop in on us when
the pressure of domesticity in this beootiful country gets you down....
When the turnips get you down! Haw-haw-haw! Bring the wife along....
She's kinda pretty. Ought to have a man-size fella.... Just ask for
me--Alf Neely! Haw-haw-haw!"

Yeah, Alf Neely was the loudest and the ugliest of John Endlich's
baiters. He had gigantic arms and shoulders, small squinty eyes, and a
pendulous nose. "Haw-haw-haw!..."

And the others, yelling and hooting, made it a pack: "Man--don't he wish
he was back in Podunk!... What!--no tomatas, Dutch?... What did they
tell yuh back at the Homestead office in Chicago?--that we were in
de-e-esperate need of fresh vegetables out here? Well, where are they,
papa?... Haw-haw-haw!..."

       *       *       *       *       *

Under the barrage John Endlich's last shreds of common-sense were all
but blotted out by the red murk of fury. He was small and broad--a
stolid-looking thirty-two years old. But now his round and usually
placid face was as red as a fiery moon, and his underlip curled in a
snarl. He might have taken the savage ribbing more calmly. But there was
too much grim fact behind what these asteroid miners said. Besides, out
here he had thought that he would have a better chance to lick the
weaknesses in himself--because he'd _have_ to work to keep his family
alive; because he'd been told that there'd be no one around to distract
him from duty. Yah! The irony of that, now, was maddening.

For the moment John Endlich was speechless and strangled--but like an
ignited firecracker. Uhunh--ready to explode. His hard body hunched, as
if ready to spring. And the baiting waxed louder. It was like the
yammering of crows, or the roar of a wild surf in his ears. Then came
the last straw. The kids had kept on bawling--more and more violently.
But now they got down to verbal explanations of what they thought was
the matter:

"Wa-aa-aa-a-ahh-h! Papa--we wanna-go-o-o--hom-m-mm-e!..."

The timing could not have been better--or worse. The shrieks and howls
of mirth from the miners, a moment ago, were as nothing to what they
were now.

"Ho-ho-ho! Tell it to Daddy, kids!... Ho-ho-ho! That was a mouthful....
Ho-ho-ho-ho! Wow!..."

There is a point at which an extremity of masculine embarrassment can
lead to but one thing--mayhem. Whether the latter is to be inflicted on
the attacked or the attacker remains the only question mark.

"I'll get you, Alf Neely!" Endlich snarled. "Right now! And I'll get all
the damned, hell-bitten rest of you guys!"

Endlich was hardly lacking in vigor, himself. Like a squat but
streamlined fighting rooster, rendered a hundred times more agile by the
puny gravity, he would have reached the hold-port threshold in a single
lithe skip--had not Rose, despairing, grabbed him around the middle to
restrain him. Together they slid several yards across the dried-out
surface of the asteroid.

"Don't, Johnny--please don't!" she wailed.

Her begging could not have stopped him. Nor could her physical
interference--for more than an instant. Nor could his conscience, nor
his recent determination to keep out of trouble. Not the certainty of
being torn limb from limb, and not hell, itself, could have held him
back, anymore, then.

Yet he was brought to a halt. It certainly wasn't cowardice that
accomplished this. No.

Suddenly there was no laughter among the miners. But in a body they
arose from their traveler-seats aboard the ship. Suddenly there was no
more humor in their faces beyond the view-ports. They were itching to be
assaulted. The glitter in Alf Neely's small eyes was about as reassuring
as the glitter in the eyes of a slightly prankish gorilla.

"We're waitin' for yuh, Mr. Civilization," he rumbled softly.

       *       *       *       *       *

After that, all space was still--electrified. The icy stars gleamed in
the black sky. The shrunken sun looked on. And John Endlich saw beyond
