consciousness for an instant. When he opened his eyes the others were
crowding round him.

"We never heard you come in," they said. "How awfully jolly of you to
wish it to give us our wish!"

"Of course we understood that was what you'd done."

"But you ought to have told us. Suppose we'd wished something silly."

"Silly?" said Robert, very crossly indeed. "How much sillier could you
have been, I'd like to know? You nearly settled _me_--I can tell
you."

Then he told his story, and the others admitted that it certainly had
been rough on him. But they praised his courage and cleverness so much
that he presently got back his lost temper, and felt braver than ever,
and consented to be captain of the besieged force.

"We haven't done anything yet," said Anthea comfortably; "we waited for
you. We're going to shoot at them through these little loopholes with
the bow and arrows uncle gave you, and you shall have first shot."

"I don't think I would," said Robert cautiously; "you don't know what
they're like near to. They've got _real_ bows and arrows--an awful
length--and swords and pikes and daggers, and all sorts of sharp things.
They're all quite, quite real. It's not just a--a picture, or a vision
or anything; they can _hurt us_--or kill us even, I shouldn't wonder. I
can feel my ear all sore yet. Look here--have you explored the castle?
Because I think we'd better let them alone as long as they let us alone.
I heard that Jakin man say they weren't going to attack till just
before sundown. We can be getting ready for the attack. Are there any
soldiers in the castle to defend it?"

"We don't know," said Cyril. "You see, directly I'd wished we were in a
besieged castle, everything seemed to go upside down, and when it came
straight we looked out of the window, and saw the camp and things and
you--and of course we kept on looking at everything. Isn't this room
jolly? It's as real as real!"

It was. It was square, with stone walls four feet thick, and great beams
for ceiling. A low door at the corner led to a flight of steps, up and
down. The children went down; they found themselves in a great arched
gate-house--the enormous doors were shut and barred. There was a window
in a little room at the bottom of the round turret up which the stair
wound, rather larger than the other windows, and looking through it they
saw that the drawbridge was up and the portcullis down; the moat looked
very wide and deep. Opposite the great door that led to the moat was
another great door, with a little door in it. The children went through
this, and found themselves in a big courtyard, with the great grey walls
of the castle rising dark and heavy on all four sides.

Near the middle of the courtyard stood Martha, moving her right hand
backwards and forwards in the air. The cook was stooping down and moving
her hands, also in a very curious way. But the oddest and at the same
time most terrible thing was the Lamb, who was sitting on nothing, about
three feet from the ground, laughing happily.

The children ran towards him. Just as Anthea was reaching out her arms
to take him, Martha said crossly, "Let him alone--do, miss, when he _is_
good."

"But what's he _doing_?" said Anthea.

"Doing? Why, a-setting in his high chair as good as gold, a precious,
watching me doing of the ironing. Get along with you, do--my iron's cold
again."

She went towards the cook, and seemed to poke an invisible fire with an
unseen poker--the cook seemed to be putting an unseen dish into an
invisible oven.

"Run along with you, do," she said; "I'm behindhand as it is. You won't
get no dinner if you come a-hindering of me like this. Come, off you
goes, or I'll pin a discloth to some of your tails."

"You're _sure_ the Lamb's all right?" asked Jane anxiously.

"Right as ninepence, if you don't come unsettling of him. I thought
you'd like to be rid of him for to-day; but take him, if you want him,
for gracious' sake."

"No, no," they said, and hastened away. They would have to defend the
castle presently, and the Lamb was safer even suspended in mid air in an
invisible kitchen than in the guard-room of the besieged castle. They
went through the first doorway they came to, and sat down helplessly on
a wooden bench that ran along the room inside.

"How awful!" said Anthea and Jane together; and Jane added, "I feel as
if I was in a lunatic asylum."

"What does it mean?" Anthea said. "It's creepy; I don't like it. I wish
we'd wished for something plain--a rocking-horse, or a donkey, or
something."

"It's no use wishing _now_," said Robert bitterly; and Cyril said--

"Do be quiet; I want to think."

He buried his face in his hands, and the others looked about them. They
were in a long room with an arched roof. There were wooden tables along
it, and one across at the end of the room, on a sort of raised platform.
The room was very dim and dark. The floor was strewn with dry things
like sticks, and they did not smell nice.

Cyril sat up suddenly and said--

"Look here--it's all right. I think it's like this. You know, we wished
that the servants shouldn't notice any difference when we got wishes.
And nothing happens to the Lamb unless we specially wish it to. So of
course they don't notice the castle or anything. But then the castle is
on the same place where our house was--is, I mean--and the servants have
to go on being in the house, or else they _would_ notice. But you can't
have a castle mixed up with our house--and so _we_ can't see the house,
because we see the castle; and they can't see the castle, because they
go on seeing the house; and so"--

"Oh, _don't_," said Jane; "you make my head go all swimmy, like being on
a roundabout. It doesn't matter! Only, I hope we shall be able to see
our dinner, that's all--because if it's invisible it'll be unfeelable as
well, and then we can't eat it! I _know_ it will, because I tried to
feel if I could feel the Lamb's chair and there was nothing under him at
all but air. And we can't eat air, and I feel just as if I hadn't had
any breakfast for years and years."

"It's no use thinking about it," said Anthea. "Let's go on exploring.
Perhaps we might find something to eat."

This lighted hope in every breast, and they went on exploring the
castle. But though it was the most perfect and delightful castle you can
possibly imagine, and furnished in the most complete and beautiful
manner, neither food nor men-at-arms were to be found in it.

"If you'd only thought of wishing to be besieged in a castle thoroughly
garrisoned and provisioned!" said Jane reproachfully.

"You can't think of everything, you know," said Anthea. "I should think
it must be nearly dinner-time by now."

It wasn't; but they hung about watching the strange movements of the
servants in the middle of the courtyard, because, of course, they
couldn't be sure where the dining-room of the invisible house was.
Presently they saw Martha carrying an invisible tray across the
courtyard, for it seemed that, by the most fortunate accident, the
dining-room of the house and the banqueting-hall of the castle were in
the same place. But oh, how their hearts sank when they perceived that
the tray _was_ invisible!

They waited in wretched silence while Martha went through the form of
carving an unseen leg of mutton and serving invisible greens and
potatoes with a spoon that no one could see. When she had left the room,
the children looked at the empty table, and then at each other.

"This is worse than anything," said Robert, who had not till now been
particularly keen on his dinner.

"I'm not so very hungry," said Anthea, trying to make the best of
things, as usual.

Cyril tightened his belt ostentatiously. Jane burst into tears.




CHAPTER VII

A SIEGE AND BED


The children were sitting in the gloomy banqueting-hall, at the end of
one of the long bare wooden tables. There was now no hope. Martha had
brought in the dinner, and the dinner was invisible, and unfeelable too;
for, when they rubbed their hands along the table, they knew but too
well that for them there was nothing there _but_ table.

Suddenly Cyril felt in his pocket.

"Right, _oh_!" he cried. "Look here! Biscuits."

Somewhat broken and crumbled, certainly, but still biscuits. Three whole
ones, and a generous handful of crumbs and fragments.

"I got them this morning--cook--and I'd quite forgotten," he explained
as he divided them with scrupulous fairness into four heaps.

They were eaten in a happy silence, though they had an odd taste,
because they had been in Cyril's pocket all the morning with a hank of
tarred twine, some green fir-cones, and a ball of cobbler's wax.

"Yes, but look here, Squirrel," said Robert; "you're so clever at
explaining about invisibleness and all that. How is it the biscuits are
here, and all the bread and meat and things have disappeared?"

"I don't know," said Cyril after a pause, "unless it's because _we_ had
them. Nothing about _us_ has changed. Everything's in my pocket all
right."

"Then if we _had_ the mutton it would be real," said Robert. "Oh, don't
I wish we could find it!"

"But we can't find it. I suppose it isn't ours till we've got it in our
mouths."

"Or in our pockets," said Jane, thinking of the biscuits.

"Who puts mutton in their pockets, goose-girl?" said Cyril. "But I
know--at any rate, I'll try it!"

He leaned over the table with his face about an inch from it, and kept
opening and shutting his mouth as if he were taking bites out of air.

"It's no good," said Robert in deep dejection. "You'll only---- Hullo!"

Cyril stood up with a grin of triumph, holding a square piece of bread
in his mouth. It was quite real. Everyone saw it. It is true that,
directly he bit a piece off, the rest vanished; but it was all right,
because he knew he had it in his hand though he could neither see nor
feel it. He took another bite from the air between his fingers, and it
turned into bread as he bit. The next moment all the others were
following his example, and opening and shutting their mouths an inch or
so from the bare-looking table. Robert captured a slice of mutton,
and--but I think I will draw a veil over the rest of this painful scene.
It is enough to say that they all had enough mutton, and that when
Martha came to change the plates she said she had never seen such a mess
in all her born days.

The pudding was, fortunately, a plain suet one, and in answer to
Martha's questions the children all with one accord said that they would
_not_ have molasses on it--nor jam, nor sugar--"Just plain, please,"
they said. Martha said, "Well, I never--what next, I wonder!" and went
away.

Then ensued another scene on which I will not dwell, for nobody looks
nice picking up slices of suet pudding from the table in its mouth, like
a dog.

The great thing, after all, was that they had had dinner; and now
everyone felt more courage to prepare for the attack that was to be
delivered before sunset. Robert, as captain, insisted on climbing to the
top of one of the towers to reconnoitre, so up they all went. And now
they could see all round the castle, and could see, too, that beyond the
moat, on every side, tents of the besieging party were pitched. Rather
uncomfortable shivers ran down the children's backs as they saw that all
the men were very busy cleaning or sharpening their arms, re-stringing
their bows, and polishing their shields. A large party came along the
road, with horses dragging along the great trunk of a tree; and Cyril
felt quite pale, because he knew this was for a battering-ram.

"What a good thing we've got a moat," he said; "and what a good thing
the drawbridge is up--I should never have known how to work it."

"Of course it would be up in a besieged castle."

"You'd think there ought to have been soldiers in it, wouldn't you?"
said Robert.

"You see you don't know how long it's been besieged," said Cyril darkly;
"perhaps most of the brave defenders were killed early in the siege and
all the provisions eaten, and now there are only a few intrepid
survivors,--that's us, and we are going to defend it to the death."

"How do you begin--defending to the death, I mean?" asked Anthea.

"We ought to be heavily armed--and then shoot at them when they advance
to the attack."

"They used to pour boiling lead down on besiegers when they got too
close," said Anthea. "Father showed me the holes on purpose for pouring
it down through at Bodiam Castle. And there are holes like it in the
gate-tower here."

"I think I'm glad it's only a game; it _is_ only a game, isn't it?" said
Jane.

But no one answered.

The children found plenty of strange weapons in the castle, and if they
were armed at all it was soon plain that they would be, as Cyril said,
"armed heavily"--for these swords and lances and crossbows were far too
weighty even for Cyril's manly strength; and as for the longbows, none
of the children could even begin to bend them. The daggers were better;
but Jane hoped that the besiegers would not come close enough for
daggers to be of any use.

"Never mind, we can hurl them like javelins," said Cyril, "or drop them
on people's heads. I say--there are lots of stones on the other side of
the courtyard. If we took some of those up? Just to drop on their heads
if they were to try swimming the moat."

So a heap of stones grew apace, up in the room above the gate; and
another heap, a shiny spiky dangerous-looking heap, of daggers and
knives.

As Anthea was crossing the courtyard for more stones, a sudden and
valuable idea came to her.

She went to Martha and said, "May we have just biscuits for tea? We're
going to play at besieged castles, and we'd like the biscuits to
provision the garrison. Put mine in my pocket, please, my hands are so
dirty. And I'll tell the others to fetch theirs."

This was indeed a happy thought, for now with four generous handfuls of
air, which turned to biscuits as Martha crammed it into their pockets,
the garrison was well provisioned till sundown.

They brought up some iron pots of cold water to pour on the besiegers
instead of hot lead, with which the castle did not seem to be provided.

The afternoon passed with wonderful quickness. It was very exciting; but
none of them, except Robert, could feel all the time that this was real
deadly dangerous work. To the others, who had only seen the camp and the
besiegers from a distance, the whole thing seemed half a game of
make-believe, and half a splendidly distinct and perfectly safe dream.
But it was only now and then that Robert could feel this.

When it seemed to be tea-time the biscuits were eaten, with water from
the deep well in the courtyard, drunk out of horns. Cyril insisted on
putting by eight of the biscuits, in case anyone should feel faint in
stress of battle.

Just as he was putting away the reserve biscuits in a sort of little
stone cupboard without a door, a sudden sound made him drop three. It
was the loud fierce cry of a trumpet.

"You see it _is_ real," said Robert, "and they are going to attack."

All rushed to the narrow windows.

"Yes," said Robert, "they're all coming out of their tents and moving
about like ants. There's that Jakin dancing about where the bridge
joins on. I wish he could see me put my tongue out at him! Yah!"

The others were far too pale to wish to put their tongues out at
anybody. They looked at Robert with surprised respect. Anthea said--

"You really _are_ brave, Robert."

"Rot!" Cyril's pallor turned to redness now, all in a minute. "He's been
getting ready to be brave all the afternoon. And I wasn't ready, that's
all. I shall be braver than he is in half a jiffy."

"Oh dear!" said Jane, "what does it matter which of you is the bravest?
I think Cyril was a perfect silly to wish for a castle, and I don't want
to play."

"It _isn't_"--Robert was beginning sternly, but Anthea interrupted--

"Oh yes, you do," she said coaxingly; "it's a very nice game, really,
because they can't possibly get in, and if they do the women and
children are always spared by civilised armies."
