garrulous, and this man was so very quiet and still.  Again she strained
her eyes through the gloom.  His hat was pulled down and his cloak was
still drawn across his mouth, but from out of the shadow she seemed to
get a glimpse of two eyes which peered at her even as she did at him.

At last the silence impressed her with a vague uneasiness.  It was time
to bring it to an end.

"Surely, monsieur, we have passed the park gate where we were to pick up
my brother."

Her companion neither answered nor moved.  She thought that perhaps the
rumble of the heavy caleche had drowned her voice.

"I say, monsieur," she repeated, leaning forwards, "that we have passed
the place where we were to meet Monsieur de Vivonne."

He took no notice.

"Monsieur," she cried, "I again remark that we have passed the gates."

There was no answer.

A thrill ran through her nerves.  Who or what could he be, this silent
man?  Then suddenly it struck her that he might be dumb.

"Perhaps monsieur is afflicted," she said.  "Perhaps monsieur cannot
speak.  If that be the cause of your silence, will you raise your hand,
and I shall understand."  He sat rigid and silent.

Then a sudden mad fear came upon her, shut up in the dark with this
dreadful voiceless thing.  She screamed in her terror, and strove to
pull down the window and open the door.  But a grip of steel closed
suddenly round her wrist and forced her back into her seat.  And yet the
man's body had not moved, and there was no sound save the lurching and
rasping of the carriage and the clatter of the flying horses.  They were
already out on the country roads far beyond Versailles.  It was darker
than before, heavy clouds had banked over the heavens, and the rumbling
of thunder was heard low down on the horizon.

The lady lay back panting upon the leather cushions of the carriage.
She was a brave woman, and yet this sudden strange horror coming upon
her at the moment when she was weakest had shaken her to the soul.
She crouched in the corner, staring across with eyes which were dilated
with terror at the figure on the other side.  If he would but say
something!  Any revelation, any menace, was better than this silence.
It was so dark now that she could hardly see his vague outline, and
every instant, as the storm gathered, it became still darker.  The wind
was blowing in little short angry puffs, and still there was that
far-off rattle and rumble.  Again the strain of the silence was
unbearable.  She must break it at any cost.

"Sir," said she, "there is some mistake here.  I do not know by what
right you prevent me from pulling down the window and giving my
directions to the coachman."

He said nothing.

"I repeat, sir, that there is some mistake.  This is the carriage of my
brother, Monsieur de Vivonne, and he is not a man who will allow his
sister to be treated uncourteously."

A few heavy drops of rain splashed against one window.  The clouds were
lower and denser.  She had quite lost sight of that motionless figure,
but it was all the more terrible to her now that it was unseen.
She screamed with sheer terror, but her scream availed no more than her
words.

"Sir," she cried, clutching forward with her hands and grasping his
sleeve, "you frighten me.  You terrify me.  I have never harmed you.
Why should you wish to hurt an unfortunate woman?  Oh, speak to me; for
God's sake, speak!"

Still the patter of rain upon the window, and no other sound save her
own sharp breathing.

"Perhaps you do not know who I am!" she continued, endeavouring to
assume her usual tone of command, and talking now to an absolute and
impenetrable darkness.  "You may learn when it is too late that you have
chosen the wrong person for this pleasantry.  I am the Marquise de
Montespan, and I am not one who forgets a slight.  If you know anything
of the court, you must know that my word has some weight with the king.
You may carry me away in this carriage, but I am not a person who can
disappear without speedy inquiry, and speedy vengeance if I have been
wronged.  If you would--Oh, Jesus! Have mercy!"

A livid flash of lightning had burst from the heart of the cloud, and,
for an instant, the whole country-side and the interior of the caleche
were as light as day.  The man's face was within a hand's breadth of her
own, his mouth wide open, his eyes mere shining slits, convulsed with
silent merriment.  Every detail flashed out clear in that vivid light--
his red quivering tongue, the lighter pink beneath it, the broad white
teeth, the short brown beard cut into a peak and bristling forward.

But it was not the sudden flash, it was not the laughing, cruel face,
which shot an ice-cold shudder through Francoise de Montespan.  It was
that, of all men upon earth, this was he whom she most dreaded, and whom
she had least thought to see.

"Maurice!" she screamed.  "Maurice! it is you!"

"Yes, little wifie, it is I.  We are restored to each other's arms, you
see, after this interval."

"Oh, Maurice, how you have frightened me!  How could you be so cruel?
Why would you not speak to me?"

"Because it was so sweet to sit in silence and to think that I really
had you to myself after all these years, with none to come between.
Ah, little wifie, I have often longed for this hour."

"I have wronged you, Maurice; I have wronged you!  Forgive me!"

"We do not forgive in our family, my darling Francoise.  Is it not like
old days to find ourselves driving together?  And in this carriage, too.
It is the very one which bore us back from the cathedral where you made
your vows so prettily.  I sat as I sit now, and you sat there, and I
took your hand like this, and I pressed it, and--"

"Oh, villain, you have twisted my wrist!  You have broken my arm!"

"Oh, surely not, my little wifie!  And then you remember that, as you
told me how truly you would love me, I leaned forward to your lips,
and--"

"Oh, help!  Brute, you have cut my mouth!  You have struck me with your
ring."

"Struck you!  Now who would have thought that spring day when we planned
out our future, that this also was in the future waiting for me and you?
And this! and this!"

He struck savagely at her face in the darkness.  She threw herself down,
her head pressed against the cushions.  With the strength and fury of a
maniac he showered his blows above her, thudding upon the leather or
crashing upon the woodwork, heedless of his own splintered hands.

"So I have silenced you," said he at last.  "I have stopped your words
with my kisses before now.  But the world goes on, Francoise, and times
change, and women grow false, and men grow stern."

"You may kill me if you will," she moaned.

"I will," he said simply.

Still the carriage flew along, jolting and staggering in the
deeply-rutted country roads.  The storm had passed, but the growl of the
thunder and the far-off glint of a lightning-flash were to be heard and
seen on the other side of the heavens.  The moon shone out with its
clear cold light, silvering the broad, hedgeless, poplar-fringed plains,
and shining through the window of the carriage upon the crouching figure
and her terrible companion.  He leaned back now, his arms folded upon
his chest, his eyes gloating upon the abject misery of the woman who had
wronged him.

"Where are you taking me?" she asked at last.

"To Portillac, my little wifie."

"And why there?  What would you do to me?"

"I would silence that little lying tongue forever.  It shall deceive no
more men."

"You would murder me?"

"If you call it that."

"You have a stone for a heart."

"My other was given to a woman."

"Oh, my sins are indeed punished."

"Rest assured that they will be."

"Can I do nothing to atone?"

"I will see that you atone."

"You have a sword by your side, Maurice.  Why do you not kill me, then,
if you are so bitter against me?  Why do you not pass it through my
heart?"

"Rest assured that I would have done so had I not an excellent reason."

"Why, then?"

"I will tell you.  At Portillac I have the right of the high justice,
the middle, and the low.  I am seigneur there, and can try, condemn, and
execute.  It is my lawful privilege.  This pitiful king will not even
know how to avenge you, for the right is mine, and he cannot gainsay it
without making an enemy of every seigneur in France."

He opened his mouth again and laughed at his own device, while she,
shivering in every limb, turned away from his cruel face and glowing
eyes, and buried her face in her hands.  Once more she prayed God to
forgive her for her poor sinful life.  So they whirled through the night
behind the clattering horses, the husband and the wife, saying nothing,
but with hatred and fear raging in their hearts, until a brazier fire
shone down upon them from the angle of a keep, and the shadow of the
huge pile loomed vaguely up in front of them in the darkness.  It was
the Castle of Portillac.



CHAPTER XXII.


THE SCAFFOLD OF PORTILLAC.

And thus it was that Amory de Catinat and Amos Green saw from their
dungeon window the midnight carriage which discharged its prisoner
before their eyes.  Hence, too, came that ominous planking and that
strange procession in the early morning.  And thus it also happened that
they found themselves looking down upon Francoise de Montespan as she
was led to her death, and that they heard that last piteous cry for aid
at the instant when the heavy hand of the ruffian with the axe fell upon
her shoulder, and she was forced down upon her knees beside the block.
She shrank screaming from the dreadful, red-stained, greasy billet of
wood, but the butcher heaved up his weapon, and the seigneur had taken a
step forward with hand outstretched to seize the long auburn hair and to
drag the dainty head down with it when suddenly he was struck motionless
with astonishment, and stood with his foot advanced and his hand still
out, his mouth half open, and his eyes fixed in front of him.

And, indeed, what he had seen was enough to fill any man with amazement.
Out of the small square window which faced him a man had suddenly shot
head-foremost, pitching on to his outstretched hands and then bounding
to his feet.  Within a foot of his heels came the head of a second one,
who fell more heavily than the first, and yet recovered himself as
quickly.  The one wore the blue coat with silver facings of the king's
guard; the second had the dark coat and clean-shaven face of a man of
peace; but each carried a short rusty iron bar in his hand.  Not a word
did either of them say, but the soldier took two quick steps forward and
struck at the headsman while he was still poising himself for a blow at
the victim.  There was a thud, with a crackle like a breaking egg, and
the bar flew into pieces.  The heads-man gave a dreadful cry, and
dropped his axe, clapped his two hands to his head, and running zigzag
across the scaffold, fell over, a dead man, into the courtyard beneath.

Quick as a flash De Catinat had caught up the axe, and faced De
Montespan with the heavy weapon slung over his shoulder and a challenge
in his eyes.

"Now!" said he.

The seigneur had for the instant been too astounded to speak.  Now he
understood at least that these strangers had come between him and his
prey.

"Seize these men!" he shrieked, turning to his followers.

"One moment!" cried De Catinat, with a voice and manner which commanded
attention.  "You see by my coat what I am.  I am the body-servant of the
king.  Who touches me touches him.  Have a care for yourselves.  It is a
dangerous game!"

"On, you cowards!" roared De Montespan.

But the men-at-arms hesitated, for the fear of the king was as a great
shadow which hung over all France.  De Catinat saw their indecision, and
he followed up his advantage.

"This woman," he cried, "is the king's own favourite, and if any harm
come to a lock of her hair, I tell you that there is not a living soul
within this portcullis who will not die a death of torture.  Fools, will
you gasp out your lives upon the rack, or writhe in boiling oil, at the
bidding of this madman?"

"Who are these men, Marceau?" cried the seigneur furiously.

"They are prisoners, your excellency."

"Prisoners!  Whose prisoners?"

"Yours, your excellency."

"Who ordered you to detain them?"

"You did.  The escort brought your signet-ring."

"I never saw the men.  There is devilry in this.  But they shall not
beard me in my own castle, nor stand between me and my own wife.
No, _par dieu!_ they shall not and live! You men, Marceau, Etienne,
Gilbert, Jean, Pierre, all you who have eaten my bread, on to them, I
say!"

He glanced round with furious eyes, but they fell only upon hung heads
and averted faces.  With a hideous curse he flashed out his sword and
rushed at his wife, who knelt half insensible beside the block.
De Catinat sprang between them to protect her; but Marceau, the bearded
seneschal, had already seized his master round the waist.  With the
strength of a maniac, his teeth clenched and the foam churning from the
corners of his lips, De Montespan writhed round in the man's grasp, and
shortening his sword, he thrust it through the brown beard and deep into
the throat behind it.  Marceau fell back with a choking cry, the blood
bubbling from his mouth and his wound; but before his murderer could
disengage his weapon, De Catinat and the American, aided by a dozen of
the retainers, had dragged him down on to the scaffold, and Amos Green
had pinioned him so securely that he could but move his eyes and his
lips, with which he lay glaring and spitting at them.  So savage were
his own followers against him--for Marceau was well loved amongst them--
that, with axe and block so ready, justice might very swiftly have had
her way, had not a long clear bugle-call, rising and falling in a
thousand little twirls and flourishes, clanged out suddenly in the still
morning air.  De Catinat pricked up his ears at the sound of it like a
hound at the huntsman's call.

"Did you hear, Amos?"

"It was a trumpet."

"It was the guards' bugle-call.  You, there, hasten to the gate!
Throw up the portcullis and drop the drawbridge!  Stir yourselves, or
even now you may suffer for your master's sins!  It has been a narrow
escape, Amos!"

"You may say so, friend.  I saw him put out his hand to her hair, even
as you sprang from the window.  Another instant and he would have had
her scalped.  But she is a fair woman, the fairest that ever my eyes
rested upon, and it is not fit that she should kneel here upon these
boards."  He dragged her husband's long black cloak from him, and made a
pillow for the senseless woman with a tenderness and delicacy which came
strangely from a man of his build and bearing.

He was still stooping over her when there came the clang of the falling
bridge, and an instant later the clatter of the hoofs of a troop of
cavalry, who swept with wave of plumes, toss of manes, and jingle of
steel into the courtyard.  At the head was a tall horseman in the full
dress of the guards, with a curling feather in his hat, high buff
gloves, and his sword gleaming in the sunlight.  He cantered forward
towards the scaffold, his keen dark eyes taking in every detail of the
group which awaited him there.  De Catinat's face brightened at the
sight of him, and he was down in an instant beside his stirrup.

"De Brissac!"

"De Catinat!  Now where in the name of wonder did you come from?"

"I have been a prisoner.  Tell me, De Brissac, did you leave the message
in Paris?"

"Certainly I did."

"And the archbishop came?"

"He did."

"And the marriage?"

"Took place as arranged.  That is why this poor woman whom I see yonder
has had to leave the palace."

"I thought as much."

"I trust that no harm has come to her?"

"My friend and I were just in time to save her.  Her husband lies there.
He is a fiend, De Brissac."

"Very likely; but an angel might have grown bitter had he had the same
treatment."

"We have him pinioned here.  He has slain a man, and I have slain
another."

"On my word, you have been busy."

"How did you know that we were here?"

"Nay, that is an unexpected pleasure."

"You did not come for us, then?"

"No; we came for the lady."

"And how did this fellow get hold of her?"

"Her brother was to have taken her in his carriage.  Her husband learned
it, and by a lying message he coaxed her into his own, which was at
another door.  When De Vivonne found that she did not come, and that her
rooms were empty, he made inquiries, and soon learned how she had gone.
De Montespan's arms had been seen on the panel, and so the king sent me
here with my troop as fast as we could gallop."

"Ah, and you would have come too late had a strange chance not brought
us here.  I know not who it was who waylaid us, for this man seemed to
know nothing of the matter.  However, all that will be clearer
afterwards.  What is to be done now?"

"I have my own orders.  Madame is to be sent to Petit Bourg, and any who
are concerned in offering her violence are to be kept until the king's
pleasure is known.  The castle, too, must be held for the king.
But you, De Catinat, you have nothing to do now?"

"Nothing, save that I would like well to ride into Paris to see that all
is right with my uncle and his daughter."

"Ah, that sweet little cousin of thine!  By my soul, I do not wonder
that the folk know you well in the Rue St. Martin.  Well, I have carried
a message for you once, and you shall do as much for me now."

"With all my heart.  And whither?"

"To Versailles.  The king will be on fire to know how we have fared.
You have the best right to tell him, since without you and your friend
yonder it would have been but a sorry tale."

"I will be there in two hours."

"Have you horses?"

"Ours were slain."

"You will find some in the stables here.  Pick the best, since you have
lost your own in the king's service."

The advice was too good to be overlooked.  De Catinat, beckoning to Amos
Green, hurried away with him to the stables, while De Brissac, with a
few short sharp orders, disarmed the retainers, stationed his guardsmen
all over the castle, and arranged for the removal of the lady, and for
the custody of her husband.  An hour later the two friends were riding
swiftly down the country road, inhaling the sweet air, which seemed the
fresher for their late experience of the dank, foul vapours of their
dungeon.  Far behind them a little dark pinnacle jutting over a grove of
trees marked the chateau which they had left, while on the extreme
horizon to the west there came a quick shimmer and sparkle where the
level rays of the early sun gleamed upon the magnificent palace which
was their goal.





CHAPTER XXIII.


THE FALL OF THE CATINATS.

Two days after Madame de Maintenon's marriage to the king there was held
within the humble walls of her little room a meeting which was destined
to cause untold misery to many hundreds of thousands of people, and yet,
in the wisdom of Providence, to be an instrument in carrying French arts
and French ingenuity and French sprightliness among those heavier
Teutonic peoples who have been the stronger and the better ever since
for the leaven which they then received.  For in history great evils
have sometimes arisen from a virtue, and most beneficent results have
often followed hard upon a crime.

The time had come when the Church was to claim her promise from madame,
and her pale cheek and sad eyes showed how vain it had been for her to
try and drown the pleadings of her tender heart by the arguments of the
bigots around her.  She knew the Huguenots of France.  Who could know
them better, seeing that she was herself from their stock, and had been
brought up in their faith?  She knew their patience, their nobility,
their independence, their tenacity.  What chance was there that they
would conform to the king's wish?  A few great nobles might, but the
others would laugh at the galleys, the jail, or even the gallows when
the faith of their fathers was at stake.  If their creed were no longer
tolerated, then, and if they remained true to it, they must either fly
from the country or spend a living death tugging at an oar or working in
a chain-gang upon the roads.  It was a dreadful alternative to present
to a people who were so numerous that they made a small nation in
themselves.  And most dreadful of all, that she who was of their own
blood should cast her voice against them.  And yet her promise had been
given, and now the time had come when it must be redeemed.

The eloquent Bishop Bossuet was there, with Louvois, the minister of
war, and the famous Jesuit, Father la Chaise, each piling argument upon
argument to overcome the reluctance of the king.  Beside them stood
another priest, so thin and so pale that he might have risen from his
bed of death, but with a fierce light burning in his large dark eyes,
and with a terrible resolution in his drawn brows and in the set of his
grim, lanky jaw.  Madame bent over her tapestry and weaved her coloured
silks in silence, while the king leaned upon his hand and listened with
the face of a man who knows that he is driven, and yet can hardly turn
against the goads.  On the low table lay a paper, with pen and ink
beside it.  It was the order for the revocation, and it only needed the
king's signature to make it the law of the land.

"And so, father, you are of opinion that if I stamp out heresy in this
fashion I shall assure my own salvation in the next world?" he asked.

"You will have merited a reward."

"And you think so too, Monsieur Bishop?"
