the other comparatively much shorter, of three to seven days.
_[alpha] Herculis_ came to occupy the middle place between these groups,
its period being about sixty days.

The cause of these strange and regular variations of brightness was
supposed by HERSCHEL to be the rotation of the star bodily on an axis,
by which revolution different parts of its surface, of different
brilliancy, were successively and periodically presented to us. This
explanation it might have been difficult to receive, when the periods of
the known variables were so markedly various in length. His own
discovery came to bridge over the interval, and quite confirmed him in
his belief. He returned to the subject of the revolution of stars about
their axes again and again, and connected it with the revolution of
satellites.

He found that the satellites of _Jupiter_ and one of _Saturn's_
periodically changed in brightness, and by quite simple means showed
that their periods of rotation were at least approximately the same as
their periods of revolution about their primaries. In this case, as in
every other, he considered a discovery in each and every one of its
possible bearings. There are no instances where he has singularly
overlooked the consequences of his observations.


                    _Researches on Double Stars._

The double stars were the subject of HERSCHEL'S earliest and of his
latest papers. In 1782 he published his "_Catalogue of Double Stars_,"
and his last published memoir (1822) was on the same subject.

The question of determining the parallax of stars first brought HERSCHEL
to the discovery of double stars. If two stars, A and B, appear very
close together, and if, in reality, the star B is very many times more
distant from the earth than A, although seen along the same line of
sight, then the revolution of the earth in its orbit will produce
changes in the relative situation of A and B, and, in fact, B will
describe a small orbit about A, due to this revolution. This idea had
been proposed by GALILEO, and measures on this plan had been made by
LONG, with negative results. But HERSCHEL, in reviewing their work,
declares that the stars chosen by LONG were not suitable to the purpose.
It is necessary, among other things, to the success of this method, that
it should be certain that the star B is really very much more distant
than the star A. The only general test of the distance of stars is their
brilliancy, and HERSCHEL decided to use only stars for this research
which had two components very greatly different in brightness. A must be
very bright (and presumably near to us), and B must be very close to A,
and very faint (and thus, presumably, very distant).

It was in the search for such pairs of stars that the _Catalogue of
Double Stars_ (1782) was formed. HERSCHEL'S first idea of a double star
made such pairs as he found, to consist of two stars _accidentally_ near
to each other. A was near to us, and appeared projected in a certain
place on the celestial sphere. B was many times more distant, but, by
chance, was seen along the same line, and made with A an _optical_
double. If the two stars were at the same distance from the earth, if
they made part of the same physical system, if one revolved around the
other, then this method of gaining a knowledge of their distance failed.
Even in his first memoir on the subject, a surmise that this latter
state might occur in some cases, was expressed by HERSCHEL. The notes on
some of the pairs declare that a motion of one of them was suspected.
But this motion might be truly orbital--of one star about the other as
a centre--or it might simply be that one star was moving by its own
_proper_ motion, and leaving the other behind. It was best to wait and
see. The first Catalogue of Double Stars contained two hundred and three
instances of such associations. These were observed from time to time,
and new pairs discovered. The paper of MICHELL, "An Inquiry into the
probable Parallax and Magnitude of the Fixed Stars, from the Quantity of
Light which they Afford, and the Particular Circumstances of their
Situation" (1767), was read and pondered. By 1802 HERSCHEL had become
certain that there existed in the heavens real pairs of stars, both at
the same distance from the earth, which were physically connected with
each other. The arguments of MICHELL have been applied by BESSEL to the
case of one of HERSCHEL'S double stars, in much the same order in which
the argument ran in HERSCHEL'S own mind, as follows:

The star _Castor_ (_[alpha] Geminorum_) is a double star, where A is of
the second, and B of the fourth, magnitude. To the naked eye these two
appear as one star. With a telescope this is seen to be two stars, some
5" apart. In the whole sky there are not above fifty such stars
as the brighter of the two, and about four hundred of the brilliancy of
B. These fifty and four hundred stars are scattered over the vault of
heaven, almost at random. No law has yet been traced by which we can say
that here or here there shall be a bright star like A, or a fainter one
like B. In general the distribution appears to be fortuitous. How then
can we account for one of the four hundred stars like B placed so close
to one of the fifty like A?

The chances are over four hundred thousand to one that the association
in position is not accidental. This argument becomes overwhelming when
the same association is found in many other cases. There were two
hundred and three doubles in the Catalogue of 1782 alone, and many
thousands are now known.

By a process like this, HERSCHEL reached his grand discovery of true
binary systems, where one sun revolves about another. For he saw that
if the two stars are near together in space, they could not stand still
in face of each other, but that they must revolve in true orbits. Here
was the discovery which came to take the place of the detection of the
parallaxes of the fixed stars.

He had failed in one research, but he was led to grand conclusions.
Was the force that these distant pairs of suns obeyed, the force of
gravitation? This he could not settle, but his successors have done so.
It was not till about 1827 that SAVARY, of the Paris Observatory, showed
that one of HERSCHEL'S doubles was subjected to the law of gravitation,
and thus extended the power of this law from our system to the universe
at large. HERSCHEL himself lived to see some of his double stars perform
half a revolution.

Of HERSCHEL'S discoveries, ARAGO thinks this has "le plus d'avenir."
It may well be so. The laws which govern our solar system have been
extended, through his researches, to regions of unknown distance. The
binary stars will afford the largest field for research into the laws
which govern them, and together with the clusters and groups, they will
give a firm basis by which to study the distribution of stars in
general, since here we have the great advantage of knowing, if not the
real distance of the two stars from the earth, at least that this
distance is alike for both.


                  _Researches on Planets and Satellites._

After HERSCHEL'S first publication on the mountains of the Moon (1780),
our satellite appears to have occupied him but little. The observation
of volcanoes (1787) and of a lunar eclipse are his only published ones.
The planets _Mercury_, _Venus_, _Mars_, and _Jupiter_, although they
were often studied, were not the subjects of his more important memoirs.
The planet _Saturn_, on the contrary, seems never to have been lost
sight of from the time of his first view of it in 1772.

The field of discovery always appears to be completely occupied until
the advent of a great man, who, even by his way of putting old and
familiar facts, shows the paths along which discoveries must come, if at
all. This faculty comes from profound reflection on the nature of the
subject itself, from a sort of transmuting power which changes the words
of the books into the things of reality. HERSCHEL'S paper on _Saturn_,
in 1790, is an admirable example of this.

HERSCHEL'S observations on _Saturn_ began in 1772. From 1790 to 1808 he
published six memoirs on the figure, the ring, and the satellites of
this planet. The spheroidal shape of the ball was first discovered by
him, and we owe much of our certain knowledge of the constitution of the
rings to his work. The sixth and seventh satellites, _Mimas_ and
_Enceladus_, were discovered by him in 1789. The periods of rotation of
the ball and of the ring were also fixed. In his conclusions as to the
real figure of the rings, there is a degree of scientific caution which
is truly remarkable, and which to-day seems almost excessive.

In his paper of 1792, HERSCHEL shows that the most distant satellite of
_Saturn_--_Japetus_--turns once on its axis in each revolution about its
primary, just as our moon does. He says of this:

    "I cannot help reflecting with some pleasure on the discovery of an
    analogy which shows that a certain uniform plan is carried on among
    the secondary planets of our solar system; and we may conjecture
    that probably most of the satellites are governed by the same law;
    especially if it be founded on such a construction of their figure
    as makes them more ponderous towards their primary planets."

I believe the last suggestion to have been the first statement of the
possible arrangement of matter in satellites, which was afterwards so
forcibly maintained by HANSEN in his theory of the moon. HANSEN'S
researches show the consequences of such an arrangement, although they
do not prove its existence.

It should be recorded that the explanation which is to-day received of
the belts and bands upon _Jupiter_, is, I believe, first found in
HERSCHEL'S memoir on _Venus_ (1793). His memoir of 1797, on the
changeable brightness of the satellites of _Jupiter_, has already been
referred to. The times of the rotation of the satellites on their axes
was first determined by HERSCHEL from these observations, which also
contain accounts of the curious, and as yet unexplained, phenomena
attending their appearances on the disc of the planet.

HERSCHEL discovered in January, 1787, the two brighter satellites of
_Uranus_, now called _Oberon_ and _Titania_. They are among the faintest
objects in the solar system. A later discussion of all his observations
led him to the belief that there were four more, and he gives his
observations and computations in full. He says that of the existence of
additional satellites he has no doubt. Of these four, three were
exterior to the most distant satellite _Oberon_, the other was
"interior" to _Titania_.

It was not until 1834 that even _Oberon_ and _Titania_ were again
observed (by Sir JOHN HERSCHEL) with a telescope of twenty feet, similar
to that which had discovered them, and not until 1847 was the true state
of this system known, when Mr. LASSELL discovered _Ariel_ and _Umbriel_,
two satellites interior to _Titania_, neither of which was HERSCHEL'S
"interior" satellite. In 1848 and later years Mr. LASSELL, by the aid of
telescopes constructed by himself, fully settled the fact that only
four satellites of this planet existed. In 1874 I examined the
observations of HERSCHEL on his supposed "interior" satellite, thinking
that it might be possible that among the very few glimpses of it which
he recorded, some might have belonged to _Ariel_ and some to _Umbriel_,
and that by combining rare and almost accidental observations of two
satellites which really existed, he had come to announce the existence
of an "interior" satellite which had no existence in fact. Such I
believe to be the case. In 1801, April 17, HERSCHEL describes an
interior satellite in the position angle 189 deg., distant 18" from
the planet. At that instant _Umbriel_, one of Mr. LASSELL'S satellites,
was in the position 191 deg., and distant 21" from _Uranus_, in the
most favorable position for seeing it. The observation of 1794, March
27, _may_ belong to _Ariel_. At the best the investigation is of passing
interest only, and has nothing to do with the question of the discovery
of the satellites. HERSCHEL discovered the two brighter ones, and it
was only sixty years later that they were properly re-observed by Mr.
LASSELL, who has the great honor of having added as many more, and who
first settled the vexed question of satellites _exterior_ to _Oberon_,
and this with a reflecting telescope made by himself, which is
unequalled by any other of its dimensions.


                    _Researches on the Nature of the Sun._

In the introduction to his paper on the _Nature and Construction of the
Sun and Fixed Stars_ (1795), HERSCHEL recounts what was known of the
nature of the sun at that time. NEWTON had shown that it was the centre
of the system; GALILEO and his successors had determined its rotation,
the place of its equator, its real diameter, magnitude, density,
distance, and the force of gravity on its surface. He says:

    "I should not wonder if, considering all this, we were induced to
    think that nothing remained to be added; and yet we are still very
    ignorant in regard to the internal construction of the sun." "The
    spots have been supposed to be solid bodies, the smoke of
    volcanoes, the scum floating on an ocean of fluid matter, clouds,
    opaque masses, and to be many other things." "The sun itself has
    been called a globe of fire, though, perhaps, metaphorically." "It
    is time now to profit by the observations we are in possession of.
    I have availed myself of the labors of preceding astronomers, but
    have been induced thereto by my own actual observation of the solar
    phenomena."

HERSCHEL then refers to the theories advanced by his friend, Prof.
WILSON, of Glasgow, in 1774. WILSON maintained that the spots were
depressions below the sun's atmosphere, vast hollows as it were, at the
bases of which the true surface of the sun could be seen.

The essence of his theory was the existence of two different kinds of
matter in the sun: one solid and non-luminous--the nucleus--the other
gaseous and incandescent--the atmosphere. Vacant places in the
atmosphere, however caused, would show the black surface of the solid
mass below. These were the spots. No explanation could be given of the
_faculae_, bright streaks, which appear on the sun's surface from time
to time; but his theory accounted for the existence of the black
_nuclei_ of the spots, and for the existence of the _penumbrae_ about
these. The penumbra of a spot was formed by the thinner parts of the
atmosphere about the vacancy which surrounded the nucleus.

This theory of WILSON'S was adopted by HERSCHEL as a basis for his own,
and he brought numerous observations to confirm it, in the modified
shape which he gave to it.

According to HERSCHEL, the sun consisted of three essentially different
parts. First, there was a solid nucleus, non-luminous, cool, and even
capable of being inhabited. Second, above this was an atmosphere proper;
and, lastly, outside of this was a layer in which floated the clouds, or
bodies which gave to the solar surface its intense brilliancy:

    "According to my theory, a dark spot in the sun is a place in its
    atmosphere which happens to be free from luminous decompositions"
    above it.

The two atmospheric layers, which will be of varying thickness about a
spot, will account for all the shades of darkness seen in the penumbra.
Ascending currents from the solar surface will elevate certain regions,
and may increase the solar activity near by, and will thus give rise to
faculae, which HERSCHEL shows to be elevated above the general surface.
It will not be necessary to give a further account of this theory. The
data in the possession of the modern theorist is a thousand-fold that to
be derived from HERSCHEL'S observations, and, while the subject of the
internal construction of the sun is to-day unsettled, we know that many
important, even fundamental, portions of his theory are untenable.
A remark of his should be recorded, however, as it has played a great
part in such theories:

    "That the emission of light must waste the sun, is not a difficulty
    that can be opposed to our hypothesis. Many of the operations of
    Nature are carried on in her great laboratory which we cannot
    comprehend. Perhaps the many telescopic comets may restore to the
    sun what is lost by the emission of light."

Arguments in favor of the habitability of both sun and moon are
contained in this paper; but they rest more on a metaphysical than a
scientific basis, and are to-day justly forgotten.


             _Researches on the Motion of the Sun and of
                    the Solar System in Space._

In 1782 HERSCHEL writes, in regard to some of his discoveries of double
stars:

    "These may serve another very important end. I will just mention it,
    though it is foreign to my present purpose. Several stars of the
    first magnitude have been observed or suspected to have a proper
    motion; hence we may surmise that our sun, with all its planets and
    comets, may also have a motion towards some particular point of the
    heavens. . . . If this surmise should have any foundation, it will show
    itself in a series of some years in a kind of systematical parallax,
    or change, due to the motion of the whole solar system."

In 1783 he published his paper _On the Proper Motion of the Solar
System_, which contained the proofs of his surmises of a year before.
That certain of the stars had in fact a _proper_ motion had been well
established by the astronomers of the eighteenth century. After all
allowances had been made for the effects of precession and other
displacements of a star's position which were produced by motions of the
earth, it was found that there were still small outstanding differences
which must be due to the motion of the star itself--its proper motion.
The quantity of this motion was not well known for any star when
HERSCHEL'S researches began. Before they were concluded, however,
MASKELYNE had deduced the proper motions of thirty-six stars--the
fundamental stars, so called--which included in their number _Sirius_,
_Procyon_, _Arcturus_, and generally the brightest stars.
