"No foolin'? What's a watt ... aw, you're pullin' my leg again, Freddy,
talkin' riddles. Where'd ya ever learn to talk that way anyhow!"

"Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Oxford, Georgia Tech, Oklahoma. Picked up a
little here, a little there," Freddy said, reflecting on his
indiscriminate past.

"Aw, cut it out, Freddy! C'mon, read it to me. Betcha can't! Where'd ya
say it was from? Cygnus?"

"Not Cygnus. Ganymede." Freddy cleared his throat and rattled the
newspaper authoritatively. "Washington: White House sources declared
today that intelligent beings on a Jupiter moon have contacted the
United States government. While the contents of the message have been
made secret, the White House emphasized the message was friendly."

Freddy continued, "The signals, which were intercepted yesterday, were
decoded this morning by a team of government scientists and
cryptographers who had been at the task all night. While officials were
noncommittal about the nature of the message contained in the signals,
they declared, 'We are authorized to state that the received message was
friendly and appears to represent a sincere attempt by another race of
intelligent beings to contact the people of Earth. A reply message is
being formulated.' Officials further explained that the possibility of
the signal's being a hoax has been thoroughly investigated and that
there is no doubt whatsoever that the message is a genuine interspatial
communication from intelligent beings on Ganymede. Ganymede is one of
twelve moons of the planet Jupiter, and is larger than the planet
Mercury."

Freddy stopped.

"Ain't there any more?" Willy whined.

"The rest of it is about how far away Ganymede is, and its relative
density and mass and stuff. You wouldn't be interested, Willy."

"Oh. I guess not." Willy helped himself to a peanut. "What's it mean,
Freddy?"

"Nothing much, Willy. Just that there's people somewhere besides here on
Earth, and they called us on the phone."

"Whadd'ya know about that!" Willy gasped. "I didn't even know they was
other people!" He stared with disbelief at the paper.

"I don't suppose anyone knew."

"How d'ya suppose they knew?" Willy asked. "I mean, that we was here, if
we didn't know they was there?"

"I've been wondering about that, Willy. You know that last rocket we
shot?"

"From Cape Carnival you mean?"

"Yeh. It was supposed to go into orbit around Jupiter. I wouldn't be
surprised if maybe it didn't land on Ganymede; the people there could
have examined it, figured out where it came from, and then radioed us on
the same frequency the rocket transmitter used. Paper doesn't say that,
of course, but it's a reasonable hypothesis."

"Freddy, I think you must be a genius or sumpin'."

Freddy smiled and stretched out to sleep again as Willy wandered off,
staring blankly at the newspaper.

       *       *       *       *       *

Carlton Jones, America's Number One personnel specialist, scowled at the
pamphlet on his desk.

SECRET, it said in big red letters across the top and bottom. Special
Instructions for Operation Space Case, said the smaller letters across
the middle of the top sheet.

"Now I ask you, Dwindle," Jones said to his clerkish aide, "where, in
this worldful of specialists, am I going to find someone with a
well-rounded education? Much less one who'll take a chance on a flier
like this?"

"Gosh, Mr. Jones, I just wouldn't know," Dwindle blinked. "Have you
tried looking through your files?"

"Have I tried looking through my files," Jones sighed, looking at the
ceiling light. "Dwindle, my files include every gainfully employed
person in the United States of America and its possessions. Millions of
them. One doesn't just browse through the files looking for things."

"Oh," Dwindle said. "I'm kinda new at this specialty," he explained.

"Yes, Dwindle. However," Jones continued, "one does make IBM runouts to
find things."

"Hey, that's great!" Dwindle said, brightening. "Why don't you try
making an IBM runout?"

"I did, Dwindle. Please let me finish? Our instructions call for finding
a person with a well-rounded education. More specifically, a person who
is capable of intelligently discussing and explaining some two dozen
major 'fields of knowledge.' Plus, of course, at least a passing
acquaintance with some one or two hundred minor fields of knowledge.

"So I set Mathematics into the IBM sorter. Mathematics is one of the
major fields of knowledge, you see."

"Yeh," Dwindle acknowledged.

"So I took the few million mathematicians' cards which I got--good
mathematicians and bad mathematicians, but at least people who can get
their decimals in the right place. I set the IBM sorter for Biology, and
