I got next to him on a tip. He could be close-mouthed as a clam, but his
sister let things slip from time to time, and on this occasion she
passed the word to one of her friends in a grocery store that her
brother had invented a machine that took him off on trips into the past.
It seemed like routine whack stuff, but Blake, who decided what went
into the _Enterprise_ and what didn't, sent me over to Manhattan to get
something for the paper, on the theory that since Vanderkamp was
well-known in Brooklyn, it was good neighborhood copy.

"Vanderkamp was a sharp-eyed little fellow, about five feet or so in
height, and I hit him at a good time. His sister said he had just come
back from a trip--she left me to draw my own conclusions about what kind
of trip--and I found him in a mild fit of temper. He was too upset, in
fact, to be truculent, which was more like his nature.

"Was it true, I wanted to know, that he'd invented a machine that
traveled in time?

"He didn't make any bones about it. 'Certainly,' he said. 'I've been
using it for the last month, and if my sister hadn't decided to blab
nobody would know about it yet. What about it?'

"'You believe it can take you backwards or forwards into the past or the
future?'

"'Do I look crazy? I said so, didn't I?'

"Now, as a matter of fact, he _did_ look crazy. Unlike most of the
candidates for my file of queer people, Vanderkamp actually looked like
a nut. He had a wild eye and a constantly working mouth; he blinked a
good deal and stammered when he was excited. In features he was as Dutch
as his name implied. Well, we talked back and forth for some time, but I
stuck with him and in the end he took me out into a shed adjoining his
house and showed me the contraption he'd built.

"It looked like a top. The first thing I thought of was Brick Bradford,
and before I could catch myself, I'd asked, 'Is that pure Brick
Bradford?'

"He didn't turn a hair. 'Not by a long shot,' he answered. 'H. G. Wells
was there first. I owe it to Wells.'

"'I see,' I said.

"'The hell you do!' he shot back. 'You think I'm as nutty as a
fruit-cake.'

"'The idea of time travel is a little hard to swallow,' I said.

"'Sure it is. But me, I'm doing it. So that's all there is to it.'

"'If you don't mind, Mr. Vanderkamp,' I said, 'I'm a dummy in scientific
matters. I have all I can do to tell a nut from a bolt.'

"'That I believe,' he said.

"'So how do you time travel?'

"'Look,' he said, 'time is a dimension like space. You can go up or down
this ruler,' he snatched a steel ruler and waved it in front of me,
'from any given point. But you move. In the dimension of time, you only
seem to move. You stand still; time moves. Do you get it?'

"I had to confess that I didn't.

"He tried again, with obviously strained patience. Judging by what I
could gather from what he said, it was possible for him--so he
believed--to get into his machine, twirl a few knobs, push a few
buttons, relax for any given period, and end up just where he
liked--back in the past, or ahead in the future. But wherever he ended
up, he was still in this same spot. In other words, whether he was back
in 1492 or ahead in 2092, the place he got out of his time machine was
still his present address.

"It was beyond me, frankly, but I figured that as long as he was a
little touched, it wouldn't do any harm to humor him. I intimated that I
understood and asked him where he'd been last.

"His face fell, his brow clouded, and he said, 'I've been ahead thirty
years.' He shook his head angrily. 'What a time! I'll be seventy, and
you won't even be that, Mr. Harrigan. But we'll be in the middle of the
worst atomic war you ever dreamed about.'

"Now this was before Hiroshima, quite a bit. I didn't know what he was
talking about, but it gives me a queer feeling now and then when I think
of what he said, especially since it's still short of thirty years since
that time.

"'It's no time to be living here,' he went on. 'Direct hits on the
entire area. What would you do?'

"'I'd get out,' I said.

"'That's what I thought,' he said. 'But that kind of warfare carries a
long way. A long way. And I'm a man who loves his comforts, reasonably.
I don't intend to set up housekeeping in equatorial Africa or the
forests of Brazil.'

"'What did you see thirty years from now, Mr. Vanderkamp?' I asked him.

"'Everything blown to hell,' he answered. 'Not a building in all
