language." He set the tape in the hypnophone and switched it on.
"Another useless tongue in my overstuffed head," he murmured, and then
the hypnophone took over.

       *       *       *       *       *

Coming out of transformer drive with at least a drop of fuel left, they
switched to atomics. Fannia rode the beam right across the planet,
locating the slender metal spire of the Galactic Survey cache. The plain
was no longer unoccupied, however. The Cascellans had built a city
around the cache, and the spire dominated the crude wood-and-mud
buildings.

"Hang on," Fannia said, and brought the ship down on the outskirts of
the city, in a field of stubble.

"Now look," Fannia said, unfastening his safety belt. "We're just here
for fuel. No souvenirs, no side-trips, no fraternizing."

Through the port, they could see a cloud of dust from the city. As it
came closer, they made out figures running toward their ship.

"What do you think this unique social structure is?" Donnaught asked,
pensively checking the charge in a needler gun.

"I know not and care less," Fannia said, struggling into space armor.
"Get dressed."

"The air's breathable."

"Look, pachyderm, for all we know, these Cascellans think the proper way
to greet visitors is to chop off their heads and stuff them with green
apples. If Galactic says unique, it probably means unique."

"Galactic said they were friendly."

"That means they haven't got atomic bombs. Come on, get dressed."
Donnaught put down the needler and struggled into an oversize suit of
space armor. Both men strapped on needlers, paralyzers, and a few
grenades.

"I don't think we have anything to worry about," Fannia said, tightening
the last nut on his helmet. "Even if they get rough, they can't crack
space armor. And if they're not rough, we won't have any trouble. Maybe
these gewgaws will help." He picked up a box of trading
articles--mirrors, toys and the like.

Helmeted and armored, Fannia slid out the port and raised one hand to
the Cascellans. The language, hypnotically placed in his mind, leaped to
his lips.

"We come as friends and brothers. Take us to the chief."

The natives clustered around, gaping at the ship and the space armor.
Although they had the same number of eyes, ears and limbs as humans,
they completely missed looking like them.

"If they're friendly," Donnaught asked, climbing out of the port, "why
all the hardware?" The Cascellans were dressed predominantly in a
collection of knives, swords and daggers. Each man had at least five,
and some had eight or nine.

"Maybe Galactic got their signals crossed," Fannia said, as the natives
spread out in an escort. "Or maybe the natives just use the knives for
mumblypeg."

       *       *       *       *       *

The city was typical of a non-mechanical culture. Narrow, packed-dirt
streets twisted between ramshackle huts. A few two-story buildings
threatened to collapse at any minute. A stench filled the air, so strong
that Fannia's filter couldn't quite eradicate it. The Cascellans
bounded ahead of the heavily laden Earthmen, dashing around like a pack
of playful puppies. Their knives glittered and clanked.

The chief's house was the only three-story building in the city. The
tall spire of the cache was right behind it.

"If you come in peace," the chief said when they entered, "you are
welcome." He was a middle-aged Cascellan with at least fifteen knives
strapped to various parts of his person. He squatted cross-legged on a
raised dais.

"We are privileged," Fannia said. He remembered from the hypnotic
language lesson that "chief" on Cascella meant more than it usually did
on Earth. The chief here was a combination of king, high priest, deity
and bravest warrior.

"We have a few simple gifts here," Fannia added, placing the gewgaws at
the king's feet. "Will his majesty accept?"

"No," the king said. "We accept no gifts." Was that the unique social
structure? Fannia wondered. It certainly was not human. "We are a
warrior race. What we want, we take."

Fannia sat cross-legged in front of the dais and exchanged conversation
with the king while Donnaught played with the spurned toys. Trying to
overcome the initial bad impression, Fannia told the chief about the
stars and other worlds, since simple people usually liked fables. He
spoke of the ship, not mentioning yet that it was out of fuel. He spoke
