demand assistance to undo an unimaginable murder....

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy was tense and alert as Von Holtz opened the door of the barnlike
laboratory. He waved the lean young man on ahead.

"After you," he said curtly.

He felt almost a shiver as he entered. But the interior of the
laboratory displayed no gruesome scene. It was a huge, high-ceilinged
room with a concrete floor. A monster dynamo was over in one corner,
coupled to a matter-of-fact four-cylinder crude-oil engine, to which
was also coupled by a clutch an inexplicable windlass-drum with
several hundred feet of chain wrapped around it. There were ammeters
and voltmeters on a control panel, and one of the most delicate of
dynamometers on its own stand, and there were work benches and a
motor-driven lathe and a very complete equipment for the working of
metals. And there was an electric furnace, with splashes of solidified
metal on the floor beside it, and there was a miniature casting-floor,
and at the farther end of the monster room there was a gigantic
solenoid which evidently had once swung upon gymbals and as evidently
now was broken, because it lay toppled askew upon its supports.

The only totally unidentifiable piece of apparatus in the place was
one queer contrivance at one side. It looked partly like a
machine-gun, because of a long brass barrel projecting from it. But
the brass tube came out of a bulging casing of cast aluminum and there
was no opening through which shells could be fed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Von Holz moved to that contrivance, removed a cap from the end of the
brass tube, looked carefully into the opening, and waved stiffly for
Tommy to look in.

Again Tommy was suspicious; watched until Von Holtz was some distance
away. But the instant he put his eye to the end of the brass tube he
forgot all caution, all suspicion, all his doubts. He forgot
everything in his amazement.

There was a lens in the end of the brass tube. It was, in fact,
nothing more or less than a telescope, apparently looking at something
in a closed box. But Tommy was not able to believe that he looked at
an illuminated miniature for even the fraction of a second. He looked
into the telescope, and he was seeing out-of-doors. Through the
aluminum casting that enclosed the end of the tube. Through the thick
brick walls of the laboratory. He was gazing upon a landscape such as
should not--such as could not--exist upon the earth.

There were monstrous, feathery tree-ferns waving languid fronds in a
breeze that came from beyond them. The telescope seemed to be pointing
at a gentle slope, and those tree-ferns cut off a farther view, but
there was an impenetrable tangle of breast-high foliage between the
instrument and that slope, and halfway up the incline there rested a
huge steel globe.

Tommy's eyes fixed themselves upon the globe. It was man-made, of
course. He could see where it had been bolted together. There were
glassed-in windows in its sides, and there was a door.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Tommy looked, that door opened partway, stopped as if someone
within had hesitated, and then opened fully. A man came out. And Tommy
said dazedly:

"My God!"

Because the man was a perfectly commonplace sort of individual,
dressed in a perfectly commonplace fashion, and he carried a perfectly
commonplace briar pipe in his hand. Moreover, Tommy recognized him. He
had seen pictures of him often enough, and he was Professor Edward
Denham, entitled to put practically all the letters of the alphabet
after his name, the author of "Polymerization of the Pseudo-Metallic
Nitrides" and the proper owner of this building and its contents. But
Tommy saw him against a background of tree-ferns such as should have
been extinct upon this earth since the Carboniferous Period, some
millions of years ago.

He was looking hungrily at his briar pipe. Presently he began to hunt
carefully about on the ground. He picked together half a handful of
brownish things which had to be dried leaves. He stuffed them into the
pipe, struck a match, and lighted it. He puffed away gloomily,
surrounded by wholly monstrous vegetation. A butterfly fluttered over
the top of the steel globe. Its wings were fully a yard across. It
flittered lightly to a plant and seemed to wait, and abruptly a vivid
carmine blossom opened wide; wide enough to admit it.

Denham watched curiously enough, smoking the rank and plainly
unsatisfying dried leaves. He turned his head and spoke over his
shoulder. The door opened again. Again Tommy Reames was dazed. Because
a girl came out of the huge steel sphere--and she was a girl of the
most modern and most normal sort. A trim sport frock, slim silken
legs, bobbed hair....

Tommy did not see her face until she turned, smiling, to make some
comment to Denham. Then he saw that she was breath-takingly pretty. He
swore softly under his breath.

       *       *       *       *       *

The butterfly backed clumsily out of the gigantic flower. It flew
lightly away, its many-colored wings brilliant in the sunshine. And
the huge crimson blossom closed slowly.

Denham watched the butterfly go away. His eyes returned to the girl
who was smiling at the flying thing, now out of the field of vision of
the telescope. And there was utter discouragement visible in every
line of Denham's figure. Tommy saw the girl suddenly reach out her
hand and put it on Denham's shoulder. She patted it, speaking in an
evident attempt to encourage him. She smiled, and talked coaxingly,
and presently Denham made a queer, arrested gesture and went heavily
back into the steel globe. She followed him, though she looked wearily
all about before the door closed behind her, and when Denham could not
see her face, her expression was tired and anxious indeed.

Tommy had forgotten Von Holtz, had forgotten the laboratory, had
forgotten absolutely everything. If his original suspicions of Von
Holtz had been justified, he could have been killed half a dozen times
over. He was oblivious to everything but the sight before his eyes.

Now he felt a touch on his shoulder and drew his head away with a
jerk. Von Holtz was looking down at him, very pale, with his
weak-looking eyes anxious.

"They are still all right?" he demanded.

"Yes," said Tommy dazedly. "Surely. Who is that girl?"

"That is the Herr Professor's daughter Evelyn," said Von Holtz
uneasily. "I suggest, Herr Reames, that you swing the dimensoscope
about."

"The--what?" asked Tommy, still dazed by what he had seen.

"The dimensoscope. This." Von Holtz shifted the brass tube. The whole
thing was mounted so that it could be swung in any direction. The
mounting was exactly like that of a normal telescope. Tommy instantly
put his eye to the eyepiece again.

       *       *       *       *       *

He saw more tree-ferns, practically the duplicates of the background
beyond the globe. Nothing moved save small, fugitive creatures among
their fronds. He swung the telescope still farther. The landscape
swept by before his eyes. The tree-fern forest drew back. He saw the
beginning of a vast and noisome morass, over which lay a thick haze as
of a stream raised by the sun. He saw something move in that morass;
something huge and horrible with a long and snake-like neck and the
tiniest of heads at the end of it. But he could not see the thing
clearly.

He swung the telescope yet again. And he looked over miles and miles
of level, haze-blanketed marsh. Here and there were clumps of taller
vegetation. Here and there were steaming, desolate pools. And three or
four times he saw monstrous objects moving about clumsily in the
marsh-land.

But then a glitter at the skyline caught his eye. He tilted the
telescope to see more clearly, and suddenly he caught his breath.
There, far away at the very horizon, was a city. It was tall and
gleaming and very strange. No earthly city ever flung its towers so
splendidly high and soaring. No city ever built by man gave off the
fiery gleam of gold from all its walls and pinnacles. It looked like
an artist's dream, hammered out in precious metal, with its outlines
softened by the haze of distance.

And something was moving in the air near the city. Staring, tense,
again incredulous, Tommy Reames strained his eyes and saw that it was
a machine. An air-craft; a flying-machine of a type wholly unlike
anything ever built upon the planet Earth. It swept steadily and
swiftly toward the city, dwindling as it went. It swooped downward
toward one of the mighty spires of the city of golden gleams, and
vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was with a sense of shock, of almost physical shock, that Tommy
came back to realization of his surroundings to feel Von Holtz's hand
upon his shoulder and to hear the lean young man saying harshly:

"Well, Herr Reames? Are you convinced that I did not lie to you? Are
you convinced that the Herr Professor Denham is in need of help?"

Tommy blinked dazedly as he looked around the laboratory again. Brick
walls, an oil-spattered crude-oil engine in one corner, a concrete
floor and an electric furnace and a casting-box....

"Why--yes...." said Tommy dazedly. "Yes. Of course!" Clarity came to
his brain with a jerk. He did not understand at all, but he believed
what he had seen. Denham and his daughter were somewhere in some other
dimension, yet within range of the extraordinary device he had looked
through. And they were in trouble. So much was evident from their
poses and their manner. "Of course," he repeated. "They're--there,
wherever it is, and they can't get back. They don't seem to be in any
imminent danger...."

Von Holtz licked his lips.

"The Ragged Men have not found them yet," he said in a hushed, harsh
voice. "Before they went in the globe we saw the Ragged Men. We
watched them. If they do find the Herr Professor and his daughter,
they will kill them very slowly, so that they will take days of
screaming agony to die. It is that that I am afraid of, Herr Reames.
The Ragged Men roam the tree-fern forests. If they find the Herr
Professor they will trace each nerve to its root of agony until he
dies. And we will be able only to watch...."


CHAPTER II

"The thing is," said Tommy feverishly, "that we've got to find a way
to get them back. Whether it duplicates Denham's results or not. How
far away are they?"

"A few hundred yards, perhaps," said Von Holtz wearily, "or ten
million miles. It is the same thing. They are in a place where the
fifth dimension is the dominant coordinate."

Tommy was pacing up and down the laboratory. He stopped and looked
through the eyepiece of the extraordinary vision apparatus. He tore
himself away from it again.

"How does this thing work?" he demanded.

Von Holtz began to unscrew two wing-nuts which kept the top of the
aluminum casting in place.

"It is the first piece of apparatus which Professor Denham made," he
said precisely. "I know the theory, but I cannot duplicate it. Every
dimension is at right angles to all other dimensions, of course. The
Herr Professor has a note, here--"

He stopped his unscrewing to run over a heap of papers on the
work-bench--papers over which he seemed to have been poring
desperately at the time of Tommy's arrival. He handed a sheet to
Tommy, who read:

"If a creature who was aware of only two dimensions made two
right-angled objects and so placed them that all the angles formed by
the combination were right angles, he would contrive a figure
represented by the corner of a box; he would discover a third
dimension. Similarly, if a three-dimensioned man took three right
angles and placed them so that all the angles formed were right
angles, he would discover a fourth dimension. This, however, would
probably be the time dimension, and to travel in time would instantly
be fatal. But with four right angles he could discover a fifth
dimension, and with five right angles he could discover a sixth...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy Reames put down the paper impatiently.

"Of course" he said brusquely. "I know all that stuff. But up to the
present time nobody has been able to put together even three right
angles, in practise."

Von Holtz had returned to the unscrewing of the wing-nuts. He lifted
off the cover of the dimensoscope.

"It is the thing the Herr Professor did not confide to me," he said
bitterly. "The secret. The one secret! Look in here."

Tommy looked. The objective-glass at the end of the telescope faced a
mirror, which was inclined to its face at an angle of forty-five
degrees. A beam of light from the objective would be reflected to a
second mirror, twisted in a fashion curiously askew. Then the light
would go to a third mirror....

Tommy looked at that third mirror, and instantly his eyes ached. He
closed them and opened them again. Again they stung horribly. It was
exactly the sort of eye-strain which comes of looking through a lens
which does not focus exactly, or through a strange pair of eyeglasses.
He could see the third mirror, but his eyes hurt the instant they
looked upon it, as if that third mirror were distorted in an
impossible fashion. He was forced to draw them away. He could see,
though, that somehow that third mirror would reflect his imaginary
beam of light into a fourth mirror of which he could see only the
edge. He moved his head--and still saw only the edge of a mirror. He
was sure of what he saw, because he could look into the wavy, bluish
translucency all glass shows upon its edge. He could even see the thin
layer of silver backing. But he could not put himself into a position
in which more than the edge of that mirror was visible.

"Good Lord!" said Tommy Reames feverishly. "That mirror--"

"A mirror at forty-five degrees," said Von Holtz precisely, "reflects
light at a right angle. There are four mirrors, and each bends a ray
of light through a right angle which is also a right angle to all the
others. The result is that the dimensoscope looks into what is a fifth
dimension, into which no man ever looked before. But I cannot move
other mirrors into the positions they have in this instrument. I do
not know how."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy shook his head impatiently, staring at the so-simple, yet
incredible device whose theory had been mathematically proven
numberless times, but never put into practice before.

"Having made this device," said Von Holtz, "the Herr Professor
constructed what he termed a catapult. It was a coil of wire, like the
large machine there. It jerked a steel ball first vertically, then
horizontally, then laterally, then in a fourth-dimensional direction,
and finally projected it violently off in a fifth-dimensional path. He
made small hollow steel balls and sent a butterfly, a small sparrow,
and finally a cat into that other world. The steel balls opened of
themselves and freed those creatures. They seemed to suffer no
distress. Therefore he concluded that it would be safe for him to go,
himself. His daughter refused to permit him to go alone, and he was so
sure of his safety that he allowed her to enter the globe with him.
She did. I worked the catapult which flung the globe in the fifth
dimension, and his device for returning failed to operate. Hence he is
marooned."

"But the big catapult--"

"Can you not see that the big catapult is broken?" demanded Von Holtz
bitterly. "A special metal is required for the missing parts. That, I
know how to make. Yes. I can supply that. But I cannot shape it! I
cannot design the gears which will move it as it should be moved! I
cannot make another dimensoscope. I cannot, Herr Reames, calculate any
method of causing four right angles to be all at right angles to each
other. It is my impossibility! It is for that that I have appealed to
you. You see it has been done. I see that it is done. I can make the
metal which alone can be moved in the necessary direction. But I
cannot calculate any method of moving it in that direction! If you can
do so, Herr Reames, we can perhaps save the Herr Professor Denham. If
you cannot--Gott! The death he will die is horrible to think of!"

"And his daughter," said Tommy grimly. "His daughter, also."

       *       *       *       *       *

He paced up and down the laboratory again. Von Holtz moved to the
work-bench from which he had taken Denham's note. There was a pile of
such memoranda, thumbed over and over. And there were papers in the
angular, precise handwriting which was Von Holtz's own, and
calculations and speculations and the remains of frantic efforts to
work out, somehow, the secret which as one manifestation had placed
one mirror so that it hurt the eyes to look at it, and one other
mirror so that from every angle of a normal existence, one could see
only the edge.

"I have worked, Herr Reames," said Von Holtz drearily. "Gott! How I
have worked! But the Herr Professor kept some things secret, and that
so-essential thing is one of them."

Presently he said tiredly:

"The dimension-traveling globe was built in this laboratory. It rested
here." He pointed. "The Herr Professor was laughing and excited at the
moment of departure. His daughter smiled at me through the window of
the globe. There was an under-carriage with wheels upon it. You cannot
see those wheels through the dimensoscope. They got into the globe and
closed the door. The Herr Professor nodded to me through the glass
window. The dynamo was running at its fullest speed. The laboratory
smelled of hot oil, and of ozone from the sparks. I lifted my hand,
