extensively. Mercurial fumigation. Turpeth mineral. To salivate the patient
as soon as possible. Exsection or a caustic on the scar, even after the
appearance of hydrophobia. Put a tight bandage on the limb above the scar
of the old wound to benumb the pained tendon, however long the wound may
have been healed. Could a hollow catheter of elastic gum, caoutchouc, be
introduced into the oesophagus by the mouth or nostril, and liquid
nourishment be thus conveyed into the stomach? See Desault's Journal, Case
I. where, in an ulcer of the mouth, such a catheter was introduced by the
nostril, and kept in the oesophagus for a month, by which means the patient
was nourished and preserved.

It is recommended by Dr. Bardsley to give oil internally by a similar
method contrived by Mr. John Hunter. He covered a probang with the skin of
a small eel, or the gut of a lamb or cat. It was tied up at one end above
and below the sponge, and a slit made above the upper ligature; to the
other end of the eel-skin or gut was fixed a bladder and pipe. The probang
thus covered was introduced into the stomach, and the liquid food or
medicine was put into the bladder and squeezed down through the eel-skin.
Mem. of Society at Manchester. See Class I. 2. 3. 25.

Dr. Bardsley has endeavoured to prove, that dogs never experience the
hydrophobia, or canine madness, without having been previously bitten or
infected; and secondly, that the disease in this species of animal always
shews itself in five or six weeks; and concludes from hence, that this
dreadful malady might be annihilated by making all the dogs in Great
Britain perform a kind of quarantine, by shutting them up for a certain
number of weeks. Though the disease from the bite of the mad dog is perhaps
more analogous to those from the wounds inflicted by venomous animals than
to those from other contagious matter, yet these observations are well
worthy further attention; which the author promises.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Volition._

GENUS II.

_With increased Actions of the Organs of Sense._

In every species of madness there is a peculiar idea either of desire or
aversion, which is perpetually excited in the mind with all its
connections. In some constitutions this is connected with pleasurable ideas
without the exertion of much muscular action, in others it produces violent
muscular action to gain or avoid the object of it, in others it is attended
with despair and inaction. Mania is the general word for the two former of
these, and melancholia for the latter; but the species of them are as
numerous as the desires and aversions of mankind.

In the present age the pleasurable insanities are most frequently induced
by superstitious hopes of heaven, by sentimental love, and by personal
vanity. The furious insanities by pride, anger, revenge, suspicion. And the
melancholy ones by fear of poverty, fear of death, and fear of hell; with
innumerable others.

  Quicquid agunt homines, votum, timor, ira, voluptas,
  Gaudia, discursus, nostri est farrago libelli.
                                JUVEN. I. 85.

This idea, however, which induces madness or melancholy, is generally
untrue; that is, the object is a mistaken fact. As when a patient is
persuaded he has the itch, or venereal disease, of which he has no symptom,
and becomes mad from the pain this idea occasions. So that the object of
madness is generally a delirious idea, and thence cannot be conquered by
reason; because it continues to be excited by painful sensation, which is a
stronger stimulus than volition. Most frequently pain of body is the cause
of convulsion, which is often however exchanged for madness; and a painful
delirious idea is most frequently the cause of madness originally, but
sometimes of convulsion. Thus I have seen a young lady become convulsed
from a fright, and die in a few days; and a temporary madness frequently
terminates the paroxysms of the epilepsia dolorifica, and an insanity of
greater permanence is frequently induced by the pains or bruises of
parturition.

Where the patient is debilitated a quick pulse sometimes attends insane
people, which is nevertheless generally only a symptom of the debility,
owing to the too great expenditure of sensorial power; or of the paucity of
its production, as in inirritative, or in sensitive inirritated fever. See
III. 1. 1.

But nevertheless where the quick pulse is permanent, it shews the presence
of fever; and as the madness then generally arises from the disagreeable
sensations attending the fever, it is so far a good symptom; because when
the fever is cured, or ceases spontaneously, the insanity most frequently
vanishes at the same time.

The stimulus of so much volition supports insane people under variety of
hardships, and contributes to the cure of diseases from debility, as
sometimes occurs towards the end of fevers. See Sect. XXXIV. 2. 5. And, on
the same account, they bear large doses of medicines to procure any
operation on them; as emetics, and cathartics, which, before they produce
their effect in inverting the motions of the stomach in vomiting, or of the
absorbents of the bowels in purging, must first weaken the natural actions
of those organs, as shewn in Sect. XXXV. 1. 3.

From these considerations it appears, that the indications of cure must
consist in removing the cause of the pain, whether it arises from a
delirious idea, or from a real fact, or from bodily disease; or secondly,
if this cannot be done, by relieving the pain in consequence of such idea
or disease. The first is sometimes effected by presenting frequently in a
day contrary ideas to shew the fallacy, or the too great estimation, of the
painful ideas. 2dly. By change of place, and thus presenting the stimulus
of new objects, as a long journey. 3dly. By producing forgetfulness of the
idea or object, which causes their pain; by removing all things which recal
it to their minds; and avoiding all conversation on similar subjects. For I
suppose no disease of the mind is so perfectly cured by other means as by
forgetfulness.

Secondly, the pain in consequence of the ideas or bodily diseases above
described is to be removed, first, by evacuations, as venesection, emetics,
and cathartics; and then by large doses of opium, or by the vertigo
occasioned by a circulating swing, or by a sea-voyage, which, as they
affect the organs of sense as well as evacuate the stomach, may contribute
to answer both indications of cure.

Where maniacs are outrageous, there can be no doubt but coercion is
necessary; which may be done by means of a straight waistcoat; which
disarms them without hurting them; and by tying a handkerchief round their
ankles to prevent their escape. In others there can be no doubt, but that
confinement retards rather than promotes their cure; which is forwarded by
change of ideas in consequence of change of place and of objects, as by
travelling or sailing.

The circumstances which render confinement necessary, are first, if the
lunatic is liable to injure others, which must be judged of by the outrage
he has already committed. 2dly. If he is likely to injure himself; this
also must be judged of by the despondency of his mind, if such exists.
3dly. If he cannot take care of his affairs. Where none of these
circumstances exist, there should be no confinement. For though the
mistaken idea continues to exist, yet if no actions are produced in
consequence of it, the patient cannot be called insane, he can only be
termed delirious. If every one, who possesses mistaken ideas, or who puts
false estimates on things, was liable to confinement, I know not who of my
readers might not tremble at the sight of a madhouse!

The most convenient distribution of insanities will be into general, as
mania mutabilis, studium inane, and vigilia; and into partial insanities.
These last again may be subdivided into desires and aversions, many of
which are succeeded by pleasurable or painful ideas, by fury or dejection,
according to the degree or violence of their exertions. Hence the analogy
between the insanities of the mind, and the convulsions of the muscles
described in the preceding genus, is curiously exact. The convulsions
without stupor, are either just sufficient to obliterate the pain, which
occasions them; or are succeeded by greater pain, as in the convulsio
dolorifica. So the exertions in the mania mutabilis are either just
sufficient to allay the pain which occasions them, and the patient dwells
comparatively in a quiet state; or those exertions excite painful ideas,
which are succeeded by furious discourses, or outrageous actions. The
studium inane, or reverie, resembles epilepsy, in which there is no
sensibility to the stimuli of external objects. Vigilia, or watchfulness,
may be compared to the general writhing of the body; which is just a
sufficient exertion to relieve the pain which occasions it. Erotomania may
be compared to trismus, or other muscular fixed spasm, without much
subsequent pain; and maeror to cramp of the muscles of the leg, or other
fixed spasm with subsequent pain. All these coincidences contribute to
shew, as explained in Sect. III. 5, that our ideas are motions of the
immediate organs of sense obeying the same laws as our muscular motions.

The violence of action accompanying insanity depends much on the education
of the person; those who have been proudly educated with unrestrained
passions, are liable to greater fury; and those, whose education has been
humble, to greater despondency. Where the delirious idea, above described,
produces pleasurable sensations, as in personal vanity or religious
enthusiasm; it is almost a pity to snatch them from their fool's paradise,
and reduce them again to the common lot of humanity; lest they should
complain of their cure, like the patient described in Horace,

  --------Pol! me occidistis, amici,
  Non servastis, ait, cui sic extorta voluptas,
  Et demptus per vim mentis gratissimus error!

The disposition to insanity, as well as to convulsion, is believed to be
hereditary; and in consequence to be induced in those families from
slighter causes than in others. Convulsions have been shewn to have been
most frequently induced by pains owing to defect of stimulus, as the
shuddering from cold, and not from pains from excess of stimulus, which are
generally succeeded by inflammation. But insanities are on the contrary
generally induced by pains from excess of stimulus, as from the too violent
actions of our ideas, as in common anger, which is an insanity of short
duration; for insanities generally, though not always, arise from pains of
the organs of sense; but convulsions generally, though not always, from
pains of the membranes or glands. And it has been previously explained,
that though the membrane and glands, as the stomach and skin, receive great
pain from want of stimulus; yet that the organs of sense, as the eye and
ear, receive no pain from defect of stimulus.

Hence it follows, that the constitutions most liable to convulsion, are
those which most readily become torpid in some part of the system, that is,
which possess less irritability; and that those most liable to insanity,
are such as have excess of sensibility; and lastly, that these two
circumstances generally exist in the same constitution; as explained in
Sect. XXXI. 2. on Temperaments. These observations explain why epilepsy and
insanity frequently succeed or reciprocate with each other, and why
inirritable habits, as scrophulous ones, are liable to insanity, of which I
have known some instances.

In many cases however there is no appearance of the disposition to epilepsy
or insanity of the parent being transmitted to the progeny. First, where
the insanity has arisen from some violent disappointment, and not from
intemperance in the use of spirituous liquors. Secondly, where the parent
has acquired the insanity or epilepsy by habits of intoxication after the
procreation of his children. Which habits I suppose to be the general cause
of the disposition to insanity in this country. See Class III. 1. 1. 7.

As the disposition to gout, dropsy, epilepsy, and insanity, appears to be
produced by the intemperate use of spirituous potation, and is in all of
them hereditary; it seems probable, that this disposition gradually
increases from generation to generation, in those families which continue
for many generations to be intemperate in this respect; till at length
these diseases are produced; that is, the irritability of the system
gradually is decreased by this powerful stimulus, and the sensibility at
the same time increased, as explained in Sect. XXXI. 1. and 2. This
disposition is communicated to the progeny, and becomes still increased, if
the same stimulus be continued, and so on by a third and fourth generation;
which accounts for the appearance of epilepsy in the children of some
families, where it was never known before to have existed, and could not be
ascribed to their own intemperance. A parity of reasoning shews, that a few
sober generations may gradually in the same manner restore a due degree of
irritability to the family, and decrease the excess of sensibility.

From hence it would appear probable, that scrophula and dropsy are diseases
from inirritability; but that in epilepsy and insanity an excess of
sensibility is added, and the two faulty temperaments are thus conjoined.

SPECIES.

1. _Mania mutabilis._ Mutable madness. Where the patients are liable to
mistake ideas of sensation for those from irritation, that is, imaginations
for realities, if cured of one source of insanity, they are liable in a few
months to find another source in some new mistaken or imaginary idea, and
to act from this new idea. The idea belongs to delirium, when it is an
imaginary or mistaken one; but it is the voluntary actions exerted in
consequence of this mistaken idea, which constitute insanity.

In this disease the patient is liable carefully to conceal the object of
his desire or aversion. But a constant inordinate suspicion of all people,
and a carelessness of cleanliness, and of decency, are generally
concomitants of madness. Their designs cannot be counteracted, till you can
investigate the delirious idea or object of their insanity; but as they are
generally timid, they are therefore less to be dreaded.

Z. Z. called a young girl, one of his maid-servants, into the parlour, and,
with cocked pistols in his hands, ordered her to strip herself naked; he
then inspected her with some attention, and dismissed her untouched. Then
he stripped two of his male servants in the same manner, to the great
terror of the neighbourhood. After he was secured, with much difficulty he
was persuaded to tell me, that he had got the itch, and had examined some
of his servants to find out from whom he had received it; though at the
same time there was not a spot to be seen on his hands, or other parts. The
outrages in consequence of this false idea were in some measure to be
ascribed to the pride occasioned by unrestrained education, affluent
wealth, and dignified family.

Madness is sometimes produced by bodily pain, particularly I believe of a
diseased liver, like convulsion and epilepsy; at other times it is caused
by very painful ideas occasioned by external circumstances, as of grief or
disappointment; but the most frequent cause of insanity arises from the
pain of some imaginary or mistaken idea; which may be termed hallucinatio
maniacalis. This hallucination of one of the senses is often produced in an
instant, and generally becomes gradually weakened in process of time, by
the perpetual stimulus of external objects, or by the successions of other
catenations of ideas, or by the operations of medicines; and when the
maniacal hallucination ceases, or is forgotten, the violent exertions
cease, which were in consequence of it, and the disease is cured.

Mr. ----, a clergyman, about forty years of age, who was rather a weak man,
happened to be drinking wine in jocular company, and by accident swallowed
a part of the seal of a letter, which he had just then received; one of his
companions seeing him alarmed, cried out in humour, "It will seal your
bowels up." He became melancholy from that instant, and in a day or two
refused to swallow any kind of nourishment. On being pressed to give a
reason for this refusal, he answered, he knew nothing would pass through
him. A cathartic was given, which produced a great many evacuations, but he
still persisted, that nothing passed through him; and though he was
frightened into taking a little broth once or twice by threats, yet he soon
ceased intirely to swallow any thing, and died in consequence of this
insane idea.

Miss ----, a sensible and ingenious lady, about thirty, said she had seen
an angel; who told her, that she need not eat, though all others were under
the necessity of supporting their earthly existence by food. After
fruitless persuasions to take food, she starved herself to death.--It was
proposed to send an angel of an higher order to tell her, that now she must
begin to eat and drink again; but it was not put into execution.

Mrs. ----, a lady between forty and fifty years of age, imagined that she
heard a voice say to her one day, as she was at her toilet, "Repent, or you
will be damned." From that moment she became melancholy, and this
hallucination affected her in greater or less degree for about two years;
she then recovered perfectly, and is now a cheerful old woman.

Mrs. ----, a farmer's wife, going up stairs to dress, found the curtains of
her bed drawn, and on undrawing them, she believed that she saw the corpse
of her sister, who was then ill at the distance of twenty miles, and became
from that time insane; and as her sister died about the time, she could not
be produced to counteract the insane hallucination, but she perfectly
recovered in a few months.

Mrs. ----, a most elegant, beautiful, and accomplished lady, about
twenty-two years of age, had been married about two months to an elegant,
polished, and affluent young man, and it was well known to be a love-match
on both sides. She suddenly became melancholy, and yet not to so great a
degree, but that she could command herself to do the honours of her table
with grace and apparent ease. After many days intreaty, she at length told
me, that she thought her marrying her husband had made him unhappy; and
that this idea she could not efface from her mind day or night. I withstood
her being confined, as some had advised, and proposed a sea-voyage to her,
with expectation that the sickness, as well as change of objects, might
remove the insane hallucination, by introducing other energetic ideas; this
was not complied with, but she travelled about England with her friends and
her husband for many months, and at length perfectly recovered, and is now
I am informed in health and spirits.

These cases are related to shew the utility of endeavouring to investigate
the maniacal idea, or hallucination; as it may not only acquaint us with
the probable designs of the patient, from whence may be deduced the
necessity of confinement; but also may some time lead to the most effectual
plan of cure.

I received good information of the truth of the following case, which was
published a few years ago in the newspapers. A young farmer in
Warwickshire, finding his hedges broke, and the sticks carried away during
a frosty season, determined to watch for the thief. He lay many cold hours
under a hay-stack, and at length an old woman, like a witch in a play,
approached, and began to pull up the hedge; he waited till she had tied up
her bottle of sticks, and was carrying them off, that he might convict her
of the theft, and then springing from his concealment, he seized his prey
with violent threats. After some altercation, in which her load was left
upon the ground, she kneeled upon her bottle of sticks, and raising her
arms to heaven beneath the bright moon then at the full, spoke to the
farmer already shivering with cold, "Heaven grant, that thou never mayest
know again the blessing to be warm." He complained of cold all the next
day, and wore an upper coat, and in a few days another, and in a fortnight
took to his bed, always saying nothing made him warm, he covered himself
with very many blankets, and had a sieve over his face, as he lay; and from
this one insane idea he kept his bed above twenty years for fear of the
cold air, till at length he died.

M. M. As mania arises from pain either of our muscles or organs of sense,
the arts of relieving pain must constitute the method of cure. See Sect.
XXXIV. 3. 4. Venesection. Vomits of from five grains to ten of emetic
tartar, repeated every third morning for three or four times; with solution
of gum-ammoniac, and soluble tartar, so as to purge gently every day.
Afterwards warm bath for two or three hours a day. Opium in large doses.
Bark. Steel.

Dr. Binns gave two scruples (40 grains) of solid opium at a dose, and
twenty grains four hours afterwards; which restored the patient. Dr.
Brandreth gave 400 drops of laudanum to a maniac in the greatest possible
furor, and in a few hours he became calm and rational. Med. Comment for
1791, p. 384.

_Prognostic._

The temporary quick pulse attending some maniacal cases is simply a symptom
of debility, and is the consequence of too great exertions; but a permanent
quick pulse shews the presence of fever, and is frequently a salutary sign;
because, if the life of the patient be safe, when the fever ceases, the
insanity generally vanishes along with it, as mentioned above. In this case
the kind of fever must direct the method of curing the insanity; which must
consist of moderate evacuations and diluents, if the pulse be strong; or by
nutrientia, bark, and small doses of opium, if the pulse be weak.

Where the cause is of a temporary nature, as in puerperal insanity, there
is reason to hope, that the disease will cease, when the bruises, or other
painful sensations attending this state, are removed. In these cases the
child should be brought frequently to the mother, and applied to her
breast, if she will suffer it, and this whether she at first attends to it
or not; as by a few trials it frequently excites the storge, or maternal
affection, and removes the insanity, as I have witnessed.

When the madness is occasioned by pain of the teeth, which I believe is no
uncommon case, these must be extracted; and the cure follows the extinction
of the pain. There is however some difficulty in detecting the delinquent
tooth in this case, as in hemicrania, unless by its apparent decay, or by
some previous information of its pain having been complained of; because
the pain of the tooth ceases, as soon as the exertions of insanity
commence.

When a person becomes insane, who has a family of small children to solicit
his attention, the prognostic is very unfavourable; as it shews the
maniacal hallucination to be more powerful than those ideas which generally
interest us the most.

2. _Studium inane._ Reverie consists of violent voluntary exertions of
ideas to relieve pain, with all the trains or tribes connected with them by
sensations or associations. It frequently alternates with epileptic
convulsions; with which it corresponds, in respect to the insensibility of
the mind to the stimuli of external objects, in the same manner as madness
corresponds with common convulsion, in the patient's possessing at the same
time a sensibility of the stimuli of external objects.

Some have been reported to have been involved in reverie so perfectly, as
not to have been disturbed by the discharge of a cannon; and others to have
been insensible to torture, as the martyrs for religious opinions; but
these seem more properly to belong to particular insanities than to
reverie, like nostalgia and erotomania.

Reverie is distinguished from madness as described above; and from
delirium, because the trains of ideas are kept consistent by the power of
volition, as the person reasons and deliberates in it. Somnambulismus is a
part of reverie, the latter consisting in the exertions of the locomotive
muscles, and the former of the exertions of the organs of sense; see Class
III. 1. 1. 9. and Sect. XIX. both which are mixed, or alternate with each
other, for the purpose of relieving pain.

When the patients in reverie exert their volition on their organs of sense,
they can occasionally perceive the stimuli of external objects, as
explained in Sect. XIX. And in this case it resembles sometimes an
hallucination of the senses, as there is a mixture of fact and imagination
in their discourse; but may be thus distinguished: hallucinations of the
lenses are allied to delirium, and are attended generally with quick pulse,
and other symptoms of great debility; but reverie is without fever, and
generally alternates with convulsions; and so much intuitive analogy (see
Sect. XVII. 3. 7.) is retained in its paroxysms, as to preserve a
consistency in the trains of ideas.

Miss G----, whose case is related in Sect. III. 5. 8. said, as I once sat
by her, "My head is fallen off, see it is rolled to that corner of the
room, and the little black dog is nibbling the nose off." On my walking to
the place which she looked at, and returning, and assuring her that her
nose was unhurt, she became pacified, though I was doubtful whether she
attended to me. See Class III. 1. 1. 9. and Class III. 1. 2. 2.

M. M. Large doses of opium given before the expected paroxysm, as in
epilepsia dolorifica, Class III. 1. 1. 8.

The hallucinatio studiosa, or false ideas in reverie, differ from maniacal
hallucinations above described, as no insane exertions succeed, and in the
patients whom I have seen they have always been totally forgotten, when the
paroxysm was over.

Master ----, a school-boy about twelve years old, after he came out of a
convulsion fit and sat up in bed, said to me, "Don't you see my father
standing at the feet of the bed, he is come a long way on foot to see me."
I answered, no: "What colour is his coat!" He replied, "A drab colour."
"And what buttons?" "Metal ones," he answered, and added, "how sadly his
legs are swelled." In a few minutes he said, with apparent surprise, "He is
gone," and returned to his perfect mind. Other cases are related in Sect.
XIX. and XXXIV. 3. and in Class III. 1. 2. 2. with further observations on
this kind of hallucination; which however is not the cause of reverie, but
constitutes a part of it, the cause being generally some uneasy sensation
of the body.

3. _Vigilia._ Watchfulness consists in the unceasing exertion of volition;
which is generally caused by some degree of pain either of mind or of body,
or from defect of the usual quantity of pleasurable sensation; hence if
those, who are accustomed to wine at night, take tea instead, they cannot
sleep. The same happens from want of solid food for supper, to those who
are accustomed to use it; as in these cases there is pain or defect of
pleasure in the stomach.

Sometimes the anxiety about sleeping, that is the desire to sleep, prevents
sleep; which consists in an abolition of desire or will. This may so far be
compared to the impediment of speech described in Sect. XVII. 1. 10. as the
interference of the will prevents the effect desired.

Another source of watchfulness may be from the too great secretion of
sensorial power in the brain, as in phrenzy, and as sometimes happens from
the exhibition of opium, and of wine; if the exhaustion of sensorial power
by the general actions of the system occasioned by the stimulus of these
drugs can be supposed to be less than the increased secretion of it.

M. M. 1. Solid food to supper. Wine. Opium. Warm bath. 2. The patient
should be told that his want of sleep is of no consequence to his health.
3. Venesection by cupping. Abstinence from wine. 4. A blister by
stimulating the skin, and rhubarb by stimulating the bowels, will sometimes
induce sleep. Exercise. An uniform sound, as of a pausing drop of water, or
the murmur of bees. Other means are described in Sect. XVIII. 20.

4. _Erotomania._ Sentimental love. Described in its excess by
romance-writers and poets. As the object of love is beauty, and as our
perception of beauty consists in a recognition by the sense of vision of
those objects, which have before inspired our love, by the pleasure they
have afforded to many of our senses (Sect. XVI. 6); and as brute animals
have less accuracy of their sense of vision than mankind (ib.); we see the
reason why this kind of love is not frequently observable in the brute
creation, except perhaps in some married birds, or in the affection of the
mother to her offspring. Men, who have not had leisure to cultivate their
taste for visible objects, and who have not read the works of poets and
romance-writers, are less liable to sentimental love; and as ladies are
educated rather with an idea of being chosen, than of choosing; there are
many men, and more women, who have not much of this insanity; and are
therefore more easily induced to marry for convenience or interest, or from
the flattery of one sex to the other.

In its fortunate gratification sentimental love is supposed to supply the
purest source of human felicity; and from the suddenness with which many of
those patients, described in Species I. of this genus, were seized with the
maniacal hallucination, there is reason to believe, that the most violent
sentimental love may be acquired in a moment of time, as represented by
Shakespeare in the beginning of his Romeo and Juliet.

Some have endeavoured to make a distinction between beauty and grace, and
have made them as it were rivals for the possession of the human heart; but
grace may be defined beauty in action; for a sleeping beauty cannot be
called graceful in whatever attitude she may recline; the muscles must be
in action to produce a graceful attitude, and the limbs to produce a
graceful motion. But though the object of love is beauty, yet the idea is
nevertheless much enhanced by the imagination of the lover; which appears
from this curious circumstance, that the lady of his passion seldom appears
so beautiful to the lover after a few months separation, as his ideas had
painted her in his absence; and there is, on that account, always a little
disappointment felt for a minute at their next interview from this
hallucination of his ideas.

This passion of love produces reverie in its first state, which exertion
alleviates the pain of it, and by the assistance of hope converts it into
pleasure. Then the lover seeks solitude, lest this agreeable reverie should
be interrupted by external stimuli, as described by Virgil.

  Tantum inter densas, umbrosa cacumina, fagos
  Assidue veniebat, ibi haec incondita solus
  Montibus et sylvis studio jactabat inani.

When the pain of love is so great, as not to be relieved by the exertions
of reverie, as above described; as when it is misplaced on an object, of
which the lover cannot possess himself; it may still be counteracted or
conquered by the stoic philosophy, which strips all things of their
ornaments, and inculcates "nil admirari." Of which lessons may be found in
the meditations of Marcus Antoninus. The maniacal idea is said in some
lovers to have been weakened by the action of other very energetic ideas;
such as have been occasioned by the death of his favourite child, or by the
burning of his house, or by his being shipwrecked. In those cases the
violence of the new idea for a while expends so much sensorial power as to
prevent the exertion of the maniacal one; and new catenations succeed. On
this theory the lover's leap, so celebrated by poets, might effect a cure,
if the patient escaped with life.

The third stage of this disease I suppose is irremediable; when a lover has
previously been much encouraged, and at length meets with neglect or
disdain; the maniacal idea is so painful as not to be for a moment
relievable by the exertions of reverie, but is instantly followed by
furious or melancholy insanity; and suicide, or revenge, have frequently
been the consequence. As was lately exemplified in Mr. Hackman, who shot
Miss Ray in the lobby of the playhouse. So the poet describes the passion
of Dido,

  ----------Moriamur inultae?--
  At moriamur, ait,--sic, sic, juvat ire sub umbras!

The story of Medaea seems to have been contrived by Ovid, who was a good
judge of the subject, to represent the savage madness occasioned by
ill-requited love. Thus the poet,

  Earth has no rage like love to hatred turn'd,
  Nor hell a fury like a woman scorn'd.
                          DRYDEN.

5. _Amor sui._ Vanity consists of an agreeable reverie, and is well
ridiculed in the story of Narcissus, who so long contemplated his own
beautiful image in the water, that he died from neglect of taking
sustenance. I once saw a handsome young man, who had been so much flattered
by his parents, that his vanity rose so near to insanity, that one might
discern by his perpetual attention to himself, and the difficulty with
which he arranged his conversation, that the idea of himself intruded
itself at every comma or pause of his discourse. In this degree vanity must
afford great pleasure to the possessor; and when it exists within moderate
bounds, may contribute much to the happiness of social life.

My friend Mr. ---- once complained to me, that he was much troubled with
bashfulness in company, and believed that it arose from his want of
personal vanity; on this account he determined on a journey to Paris, when
Paris was the center of politeness; he there learnt to dress, to dance, and
to move his hands gracefully in conversation; and returned a most
consummate coxcomb. But after a very few years he relapsed into rusticity
of dress and manners.

M. M. The cure of vanity may be attempted by excess of flattery, which will
at length appear ridiculous, or by its familiarity will cease to be
desired. I remember to have heard a story of a nobleman in the court of
France, when France had a court, who was so disagreeably vain in
conversation, that the king was pleased to direct his cure, which was thus
performed. Two gentlemen were directed always to attend him, one was to
stand behind his chair, and the other at a respectful distance before him;
whenever his lordship began to speak, one of them always pronounced, "Lord
Gallimaufre is going to say the best thing in the world." And, as soon as
his lordship had done speaking, the other attendant pronounced, "Lord
Gallimaufre has spoken the best thing in the world." Till in a few weeks
this noble lord was so disgusted with praise that he ceased to be vain; and
his majesty dismissed his keepers.

6. _Nostalgia._ Maladie de Pais. Calenture. An unconquerable desire of
returning to one's native country, frequent in long voyages, in which the
patients become so insane as to throw themselves into the sea, mistaking it
for green fields or meadows. The Swiss are said to be particularly liable
to this disease, and when taken into foreign service frequently to desert
from this cause, and especially after hearing or singing a particular tune,
which was used in their village dances, in their native country, on which
account the playing or singing this tune was forbid by the punishment of
death. Zwingerus.

  Dear is that shed, to which his soul conforms,
  And dear that hill, which lifts him to the storms.
                                GOLDSMITH.

7. _Spes religiosa._ Superstitious hope. This maniacal hallucination in its
milder state produces, like sentimental love, an agreeable reverie; but
when joined with works of supererogation, it has occasioned many
enormities. In India devotees consign themselves by vows to most painful
and unceasing tortures, such as holding up their hands, till they cannot
retract them; hanging up by hooks put into the thick skin over their
shoulders, sitting upon sharp points, and other self torments. While in our
part of the globe fasting and mortification, as flagellation, has been
believed to please a merciful deity! The serenity, with which many have
suffered cruel martyrdoms, is to be ascribed to this powerful reverie.

Mr. ----, a clergyman, formerly of this neighbourhood, began to bruise and
wound himself for the sake of religious mortification, and passed much time
in prayer, and continued whole nights alone in the church. As he had a wife
and family of small children, I believed the case to be incurable; as
otherwise the affection and employment in his family connections would have
opposed the beginning of this insanity. He was taken to a madhouse without
effect, and after he returned home, continued to beat and bruise himself,
and by this kind of mortification, and by sometimes long fasting, he at
length became emaciated and died. I once told him in conversation, that
"God was a merciful being, and could not delight in cruelty, but that I
supposed he worshipped the devil." He was struck with this idea, and
promised me not to beat himself for three days, and I believe kept his word
for one day. If this idea had been frequently forced on his mind, it might
probably have been of service.

When these works of supererogation have been of a public nature, what
cruelties, murders, massacres, has not this insanity introduced into the
world!--A commander, who had been very active in leading and encouraging
the bloody deeds of St. Bartholomew's day at Paris, on confessing his sins
to a worthy ecclesiastic on his death-bed, was asked, "Have you nothing to
say about St. Bartholomew?" "On that day," he replied, "God Almighty was
obliged to me!"--The fear of hell is another insanity, which will be spoken
of below.

8. _Superbia stemmatis._ Pride of family has frequently formed a maniacal
hallucination, which in its mild state has consisted in agreeable reverie,
but when it has been so painful as to demand homage from others, it has
frequently induced insane exertions. This insanity seems to have existed in
the flourishing state of Rome, as now all over Germany, and is attacked by
Juvenal with great severity, a small part of which I shall here give as a
method of cure. Sat. 8.

  Say, what avails the pedigree, that brings
  Thy boasted line from heroes or from kings;
  Though many a mighty lord, in parchment roll'd,
  Name after name, thy coxcomb hands unfold;
  Though wreathed patriots crowd thy marble halls,
  Or steel-clad warriors frown along the walls;
  While on broad canvas in the gilded frame
  All virtues flourish, and all glories flame?--
  Say,--if ere noon with idiot laugh you lie
  Wallowing in wine, or cog the dubious die,
  Or act unshamed, by each indignant bust,
  The midnight orgies of promiscuous lust!--
    Go, lead mankind to Virtue's holy shrine,
  With morals mend them, and with arts refine,
  Or lift, with golden characters unfurl'd,
  The flag of peace, and still a warring world!--
  --So shall with pious hands immortal Fame
  Wreathe all her laurels round thy honour'd name,
  High o'er thy tomb with chissel bold engrave,
  "THE TRULY NOBLE ARE THE GOOD AND BRAVE."

9. _Ambitio._ Inordinate desire of fame. A carelessness about the opinions
of others is said by Xenophon to be the source of impudence; certainly a
proper regard for what others think of us frequently incites us to virtuous
actions, and deters us from vicious ones; and increases our happiness by
enlarging our sphere of sympathy, and by flattering our vanity.

  Abstract what others feel, what others think,
  All pleasures sicken, and all glories sink.
                          POPE.

When this reverie of ambition excites to conquer nations, or to enslave
them, it has been the source of innumerable wars, and the occasion of a
great devastation of mankind. Caesar is reported to have boasted, that he
had destroyed three millions of his enemies, and one million of his
friends.

The works of Homer are supposed to have done great injury to mankind by
inspiring the love of military glory. Alexander was said to sleep with them
always on his pillow. How like a mad butcher amid a flock of sheep appears
the hero of the Iliad, in the following fine lines of Mr. Pope, which
conclude the twentieth book.

    His fiery coursers, as the chariot rolls,
  Tread down whole ranks, and crush out heroes' souls;
  Dash'd from their hoofs, as o'er the dead they fly,
  Black bloody drops the smoaking chariot dye;--
  The spiky wheels through heaps of carnage tore,
  And thick the groaning axles dropp'd with gore;
  High o'er the scene of death ACHILLES stood,
  All grim with dust, all horrible with blood;
  Yet still insatiate, still with rage on flame,
  Such is the lust of never-dying fame!

The cure must be taken from moral writers. Woolaston says, Caesar conquered
Pompey; that is, a man whose name consisted of the letters C. a. e. s. a.
r. conquered a long time ago a man, whose name consisted of the letters P.
o. m. p. e. y. and that this is all that remains of either of them. Juvenal
also attacks this mode of insanity, Sat. X. 166.

  --I, demens, et saevas curre per alpes,
  Ut pueris placeas, et declamatio fias!

Which is thus translated by Dr. Johnson,

  And left a name, at which the world grew pale,
  To point a moral, or adorn a tale!

10. _Maeror._ Grief. A perpetual voluntary contemplation of all the
circumstances of some great loss, as of a favourite child. In general the
painful ideas gradually decrease in energy, and at length the recollection
becomes more tender and less painful. The letter of Sulpicius to Cicero on
the loss of his daughter is ingenious. The example of David on the loss of
his child is heroic.

A widow lady was left in narrow circumstances with a boy and a girl, two
beautiful and lively children, the one six and the other seven years of
age; as her circumstances allowed her to keep but one maid-servant, these
two children were the sole attention, employment, and consolation of her
life; she fed them, dressed them, slept with them, and taught them herself;
they were both snatched from her by the gangrenous sore throat in one week:
so that she lost at once all that employed her, as well as all that was
dear to her. For the first three or four days after their death, when any
friend visited her, she sat upright, with her eyes wide open, without
shedding tears, and affected to speak of indifferent things. Afterwards she
began to weep much, and for some weeks talked to her friends of nothing
else but her dear children. But did not for many years, even to her dying
hour, get quite over a gloom, which was left upon her countenance.

In violent grief, when tears flow, it is esteemed a good symptom; because
then the actions caused by sensitive association take the place of those
caused by volition; that is, they prevent the voluntary exertions of ideas,
or muscular actions, which constitute insanity.

The sobbing and sighing attendant upon grief are not convulsive movements,
they are occasioned by the sensorial power being so expended on the painful
ideas, and their connections, that the person neglects to breathe for a
time, and then a violent sigh or sob is necessary to carry on the blood,
which oppresses the pulmonary vessels, which is then performed by deep or
quick inspirations, and laborious expirations. Sometimes nevertheless the
breath is probably for a while voluntarily held, as an effort to relieve
pain. The paleness and ill health occasioned by long grief is spoken of in
Class IV. 2. 1. 9.

The melioration of grief by time, and its being at length even attended
with pleasure, depends on our retaining a distinct idea of the lost object,
and forgetting for a time the idea of the loss of it. This pleasure of
grief is beautifully described by Akenside. Pleasures of Imagination, Book
II. l. 680.

    ----------Ask the faithful youth,
  Why the cold urn of her, whom long he loved,
  So often fills his arms; so often draws
  His lonely footsteps at the silent hour
  To pay the mournful tribute of his tears?
  Oh! he will tell thee, that the wealth of worlds
  Should ne'er seduce his bosom to forego
  That sacred hour; when, stealing from the noise
  Of care and envy, sweet remembrance soothes
  With Virtue's kindest looks his aching breast,
  And turns his tears to rapture.

M. M. Consolation is best supplied by the Christian doctrine of a happy
immortality. In the pagan religion the power of dying was the great
consolation in irremediable distress. Seneca says, "no one need be unhappy
unless by his own fault." And the author of Telemachus begins his work by
saying, that Calypso could not console herself for the loss of Ulysses, and
found herself unhappy in being immortal. In the first hours of grief the
methods of consolation used by uncle Toby, in Tristram Shandy, is probably
the best; "he sat down in an arm chair by the bed of his distressed friend,
and said nothing."

11. _Taedium vitae._ The inanity of sublunary things has afforded a theme
to philosophers, moralists, and divines, from the earliest records of
antiquity; "Vanity of vanities!" says the preacher, "all is vanity!" Nor is
there any one, I suppose, who has passed the meridian of life, who has not
at some moments felt the nihility of all things.

Weariness of life in its moderate degree has been esteemed a motive to
action by some philosophers. See Sect. XXXIV. 2. 3. But in those men, who
have run through the usual amusements of life early in respect to their
age; and who have not industry or ability to cultivate those sciences,
which afford a perpetual fund of novelty, and of consequent entertainment,
are liable to become tired of life, as they suppose there is nothing new to
be found in it, that can afford them pleasure; like Alexander, who is said
to have shed tears, because he had not another world to conquer.

Mr. ----, a gentleman about fifty, of polished manners, who in a few months
afterwards destroyed himself, said to me one day, "a ride out in the
morning, and a warm parlour and a pack of cards in the afternoon, is all
that life affords." He was persuaded to have an issue on the top of his
head, as he complained of a dull head-ach, which being unskilfully managed,
destroyed the pericranium to the size of an inch in diameter; during the
time this took in healing, he was indignant about it, and endured life, but
soon afterwards shot himself.

Mr. ----, a gentleman of Gray's Inn, some years ago was prevailed upon by
his friends to dismiss a mistress, by whom he had a child, but who was so
great a termagant and scold, that she was believed to use him very ill, and
even to beat him. He became melancholy in two days from the want of his
usual stimulus to action, and cut his throat on the third so completely,
that he died immediately.

Mr. Anson, the brother to the late Lord Anson, related to me the following
anecdote of the death of Lord Sc----. His Lordship sent to see Mr. Anson on
the Monday preceding his death, and said, "You are the only friend I value
in the world, I determined therefore to acquaint you, that I am tired of
the insipidity of life, and intend to-morrow to leave it." Mr. Anson said,
after much conversation, that he was obliged to leave town till Friday, and
added, "As you profess a friendship for me, do me this last favour, I
entreat you, live till I return." Lord Sc---- believed this to be a pious
artifice to gain time, but nevertheless agreed, if he should return by four
o'clock on that day. Mr. Anson did not return till five, and found, by the
countenances of the domestics, that the deed was done. He went into his
chamber and found the corpse of his friend leaning over the arm of a great
chair, with the pistol on the ground by him, the ball of which had been
discharged into the roof of his mouth, and passed into his brain.

Mr. ---- and Mr. ----, two young men, heirs to considerable fortunes, shot
themselves at the age of four or five and twenty, without their friends
being able to conjecture any cause for those rash actions. One of them I
had long known to express himself with dissatisfaction of the world; at
eighteen years of age he complained, that he could not entertain himself;
he tried to study the law at Cambridge, and afterwards went abroad for a
year or two by my advice; but returned dissatisfied with all things. As he
had had an eruption for some years on a part of his face, which he probably
endeavoured to remove by external applications; I was induced to ascribe
his perpetual ennui to the pain or disagreeable sensation of a diseased
liver. The other young gentleman shot himself in his bed-room, and I was
informed that there was found written on a scrap of paper on his table, "I
am impotent, and therefore not fit to live." From whence there was reason
to conclude, that this was the hallucinatio maniacalis, the delirious idea,
which caused him to destroy himself. The case therefore belongs to mania
mutabilis, and not to taedium vitae.

M. M. Some restraint in exhausting the usual pleasures of the world early
in life. The agreeable cares of a matrimonial life. The cultivation of
science, as of chemistry, natural philosophy, natural history, which
supplies an inexhaustible source of pleasurable novelty, and relieves ennui
by the exertions it occasions.

In many of these cases, whence irksomeness of life has been the ostensible
cause of suicide, there has probably existed a maniacal hallucination, a
painful idea, which the patient has concealed even to his dying hour;
except where the mania has evidently arisen from hereditary or acquired
disease of the membranous or glandular parts of the system.

12. _Pulchritudinis desiderium._ The loss of beauty, either by disease, as
by the small-pox, or by age, as life advances, is sometimes painfully felt
