The Project Gutenberg EBook of Helping Himself, by Horatio Alger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Helping Himself

Author: Horatio Alger

Release Date: June, 2004 [EBook #5833]
Last Updated: August 15, 2012

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HELPING HIMSELF ***




Produced by Carrie Fellman






HELPING HIMSELF

Or

Grant Thornton's Ambition

By Horatio Alger, Jr.

New York



HELPING HIMSELF



CHAPTER I -- THE MINISTER'S SON


"I wish we were not so terribly poor, Grant," said Mrs. Thornton, in
a discouraged tone.

"Is there anything new that makes you say so, mother?" answered the
boy of fifteen, whom she addressed.

"Nothing new, only the same old trouble. Here is a note from Mr.
Tudor, the storekeeper."

"Let me see it, mother."

Grant took a yellow envelope from his mother's hand, and drew out
the inclosure, a half sheet of coarse letter paper, which contained
the following lines:

"July 7, 1857.

REV. JOHN THORNTON:

DEAR SIR: Inclosed you will find a bill for groceries and other
goods furnished to you in the last six months, amounting to
sixty-seven dollars and thirty-four cents ($67.34). It ought to have
been paid before. How you, a minister of the Gospel, can justify
yourself in using goods which you don't pay for, I can't understand.
If I remember rightly, the Bible says: 'Owe no man anything.' As I
suppose you recognize the Bible as an authority, I expect you to pay
up promptly, and oblige,

Yours respectfully, THOMAS TUDOR."

Grant looked vexed and indignant. "I think that is an impudent
letter, mother," he said.

"It is right that the man should have his money, Grant."

"That is true, but he might have asked for it civilly, without
taunting my poor father with his inability to pay. He would pay if
he could."

"Heaven knows he would, Grant," said his mother, sighing.

"I would like to give Mr. Tudor a piece of my mind." "I would rather
pay his bill. No, Grant, though he is neither kind nor considerate,
we must admit that his claim is a just one. If I only knew where to
turn for money!"

"Have you shown the bill to father?" asked Grant.

"No; you know how unpractical your father is. It would only annoy
and make him anxious, and he would not know what to do. Your poor
father has no business faculty."

"He is a very learned man," said Grant, proudly.

"Yes, he graduated very high at college, and is widely respected by
his fellow ministers, but he has no aptitude for business."

"You have, mother. If you had been a man, you would have done better
than he. Without your good management we should have been a good
deal worse off than we are. It is the only thing that has kept our
heads above water."

"I am glad you think so, Grant. I have done the best I could, but no
management will pay bills without money."

It was quite true that the minister's wife was a woman of excellent
practical sense, who had known how to make his small salary go very
far. In this respect she differed widely from her learned husband,
who in matters of business was scarcely more than a child. But, as
she intimated with truth, there was something better than
management, and that was ready cash.

"To support a family on six hundred dollars a year is very hard,
Grant, when there are three children," resumed his mother.

"I can't understand why a man like father can't command a better
salary," said Grant. "There's Rev. Mr. Stentor, in Waverley, gets
fifteen hundred dollars salary, and I am sure he can't compare
with father in ability."

"True, Grant, but your father is modest, and not given to blowing
his own trumpet, while Mr. Stentor, from all I can hear, has a very
high opinion of himself."

"He has a loud voice, and thrashes round in his pulpit, as if he
were a--prophet," said Grant, not quite knowing how to finish his
sentence.

"Your father never was a man to push himself forward. He is very
modest."

"I suppose that is not the only bill that we owe," said Grant.

"No; our unpaid bills must amount to at least two hundred dollars
more," answered his mother.

Grant whistled.

Two hundred and sixty-seven dollars seemed to him an immense sum,
and so it was, to a poor minister with a family of three children
and a salary of only six hundred dollars. Where to obtain so large a
sum neither Grant nor his mother could possibly imagine. Even if
there were anyone to borrow it from, there seemed no chance to pay
back so considerable a sum.

Mother and son looked at each other in perplexity. Finally, Grant
broke the silence.

"Mother," he said, "one thing seems pretty clear. I must go to work.
I am fifteen, well and strong, and I ought to be earning my own
living."

"But your father has set his heart upon your going to college,
Grant."

"And I should like to go, too; but if I did it would be years before
I could be anything but an expense and a burden, and that would make
me unhappy."

"You are almost ready for college, Grant, are you not?"

"Very nearly. I could get ready for the September examination. I
have only to review Homer, and brush up my Latin."

"And your uncle Godfrey is ready to help you through."

"That gives me an idea, mother. It would cost Uncle Godfrey as much
as nine hundred dollars a year over and above all the help I could
get from the college funds, and perhaps from teaching school this
winter. Now, if he would allow me that sum for a single year and let
me go to work, I could pay up all father's debts, and give him a new
start. It would save Uncle Godfrey nine hundred dollars."

"He has set his heart on your going to college. I don't think he
would agree to help you at all if you disappoint him."

"At any rate, I could try the experiment. Something has got to be
done, mother."

"Yes, Grant, there is no doubt of that. Mr. Tudor is evidently in
earnest. If we don't pay him, I think it very likely he will refuse
to let us have anything more on credit. And you know there is no
other grocery store in the village."

"Have you any money to pay him on account, mother?"

"I have eight dollars."

"Let me have that, and go over and see what I can do with him. We
can't get along without groceries. By the way, mother, doesn't the
parish owe father anything?"

"They are about sixty dollars in arrears on the salary."

"And the treasurer is Deacon Gridley?"

"Yes."

"Then I'll tell you what I will do. I'll first go over to the
deacon's and try to collect something. Afterward I will call on Mr.
Tudor."

"It is your father's place to do it, but he has no business faculty,
and could not accomplish anything. Go, then, Grant, but remember one
thing."

"What is that, mother?"

"You have a quick temper, my son. Don't allow yourself to speak
hastily, or disrespectfully, even if you are disappointed. Mr.
Tudor's bill is a just one, and he ought to have his money."

"I'll do the best I can, mother."



CHAPTER II -- GRANT MAKES TWO BUSINESS CALLS



Deacon Gridley had a small farm, and farming was his chief
occupation, but he had a few thousand dollars laid away in stocks
and bonds, and, being a thrifty man, not to say mean, he managed to
save up nearly all the interest, which he added to his original
accumulation. He always coveted financial trusts, and so it came
about that he was parish treasurer. It was often convenient for him
to keep in his hands, for a month at a time, money thus collected
which ought to have been paid over at once to the minister, but the
deacon was a thoroughly selfish man, and cared little how pressed
for money Mr. Thornton might be, as long as he himself derived some
benefit from holding on to the parish funds.

The deacon was mowing the front yard of his house when Grant came up
to his front gate.

"Good-morning, Deacon Gridley," said the minister's son.

"Mornin', Grant," answered the deacon. "How's your folks?"

"Pretty well in health," returned Grant, coming to business at once,
"but rather short of money."

"Ministers most gen'ally are," said Deacon Gridley, dryly.

"I should think they might be, with the small salaries they get,"
said Grant, indignantly.

"Some of 'em do get poorly paid," replied the deacon; "but I call
six hundred dollars a pooty fair income."

"It might be for a single man; but when a minister has a wife and
three children, like my father, it's pretty hard scratching."

"Some folks ain't got faculty," said the deacon, adding,
complacently, "it never cost me nigh on to six hundred dollars a
year to live."

The deacon had the reputation of living very penuriously, and Abram
Fish, who once worked for him and boarded in the family, said he was
half starved there.

"You get your milk and vegetables off the farm," said Grant, who
felt the comparison was not a fair one. "That makes a great deal of
difference."

"It makes some difference," the deacon admitted, "but not as much as
the difference in our expenses. I didn't spend more'n a hundred
dollars cash last year."

This excessive frugality may have been the reason why Mrs. Deacon
Gridley was always so shabbily dressed. The poor woman had not had a
new bonnet for five years, as every lady in the parish well knew.

"Ministers have some expenses that other people don't," persisted
Grant.

"What kind of expenses, I'd like to know?"

"They have to buy books and magazines, and entertain missionaries,
and hire teams to go on exchanges."

"That's something," admitted the deacon. "Maybe it amounts to twenty
or thirty dollars a year."

"More likely a hundred," said Grant.

"That would be awful extravagant sinful waste. If I was a minister,
I'd be more keerful."

"Well, Deacon Gridley, I don't want to argue with you. I came to see
if you hadn't collected some money for father. Mr. Tudor has sent in
his bill, and he wants to be paid."

"How much is it?"

"Sixty-seven dollars and thirty-four cents."

"You don't tell me!" said the deacon, scandalized. "You folks must
be terrible extravagant."

Grant hardly knew whether to be more vexed or amused.

"If wanting to have enough to eat is extravagant," he said, "then we
are."

"You must live on the fat of the land, Grant."

"We haven't any of us got the gout, nor are likely to have,"
answered Grant, provoked. "But let us come back to business. Have
you got any money for father?"

Now it so happened that Deacon Gridley had fifty dollars collected,
but he thought he knew where he could let it out for one per cent,
for a month, and he did not like to lose the opportunity.

"I'm sorry to disappoint you, Grant," he answered, "but folks are
slow about payin' up, and--"

"Haven't you got any money collected?" asked Grant, desperately.

"I'll tell you what I'll do," said the deacon, with a bright idea.
"I've got fifty dollars of my own--say for a month, till I can make
collections."

"That would be very kind," said Grant, feeling that he had done the
deacon an injustice.

"Of course," the deacon resumed, hastily, "I should have to charge
interest. In fact, I was goin' to lend out the money to a neighbor
for a month at one per cent; but I'd just as lieve let your father
have it at that price."

"Isn't that more than legal interest?" asked Grant.

"Well, you see, money is worth good interest nowadays. Ef your
father don't want it, no matter. I can let the other man have it."

Grant rapidly calculated that the interest would only amount to
fifty cents, and money must be had.

"I think father'll agree to your terms," he said. "I'll let you know
this afternoon."

"All right, Grant. It don't make a mite of difference to me, but if
your father wants the money he'll have to speak for it to-day."

"I'll see that the matter is attended to," said Grant, and he went
on his way, pleased with the prospect of obtaining money for their
impoverished household, even on such hard terms.

Next he made his way to Mr. Tudor's store.

It was one of those country variety stores where almost everything
in the way of house supplies can be obtained, from groceries to dry
goods.

Mr. Tudor was a small man, with a parchment skin and insignificant
features. He was in the act of weighing out a quantity of sugar for
a customer when Grant entered.

Grant waited till the shopkeeper was at leisure.

"Did you want to see me, Grant?" said Tudor.

"Yes, Mr. Tudor. You sent over a bill to our house this morning."

"And you've come to pay it. That's right. Money's tight, and I've
got bills to pay in the city."

"I've got a little money for you on account," said Grant, watching
Tudor's face anxiously.

"How much?" asked the storekeeper, his countenance changing.

"Eight dollars."

"Eight dollars!" ejaculated Tudor, indignantly. "Only eight dollars
out of sixty-seven! That's a regular imposition, and I don't care ef
your father is a minister, I stick to my words."

Grant was angry, but he remembered his mother's injunction to
restrain his temper.

"We'd like to pay the whole, Mr. Tudor, if we had the money, and--"

"Do you think I can trust the whole neighborhood, and only get one
dollar in ten of what's due me?" spluttered Mr. Tudor. "Ministers
ought to set a better example."

"Ministers ought to get better pay," said Grant.

"There's plenty don't get as much as your father. When do you expect
to pay the rest, I'd like to know? I s'pose you expect me to go on
trustin', and mebbe six months from now you'll pay me another eight
dollars," said the storekeeper, with withering sarcasm.

"I was going to tell you, if you hadn't interrupted me," said Grant,
"that we should probably have some more money for you to-morrow."

"How much?"
