Boyd whispered: "Malone, what is this? It's no place for a date. And
I--"

"Oh, shut up," Malone told him in a kindly fashion. He turned back to
Dorothea. "I promise he won't," he said. "If I can just talk to your
brother, make him listen to reason, I think we can get him and the
others off. Believe me."

"But you--"

"Please," Malone said. "Believe me."

"Oh, Ken," Dorothea said, raising her head. "Do you ... do you mean it?"

"Sure I mean it," Malone said. "What have I been saying? The Government
needs these kids."

"The Government?"

"It's nothing to worry about," Malone said. "Just go on home now, all
right? I'll call you tomorrow. Late tonight, if I can. All right?"

"No," Dorothea said. "It's not all right. Not at all."

"But--"

Boyd hissed: "Malone!"

Malone ignored him. He had a bigger fight on his hands. "I'm not going
home," Dorothea announced. "I'm going in there with you. After all," she
added, "I can talk more sense into Mike's head than you can."

"Now, look," Malone began.

Dorothea grinned in the darkness. "If you don't take me along," she said
quietly, "I'll scream and warn them."

Malone surrendered at once. He had no doubt at all that Dorothea meant
what she said. And, after all, the girl might really be some use to
them. And there probably wouldn't be much danger.

Of course there wouldn't, he thought. He was going to see to that.

"All right," he said. "Come along. Stick close to us, and don't worry
about the darkness. We can see, even if you can't, so let us guide you.
But be quiet!"

Boyd whispered: "Malone, what's going on?"

"She's coming with us," Malone said, pointing to Dorothea.

Boyd shrugged. "Malone," he said, "who do you think you are? The Pied
Piper of Hamelin?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Malone wheeled and went ahead. Opening the door, he played his I-R
flashlight on the room inside and he, Boyd and Dorothea trailed in,
going through rooms piled with huge boxes. They went up an iron stairway
to the second floor, and so on up to the roof.

They moved across the roof quickly under the cold stars, to the wall of
the warehouse, which was two stories higher than the building they were
on. Of course, there were no windows in the warehouse wall facing them,
except on the top story.

But there was a single, heavy, fireproof emergency exit. It would have
taken power machinery or explosives to open that door from the outside
without a key, although from the inside it would open easily.

Fortunately, Malone had a key.

He took it out and stepped aside. "Give that lock the works," he
whispered to Boyd.

Boyd took a lubricant gun from his pocket and fired three silent shots
of special oil into the lock. Then he shot the hinges, and cracks around
the door.

They waited for a minute or two while the oil, forced in under pressure,
did its work. Then Malone fitted the key carefully into the lock and
turned it, slowly and delicately. The door swung open in silence. Malone
slipped inside, followed by Boyd and Dorothea Fueyo.

Infrared equipment went on again, and the eerie illumination spread over
their surroundings. Malone tapped Boyd on the shoulder and jerked his
thumb toward the back stairs. This was plainly no time for talk.

From the floor above, they could hear the murmur of youthful voices.

They started for the stairway. Fortunately, the building was of the
steel-and-concrete type; there were no wooden floors to creak and groan
beneath their feet.

At the bottom of the stairs, they paused. Voices came down the stairwell
clearly, even words being defined in the silence.

"... And quit harping on whose fault it was." Malone recognized Mike
Fueyo's voice. "That FBI guy was on to us and we had to pull out; you
know that. We always figured we'd have to pull out some day. So why not
now?"

"Yeah," another voice said. "But you didn't have to go and vanish right
under that Fed's nose. You been beating into our heads not to do that
sort of stuff ever since we first found out we could make this vanishing
bit. And then you go and do it in front of a Fed. Smart. Sure, you get a
big bang out of it, but is it smart? I ask you--"

"Yeah?" Mike said. "Listen, Silvo, they never would've got onto us if it
hadn't been for your stupid tricks. Slugging a cop on the dome. Cracking
up a car. You and your bug for speed!"

Malone blinked. Then it hadn't been Miguel Fueyo who'd hit Sergeant
Jukovsky, but Silvo. Malone tried to remember the list of Silent Spooks.
Silvo ... Envoz. That was it.

"You slugged the FBI guy, Mike," Silvo said. "And now you got us all on
the run. That's your fault, Mike. I want to see my old lady."

"I had to slug him," Mike said. "Listen, all Ramon's stuff was in that
Cadillac. What'd have happened if he'd found all that stuff?"

"So what happened anyway?" another voice--Ramon?--said. "He found your
stupid notebook, didn't he? He went yelling to the cops, didn't he?
We're running, ain't we? So what difference?"

"Shut up!" Mike roared.

"You ain't telling me to shut up!" (That was the third voice. Malone
thought; possibly Ramon Otravez.)

"Me either!" Silvo yelled. "You think you're a great big-shot, you think
you're king of the world!"

"Who figured out the Vanish?" Mike screamed. "You'd all be a bunch of
bums if I hadn't showed you that! And you know it! You'd all--"

"Don't give us that!" Silvo said. "We'd have been able to do it, same as
you. Like you said, anybody who's got talent could do it. There were
guys you tried to teach--"

"Sure," said a fourth voice. "Listen, Fueyo, you're so bright--so why
don't you try teaching it to somebody who don't have the talent?"

"Yeah!" said voice number five. "You think you could teach that flashy
sister of yours the Vanish?"

"You shut up about my sister, Phil!" Mike screamed.

"So what's so great about her?"

"She got that book back from the Fed," Mike said. "That's what. It's
enough!"

A voice said, "Any dame with a little--"

"Shut your face before I shut it for you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Malone couldn't tell who was yelling what at who after a minute. They
all seemed unhappy about being on the run from the police, and they were
all tired of being cooped up in a warehouse under Mike's orders. Mike
was the only person they could take it out on--and Mike was under heavy
attack.

Two of the boys, surprisingly, seemed to side with him. The other five
were trying to outshout them. Malone wondered if it would become a
fight, and then realized that these kids could hardly fight each other
when the one who was losing could always fade out.

He leaned over and whispered to Dorothea and Boyd: "Let's sneak up there
while the argument's going on."

"But--" Boyd began.

"Less chance of their noticing us," Malone explained, and started
forward.

They tiptoed up the stairs and got behind a pile of crates in the
shadows, while invectives roared around them. This floor was lit by a
single small bulb hanging from a socket in the ceiling. The windows were
hung with heavy blankets to keep the light from shining out.

The kids didn't notice anything except each other. Malone took a couple
of deep breaths and began to look around.

All things considered, he thought, the kids had fixed the place up
pretty nicely. The unused warehouse had practically been made over into
an apartment. There were chairs, beds, tables and everything else in the
line of furnishings for which the kids could conceivably have any use.
There were even some floor lamps scattered around, but they weren't
plugged in. Malone guessed that a job would have to be done on the
warehouse wiring to get the floor lamps in operation, and the kids just
hadn't got around to it yet.

By now, the boys were practically standing toe to toe, ripping
air-bluing epithets out at each other. Not a single hand was lifted.

Malone stared at them for a second, then turned to Dorothea. "We'll wait
till they calm down a little," he whispered. "Then you go out and talk
to them. Tell them we won't hurt them or lock them up or anything. All
we want to do is talk to them for a while."

"All right," she whispered back.

"They can vanish any time they want to," Malone said, "so there's no
reason for them not to listen to--"

He stopped suddenly, listening. Over the shouting, screaming and cursing
of the kids, he heard motion on the floor below.

Cops?

It couldn't be, he told himself. But when he took out his radiophone,
his hands were shaking a little.

Lynch's voice was already coming over it when Malone thumbed it on.

"... So hang on, Malone! I repeat: we heard the ruckus, and we're coming
in! We're on our way! Hang on, Malone!"

The voice stopped. There was a click.

Malone stared at the handset, fascinated and horrified. He swallowed.
"No, Lynch!" he whispered, afraid to talk any louder for fear the kids
would hear him. "No! Don't come up! Go away! Repeat: go away! Stay away!
Lynch--"

It was no use. The radiophone was dead.

Lynch, apparently thinking Malone's set had been smashed in the fight,
or else that Malone was unconscious, had shut his own receiver off.

There was absolutely nothing that Malone could do.

       *       *       *       *       *

The kids were still yelling at the top of their voices, but the
thundering of heavy, flat feet galumphing up from the lower depths
couldn't be ignored for long. All the boys noticed it at about the same
time. They jerked their heads round to face the stairway. Malone and his
campatriots crouched lower behind the boxes.

Mike Fueyo was the first to speak. "Don't vanish yet!" he snapped.
"Let's see who it is."

The internal dissent among the Silent Spooks disappeared as if it had
never been, as they faced a common foe. Once again, they fell naturally
under Fueyo's leadership. "If it's cops," he said, "we'll give 'em the
Grasshopper Play we worked out. We'll show 'em."

"They can't fool with us," another boy said. "Sure. The Grasshopper
Play."

It was cops, all right. Lieutenant Lynch ran up the stairs waving his
billy in a heroic fashion, followed by a horde of blue-clad officers.

"Where's Malone?" Lynch shouted as he came through the doorway.

"Where's your what?" Mike yelled back, and the fight was on.

Later, Malone thought that he should have been surprised, but he wasn't.
There wasn't any time to be surprised. The kids didn't disappear. They
spread out over the floor of the room easily and lightly, and the cops
charged them in a great blundering mass.

Naturally, the kids winked out one by one--and reformed in the center of
the cops' muddle. Malone saw one cop raise his billy and swing it at
Mike. Mike watched it come down and vanish at the last instant. The
cop's billy descended on the head of another cop, standing just behind
where Mike had been.

The second cop, hit and blinded by the blow on his head, swung back and
hit the first cop. Meanwhile, Mike was somewhere else.

Malone stayed crouched behind the boxes. Dorothea stood up and shouted:
"Mike! Mike! We just want to talk to you!"

Unfortunately, the police were making such a racket that this could not
be heard more than a foot or so from the speaker. Lynch himself charged
into the mass, swinging his billy and his free fist and laying others
out one after the other. Pretty soon the floor was littered with cops.
Lynch was doing yeoman duty, but it was hard to tell what side he was
on.

The vanishing trick Mike had worked out was being used by all of the
kids. Cops were hitting other cops, Lynch was hitting everybody, and the
kids were winking on and off all over the loft. It was a scene of
tremendous noise and carnage.

Malone suddenly sprang to his feet and charged into the melee, shouting
at the top of his lungs and swinging both fists. The first person he saw
was one of the teen-agers, and he charged him with abandon.

[Illustration]

He should, he reflected, have known better. The kid disappeared. Malone
caromed off the stomach of a policeman, received a blow on the shoulder
from his billy, and rebounded into the arms of a surprised police
officer at the edge of the battle.

"Who're you?" the officer gasped.

"Malone," Malone said.

"You on our side?"

"How about you?" Malone said.

"I'm a lieutenant here," the officer said. "In charge of warehouse
precinct. I--"

Malone and the lieutenant stepped nimbly aside as another cop careened
by them, waving his billy helplessly. They looked away as the crash
came. The cop had fallen over a table, and now lay with his legs in the
air, supported by the overturned table, blissfully unconscious.

"We seem," Malone said, "to be in an area of some activity. Let's move."

       *       *       *       *       *

They shifted away a few feet. Malone looked into the foray and saw Boyd
at work roaring and going after the kids. One of them had established a
kind of game with him. He would appear just in front of Boyd, who rushed
at him, arms outstretched. As Boyd had almost reached him, the kid
disappeared and reappeared again just behind Boyd. He tapped the FBI
agent gently on the shoulder; Boyd turned and the process was repeated.

Boyd seemed to be getting winded.

The lieutenant suddenly dashed back into the fray. Malone looked around,
saw Mike Fueyo flickering in and out at the edges, and headed for him.

A cop swung at Mike, missed, and hit Malone on the arm. Malone swore.
The cop backed off, looking in a bewildered fashion for his victim, who
was nowhere in sight. Then Malone caught sight of him, at the other edge
of the fight. He started to work his way around.

He tried to avoid blows, but it wasn't always possible. A reeling cop
caught his lapel and tore it, and Lynch, indefatigable in battle,
managed to graze his chin with a blow meant for one of the disappearing
boys. Other cops were battling each other, going after the kids and
clutching empty air, cursing and screaming unheard orders in the fracas.

Malone ducked past Lynch, rubbed at his chin and looked for Mike. In the
tangle of bodies it was getting hard to see. There was the sound of
breaking ceramics as a floor lamp went over, and then a table followed
it, but Malone avoided both. He looked for Mike Fueyo--

A cop clutched him around the middle, out of nowhere, said: "Sorry,
buddy, who are you?" and dove back into the mass of bodies. Malone
caught his breath and forged onward.

There was Mike, at the edge of the fight, watching everything coolly. No
cop was near him. In the dim light the place looked like a scene from
Hell, a special Hell for policemen. Malone wove through battling hordes
to the edge and came out a few feet away from Mike Fueyo.

Fueyo didn't see him. He was looking at Boyd instead--still stumbling
back and forth as the teen-ager baiting him winked on and off in front
of him and behind him. He was laughing.

Malone came up silently from behind. The trip seemed to take hours. He
was being very quiet, although he was reasonably sure that even if he
yelled he wouldn't be heard. But he didn't want to take the slightest
chance.

He sprang on Mike and attached the handcuffs to his wrist, and to
Mike's wrist, within seconds.

"Ha!" he said involuntarily. "Now come with me!"

He gave his end of the handcuffs a tremendous yank.

He started to stagger, trailing an empty cuff behind him, flailing his
arms wildly. Ahead of him he could see a big cop with an upraised billy.
Malone tried to alter his course, but it was too late. He skidded
helplessly into the cop, who jerked round and swung the billy
automatically. Malone said: "Yi!" as he caught the blow on the
cheekbone, bounced off the cop and kept going.

He careened past a blur of figures, trying to avoid hard surfaces and
other human beings. But there was--

Oh, no, Malone thought.

Lynch.

Lynch was ready to swing. His fist was cocked, and he was heading for
one of the teen-agers with murder in his eye. Malone knew their paths
were going to intersect. "Watch out!" he yelled. "Watch out, it's me!
Stop me! Stop me! Somebody stop me!"

He went completely unheard.

Lynch swung and missed, hitting a cop who had been hiding behind the
teen-ager. The cop went down to join the wounded, and Lynch roared like
a bull and swung around, looking for more enemies.

That was when Malone hit him.

Long afterward, he remembered Lynch's hat sailing through the air, and
landing in the center of a struggling mass of policemen. He remembered
Lynch saying: "So there you are!" and swinging before he looked.

He remembered the blow on the chin.
