
"Do you really mean it?" said Nora.

"Mean what, dear?"

"To talk to me about--about my letter? Do you mean it?"

"Certainly I do, and there is no time like the present. Come--where
shall we go?"

"Where we can be alone; where none of the prim English can interrupt."

"Nora, you must not be so prejudiced. We are not so bad as all that."

"Oh, I know it. I wish you were bad; it's because you are so awfully
good that I hate--I mean, that I cannot get on with any of you."

"Poor child! you are a little wild creature. Come into my study; we
shall be quite safe from interruption there."




CHAPTER XVIII.


A COMPACT.

Mr. Hartrick, still holding Nora's hand, took her down a corridor,
and the next moment they found themselves in a large room, with oak
bookcases and lined with oak throughout; but it was a stately sort of
apartment, and it oppressed the girl as much as the rest of the house
had done.

"I had thought," she murmured inwardly, "that his study would be a
little bare. I cannot think how he can stand such closeness, so much
furniture." She sighed as the thought came to her.

"More and more sighs, my little Irish girl," said Mr. Hartrick. "Why,
what is the matter with you?"

"I cannot breathe; but I'll soon get accustomed to it," said Nora.

"Cannot breathe? Are you subject to asthma, my dear?"

"Oh, no, no; but there is so much furniture, and I am accustomed to so
little."

"All right, Nora; but now you must pull yourself together, and try to be
broad-minded enough to take us English folk as we are. We are not
wild; we are civilized. Our houses are not bare; but I presume you must
consider them comfortable."

"Oh, yes," said Nora; "yes."

"Do you dislike comfortable houses?"

"Hate them!" said Nora.

"My dear, dear child!"

"You would if you were me--wouldn't you, Uncle George?"

"I suppose if I were you I should feel as you do, Nora. I must honestly
say I am very thankful I am not you."

Nora did not reply at all to that.

"Ah, at home now," she said, "the moon is getting up, and it is making
a path of silver on the waves, and it is touching the head of Slieve
Nagorna. The dear old Slieve generally keeps his snow nightcap on, and I
dare say he has it by now. In very hot weather, sometimes, it melts and
disappears; but probably he has got his first coat of snow by now, just
on his very top, you know. Then, when the moon shines on it and then on
the water--why, don't you think, Uncle George, you would rather look at
Slieve Nagorna, with the snow on him and the moon touching his forehead,
and the path of silver on the water, than--than be just comfortable?"

"I don't see why I should not have both," said Mr. Hartrick after
a pause; "the silver path on the water and the grand look of Slieve
Nagorna (I can quite fancy what he is like from your description, Nora),
and also have a house nicely furnished, and good things to eat, and----.
But I see we are at daggers drawn, my dear niece. Now, please tell me
what your letter means."

"Do you really want me to tell you now?"

"Yes."

"Do you know why I have really come here?"

"You said something in your letter; but you did not explain yourself
very clearly."

"I came here," said Nora, "for a short visit. I want to go back again
soon. Time is flying. Already a month of the three months is over. In
two months' time the blow will fall unless--unless you, Uncle George,
avert it."

"The blow, dear? What blow?"

"They are going," said Nora--she held out both her hands--"the place,
the sea, the mountains, the home of our ancestors, they are going
unless--unless you help us, Uncle George."

"My dear Nora, you are very melodramatic; you must try and talk plain
English. Do you mean to say that Castle O'Shanaghgan--"

"Yes, that's it," said Nora; "it is mortgaged. I don't quite know what
mortgaged means, but it is something very bad; and unless father can get
a great deal of money--I don't know how much, but a good deal--before
two months are up, the man to whom Castle O'Shanaghgan is mortgaged will
take possession of it. He is a horrid Englishman; but he will go there,
and he will turn father out, and mother out, and me--oh, Terence doesn't
matter. Terence never was an Irishman--never, never; but he will turn us
out. We will go away. Oh, it does not greatly matter for me, because I
am young; and it does not greatly matter for mother, because she is an
English woman. Oh, yes, Uncle George, she is just like you--she likes
comfort; she likes richly furnished rooms; but she is my mother, and of
course I love her; she will stand it, for she will think perhaps we will
come here to this country. But it is father I am thinking of, the old
lion, the old king, the dear, grand old father. He won't understand,
he'll be so puzzled. No other place will suit him; he won't say a word;
it's not the way of the O'Shanaghgans to grumble. He won't utter a word;
he will go away, and he will--die. His heart will be broken; he will
die."

"Nora, my dear child!"

"It is true," said Nora. Her face was ghastly white; her words came out
in broken sobs. "I see him, Uncle George; every night I see him, with
his bowed head, and his broken heart, and his steps getting slower
and slower. He'll be so puzzled, for he is such a true Irishman, Uncle
George. You don't know what we are--happy one day, miserable the next.
He thinks somehow, somehow, that the money will be paid. But, oh, Uncle
George!--I suppose I have got a little bit of the English in me after
all--I know it will not be paid, that no one will lend it to him, not
any of his old friends and cronies; and he will have to go, and it
will break his heart, unless, unless you help him. I thought of you;
I guessed you must be rich. I see now that you are very rich. Oh, how
rich!--rich enough for carriages, and thick carpets, and easy-chairs,
and tables, and grand dresses, and--and all those sort of things; and
you will help--won't you? Please, do! please, do! You'll be so glad some
day that you helped the old king, and saved him from dying of a broken
heart. Please, help him, Uncle George."

"My dear little girl!" said Mr. Hartrick. He was really affected by
Nora's speech; it was wild; it was unconventional; there was a great
deal of false sentiment about it; but the child herself was true, and
her eyes were beautiful, and she looked graceful, and young, and full
of passion, almost primeval passion, as she stood there before him. Then
she believed in him. If she did not believe in anyone else in the house,
she believed in him. She thought that if she asked him he would help.

"Now, tell me," he said after a pause, "does your mother know what you
have come here for?"

"Mother? Certainly not; I told you in my letter that you must not
breathe a word of it to mother; and father does not know. No one knows
but I--Nora, I myself."

"This has been completely your own idea?"

"Completely."

"You are a brave girl."

"Oh, I don't know about being brave. I had to do something. If you
belonged to Patrick O'Shanaghgan you would do something for him too.
Have you ever seen him, Uncle George?"

"Yes, at the time of my sister's wedding, but not since."

"And then?"

"He was as handsome a fellow as I ever laid eyes on, and Irish through
and through."

"Of course. What else would he be?"

"I have not seen him since. My sister, poor Ellen, she was a beautiful
girl when she was young, Nora."

"She is stately, like a queen," said Nora. "We all admire her very, very
much."

"And love her, my dear?"

"Oh yes, of course I love mother."

"But not as well as your father?"

"You could not, Uncle George, if you knew father."

"Well, I shall not ask any more. You really do want me to help?"

"If you can; if it will not cost you too much money."

"And you mean that your father is absolutely, downright poor?"

"Oh, I suppose so. I don't think that matters a bit. We wouldn't like to
be rich, neither father nor I; but we do want to keep O'Shanaghgan."

"Even without carpets and chairs and tables?" said Mr. Hartrick.

"We don't care about carpets and chairs and tables," said Nora. "We want
to keep O'Shanaghgan, the place where father was born and I was born."

"Well, look here, Nora. I can make you no promises just now; but I
respect you, my dear, and I will certainly do something--what I cannot
possibly tell you, for I must look into this matter for myself. But I
will do this: I will go to O'Shanaghgan this week and see my sister, and
find out from the Squire what really is wrong."

"You will?" said Nora. She thought quickly. Her father would hate it;
but, after all, it was the only chance. Even she had sufficient common
sense to know that Mr. Hartrick could not help unless he went to the old
place.

"Oh, you will do it when you see it," she said, with sudden rapture.
"And you'll take me home with you?"

"Well, I think not, Nora. Now that you are here you must stay. I am fond
of you, my little girl, although I know very little about you; but I do
think that you have very mistaken ideas. I want you to love your English
cousins for your mother's sake, and to love their home for your mother's
sake also; and I should like you to have a few lessons, and to take some
hints from your Aunt Grace, for you are wild, and need training. If I go
to O'Shanaghgan for you, will you stay at The Laurels for me?"

"I will do anything, anything for you, if you save father," said Nora.
She fell on her knees before her uncle could prevent her, took his hand,
and kissed it.

"Then it is a compact," said Mr. Hartrick; "but remember I only promise
to go. I cannot make any promises to help your father until I have seen
him."




CHAPTER XIX.


SHE WILL SOON TAME DOWN.

"I am going to Ireland to-morrow, Grace," said Mr. Hartrick to his wife
that evening.

"To Ireland!" she cried. "What for?"

"I want to see my sister Ellen. I feel that I have neglected her too
long. I shall run over to O'Shanaghgan, and stay there for two or three
nights."

"Why are you doing this, George?" said Mrs. Hartrick very slowly.

Mr. Hartrick was silent for a moment; then he said gravely:

"I have heard bad news from that child."

"From Nora?"

"Yes, from Nora."

"But Terence has never given us bad news."

"Terence is not a patch upon Nora, my dear Grace."

"There I cannot agree with you. I infinitely prefer Terence to Nora,"
was Mrs. Hartrick's calm reply.

"But I thought you admired the child."

"Oh, I admire what the child may become," was the cautious answer. "I
cannot admire a perfectly wild girl, who has no idea of self-discipline
or self-restraint. And remember one thing, George: whatever she says to
you, you must take, to use a vulgarism, with a grain of salt. An
Irish girl cannot help exaggerating. She has doubtless exaggerated the
condition of things."

"I only pray God she has," was Mr. Hartrick's reply.


"If things are even half as bad as she represents them, it is high time
that I should pay my sister a visit."

"Why? What does she say?"

"She has given me a picture of the state of affairs at that house which
wrings my heart, Grace. To think that my beautiful sister Ellen should
be subjected to such discomforts, to such miseries, is intolerable. I
intend to go to O'Shanaghgan to-morrow, and will see how matters are for
myself."

Mrs. Hartrick was again silent for a moment or two; then she said
gravely:

"Doubtless you are right to do this; but I hope, while you are away, you
will do nothing rash."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that, from the little I have seen of Nora, she is a very
impetuous creature, and has tried perhaps to wring a promise from you."

"I will tell you quite simply what she has said, Grace, and then you
will understand. She says her father has mortgaged the Castle evidently
up to the hilt. The mortgagees will foreclose in a couple of months,
unless money can be found to buy them off. Now, it has just occurred
to me that I might buy Castle O'Shanaghgan for ourselves as a sort of
summer residence, put it in order, and allow Patrick O'Shanaghgan to
live there, and my sister. By and by the place can go to Terence, as
we have no son of our own. I have plenty of money. What do you think of
this suggestion, Grace?"

"It might not be a bad one," said Mrs. Hartrick; "but I could not
possibly go to a place of that sort unless it were put into proper
repair."

"It is, I believe, in reality a fine old place, and the grounds are
beautiful," said Mr. Hartrick. "A few thousand pounds would put it into
order, and we could furnish it from Dublin. You could have a great many
guests there, and--"

"But what about the O'Shanaghgans themselves?"

"Well, perhaps they would go somewhere else for the couple of months we
should need to occupy the house during the summer. Anyhow, I feel that I
must do something for Ellen's sake; but I will let you know more after I
have been there."

Mrs. Hartrick asked a few more questions. After a time she said:

"Is Nora to remain here?"

"Yes. I was going to speak to you about that. It is a sad pity that so
pretty a girl should grow up wild. We had better keep her with us for
the next two or three years. She will soon tame down and learn our
English habits; then, with her undeniable Irish charm and great beauty,
she will be able to do something with her life."

"I shall be quite pleased to have her," said Mrs. Hartrick in a cordial
tone. "I like training young girls, and Nora is the sort who would do me
credit if she really were willing to take pains."

"I am sure she will be; she is an honest little soul."

"Oh, I see you are bewitched by her."

"No, not bewitched; but I admire honesty and candor, and the child has
got both."

"Well, well!" said Mrs. Hartrick, "if it is arranged that Nora is to
stay here, I will go and see Miss Flowers at Linda's and Molly's school
to-morrow, and ask if Nora can be admitted as a pupil. There is no use
in losing time, and she may as well start her lessons next week. By all
means, George, go and do your best for the poor things. Of course your
sister ought not to be allowed to be in money difficulties."

"I should think not," said Mr. Hartrick.

The next day Mr. Hartrick bade Nora and his own family good-by,
and started on his expedition to Ireland. Nora was quivering with
impatience. When she had seen the last of him she turned back into the
house, and was there met by her brother Terence.

