In a dirty narrow street, near the harbour of the town, there stood a
small public-house which was frequented chiefly by the sailors who
chanced to be in the port, and by the squalid population in its
immediate neighbourhood.  Although small, the Red Lion Inn was superior
in many respects to its surroundings.  It was larger than the decayed
buildings that propped it; cleaner than the locality that owned it;
brighter and warmer than the homes of the lean crew on whom it fattened.
It was a pretty, light, cheery, snug place of temptation, where men and
women, and even children assembled at nights to waste their hard-earned
cash and ruin their health.  It was a place where the devil reigned, and
where the work of murdering souls was carried on continually,--
nevertheless it was a "jolly" place.  Many good songs were sung there,
as well as bad ones; and many a rough grasp of hearty friendship was
exchanged.  Few people, going into the house for a few minutes, could
have brought themselves to believe that it was such a _very_ broad part
of the road leading to destruction: but the landlord had some hazy
notion on that point.  He sat there day and night, and saw the
destruction going on.  He saw the blear-eyed, fuddled men that came to
drown conscience in his stalls, and the slatternly women who came and
went.  Nevertheless he was a rosy, jocund fellow who appeared to have a
good deal of the milk of human kindness about him, and would have looked
on you with great surprise, if not scorn, had you told him that he had a
hand in murdering souls.  Yes! the Red Lion might have been
appropriately styled the Roaring Lion, for it drove a roaring trade
among the poor in that dirty little street near the harbour.

The gas was flaring with attractive brilliancy in the Red Lion when Will
Osten entered it, and asked if Captain Dall was within.

"No, sir," answered the landlord; "he won't be here for half-an-hour
yet."

"A pot of beer," said Will, entering one of the stalls, and sitting down
opposite a tall, dark-countenanced man, who sat smoking moodily in a
corner.

It was evident that our hero had not gone there to drink, for the beer
remained untouched at his elbow, as he sat with his face buried in his
hands.

The dark man in the corner eyed him steadily through the smoke which
issued from his lips, but Will paid no attention to him.  He was too
deeply absorbed in his own reflections.

"A fine night, stranger," he said at length, in a slightly nasal tone.

Still Will remained absorbed, and it was not until the remark had been
twice repeated that he looked up with a start.

"I beg pardon; did you speak?" he said.  "Well, yes," drawled the dark
man, puffing a long white cloud from his lips, "I did make an
observation regardin' the weather.  It looks fine, don't it?"

"It does," said Will.

"You're waitin' for Captain Dall, ain't you?"

"Why, how did _you_ come to know that?" said Will.

"I didn't come to know it, I guessed it," said the dark man.

At that moment the door opened, and a short thick-set man, in a glazed
hat and pea-jacket, with huge whiskers meeting under his chin, entered.

His eye at once fell upon the dark man, whom he saluted familiarly--"All
ready, Mr Cupples?"

"All ready, sir," replied the other; "it's now more than half-flood; in
three hours we can drop down the river with the first of the ebb, and if
this breeze holds we'll be in blue water before noon to-morrow."

"Hallo, doctor, is that yourself?" said the captain, whose eye had for
some moments rested on Will.

"It is," said the youth, extending his hand, which the other grasped and
shook warmly.

"What! changed your mind--eh?"

"Yes, I'm going with you."

"The governor bein' agreeable?" inquired the captain.

Will shook his head.

"Hope there ain't bin a flare-up?" said the captain earnestly.

"Not exactly," said Will; "but he is displeased, and will not give his
consent, so I have come away without it."

At this the jovial skipper, who was styled captain by courtesy, sat down
and shook his head gravely, while he removed his hat and wiped the
perspiration from his bald forehead.

"It's a bad business to run agin the wishes of one's parents," he said;
"it seldom turns out well; couldn't you come round him nohow?"

"Impossible.  He won't listen to reason."

"Ah, then, it's of no manner of use," said the captain, with a pitying
sigh, "when a man won't listen to reason, what's the consequence? why
he's unreasonable, which means bein' destitoot of that which raises him
above the brutes that perish.  Such bein' the case, give it up for a bad
job, that's my advice.  Come, I'll have a bottle o' ginger-beer, not
bein' given to strong drink, an' we'll talk over this matter."

Accordingly the beer was ordered, and the three sat there talking for a
couple of hours in reference to a long, long voyage to the southern
seas.

After that they rose, and, leaving the Red Lion, went down to the pier,
where a boat was in waiting.  It conveyed them to a large ship, whose
sails were hanging in the loose condition peculiar to a vessel ready to
set sail.  An hour after that the anchor was raised, and wind and tide
carried the ship gently down to the sea.  There seemed to Will something
very solemn and mysterious in the quiet way in which, during these still
and dark hours of the night, the great ship was slowly moved towards her
ocean cradle.  At length she floated on the sea, and, soon after, the
moon arose on the distant horizon, streaming across the rippling surface
as if to kiss and welcome an old friend.  The wind increased; the ship
became submissive to the breeze, obedient to the helm, and ere long
moved on the waters like "a thing of life," leaving Old England far
behind her.

It was then that young Osten, leaning over the taffrail and looking
wistfully back at the point where he had seen the last glimpse of the
chalk cliffs, began to experience the first feelings of regret.  He
tried to quiet his conscience by recalling the harsh and unjustifiable
conduct of his father, but conscience would not be quieted thus, and
faithful memory reminded him of the many acts of kindness he had
experienced at his father's hands, while she pointed to his gentle
mother, and bade him reflect what a tremendous blow this sudden
departure would be to her.

Starting up and shaking off such thoughts, sternly he went below and
threw himself into his narrow cot, where conscience assailed him still
more powerfully and vividly in dreams.  Thus did Wandering Will leave
his native land.

Commenting on his sudden departure, two days afterwards, Maryann said,
in strict confidence, to her bosom friend "Jemimar," that she "know'd it
would 'appen--or somethink simular, for, even w'en a hinfant, he had
refused to larf at her most smudgin' blandishments; and that she knew
somethink strange would come of it, though she would willingly have
given her last shilling to have prevented it, but nothink was of any use
tryin' of w'en one couldn't do it, as her 'usband, as was in the
mutton-pie line, said to the doctor the night afore he died,--and that
her 'art was quite broken about it, so it was."

Whereupon Jemima finished to the dregs her last cup of tea, and burst
into a flood of tears.



CHAPTER THREE.

TELLS OF THE SEA, AND SOME OF THE MYSTERIES CONNECTED THEREWITH.

For many days and nights the good ship _Foam_ sailed the wide ocean
without encountering anything more than the ordinary vicissitudes and
experiences of sea-life.  Dolphins were seen and captured, sharks were
fished for and caught, stiff breezes and calms succeeded each other,
constellations in the far north began to disappear and new
constellations arose in the southern skies.  In fact, during many weeks
the voyage was prosperous, and young Will Osten began to experience
those peculiar feelings with which all travellers are more or less
acquainted--he felt that the ship was "home"; that his cabin with its
furniture, which had appeared so small and confined at first, was quite
a large and roomy place; that all the things about him were positive
realities, and that the home of his childhood was a shadow of the past--
a sort of dream.

During all this time the young doctor led a busy life.  He was one of
those active, intelligent, inquiring spirits which cannot rest.  To
acquire information was with him not a duty, but a pleasure.  Before he
had been many days at sea he knew the name and use of every rope, sail,
block, tackle, and spar in the ship, and made himself quite a favourite
with the men by the earnestness with which he questioned them in regard
to nautical matters and their own personal experiences.  George Goff,
the sail-maker, said he "was a fust-rate feller;" and Larry O'Hale, the
cook, declared, "he was a trump intirely, an' ought to have been born an
Irishman."  Moreover, the affections of long Mr Cupples (as the first
mate was styled by the men) were quite won by the way in which he
laboured to understand the use of the sextant, and other matters
connected with the mysteries of navigation; and stout Jonathan Dall, the
captain, was overjoyed when he discovered that he was a good player on
the violin, of which instrument he was passionately fond.  In short,
Will Osten became a general favourite on board the _Foam_, and the
regard of all, from the cabin-boy to the captain, deepened into respect
when they found that, although only an advanced student and, "not quite
a doctor," he treated their few ailments with success, and acted his
part with much self-possession, gentleness, and precision.

Larry O'Hale was particularly eloquent in his praises of him ever after
the drawing of a tooth which had been the source of much annoyance to
the worthy cook.  "Why, messmates," he was wont to say, "it bait
everything the way he tuk it out.  `Open yer mouth,' says he, an' sure I
opened it, an' before I cud wink, off wint my head--so I thought--but
faix it wor only my tuth--a real grinder wi' three fangs no less--och!
he's a cliver lad intirely."

But Will did not confine his inquiries to the objects contained within
his wooden home.  The various phases and phenomena of the weather, the
aspects of the sky, and the wonders of the deep, claimed his earnest
attention.  To know the reason of everything was with him a species of
mania, and in pursuit of this knowledge he stuck at nothing.  "Never
venture never win," became with him as favourite a motto as it had been
with his father, and he acted on it more vigorously than his father had
ever done.

One calm evening, as he was leaning over the side of the ship near the
bow, gazing contemplatively down into the unfathomable sea, he overheard
a conversation between the cook and one of the sailors named Muggins.
They were smoking their pipes seated on the heel of the bowsprit.

"Larry," said Muggins, "I think we have got into the doldrums."

"Ye're out there, boy," said Larry, "for I heerd the capting say we wos
past 'em a long way."

The men relapsed into silence for a time.

Then Muggins removed his pipe and said--

"Wot ever caused the doldrums?"

"That's more nor I can tell," said Larry; "all I know about them is,
that it's aisy to git into them, but uncommon hard to git out again.  If
my ould grandmother was here, she'd be able to tell us, I make no doubt,
but she's in Erin, poor thing, 'mong the pigs and the taties."

"Wot could _she_ tell about the doldrums?" said Muggins, with a look of
contempt.

"More nor ye think, boy; sure there isn't nothin' in the univarse but
she can spaik about, just like a book, an' though she niver was in the
doldrums as far as I knows, she's been in the dumps often enough; maybe
it's cousins they are.  Anyhow she's not here, an' so we must be contint
with spekilation."

"What's that you say, Larry?" inquired the captain, who walked towards
the bow at the moment.

The cook explained his difficulty.

"Why, there's no mystery about the doldrums," said Captain Dall.  "I've
read a book by an officer in the United States navy which explains it
all, and the Gulf Stream, and the currents, an' everything.  Come, I'll
spin you a yarn about it."

Saying this, the captain filled and lighted his pipe, and seating
himself on the shank of the anchor, said--

"You know the cause of ocean currents, I dare say?"

"Niver a taste," said Larry.  "It's meself is as innocent about 'em as
the babe unborn; an' as for Muggins there, _he_ don't know more about
'em than my ould shoes--"

"Or your old grandmother," growled Muggins.

"Don't be irriverent, ye spalpeen," said Larry.

"I ax her reverence's pardon, but I didn't know she wos a priest," said
Muggins.--"Go on, Cap'n Dall."

"Well," continued the captain, "you know, at all events, that there's
salt in the sea, and I may tell you that there is lime also, besides
other things.  At the equator, the heat bein' great, water is evaporated
faster than anywhere else, so that there the sea is salter and has more
lime in it than elsewhere.  Besides that it is hotter.  Of course, that
being the case, its weight is different from the waters of the cold
polar seas, so it is bound to move away an' get itself freshened and
cooled.  In like manner, the cold water round the poles feels obliged to
flow to the equator to get itself salted and warmed.  This state of
things, as a natural consequence, causes commotion in the sea.  The
commotion is moreover increased by the millions of shell-fish that dwell
there.  These creatures, not satisfied with their natural skins, must
needs have shells on their backs, and they extract lime from the
sea-water for the purpose of makin' these shells.  This process is
called secretin' the lime; coral insects do the same, and, as many of
the islands of the south seas are made by coral insects, you may guess
that a considerable lot of lime is made away with.  The commotion or
disturbance thus created produces two great currents--from the equator
to the poles and from the poles to the equator.  But there are many
little odds and ends about the world that affect and modify these
currents, such as depth, and local heat and cold, and rivers and
icebergs, but the chief modifiers are continents.  The currents flowin'
north from the Indian Ocean and southern seas rush up between Africa and
America.  The space bein' narrow--comparatively--they form one strong
current, on doublin' the Cape of Good Hope, which flies right across to
the Gulf of Mexico.  Here it is turned aside and flows in a
nor'-easterly direction, across the Atlantic towards England and Norway,
under the name of the Gulf Stream, but the Gulf of Mexico has no more to
do with it than the man in the moon, 'xcept in the way of turnin' it out
of its nat'ral course.  This Gulf Stream is a _river of warm water_
flowing through the cold waters of the Atlantic; it keeps separate, and
wherever it flows the climate is softened.  It embraces Ireland, and
makes the climate there so mild that there is, as you know, scarcely any
frost all the year round--"

"Blissin's on it," broke in Larry, "sure that accounts for the purty
green face of Erin, which bates all other lands in the world.  Good luck
to the Gulf Stream, say I!"

"You're right, Larry, and England, Scotland, and Norway have reason to
bless it too, for the same latitudes with these places in America have a
rigorous winter extendin' over more than half the year.  But what I was
comin' to was this--there are, as you know, eddies and stagnant places
in ornary rivers, where sticks, leaves, and other odds and ends collect
and remain fixed.  So, in this great ocean river, there are eddies where
seaweed collects and stagnates, and where the air above also stagnates
(for the air currents are very much like those of the sea).  These
eddies or stagnant parts are called sargasso seas.  There are several of
them, of various sizes, all over the ocean, but there is one big one in
the Atlantic, which is known by the name of the `Doldrums.'  It has
bothered navigators in all ages.  Columbus got into it on his way to
America, and hundreds of ships have been becalmed for weeks in it since
the days of that great discoverer.  It is not very long since it was
found out that, by keeping well out of their way, and sailing round 'em,
navigators could escape the Doldrums altogether."

