inside, and watch. And _afterward_, go quickly to join the Princess and
your Elza. You understand?"

She clung to me, with her slim, white body pressed against my cloak. To
anyone watching us, she would have seemed merely making love. Her eyes
were provocative; her lips mocking me. But she was whispering, _"Drop to
the floor when Tarrano dances with the Red Woman--drop or the rays might
strike you!"_

Another girl was plucking at me from behind. Alda shouted: "You shall
not have him!" and cast me off. But I heard her whisper, _"Come outside
for a moment--then come back!"_--and then, aloud, she cried to the other
girl, "You shall not have him! He is coming to watch me dive and swim! I
am more beautiful than you--you could not win him from me!"

I let them drag me out into the grove by the scented pool.




CHAPTER XXII

_Revolution!_


I realize that I am, by nature, not overly observant; and in those
moments, when I stood out there beside the pool, I think I came most
forcibly to appreciate how little I habitually observe that which is not
readily apparent. An incident now occurred to bring it home to me; and,
quite suddenly, a score of things which I had seen during the past two
hours at the festival were made plain.

Music, feasting, merry-making, love! In the midst of it all, an
undercurrent of events was flowing. Unseen events--but I had partly seen
some of them, and now, at last, I began to understand.

In the main hall of the pavilion, midway to its roof, a line of mirrors
was placed along the wall facing Tarrano. A hundred small mirrors, side
by side. On them were moving images of what was taking place in
different parts of the festival--so that Tarrano and the others might
see the merry-making, not only in the pavilion, but elsewhere, as well.
It was interesting to watch the mirrors--and sometimes amusing. The
scene of a gay battle of boats in a nearby lagoon; the diving girls in
the pools; a view from the sky above of the whole scene; another,
looking upward at the color bombs bursting overhead; a bridge on which a
dozen girls were besieged by as many men, who sought to climb upward
from their boats underneath, flowers for missiles, and the alcholite
fumes which held off the attackers, or, perchance, caused a girl to fall
into the water, to be instantly captured.

Other mirrors, eavesdropping upon the secluded islands, making public,
for the amusement of the spectators in the pavilion, the furtive
love-making of couples who fancied themselves alone.

All this I had seen. And now I remembered that, occasionally, a mirror
had gone dark, and then turned suddenly to a scene somewhere else. I
understood now. Quiet incidents against Tarrano were in progress. The
mirrors were being tampered with, that none of these events should be
shown.

There were, scattered throughout the festival, fully a hundred men of
Tarrano's guard. Some of them I knew by their uniforms; others were
concealed by red masks and robes like myself. When first we entered the
pavilion, some twenty or thirty of them had been there with us. But many
of them did not stay; and now I remembered that, one by one, I had seen
them slip away, lured by the slim, white shapes of girls who came from
the pool to beguile them.

I realized now that these girls of the scented pool were very possibly
all working for Maida. Most daring of all at the festival, these fifty
girls who now disported themselves in the water at my feet. All
beautiful, none beyond the first flush of earliest maturity. Slight,
grey-white nymphs, laughing as they discarded their hampering veils,
tossing their white hair as they plunged into the shimmering pool.
Seemingly the most seductive, most abandoned of everyone.

Yet, as I stood there, I saw three of them climb from the water and,
with gay shouts, rush into the pavilion. Back in a moment; and with them
a flushed man--one of Tarrano's guards--flushed and flattered at their
attention. His hat was gone, his robe disheveled, as the girls fought
for him. They stopped quite close to me; and I saw that one of them was
Alda.

"You shall not have him!" she shouted to her companions. "He is mine! He
loves me--none of you!"

From her thick hair I saw her draw a tiny cylinder, wave it in the man's
face. And, with another laugh, she flung her arms around his neck and
fell with him into the water. I watched the splash and the ripples where
they went down. In a moment, the girl came up--_but the man did not_. In
all the confusion of the crowded pool, it was not very obvious.

A dozen, perhaps, of such incidents, which now, that I was alert to
understand, were apparent. The mirrors might have shown some of
them--but the mirrors always went dark just in time.

Tarrano's guards were disappearing. And now I saw a _slaan_ skulking in
the shadows of the shrubbery nearby. And I noticed, too, that this pool
at my feet had a stream flowing outward from it--a waterway connecting
it with the main lake. And I remembered the Earth man in sub-sea garb
whom I had seen. Were there many Earth men down here in the water?

_"When Tarrano dances with the Red Woman, you drop to the floor."_

I remembered Alda's words and her admonition, "Be inside the pavilion."
And presently I caught her glance as she was poised for a dive--and it
seemed directing me to leave.

Wrapped in my drab cloak, I went back inside. The merry-making had
increased; the place was more crowded than ever. I had been there but a
moment when a gong sounded. The music stopped. In the hush Tarrano, on
the balcony, rose to his feet.

"The tri-night hour[21] is here." He removed his mask; his face was
grave, but a slight smile curved his thin lips. "Let us see ourselves
now as we really are."

[Footnote 21: Half-way between midnight and dawn.]

He slipped his robe from his shoulders and stood in his festive costume.
For so slight a man, I was surprised at the strength of him. Bands of
gold-metal encircled his naked torso; a broad girdle of purple cloth
hung from his waist. His bare limbs were lean and straight; sandals of
red were on his feet. And a band about his forehead with a single
feather in it.

Yet, for it all, he was no male _nada_, but every inch a man. Gravely
smiling, as, with a gesture, he bade them all discard their masks and
robes. From overhead the colored lights turned white. And in the glare,
the robes and masks were dropped. Costumes grotesque, some of them;
others symbolic; others merely beautiful. Vivid colors. Dancers daringly
garbed, with whom the girls from the pool now mingled.

A moment of breathless silence; then ripples of applause from the
spectators. And then the music and the dancing went on.

Barbaric costumes? Some frankly imitated the bygone ages of Venus, Mars
and Earth. But the spirit that prompted them was decadence--nothing
more.

Presently, as I stood unmasked in my effeminate garb, holding myself
aloof from the girls who would have carried me off to the dancing floor,
I saw the roof of the pavilion roll back. The open sky spread above us.
And from it came down an effulgence of silver light, from a source high
overhead. It bathed us all in its soft radiance; and, simultaneously,
the lights in the pavilion went out. A single golden shaft rested on
Tarrano. Elza, Georg and Maida were still there. In the golden light I
could see them quite plainly--could see that Elza was flushed with
suppressed excitement. Not the alcholite fumes now. Georg, too, seemed
very alert. And Maida. There was, indeed, a tenseness about them all--an
air of vague expectancy which made my heart beat faster as I realized
it.

Was Tarrano totally unaware of what was about to happen? Was he unaware
of this hidden, lurking menace to him, which now, to me, was so obvious?
I could not believe that; yet, he was imperturbable, solemn as ever.

A shaft of golden light upon Tarrano. The darkened chamber. The silver
radiance coming down upon us in a shaft from the sky. A hush lay upon
the room. The music had ceased; now it began again, very soft, ethereal.
Everyone in the room was gazing upward. From high overhead in the silver
shaft a shape appeared, slowly floating downward. A woman's figure. It
came down, supported by what mechanical or scientific device I never
knew. It seemed floating unsupported.

Within the pavilion, suspended in mid-air, I saw that it was a woman in
filmy red veils. Poised on tip-toe in the air. Arms outstretched, with
the red veils hanging from them like wings. A woman fully matured. White
hair piled in coils on her head, with a huge, scarlet blossom in it. A
face, somewhat heavy of feature, powdered white; with glowing eyes, dark
lidded; and a scarlet mouth. A face, an expression in the smouldering
eyes, the full lips half parted--a face and an expression that seemed
the very incarnation of all that is sensuous in humans. The Red Woman!
The living symbol of all that lay beneath this festive merry-making.

The Red Woman! For a moment she hovered there before us. A shaft of red
light now came down from above. It caught her, bathed her in its lurid
glow. On her face came a look of triumph, and a leer almost insolent, as
slowly she began fluttering through the air toward Tarrano. He rose to
meet her. Whispered something aside to Elza.

Close before him, the Red Woman hovered. And now a circle-dais from the
floor came up to her. She rested upon it; began a slow, sinuous dance;
one by one loosening the veils; the red light deepening until it painted
her body red in lieu of the draperies.

No frivolous mockery here. Intense, smouldering eyes as she held her
gaze on Tarrano's face and slowly raised her arms in invitation to him.
At her gesture, he rose to his feet. Yet I knew he was not under her
spell, for his lips were smiling, bantering.

But he rose obediently, and stepped from the balcony to the upraised
dais. Around his neck the Red Woman wound her arms--white arms stained
red by the lurid light.

A flash! I did not see from whence it came; but within me some
subconscious impulse made me drop to the floor. The light from overhead
was out. Momentary darkness. A woman's scream of terror. Then others.
The sound of running feet; bodies falling. Panic in the crowd. Confusion
everywhere.

Then light from somewhere came on. People were tramping me. I fought
them off, climbed to my feet. On the dais the Red Woman lay dead.
Huddled in a heap, with a brand of black searing her forehead. _Slaans_
were leaping about the room--huge, half-naked men--brandishing primitive
knives. Flashing steel, buried in the backs of the fleeing merry-makers.
Other figures--Earth men they seemed--gripping the _slaans_, staying
their murderous fury.

Tarrano? I did not see him at first. The air above the floor of the
pavilion was full of snapping sparks--a battle of some unknown rays. The
mirrors were shattered: glass from them was falling about me. Then, in
the semi-gloom on the balcony, Tarrano's figure materialized. Invisible
before, the hostile rays upon it now made it apparent. But Tarrano
seemed proof against the rays. I could see he was unharmed; and as he
stood there, no doubt using a curved, duplicating beam, the like of
which I have seen used in warfare, the image of him seemed to shift.
Then it doubled--two images, one here, one further down the balcony.
Then still others--appearing and disappearing, always in different
places, until no one could have said where the man himself really was. A
dozen Tarranos, each enveloped in hostile sparks, each with his face
grinning at us in mockery.

Abruptly, I heard Georg's voice shout above the din: "Elza! Elza is
gone!"

The images of Tarrano faded. He, too, was gone.

And then I saw Maida on the balcony, standing with upraised arms. Her
voice rang out.

"Down with Tarrano! Death to Tarrano!" And then her pleading command:

"_Slaans_, no more bloodshed! Be loyal, _slaans_, to your Princess
Maida!"

And Georg calling: "Loyalty, everyone, to your Princess Maida. Loyalty!
Loyalty!"




CHAPTER XXIII

_First Retreat_


I must recount now what Elza later told me, going back to those moments
when Elza sat upon the balcony watching Tarrano and the Red Woman. The
significance of what had been transpiring at the Water Festival was not
clear to Elza; she did not know what was impending, but as she sat there
with Tarrano beside her, a sense of danger oppressed her. Danger which
lay like a weight upon her heart. Yet several times she found herself
laughing--hilarious; and from Maida's warning glance, and the steadying
odor which Maida wafted to her, she knew that Tarrano was using the
alcholite fumes to intoxicate her.

The Red Woman and Tarrano were upon the dais. There came a flash; then
darkness. Elza went cold with terror. She sat stiff and silent, while
around her surged that turmoil of confusion. The smell of chemicals was
in the air; her skin prickled as with a million tiny needles where
sparks now began to snap against it.

How long she crouched there, or what was happening, Elza did not know.
But presently she heard Tarrano's voice in her ear.

"Come, Lady Elza, I must get you out of this." In the darkness his face
glowed wraith-like. Then she felt his hand upon her arm.

"Come, we must leave here. I would not have you endangered."

With a haste and roughness that belied the calm solicitude of his words,
he pulled her to her feet. There was light in the pavilion now. Elza saw
dimly the turmoil of struggling figures; and then she saw the scene
duplicated--saw it shift and sway in crazy fashion. Though she did not
know it, she was looking out along the curved rays which Tarrano was
sending from them. Sparks were snapping everywhere. A second image of
Tarrano appeared to the left of her--she saw it in a mirror nearby--yet
he was at her right, gripping her arm.

"Hurry, Lady Elza."

She found herself being dragged along the balcony; stumbling over a body
lying there; feeling a surge of heat and electric disturbance beat
against her face. Then Tarrano had her in his arms, carrying her. She
heard him curse as a sudden wave of fire seemed to strike them--hostile
rays bringing a numbness to muscles and brain. Tarrano was fumbling at
his belt; and through a shower of sparks he stumbled onward with his
burden.

Elza's senses were fading. Vaguely she was conscious that Tarrano was
carrying her down an incline to the ground. Grateful, cool air. Stars
overhead. Trees; foliage; shimmering water. The screams and confusion of
the pavilion growing fainter....

When Elza regained consciousness, she was lying in the bottom of a
little boat, Tarrano beside her.

"So? You have awakened? We are quite safe, Lady Elza."

She and Tarrano were alone in the boat. It was long and very narrow,
with its sides no more than a foot above the water. Tarrano sat at its
chemical mechanism. A boat familiar to us of Earth. A small
chemical-electric generator. The explosion of water in a little tank,
with the resultant gases ejected through a small pipe projecting under
the surface at its stern. The boat swept forward smoothly, rapidly and
almost silently, with a stream of the gas bubbles coming to the surface
in its wake.

"Quite safe, Lady Elza."

She saw that Tarrano's face was blackened with grime. His garments were
burned, and hers were also. He was disheveled, but his manner was as
imperturbable as ever. He made her comfortable on the cushions in the
boat; drew a robe closer around her against the rush of the night air.

Elza was unhurt. She saw now, with clarifying senses, that they were
plying along a narrow river. Banks of foliage on each side; the auroral
lights in the sky; occasionally on the hillsides along the river, the
dim outlines of a house.

It was all a trifle unreal--like looking through a sunglass that was
darkened--for around the boat hung always a vague pall of gloom. Tarrano
spoke of it.

"Our isolation barrage. It is very weak, but the best I can
contrive. From these hills the naked eye, now at night could hardly
penetrate it.... A precaution, for they will be searching for us
perhaps.... Ah!..."

A white search-ray sprang from a house at the top of a hill nearby. It
leaped across the dark countryside, swept the water--which at that point
had broadened into a lagoon--and landed upon the boat. It was a light
strong enough to penetrate the barrage--the boat was disclosed to
observers in the house. But Tarrano raised a small metal projector. A
dull-red beam sprang from it and mingled with the other. A surge of
sparks; then Tarrano's red beam conquered. It absorbed the white light.
And Tarrano's beam was curved. It lay over the lake in a huge bow,
bending far out to one side. Yet its other end fell upon the hostile
house. The white search-ray from the house was submerged, bent outward
with Tarrano's beam. From the house, the observer could only gaze along
this curved light. He saw the image of the boat--not where the boat
really was--but as though the ray were straight.

Elza, staring with her heart in her throat, saw a ball of yellow fire
mount from the house. It swung into the air in a slow, lazy parabola,
came down and dropped into the lake. But it fell where the marksman saw
the boat, a safe distance to one side. A ball of fire dropping into the
water, exploding the water all around it for a distance of a dozen feet.
Like a cascade, the water mounted.

Tarrano chuckled. "A very bad marksman."

Other bombs came. It turns me cold when I think how orders like this
could have come from the Great City--these bombs which had they found
their mark would have killed Tarrano, but at the expense of the life of
Elza. They did not find their mark. Tarrano continually changed the
curve of his beam. The image of the boat shifted. A few moments only;
and riding the waves of the bomb-tossed water, they rounded a bend, back
into the narrow river and were beyond range.

Tarrano snapped off his ray. "Quite safe, Lady Elza. Do not be alarmed.
I doubt if they will locate us again. They should be very busy now in
the Great City. I'm surprised they could even think to notify this
Station we have just passed."

We were indeed very busy in the Great City during those hours, as you
shall presently hear.

Tarrano and Elza were not again disturbed. How far they went in the boat
she does not know, but at last they landed in a sheltered cove. An air
vehicle was there. Tarrano transferred Elza to it, and in a moment more
they were aloft.

The vehicle was little more than an oblong platform, with a low railing.
A platform of a substance resembling _glascite-transparent_; and with a
_glascite_ shield V-shaped in front to break the rush of wind and yet
give vision. A mechanism, not of radio-power, but of gravity like the
space-flyers. Such platforms had been, but were no longer in use on
Earth. Elza had never seen one. It was a new experience for her, this
flying with nothing above one, nothing to the side, or underneath save
that transparent substance. To her it was like floating, and at times
falling headlong through the air.

They rose no more than a thousand feet at first, and then swept parallel
with the ground. At a tremendous speed; even at this height the forests
seemed moving backward as the ground moves beneath a surface vehicle.

Dark, somber forests of luxuriant tropical vegetation. It was now
nearing dawn; the auroral lights were dropping low in the sky; the great
Venus Cross of Dawn was rising, its first two stars already above the
line of hills to one side.

Then the sky out there flushed red; a limb of the glorious Sun of Venus
came up. A new day. And even though the air was warm, within Elza was
ashiver.

"It is very wonderful to me, my Elza, this being alone with you."

He sat beside her, gazing at her with his calm, impenetrable eyes. It
was near noon of that day following their escape from the Water
Festival. They had flown possibly two thousand miles. The Sun had risen,
but after a time--since their enormous speed and change of latitude had
affected the angle at which they viewed it--the Sun now was hanging
almost level, not far above the horizon.

Beneath the platform--a mile below now--lay a tumbled waste of naked
crags. The borders of the Cold Country! Tarrano's stronghold! The
birthplace of his dreams of universal conquest.

Elza was staring downward. A barren waste. Rocks bare of verdure. Grey,
with red ore staining them. A desolation of empty rock, with grey flat
shadows. And far ahead, the broken, serrated ranks of mountains with
rocky peaks, white-hooded with the snow upon their summits. The Cold
Country. Bleak; forbidding.

This brittle air was cold; yet Elza and Tarrano were warm. Before the
platform, a ray darted--a low-powered ray of a type that was to be so
great a factor in the warfare into which we were all so soon to be
plunged. It heated the air, so that the platform rushed always through a
wind that was balmy.

