
'Simple, manly, and humorous. Every cricketer should buy the
book.'--_Westminster Gazette._

'Cricket has never known such a singer.'--_Cricket_.


Langbridge. BALLADS OF THE BRAVE: Poems of Chivalry, Enterprise,
Courage, and Constancy, from the Earliest Times to the Present Day.
Edited, with Notes, by Rev. F. LANGBRIDGE. _Crown 8vo. Buckram 3s.
6d_. School Edition, _2s. 6d._

'A very happy conception happily carried out. These "Ballads of the
Brave" are intended to suit the real tastes of boys, and will suit the
taste of the great majority.--_Spectator_.

'The book is full of splendid things.'--_World_.



ENGLISH CLASSICS


Edited by W.E. HENLEY.

Messrs. Methuen are publishing, under this title, a series of the
masterpieces of the English tongue, which, while well within the reach
of the average buyer, shall be at once an ornament to the shelf of him
that owns, and a delight to the eye of him that reads.

The series, of which Mr. William Ernest Henley is the general editor,
will confine itself to no single period or department of literature.
Poetry, fiction, drama, biography, autobiography, letters, essays--in
all these fields is the material of many goodly volumes.

The books, which are designed and printed by Messrs. Constable, are
issued in two editions--(1) A small edition, on the finest Japanese
vellum, demy 8vo, 21_s_. a volume net; (2) the popular edition on laid
paper, crown 8vo, buckram, 3_s. 6d_. a volume.


THE LIFE AND OPINIONS OF TRISTRAM SHANDY. By LAWRENCE STERNE. With an
Introduction by CHARLES WHIBLEY, and a Portrait. 2_vols. 7s_.

60 copies on Japanese paper. 42_s. net_.

'Very dainty volumes are these; the paper, type and light green
binding are all very agreeable to the eye. "Simplex munditiis" is the
phrase that might be applied to them. So far as we know, Sterne's
famous work has never appeared in a guise more attractive to the
connoisseur than this.'--_Globe._

'The book is excellently printed by Messrs. Constable on good paper,
and being divided into two volumes, is light and handy without lacking
the dignity of a classic.'--_Manchester Guardian_.

'This new edition of a great classic might make an honourable
appearance in any library in the world. Printed by Constable on laid
paper, bound in most artistic and restful-looking fig-green buckram,
with a frontispiece portrait and an introduction by Mr. Charles
Whibley, the book might well be issued at three times its present
price.'--_Irish Independent._

'Cheap and comely; a very agreeable edition.'--_Saturday Review._

'A real acquisition to the library.'--_Birmingham Post._


THE COMEDIES OF WILLIAM CONGREVE. With an Introduction by G.S. STREET,
and a Portrait. _2 vols. 7s._

25 copies on Japanese paper. _42s. net._

'The comedies are reprinted in a good text and on a page delightful to
look upon. The pieces are rich reading.'--_Scotsman._

'So long as literature thrives, Congreve must be read with growing
zest, in virtue of qualities which were always rare, and which
were never rarer than at this moment. All that is best and most
representative of Congreve's genius is included in this latest
edition, wherein for the first time the chaotic punctuation of its
forerunners is reduced to order--a necessary, thankless task on which
Mr. Street has manifestly spent much pains. Of his introduction it
remains to say that it is an excellent appreciation, notable
for catholicity, discretion, and finesse: an admirable piece of
work.'--_Pall Mall Gazette._

'Two volumes of marvellous cheapness.'--_Dublin Herald._


THE ADVENTURES OF HAJJI BABA OF ISPAHAN. By JAMES MORIER. With an
Introduction by E.G. BROWNE, M.A. and a Portrait. _2 vols. 7s._

25 copies on Japanese paper. _21s. net._



HISTORY


FLINDERS PETRIE. A HISTORY OF EGYPT, FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO THE
HYKSOS. By W.M. FLINDERS PETRIE, D.C.L., Professor of Egyptology at
University College. _Fully Illustrated. Second Edition. Crown 8vo.
6s._

'An important contribution to scientific study.'--_Scotsman._

'A history written in the spirit of scientific precision so worthily
represented by Dr. Petrie and his school cannot but promote sound and
accurate study, and supply a vacant place in the English literature of
Egyptology.'--_Times._


FLINDERS PETRIE. EGYPTIAN TALES. Edited by W.M. FLINDERS PETRIE.
Illustrated by TRISTRAM ELLIS. _Crown 8vo._ In two volumes. _3s. 6d.
each._

'A valuable addition to the literature of comparative folk-lore.
The drawings are really illustrations in the literal sense of the
word.'--_Globe._

'It has a scientific value to the student of history and
archaeology.'--_Scotsman._

'Invaluable as a picture of life in Palestine and Egypt.'--_Daily
News._


CLARK. THE COLLEGES OF OXFORD: Their History and their Traditions. By
Members of the University. Edited by A. CLARK, M.A., Fellow and Tutor
of Lincoln College. _8vo. 12s. 6d._

'A delightful book, learned and lively.'--_Academy_.

'A work which will certainly be appealed to for many years as the
standard book on the Colleges of Oxford.'--_Athenaeum_.


PERRENS. THE HISTORY OF FLORENCE FROM THE TIME OF THE MEDICIS TO THE
FALL OF THE REPUBLIC. By F.T. PERRENS. Translated by HANNAH LYNCH. _In
Three Volumes. Vol. I. 8vo. 12s. 6d._

'This is a standard book by an honest and intelligent historian,
who has deserved well of all who are interested in Italian
history.'--_Manchester Guardian_.


GEORGE. BATTLES OF ENGLISH HISTORY. By H.B. GEORGE, M.A., Fellow of
New College, Oxford. _With numerous Plans. Second Edition. Crown 8vo.
6s._

'Mr. George has undertaken a very useful task--that of making military
affairs intelligible and instructive to non-military readers--and has
executed it with laudable intelligence and industry, and with a large
measure of success.'--_Times_.

'This book is almost a revelation; and we heartily congratulate the
author on his work and on the prospect of the reward he has well
deserved for so much conscientious and sustained labour.'--_Daily
Chronicle_.


BROWNING. GUELPHS AND GHIBELLINES: A Short History of Mediaeval Italy,
A.D. 1250-1409. By OSCAR BROWNING, Fellow and Tutor of King's College,
Cambridge. _Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 5s._

'A very able book.'--_Westminster Gazette_.

'A vivid picture of mediaeval Italy.'--_Standard_.


BROWNING. THE AGE OF THE CONDOTTIERI: A Short Story of Italy from 1409
to 1530. By OSCAR BROWNING, M.A., Fellow of King's College, Cambridge.
_Crown 8vo. 5s._

This book is a continuation of Mr. Browning's 'Guelphs and
Ghibellines,' and the two works form a complete account of Italian
history from 1250 to 1530.

'Mr. Browning is to be congratulated on the production of a work of
immense labour and learning.'--_Westminster Gazette_.


O'GRADY. THE STORY OF IRELAND. By STANDISH O'GRADY, Author of 'Finn
and his Companions.' _Cr. 8vo. 2s. 6d._

'Novel and very fascinating history. Wonderfully alluring.'--_Cork
Examiner_.

'Most delightful, most stimulating. Its racy humour, its
original imaginings, make it one of the freshest, breeziest
volumes.'--_Methodist Times_.

'A survey at once graphic, acute, and quaintly written.'--_Times_.


MAIDEN. ENGLISH RECORDS. A Companion to the History of England. By
H.E. MALDEN, M.A. _Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d._

A book which concentrates information upon dates, genealogy,
officials, constitutional documents, etc., which is usually found
scattered in different volumes.



Biography


COLLINGWOOD. THE LIFE OF JOHN RUSKIN. By W.G. COLLINGWOOD, M.A.,
Editor of Mr. Ruskin's Poems. With numerous Portraits, and 13 Drawings
by Mr. Ruskin. _2 vols. 8vo. 32s. Second Edition_.

'No more magnificent volumes have been published for a long
time....'--_Times_.

'It is long since we have had a biography with such delights of
substance and of form. Such a book is a pleasure for the day, and a
joy for ever.'--_Daily Chronicle_.

'A noble monument of a noble subject. One of the most beautiful books
about one of the noblest lives of our century.'--_Glasgow Herald_.


WALDSTEIN. JOHN RUSKIN: a Study. By CHARLES WALDSTEIN, M.A., Fellow
of King's College, Cambridge. With a Photogravure Portrait after
Professor HERKOMER. _Post 8vo. 5s._

Also 25 copies on Japanese paper. _Demy 8vo. 21s. net_.

'A thoughtful, impartial, well-written criticism of Ruskin's teaching,
intended to separate what the author regards as valuable and
permanent from what is transient and erroneous in the great master's
writing.'--_Daily Chronicle_.


KAUFMANN. CHARLES KINGSLEY. By M. KAUFMANN, M.A. _--Crown 8vo. Buckram.
5s._

A biography of Kingsley, especially dealing with his achievements in
social reform.

'The author has certainly gone about his work with conscientiousness
and industry.'--_Sheffield Daily Telegraph_.


ROBBINS. THE EARLY LIFE OF WILLIAM EWART GLADSTONE. By A.F. ROBBINS.
_With Portraits. Crown 8vo. 6s_.

'Considerable labour and much skill of presentation have not been
unworthily expended on this interesting work.'--_Times_.

'Not only one of the most meritorious, but one of the most
interesting, biographical works that have appeared on the subject of
the ex-Premier.... It furnishes a picture from many points original
and striking; it makes additions of value to the evidence on which we
are entitled to estimate a great public character; and it gives
the reader's judgment exactly that degree of guidance which is the
function of a calm, restrained, and judicious historian.'--_Birmingham
Daily Post_.


CLARK RUSSELL. THE LIFE OF ADMIRAL LORD COLLINGWOOD. By W. CLARK
RUSSELL, Author of 'The Wreck of the Grosvenor.' With Illustrations by
F. BRANGWYN. _Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s._

'A really good book.'--_Saturday Review_.

'A most excellent and wholesome book, which we should like to see in
the hands of every boy in the country.'--_St. James's Gazette_.


SOUTHEY. ENGLISH SEAMEN (Howard, Clifford, Hawkins, Drake, Cavendish).
By ROBERT SOUTHEY. Edited, with an Introduction, by DAVID HANNAY.
_Crown 8vo. 6s._

This is a reprint of some excellent biographies of Elizabethan seamen,
written by Southey and never republished. They are practically
unknown, and they deserve, and will probably obtain, a wide
popularity.



GENERAL LITERATURE


GLADSTONE. THE SPEECHES AND PUBLIC ADDRESSES OF THE RT. HON.W.E.
GLADSTONE, M.P. With Notes and Introductions. Edited by A.W. HUTTON,
M.A. (Librarian of the Gladstone Library), and H.J. COHEN, M.A. With
Portraits. _8vo. Vols. IX. and X. 12s. 6d. each._


HENLEY AND WHIBLEY. A BOOK OF ENGLISH PROSE. Collected by W.E. HENLEY
and CHARLES WHIBLEY. _Cr. 8vo. 6s._

Also 40 copies on Dutch paper. _21s. net._

Also 15 copies on Japanese paper. _42s. net._

'A unique volume of extracts--an art gallery of early
prose.'--_Birmingham Post._

'An admirable companion to Mr. Henley's "Lyra Heroica."'--_Saturday
Review._

'Quite delightful. The choice made has been excellent, and the volume
has been most admirably printed by Messrs. Constable. A greater treat
for those not well acquainted with pre-Restoration prose could not be
imagined.'--_Athenaeum_.


WELLS. OXFORD AND OXFORD LIFE. By Members of the University. Edited by
J. WELLS, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Wadham College. _Crown 8vo. 3s.
6d._

This work contains an account of life at Oxford--intellectual, social,
and religious--a careful estimate of necessary expenses, a review of
recent changes, a statement of the present position of the University,
and chapters on Women's Education, aids to study, and University
Extension.

'We congratulate Mr. Wells on the production of a readable and
intelligent account of Oxford as it is at the present time, written by
persons who are possessed of a close acquaintance with the system and
life of the University.'--_Athenaeum_.


OUIDA. VIEWS AND OPINIONS. By OUIDA. _Crown 8vo. 6s._

'Her views are always well marked and forcibly expressed, so that even
when you most strongly differ from the writer you can always recognise
and acknowledge her ability.'--_Globe._

'Ouida is outspoken, and the reader of this book will not have a dull
moment. The book is full of variety, and sparkles with entertaining
matter.'--_Speaker._


BOWDEN. THE EXAMPLE OF BUDDHA: Being Quotations from Buddhist
Literature for each Day in the Year. Compiled by E.M. BOWDEN. With
Preface by Sir EDWIN ARNOLD. _Third Edition. 16mo. 2s. 6d._


BUSHILL. PROFIT SHARING AND THE LABOUR QUESTION. By T.W. BUSHILL, a
Profit Sharing Employer. With an Introduction by SEDLEY TAYLOR, Author
of 'Profit Sharing between Capital and Labour.' _Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d_.


MALDEN. THE ENGLISH CITIZEN: HIS RIGHTS AND DUTIES. By H.E. MALDEN,
M.A. _Crown 8vo. 1s. 6d_.

A simple account of the privileges and duties of the English citizen.


JOHN BEEVER. PRACTICAL FLY-FISHING, Founded on Nature, by JOHN BEEVER,
late of the Thwaite House, Coniston. A New Edition, with a Memoir of
the Author by W.G. COLLINGWOOD, M.A. _Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d._

A little book on Fly-Fishing by an old friend of Mr. Ruskin.



Science


FREUDENREICH. DAIRY BACTERIOLOGY. A Short Manual for the Use of
Students in Dairy Schools, Cheesemakers, and Farmers. By Dr. ED. VON
