the last wreaths fled up the hillsides and passed, we saw that the
horses yet fed quietly where we had left them, full half a mile
away up the steep rise down which the stream came.

And it was strange to see what manner of place this was in
daylight, for until the mist lifted we could not tell in the least,
and it was confused to us. Now all the hillsides glowed purple with
heather in a great cup round us, and we were on a little rise in
the midst of them whereon stood the dolmen, and the same hands
doubtless that raised it had set up a wide circle of standing
stones round about it, such as I have seen in the Orkneys. It was
not a place where one would choose to spend the night.

There was no sign of the wild folk anywhere outside the stone
circle. They had gone, and there seemed no cover for them anywhere,
unless they dwelt in clefts and caves of the bare tors around us.
So we feared no longer lest there should be any ambush set for us,
and went about to see what they had left.

There were the long line that had noosed me, the earthen drum with
its dry skin head, the raw hide thongs we had been bound with, and
the food and drink; and that was all save what weapons lay round
the slain, and the bodies of the two good greyhounds.

"These are but men, and not trolls as one might well think," I
said, looking on those who lay before us.

One whom I had slain had a heavy gold torque round his neck, and
twisted gold armlets, being the chief, as I think. Kolgrim took
these off and gave them to me, and then he went to the drum and
dashed it on a stone and broke it, saying nothing.

"Let us be going," I said. "These folk will come back and see to
their dead."

But Kolgrim looked at the drumhead and took it, and then coiled the
long line on his arm.

"Trust a sailor for never losing a chance of getting a new bit of
rigging," said Harek, laughing; for he seemed none the worse for
the things of last night, which indeed began to seem ghostly and
dreamlike to us all. "But what good is the bit of skin?"

"Here be strange charms wrought into it," Kolgrim said. "It will
make a sword scabbard that will avail somewhat against such like
folk if ever we meet them again."

Truly there were marks as of branded signs on the bit of skin, and
so he kept it; and I hung the gold trophies in my belt, and Harek
took some of the remains of our supper: and so we went to the
horses, seeing nothing of the wild men anywhere.

Very glad were the good steeds to see us come, and the falcon, who
still sat on the saddle where I had perched her, spread her wings
and ruffled her feathers to hear us. I unhooded and fed her; and we
washed in the stream, and set out gaily enough, making southward,
for so we thought we should strike the great road. And at last,
when we saw its white line far off from a steep hillside, I was
glad enough.

I cannot tell how we had reached our halting place through the
hills in the dark, nor could I find it again directly. It was
midday before we reached the road, riding easily; so that, what
with the swift gallop of the hunting and the long hours of riding
in mist and darkness, we had covered many miles. We saw no house
till we were close to the road, and then lit on one made of stones
and turf hard by it, where an old woman told us that no party had
been by since daylight.

So we turned eastward and rode to meet the king, and did so before
long. He had left men at his village to wait for us in case we came
back there; but he laughed at us for losing ourselves, though he
said he had no fear for sailors adrift in the wilds when Ethelnoth
came in without us.

But when, as we rode on, I told him what had befallen us, he
listened gravely, and at last said:

"I have heard the like of this before. Men say that the pixies
dwell in the moorland, and will dance to death those who disturb
them. What think you of those you have seen?"

I said that, having slain them, one could not doubt that they were
men, if strange ones.

"That is what I think," he answered. "They are men who would be
thought pixies. Maybe they are the pixies. I believe they are the
last of the old Welsh folk who have dwelt in these wilds since the
coming of the Romans or before. There were the like in the great
fens of East Anglia and Mercia when Guthlac the Holy went there,
and he thought them devils. None can reach these men or know where
they dwell. Maybe they are heathen, and their dance in that stone
ring was some unholy rite that you have seen. But you have been
very far into the wastes, and I have never seen those stones."

And when he handled the gold rings, he showed me that they were
very old; but when he handled the drumhead and looked at the marks
thereon, he laughed.

"Here is the magic of an honest franklin's cattle brand. I have
seen it on beasts about the hills before now. The pixies have made
a raid on the farmer's herds at some time."

Now I think that King Alfred was right, and that we had fallen into
the hands of wild Welsh or Cornish moor folk. But one should hear
Kolgrim's tale of the matter as he shows his sword sheath that he
made of the drumhead; for nothing would persuade him that it was
not of more than mortal work.

"Had the good king been in that place with us, he would have told a
different tale altogether," he says.

So we went on our journey quietly, and ever as we went and spoke
with Alfred, I began to be sure that this pale and troubled king
was the most wondrous man that I had ever seen. And now, as I look
back and remember, I know that in many ways he was showing me that
the faith he held shaped his life to that which seemed best in him
to my eyes.

I know this, that had he scoffed at the Asir, I had listened to
Neot not at all. But when we came to his place, I was ready, and
more than ready, to hear what he had to tell me.



Chapter VIII. The Black Twelfth-Night.


When we came to the little out of the way village among the Cornish
hills near which Neot, the king's cousin, had his dwelling, I
thought it strange that any one should be willing to give up the
stirring life at court for such a place as this. Here was only one
fair-sized house in the place, and that was built not long before
by the king for his own use when he came here, which was often. And
Neot's own dwelling was but a little stone-walled and turf-roofed
hut, apart from all others, on the hillside, and he dwelt there
with one companion--another holy man, named Guerir, a Welshman by
birth--content with the simple food that the villagers could give
him, and spending his days in prayer and thought for the king and
people and land that he loved.

But presently, as I came to know more of Neot, it seemed good that
some should live thus in quiet while war and unrest were over the
country, else had all learning and deeper thought passed away. It
is certain from all that I have heard, from the king himself and
from others, that without Neot's steady counsel and gathered wisdom
Alfred had remained haughty and proud, well-nigh hated by his
people, as he had been when first he came to the throne.

At one time he would drive away any who came to him with plaints or
tales of wrong and trouble; but Neot spoke to him in such wise that
he framed his ways differently. And now I used to wonder to see him
stay and listen patiently to some rambling words of trifling want,
told by a wayside thrall, to which it seemed below his rank to
hearken, and next I would know that it was thus he made his people
love him as no other king has been loved maybe. There was no man
who could not win hearing from him now.

It is said of him that when Neot showed him the faults in his ways,
he asked that some sickness, one that might not make him useless or
loathsome to his people, might be sent him to mind him against his
pride, and that so he had at first one manner of pain, and now this
which I had seen. It may be so, for I know well that so he made it
good for him, and he bore it most patiently. Moreover, I have never
heard that it troubled him in the times of direst need, though the
fear of it was with him always.

Now what Alfred and Neot spoke of at this time I cannot say, except
that it was certainly some plan for the good of the land. I and my
comrades hunted and hawked day by day until the evening came, and
then would sup plainly with the king, and then sit at Neot's door
in the warm evening, and talk together till the stars came out.

Many things we spoke of, and Neot told me what I would. I cannot
write down those talks, though I mind every word of them. But there
was never any talk of the runes I had offered.

Neot spoke mostly, but Alfred put in words now and then that ever
seemed to make things plainer; and I mind how Ethelnoth the
ealdorman sat silent, listening to questions and answers that maybe
he had never needed to put or hear concerning his own faith.

At first I was only asking because the king wished it, then because
I grew curious, and because I thought it well to know what a
Saxon's faith was if I was to bide among Alfred's folk. Kolgrim
listened, saying nought. But presently Harek the scald would ask
more than I, and his questions were very deep, and I thought that
as days went on he grew thoughtful and silent.

Then one evening the song woke within the scald's breast, and he
said to Neot:

"Many and wise words have you spoken, Father Neot. Hear now the
song of Odin--the Havamal--and tell me if you have aught to equal
it."

"Sing, my son," the good man answered. "Wisdom is from above, and
is taught in many ways."

Then Harek sang, and his voice went over the hillsides, echoing
wonderfully; while we who heard him were very still, unwilling to
lose one word or note of the song. Many verses and sayings of the
"Havamal" I knew, but I had not heard it all before. Now it seemed
to me that no more wisdom than is therein could be found {ix}.

So when Harek ended Neot smiled on him, and said:

"That is a wondrous song, and I could have listened longer. There
is little therein that one may not be wiser in remembering."

"There is nought wiser; it is Odin's wisdom," said Harek.

Now the old hermit, Guerir, Neot's friend, sat on the stone bench
beside the king, and he said:

"Hear the words of the bards, the wondrous 'triads' of old time."

And he chanted them in a strange melody, unlike aught I had ever
heard. And they, the old savings, were wise as the "Havamal"
itself. But he stopped ere long, saying:

"The English words will not frame the meaning rightly. I do no
justice to the wisdom that is hidden."

Then Neot turned to the king, and said:

"Sing to Harek words from the book of Wisdom that we know. I think
you can remember it well."

"I have not rhymed it," the king answered; "but sometimes the song
shapes itself when it is needed."

He took Guerir's little harp and tuned it afresh and sang. And in
the words were more wisdom than in the Havamal or in the song of
the bards, so that I wondered; and Harek was silent, looking out to
the sunset with wide eyes.

Not long did the king sing, as it seemed to us; and when he ceased,
Harek made no sign.

"Sing now, my cousin, words that are wiser than those; even sing
from the songs of David the king."

So said Neot; and Alfred sang again very wondrously, and as with
some strange awe of the words he said. Then to me it seemed that
beside these the words of Odin were as nought. They became as words
of the wisdom of daily life, wrung from the lips of men forced to
learn by hardness and defeat and loss; and then the words that
Alfred had first sung were as those of one who knew more than Odin,
and yet spoke of daily troubles and the wisdom that grows thereout.
But now the things that he sang must needs have come from wisdom
beyond that of men--wisdom beyond thought of mine. And if so it
seemed to me, I know not how the heart of the scald, who was more
thoughtful and knew more than I, was stirred.

He rose up when Alfred ceased, and walked away down the hillside
slowly, as in a dream, not looking at us; and the kindly Saxons
smiled gently, and said nothing to rouse him.

It is in my mind that Harek's eyes were wet, for he had lost
somewhat--his belief in things he held dearest and first of
all--and had as yet found nothing that should take its place. There
is nought harder than that to a man.

When he had passed out of hearing, I said:

"Are there wiser things yet that you may sing?"

"Ay, and that you may learn, my son," answered Neot. "Listen."

Then he spoke words from Holy Writ that I know now--the words that
speak of where wisdom may be found. And he said thereafter, and
truly, that it was not all.

Then I seemed to fear greatly.

"Not now, my king, not now," I said; "it is enough."

Then those two spoke to me out of their kind hearts. Yet to me the
old gods were very dear, and I clung to them. Neither Neot nor the
king said aught against them, being very wise, at that time.

Presently Harek came back, and his eyes were shining.

"Tell me more of this learning," he said, casting himself down on
the grass at Alfred's feet. "Scald have I been since I could sing,
and nought have I heard like this."

"Some day," Neot said; "it is enough now that you should know what
you have heard."

So ended that strange song strife on Neot's quiet hillside. The sun
set, and the fleecy mists came up from the little river below, and
we sat silent till Alfred rose and said farewell, and we went to
the guest house in the village.

Now I think that none will wonder that after we had been with Neot
for those ten days, we were ready and willing to take on us the
"prime signing," as they called it, gladly and honestly. So we were
signed with the cross by Neot, and Alfred and Ethelnoth and Guerir
were our witnesses.

I know that many scoff at this, because there are heathen who take
this on them for gain, that they may trade more openly, or find
profit among Christian folk, never meaning or caring to seek
further into the faith that lies open, as it were, before them. But
it was not so with us, nor with many others. We were free to serve
our old gods if we would, but free also to learn the new faith; and
to learn more of it for its own sake seemed good to us.

So we went back to Exeter with the king, and Neot came for a few
miles with us, on foot as was his wont, parting from us with many
good words. And after he was gone the king was cheerful, and spoke
with me about the ordering of the fleet we were to build, as though
he were certain that I should take command of it in the spring.
