closer even than Alpha Centauri, the new sun appeared, scarcely three
light-years away across the void surrounding the solar system. And all
the while he watched, he witnessed a thing no man had ever before
seen--the birth of a world!

       *       *       *       *       *

By one o'clock, the new star was of fifth magnitude; by two it was of
the first. As the faint flush of dawn began to come toward the close of
that frosty, moonless November night, the new star was a great white-hot
object more brilliant than any other star in the heavens. Phobar knew
that when its light finally reached Earth so that ordinary eyes could
see, it would be the most beautiful object in the night sky. What was
the reason for these unparalleled births of worlds and the terrifying
mathematical precision that characterized them?

Whatever the cosmic force behind, it was progressing toward the solar
system. Perhaps it would even disturb the balance of the planets. The
possible chance of such an event had already called the attention of
some astronomers, but the whole phenomenon was too inexplicable to
permit more than speculation.

The next evening was cloudy. Jupiter reported nothing new except that
Neptune had deviated from its course and tended to pursue an erratic and
puzzling new orbit.

Phobar pondered long over this last news item and turned his attention
to the outermost planet on the succeeding night. To his surprise, he had
great difficulty in locating it. The ephemeris was of absolutely no use.
When he did locate Neptune after a brief search, he discovered it more
than eighty million miles from its scheduled place! This was at
one-forty. At two-ten he was thunderstruck by a special announcement
sent from the Central Bureau to every observatory and astronomer of note
throughout the world, proclaiming the discovery of an ultra-Plutonian
planet. Phobar was incredulous. For centuries it had been proved that no
planet beyond Pluto could possibly exist.

       *       *       *       *       *

With feverish haste, Phobar ran to the huge telescope and rapidly
focused it where the new planet should be. Five hundred million miles
beyond Neptune was a flaming path like the beam of a giant searchlight
that extended exactly to the eighth solar planet. Phobar gasped. He
could hardly credit the testimony of his eyes. He looked more closely.
The great stream of flame still crossed his line of vision. But this
time he saw something else: at the precise farther end of the flame-path
a round disk--dark!

Beyond a doubt, a new planet of vast size now formed an addition to the
solar group. But that planet was almost impervious to the illuminating
rays of the sun and was barely discernible. Neptune itself shone
brighter than it ever had, and was falling away from the sun at a rate
of twelve hundred miles per second.

All night Phobar watched the double mystery. By three o'clock, he was
convinced, as far as lightning calculations showed, that the invader was
hurtling toward the sun at a speed of more than ten million miles an
hour. At three-fifteen, he thought that vanishing Neptune seemed
brighter even than the band of fire running to the invader. At four, his
belief was certainty. With amazement and awe, Phobar sat through the
long, cold night, watching a spectacular and terrible catastrophe in the
sky.

As dawn began to break and the stars grew paler, Phobar turned away from
his telescope, his brain awhirl, his heart filled with a great fear. He
had witnessed the devastation of a world, the ruin of a member of his
own planetary system by an invader from outer space. As dawn cut short
his observations, he knew at last the cause of Neptune's brightness,
knew that it was now a white-hot flaming sun that sped with increased
rapidity away from the solar system. Somehow, the terrible swathe of
fire that flowed from the dark star to Neptune had wrenched it out of
its orbit and made of it a molten inferno.

       *       *       *       *       *

At dawn came another bulletin from the Central Bureau. Neptune had a
surface temperature of 3,000 deg. C, was defying all laws of celestial
mechanics, and within three days would have left the solar system for
ever. The results of such a disaster were unpredictable. The entire
solar system was likely to break up. Already Uranus and Jupiter had
deviated from their orbits. Unless something speedily occurred to check
the onrush of the dark star, it was prophesied that the laws governing
the planetary system would run to a new balance, and that in the ensuing
chaos the whole group would spread apart and fall toward the gulfs
beyond the great surrounding void.

What was the nature of the great path of fire? What force did it
represent? And was the dark star controlled by intelligence, or was it a
blind wanderer from space that had come by accident? The flame-path
alone implied that the dark star was guided by an intelligence that
possessed the secret of inconceivable power. Menace hung in the sky now
where all eyes could see in a great arc of fire!

The world was on the brink of eternity, and vast forces at whose nature
men could only guess were sweeping planets and suns out of its path.

The following night was again cold and clear. High in the heavens, where
Neptune should have been, hung a disk of enormously greater size.
Neptune itself was almost invisible, hundreds of millions of miles
beyond its scheduled position. As nearly as Phobar could estimate, not
one hundredth of the sun's rays were reflected from the surface of the
dark star, a proportion far below those for the other planets. Phobar
had a better view of the flame-path, and it was with growing awe that he
watched that strange swathe in the sky during the dead of night. It shot
out from the dark star like a colossal beam or huge pillar of fire
seeking a food of worlds.

With a shiver of cold fear he saw that there were now three of the
bands: one toward Neptune, one toward Saturn, and one toward the sun.
The first was fading, a milky, misty white; the second shone almost as
bright as the first one previously had; and the third, toward the sun,
was a dazzling stream of orange radiance, burning with a steady,
terrible, unbelievable intensity across two and a half billions of miles
of space! That gigantic flare was the most brilliant sight in the whole
night sky, an awful and abysmally prophetic flame that made city streets
black with staring people, a radiance whose grandeur and terrific
implication of cosmic power brought beauty and the fear of doom into the
heavens!

       *       *       *       *       *

Those paths could not be explained by all the physicists and all the
astronomers in the Five World Federation. They possessed the properties
of light, but they were rigid bands like a tube or a solid pillar from
which only the faintest of rays escaped; and they completely shut off
the heavens behind them. They had, moreover, singular properties which
could not be described, as if a new force were embodied in them.

Hour after hour humanity watched the spectacular progress of the dark
star, watched those mysterious and threatening paths of light that
flowed from the invader. When dawn came, it brought only a great fear
and the oppression of impending disaster.

