"Truly a depraved evolution--it is sad to contemplate such a perversion
of a really excellent brain. They have power, even as you have, and they
have the will to destroy, which is a thing that I cannot understand.
However, if it is graven upon the Sphere that we are to pass, it means
only that upon the next plane we shall continue our searches--let us
hope with better tools and with greater understanding than we now
possess."

"'Smatter?" snapped Seaton gravely. "Going to take it lying down,
without putting up any fight at all?"

"What can we do? Violence is contrary to our very natures. No man of
Norlamin could offer any but passive resistance."

"You can do a lot if you will. Put on that headset again and get my
plan, offering any suggestions your far abler brain may suggest."

As the human scientist poured his plan of battle into the brain of the
astronomer, Orlon's face cleared.

"It is graven upon the Sphere that the Fenachrone shall pass," he said
finally. "What you ask of us we can do. I have only a general knowledge
of rays, as they are not in the province of the Orlon family; but the
student Rovol, of the family Rovol of Rays, has all present knowledge of
such phenomena. Tomorrow I will bring you together, and I have little
doubt that he will be able, with the help of your metal of power, to
solve your problem."

"I don't quite understand what you said about a whole family studying
one subject, and yet having only one student in it," said Dorothy, in
perplexity.

"A little explanation is perhaps necessary," replied Orlon. "First, you
must know that every man of Norlamin is a student, and most of us are
students of science. With us, 'labor' means mental effort, that is,
study. We perform no physical or manual labor save for exercise, as all
our mechanical work is done by forces. This state of things having
endured for many thousands of years, it long ago became evident that
specialization was necessary in order to avoid duplication of effort and
to insure complete coverage of the field. Soon afterward, it was
discovered that very little progress was being made in any branch,
because so much was known that it took practically a lifetime to review
that which had already been accomplished, even in a narrow and highly
specialized field. Many points were studied for years before it was
discovered that the identical work had been done before, and either
forgotten or overlooked. To remedy this condition the mechanical
educator had to be developed. Once it was perfected a new system was
begun. One man was assigned to each small subdivision of scientific
endeavor, to study it intensively. When he became old, each man chose a
successor--usually a son--and transferred his own knowledge to the
younger student. He also made a complete record of his own brain, in
much the same way as you have recorded the brain of the Fenachrone upon
your metallic tape. These records are all stored in a great central
library, as permanent references.

"All these things being true, now a young person may need only finish an
elementary education--just enough to learn to think, which takes only
about twenty-five or thirty years--and then he is ready to begin actual
work. When that time comes, he receives in one day all the knowledge of
his specialty which has been accumulated by his predecessors during many
thousands of years of intensive study."

"Whew!" Seaton whistled, "no wonder you folks know something! With that
start, I believe I might know something myself! As an astronomer, you
may be interested in this star-chart and stuff--or do you know all about
that already?"

"No, the Fenachrone are far ahead of us in that subject, because of
their observatories out in open space and because of their gigantic
reflectors, which cannot be used through any atmosphere. We are further
hampered in having darkness for only a few hours at a time and only in
the winter, when our planet is outside the orbit of our sun around the
great central sun of our entire system. However, with the Rovolon you
have brought us, we shall have real observatories far out in space; and
for that I personally will be indebted to you more than I can ever
express. As for the chart, I hope to have the pleasure of examining it
while you are conferring with Rovol of Rays."

"How many families are working on rays--just one?"

"One upon each kind of ray. That is, each of the ray families knows a
great deal about all kinds of vibrations of the ether, but is
specializing upon one narrow field. Take, for instance, the rays you are
most interested in; those able to penetrate a zone of force. From my own
very slight and general knowledge I know that it would of necessity be a
ray of the fifth order. These rays are very new--they have been under
investigation only a few hundred years--and the Rovol is the only
student who would be at all well informed upon them. Shall I explain the
orders of rays more fully than I did by means of the educator?"

"Please. You assumed that we knew more than we do, so a little
explanation would help."

"All ordinary vibrations--that is, all molecular and material ones, such
as light, heat, electricity, radio, and the like--were arbitrarily
called waves of the first order; in order to distinguish them from waves
of the second order, which are given off by particles of the second
order, which you know as protons and electrons, in their combination to
form atoms. Your scientist Millikan discovered these rays for you, and
in your language they are known as Millikan, or Cosmic, rays.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Some time later, when sub-electrons were identified the rays given off
by their combination into electrons, or by the disruption of electrons,
were called rays of the third order. These rays are most interesting and
most useful; in fact, they do all our mechanical work. They as a class
are called protelectricity, and bear the same relation to ordinary
electricity that electricity does to torque--both are pure energy, and
they are inter-convertible. Unlike electricity, however, it may be
converted into many different forms by fields of force, in a way
comparable to that in which white light is resolved into colors by a
prism--or rather, more like the way alternating current is changed to
direct current by a motor-generator set, with attendant changes in
properties. There is a complete spectrum of more than five hundred
factors, each as different from the others as red is different from
green.

"Continuing farther, particles of the fourth order give rays of the
fourth order; those of the fifth, rays of the fifth order. Fourth-order
rays have been investigated quite thoroughly, but only mathematically
and theoretically, as they are of excessively short wave-length and are
capable of being generated only by the breaking down of matter itself
into the corresponding particles. However, it has been shown that they
are quite similar to protelectricity in their general behavior. Thus,
the power that propels your space-vessel, your attractors, your
repellers, your object-compass, your zone of force--all these things are
simply a few of the many hundreds of wave-bands of the fourth order, all
of which you doubtless would have worked out for yourselves in time.
Very little is known, even in theory, of the rays of the fifth order,
although they have been shown to exist."

"For a man having no knowledge, you seem to know a lot about rays. How
about the fifth order--is that as far as they go?"

"My knowledge is slight and very general; only such as I must have in
order to understand my own subject. The fifth order certainly is not the
end--it is probably scarcely a beginning. We think now that the orders
extend to infinite smallness, just as the galaxies are grouped into
larger aggregations, which are probably in their turn only tiny units in
a scheme infinitely large.

"Over six thousand years ago the last third order rays were worked out;
and certain peculiarities in their behavior led the then Rovol to
suspect the existence of the fourth order. Successive generations of the
Rovol proved their existence, determined the conditions of their
liberation, and found that this metal of power was the only catalyst
able to decompose matter and thus liberate the rays. This metal, which
was called Rovolon after the Rovol, was first described upon theoretical
grounds and later was found, by spectroscopy, in certain stars, notably
in one star only eight light-years away, but not even the most
infinitesimal trace of it exists in our entire solar system. Since these
discoveries, the many Rovol have been perfecting the theory of the
fourth order, beginning that of the fifth, and waiting for your coming.
The present Rovol, like myself and many others whose work is almost at a
standstill, is waiting with all-consuming interest to greet you, as soon
as the _Skylark_ can be landed upon our planet."

"Neither your rocket-ships nor your projections could get you any
Rovolon?"

"No. Every hundred years or so someone develops a new type of rocket
that he thinks may stand a slight chance of making the journey, but not
one of these venturesome youths has as yet returned. Either that sun has
no planets or else the rocket-ships have failed. Our projections are
useless, as they can be driven only a very short distance upon our
present carrier wave. With a carrier of the fifth order we could drive a
projection to any point in the galaxy, since its velocity would be
millions of times that of light and the power necessary reduced
accordingly--but as I have said before, such waves cannot be generated
without metal Rovolon."

"I hate to break this up--I'd like to listen to you talk for a week--but
we're going to land pretty quick, and it looks as though we were going
to land pretty hard."

"We will land soon, but not hard," replied Orlon confidently, and the
landing was as he had foretold. The _Skylark_ was falling with an
ever-decreasing velocity, but so fast was the descent that it seemed to
the watchers as though they must crash through the roof of the huge
brilliantly lighted building upon which they were dropping and bury
themselves many feet in the ground beneath it. But they did not strike
the observatory. So incredibly accurate were the calculations of the
Norlaminian astronomer and so inhumanly precise were the controls he had
set upon their bar, that, as they touched the ground after barely
clearing the domed roof and he shut off their power, the passengers felt
only a sudden decrease in acceleration, like that following the coming
to rest of a rapidly moving elevator, after it has completed a downward
journey.

"I shall join you in person very shortly," Orlon said, and the
projection vanished.

"Well, we're here, folks, on another new world. Not quite as thrilling
as the first one was, is it?" and Seaton stepped toward the door.

"How about the air composition, density, gravity, temperature, and so
on?" asked Crane. "Perhaps we should make a few tests."

"Didn't you get that on the educator? Thought you did. Gravity a little
less than seven-tenths. Air composition, same as Osnome and Dasor.
Pressure, half-way between Earth and Osnome. Temperature, like Osnome
most of the time, but fairly comfortable in the winter. Snow now at the
poles, but this observatory is only ten degrees from the equator. They
don't wear clothes enough to flag a hand-car with here, either, except
when they have to. Let's go!"

He opened the door and the four travelers stepped out upon a
close-cropped lawn--a turf whose blue-green softness would shame an
Oriental rug. The landscape was illuminated by a soft and mellow, yet
intense green light which emanated from no visible source. As they
paused and glanced about them, they saw that the _Skylark_ had alighted
in the exact center of a circular enclosure a hundred yards in diameter,
walled by row upon row of shrubbery, statuary, and fountains, all bathed
in ever-changing billows of light. At only one point was the circle
broken. There the walls did not come together, but continued on to
border a lane leading up to the massive structure of cream-and-green
marble, topped by its enormous, glassy dome--the observatory of Orlon.

"Welcome to Norlamin, Terrestrials," the deep, calm voice of the
astronomer greeted them, and Orlon in the flesh shook hands cordially in
the American fashion with each of them in turn, and placed around each
neck a crystal chain from which depended a small Norlaminian
chronometer-radiophone. Behind him there stood four other old men.

"These men are already acquainted with each of you, but you do not as
yet know them. I present Fodan, Chief of the Five of Norlamin. Rovol,
about whom you know. Astron, the First of Energy. Satrazon, the First of
Chemistry."

Orlon fell in beside Seaton and the party turned toward the observatory.
As they walked along the Earth-people stared, held by the unearthly
beauty of the grounds. The hedge of shrubbery, from ten to twenty feet
high, and which shut out all sight of everything outside it, was one
mass of vivid green and flaring crimson leaves; each leaf and twig
groomed meticulously into its precise place in a fantastic geometrical
scheme. Just inside this boundary there stood a ring of statues of
heroic size. Some of them were single figures of men and women; some
were busts; some were groups in natural or allegorical poses--all were
done with consummate skill and feeling. Between the statues there were
fountains, magnificent bronze and glass groups of the strange aquatic
denizens of this strange planet, bathed in geometrically shaped sprays,
screens, and columns of water. Winding around between the statues and
the fountains there was a moving, scintillating wall, and upon the
waters and upon the wall there played torrents of color, cataracts of
harmoniously blended light. Reds, blues, yellows, greens--every color of
their peculiar green spectrum and every conceivable combination of those
colors writhed and flamed in ineffable splendor upon those deep and
living screens of falling water and upon that shimmering wall.

As they entered the lane, Seaton saw with amazement that what he had
supposed a wall, now close at hand, was not a wall at all. It was
composed of myriads of individual sparkling jewels, of every known
color, for the most part self-luminous; and each gem, apparently
entirely unsupported, was dashing in and out and along among its
fellows, weaving and darting here and there, flying at headlong speed
along an extremely tortuous, but evidently carefully calculated course.

"What can that be, anyway, Dick?" whispered Dorothy, and Seaton turned
to his guide.

"Pardon my curiosity, Orlon, but would you mind explaining the why of
that moving wall? We don't get it."

"Not at all. This garden has been the private retreat of the family of
Orlon for many thousands of years, and women of our house have been
beautifying it since its inception. You may have observed that the
statuary is very old. No such work has been done for ages. Modern art
has developed along the lines of color and motion, hence the lighting
effects and the tapestry wall. Each gem is held upon the end of a minute
pencil of force, and all the pencils are controlled by a machine which
has a key for every jewel in the wall."

Crane, the methodical, stared at the innumerable flashing jewels and
asked, "It must have taken a prodigious amount of time to complete such
an undertaking?"

"It is far from complete; in fact, it is scarcely begun. It was started
only about four hundred years ago."

"_Four hundred years!_" exclaimed Dorothy. "Do you live that long? How
long will it take to finish it, and what will it be like when it is
done?"

"No, none of us live longer than about one hundred and sixty years--at
about that age most of us decide to pass. When this tapestry wall is
finished, it will not be simply form and color, as it is now. It will be
a portrayal of the history of Norlamin from the first cooling of the
planet. It will, in all probability, require thousands of years for its
completion. You see, time is of little importance to us, and workmanship
is everything. My companion will continue working upon it until we
decide to pass; my son's companion may continue it. In any event, many
generations of the women of the Orlon will work upon it until it is
complete. When it is done, it will be a thing of beauty as long as
Norlamin shall endure."

"But suppose that your son's wife isn't that kind of an artist? Suppose
she should want to do music or painting or something else?" asked
Dorothy, curiously.

"That is quite possible; for, fortunately, our art is not yet entirely
intellectual, as is our music. There are many unfinished artistic
projects in the house of Orlon, and if the companion of my son should
not find one to her liking, she will be at liberty to continue anything
else she may have begun, or to start an entirely new project of her
own."

"You have a family, then?" asked Margaret, "I'm afraid I didn't
understand things very well when you gave them to us over the educator."

"I sent things too fast for you, not knowing that your educator was new
to you; a thing with which you were not thoroughly familiar. I will
therefore explain some things in language, since you are not familiar
with the mechanism of thought transference. The Five, a
self-perpetuating body, do what governing is necessary for the entire
planet. Their decrees are founded upon self-evident truth, and are
therefore the law. Population is regulated according to the needs of the
planet, and since much work is now in progress, an increase in
population was recommended by the Five. My companion and I therefore had
three children, instead of the customary two. By lot it fell to us to
have two boys and one girl. One of the boys will assume my duties when I
pass; the other will take over a part of some branch of science that has
grown too complex for one man to handle as a specialist should. In fact,
he has already chosen his specialty and been accepted for it--he is to
be the nine hundred and sixty-seventh of Chemistry, the student of the
asymmetric carbon atom, which will thus be his specialty from this time
henceforth.

"It was learned long ago that the most perfect children were born of
parents in the full prime of mental life, that is, at one hundred years
