
One minute Ross had been standing on the carpet of living moss.
Then ... he was in a more normal room with four walls, a floor, a
ceiling, and light which came from rods set in the corners. He gasped.

"Stunned me, too, the first time they put me through it," he heard Ashe
say. "Here, get some of this inside you, it'll steady your head."

There was a cup in his hand, a beautifully carved, rose-red container
shaped in the form of a flower. Somehow Ross brought it to his lips with
shaking hands, gulped down a good third of its contents. The liquid was
a mixture of tart and sweet, cooling his mouth and throat, but warming
as it went down, and that glow spread through him.

"What--how did they do that?" he demanded.

Ashe shrugged. "How do they do the hundred and one things I have seen
happen here? We've been teleported. How it's done I don't know any more
than I did the first time it happened. Simply a part of Foanna 'magic'
as far as spectators are concerned." He sat down on a stool, his long
legs stretched out before him. "Other worlds, other ways--even if they
are confounded queer ones. As far as I know, there's no reason for their
power to work, but it does. Now, have you seen the time gate? Is it in
working order?"

Ross put down the now empty cup and sat down opposite Ashe. As concisely
as he could, he outlined the situation with a quick resume of all that
had happened to him, Karara, and the dolphins since they had been sucked
through the gate. Ashe asked no questions, but his expression was that
of the Agent Ross had known, evaluating and listing all the younger man
had to report. When the other was through he said only two words:

"No return."

So much had happened in so short a time that Ross's initial shock at the
destruction of the gate had faded, been well overlaid by all the demands
made upon his resources, skill, and strength. Even now, the fact Ashe
voiced seemed of little consequence balanced against the struggle in
progress.

"Ashe--" Ross rubbed his hands up and down his arms, brushing away
grains of sand, "remember those pylons with the empty seacoast behind
them? Does that mean the Baldies are going to win?"

"I don't know. No one has ever tried to change the course of history.
Maybe it is impossible even if we dared to try." Ashe was on his feet
again, pacing back and forth.

"Try what, Gordoon?"

Ross jerked around, Ashe halted. One of the Foanna stood there, her hair
playing about her shoulders as if some breeze felt only by her stirred
those long strands.

"Dare to try and change the course of the future," Ashe explained,
accepting her materialization with the calm of one who had witnessed it
before.

"Ah, yes, your traveling in time. And now you think that perhaps this
poor world of ours has a choice as to which overlords it will welcome? I
do not know either, Gordoon, whether the future may be altered nor if it
be wise to try. But also ... well, perhaps we should see our enemy
before we are set in any path. Now, it is time that we go. Younger
brother, how did you plan to leave this place when you accomplished your
mission?"

"By the sea gate. I have extra swimming equipment cached under the
jetty."

"And the Rover ships await you at sea?"

"Yes."

"Then we shall take your way, since the cutters are sunk."

"There is only one extra gill-pack--and that Baldy sub is out there,
too!"

"So? Then we shall try another road, though it will sap our power
temporarily." Her head inclined slightly to the left as if she listened.
"Good! Our people are now in the passage which will take them to safety.
What those outside will find here when they break in will be of little
aid to their plans. Secrets of the Foanna remain secrets past others'
prying. Though they shall try, oh, how they shall try to solve them!
There is knowledge that only certain types of minds can hold and use,
and to others it remains for all time unlearnable. Now--"

Her hand reached out, flattened against Ross's forehead.

"Think of your Rover ship, younger brother, see it in your mind! And see
well and clearly for me."

Torgul's cruiser was there; he could picture with details he had not
thought he knew or remembered. The deck in the dark of the night with
only a shaded light at the mast. The deck ...

Ross gave a choked cry. He did not see this in his mind; he saw it with
his eyes! His hand swung out in an involuntary gesture of repudiation
and struck painfully against wood. He was on the cruiser!

A startled exclamation from behind him--then a shout. Ashe was here and
beyond him three cloaked figures, the Foanna. They had their own road
indeed and had taken it.

"You ... Rosss--" Vistur fronted them, his face a mixture of
bewilderment and awe. "The Foanna--" said in a half whisper, echoed by
crewmen gathering around, but not too close.

"Gordon!" Karara elbowed her way between two of the Hawaikans and ran
across the deck. She caught the Agent's both hands as if to assure
herself that he was alive and there before her. Then she turned to the
three Foanna.

There was an odd expression on the Polynesian girl's face, first of
measurement with some fear, and then of dawning wonder. From beneath the
cloak of the middle Foanna came the rod of office with its sparking
knob. Karara dropped Ashe's hands, took a tentative step forward and
then another. The knob was directly before her, breast high. She brought
up both hands, cupping them about the knob, but not touching it
directly. The sparks it emitted could have been flashing against her
flesh, but Karara displayed no awareness of that. Instead, she lifted
both hands farther, palm up and cupped, as if she carried some invisible
bounty, then flattened them, loosing what she held.

There was a sigh from the crewmen; Karara's gesture had been confident,
as if she knew just what she was doing and why. And Ross heard Ashe draw
a deep breath also as the Terran girl turned, allying herself with the
Foanna.

"These Great Ones stand in peace," she said. "It is their will that no
harm comes to this ship and those who sail in her."

"What do the Great Ones want of us?" Torgul advanced but not too near.

"To speak concerning those who are your prisoners."

"So be it." The Captain bowed. "The Great Ones' will is our will; let it
be as they wish."




15

Return to the Battle


Ross lay listening to the even breathing from across the cabin. He had
awakened in that quick transference from sleep to consciousness which
was always his when on duty, but he made no attempt to move. Ashe was
still sleeping.

Ashe, whom he thought or had thought he knew as well as one man could
ever know another, who had taken the place of family for Ross Murdock
the loner. Years--two ... four of them now since he had made half of
that partnership.

His head turned, though he could not see that lean body, that quiet,
controlled face. Ashe still looked the same, but ... Ross's sense of
loss was hurt and anger mingled. What had they done to Gordon, those
three? Bewitched? Tales Terrans had accepted as purest fantasy for
centuries came into his mind. Could it be that his own world once had
its Foanna?

Ross scowled. You couldn't refute their "magic," call it by what
scientific name you wished--hypnotism ... telaporting. They got results,
and the results were impressive. Now he remembered the warning the
Foanna themselves had delivered hours earlier to the Rovers. There were
limits to their abilities; because they were forced to draw on mental
and physical energy, they could be exhausted. Thus, they had barriers,
too.

Again Ross considered the subject of barriers. Karara had been able to
meet the aliens, if not mind-to-mind, then in a closer way even than
Ashe. The talent which tied her to the dolphins had in turn been a bond
with the Foanna. Ashe and Karara could enter that circle, but not Ross
Murdock. Along with his new separation from Ashe came that feeling of
inferiority to bite on, and the taste was sour.

"This isn't going to be easy."

So Ashe was awake.

"What can they do?" Ross asked in return.

"I don't know. I don't believe that they can telaport an army into Baldy
headquarters the way Torgul expects. And it wouldn't do such an army
much good to get there and then be outclassed by the weapons the Baldies
might have," Ashe said.

Ross had a moment of warmth and comfort; he knew that tone of old. Ashe
was studying the problem, willing to talk out difficulties as he always
had before.

"No, outright assault isn't the answer. We'll have to know more about
the enemy. One thing puzzles me: Why have the Baldies suddenly stepped
up their timing?"

"What makes you think they have?"

"Well, according to the accounts I've heard, it's been about three or
four planet years here since some off-world devices have been
infiltrating the native civilization--"

"You mean such things as those attractors set up on the reef at Zahur's
castle?" Ross remembered Loketh's story.

"Those, and other things. The refinements added to the engine power on
these ships.... Torgul said they spread from Rover fleet to fleet; no
one's sure where they started. The Baldies began slowly, but they are
speeding up now--those fairing attacks have all been recent. And this
assault on the Foanna citadel blew up almost overnight on a flimsy
excuse. Why the quick push after the slow beginning?"

"Maybe they decided the natives are easy pushovers and they no longer
have to worry about any real opposition," Ross suggested.

"Could be. Self-confidence becoming arrogance when they didn't uncover
any opponent strong enough to matter. Or else, they may be spurred by
some need with a time limit. If we knew the reason for those pylons, we
might guess their motives."

"Are you going to try to change the future?"

"That sounds arrogant, too. Can we if we wish to? We never dared to try
it on Terra. And the risk may be worse than all our fears. Also, the
choice is not ours."

"There's one thing I don't understand," Ross said. "Why did the Foanna
walk out of the citadel and leave it undefended for their enemies? What
about their guards? Did they just leave them too?" He was willing to
make the most of any flaw in the aliens' character.

"Most of their people had already escaped through underground ways. The
rest left when they knew the cutters had been sunk," Ashe returned. "As
to why they deserted the citadel, I don't know. The decision was
theirs."

There--up with the barrier between them again. But Ross refused to
accept the cutoff this time, determined to pull Ashe back into the
familiar world of the here and now.

"That keep could be a trap, about the best on this planet!" The idea was
more than just a gambit to attract Ashe's attention, it was true! A
perfect trap to catch Baldies.

"Don't you see," Ross sat up, slapped his feet down on the deck as he
leaned forward eagerly. "Don't you see ... if the Baldies know anything
at all about the Foanna, and I'm betting they do and want to learn all
they can, they'll visit the citadel. They won't want to depend on
second- and third-hand reports of the place, especially ones delivered
by primitives such as the Wreckers. They had a sub there. I'll bet the
crew are in picking over the loot right now!"

"If that's what they're hunting"--there was amusement in Ashe's
tone--"they won't find much. The Foanna have better locks than their
enemies have keys. You heard Ynlan before we left--any secrets left will
remain secrets."

"But there's bait--bait for a trap!" argued Ross.

"You're right!" To the younger man's joy Ashe's enthusiasm was plain.
"And if the Baldies could be led to believe that what they wanted was
obtainable with just a little more effort, or the right tools--"

"The trap could net bigger catch than just underlings!" Ross's thought
matched Ashe's. "Why, it might even pull in the VIP directing the whole
operation! How can we set it up, and do we have time?"

"The trap would have to be of Foanna setting; our part would come after
it was sprung." Ashe was thoughtful again. "But it is the only move
which we can make at present with any hope of success. And it will only
work if the Foanna are willing."

"Have to be done quickly," Ross pointed out.

"Yes, I'll see." Ashe was a dark figure against the thin light of the
companionway as he slid back the cabin door. "If Ynvalda agrees...." As
he went out Ross was right behind him.

The Foanna had been given, by their own choice, quarters on the bow deck
of the cruiser where sailcloth had been used to form a tent. Not that
any of the awe-stricken Rovers would venture too near them. Ashe reached
for the flap of the fabric and a lilting voice called:

"You seek us, Gordoon?"

"This is important."

"Yes, it is important, for the thought which brings you both has merit.
Enter then, brothers!"

The flap was looped aside and before them was a swirling of
mist? ... light? ... sheets of pale color? Ross could not have described
what he saw--save if the Foanna were there, he could not distinguish them
from the rippling of their hair, the melting film of their robes.

"So, younger brother, you think that which was our home and our treasure
box has now become a trap for the confounding of those who believe we
are a threat to them?"

Somehow Ross was not surprised that they knew about his idea before he
had said a word, before Ashe had given any explanations. Their
omniscience was only a small portion of their other talents.

"Yes."

"And why do you believe so? We swear to you that the coast folk can not
be driven into those parts of the castle which mean the most, any more
than our sea gate can be breached unless we will it so."

"Yet I swam through the sea gate, and the sub was there also." Ross knew
again a flash of--was it pleasure?--at being able to state this fact.
There _were_ chinks in the Foanna defenses.

"Again the truth. You have that within you, young brother, which is both
a lack and a shield. True also that this underseas ship entered after
you. Perhaps it has a shield as part of it; perhaps those from the stars
have their own protection. But they can not reach the heart of what they
wish, not unless we open the doors for them. It is your belief, younger
brother, that they still strive to force such doors?"

"Yes. Knowing there is something to be learned, they will try for it.
They will not dare not to." Ross was very certain on that point. His
encounters with the Baldies had not led to any real understanding. But
the way they had wiped out the line of Russian time stations made him
sure that they dealt thoroughly with any situation they considered a
threat.

From the prisoners taken at Kyn Add they had learned the invaders
believed the Foanna their enemies here, even though the Old Ones had not
repulsed them or their activities. Therefore, it followed that, having
taken the stronghold, the Baldies would endeavor to rip open every one
of its secrets.

"A trap with good bait--"

Ross wondered which one of the Foanna said that. To see nothing but the
swirls of mist-color, listen to disembodied voices from it, was
disconcerting. Part of the stage dressing, he decided, for building
their prestige with the other races with whom they dealt. Three women
alone would have to buttress their authority with such trappings.

"Ah, younger brother, indeed you are beginning to understand us!"
Laughter, soft, but unmistakable.

Ross frowned. He did not feel the touch-go-touch of mental communication
which the dolphins used. But he did not doubt that the Foanna read his
thoughts, or at least a few of them.

"Some of them," echoed from the mist. "Not all--not as your older
brother's or the maiden whose mind meets with ours. With you, younger
brother, it is a thought here, a thought there, and only our intuition
to connect them into a pattern. But now, there is serious planning to be
done. And, knowing this enemy, you believe they will come to search for
what they can not find. So you would set a trap. But they have weapons
beyond your weapons, have they not, younger brother? Brave as are these
Rover kind, they can not use swords against flame, their hands against a
killer who may stand apart and slay. What remains, Gordoon? What remains
