The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Popular History of Astronomy During the
Nineteenth Century, by Agnes M. (Agnes Mary) Clerke


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Popular History of Astronomy During the Nineteenth Century
       Fourth Edition


Author: Agnes M. (Agnes Mary) Clerke



Release Date: March 4, 2009  [eBook #28247]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A POPULAR HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY
DURING THE NINETEENTH CENTURY***


E-text prepared by Eric Hutton and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 28247-h.htm or 28247-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/8/2/4/28247/28247-h/28247-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/8/2/4/28247/28247-h.zip)





A POPULAR HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY DURING THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

       *       *       *       *       *

BY THE SAME AUTHOR

  PROBLEMS IN ASTROPHYSICS.
     Demy 8vo., cloth. Containing over 100
     Illustrations. Price 20s. net.

  THE SYSTEM OF THE STARS.
     Second Edition. Thoroughly revised and
     largely rewritten. Containing numerous
     and new Illustrations. Demy 8vo., cloth.
     Price 20s. net.

  MODERN COSMOGONIES. Crown
     8vo., cloth. Price 3s. 6d. net.


   A. AND C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT NEBULA IN ORION, 1883

_See p. 408_]


A POPULAR HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY DURING THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

by

AGNES M. CLERKE







[Illustration: JUPITER 1879

               SATURN 1885]



London
Adam and Charles Black
1908

First Edition, Post 8vo., published 1885
Second Edition, Post 8vo., published 1887
Third Edition, Demy 8vo., published 1893
Fourth Edition, Demy 8vo., published 1902
Fourth Edition, Post 8vo., reprinted February, 1908




PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

Since the third edition of the present work issued from the press, the
nineteenth century has run its course and finished its record. A new era
has dawned, not by chronological prescription alone, but to the vital
sense of humanity. Novel thoughts are rife; fresh impulses stir the
nations; the soughing of the wind of progress strikes every ear. "The
old order changeth" more and more swiftly as mental activity becomes
intensified. Already many of the scientific doctrines implicitly
accepted fifteen years ago begin to wear a superannuated aspect.
Dalton's atoms are in process of disintegration; Kirchhoff's theorem
visibly needs to be modified; Clerk Maxwell's medium no longer figures
as an indispensable factotum; "absolute zero" is known to be situated on
an asymptote to the curve of cold. Ideas, in short, have all at once
become plastic, and none more completely so than those relating to
astronomy. The physics of the heavenly bodies, indeed, finds its best
opportunities in unlooked-for disclosures; for it deals with
transcendental conditions, and what is strange to terrestrial experience
may serve admirably to expound what is normal in the skies. In celestial
science especially, facts that appear subversive are often the most
illuminative, and the prospect of its advance widens and brightens with
each divagation enforced or permitted from the strait paths of rigid
theory.

This readiness for innovation has undoubtedly its dangers and drawbacks.
To the historian, above all, it presents frequent occasions of
embarrassment. The writing of history is a strongly selective operation,
the outcome being valuable just in so far as the choice what to reject
and what to include has been judicious; and the task is no light one of
discriminating between barren speculations and ideas pregnant with
coming truth. To the possession of such prescience of the future as
would be needed to do this effectually I can lay no claim; but diligence
and sobriety of thought are ordinarily within reach, and these I shall
have exercised to good purpose if I have succeeded in rendering the
fourth edition of _A Popular History of Astronomy during the Nineteenth
Century_ not wholly unworthy of a place in the scientific literature of
the twentieth century.

My thanks are due to Sir David Gill for the use of his photograph of the
great comet of 1901, which I have added to my list of illustrations, and
to the Council of the Royal Astronomical Society for the loan of glass
positives needed for the reproduction of those included in the third
edition.

London, _July_, 1902.



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

The progress of astronomy during the last hundred years has been rapid
and extraordinary. In its distinctive features, moreover, the nature of
that progress has been such as to lend itself with facility to
untechnical treatment. To this circumstance the present volume owes its
origin. It embodies an attempt to enable the ordinary reader to follow,
with intelligent interest, the course of modern astronomical inquiries,
and to realize (so far as it can at present be realized) the full effect
of the comprehensive change in the whole aspect, purposes, and methods
of celestial science introduced by the momentous discovery of spectrum
analysis.

Since Professor Grant's invaluable work on the _History of Physical
Astronomy_ was published, a third of a century has elapsed. During the
interval a so-called "new astronomy" has grown up by the side of the
old. One effect of its advent has been to render the science of the
heavenly bodies more popular, both in its needs and in its nature, than
formerly. More popular in its needs, since its progress now primarily
depends upon the interest in, and consequent efforts towards its
advancement of the general public; more popular in its nature, because
the kind of knowledge it now chiefly tends to accumulate is more easily
intelligible--less remote from ordinary experience--than that evolved by
the aid of the calculus from materials collected by the use of the
transit-instrument and chronograph.

It has thus become practicable to describe in simple language the most
essential parts of recent astronomical discoveries, and, being
practicable, it could not be otherwise than desirable to do so. The
service to astronomy itself would be not inconsiderable of enlisting
wider sympathies on its behalf, while to help one single mind towards a
fuller understanding of the manifold works which have in all ages
irresistibly spoken to man of the glory of God might well be an object
of no ignoble ambition.

The present volume does not profess to be a complete or exhaustive
history of astronomy during the period covered by it. Its design is to
present a view of the progress of celestial science, on its most
characteristic side, since the time of Herschel. Abstruse mathematical
theories, unless in some of their more striking results, are excluded
from consideration. These, during the eighteenth century, constituted
the sum and substance of astronomy, and their fundamental importance can
never be diminished, and should never be ignored. But as the outcome of
the enormous development given to the powers of the telescope in recent
times, together with the swift advance of physical science, and the
inclusion, by means of the spectroscope, of the heavenly bodies within
the domain of its inquiries, much knowledge has been acquired regarding
the nature and condition of those bodies, forming, it might be said, a
science apart, and disembarrassed from immediate dependence upon
intricate, and, except to the initiated, unintelligible formulae. This
kind of knowledge forms the main subject of the book now offered to the
public.

There are many reasons for preferring a history to a formal treatise on
astronomy. In a treatise, _what_ we know is set forth. A history tells
us, in addition, _how_ we came to know it. It thus places facts before
us in the natural order of their ascertainment, and narrates instead of
enumerating. The story to be told leaves the marvels of imagination far
behind, and requires no embellishment from literary art or high-flown
phrases. Its best ornament is unvarnished truthfulness, and this, at
least, may confidently be claimed to be bestowed upon it in the ensuing
pages.

In them unity of treatment is sought to be combined with a due regard to
chronological sequence by grouping in separate chapters the various
events relating to the several departments of descriptive astronomy. The
whole is divided into two parts, the line between which is roughly drawn
at the middle of the present century. Herschel's inquiries into the
construction of the heavens strike the keynote of the first part; the
discoveries of sun-spot and magnetic periodicity and of spectrum
analysis determine the character of the second. Where the nature of the
subject required it, however, this arrangement has been disregarded.
Clearness and consistency should obviously take precedence of method.
Thus, in treating of the telescopic scrutiny of the various planets, the
whole of the related facts have been collected into an uninterrupted
narrative. A division elsewhere natural and helpful would here have been
purely artificial, and therefore confusing.

The interests of students have been consulted by a full and authentic
system of references to the sources of information relied upon.
Materials have been derived, as a rule with very few exceptions, from
the original authorities. The system adopted has been to take as little
as possible at second-hand. Much pains have been taken to trace the
origin of ideas, often obscurely enunciated long before they came to
resound through the scientific world, and to give to each individual
discoverer, strictly and impartially, his due. Prominence has also been
assigned to the biographical element, as underlying and determining the
whole course of human endeavour. The advance of knowledge may be called
a vital process. The lives of men are absorbed into and assimilated by
it. Inquiries into the kind and mode of the surrender in each separate
case must always possess a strong interest, whether for study or for
example.

The acknowledgments of the writer are due to Professor Edward S. Holden,
director of the Washburn Observatory, Wisconsin, and to Dr. Copeland,
chief astronomer of Lord Crawford's Observatory at Dunecht, for many
valuable communications.

London, _September_, 1885.




CONTENTS

                             _INTRODUCTION_

                                                                      page
  Three Kinds of Astronomy--Progress of the Science during the
  Eighteenth Century--Popularity and Rapid Advance during the Nineteenth
  Century                                                                1


                                 PART I

  _PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY DURING THE FIRST HALF OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY_


                                CHAPTER I

                    FOUNDATION OF SIDEREAL ASTRONOMY

  State of Knowledge regarding the Stars in the Eighteenth Century--
  Career of Sir William Herschel--Constitution of the Stellar System--
  Double Stars--Herschel's Discovery of their Revolutions--
  His Method of Star-gauging--Discoveries of Nebulae--Theory of their
  Condensation into Stars--Summary of Results                            9


                                CHAPTER II

                     PROGRESS OF SIDEREAL ASTRONOMY

  Exact Astronomy in Germany--Career of Bessel--His _Fundamenta
  Astronomiae_--Career of Fraunhofer--Parallaxes of Fixed
  Stars--Translation of the Solar System--Astronomy of the
  Invisible--Struve's Researches in Double Stars--Sir John Herschel's
  Exploration of the Heavens--Fifty Years' Progress                     27


                                CHAPTER III

                  PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE REGARDING THE SUN

  Early Views as to the Nature of Sun-spots--Wilson's Observations and
  Reasonings--Sir William Herschel's Theory of the Solar
  Constitution--Sir John Herschel's Trade-Wind Hypothesis--Baily's
  Beads--Total Solar Eclipse of 1842--Corona and Prominences--Eclipse of
  1851                                                                  52


                                CHAPTER IV

                          PLANETARY DISCOVERIES

Bode's Law--Search for a Missing Planet--Its Discovery by Piazzi--
Further Discoveries of Minor Planets--Unexplained Disturbance of
Uranus--Discovery of Neptune--Its Satellite--An Eighth Saturnian
Moon--Saturn's Dusky Ring--The Uranian System                           71


                                CHAPTER V

                                 COMETS

  Predicted Return of Halley's Comet--Career of Olbers--Acceleration of
  Encke's Comet--Biela's Comet--Its Duplication--Faye's Comet--Comet of
  1811--Electrical Theory of Cometary Emanations--The Earth in a Comet's
  Tail--Second Return of Halley's Comet--Great Comet of 1843--Results to
  Knowledge                                                             88


                                CHAPTER VI

                           INSTRUMENTAL ADVANCES

  Two Principles of Telescopic Construction--Early Reflectors--Three
  Varieties--Herschel's Specula--High Magnifying Powers--Invention of
  the Achromatic Lens--Guinand's Optical Glass--The Great Rosse
  Reflector--Its Disclosures--Mounting of Telescopes--Astronomical
  Circles--Personal Equation                                           108



                                  PART II

                       _RECENT PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY_


                                 CHAPTER I

                     FOUNDATION OF ASTRONOMICAL PHYSICS

  Schwabe's Discovery of a Decennial Sun-spot Period--Coincidence with
  Period of Magnetic Disturbance--Sun-spots and Weather--Spectrum
  Analysis--Preliminary Inquiries--Fraunhofer Lines--Kirchhoff's
  Principle--Anticipations--Elementary Principles of Spectrum
  Analysis--Unity of Nature                                            125


                                CHAPTER II

                     SOLAR OBSERVATIONS AND THEORIES

  Black Openings in Spots--Carrington's Observations--Rotation of the
  Sun--Kirchhoff's Theory of the Solar Constitution--Faye's Views--Solar
  Photography--Kew Observations--Spectroscopic Method--Cyclonic Theory
  of Sun-spots--Volcanic Hypothesis--A Solar Outburst--Sun-spot
  Periodicity--Planetary Influence--Structure of the Photosphere       143


                                CHAPTER III

                           RECENT SOLAR ECLIPSES

  Expeditions to Spain--Great Indian Eclipse--New Method of Viewing
  Prominences--Total Eclipse Visible in North America--Spectrum of the
  Corona--Eclipse of 1870--Young's Reversing Layer--Eclipse of
  1871--Corona of 1878--Varying Coronal Types--Egyptian
  Eclipse--Daylight Coronal Photography--Observations at Caroline
  Island--Photographs of Corona in 1886 and 1889--Eclipses of 1896,
  1898, 1900, and 1901--Mechanical Theory of Corona--Electro-Magnetic
  Theories--Nature of Corona                                           166


                                CHAPTER IV

                            SOLAR SPECTROSCOPY

  Chemistry of Prominences--Study of their Forms--Two
  Classes--Photographs and Spectrographs of Prominences--Their
  Distribution--Structure of the Chromosphere--Spectroscopic Measurement
  of Radial Movements--Spectroscopic Determination of Solar
  Rotation--Velocities of Transport in the Sun--Lockyer's Theory of
  Dissociation--Solar Constituents--Oxygen Absorption in Solar
  Spectrum                                                             194


                                CHAPTER V

                          TEMPERATURE OF THE SUN

  Thermal Power of the Sun--Radiation and Temperature--Estimates of
  Solar Temperature--Rosetti's and Wilson's Results--Zoellner's Method
  --Langley's Experiment at Pittsburg--The Sun's Atmosphere--Langley's
  Bolometric Researches--Selective Absorption by our Air--The Solar
  Constant                                                             216


                                CHAPTER VI

                            THE SUN'S DISTANCE

  Difficulty of the Problem--Oppositions of Mars--Transits of
  Venus--Lunar Disturbance--Velocity of Light--Transit of
  1874--Inconclusive Result--Opposition of Mars in 1877--Measurements of
  Minor Planets--Transit of 1882--Newcomb's Determination of the
  Velocity of Light--Combined Result                                   227


                                CHAPTER VII

                           PLANETS AND SATELLITES

  Schroeter's Life and Work--Luminous Appearances during Transits of
  Mercury--Mountains of Mercury--Intra-Mercurian Planets--Schiaparelli's
  Results for the Rotation of Mercury and Venus--Illusory
  Satellite--Mountains and Atmosphere of Venus--Ashen Light--Solidity of
  the Earth--Variation of Latitude--Secular Changes of Climate--Figure
  of the Globe--Study of the Moon's Surface--Lunar Atmosphere--New
  Craters--Thermal Energy of Moonlight--Tidal Friction                 243


                                CHAPTER VIII

                     PLANETS AND SATELLITES--(_continued_)

  Analogy between Mars and the Earth--Martian Snowcaps, Seas, and
  Continents--Climate and Atmosphere--Schiaparelli's Canals--Discovery
  of Two Martian Satellites--Photographic Detection of Minor
  Planets--Orbit of Eros--Distribution of the Minor Planets--Their
  Collective Mass and Estimated Diameters--Condition of Jupiter--His
  Spectrum--Transits of his Satellites--Discovery of a Fifth
  Satellite--The Great Red Spot--Constitution of Saturn's Rings--Period
  of Rotation of the Planet--Variability of Japetus--Equatorial Markings
  on Uranus--His Spectrum--Rotation of Neptune--Trans-Neptunian
  Planets                                                              274


                                CHAPTER IX

                      THEORIES OF PLANETARY EVOLUTION

  Origin of the World according to Kant--Laplace's Nebular
  Hypothesis--Maintenance of the Sun's Heat--Meteoric
  Hypothesis--Radiation as an Effect of Contraction--Regenerative
  Theory--Faye's Scheme of Planetary Development--Origin of the
  Moon--Effects of Tidal Friction                                      308


                                CHAPTER X

                              RECENT COMETS

  Donati's Comet--The Earth again Involved in a Comet's Tail--Comets of
  the August and November Meteors--Star Showers--Comets and
  Meteors--Biela's Comet and the Andromedes--Holmes's Comet--Deflection
  of the Leonids--Orbits of Meteorites--Meteors with Stationary
  Radiants--Spectroscopic Analysis of Cometary Light--Comet of
  1901--Coggia's Comet                                                 323


                                CHAPTER XI

                        RECENT COMETS--(_continued_)

  Forms of Comets' Tails--Electrical Repulsion--Bredikhine's Three
  Types--Great Southern Comet--Supposed Previous Appearances--Tebbutt's
  Comet and the Comet of 1807--Successful Photographs--Schaeberle's
  Comet--Comet Wells--Sodium Blaze in Spectrum--Great Comet of
  1882--Transit across the Sun--Relation to Comets of 1843 and
  1880--Cometary Systems--Spectral Changes in Comet of 1882--Brooks's
  Comet of 1889--Swift's Comet of 1892--Origin of Comets               345


                                CHAPTER XII

                             STARS AND NEBULAE

  Stellar Chemistry--Four Orders of Stars--Their Relative Ages--Gaseous
  Stars--Spectroscopic Star-Catalogues--Stellar Chemistry--Hydrogen
  Spectrum in Stars--The Draper Catalogue--Velocities of Stars in Line
  of Sight--Spectroscopic Binaries--Eclipses of Algol--Catalogues of
  Variables--New Stars--Outbursts in Nebulae--Nova Aurigae--Nova
  Persei--Gaseous Nebulae--Variable Nebulae--Movements of Nebulae--Stellar
  and Nebular Photography--Nebulae in the Pleiades--Photographic
  Star-charting--Stellar Parallax--Double Stars--Stellar
  Photometry--Status of Nebulae--Photographs and Drawings of the Milky
  Way--Star Drift                                                      372


                                CHAPTER XIII

                             METHODS OF RESEARCH

  Development of Telescopic Power--Silvered Glass Reflectors--Giant
  Refractors--Comparison with Reflectors--The Yerkes
  Telescope--Atmospheric Disturbance--The Lick Observatory--Mechanical
  Difficulties--The Equatoreal _Coude_--The Photographic
  Camera--Retrospect and Conclusion                                    428


                                APPENDIX

  Chronology, 1774-1893--Chemical Elements in the Sun (Rowland,
  1891)--Epochs of Sun-spot Maximum and Minimum from 1610 to
  1901--Movements of Sun and Stars--List of Great Telescopes--List of
  Observatories employed in the Construction of the Photographic Chart
  and Catalogue of the Heavens                                         443


  INDEX                                                                471


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

  Photograph of the Great Nebula in Orion, 1883         _Frontispiece_

  Photographs of Jupiter, 1879, and of Saturn, 1885         _Vignette_

  Plate I. Photographs of the Solar Chromosphere
    and Prominences                                   _To face p. 198_

  Plate II. Photograph of the Great Comet of May,
    1901 (Taken at the Royal Observatory, Cape
    of Good Hope)                                          "      343

  Plate III. The Great Comet of September, 1882
    (Photographed at the Cape of Good Hope)                "      359

  Plate IV. Photographs of Swift's Comet, 1892             "      368

  Plate V. Photographic and Visual Spectrum of
    Nova Aurigae                                            "      396

  Plate VI. Photograph of the Milky Way in Sagittarius     "      424




HISTORY OF ASTRONOMY DURING THE NINETEENTH CENTURY


                          _INTRODUCTION_

We can distinguish three kinds of astronomy, each with a different
origin and history, but all mutually dependent, and composing, in their
fundamental unity, one science. First in order of time came the art of
observing the returns, and measuring the places, of the heavenly bodies.
This was the sole astronomy of the Chinese and Chaldeans; but to it the
vigorous Greek mind added a highly complex geometrical plan of their
movements, for which Copernicus substituted a more harmonious system,
without as yet any idea of a compelling cause. The planets revolved in
circles because it was their nature to do so, just as laudanum sets to
sleep because it possesses a _virtus dormitiva_. This first and oldest
branch is known as "observational," or "practical astronomy." Its
business is to note facts as accurately as possible; and it is
essentially unconcerned with schemes for connecting those facts in a
manner satisfactory to the reason.

The second kind of astronomy was founded by Newton. Its nature is best
indicated by the term "gravitational"; but it is also called
"theoretical astronomy."[1] It is based on the idea of cause; and the
whole of its elaborate structure is reared according to the dictates of
a single law, simple in itself, but the tangled web of whose
consequences can be unravelled only by the subtle agency of an elaborate
calculus.

The third and last division of celestial science may properly be termed
"physical and descriptive astronomy." It seeks to know what the heavenly
bodies are in themselves, leaving the How? and the Wherefore? of their
movements to be otherwise answered. Now, such inquiries became possible
only through the invention of the telescope, so that Galileo was, in
point of fact, their originator. But Herschel first gave them a
prominence which the whole progress of science during the nineteenth
century served to confirm and render more exclusive. Inquisitions begun
with the telescope have been extended and made effective in unhoped-for
directions by the aid of the spectroscope and photographic camera; and a
large part of our attention in the present volume will be occupied with
the brilliant results thus achieved.

The unexpected development of this new physical-celestial science is the
leading fact in recent astronomical history. It was out of the regular
course of events. In the degree in which it has actually occurred it
could certainly not have been foreseen. It was a seizing of the prize by
a competitor who had hardly been thought qualified to enter the lists.
Orthodox astronomers of the old school looked with a certain contempt
upon observers who spent their nights in scrutinising the faces of the
moon and planets rather than in timing their transits, or devoted
daylight energies, not to reductions and computations, but to counting
and measuring spots on the sun. They were regarded as irregular
practitioners, to be tolerated perhaps, but certainly not encouraged.

The advance of astronomy in the eighteenth century ran in general an
even and logical course. The age succeeding Newton's had for its special
task to demonstrate the universal validity, and trace the complex
results, of the law of gravitation. The accomplishment of that task
occupied just one hundred years. It was virtually brought to a close
when Laplace explained to the French Academy, November 19, 1787, the
cause of the moon's accelerated motion. As a mere machine, the solar
system, so far as it was then known, was found to be complete and
intelligible in all its parts; and in the _Mecanique Celeste_ its
mechanical perfections were displayed under a form of majestic unity
which fitly commemorated the successive triumphs of analytical genius
over problems amongst the most arduous ever dealt with by the mind of
man.

Theory, however, demands a practical test. All its data are derived from
observation; and their insecurity becomes less tolerable as it advances
nearer to perfection. Observation, on the other hand, is the pitiless
critic of theory; it detects weak points, and provokes reforms which may
be the beginnings of discovery. Thus, theory and observation mutually
act and react, each alternately taking the lead in the endless race of
improvement.

Now, while in France Lagrange and Laplace were bringing the
gravitational theory of the solar system to completion, work of a very
different kind, yet not less indispensable to the future welfare of
astronomy, was being done in England. The Royal Observatory at Greenwich
is one of the few useful institutions which date their origin from the
reign of Charles II. The leading position which it still occupies in the
science of celestial observation was, for near a century and a half
after its foundation, an exclusive one. Delambre remarked that, had all
other materials of the kind been destroyed, the Greenwich records alone
would suffice for the restoration of astronomy. The establishment was
indeed absolutely without a rival.[2] Systematic observations of sun,
moon, stars, and planets were during the whole of the eighteenth century
made only at Greenwich. Here materials were accumulated for the secure
correction of theory, and here refinements were introduced by which the
exquisite accuracy of modern practice in astronomy was eventually
attained.

The chief promoter of these improvements was James Bradley. Few men have
possessed in an equal degree with him the power of seeing accurately,
and reasoning on what they see. He let nothing pass. The slightest
inconsistency between what appeared and what was to be expected roused
his keenest attention; and he never relaxed his mental grip of a subject
until it had yielded to his persistent inquisition. It was to these
qualities that he owed his discoveries of the aberration of light and
the nutation of the earth's axis. The first was announced in 1729. What
is meant by it is that, owing to the circumstance of light not being
instantaneously transmitted, the heavenly bodies appear shifted from
their true places by an amount depending upon the ratio which the
velocity of light bears to the speed of the earth in its orbit. Because
light travels with enormous rapidity, the shifting is very slight; and
each star returns to its original position at the end of a year.

Bradley's second great discovery was finally ascertained in 1748.
Nutation is a real "nodding" of the terrestrial axis produced by the
dragging of the moon at the terrestrial equatorial protuberance. From it
results an _apparent_ displacement of the stars, each of them describing
a little ellipse about its true or "mean" position, in a period of
nearly nineteen years.

Now, an acquaintance with the fact and the laws of each of these minute
irregularities is vital to the progress of observational astronomy; for
without it the places of the heavenly bodies could never be accurately
known or compared. So that Bradley, by their detection, at once raised
the science to a higher grade of precision. Nor was this the whole of
his work. Appointed Astronomer-Royal in 1742, he executed during the
years 1750-62 a series of observations which formed the real beginning
of exact astronomy. Part of their superiority must, indeed, be
attributed to the co-operation of John Bird, who provided Bradley in
1750 with a measuring instrument of till then unequalled excellence. For
not only was the art of observing in the eighteenth century a peculiarly
English art, but the means of observing were furnished almost
exclusively by British artists. John Dollond, the son of a Spitalfields
weaver, invented the achromatic lens in 1758, removing thereby the chief
obstacle to the development of the powers of refracting telescopes;
James Short, of Edinburgh, was without a rival in the construction of
reflectors; the sectors, quadrants, and circles of Graham, Bird,
Ramsden, and Cary were inimitable by Continental workmanship.

Thus practical and theoretical astronomy advanced on parallel lines in
England and France respectively, the improvement of their several
tools--the telescope and the quadrant on the one side, and the calculus
on the other--keeping pace. The whole future of the science seemed to be
theirs. The cessation of interest through a too speedy attainment of the
perfection towards which each spurred the other, appeared to be the only
danger it held in store for them. When all at once, a rival stood by
their side--not, indeed, menacing their progress, but threatening to
absorb their popularity.

The rise of Herschel was the one conspicuous anomaly in the astronomical
history of the eighteenth century. It proved decisive of the course of
events in the nineteenth. It was unexplained by anything that had gone
before; yet all that came after hinged upon it. It gave a new direction
to effort; it lent a fresh impulse to thought. It opened a channel for
the widespread public interest which was gathering towards astronomical
subjects to flow in.

Much of this interest was due to the occurrence of events calculated to
arrest the attention and excite the wonder of the uninitiated. The
predicted return of Halley's comet in 1759 verified, after an
unprecedented fashion, the computations of astronomers. It deprived such
bodies for ever of their portentous character; it ranked them as
denizens of the solar system. Again, the transits of Venus in 1761 and
1769 were the first occurrences of the kind since the awakening of
science to their consequence. Imposing preparations, journeys to remote
and hardly accessible regions, official expeditions, international
communications, all for the purpose of observing them to the best
advantage, brought their high significance vividly to the public
consciousness; a result aided by the facile pen of Lalande, in rendering
intelligible the means by which these elaborate arrangements were to
issue in an accurate knowledge of the sun's distance. Lastly, Herschel's
discovery of Uranus, March 13, 1781, had the surprising effect of utter
novelty. Since the human race had become acquainted with the company of
the planets, no addition had been made to their number. The event thus
broke with immemorial traditions, and seemed to show astronomy as still
young and full of unlooked-for possibilities.

Further popularity accrued to the science from the sequel of a career so
strikingly opened. Herschel's huge telescopes, his detection by their
means of two Saturnian and as many Uranian moons, his piercing scrutiny
of the sun, picturesque theory of its constitution, and sagacious
indication of the route pursued by it through space; his discovery of
stellar revolving systems, his bold soundings of the universe, his
grandiose ideas, and the elevated yet simple language in which they were
conveyed--formed a combination powerfully effective to those least
susceptible of new impressions. Nor was the evoked enthusiasm limited to
the British Isles. In Germany, Schroeter followed--_longo intervallo_--in
Herschel's track. Von Zach set on foot from Gotha that general
communication of ideas which gives life to a forward movement. Bode
wrote much and well for unlearned readers. Lalande, by his popular
lectures and treatises, helped to form an audience which Laplace himself
did not disdain to address in the _Exposition du Systeme du Monde_.

This great accession of public interest gave the impulse to the
extraordinarily rapid progress of astronomy in the nineteenth century.
Official patronage combined with individual zeal sufficed for the elder
branches of the science. A few well-endowed institutions could
accumulate the materials needed by a few isolated thinkers for the
construction of theories of wonderful beauty and elaboration, yet
precluded, by their abstract nature, from winning general applause. But
the new physical astronomy depends for its prosperity upon the favour of
the multitude whom its striking results are well fitted to attract. It
is, in a special manner, the science of amateurs. It welcomes the most
unpretending co-operation. There is no one "with a true eye and a
faithful hand" but can do good work in watching the heavens. And not
unfrequently, prizes of discovery which the most perfect appliances
failed to grasp, have fallen to the share of ignorant or ill-provided
assiduity.

Observers, accordingly, have multiplied; observatories have been founded
in all parts of the world; associations have been constituted for mutual
help and counsel. A formal astronomical congress met in 1789 at
Gotha--then, under Duke Ernest II. and Von Zach, the focus of German
astronomy--and instituted a combined search for the planet suspected to
revolve undiscovered between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. The
Astronomical Society of London was established in 1820, and the similar
German institution in 1863. Both have been highly influential in
promoting the interests, local and general, of the science they are
devoted to forward; while functions corresponding to theirs have been
discharged elsewhere by older or less specially constituted bodies, and
new ones of a more popular character are springing up on all sides.

Modern facilities of communication have helped to impress more deeply
upon modern astronomy its associative character. The electric telegraph
gives a certain ubiquity which is invaluable to an observer of the
skies. With the help of a wire, a battery, and a code of signals, he
sees whatever is visible from any portion of our globe, depending,
however, upon other eyes than his own, and so entering as a unit into a
widespread organisation of intelligence. The press, again, has been a
potent agent of co-operation. It has mainly contributed to unite
astronomers all over the world into a body animated by the single aim of
collecting "particulars" in their special branch for what Bacon termed a
History of Nature, eventually to be interpreted according to the
sagacious insight of some one among them gifted above his fellows. The
first really effective astronomical periodical was the _Monatliche
Correspondenz_, started by Von Zach in the year 1800. It was followed in
1822 by the _Astronomische Nachrichten_, later by the _Memoirs_ and
_Monthly Notices_ of the Astronomical Society, and by the host of varied
publications which now, in every civilised country, communicate the
discoveries made in astronomy to divers classes of readers, and so
incalculably quicken the current of its onward flow.

Public favour brings in its train material resources. It is represented
by individual enterprise, and finds expression in an ample liberality.
The first regular observatory in the Southern Hemisphere was founded at
Paramatta by Sir Thomas Makdougall Brisbane in 1821. The Royal
Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope was completed in 1829. Similar
establishments were set to work by the East India Company at Madras,
Bombay, and St. Helena, during the first third of the nineteenth
century. The organisation of astronomy in the United States of America
was due to a strong wave of popular enthusiasm. In 1825 John Quincy
Adams vainly urged upon Congress the foundation of a National
Observatory; but in 1843 the lectures on celestial phenomena of Ormsby
MacKnight Mitchel stirred an impressionable audience to the pitch of
providing him with the means of erecting at Cincinnati the first
astronomical establishment worthy the name in that great country. On the
1st of January, 1882, no less than one hundred and forty-four were
active within its boundaries.

The apparition of the great comet of 1843 gave an additional fillip to
the movement. To the excitement caused by it the Harvard College
Observatory--called the "American Pulkowa"--directly owed its origin;
and the example was not ineffective elsewhere. The United States Naval
Observatory was built in 1844, Lieutenant Maury being its first
Director. Corporations, universities, municipalities, vied with each
other in the creation of such institutions; private subscriptions poured
in; emissaries were sent to Europe to purchase instruments and to
procure instruction in their use. In a few years the young Republic was,
in point of astronomical efficiency, at least on a level with countries
where the science had been fostered since the dawn of civilisation.

A vast widening of the scope of astronomy has accompanied, and in part
occasioned, the great extension of its area of cultivation which our age
has witnessed. In the last century its purview was a comparatively
narrow one. Problems lying beyond the range of the solar system were
almost unheeded, because they seemed inscrutable. Herschel first showed
the sidereal universe as accessible to investigation, and thereby
offered to science new worlds--majestic, manifold, "infinitely infinite"
to our apprehension in number, variety, and extent--for future conquest.
Their gradual appropriation has absorbed, and will long continue to
absorb, the powers which it has served to develop.

But this is not the only direction in which astronomy has enlarged, or
rather has levelled, its boundaries. The unification of the physical
sciences is perhaps the greatest intellectual feat of recent times. The
process has included astronomy; so that, like Bacon, she may now be said
to have "taken all knowledge" (of that kind) "for her province." In
return, she proffers potent aid for its increase. Every comet that
approaches the sun is the scene of experiments in the electrical
illumination of rarefied matter, performed on a huge scale for our
benefit. The sun, stars, and nebulae form so many celestial laboratories,
where the nature and mutual relations of the chemical "elements" may be
tried by more stringent tests than sublunary conditions afford. The laws
of terrestrial magnetism can be completely investigated only with the
aid of a concurrent study of the face of the sun. The solar spectrum
will perhaps one day, by its recurrent modifications, tell us something
of impending droughts, famines, and cyclones.

Astronomy generalises the results of the other sciences. She exhibits
the laws of Nature working over a wider area, and under more varied
conditions, than ordinary experience presents. Ordinary experience, on
the other hand, has become indispensable to her progress. She takes in
at one view the indefinitely great and the indefinitely little. The
mutual revolutions of the stellar multitude during tracts of time which
seem to lengthen out to eternity as the mind attempts to traverse them,
she does not admit to be beyond her ken; nor is she indifferent to the
constitution of the minutest atom of matter that thrills the ether into
light. How she entered upon this vastly expanded inheritance, and how,
so far, she has dealt with it, is attempted to be set forth in the
ensuing chapters.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: The denomination "physical astronomy," first used by
Kepler, and long appropriated to this branch of the science, has of late
been otherwise applied.]

[Footnote 2: _Histoire de l'Astronomie au xviii^e Siecle_, p. 267.]




                                 PART I

PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY DURING THE FIRST HALF OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY


                                CHAPTER I

                   _FOUNDATION OF SIDEREAL ASTRONOMY_


Until nearly a hundred years ago the stars were regarded by practical
astronomers mainly as a number of convenient fixed points by which the
motions of the various members of the solar system could be determined
and compared. Their recognised function, in fact, was that of milestones
on the great celestial highway traversed by the planets, as well as on
the byways of space occasionally pursued by comets. Not that curiosity
as to their nature, and even conjecture as to their origin, were at any
period absent. Both were from time to time powerfully stimulated by the
appearance of startling novelties in a region described by philosophers
as "incorruptible," or exempt from change. The catalogue of Hipparchus
probably, and certainly that of Tycho Brahe, some seventeen centuries
later, owed each its origin to the temporary blaze of a new star. The
general aspect of the skies was thus (however imperfectly) recorded from
age to age, and with improved appliances the enumeration was rendered
more and more accurate and complete; but the secrets of the stellar
sphere remained inviolate.

In a qualified though very real sense, Sir William Herschel may be
called the Founder of Sidereal Astronomy. Before his time some curious
facts had been noted, and some ingenious speculations hazarded,
