Fig. 110. Cyclamen Persicum: circumnutation of leaf, traced from 6.45 A.M.
June 2nd to 6.40 A.M. 5th. Apex of leaf 7 inches from the vertical glass.

downwards as almost to form a semicircle. The chord--that is, a line drawn
from the apex of the blade to the base of the petiole--of a young leaf, 4
3/4 inches in length, stood at 2.50 P.M. on
[page 248]
Dec. 5th at an angle of 13o beneath the horizon, but by 9.30 P.M. the blade
had straightened itself so much, which implies the raising of the apex,
that the chord now stood at 37o above the horizon, and had therefore risen
50o. On the next day similar angular measurements of the same leaf were
made; and at noon the chord stood 36o beneath the horizon, and 9.30 P.M. 3
1/2o above it, so had risen 39 1/2o. The chief cause of the rising movement
lies in the straightening of the blade, but the short petiole rises between
4o and 5o. On the third night the chord stood at 35o above the horizon, and
if the leaf occupied the same position at noon, as on the previous day, it
had risen 71o. With older leaves no such change of curvature could be
detected. The plant was then brought into the house and kept in a
north-east room, but at night there was no change in the curvature of the
young leaves; so that previous exposure to a strong light is apparently
requisite for the periodical change of curvature in the blade, and for the
slight rising of the petiole.

(21.) Wigandia (Hydroleaceae, Fam. 149).--Professor Pfeffer informs us that
the leaves of this plant rise in the evening; but as we do not know whether
or not the rising is great, this species ought perhaps to be classed
amongst sleeping plants.

Fig. 111. Petunia violacea: downward movement and circumnutation of a very
young leaf, traced from 10 A.M. June 2nd to 9.20 A.M. June 6th. N.B.--At
6.40 A.M. on the 5th it was necessary to move the pot a little, and a new
tracing was begun at the point where two dots are not joined in the
diagram. Apex of leaf 7 inches from the vertical glass. Temp. generally 17
1/2o C.
[page 249]

(22.) Petunia violacea (Solaneae, Fam. 157).--A very young leaf, only 3/4
inch in length, highly inclined upwards, was observed for four days. During
the whole of this time it bent outwards and downwards, so as to become more
and more nearly horizontal. The strongly marked zigzag line in the figure
on p. 248 (Fig. 111), shows that this was effected by modified
circumnutation; and during the latter part of the time there was much
ordinary circumnutation on a small scale. The movement in the diagram is
magnified between 10 and 11 times. It exhibits a clear trace of
periodicity, as the leaf rose a little each evening; but this upward
tendency appeared to be almost conquered by the leaf striving to become
more and more horizontal as it grew older. The angles which two older
leaves formed together, were measured in the evening and about noon on 3
successive days, and each night the angle decreased a little, though
irregularly.

Fig. 112. Acanthus mollis: circumnutation of young leaf, traced from 9.20
A.M. June 14th to 8.30 A.M. 16th. Apex of leaf 11 inches from the vertical
glass, so movement considerably magnified. Figure here reduced to one-half
of original scale. Temp. 15o - 16 1/2o C.

(23.) Acanthus mollis (Acanthaceae, Fam. 168).--The younger of two leaves,
2 1/4 inches in length, petiole included, produced by a seedling plant, was
observed during 47 h. Early on each of the three mornings, the apex of the
leaf fell; and it continued to fall till 3 P.M., on the two afternoons when
observed. After 3 P.M. it rose considerably, and continued to rise on the
second night until the early morning. But on the first night it fell
instead of rising, and we have little doubt that this was owing to the leaf
being very young and becoming through epinastic growth more and more
horizontal; for it may be seen in the diagram (Fig. 112), that the leaf
stood on a higher level on the first than on the second day. The leaves of
an allied species ('A. spinosus') certainly rose every night; and the rise
between noon and 10.15 P.M., when measured on one occasion, was 10o. This
rise was chiefly
[page 250]
or exclusively due to the straightening of the blade, and not to the
movement of the petiole. We may therefore conclude that the leaves of
Acanthus circumnutate periodically, falling in the morning and rising in
the afternoon and night.

(24.) Cannabis sativa (Cannabineae, Fam. 195).--We have here the rare case
of leaves moving downwards in the evening, but not to a sufficient degree
to be called sleep.* In the early morning, or in the latter part of the
night, they move upwards. For instance, all the young leaves near the
summits of several stems stood almost horizontally at 8 A.M. May 29th and
at 10.30 P.M. were considerably declined. On a subsequent day two leaves
stood at 2 P.M. at 21o and 12o beneath the horizon, and at 10 P.M. at 38o
beneath it. Two other leaves on a younger plant were horizontal at 2 P.M.,
and at 10 P.M. had sunk to 36o beneath the horizon. With respect to this
downward movement of the leaves, Kraus believes that it is due to their
epinastic growth. He adds, that the leaves are relaxed during the day, and
tense at night, both in sunny and rainy weather.

(25.) Pinus pinaster (Coniferae, Fam. 223).--The leaves on the summits of
the terminal shoots stand at first in a bundle almost upright, but they
soon diverge and ultimately become almost horizontal. The movements of a
young leaf, nearly one inch in length, on the summit of a seedling plant
only 3 inches high, were traced from the early morning of June 2nd to the
evening of the 7th. During these five days the leaf diverged, and its apex
descended at first in an almost straight line; but during the two latter
days it zigzagged so much that it was evidently circumnutating. The same
little plant, when grown to a height of 5 inches, was again observed during
four days. A filament was fixed transversely to the apex of a leaf, one
inch in length, and which had already diverged considerably from its
originally upright position. It continued to diverge (see A, Fig. 113), and
to descend from 11.45 A.M. July 31st to 6.40 A.M. Aug. 1st. On August 1st
it circumnutated about the same small space, and again descended at night.
Next morning the pot was moved nearly one inch to the right, and a new
tracing was begun (B). From this time, viz., 7 A.M. August 2nd to 8.20 A.M.
on the 4th,

* We were led to observe this plant by Dr. Carl Kraus' paper, 'Beiträge zur
Kentniss der Bewegungen Wachsender Laubblätter,' Flora, 1879, p. 66. We
regret that we cannot fully understand parts of this paper.
[page 251]

the leaf manifestly circumnutated. It does not appear from the diagram that
the leaves move periodically, for the descending course during the first
two nights, was clearly due to epinastic

Fig. 113. Pinus pinaster: circumnutation of young leaf, traced from 11.45
A.M. July 31st to 8.20 A.M. Aug. 4th. At 7 A.M. Aug. 2nd the pot was moved
an inch to one side, so that the tracing consists of two figures. Apex of
leaf 14 ½ inches from the vertical glass, so movements much magnified.

growth, and at the close of our observations the leaf was not nearly so
horizontal as it would ultimately become.

Pinus austriaca.--Two leaves, 3 inches in length, but not
[page 252]
quite fully grown, produced by a lateral shoot, on a young tree 3 feet in
height, were observed during 29 h. (July 31st), in the same manner as the
leaves of the previous species. Both these leaves certainly circumnutated,
making within the above period two, or two and a half, small, irregular
ellipses.

(26.) Cycas pectinata (Cycadeae, Fam. 224).--A young leaf, 11 ½ inches in
length, of which the leaflets had only recently become uncurled, was
observed during 47 h. 30 m. The main petiole was secured to a stick at the
base of the two terminal leaflets. To one of the latter, 3 3/4 inches in
length, a filament was fixed; the leaflet was much bowed downward, but as
the terminal part was upturned, the filament projected almost horizontally.
The leaflet moved (see Fig. 114) largely and periodically, for it fell
until about 7 P.M. and rose during the night, falling again next morning
after 6.40 A.M. The descending lines are in a marked manner zigzag, and so
probably would have been the ascending lines, if they had been traced
throughout the night.

Fig. 114. Cycas pectinata: circumnutation of one of the terminal leaflets,
traced from 8.30 A.M. June 22nd to 8 A.M. June 24th. Apex of leaflet 7 3/4
inches from the vertical glass, so tracing not greatly magnified, and here
reduced to one-third of original scale; temp. 19o - 21o C.

CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES: MONOCOTYLEDONS.

(27.) Canna Warscewiczii (Cannaceae, Fam. 2).--The movements of a young
leaf, 8 inches in length and 3 ½ in breadth, produced by a vigorous young
plant, were observed during 45 h. 50 m., as shown in Fig. 115. The pot was
slided about an inch to the right on the morning of the 11th, as a single
figure would have been too complicated; but the two figures are continuous
in time. The movement is periodical, as the leaf descended from the early
morning until about 5 P.M., and ascended during the rest of the evening and
[page 253]
part of the night. On the evening of the 11th it circumnutated on a small
scale for some time about the same spot.

Fig. 115. Canna Warscewiczii: circumnutation of leaf, traced (A) from 11.30
A.M. June 10th to 6.40 A.M. 11th; and (B) from 6.40 A.M. 11th to 8.40 A.M.
12th. Apex of leaf 9 inches from the vertical glass.

(28.) Iris pseudo-acorus (Irideae, Fam. 10).--The movements of a young
leaf, rising 13 inches above the water in which the plant grew, were traced
as shown in the figure (Fig. 116), during 27 h. 30 m. It manifestly
circumnutated, though only to a small extent. On the second morning,
between 6.40 A.M. and 2 P.M. (at which latter hour the figure here given
ends), the apex changed its course five times. During the next 8 h. 40 m.
it zigzagged much, and descended as far as the lowest dot in the figure,
making in its course two very small ellipses; but if these lines had been
added to the diagram it would have been too complex.

Fig. 116. Iris pseudo-acorus: circumnutation of leaf, traced from 10.30
A.M. May 28th to 2 P.M. 29th. Tracing continued to 11 P.M., but not here
copied. Apex of leaf 12 inches beneath the horizontal glass, so figure
considerably magnified. Temp. 15o - 16o C.
(29.) Crinum Capense (Amaryllideae, Fam. 11).--The leaves of this plant are
remarkable for their great length and narrowness: one was measured and
found to be 53 inches long and only 1.4 broad at the base. Whilst quite
young they stand up almost vertically to the height of about a foot;
afterwards
[page 254]
their tips begin to bend over, and subsequently hang vertically down, and
thus continue to grow. A rather young leaf was selected, of which the
dependent tapering point was as yet only 5 ½ inches in length, the upright
basal part being 20 inches high, though this part would ultimately become
shorter by being more bent over. A large bell-glass was placed over the
plant, with a black dot on one side; and by bringing the dependent apex of
the leaf into a line with this dot, the accompanying figure (Fig. 117) was
traced on the other side of the bell, during 2 ½ days. During the first day
(22nd) the tip travelled laterally far to the left, perhaps in consequence
of the plant having been

Fig. 117. Crinum Capense: circumnutation of dependent tip of young leaf,
traced on a bell-glass, from 10.30 P.M. May 22nd to 10.15 A.M. 25th. Figure
not greatly magnified.

disturbed; and the last dot made at 10.30 P.M. on this day is alone here
given. As we see in the figure, there can be no doubt that the apex of this
leaf circumnutated.

A glass filament with little triangles of paper was at the same time fixed
obliquely across the tip of a still younger leaf, which stood vertically up
and was as yet straight. Its movements were traced from 3 P.M. May 22nd to
10.15 A.M. 25th. The leaf was growing rapidly, so that the apex ascended
greatly during this period; as it zigzagged much it was clearly
circumnutating, and it apparently tended to form one ellipse each day. The
lines traced during the night were much more vertical than those traced
during the day; and this indicates that the tracing would have exhibited a
nocturnal rise and a diurnal fall, if the leaf had not grown so quickly.
The movement of this same leaf after an interval of six days (May 31st), by
which time the tip had curved outwards into a horizontal position,
[page 255]
and had thus made the first step towards becoming dependent, was traced
orthogonically by the aid of a cube of wood (in the manner before
explained); and it was thus ascertained that the actual distance travelled
by the apex, and due to circumnutation, was 3 1/8 inches in the course of
20 ½ h. During the next 24 h. it travelled 2 ½ inches. The circumnutating
movement, therefore, of this young leaf was strongly marked.

(30.) Pancratium littorale (Amaryllideae).--The movements, much magnified,
of a leaf, 9 inches in length and inclined at about 45o above the horizon,
were traced during two days. On the first day it changed its course
completely, upwards and downwards and laterally, 9 times in 12 h.; and the
figure traced apparently represented five ellipses. On the second day it
was observed seldomer, and was therefore not seen to change its course so
often, viz., only 6 times, but in the same complex manner as before. The
movements were small in extent, but there could be no doubt about the
circumnutation of the leaf.

(31.) Imatophyllum vel Clivia (sp.?) (Amaryllideae).--A long glass filament
was fixed to a leaf, and the angle formed by it with the horizon was
measured occasionally during three successive days. It fell each morning
until between 3 and 4 P.M., and rose at night. The smallest angle at any
time above the horizon was 48o, and the largest 50o; so that it rose only 2o
at night; but as this was observed each day, and as similar observations
were nightly made on another leaf on a distinct plant, there can be no
doubt that the leaves move periodically, though to a very small extent. The
position of the apex when it stood highest was .8 of an inch above its
lowest point.

(32.) Pistia stratiotes (Aroideae, Fam. 30).--Hofmeister remarks that the
leaves of this floating water-plant are more highly inclined at night than
by day.* We therefore fastened a fine glass filament to the midrib of a
moderately young leaf, and on Sept. 19th measured the angle which it formed
with the horizon 14 times between 9 A.M. and 11.50 P.M. The temperature of
the hot-house varied during the two days of observation between 18 1/2o and
23 1/2o C. At 9 A.M. the filament stood at 32o above the horizon; at 3.34
P.M. at 10o and at 11.50 P.M. at 55o; these two latter angles being the
highest and the lowest observed during the day, showing a difference of
45o. The rising did not become strongly marked until between

* 'Die Lehre von der Pflanzenzelle,' 1867, p. 327.
[page 256]

5 and 6 P.M. On the next day the leaf stood at only 10o above the horizon
at 8.25 A.M., and it remained at about 15o till past 3 P.M.; at 5.40 P.M.
it was 23o, and at 9.30 P.M. 58o; so that the rise was more sudden this
evening than on the previous one, and the difference in the angle amounted
to 48o. The movement is obviously periodical, and as the leaf stood on the
first night at 55o, and on the second night at 58o above the horizon, it
appeared very steeply inclined. This case, as we shall see in a future
chapter, ought perhaps to have been included under the head of sleeping
plants.

(33.) Pontederia (sp.?) (from the highlands of St. Catharina,

Fig. 118. Pontederia (sp.?): circumnutation of leaf, traced from 4.50 P.M.
July 2nd to 10.15 A.M. 4th. Apex of leaf 16 ½ inches from the vertical
glass, so tracing greatly magnified. Temp. about 17o C., and therefore
rather too low.

Brazil) (Pontederiaceae, Fam. 46).--A filament was fixed across the apex of
a moderately young leaf, 7 ½ inches in height, and its movements were
traced during 42 ½ h. (see Fig. 118). On the first evening, when the
tracing was begun, and during the night, the leaf descended considerably.
On the next morning it ascended in a strongly marked zigzag line, and
descended again in the evening and during the night. The movement,
therefore, seems to be periodic, but some doubt is thrown on this
conclusion, because another leaf, 8 inches in height, appearing older and
standing more highly inclined, behaved differently. During the first 12 h.
it circumnutated over a
[page 257]
small space, but during the night and the whole following day it ascended
in the same general direction; the ascent being effected by repeated up and
down well-pronounced oscillations.

CRYPTOGAMS.

(34.) Nephrodium molle (Filices, Fam. 1).--A filament was fixed near the
apex of a young frond of this Fern, 17 inches in height, which was not as
yet fully uncurled; and its movements were traced during 24 h. We see in
Fig. 119 that it

Fig. 119. Nephrodium molle: circumnutation of rachis, traced from 9.15 A.M.
May 28th to 9 A.M. 29th. Figure here given two-thirds of original scale.

plainly circumnutated. The movement was not greatly magnified as the frond
was placed near to the vertical glass, and would probably have been greater
and more rapid had the day been warmer. For the plant was brought out of a
warm greenhouse and observed under a skylight, where the temperature was
between 15o and 16o C. We have seen in Chap. I. that a frond of this Fern,
as yet only slightly lobed and with a rachis only .23 inch in height,
plainly circumnutated.*

* Mr. Loomis and Prof. Asa Gray have described ('Botanical Gazette,' 1880,
pp. 27, 43), an extremely curious case of movement in the fronds, but only
in the fruiting fronds, of Asplenium trichomanes. They move almost as
rapidly as the little leaflets of Desmodium gyrans, alternately backwards
and forwards through from 20 to 40 degrees, in a plane at right angles to
that of the frond. The apex of the frond describes "a long and very narrow
ellipse," so that it circumnutates. But the movement differs from ordinary
[[page 258]]
circumnutation as it occurs only when the plant is exposed to the light;
even artificial light "is sufficient to excite motion for a few minutes."
[page 258]

In the chapter on the Sleep of Plants the conspicuous circumnutation of
Marsilea quadrifoliata (Marsileaceae, Fam. 4) will be described.

It has also been shown in Chap. I. that a very young Selaginella
(Lycopodiaceae, Fam. 6), only .4 inch in height, plainly circumnutated; we
may therefore conclude that older plants, whilst growing, would do the
same.

Fig. 120. Lunularia vulgaris: circumnutation of a frond, traced from 9 A.M.
Oct 25th to 8 A.M. 27th.

(35.) Lunularia vulgaris (Hepaticae, Fam. 11, Muscales).--The earth in an
old flower-pot was coated with this plant, bearing gemmae. A highly
inclined frond, which projected .3 inch above the soil and was .4 inch in
breadth, was selected for observation. A glass hair of extreme tenuity, .75
inch in length, with its end whitened, was cemented with shellac to the
frond at right angles to its breadth; and a white stick with a minute black
spot was driven into the soil close behind the end of the hair. The white
end could be accurately brought into a line with the black spot, and dots
could thus be successively made on the vertical glass-plate in front. Any
movement of the frond would of course be exhibited and increased by the
long glass hair; and the black spot was placed so close behind the end of
the hair, relatively to the distance of the glass-plate in front, that the
movement of the end was magnified about 40 times. Nevertheless, we are
convinced that our tracing gives a fairly faithful representation of the
movements of the frond. In the intervals between each observation, the
plant was covered by a small bell-glass. The frond, as already stated,
[page 259]
was highly inclined, and the pot stood in front of a north-east window.
During the five first days the frond moved downwards or became less
inclined; and the long line which was traced was strongly zigzag, with
loops occasionally formed or nearly formed; and this indicated
circumnutation. Whether the sinking was due to epinastic growth, or
apheliotropism, we do not know. As the sinking was slight on the fifth day,
a new tracing was begun on the sixth day (Oct. 25th), and was continued for
47 h.; it is here given (Fig. 120). Another tracing was made on the next
day (27th) and the frond was found to be still circumnutating, for during
14 h. 30 m. it changed its course completely (besides minor changes) 10
times. It was casually observed for two more days, and was seen to be
continually moving.

The lowest members of the vegetable series, the Thallogens, apparently
circumnutate. If an Oscillaria be watched under the microscope, it may be
seen to describe circles about every 40 seconds. After it has bent to one
side, the tip first begins to bend back to the opposite side and then the
whole filament curves over in the same direction. Hofmeister* has given a
minute account of the curious, but less regular though constant, movements
of Spirogyra: during 2 ½ h. the filament moved 4 times to the left and 3
times to the right, and he refers to a movement at right angles to the
above. The tip moved at the rate of about 0.1 mm. in five minutes. He
compares the movement with the nutation of the higher plants.** We shall
hereafter see that heliotropic movements result from modified
circumnutation, and as unicellular Moulds bend to the light we may infer
that they also circumnutate.]

CONCLUDING REMARKS ON THE CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES.

The circumnutating movements of young leaves in 33 genera, belonging to 25
families, widely distributed

* 'Ueber die Bewegungen der Faden der Spirogyra princeps: Jahreshefte des
Vereins für vaterländische Naturkunde in Württemberg,' 1874, p. 211.

** Zukal also remarks (as quoted in 'Journal R. Microscop. Soc.,' 1880,
vol. iii. p. 320) that the movements of Spirulina, a member of the
Oscillatorieae, are closely analogous "to the well-known rotation of
growing shoots and tendrils."
[page 260]

amongst ordinary and gymnospermous Dicotyledons and amongst Monocotyledons,
together with several Cryptogams, have now been described. It would,
therefore, not be rash to assume that the growing leaves of all plants
circumnutate, as we have seen reason to conclude is the case with
cotyledons. The seat of movement generally lies in the petiole, but
sometimes both in the petiole and blade, or in the blade alone. The extent
of the movement differed much in different plants; but the distance passed
over was never great, except with Pistia, which ought perhaps to have been
included amongst sleeping plants. The angular movement of the leaves was
only occasionally measured; it commonly varied from only 2o (and probably
even less in some instances) to about 10o; but it amounted to 23o in the
common bean. The movement is chiefly in a vertical plane, but as the
ascending and descending lines never coincided, there was always some
lateral movement, and thus irregular ellipses were formed. The movement,
therefore, deserves to be called one of circumnutation; for all
circumnutating organs tend to describe ellipses,--that is, growth on one
side is succeeded by growth on nearly but not quite the opposite side. The
ellipses, or the zigzag lines representing drawn-out ellipses, are
generally very narrow; yet with the Camellia, their minor axes were half as
long, and with the Eucalyptus more than half as long as their major axes.
In the case of Cissus, parts of the figure more nearly represented circles
than ellipses. The amount of lateral movement is therefore sometimes
considerable. Moreover, the longer axes of the successively formed ellipses
(as with the Bean, Cissus, and Sea-kale), and in several instances the
zigzag lines representing ellipses, were extended in very different
directions during the same day or on
[page 261]
the next day. The course followed was curvilinear or straight, or slightly
or strongly zigzag, and little loops or triangles were often formed. A
single large irregular ellipse may be described on one day, and two smaller
ones by the same plant on the next day. With Drosera two, and with Lupinus,
Eucalyptus and Pancratium, several were formed each day.

The oscillatory and jerking movements of the leaves of Dionaea, which
resemble those of the hypocotyl of the cabbage, are highly remarkable, as
seen under the microscope. They continue night and day for some months, and
are displayed by young unexpanded leaves, and by old ones which have lost
their sensibility to a touch, but which, after absorbing animal matter,
close their lobes. We shall hereafter meet with the same kind of movement
in the joints of certain Gramineae, and it is probably common to many
plants while circumnutating. It is, therefore, a strange fact that no such
movement could be detected in the tentacles of Drosera rotundifolia, though
a member of the same family with Dionaea; yet the tentacle which was
observed was so sensitive, that it began to curl inwards in 23 seconds
after being touched by a bit of raw meat.

One of the most interesting facts with respect to the circumnutation of
leaves is the periodicity of their movements; for they often, or even
generally, rise a little in the evening and early part of the night, and
sink again on the following morning. Exactly the same phenomenon was
observed in the case of cotyledons. The leaves in 16 genera out of the 33
which were observed behaved in this manner, as did probably 2 others. Nor
must it be supposed that in the remaining 15 genera there was no
periodicity in their movements; for 6 of them were observed during too
short a period for any judgment to be formed on this head,
[page 262]
and 3 were so young that their epinastic growth, which serves to bring them
down into a horizontal position, overpowered every other kind of movement.
In only one genus, Cannabis, did the leaves sink in the evening, and Kraus
attributes this movement to the prepotency of their epinastic growth. That
the periodicity is determined by the daily alternations of light and
darkness there can hardly be a doubt, as will hereafter be shown.
Insectivorous plants are very little affected, as far as their movements
are concerned, by light; and hence probably it is that their leaves, at
least in the cases of Sarracenia, Drosera, and Dionaea, do not move
periodically. The upward movement in the evening is at first slow, and with
different plants begins at very different hours;--with Glaucium as early as
11 A.M., commonly between 3 and 5 P.M., but sometimes as late as 7 P.M. It
should be observed that none of the leaves described in this chapter
(except, as we believe, those of Lupinus speciosus) possess a pulvinus; for
the periodical movements of leaves thus provided have generally been
amplified into so-called sleep-movements, with which we are not here
concerned. The fact of leaves and cotyledons frequently, or even generally,
rising a little in the evening and sinking in the morning, is of interest
as giving the foundation from which the specialised sleep-movements of many
leaves and cotyledons, not provided with a pulvinus, have been developed.
the above periodicity should be kept in mind, by any one considering the
problem of the horizontal position of leaves and cotyledons during the day,
whilst illuminated from above.
[page 263]

CHAPTER V.

MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION: CLIMBING PLANTS; EPINASTIC AND HYPONASTIC
MOVEMENTS.

Circumnutation modified through innate causes or through the action of
external conditions--Innate causes--Climbing plants; similarity of their
movements with those of ordinary plants; increased amplitude; occasional
points of difference--Epinastic growth of young leaves--Hyponastic growth
of the hypocotyls and epicotyls of seedlings--Hooked tips of climbing and
other plants due to modified circumnutation--Ampelopsis tricuspidata--
Smithia Pfundii--Straightening of the tip due to hyponasty--Epinastic
growth and circumnutation of the flower-peduncles of Trifolium repens and
Oxalis carnosa.

THE radicles, hypocotyls and epicotyls of seedling plants, even before they
emerge from the ground, and afterwards the cotyledons, are all continually
circumnutating. So it is with the stems, stolons, flower-peduncles, and
leaves of older plants. We may, therefore, infer with a considerable degree
of safety that all the growing parts of all plants circumnutate. Although
this movement, in its ordinary or unmodified state, appears in some cases
to be of service to plants, either directly or indirectly--for instance,
the circumnutation of the radicle in penetrating the ground, or that of the
arched hypocotyl and epicotyl in breaking through the surface--yet
circumnutation is so general, or rather so universal a phenomenon, that we
cannot suppose it to have been gained for any special purpose. We must
believe that it follows in some unknown way from the manner in which
vegetable tissues grow.
[page 264]

We shall now consider the many cases in which circumnutation has been
modified for various special purposes; that is, a movement already in
progress is temporarily increased in some one direction, and temporarily
diminished or quite arrested in other directions. These cases may be
divided in two sub-classes; in one of which the modification depends on
innate or constitutional causes, and is independent of external conditions,
excepting in so far that the proper ones for growth must be present. In the
second sub-class the modification depends to a large extent on external
agencies, such as the daily alternations of light and darkness, or light
alone, temperature, or the attraction of gravity. The first small sub-class
will be considered in the present chapter, and the second sub-class in the
remainder of this volume.

THE CIRCUMNUTATION OF CLIMBING PLANTS.

The simplest case of modified circumnutation is that offered by climbing
plants, with the exception of those which climb by the aid of motionless
hooks or of rootlets: for the modification consists chiefly in the greatly
increased amplitude of the movement. This would follow either from greatly
increased growth over a small length, or more probably from moderately
increased growth spread over a considerable length of the moving organ,
preceded by turgescence, and acting successively on all sides. The
circumnutation of climbers is more regular than that of ordinary plants;
but in almost every other respect there is a close similarity between their
movements, namely, in their tendency to describe ellipses directed
successively to all points of the compass--in their courses being often
interrupted by zigzag lines, triangles, loops, or small
[page 265]
ellipses--in the rate of movement, and in different species revolving once
or several times within the same length of time. In the same internode, the
movements cease first in the lower part and then slowly upwards. In both
sets of cases the movement may be modified in a closely analogous manner by
geotropism and by heliotropism; though few climbing plants are heliotropic.
Other points of similarity might be pointed out.

That the movements of climbing plants consist of ordinary circumnutation,
modified by being increased in amplitude, is well exhibited whilst the
plants are very young; for at this early age they move like other
seedlings, but as they grow older their movements gradually increase
without undergoing any other change. That this power is innate, and is not
excited by any external agencies, beyond those necessary for growth and
vigour, is obvious. No one doubts that this power has been gained for the
sake of enabling climbing plants to ascend to a height, and thus to reach
the light. This is effected by two very different methods; first, by
twining spirally round a support, but to do so their stems must be long and
flexible; and, secondly, in the case of leaf-climbers and tendril-bearers,
by bringing these organs into contact with a support, which is then seized
by the aid of their sensitiveness. It may be here remarked that these
latter movements have no relation, as far as we can judge, with
circumnutation. In other cases the tips of tendrils, after having been
brought into contact with a support, become developed into little discs
which adhere firmly to it.

We have said that the circumnutation of climbing plants differs from that
of ordinary plants chiefly by its greater amplitude. But most leaves
circumnutate
[page 266]
in an almost vertical plane, and therefore describe very narrow ellipses,
whereas the many kinds of tendrils which consist of metamorphosed leaves,
make much broader ellipses or nearly circular figures; and thus they have a
far better chance of catching hold of a support on any side. The movements
of climbing plants have also been modified in some few other special ways.
Thus the circumnutating stems of Solnanum dulcamara can twine round a
support only when this is as thin and flexible as a string or thread. The
twining stems of several British plants cannot twine round a support when
it is more than a few inches in thickness; whilst in tropical forests some
can embrace thick trunks;* and this great difference in power depends on
some unknown difference in their manner of circumnutation. The most
remarkable special modification of this movement which we have observed is
in the tendrils of Echinocystis lobata; these are usually inclined at about
45o above the horizon, but they stiffen and straighten themselves so as to
stand upright in a part of their circular course, namely, when they
approach and have to pass over the summit or the shoot from which they
arise. If they had not possessed and exercised this curious power, they
would infallibly have struck against the summit of the shoot and been
arrested in their course. As soon as one of these tendrils with its three
branches begins to stiffen itself and rise up vertically, the revolving
motion becomes more rapid; and as soon as it has passed over the point of
difficulty, its motion coinciding with that from its own weight, causes it
to fall into its previously inclined position so quickly, that the apex can
be seen travelling like the hand of a gigantic clock.

* 'The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants,' p. 36.
[page 267]

A large number of ordinary leaves and leaflets and a few flower-peduncles
are provided with pulvini; but this is not the case with a single tendril
at present known. The cause of this difference probably lies in the fact,
that the chief service of a pulvinus is to prolong the movement of the part
thus provided after growth has ceased; and as tendrils or other
climbing-organs are of use only whilst the plant is increasing in height or
growing, a pulvinus which served to prolong their movements would be
useless.

It was shown in the last chapter that the stolons or runners of certain
plants circumnutate largely, and that this movement apparently aids them in
finding a passage between the crowded stems of adjoining plants. If it
could be proved that their movements had been modified and increased for
this special purpose, they ought to have been included in the present
chapter; but as the amplitude of their revolutions is not so conspicuously
different from that of ordinary plants, as in the case of climbers, we have
no evidence on this head. We encounter the same doubt in the case of some
plants which bury their pods in the ground. This burying process is
certainly favoured by the circumnutation of the flower-peduncle; but we do
not know whether it has been increased for this special purpose.

EPINASTY--HYPONASTY.

The term epinasty is used by De Vries* to express greater longitudinal
growth along the upper than

* 'Arbeiten des Bot. Inst., in Würzburg,' Heft ii. 1872, p. 223. De Vries
has slightly modified (p. 252) the meaning of the above two terms as first
used by Schimper, and they have been adopted in this sense by Sachs.
[page 268]

along the lower side of a part, which is thus caused to bend downwards; and
hyponasty is used for the reversed process, by which the part is made to
bend upwards. These actions come into play so frequently that the use of
the above two terms is highly convenient. The movements thus induced result
from a modified form of circumnutation; for, as we shall immediately see,
an organ under the influence of epinasty does not generally move in a
straight line downwards, or under that of hyponasty upwards, but oscillates
up and down with some lateral movement: it moves, however, in a
preponderant manner in one direction. This shows that there is some growth
on all sides of the part, but more on the upper side in the case of
epinasty, and more on the lower side in that of hyponasty, than on the
other sides. At the same time there may be in addition, as De Vries
insists, increased growth on one side due to geotropism, and on another
side due to heliotropism; and thus the effects of epinasty or of hyponasty
may be either increased or lessened.

He who likes, may speak of ordinary circumnutation as being combined with
epinasty, hyponasty, the effects of gravitation, light, etc.; but it seems
to us, from reasons hereafter to be given, to be more correct to say that
circumnutation is modified by these several agencies. We will therefore
speak of circumnutation, which is always in progress, as modified by
epinasty, hyponasty, geotropism, or other agencies, whether internal or
external.

[One of the commonest and simplest cases of epinasty is that offered by
leaves, which at an early age are crowded together round the buds, and
diverge as they grow older. Sachs first remarked that this was due to
increased growth along the upper side of the petiole and blade; and De
Vries has now shown in more detail that the movement is thus caused, aided
slightly by
[page 269]
the weight of the leaf, and resisted as he believes by apogeotropism, at
least after the leaf has somewhat diverged. In our observations on the
circumnutation of leaves, some were selected which were rather too young,
so that they continued to diverge or sink downwards whilst their movements
were being traced. This may be seen in the diagrams (Figs. 98 and 112, pp.
232 and 249) representing the circumnutation of the young leaves of
Acanthus mollis and Pelargonium zonale. Similar cases were observed with
Drosera. The movements of a young leaf, only 3/4 inch in length, of Petunia
violacea were traced during four days, and offers a better instance (Fig.
111, p. 248) as it diverged during the whole of this time in a curiously
zigzag line with some of the angles sharply acute, and during the latter
