salesman was saying, his voice muffled by the mentrol hood covering
Duggan's head and shoulders.

"Of course." Duggan's impatience made his voice shrill. "I've used
mentrols before when inspecting cave-ins and such."

"Very well, sir." The man's voice was relieved. Probably he hated his
job as much as Duggan hated his cigars and news.

Duggan tripped the switches and heard the building hum of power. An odd
sort of vibration that his mind told him was purely emotional, seemed to
be permeating his whole body.

Abruptly the transition was complete. He was no longer lying on the
padded bench beneath the mentrol hood. He was standing erect, conscious
of the retaining clamps that held him upright.

He gulped a deep draught of air into the artificial lungs that did not
need oxygen and his mechanical pulse quickened.

His eyes slitted open, drinking in by degrees the mirrored mentrol booth
and the pallid, fat, little man sitting beside his hooded body. He
stepped out of the clamps, his sharpened senses aware of softness, and
hardness, and scent, and color that human weakness so often blurs.

This super mech that was linked directly with his brain by twin mentrols
was tall, chunky and gray of eye and hair. In a general way it was a
duplicate of his own body, but there was no facial resemblance.

"How do you like it, sir?" The fat smile was empty, almost apologetic.
"We have younger, more handsome models...."

"Well enough." Duggan started donning the clothing that he had removed.
"I'll want the mech for five, possibly ten, hours."

"I'll make out the slip for ten hours, sir. We'll refund any balance due
you. But after ten hours ..."

"I know. You must report the mech missing. But with my body here you
can't lose."

The salesman smiled enigmatically. "We _have_," he said.

Duggan shrugged. He was impatient to be outside, feasting his starved
vision on the stores and parks of the various upper levels. He might
even take a lift to the Outside. It had been fifteen years ago, while
their youngest son was a baby, that they had taken a weekend motor trip
to the great scar that had been Manhattan. He remembered the vastness
and the rawness of the uncontrolled atmosphere. It had been beautiful
but also a bit terrifying. It was a ten years delayed honeymoon....

And now Merle was in the rocket corps and Janith and he were like
strangers.

Duggan zippered shut his gray-checked jacket and left the booth. He
walked slowly, savoring every picture of the crowded passenger strips
beyond the walkway, and of the fairy spans of moving walkways crossing
the travel strips. The soft glow of the level's ceiling, fifty feet
above, illuminated the double rows of apartment and store fronts.

It was good to see again.

Every twelfth section of the level was a park. The greenery was fresher
and brighter than he remembered; the tree boles and the branches were
marvels of grace and strength. He strolled along the paths, impatient to
be moving on, but aching with the emerald beauty around him....

He took the lifts to the upper levels. He rode the swiftest walkways and
travel strips, his eyes drinking in the long-hidden sights. From an
observation dome he looked out over the wooded mountain slopes of
Outside, and saw the telltale ridging of rock and earth that marked the
scores of hidden vehicular tubes linking Appalachia with its sister
cities of Ondack and Smoky.

His five hours stretched into seven, and then, eight. Slowly a
determination to keep these eyes, at whatever cost, was building within
him. Always before he had agreed when Janith decided. He had been so
dependent on her those first terrible weeks. But now, with this money
from the breakthrough pool, he could rent a super mech--live as a man
should live!

       *       *       *       *       *

Duggan left the employment booth on the 20th Level, a badge on his
jacket and a half-grin on his full super mech's lips.

On the records he was now Al Duggan, a second cousin from Montana. He
knew that nothing in the world could bring Al further east than Ozarka.
Just to be safe, however, he decided to drop Al a line to explain.

As far as his wife was concerned Merle Duggan was gone. Dead and buried.
She could get a divorce if she wanted and marry that podgy, pink-skulled
boss of hers at the advertising agency....

"Five hundred a month," Duggan told himself. "Two-fifty for the rental,
fifty for insurance--maybe fifty or so for spare parts--that leaves
about a hundred and fifty for me."

He was starting at the bottom as a rock hog, a mucker, a clean-up man in
the newly opened 80th Level. And his wages were the minimum union scale.

He took the lift down to the 79th Level, flashed his new badge at the
guards, and took the gritty freight lift to the lowest level of the
