written; but I told her of the flattering way in which General Yule had
spoken of the doings of you and your party, and said that I hoped she
would not be anxious, for it was quite evident that you were able to
take good care of yourselves. My letter was in answer to one she wrote
to me from Durban, begging me to keep you from undertaking what she
called 'mad-brained business', and expressing some regret that you and
the others had been allowed to form a separate corps, instead of being
under the command of an experienced officer like myself. I told her
that I thought that you would have less chance of coming to harm in
scouting work than if you had to work in a regular way as the general
ordered. If this sort of fighting--I mean, of attacking in front every
position the Boers choose to take--goes on, our numbers will very
speedily dwindle away.

"The fact is, as far as we colonials can see, the regulars do not as
yet understand fighting the Boers. Nothing could be more splendid than
the behaviour of the troops, both at Dundee and Elandslaagte, but in
our humble opinion neither fight was necessary; and if Talana was to be
attacked, it should have been done by marching the troops round the
hill and taking it in the rear. In that case the Boers would have
bolted without firing a shot. That it could have been done is shown by
the fact that the cavalry did it, and encountered no difficulty on the
way. Again, at Elandslaagte the object of keeping the road open would
have been equally well attained if, after driving them out of the
station, we had taken up a strong position there and waited for them to
attack us. Therefore, Chris, I think that fighting in our way--that is
to say, in Boer fashion--and trusting to skill as much as to shooting,
you will be running a good deal less risk than you would in fighting
under British generals in British fashion. We shall go off quietly this
evening. We must keep a bright look-out on the way, for the trains have
been fired upon, and at any moment the Boers may pull up the rails and
block the roads altogether."

Two hours later all was ready for a start, and just before sunset the
corps rode out of Ladysmith. They kept a sharp look-out as they went,
but saw no signs of the enemy, and crossing the Tugela by the bridge
near Colenso, halted there for the night. Here Captain Brookfield
reported his arrival to the officer in command of the troops, and on
the following day Chris and his friends rode on to Estcourt. They had
seen some parties of mounted men in the far distance, but none had come
near them, and as the military authorities were well aware of the Boers
being in the vicinity, there was nothing to be gained by scouting. But
it was now decided that they were in advance of the point that any
large number of the enemy were likely to reach, and might therefore
strike across the country and resume what they considered their regular
work. They added to their stores several articles whose want they had
felt, had slits made in the waterproof sheets, and covers sewn on to
close the holes when they were used for tents, and had some triangular
pieces of the same material made to buckle on so as to close the rear
of the tents, which had before been open to the wind and rain. They had
employed much of their spare time in training their horses and in
teaching them to lie down when ordered, and thus share the shelter
taken up by their masters, behind rocks or a wall.

The officer commanding the small force at Estcourt had at first viewed
them with some suspicion, but Colonel Yule had purposely left open the
letter with which he had furnished Chris, so that it could be shown to
any officers commanding posts or detached forces, and its production
now caused his cold reception to be converted into a warm welcome.
Riding across country they met more than one farmer trekking with his
cattle and belongings towards the ferry across the Mooi river. These
reported that the Boers had overrun the whole of the country north of
the Tugela, and that some parties had already crossed at the ferry on
the road between Helpmakaar and Greytown. Fugitives had come in from
the villages on the other side, and complained that the Boers were
looting everywhere, and had driven off thousands of cattle and numbers
of horses, and had everywhere wantonly destroyed the furniture and
everything they could not carry off, in the farmhouses they visited.

A vigilant look-out was kept as the scouts advanced. On the second day
after starting they encamped on a slight elevation near Mount Umhlumba,
and early next morning they saw a party of some twenty Boers riding in
a direction that would bring them within rifle-shot of their camp. All
were at once on the alert.

"We will not go out and attack them," Chris said to the lads who were
running towards their horses. "That would mean that though we might
kill all of them, half of us would probably be shot. We will ambush
them. Get the picket ropes loose and the bridles on ready for mounting,
and then leave the horses in charge of the natives where we camped.
They will be out of sight there. When you have done that take your
places quietly among the rocks. Do you, Capper and Carmichael, put
yourselves twenty or thirty yards apart; you are our best shots. When
the Boers get within a thousand yards, which is as near as they will do
if they keep the line they are going, open fire upon them and keep it
up steadily, but not too fast. When they see that only two men are
firing they will think that you are a couple of farmers whose place
they have plundered, and who are determined to have their revenge. You
are safe to hit some of them, and the others will decide upon wiping
you out, and will probably leave their horses and crawl up in their
usual style. When they get close it will be our turn. I don't think
many of them are likely to get away."

His orders were carried out, and five minutes later the two rifles
flashed out one after another. The Boers were riding in a clump. One
was seen to fall, and the horse of another gave a violent plunge.

"Very good," exclaimed Chris, who, like the rest, was lying down behind
a rock. "Don't fire too fast. Wait half a minute, and then each take
another turn, one a little time after the other." The man who had
fallen was instantly picked up by one of his comrades, and all rode off
at full gallop, but before they could get beyond the range of the
Mausers each of the lads had fired two more shots. No more of the Boers
dropped, but the watchers, who had their glasses directed upon them,
thought by their movements that two had been hit. The Boers, when the
firing ceased, stopped, and for some little time remained clustered
together. Then they took a long sweep round to a point where the ground
was broken, and a shallow donga ran up in a direction that would bring
them within a hundred yards of the position occupied by their hidden
assailants. There they were seen to dismount, and, after some talk,
leaving all the horses in the charge of one man, probably one of the
wounded, they entered the donga. Its course was irregular, and once or
twice the two lads were able to get a shot at them. The Boers did not
return the fire but hurried past the exposed points. As they approached
a head was occasionally raised above the bank to view the position, and
then disappeared again. The ground between the camp and the nearest
point of the donga was thickly strewn with boulders, with bushes
growing between them. The lads had all shifted their position to this
side.

"Don't open fire till I give the order," Chris said quietly. "We have
got them now."

Except for a slight movement of the bushes, it would not have been
known that the Boers had left the donga. Once or twice Capper and
Carmichael caught a momentary glimpse of one of them, but held their
fire, as Chris had said.

"Let them come within twenty yards, then both fire at once, whether you
catch a glimpse of them or not. Thinking that your rifles are
discharged, they will all jump up and make a rush. Then it will be our
turn."

[Illustration: "BOTH RIFLES CRACKED AT ONCE."]

Presently a man's head was seen peering round a rock at about the right
distance. Both the rifles cracked at once, and a Boer fell prone on the
ground beyond his shelter. At the same moment there was a shout, and
his comrades all sprang to their feet and rushed forward. A volley from
the whole of the scouts flashed out. Twelve of the Boers fell, the
others leapt back behind their shelters, and in turn opened fire.

"Keep in shelter!" Chris shouted. "They know now that we are two to
their one, and will soon be making off."

The combatants were so close to each other that neither dared expose
shoulder or head to take aim, and after the first shots fired at the
Boers all remained quiet. Chris waited for three or four minutes, and
then told four of the lads who were in the best shelter to crawl back,
mount their horses, and ride out down the other side of the slope, and,
after making a slight circuit, to gallop straight at the Boers' horses.

"The fellows may be some distance away already," he said, "as they may
have slipped off directly they discharged their rifles. In any case
there is no time to be lost in getting hold of their ponies, or at any
rate in driving them off."

As two or three minutes again passed without a shot being fired by the
Boers, Chris was in the act of calling off half the troop to watch the
donga and fire at the Boers if they saw them running past the exposed
points, when at this moment he heard the horses returning, and directly
afterwards one of the lads he had sent off ran up to him.

"There are a whole lot of them coming round the other side," he said,
"sixty or seventy of them at least. Some distance behind I can see a
lot of cattle and waggons. I suppose they were making for home when
they heard the firing." Just at this moment two or three shots rang
out, telling that the surviving Boers were seen running down the donga.

"Never mind them," Chris shouted; "we are going to be attacked by a big
party. Put down your rifles all of you, and pile the stones on the
crest, so as to make a shelter, as quickly as you can. We shall have a
few minutes. Those who are coming up can't know yet what the firing
means." He ran up to the top. "They are not more than six or seven
hundred yards away," he said, "and it would be better to fight it out
here than to take to our horses. Some of us would certainly not get off
without a bullet. You need not mind showing yourselves when they come
up. They won't be able to make out what we are."

The Boers, indeed, reined in their ponies when they saw Chris appear on
the brow of the eminence, and as a preliminary some of them rode off in
both directions and endeavoured to ascertain the position. Those on the
right soon caught sight of the clump of horses.

"They will soon know all about it," Chris said, as two of them galloped
off. "We may as well teach them to keep their distance. Take your
places behind rocks, and then open a sharp fire with your magazines.
They cannot know how many of us there are here. Now, are you all ready?
Yes? Well, then, set to work!"

In a moment an almost incessant rattle of musketry broke out upon the
astounded Boers, who, turning their horses, scattered at full gallop to
escape the hail of bullets; but more than a dozen had fallen before
they were beyond the range of the Mausers and were fully two thousand
yards away.

"I don't think we need stop," Chris said. "Fill up your magazines
again, and then make for the horses." Directly the first party of Boers
had been seen, Jack and Japhet had set to work taking down and rolling
up the tents and loading the spare horses.

"Jump up," Chris said to them, "we are off. Mind you keep well with us.
Now," he went on, as they rode off in a body, "we will do a little
cattle raiding on our own account. Make for them, lads!"

With a shout they rode off at full gallop towards the great herd of
cattle. As they approached, the Kaffirs who were driving them fled.
Separating as they rode, waving their hats and shouting at the top of
their voices, the lads dashed at the herd, who at once turned and went
off at a rate that would have astonished animals accustomed only to
small pastures and other enclosures.

"Don't press them too much," Chris had ordered before the band
separated, "or they will break down. Listen for my whistle; when you
hear it, Field, Willesden, Harris, and Bryan will follow up the herd
with the Kaffirs and keep them moving, the rest will dismount, make
their horses lie down, and open fire. That narrow valley we passed
through yesterday afternoon will do to make a stand. It is about five
miles away, head the cattle for it. The Boers won't be far behind us
when we get there."

The enemy indeed had not noticed them leave the little kopje, as they
were hidden by a slight fall in the ground where they descended, and it
was not until they observed a commotion among the cattle that they
perceived what had happened. Then, furious not only at the loss they
had suffered, but at seeing their booty driven away, they mounted and
pursued in hot haste. But the party had obtained a start of fully a
mile, and the valley was reached by the fugitives while the Boers were
still half that distance in their rear. Chris rode along until he came
to a narrow and defensible point; the horses were taken a hundred yards
on and made to lie down, and he and his sixteen companions then ran
back and took up their positions among the rocks on each side of the
track and the slopes above it.




CHAPTER VIII

A DESPERATE PROJECT


Scarcely had the band taken cover in the gorge than the Boers appeared
some five hundred yards away.

"Open fire at once!" Chris shouted, "the farther they have to come
under fire the less they will like it."

The rifles at once spoke out. The lads had all used the boulders behind
which they crouched as rests for their rifles, and confident of their
shooting and their position, their aim was deadly. Five or six of the
leading Boers fell and several horses, the rest came to an abrupt
pause, galloped back some little distance and then dismounted, and
leaving their horses in shelter, disappeared from sight. In a short
time a dropping fire was opened from both sides of the valley.

"Don't fire unless you see a man," Chris ordered, "there are gaps on
the hillside that they can't pass without giving you a chance. Fire in
rotation, it is no use wasting a dozen bullets on one man; if the first
misses, let the next shoot instantly, and so on. When they learn that
it is death to leave shelter, they will soon get sick of it. Keep
yourselves well under cover."

The rifle duel continued for an hour. As Chris had said would be the
case, after seven or eight had fallen, as they were trying to make
rushes across pieces of ground where boulders afforded no cover, the
rest became very cautious, and at last only an occasional shot was
heard.

"We will fall back now," Chris said, "for aught we know a party of them
may be working round somewhere to take us in rear. We know that they
have not got their horses with them, for we can see the spot where they
hid them. Still, we do not want to be caught between two fires. Let
four on each flank crawl back; keep well among the rocks, and don't let
them catch sight of you. We will fire occasionally to let them know
that we are still here. When you have got the horses up and everything
is ready, whistle, and we will come back to you. It will be a long time
before they venture to crawl up and discover that we have gone, an hour
most likely, and by that time the cattle will be a dozen miles on their
way to Estcourt, and the Boers are not likely to follow them."

Ten minutes later all were in their saddles. They had left the horses
at a spot where there was a sharp elbow in the gorge, and their retreat
could not be seen from the valley below. They cantered along in high
glee; not one had received a scratch, while some twelve of the first
party of Boers had fallen, and fully fifteen of the second, and it was
certain that at least as many more must have been wounded.

"I expect they really gave up all idea of carrying our position long
ago," Chris said, "and have only been keeping up their fire to prevent
our turning the tables upon them. They must have seen that we are
better mounted than they are, and have been afraid that we should in
turn take the offensive. I should not be surprised if they stay where
they are all day, and don't venture to mount and ride off till it gets
dark."

"You are something like a leader," Peters said enthusiastically. "We
knew that you were a good fellow, and would make the best leader among
us, but no one could think that our choice would turn out so well as it
has done. This is the second fight we have had with the Boers, and we
have thrashed them well each time, although the first time they were
twice as strong, and in the second something like four times, and we
have not lost one of our number. I am sure if we had been caught where
we were without you with us, at least half of us would have been
killed, and we should have been lucky to get away with only that."

Riding without pressing their horses, it was two hours before they
overtook the party with the cattle. These had now broken into a walk.

"We kept them at it till half an hour ago," Willesden said
apologetically, when they came up, "but the Kaffirs said that unless we
gave them a rest half of them would drop, so we let them go easy till
you came up."

"Quite right," Chris said. "We have given the Boers such a thrashing
that there is no fear of their continuing the pursuit. Unless we meet
some more of these thieves, we can go on as quietly as we like. I have
some sort of respect for men like those we met at Dundee and
Elandslaagte, who fight manfully and stoutly, but for these raiding
scoundrels who only come out to rob and plunder, and do wanton damage
to quiet people, one feels only disgust, and shoots them without the
least compunction."

There was a general chorus of agreement.

"Did they get near you, Chris?"

"Not within about four hundred yards. They got it so hot at first that
they dismounted and took to the rocks; they pushed on for a bit, and if
the whole hillside had been covered with boulders we might have had
some sharp fighting, but there were some open spaces to be crossed, and
after getting over two or three of them they found it safer to lie as
close as rabbits. For aught we know they are there still."

They travelled quietly till sunset, and then halted in an open valley
where there was water and good grass. Half the company kept watch by
turns, being posted with their horses some half a mile out in the
country, taking the animals with them not only because they could fall
back more quickly, but because they knew the horses would hear any
approaching sound long before their masters were able to do so, and
would evince their uneasiness unmistakably. There was, however, no
alarm, and two days later, travelling by easy stages, they arrived at
Estcourt, where their arrival with so large a number of cattle created
quite a sensation. They at once put up a notice at the post-office,
that all persons who had been raided by the Boers could come and
inspect the herd and take all animals bearing their brand. It soon
appeared that the cattle were the property of four farmers living
within a short distance of each other. They had arrived in Estcourt
with their families two days previously, weary and broken down with
fatigue, hunger, and the loss and ruin of their property. Their
gratitude was deep indeed at this wholly unexpected recovery of a large
portion of their herds, and they started the next morning, mounted on
some ponies they had picked up for a trifle, to drive them down the
country.

Chris saw the officer in command as soon as they arrived in the town,
and gave him an outline of their adventure, upon which he was warmly
congratulated. "Shall I send in a written report to you, sir?" Chris
asked.

"No, you are not under my orders; and I should say that you had better
write and post it to the officer commanding the force at Maritzburg. I
do not know who it may be."

"Is the road closed to Ladysmith?" Chris asked.

"Yes, two days since. General French, who is ordered to Port Elizabeth
to take command of the cavalry brigade that is forming to drive back
the Boers who have crossed the Orange River, came down in the last
train that got out. It was hotly fired upon by the Boers, but luckily
they had not taken up the rails, and the train got through safely. We
have had no news since, for even the wire to Colenso has been cut, and
for anything we know the place may be in possession of the Boers. We
have a little fort here, and have been throwing up entrenchments, but
if they come in any force there is not much hope of our getting off. We
have an armored train, which yesterday ran to within a mile or so of
Colenso without being interfered with, though several parties of the
enemy could be seen in the distance. I have great hopes that we shall
get half a battalion up from Maritzburg to-morrow; if so, by loopholing
the houses and throwing up some breastworks, we ought to be able to
keep the Boers out of the place, unless they come in force. At any
rate, I should advise you to scout next time beyond the Mooi River and
to make Maritzburg your head-quarters. So far as we know the Boers have
not yet gone beyond that river, and any news of their doing so would
certainly be of value. You have done marvellously well in getting away
from that party you met, but you might not be so lucky next time, for
as they push on they are sure in a short time to be strong all over the
country between the Tugela and the Mooi."

This, after some consultation, was agreed to by the troop. There was no
reason for haste, and they rode by easy stages down to Maritzburg,
stopping at Weston and Hawick. Many of their friends had gone down to
Durban, but some still remained, and from these they received a hearty
