"Go down, Harcourt, and tell Herve to fall back at once; and to
take position in the clump of trees, a quarter of a mile down the
valley, so as to sweep the entrance.

"Laon, go to the right, and you, Dubois, to the left. Order the
franc tireurs to retreat along the hillside and, when they get to
the end of the gorge, to form in the plain, and fall back to the
first village.

"You are wounded, Barclay. Not seriously, I hope?" he said, kindly,
as the officers hurried away on their respective missions.

"A splinter of a shell, sir," Ralph said, faintly. "I don't think
it has touched the bone, but it has cut the flesh badly."

Ralph was just able to say this, when his head swam; and he would
have fallen, had not Percy caught him in his arms, with a little
cry.

"He has only fainted from loss of blood," the general said. "Two or
three handkerchiefs, gentlemen.

"Now, major, bind them round his arm.

"Now take off his sash, and bind it as tightly as you can, over
them. That's right.

"Now carry him down the rocks, to the horses. We have no time to
lose."

Two of the officers at once put their arms under Ralph's shoulders,
while Percy took his feet; and they hastened down to the horses. As
they did so, Ralph opened his eyes.

"I am all right, now," he said, faintly.

"Lie quiet," the major said, kindly. "It is only loss of blood.
There is no real harm done.

"There, here are the horses."

Ralph was placed, sitting, on the ground; a little brandy and water
was given to him and, as the blood was oozing but slowly through
the bandage, he felt sufficiently restored to sit on his horse.

"Doyle, you go with Lieutenant Barclay," the colonel of the staff
said. "Ride slowly, and keep close beside him; so as to catch him,
if you see him totter. You will find the surgeons ready at the
general's quarters.

"Halt, stand aside for a moment. Here comes the artillery."

"Well done, lads, well done!" the general said, as the diminished
battery rattled past, at full gallop.

Then he himself, with his staff, put spurs to his horse and went
off at full speed; while Tim followed at a walk, riding by the side
of Ralph. The flow of blood had now stopped, and Ralph was able to
sit his horse until he reached the house which had served as the
general's headquarters, in the morning. Here one of the staff
surgeons had fitted up a temporary ambulance; and Ralph's bandages
were soon taken off, and his coat removed. Tim turned sick at the
sight of the ugly gash in his young master's arm, and was obliged
to go out into the air.

The artillery were already at work, and their fire told that the
franc tireurs had retired from the gorge, and that the Germans were
entering the wider valley.

"You have had a narrow escape," the surgeon said, after examining
Ralph's arm, "a quarter of an inch lower, and it would have cut the
main artery; and you would have bled to death in five minutes. As
it is, there is no great harm done. It is a deepish flesh wound
but, with your youth and constitution, it will heal up in a very
short time. I will draw the edges together, with a needle and
thread: put a few straps of plaster on, and a bandage; and then you
had better get into an ambulance wagon and go to the rear, at
once."

"Can't I go into the field again, now?" Ralph asked; "I feel as if
I could ride again, now."

"No, you can do nothing of the sort," the surgeon said. "You have
lost a lot of blood; and if you were to ride now, it might set off
the wound bleeding again, and you might be a dead man before you
could be brought back here. Keep quiet, and do as you are ordered,
and in a week you may be in the saddle again."

"It seems very hard," Ralph began.

"Not at all hard," the surgeon said. "You will see plenty more
fighting, before this war is over.

"This is a hard case, if you like; you have every reason to be
thankful."

As he spoke, he pointed to a young mobile who was brought in, his
chest literally torn open with a shell.

"I can do nothing for him," the surgeon said, after a brief
inspection of his wound; "he has not half an hour to live, and will
probably not recover consciousness. If he does, give him some weak
brandy, and water."

Wounded men were now being brought in fast, and Ralph went out and
sat down by the door.

"Fasten my horse up here, Tim. The ambulance will be full of poor
fellows who will want them more than I shall. If I see that we are
being driven back, I shall mount and ride quietly back.

"No, there is nothing more you can do for me. Go and join Percy."

The fight was now raging furiously. The Germans, covered by the
fire of their artillery, had debouched from the pass and were
steadily pressing forward. They had already carried the village
nearest to them. This the French had set fire to, before
retreating, to prevent its serving as a shelter for the enemy. The
Mobiles stood their ground, for the most part well, under the heavy
fire of shot and shell; but their muzzle loaders were no match for
the Germans' needle guns, and the enemy were pressing steadily
forward. Just as Tim Doyle rode up to the staff, the Germans had
taken another village.

"That village must be retaken," the general said. "Barclay, ride
and order the Zouaves to carry it, with the bayonet."

Percy galloped off to where the Zouaves, lying behind a ridge in
the ground, were keeping up a heavy fire in answer to the storm of
shot and shell which fell around them. He rode up to the officer in
command.

"The Zouaves are to retake the village, with the bayonet," he said.

The colonel gave the order, but the fire was so heavy that the men
would not face it. Again and again the officer reiterated the
order; standing exposed on the bank, in front of his men, to give
them confidence. It was in vain, and the colonel looked towards
Percy with an air of despair. Percy turned his horse, and galloped
back to the general.

"The colonel has done all he can, sir, but the men won't advance."

"The fire is very heavy," the general said, "but we must have the
village back again."

And he rode off, himself, to the battalion of Zouaves. The shot and
shell were flying around him, but he sat on his horse as immovable
as if at a review.

"My lads," he said, in a loud, clear tone, "generally the
difficulty has been to prevent the Zouaves rushing to an attack.
Don't let it be said that a French general had to repeat, to French
Zouaves, an order to charge before they obeyed him."

In an instant the Zouaves were on their feet and, with a cheer,
went at the village. The Germans in possession fired rapidly, as
the French approached, and then hastily evacuated it; the Zouaves
taking possession, and holding it, under a tremendous fire.

All the afternoon the battle raged, villages being taken and
retaken, several times. The Germans, however, were gradually
gaining ground. Some of the regiments of Mobiles had quite lost all
order and discipline, and their officers in vain tried to persuade
them to hold the position in which they were placed. Two of the
staff officers were killed, three others wounded.

Percy had escaped, almost by a miracle. Over and over again, he had
carried the general's orders across ground swept by the enemy's
shot and shell. A horse had been killed under him, but he had not
received even a scratch; and now, mounted upon the horse of one of
the officers, who was killed, he was returning from carrying an
order across a very open piece of ground, at full gallop. Suddenly
he came upon a sight which--hurried as he was, and exposed as was
the position--caused him instantly to draw his rein, and come to a
full stop.

Illustration: The Children on the Battlefield.

There, in the open field, were two children: the one a boy, of six
or seven years old; the other a little flaxen-haired, blue-eyed
girl, of five. They were quietly picking flowers.

"What are you doing here?" Percy asked, in astonishment.

He spoke in French and, receiving no answer, repeated the question
in German.

"What are you doing here?"

"If you please, sir," the boy answered, "I have been out in the
wood, with Lizzie, to pick flowers; and when I came back there was
a great fire in the house, and a great noise all round, and I
couldn't find father and mother; and so we came out, to look for
them."

Percy did not know what to do. It was too pitiful to leave the poor
little creatures where they were; and yet, he could not carry them
away. He had no doubt that their parents were hid in the woods.

"Look here," he said; "if I take Lizzie upon my horse, will you run
along after me?"

"No, no," the little girl said, vehemently.

There was no time for parley.

"Look here, do you see those soldiers lying down in a ditch?" Percy
asked, pointing to a line of Mobiles, not fifty yards in front.

The children nodded.

"Now look here, the best thing you can possibly do is to play at
being soldiers. It is capital fun. You lie down quite flat in that
ditch, and throw little stones over the bank. Don't you go away.
Don't get up, whatever you do; and if you are good children, and
play nicely, I will send father and mother to you, if I can find
them. If they don't come, you go on playing at soldiers till all
this noise stops; and then, when it is quite quiet, you go home,
and wait there till father and mother come back."

The children were delighted with the idea, and threw themselves
flat in the bottom of the ditch; and Percy went on again, at full
gallop. The French were now being driven back, towards the point
where the valley narrowed again; and many of the Mobiles were in
full flight. General Cambriels, therefore, withdrew his artillery
to a point where they could cover the movements; and then ordered a
rapid retreat--ten regiments of line, and the Zouaves, acting as
rear guard.

It was already getting dark, and the movements were carried out
with but slight loss. The Germans, contented with their success,
attempted no movement in pursuit.



Chapter 12: The Surprise.


After the check in the Vosges, General Cambriels found it
impossible to restore sufficient order, among the Mobiles, to
enable him to show face again to the enemy. He was, besides, in
want of many articles of urgent necessity. Half his force were
shoeless; and the thin blouses which were--as has been said--all
the covering that many of the Mobiles had, were ill calculated to
resist the bitter cold which was already setting in. Ammunition,
too, as well as food, was short.

The general determined, therefore, upon falling back upon Besancon,
and reorganizing his forces there. A wound in his head, too, which
was insufficiently healed when he took the command, had now broken
out again; and his surgeon ordered absolute repose, for a while.

Upon the day of the fight, Ralph had ridden slowly to the rear,
when he saw that the fight was going against the French. Hardened
as he was by his work, and with an excellent constitution, his
wound never for a moment assumed a troublesome aspect; but at the
end of a week he was able--keeping it, of course, in a sling--to
mount his horse, and report himself ready for duty. The
headquarters were now at Besancon; and Ralph could, had he applied
for it, have obtained leave to go to Dijon; but he had not done so,
as he had been so lately at home, and he thought that the sight of
his arm in a sling would be likely to make his mother more nervous,
and anxious on their account, than before.

The Germans were still at some distance from Besancon, being
watched by Colonel Tempe and his franc tireurs, and by the
irregular forces. A considerable army was now fast gathering at
Besancon, and the regimental and superior staff officers were hard
at work at the organization As aides-de-camp, the boys had little
to do; and therefore requested leave, for two or three days, to go
up to their old friends, the franc tireurs of Dijon. The general at
once granted the required permission; adding, with a smile:

"Don't forget you are officers now, lads, and get into any
hare-brained adventures, you know; and be sure you are back on
Thursday, as I expect General Michel--my successor--to arrive on
Friday; and I shall have to give you, as part of my belongings."

"We are sure to be back, general."

And so they set off; taking, as usual, Tim Doyle with them, as
orderly and servant.

"Faith, and I am glad enough to be out in the open again, Mister
Ralph," Tim said, as they left Besancon behind. "After living out
in the woods, for six weeks; there does not seem room to breathe,
in a crowded town."

"It's jolly to be out again, Tim; but I don't know that I mind a
town again, for a few days."

"Ah, it's all very well for the likes of yees, Mister Ralph--with
your officer's uniform, and your arm in a sling, and the girls all
looking at you as a hero--but for me it's different, entirely. Out
in the open I feel that--except when there's anything to do for
your honors--I am my own master, and can plase myself. Here in the
town I am a common hussar; and my arm is just weary with saluting
to all the fellows, with a sword by their side, that I meet in the
street.

"Then there's no chance of any fighting, as long as we're shut up
in the walls of a town; and what's the use of being decked up in
uniform, except to fight? Is there any chance of just the least
scrimmage in the world, while we are back again with the boys?" he
asked, persuasively.

The boys laughed.

"Not much, Tim; but we shall be pretty close to the enemy, and
something may turn up, at any moment. But surely you've had enough,
in the last six weeks?"

"Pretty well, Mister Percy--pretty well; but you see, the last
affair didn't count."

"Oh, didn't it count!" Ralph said, looking at his arm. "I think it
counted for two or three fights and, if you were not hit, I am sure
you were fired at often enough to satisfy the most desperate lover
of fighting, Tim."

"I was fired at often enough, I daresay, Mister Ralph; and I can't
say that I liked it, entirely. It isn't so mighty pleasant--sitting
like a stiff statue behind the general, with the shells falling
about you like peas, and not allowed the divarshin of a single shot
back, in return.

"'Shoot away,' says I, 'as hard as you like; but let's shoot back,
in return.'"

The boys laughed, and the day passed pleasantly as they rode, and
talked. The dusk had already fallen when they reached a party of
franc tireurs. It was not their own corps, nor could the officer in
command tell exactly where they could find them.

"We are scattered over a considerable extent of country," he said;
"and the colonel, alone, could tell you how we are all placed. I
expect that he will be here, tonight; and your best plan will be to
stay here, till he comes. We have not much to offer you, but such
as it is, it is at your service."

After a moment's consultation, the boys agreed to accept the offer;
as they had palpably more chance of meeting Colonel Tempe, there,
than in a journey through the woods, at night; and in another ten
minutes their horses were tied to trees, and they were sitting by a
blazing fire, with the officers of franc tireurs. The village
consisted of only three or four houses and, as there were fifty men
in the party upon which they had come, they bivouacked under the
trees, hard by.

"How far off are the Germans?" Ralph asked, when dinner was over;
and they lay by the fire, smoking cigars.

"Ten miles or so," the officer answered, carelessly.

"No chance of their coming this way, I hope," Ralph laughed. "We
were very nearly caught near Saverne, once."

"So I heard," the officer said, "but I am rather skeptical as to
these night surprises. In nine cases out of ten--mind, I don't mean
for a moment that it was so in your case--but in nine cases out of
ten, these rumors of night attacks are all moonshine."

"Perhaps so," Ralph said, a little gravely--for he had already
noticed that the discipline was very different, among these men,
than that to which he had been accustomed among the franc tireurs
of Dijon; "perhaps so, but we can hardly be too careful.

"How do you all like Colonel Tempe?"

"The colonel would be an excellent fellow, were he not our
colonel," the officer laughed. "He is a most unconscionable man.
For ever marching, and drilling, and disciplining. If he had his
way, he would make us like a regiment of line; as if there could be
any good in carrying out all that sort of thing, with franc
tireurs. He had about half of us together, for three or four days;
and I give you my word it was as bad as slavery. Drill, drill,
drill, from morning till night. I was heartily glad, I can tell
you, when I got away with this detachment."

Ralph saw that his new acquaintance was one of that innumerable
class who conceived that drill and discipline were absurdities, and
that it was only necessary for a Frenchman to shoulder a gun for
him to be a soldier; so he easily avoided argument, by turning the
subject. For a couple of hours they chatted; and then, as the fire
was burning low, and the men had already laid down to sleep, Ralph
suggested that they should do the same.

"I will walk round the sentries first, with you, if you like," he
said.

"Sentries!" the other said, with a laugh; "there is my sentry," and
he pointed to a man standing, ten paces off, leaning against a
tree. "The men have marched all day--they only came in an hour
before you did--and I am not going to waste their strength by
putting half of them out to watch the forest.

"No, no, I am no advocate for harassing my men."

"Good night, then," Ralph said, briefly, and he wrapped himself in
his cloak, and lay down.

"We are not accustomed to this sort of thing, Percy," he whispered
to his brother, in English, "and I don't like it. No wonder our
franc tireurs do so badly, if this is a sample of their
discipline."

"I don't like it either, Ralph. The Prussians are advancing; and if
that fellow last heard of them as ten miles off, they are as likely
as not to be only two. I shan't be sorry when morning comes."

"Nor I either, Percy. However, here we are, and we have no
authority over this fellow; so we must make the best of it, and
hope that--for once--folly will not have its just reward."

So saying, the boys remained silent for the night. But although
silent, neither of them slept much--Ralph especially, whose arm was
still very sore, and at times painful, hardly closed his eyes. He
told himself it was absurd, but he could not help listening, with
painful attention.

Had the night been a quiet one, he need not have strained his ears;
for as he knew, from the many hours he had passed at night upon
guard, the hush is so intense--in these great forests--that one can
