The plane's captain had caught Culver's glance. "Speak your piece," he
said pleasantly. "Don't stop on my account. There's a lot to what Mr.
Smith says--but you don't know all that's going on."

He had been half turned. Now he swung about in his little swivel
chair, whose base was riveted solidly to the floor and whose safety
belt ends dangled as he turned.

"My orders are to deliver you two gentlemen at San Francisco. But
there's a show scheduled for to-night down south of there--two hundred
planes, big and little, scouts, cruisers, battle planes. They're going
to swarm in over when the enemy makes his first crack. There's a devil
of a storm in the mountains along the route we would usually take. I'm
afraid I'll have to swing off south." He was grinning openly as he
turned back to his desk.

Colonel Culver smiled back. "Attaboy!" he said.

But Smithy's forehead was still wrinkled in scowling lines as he
walked forward to an adjoining room. "Underground," he was thinking.
"We've got to carry the fight to them; got to lick 'em so they'll stay
licked. But Rawson--good old Dean--we're too late to help him. And the
lives of all the devils left in hell can't pay for that."

       *       *       *       *       *

Smithy had been dozing. The shrill whistle of a high-pitched siren
brought him fully awake in an instant. Culver, too, sprang alertly to
his feet. Both men knew the signal was the call to quarters.

They had spread blankets on the floor of the fire-control room. Culver
immediately folded his into a compact bundle, and Smithy followed
suit, as he said: "That's right; we don't want any feather beds flying
around here in case of a mix-up."

Even Culver's simple act of stowing the blankets back in their little
compartment thrilled him with what it portended. His nerves were
suddenly aquiver with anticipation. A real fight! A determined effort!
No telling what these big dreadnoughts could do. Two hundred, big and
little, Captain Farrell had said. If they could catch the enemy out in
the open, show him up in a blaze of enormous flares....

Captain Farrell was calling them. A section of the floor had been
raised up mysteriously to form a platform beneath the shallow dome of
the conning tower. Farrell was there, headphones clamped to his ears,
one hand on the little switchboard at the base of the glass dome that
kept him in touch with every station on the ship. Beside him was the
fire-control officer similarly equipped, though his headphone was
connected only with the gun crews.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The enemy's out!" said Captain Farrell. "And not just where they were
expected--they're raising fourteen kinds of hell. The ships have been
ordered in. I'm hooked up with the radio room now. They're less than a
hundred miles ahead. Of course we won't mix in on it, but I thought it
best to have my men standing by."

He pressed a little lever on his switchboard and spoke into the
mouthpiece of his head-set. "Pilot room? Our two passengers, Colonel
Culver and Mr. Smith, are coming forward. Let them see whatever they
can of the show."

He gave the two a quick smile and a nod and waved them forward with
the binoculars in his free hand. "It will be 'lights out' after you
get there. We'll be flying dark except for wing and tail lights up on
top. The enemy's movements are uncertain; perhaps he can see us
anyway, but we won't advertise ourselves to him."

The ship's bow was a blunt, rounded nose of glass, cut by cross bars
of aluminum alloy. That deeper central portion of the big flying wing
was carried ten feet forward; it was but one of many details that
Smithy had looked at with interest when he had seen the ship waiting
for them on the field.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pilot room was dark when they entered. Only the glow from the
instrument panel showed the two men who were seated behind the wheel
controls. One of them turned and nodded a welcome.

"Can't offer you gentlemen seats," he said, "but if you'll stand right
here behind us you can see the whole works." He did not wait for a
reply, but turned back toward the black night ahead.

Smithy glanced past him at the lighted instruments and found the
altimeter. Twelve thousand--yes, there was nasty country hereabouts.
Then he, too, stared out into the dark at the sky sprinkled with
stars, at the vague blur of an unlighted world far below, and off at
either side and behind them the quivering lines of cold light where
starlight was reflected dimly from the spinning propellers.

Other wing lights winked out as he watched, and he knew that from that
moment on, they were invisible from below--invisible to human eyes at
least--that they were sweeping on through the darkness like some
gargantuan night bird pursuing its prey.

"Flares ahead, sir," one of the pilots had spoken into the mouthpiece
of his telephone, spoken lightly, reporting back to Captain Farrell.
The words whipped Smithy's head about, and he, too, saw on a distant
horizon, the beginning of a white glare.

They were fighting there--two hundred planes roaring downward, one
formation following another. In his mind he was seeing it so plainly.

The white blaze of light dead ahead grew broader. It had not been as
far distant as he had first thought, and the scene that he had
pictured came swiftly to reality.

       *       *       *       *       *

Their own ship was still at the twelve-thousand-foot level. Ahead, and
five thousand feet below, tiny lights, red and white and green, lights
whose swift motion made their hundreds seem like thousands instead,
were weaving intricate patterns in the night. The flying lights of the
fighting planes were on for the planes' own protection; and, too, no
further concealment was possible in the glare that shone upward from
below.

Settling downward were balls of blinding fire, flares dropped by the
squadron of scout planes that had torn through in advance. They
lighted brilliantly a valley which, a few hours before, had been one
of many like it--square fields, dark green with the foliage of fruit
trees, straight lines of crossing roads, houses, and off in the
distance a little city.

And now the valley was an inferno of spouting flame. That city was a
vast, roaring furnace under smoke clouds of mingled blood-red and
black. The valley floor was a place of desolation, of drifting smoke
and of flashing shell-bursts as the fleet swept in above.

The myriad lights of the planes had drawn into a circle, a great
whirlpool of lines that revolved above a mile-wide section of that
valley.

Beside Smithy a wheel control was moving. He clung to the pilot's seat
as their own plane banked and nosed downward. And now he shouted aloud
to Culver:

"The mole-men! There they are! Thousands of them!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He was pointing between the two pilots as their own plane swept down.
He could see them plainly now, clotted masses of dark figures surging
frenziedly to and fro. For an instant he saw them--then that part of
the world where they had been was a seething inferno of bursting bombs
and shells.

Beside him Colonel Culver spoke quietly: "Caught them cold! That's
handing it to them."

Their own plane had leveled off. With motors throttled they were
drifting slowly past, only a thousand feet higher than the circling
planes just off at one side. Culver's quiet tones rose to a hoarse
shout: "The ships! My God, they're falling!"

His wild cry ended in a gasp. Beside him Smithy, in breathless horror,
like Culver, was staring at that whirlpool of tiny lights that had
gone suddenly from smooth circular motion into frenzied confusion, or
vanished in the yellow glare of exploding gas tanks. The light of
their own white flares picked them out in ghastly clarity as they
fell.

Straight, vertical lines of yellow were burning planes. Again they
made horrible zigzag darts and flashed down into view torn and
helpless, while others, tens and scores of others with crumpled wings,
joined the mad dance of death.

Smithy knew that he could never tear his eyes away from the sight. Yet
within him something was clamoring for his attention. "They didn't do
it from below!" that something was shouting. "Not down in that hell.
There are more of them somewhere." Then somehow, he forced his eyes to
stare ahead and outside of that circle of fearful fascination and he
knew that for an instant he was seeing a single stab of green flame.

       *       *       *       *       *

One single light on the darkness of a little knoll that stood close
beside this place of white flame and destruction. One light--and in
the valley there had flashed a million brighter. It had shone but an
instant, but, to Smithy, watching, it was the same he had seen when
their own camp was attacked. And now it was Smithy who was abruptly
stone cold.

One hand closed upon a pilot's shoulder with a grip of steel; his
other pointed. "Down there--they're hiding back of that hill, picking
off our ships from the side." And then, like a guiding beacon, a point
of green showed once more.

The plane banked sharply while one of the pilots spoke crisp, clearly
enunciated words into his phone. He listened; then: "Right!" he
snapped. "Power dive for bow-gun firing. Level off for bombing from
five hundred feet."

Off into the night they were headed. Then a left bank and turn brought
the place of blazing flares and falling planes swinging smoothly into
view; they were flying toward it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Against the white glare in the valley of death was a hill, roundly
outlined. Then the ship's nose sank heavily down; and, from each broad
wing, in straight, forward-stabbing lines, was the steady lightning of
the Rickert batteries in action.

The pilot's room was a place of unbearable sound. The crash of
gunfire, it seemed, must crush the glass wall like an eggshell by the
sheer impact of its own thunder. In that pandemonium Smithy never knew
when they flattened out. He knew only that the hill ahead twinkled
brilliantly, and that each flashing light was an exploding shell. He
knew when the hill passed beneath them.

Then, in the night, close beside them and just outside the pilot-room
glass, was a quick glow of red. The plane lurched and staggered.
Smithy clung desperately to the seat ahead. The pilot was fighting
madly with the wheel. The roar of bombs from astern, where the bombers
had launched their missiles at the approaching hill, was unheard. In a
world suddenly gone chaotic he could hear nothing. He knew only that
the valley dead ahead was whirling dizzily--that it sank suddenly from
sight.

They were crashing. That red glow--they had been hit. Then something
hard and firm was pressing against him, pressing irresistibly. It was
the last conscious impression upon Smithy's mind.




CHAPTER XIX

_The Voice of the Mountain_


In a strange new world surrounded by a group of kneeling figures of
whom one, who called himself Gor, had spoken in Rawson's own tongue,
Dean Rawson stood silent. It was all too overwhelming. He could not
bring words together to formulate a reply. He only stood and stared
with wondering eyes at the exquisite beauty of the world about him, a
world flooded with a golden light, faintly tinged with green. Then he
looked above him to see the source of that light and found the sun.

Not the sun that he had known, but a flaming ball nevertheless.
Straight above it hung, in the center of the heavens, a gleaming disk
of pale-green gold, magnificently brilliant. He saw it through lids
half closed against its glare. Then his gaze swept back down the blue
vault of the heavens, back to a world of impossible beauty.

Directly ahead was a land of desolation, radiant in its barrenness.
For every rock, every foot of ground, was made of crystal. Nearby
hills were visions of loveliness where the colors of a million
rainbows quivered and flashed. Veins of metal showed the rich blues
and greens of peacock coloring. Others were scarlet, topaz, green, and
all of them took the strange sunlight that flooded them and threw it
back in blendings radiant and delicate.

The little hills began a short distance off, two low ranges running
directly away. One on either side, they made brilliant walls for the
flat valley between, whose foreground was barren rock of rose and
white. But beyond the glistening barren stretch were green fields of
luxuriant vegetation and in the distance, nestled in the green were
clustered masses that might have been a city of men. Still farther on,
a single mountain peak, white beyond belief, reared its graceful
sweeping sides to a shining apex against the heavens of clear blue.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly Rawson turned. A hundred yards away, at his left, there was
water, a sea whose smooth rollers might have been undulating liquid
emeralds that broke to infinite flashing gems upon the shore. He
swung sharply to the right and found the same expanse of water,
perhaps the same distance away.

Then he turned toward the shell, which had been behind him and the
shaft from which it had emerged, and into which the air was driving
with a ceaseless rushing sound. Now, looking beyond them, he found the
same ocean; he was standing on a blunt point of rock projecting into
the sea. The rest of this world was one vast expanse of water.

Suddenly Rawson knew that it was unlike any ocean of earth. Instead of
finishing on a sharply-cut horizon, that sea of emerald green reached
out and still out, and _up_! It did not fall away. It curved upward,
until it lost itself in the distance and merged with the blue of the
sky. It was the same on all sides.

He swung slowly back to face the land that perhaps was only an island.
The kneeling ones had raised their bowed heads. They were regarding
him from shining, expectant eyes. Only the girl kept her face averted.
Rawson spoke to none of them; the exclamations that his amazement and
dismay wrung from his lips were meant for himself.

"It's concave! It curves upward! I'm on the inside of the world! And
that sun is the center! But what holds us here? What keeps us from
falling?" He passed one hand heavily across his eyes. The excitement
of the moment had lifted him above the weariness of muscle and mind.
Now fatigue claimed him.

"Sleep," he said dully. "I've got to sleep. I've got to. I'm all in."

Gor was beside him in an instant. "Whatever you wish is yours," he
promised.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rawson was to remember little of that journey toward the habitations
of this people. Gor had spoken at times along the way: "... the Land
of the Central Sun.... The People of the Light, peaceful and happy in
our little world...."

Rawson had roused himself to ask: "Who it at the head of it? Who is
the king, the ruler?"

And the tall man beside him had answered humbly: "Always since the
beginning one named Gor has led. My father, and those who came before
him; now it is I. And when I have gone, my little son will take the
name of Gor."

He had glanced toward the girl and his voice had dropped into the
soft, liquid syllables of their own tongue. She had smiled back at
Gor, though her eyes persistently refused to meet those of Rawson.

Again Gor spoke in words that Rawson could understand.

"I think at times," he said, "it is my daughter Loah, my little
Loah-San who really rules. I, knowing not who you were, did not
approve of this expedition, but Loah insisted. She had seen you,
and--" A glance from the girl cut him short.

The words lingered in Rawson's mind when he awoke. The horrible
experience of the past days were no longer predominant. Even his own
world seemed of a dim and distant past.

       *       *       *       *       *

He awoke refreshed. He was in a new world and, for the moment, he
asked nothing except to explore its mystery. He bathed under a
fountain in an adjoining room, and grinned broadly as he wrapped the
folds of the long golden loin cloth about him.

"As well be dead as out of style," he quoted. "And now to find Gor and
Loah, and see what the devil all this is about--a talking mountain and
a buried race that speaks first-rate American."

Gor was waiting for him in a room whose translucent walls admitted a
subdued glow from outside. There was food on a table, strange fruits,
and a clear scarlet liquid in a crystal glass. Rawson ate ravenously,
then followed Gor.

Outside were houses, whose timbered frames of jet-black contrasted
startlingly with the quartz walls they enclosed. The street was
thronged with people who drew back to let them pass, and who dropped
to their knees in humble worship. Like Gor, the men wore only the loin
cloth, but for this gala day, that simple apparel added a note of
flashing color. The long cloths wrapped about their hips, and brought
up and about the waist where the ends hung free, were brilliant with
countless variations of crimson and blue and gold. The same rainbow
hues were found in the loose folded cloths that draped themselves like
short skirts from the women's waists. Here and there, in the sea of
white bodies and scintillant jeweled breast-plates, was one with an
additional flash of color, where brilliant silken scarves had been
thrown about the shoulders of the younger girls.

"From all the land," said Gor, "they have come to do you honor."

