The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Doomsman, by Van Tassel Sutphen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Doomsman

Author: Van Tassel Sutphen

Release Date: January 7, 2009 [EBook #27730]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DOOMSMAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Geetu Melwani, George P. Snoga and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

A number of typographical errors found in the original text
have been corrected in this version. A list of these errors
is provided at the end of the book.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DOOMSMAN

BY

VAN TASSEL SUTPHEN


AUTHOR OF
"THE CARDINAL'S ROSE"
"THE GATES OF CHANCE"
ETC.


ILLUSTRATED


NEW YORK AND LONDON
HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
MCMVI


Copyright, 1905, 1906, by
The Metropolitan Magazine Company.


Copyright, 1906, by HARPER & BROTHERS.

_All rights reserved._

Published June, 1906.




[Illustration: "CONSTANS AND NIGHT WERE DOWN." See p. 28]


CONTENTS


CHAP.                                  PAGE

I.      THE VERMILION FEATHER             1

II.     THE NIGHT OF THE TERROR          14

III.    THE NEW WORLD                    19

IV.     THE MAN ON HORSEBACK             25

V.      THE RAT'S-HOLE                   32

VI.     TROY TOWN                        41

VII.    THE BREAD OF AFFLICTION          50

VIII.   IN THE SHADOW OF DOOM            58

IX.     THE KEYS OF POWER                67

X.      THE MESSAGE                      83

XI.     THE SISTERS                      93

XII.    THE HEDGE OF ARROWS             106

XIII.   GODS IN EXILE                   120

XIV.    ARCADIA HOUSE                   136

XV.     A MAN AND A MAID                150

XVI.    AS IN A LOOKING-GLASS           162

XVII.   THE AWAKENING                   173

XVIII.  A PROPHET OF EVIL               181

XIX.    IN QUINTON EDGE'S GARDEN        188

XX.     THE SILVER WHISTLE BLOWS        199

XXI.    OXENFORD'S DAUGHTER             209

XXII.   YET THREE DAYS                  223

XXIII.  THE RED LIGHT IN THE NORTH      231

XXIV.   THE EVE OF THE THIRD DAY        238

XXV.    ENTR'ACTE                       242

XXVI.   THE SONG OF THE SWORD           250

XXVII.  DOOMSDAY                        266

XXVIII. IN THE FULNESS OF TIME          274

XXIX.   DEATH AND LIFE                  281

XXX.    THE STAR IN THE EAST            290




ILLUSTRATIONS


"CONSTANS AND NIGHT WERE DOWN"           _Frontispiece_

"OUT LEAPED QUINTON EDGE'S SWORD"        _Facing p._ 48

"CONSTANS LOOKED ABOUT HIM IN WONDERMENT"       "    64

"THE BLOWS RAINED DOWN UPON HIS FACE"           "    76

"THEY PARTED WITHOUT FURTHER SPEAKING"          "    90

"AN INSTANT LATER THE BOWSTRING TWANGED"        "   118

"SHE STOOD MUTE AND WIDE-EYED BEFORE HIM"       "   156

"OF DOOM SHALL WE REQUIRE IT"                   "   220




       *       *       *       *       *




THE DOOMSMAN

I

THE VERMILION FEATHER


A beach of yellow sand and a stranded log upon which sat a boy looking
steadfastly out upon the shining waters.

It was a delicious morning in early May, and the sun was at his back,
its warm rays falling upon him with affectionate caress. But the lad was
plainly oblivious of his immediate surroundings; in spirit he had
followed the leading of his eyes a league or more to the westward, where
a mass of indefinable shadow bulked hugely upon the horizon line.
Indefinable, in that it was neither forest nor mountain nor yet an
atmospheric illusion produced by the presence of watery vapor. It did
not change in density as does the true cloud; for all of its mistiness
of outline there was an impression of solidity about its deeper shadows,
something that the wind could not lift nor the light pierce. A mystery,
and the boy devoured it with his eyes, his head bent forward and his
shoulders held tensely.

The place was a rocky point of land jutting forth into a reef-strewn
tideway. The forest came down close to the strip of beach, but there was
comparatively little underwood, and the grass, growing up to the very
roots of the trees, gave to the glade an appearance almost parklike.
There was no house in sight, not even the thin, blue curl of a smoking
hearth to proclaim the neighborhood of man. Yet the sign of human
handicraft was not wholly wanting; through the tree trunks, at perhaps a
hundred yards away, appeared the line of a timber stockade--enormous
palisades, composed of twelve-foot ash and hickory poles, set in a
double row and bound together by lengths of copper wire. It was to be
further observed that the timbers had been stripped of their bark and
the knots smoothed down so as to afford no coigne of vantage to even a
naked foot. Add, again, that the poles had been charred and sharpened at
the top, and it will be understood that the barrier was a formidable one
against any assault short of artillery.

There was no beaten road or path near the line of palisades, but,
following the curving of the shore, a forest track, already green with
the young grass that was pushing its way through last year's stubble,
stretched away to the north and south. It was hardly more than a runway
for the deer and wild cattle, but it did not give one the impression of
having been originally plotted out by these creatures, after the
immemorial fashion of their kind. An animal does not lay out his road in
sections of perfectly straight lines connected by mathematical curves,
neither does he fill up gullies nor cut through hills, when it is so
easy to go around these obstructions.

The boy, who sat and dreamed at the water's edge, was in his eighteenth
year or thereabouts, slenderly proportioned, and with well-cut features.
The delicately moulded chin, the sensitive nostril--these are the signs
of the poet, the dreamer, rather than of the man of action. And yet the
face was not altogether deficient in indications of strength. That heavy
line of eyebrow should mean something, as also the free up-fling of the
head when he sat erect; the final impression was of immaturity of
character rather than of the lack of it. From the merely superficial
stand-point, it may be added that he had brown eyes and hair (the latter
being cut square across his forehead and falling to his shoulders), a
good mouth containing the whitest of teeth, and a naturally light
complexion that was already beginning to accumulate its summer's coat of
tan.

He was dressed in a tunic or smock of brown linen, gathered at the waist
by a belt of greenish leather, with a buckle that shone like gold. His
knees were bare, but around his legs were wound spiral bands of
soft-dressed deer-hide. Buskins, secured by thongs of red leather and
soled with moose-hide, to prevent slipping, covered his feet, while his
head-dress consisted of a simple band of thin gold, worn fillet-wise.
This last, being purely ornamental, was doubtless a token of gentle
birth or of an assured social station. A short fur coat, made from the
pelt of the much-prized forest cat, lay in a careless heap at the boy's
feet. It had felt comfortable enough in the still keenness of the early
morning hour, but now that the sun was well up in the sky it had been
discarded.

In his belt was stuck a long, double-edged hunting-knife, having its
wooden handle neatly bound with black waxed thread. A five-foot bow of
second-growth hickory leaned against the log beside him, but it was
unstrung, and the quiver of arrows, suspended by a strap from his
shoulders, had been allowed to shift from its proper position so that it
hung down the middle of his back and was, consequently, out of easy
hand-reach. But the youth was in no apparent fear of being surprised by
the advent of an enemy; certainly he had made no provision against such
a contingency, and the carelessness of his attitude was entirely
unaffected. It may be remarked that the arrows aforesaid were
iron-tipped instead of being simply fire-hardened, and in the feathering
of each a single plume of the scarlet tanager had been carefully
inserted. Presumably, the vermilion feather was the owner's private sign
of his work as a marksman. So far the lad's dress and accoutrements were
in entire conformity to the primeval rusticity of his surroundings.
Judge, then, of the reasonable surprise which the observer might feel at
discovering that the object in the boy's hand was nothing less
incongruous than a pair of binocular glasses, an exquisitely finished
example of the highest art of the optician. One of the eye-piece lenses
had been lost or broken, for, as the youth raised the glasses to sweep
again the distant sea-line, he covered the left-hand cylinder with a
flat, oblong object--a printed book. Its title, indeed, could be clearly
read as, a moment after, it lay partly open upon his knee--_A Child's
History of the United States_--and across the top of the page had been
neatly written in charcoal ink, "Constans, Son of Gavan at the Greenwood
Keep."

Mechanically, the boy began turning the leaves, stopping finally at a
page upon which was a picture of the lower part of New York City as seen
from the bay. Long and earnestly he studied it, looking up occasionally
as though he would find its visible presentment in that dark blur on the
horizon line. "It must be," he muttered, with a quick intake of his
breath. "The Forgotten City and Doom the Forbidden--one and the same.
Well, and what then?" and again he fell upon his dreaming.

For the best part of an hour the boy had sat almost motionless, looking
out across the water. Then, suddenly, he turned his head; his ear had
caught a suspicious sound, perhaps the dip of an oar-blade. Thrusting
the field-glass and book into his bosom, he drew the bow towards him and
listened. All was still, except for the chatter of a blue-jay, and after
a moment or so his attention again relaxed. But his eyes, instead of
losing themselves in the distance as before, remained fixed upon the
sand at his feet. Fortunately so, or he must have failed to notice the
