window, one thin hand hard pressed upon his heart to still its beating,
there was a light of sudden resolve in his eyes, a new-born look of
anxiety on his unchildlike face.

"I will not have Gay protectioned and reliefed, and I will not be taken
away from her and sent to a 'sylum, where I can never find her again!"
and with these defiant words trembling, half spoken, on his lips, he
glanced from the unconscious form in the crib to the terrible door,
which might open at any moment and divide him from his heart's delight,
his darling, his treasure, his only joy, his own, own baby Gay.

But what should he do? Run away: that was the only solution of the
matter, and no very difficult one either. The cruel women were asleep;
the awful Thing that had been Flossy would never speak again; and no one
else in Minerva Court cared enough for them to pursue them very far or
very long.

"And so," thought Timothy swiftly, "I will get things ready, take Gay,
and steal softly out of the back door, and run away to the 'truly'
country, where none of these bad people ever can find us, and where I
can get a mother for Gay; somebody to 'dopt her and love her till I
grow up a man and take her to live with me."

The moment this thought darted into Timothy's mind, it began to shape
itself in definite action.

Gabrielle, or Lady Gay, as Flossy called her, in honor of her favorite
stage heroine, had been tumbled into her crib half dressed the night
before. The only vehicle kept for her use in the family stables was a
clothes-basket, mounted on four wooden wheels and cushioned with a dingy
shawl. A yard of clothes-line was tied on to one end, and in this humble
conveyance the Princess would have to be transported from the Ogre's
castle; for she was scarcely old enough to accompany the Prince on foot,
even if he had dared to risk detection by waking her: so the
clothes-basket must be her chariot, and Timothy her charioteer, as on
many a less fateful expedition.

After he had changed his ragged night-gown for a shabby suit of clothes,
he took Gay's one clean apron out of a rickety bureau drawer ("for I can
never find a mother for her if she's too dirty," he thought), her Sunday
hat from the same receptacle, and last of all a comb, and a faded
Japanese parasol that stood in a corner. These he deposited under the
old shawl that decorated the floor of the chariot. He next groped his
way in the dim light toward a mantelshelf, and took down a
savings-bank,--a florid little structure with "Bank of England" stamped
over the miniature door, into which the jovial gentleman who frequented
the house often slipped pieces of silver for the children, and into
which Flossy dipped only when she was in a state of temporary financial
embarrassment. Timothy did not dare to jingle it; he could only hope
that as Flossy had not been in her usual health of late (though in more
than her usual "spirits"), she had not felt obliged to break the bank.

Now for provisions. There were plenty of "funeral baked meats" in the
kitchen; and he hastily gathered a dozen cookies into a towel, and
stowed them in the coach with the other sinews of war.

So far, well and good; but the worst was to come. With his heart beating
in his bosom like a trip-hammer, and his eyes dilated with fear, he
stepped to the door between the two rooms, and opened it softly. Two
thundering snores, pitched in such different keys that they must have
proceeded from two separate sets of nasal organs, reassured the boy. He
looked out into the alley. "Not a creature was stirring, not even a
mouse." The Minerva Courtiers couldn't be owls and hawks too, and there
was not even the ghost of a sound to be heard. Satisfied that all was
well, Timothy went back to the bedroom, and lifted the battered
clothes-basket, trucks and all, in his slender arms, carried it up the
alley and down the street a little distance, and deposited it on the
pavement beside a vacant lot. This done, he sped back to the house. "How
beautifully they snore!" he thought, as he stood again on the threshold.
"Shall I leave 'em a letter?... P'raps I better ... and then they won't
follow us and bring us back." So he scribbled a line on a bit of torn
paper bag, and pinned it on the enemies' door.

     "A kind Lady is goin to Adopt us it is
     a Grate ways off so do not Hunt good by.     TIM."

Now all was ready. No; one thing more. Timothy had been met in the
street by a pretty young girl a few weeks before. The love of God was
smiling in her heart, the love of children shining in her eyes; and she
led him, a willing captive, into a mission Sunday-school near by. And so
much in earnest was the sweet little teacher, and so hungry for any sort
of good tidings was the starved little pupil, that Timothy "got
religion" then and there, as simply and naturally as a child takes its
mother's milk. He was probably in a state of crass ignorance regarding
the Thirty-nine Articles; but it was the "engrafted word," of which the
Bible speaks, that had blossomed in Timothy's heart; the living seed had
always been there, waiting for some beneficent fostering influence; for
he was what dear Charles Lamb would have called a natural
"kingdom-of-heavenite." Thinking, therefore, of Miss Dora's injunction
to pray over all the extra-ordinary affairs of life and as many of the
ordinary ones as possible, he hung his tattered straw hat on the
bedpost, and knelt beside Gay's crib with this whispered prayer:--

"_Our Father who art in heaven, please help me to find a mother for Gay,
one that she can call Mamma, and another one for me, if there's enough,
but not unless. Please excuse me for taking away the clothes-basket,
which does not exactly belong to us; but if I do not take it, dear
heavenly Father, how will I get Gay to the railroad? And if I don't take
the Japanese umbrella she will get freckled, and nobody will adopt her.
No more at present, as I am in a great hurry. Amen._"

He put on his hat, stooped over the sleeping baby, and took her in his
faithful arms,--arms that had never failed her yet. She half opened her
eyes, and seeing that she was safe on her beloved Timothy's shoulder,
clasped her dimpled arms tight about his neck, and with a long sigh
drifted off again into the land of dreams. Bending beneath her weight,
he stepped for the last time across the threshold, not even daring to
close the door behind him.

Up the alley and round the corner he sped, as fast as his trembling legs
could carry him. Just as he was within sight of the goal of his
ambition, that is, the chariot aforesaid, he fancied he heard the sound
of hurrying feet behind him. To his fevered imagination the tread was
like that of an avenging army on the track of the foe. He did not dare
to look behind. On! for the clothes-basket and liberty! He would
relinquish the Japanese umbrella, the cookies, the comb, and the
apron,--all the booty, in fact,--as an inducement for the enemy to
retreat, but he would never give up the prisoner.

On the feet hurried, faster and faster. He stooped to put Gay in the
basket, and turned in despair to meet his pursuers, when a little,
grimy, rough-coated, lop-eared, split-tailed thing, like an animated
rag-bag, leaped upon his knees; whimpering with joy, and imploring, with
every grace that his simple doggish heart could suggest, to be one of
the eloping party.

Rags had followed them!

Timothy was so glad to find it no worse that he wasted a moment in
embracing the dog, whose delirious joy at the prospect of this probably
dinnerless and supperless expedition was ludicrously exaggerated. Then
he took up the rope and trundled the chariot gently down a side street
leading to the station.

Everything worked to a charm. They met only an occasional milk (and
water) man, starting on his matutinal rounds, for it was now after four
o'clock, and one or two cavaliers of uncertain gait, just returning to
their homes, several hours too late for their own good; but these
gentlemen were in no condition of mind to be over-interested, and the
little fugitives were troubled with no questions as to their intentions.

And so they went out into the world together, these three: Timothy
Jessup (if it was Jessup), brave little knight, nameless nobleman,
tracing his descent back to God, the Father of us all, and bearing
the Divine likeness more than most of us; the little Lady
Gay,--somebody--nobody--anybody,--from nobody knows where,--destination
equally uncertain; and Rags, of pedigree most doubtful, scutcheon quite
obscured by blots, but a perfect gentleman, true-hearted and loyal to
the core,--in fact, an angel in fur. These three, with the
clothes-basket as personal property and the Bank of England as security,
went out to seek their fortune; and, unlike Lot's wife, without daring
to look behind, shook the dust of Minerva Court from off their feet
forever and forever.




SCENE III.

_The Railway Station._

TIMOTHY PLANS A CAMPAIGN, AND PROVIDENCE ASSISTS MATERIALLY IN CARRYING
IT OUT, OR VICE VERSA.


By dint of skillful generalship, Timothy gathered his forces on a green
bank just behind the railway depot, cleared away a sufficient number of
tin cans and oyster-shells to make a flat space for the chariot of war,
which had now become simply a cradle, and sat down, with Rags curled up
at his feet, to plan the campaign.

He pushed back the ragged hat from his waving hair, and, clasping his
knees with his hands, gazed thoughtfully at the towering chimneys in the
foreground and the white-winged ships in the distant harbor. There was a
glimpse of something like a man's purpose in the sober eyes; and as the
morning sunlight fell upon his earnest face, the angel in him came to
the surface, and crowded the "boy part" quite out of sight, as it has a
way of doing sometimes with children.

How some father-heart would have throbbed with pride to own him, and how
gladly lifted the too heavy burden from his childish shoulders!

Timothy Jessup, aged ten or eleven, or thereabouts (the records had not
been kept with absolute exactness)--Timothy Jessup, somewhat ragged, all
forlorn, and none too clean at the present moment, was a poet,
philosopher, and lover of the beautiful. The dwellers in Minerva Court
had never discovered the fact; for, although he had lived in that world,
he had most emphatically never been of it. He was a boy of strange
notions, and the vocabulary in which he expressed them was stranger
still; further-more, he had gentle manners, which must have been
indigenous, as they had certainly never been cultivated; and, although
he had been in the way of handling pitch for many a day, it had been
helpless to defile him, such was the essential purity of his nature.

To find a home and a mother for Lady Gay had been Timothy's secret
longing ever since he had heard people say that Flossy might die. He
had once enjoyed all the comforts of a Home with a capital H; but it was
the cosy one with the little "h" that he so much desired for her.

Not that he had any ill treatment to remember in the excellent
institution of which he was for several years an inmate. The matron was
an amiable and hard-working woman, who wished to do her duty to all the
children under her care; but it would be an inspired human being indeed
who could give a hundred and fifty motherless or fatherless children all
the education and care and training they needed, to say nothing of the
love that they missed and craved. What wonder, then, that an occasional
hungry little soul, starved for want of something not provided by the
management; say, a morning cuddle in father's bed or a ride on father's
knee,--in short, the sweet daily jumble of lap-trotting, gentle
caressing, endearing words, twilight stories, motherly tucks-in-bed,
good-night kisses,--all the dear, simple, every-day accompaniments of
the home with the little "h."

Timothy Jessup, bred in such an atmosphere, would have gladdened every
life that touched his at any point. Plenty of wistful men and women
would have thanked God nightly on their knees for the gift of such a
son; and here he was, sitting on a tin can, bowed down with family
cares, while thousands of graceless little scalawags were slapping the
faces of their French nurse-maids and bullying their parents, in that
very city.--Ah me!

As for the tiny Lady Gay, she had all the winsome virtues to recommend
her. No one ever feared that she would die young out of sheer goodness.
You would not have loved her so much for what she was as because you
couldn't help yourself. This feat once accomplished, she blossomed into
a thousand graces, each one more bewitching than the last you noted.

Where, in the name of all the sacred laws of heredity, did the child get
her sunshiny nature? Born in misery, and probably in sin, nurtured in
wretchedness and poverty, she had brought her "radiant morning visions"
with her into the world. Like Wordsworth's immortal babe, "with trailing
clouds of glory" had she come, from God who was her home; and the heaven
that lies about us all in our infancy,--that Garden of Eden into which
we are all born, like the first man and the first woman,--that heaven
lay about her still, stronger than the touch of earth.

What if the room were desolate and bare? The yellow sunbeams stole
through the narrow window, and in the shaft of light they threw across
the dirty floor Gay played,--oblivious of everything save the flickering
golden rays that surrounded her.

The raindrops chasing each other down the dingy pane, the snowflakes
melting softly on the casement, the brown leaf that the wind blew into
her lap as she sat on the sidewalk, the chirp of the little
beggar-sparrows over the cobblestones, all these brought as eager a
light into her baby eyes as the costliest toy. With no earthly father or
mother to care for her, she seemed to be God's very own baby, and He
amused her in his own good way; first by locking her happiness within
her own soul (the only place where it is ever safe for a single moment),
and then by putting her under Timothy's paternal ministrations.

Timothy's mind traveled back over the past, as he sat among the tin cans
and looked at Rags and Gay. It was a very small story, if he ever found
any one who would care to hear it. There was a long journey in a great
ship, a wearisome illness of many weeks,--or was it months?--when his
curls had been cut off, and all his memories with them; then there was
the Home; then there was Flossy, who came to take him away; then--oh,
bright, bright spot! oh, blessed time!--there was baby Gay; then, worse
than all, there was Minerva Court. But he did not give many minutes to
reminiscence. He first broke open the Bank of England, and threw it
away, after finding to his joy that their fortune amounted to one dollar
and eighty-five cents. This was so much in advance of his expectations
that he laughed aloud; and Rags, wagging his tail with such vigor that
he nearly broke it in two, jumped into the cradle and woke the baby.

Then there was a happy family circle, you may believe me, and with good
reason, too! A trip to the country (meals and lodging uncertain, but
that was a trifle), a sight of green meadows, where Tim would hear real
birds sing in the trees, and Gay would gather wild flowers, and Rags
would chase, and perhaps--who knows?--catch toothsome squirrels and fat
little field-mice, of which the country dogs visiting Minerva Court had
told the most mouth-watering tales. Gay's transport knew no bounds. Her
child-heart felt no regret for the past, no care for the present, no
anxiety for the future. The only world she cared for was in her sight;
and she had never, in her brief experience, gazed upon it with more
radiant anticipation than on this sunny June morning, when she had
opened her bright eyes on a pleasant, odorous bank of oyster-shells,
instead of on the accustomed surroundings of Minerva Court.

Breakfast was first in order.

There was a pump conveniently near, and the oyster-shells made capital
cups. Gay had three cookies, Timothy two, and Rags one; but there was no
statute of limitations placed on the water; every one had as much as he
could drink.

The little matter of toilets came next. Timothy took the dingy rag which
did duty for a handkerchief, and, calling the pump again into
requisition, scrubbed Gay's face and hands tenderly, but firmly. Her
clothes were then all smoothed down tidily, but the clean apron was kept
for the eventful moment when her future mother should first be allowed
to behold the form of her adopted child.

The comb was then brought out, and her mop of red-gold hair was assisted
to fall in wet spirals all over her lovely head, which always "wiggled"
too much for any more formal style of hair-dressing. Her Sunday hat
being tied on, as the crowning glory, this lucky little princess, this
child of Fortune, so inestimably rich in her own opinion, this daughter
of the gods, I say, was returned to the basket, where she endeavored to
keep quiet until the next piece of delightful unexpectedness should rise
from fairy-land upon her excited gaze.

Timothy and Rags now went to the pump, and Rags was held under the
spout. This was a new and bitter experience, and he wished for a few
brief moments that he had never joined the noble army of deserters, but
had stayed where dirt was fashionable. Being released, the sense of
abnormal cleanliness mounted to his brain, and he tore breathlessly
round in a circle seventy-seven times without stopping. But this only
dried his hair and amused Gay, who was beginning to find the basket
confining, and who clamored for "Timfy" to take her to "yide."

Timothy attended to himself last, as usual. He put his own head under
the pump, and scrubbed his face and hands heartily; wiping them on
his--well, he wiped them, and that is the main thing; besides, his
handkerchief had been reduced to a pulp in Gay's service. He combed his
hair, pulled up his stockings and tied his shoes neatly, buttoned his
jacket closely over his shirt, and was just pinning up the rent in his
hat, when Rags considerately brought another suggestion in the shape of
an old chicken-wing, with which he brushed every speck of dust from his
clothes. This done, and being no respecter of persons, he took the
family comb to Rags, who woke the echoes during the operation, and hoped
to the Lord that the squirrels would run slowly and that the field-mice
would be very tender, to pay him for this.

It was now nearly eight o'clock, and the party descended the hillside
and entered the side door of the station.

The day's work had long since begun, and there was the usual din and
uproar of railroad traffic. Trucks, laden high with boxes and barrels,
were being driven to the wide doors, and porters were thundering and
thumping and lurching the freight from one set of cars into another;
their primary objects being to make a racket and demolish raw material,
thereby increasing manufacture and export, but incidentally to load or
unload as much freight as possible in a given time.

Timothy entered, trundling his carriage, where Lady Gay sat enthroned
like a Murray Hill belle on a dog-cart, conscious pride of Sunday hat on
week-day morning exuding from every feature; and Rags followed close
behind, clean, but with a crushed spirit, which he could stimulate only
by the most seductive imaginations. No one molested them, for Timothy
was very careful not to get in any one's way. Finally, he drew up in
front of a high blackboard, on which the names of various way-stations
were printed in gold letters:--

  CHESTERTOWN.
  SANDFORD.
  REEDVILLE.
  BINGHAM.
  SKAGGSTOWN.
  ESBURY.
  SCRATCH CORNER.
  HILLSIDE.
  MOUNTAIN VIEW.
  EDGEWOOD.
  PLEASANT RIVER.

"The names get nicer and nicer as you read down the line, and the
furtherest one of all is the very prettiest, so I guess we'll go there,"
thought Timothy, not realizing that his choice was based on most
insecure foundations; and that, for aught he knew, the milk of human
kindness might have more cream on it at Scratch Corner than at Pleasant
River, though the latter name was certainly more attractive.

Gay approved of Pleasant River, and so did Rags; and Timothy moved off
down the station to a place on the open platform where a train of cars
stood ready for starting, the engine at the head gasping and puffing and
breathing as hard as if it had an acute attack of asthma.

"How much does it cost to go to Pleasant River, please?" asked Tim,
bravely, of a kind-looking man in a blue coat and brass buttons, who
stood by the cars.

"This is a freight train, sonny," replied the man; "takes four hours to
get there. Better wait till 10.45; buy your ticket up in the station."

"10.45!" Tim saw visions of Mrs. Simmons speeding down upon him in hot
pursuit, kindled by Gay's disappearance into an appreciation of her
charms.

The tears stood in his eyes as Gay clambered out of the basket, and
danced with impatience, exclaiming, "Gay wants to yide now! yide now!
yide now!"

"Did you want to go sooner?" asked the man, who seemed to be entirely
too much interested in humanity to succeed in the railroad business.
"Well, as you seem to have consid'rable of a family on your hands, I
guess we'll take you along. Jim, unlock that car and let these children
in, and then lock it up again. It's a car we're taking up to the end of
the road for repairs, bubby, so the comp'ny 'll give you and your folks
a free ride!"

Timothy thanked the man in his politest manner, and Gay pressed a piece
of moist cooky in his hand, and offered him one of her swan's-down
kisses, a favor of which she was usually as chary as if it had possessed
a market value.

"Are you going to take the dog?" asked the man, as Rags darted up the
steps with sniffs and barks of ecstatic delight. "He ain't so handsome
but you can get another easy enough!" (Rags held his breath in suspense,
and wondered if he had been put under a roaring cataract, and then
ploughed in deep furrows with a sharp-toothed instrument of torture,
only to be left behind at last!)

"That's just why I take him," said Timothy; "because he isn't handsome
and has nobody else to love him."

("Not a very polite reason," thought Rags; "but anything to go!")

"Well, jump in, dog and all, and they'll give you the best free ride to
the country you ever had in your life! Tell 'em it's all right, Jim;"
and the train steamed out of the depot, while the kind man waved his
bandana handkerchief until the children were out of sight.




SCENE IV.

_Pleasant River._

JABE SLOCUM ASSUMES THE ROLE OF GUARDIAN ANGEL.


Jabe Slocum had been down to Edgewood, and was just returning to the
White Farm, by way of the cross-roads and Hard Scrabble school-house. He
was in no hurry, though he always had more work on hand than he could
leave undone for a month; and Maria also was taking her own time, as
usual, even stopping now and then to crop an unusually sweet tuft of
grass that grew within smelling distance, and which no mare (with a
driver like Jabe) could afford to pass without notice.

Jabe was ostensibly out on an "errant" for Miss Avilda Cummins; but, as
he had been in her service for six years, she had no expectations of his
accomplishing anything beyond getting to a place and getting back in the
same day, the distance covered being no factor at all in the matter.

But one needn't go to Miss Avilda Cummins for a description of Jabe
Slocum's peculiarities. They were all so written upon his face and
figure and speech that the wayfaring man, though a fool, could not err
in his judgment. He was a long, loose, knock-kneed, slack-twisted
person, and would have been "longer yit if he hedn't hed so much turned
up for feet,"--so Aunt Hitty Tarbox said. (Aunt Hitty went from house to
house in Edgewood and Pleasant River, making over boys' clothes; and as
her tongue flew as fast as her needle, her sharp speeches were always in
circulation in both villages.)

Mr. Slocum had sandy hair, high cheekbones, a pair of kindly light blue
eyes, and a most unique nose: I hardly know to what order of
