Dick slept uneasily through the night, and rose to another hot August
sun. Then the two armies looked at each other and it seemed that each
was waiting for the other to begin, as the morning hours dragged on and
only the skirmishers were busy. During this comparative peace, the heavy
clouds of dust were not floating about, and Dick whose body had come to
life again walked back and forth with his colonel, gazing through their
glasses at the enemy. He scarcely noticed it, but Colonel Winchester's
manner toward him had become paternal. The boy merely ascribed it to the
friendly feeling an officer would feel for a faithful aide, but he knew
that he had in his colonel one to whom he could speak both as a friend
and a protector. Walking together they talked freely of the enemy who
stood before them in such an imposing array.

"Colonel," said Dick, "do you think General Pope is correct in stating
that one wing of the Southern army is already retreating through
Thoroughfare Gap?"

"I don't, Dick. I don't think it is even remotely probable. I'm quite
sure, too, that we have the whole Confederate army in front of us. We'll
have to beat both Lee and Jackson, if we can."

"Where do you think the main attack will be?"

"On Jackson, who is still in front of us. But we have waited a long
time. It must be full noon now."

"It is past noon, sir, but I hear the trumpets, calling up our men."

"They are calling to us, too."

The regiment shifted a little to the right, where a great column was
forming for a direct attack upon the Confederate lines. Twenty thousand
men stood in a vast line and forty thousand were behind them to march in
support.

Dick had thought that he would be insensible to emotions, but his heart
began to throb again. The spectacle thrilled and awed him--the great
army marching to the attack and the resolute army awaiting it. Soon he
heard behind him the firing of the artillery which sent shot and shell
over their heads at the enemy. A dozen cannon came into action, then
twenty, fifty, a hundred and more, and the earth trembled with the
mighty concussion.

Dick felt the surge of triumph. They had yet met no answering fire.
Perhaps General Pope and not Colonel Winchester had been right after
all, and the Confederates were crushed. Awaiting them was only a rear
guard which would flee at the first flash of the bayonets in the wood.

The great line marched steadily onward, and the cannon thundered and
roared over the heads of the men raking the wood with steel. Still
no reply. Surely the sixty thousand Union men would now march over
everything. They were driving in the swarms of skirmishers. Dick could
see them retreating everywhere, in the wood over the hills and along an
embankment.

Warner was on his right and Pennington on his left. Dick glanced at them
and he saw the belief in speedy victory expressed on the faces of both.
It seemed to him, too, that nothing could now stop the massive
columns that Pope was sending forward against the thinned ranks of the
Confederates.

They were much nearer and he saw gray lines along an embankment and in
a wood. Then above the crash and thunder of their covering artillery he
heard another sound. It was the Southern bugles calling with a piercing
note to their own men just as the Northern trumpets had called.

Dick saw a great gray multitude suddenly pour forward. It looked to him
in the blur and the smoke like an avalanche, and in truth it was a human
avalanche, a far greater force of the South than they expected to
meet there. Directly in front of the Union column stood the Stonewall
Brigade, and all the chosen veterans of Stonewall Jackson's army.

"It's a fight, face to face," Dick heard Colonel Winchester say.

Then he saw a Union officer, whose name he did not know suddenly gallop
out in front of the division, wave his saber over his head and shout
the charge. A tremendous rolling cry came from the blue ranks and Dick
physically felt the whole division leap forward and rush at the enemy.

Dick saw the officer who had made himself the leader of the charge
gallop straight at a breastwork that the Southerners had built, reach
and stand, horse and rider, a moment at the top, then both fall in
a limp heap. The next instant the officer, not dead but wounded, was
dragged a prisoner behind the embankment by generous foes who had
refused to shoot at him until compelled to do so.

The Union men, with a roar, followed their champion, and Dick felt a
very storm burst upon them. The Southerners had thrown up earthworks at
midnight and thousands of riflemen lying behind them sent in a fire at
short range that caused the first Union line to go down like falling
grain. Cannon from the wood and elsewhere raked them through and
through.

It was a vortex of fire and death. The Confederates themselves were
losing heavily, but taught by the stern Jackson and knowing that his eye
was upon them they refused to yield. The Northern charge broke on their
front, but the men did not retreat far. The shrill trumpet called them
back to the charge, and once more the blue masses hurled themselves upon
the barrier of fire and steel, to break again, and to come yet a third
time at the trumpet's call. Often the combatants were within ten yards
of one another, but strive as they would the Union columns could not
break through the Confederate defense.

Elsewhere the men of Hill and Longstreet showed a sternness and valor
equal to that of Jackson's. Their ranks held firm everywhere, and now,
as the long afternoon drew on, the eye of Lee, watching every rising
and falling wave of the battle, saw his chance. He drew his batteries
together in great masses and as the last charge broke on Jackson's lines
the trumpets sounded the charge for the Southern troops who hitherto had
stood on the defensive.

Dick heard a tremendous shout, the great rebel yell, that he had heard
so often before, and that he was destined to hear so often again.
Through the clouds of smoke and dust he saw the long lines of Southern
bayonets advancing swiftly. His regiment, which had already lost more
than half its numbers, was borne back by an appalling weight.

Then hope deserted the boy for the first time. The Union was not to be
saved here on this field. It was instead another lost Manassas, but far
greater than the first. The genius of Lee and Jackson which bore up
the Confederacy was triumphing once again. Dick shut his teeth in grim
despair. He heard the triumphant shouts of the advancing enemy, and he
saw that not only his own regiment, but the whole Northern line, was
being driven back, slowly it is true, but they were going.

Now at the critical moment, Lee was hurling forward every man and gun.
Although his army was inferior in numbers he was always superior at the
point of contact, and his exultant veterans pressed harder and harder
upon their weakening foes. Only the artillery behind them now protected
Dick and his comrades. But the Confederates still came with a rush.

Jackson was leading on his own men who had stood so long on the
defensive. The retreating Union line was broken, guns were lost, and
there was a vast turmoil and confusion. Yet out of it some order finally
emerged, and although the Union army was now driven back at every point
it inflicted heavy losses upon its foe, and under the lead of brave
commanders great masses gathered upon the famous Henry Hill, resolved,
although they could not prevent defeat, to save the army from
destruction.

Night was coming down for the second time upon the field of battle, lost
to the North, although the North was ready to fight again.

Lee and Jackson looked upon the heavy Union masses gathered at the Henry
Hill, and then looking at the coming darkness they stopped the attack.
Night heavier than usual came down over the field, covering with
its friendly veil those who had lost and those who had won, and the
twenty-five thousand who had fallen.




CHAPTER VI. THE MOURNFUL FOREST


As the night settled down, heavy and dark, and the sounds of firing
died away along the great line, Dick again sank to the ground exhausted.
Although the battle itself had ceased, it seemed to him that the drums
of his ears still reproduced its thunder and roar, or at least the echo
of it was left upon the brain.

He lay upon the dry grass, and although the night was again hot and
breathless, surcharged with smoke and dust and fire, he felt a
chill that went to the bone, and he trembled all over. Then a cold
perspiration broke out upon him. It was the collapse after two days of
tremendous exertion, excitement and anxiety. He did not move for eight
or ten minutes, blind to everything that was going on about him, and
then through the darkness he saw Colonel Winchester standing by and
looking down at him.

"Are you all right, Dick, my boy?" the colonel asked.

"Yes, sir," replied Dick, as his pride made him drag himself to his
feet. "I'm not wounded at all. I was just clean played out."

"You're lucky to get off so well," said the colonel, smiling sadly.
"We've lost many thousands and we've lost the battle, too. The killed or
wounded in my regiment number more than two-thirds."

"Have you seen anything of Warner and Pennington, sir? I lost sight of
them in that last terrible attack."

"Pennington is here. He has had a bullet through the fleshy part of his
left arm, but he's so healthy it won't take him long to get well. I'm
sorry to say that Warner is missing."

"Missing, sir? You don't say that George has been killed?"

"I don't say it. I'm hoping instead that he's been captured."

Dick knew what the colonel meant. In Colonel Winchester's opinion only
two things, death or capture, could keep Warner from being with them.

"Maybe he will come in yet," he said. "We were mixed up a good deal when
the darkness fell, and he may have trouble in finding our position."

"That's true. There are not so many of us left, and we do not cover any
great area of ground. Lie still, Dick, and take a little rest. We
don't know what's going to happen in the night. We may have to do more
fighting yet, despite the darkness."

The colonel's figure disappeared in the shadow, and Dick, following his
advice, lay quiet. All around him were other forms stretched upon the
earth, motionless. But Dick knew they were not dead, merely sleeping.
His own nervous system was being restored by youth and the habit
of courage. Yet he felt a personal grief, and it grew stronger with
returning physical strength. Warner, his comrade, knitted to him by ties
of hardship and danger, was missing, dead no doubt in the battle. For
the moment he forgot about the defeat. All his thoughts were for the
brave youth who lay out there somewhere, stretched on the dusty field.

Dick strained his eyes into the darkness, as if by straining he might
see where Warner lay. He saw, indeed, dim fires here and there along a
long line, marking where the Confederates now stood, or rather lay. Then
a bitter pang came. It was ground upon which the Union army had stood in
the morning.

The rifle fire, which had died down, began again in a fitful way. Far
off, skirmishers, not satisfied with the slaughter of the day, were
seeing what harm they could do in the dark. Somewhere the plumed and
unresting Stuart was charging with his horsemen, driving back some
portion of the Union army that the Confederate forces might be on their
flank in the morning.

But Dick, as he lay quietly and felt his strength, mental and physical,
returning, was taking a resolution. Down there in front of them and in
the darkness was the wood upon which they had made five great assaults,
all to fail. In front of that mournful forest, and within its edge, more
than ten thousand men had fallen. He had no doubt that Warner was among
them.

His sense of direction was good, and, as his blurred faculties regained
their normal keenness, he could mark the exact line by which they
had advanced, and the exact line by which they had retreated. Warner
unquestionably lay near the edge of the wood and he must seek him. Were
it the other way, Warner would do the same.

Dick stood up. He was no longer dizzy, and every muscle felt steady and
strong. He did not know what had become of Colonel Winchester, and his
comrades still lay upon the ground in a deep stupor.

It could not be a night of order and precision, with every man numbered
and in his place, as if they were going to begin a battle instead of
just having finished one, and Dick, leaving his comrades, walked calmly
toward the wood. He passed one sentinel, but a few words satisfied him,
and he continued to advance. Far to right and left he still heard the
sound of firing and saw the flash of guns, but these facts did not
disturb him. In front of him lay darkness and silence, with the horizon
bounded by that saddest of all woods where the heaped dead lay.

Dick looked back toward the Henry Hill, on the slopes of which were the
fragments of his own regiment. Lights were moving there, but they were
so dim they showed nothing. Then he turned his face toward the enemy's
position and did not look back again.

The character of the night was changing. It had come on dark and heavy.
Hot and breathless like the one before, he had taken no notice of the
change save for the increased darkness. Now he felt a sudden damp touch
on his face, as if a wet finger had been laid there. The faintest of
winds had blown for a moment or two, and when Dick looked up, he saw
that the sky was covered with black clouds. The saddest of woods had
moved far away, but by some sort of optical illusion he could yet see
it.

Save for the distant flash of random firing, the darkness was intense.
Every star was gone, and Dick moved without any guide. But he needed
none. His course was fixed. He could not miss the mournful wood hanging
there like a pall on the horizon.

His feet struck against something. It was a man, but he was past all
feeling, and Dick went on, striking by and by against many more. It was
impossible at the moment to see Warner's face, but he began to feel
of the figures with his hands. There was none so long and slender as
Warner's, and he continued his search, moving steadily toward the wood.

He saw presently a lantern moving over the field, and he walked toward
it. Three men were with the lantern, and the one who carried it held it
up as he approached. The beams fell directly upon Dick, revealing his
pale face and torn and dusty uniform.

"What do you want, Yank?" called the man.

"I'm looking for a friend of mine who must have fallen somewhere near
here."

The man laughed, but it was not a laugh of joy or irony. It was a laugh
of pity and sadness.

"You've shorely got a big look comin'," he said. "They're scattered all
around here, coverin' acres an' acres, just like dead leaves shook by
a storm from the trees. But j'in us, Yank. You can't do nothin' in the
darkness all by yourself. We're Johnny Rebs, good and true, and I may
be shootin' straight at you to-morrow mornin', but I reckon I've got
nothin' ag'in you now. We're lookin' for a brother o' mine."

Dick joined them, and the four, the three in gray and the one in blue,
moved on. A friendly current had passed between him and them, and there
would be no thought of hostility until the morning, when it would come
again. It was often so in this war, when men of the same blood met in
the night between battles.

"What sort of a fellow is it that you're lookin' for?" asked the man
with the lantern.

"About my age. Very tall and thin. You could mark him by his height."

"It takes different kinds of people to make the world. My brother ain't
like him a-tall. Sam's short, an' thick as a buffalo. Weighs two twenty
with no fat on him. What crowd do you belong to, youngster?"

"The division on our right. We attacked the wood there."

"Well, you're a bully boy. Give me your hand, if you are a Yank. You
shorely came right up there and looked us in the eyes. How often did you
charge us?"

"Five times, I think. But I may be mistaken. You know it wasn't a day
when a fellow could be very particular about his count."

"Guess you're right there. I made it five. What do you say, Jim?"

"Five she was."

"That settles it. Jim kin always count up to five an' never make a
mistake. What you fellers goin' to do in the mornin'?"

"I don't know."

"Pope ain't asked you yet what to do. Well, Bobby Lee and Old Stonewall
ain't been lookin' for me either to get my advice, but, Yank, you
fellers do just what I tell you."

"What's that?"

"Pack up your clothes before daylight, say good-bye, and go back
to Washington. You needn't think you kin ever lick Marse Bobby an'
Stonewall Jackson."

"But what if we do think it? We've got a big army back there yet, and
more are always coming to us. We'll beat you yet."

"There seems to be a pow'ful wide difference in our opinions, an'
