
"You never said a truer word," said Mrs. Rachel solemnly. "I knew
there'd be trouble when Robert Bell sold his place to a New Brunswick
man, that's what. I don't know what Avonlea is coming to, with so many
strange people rushing into it. It'll soon not be safe to go to sleep in
our beds."

"Why, what other strangers are coming in?" asked Marilla.

"Haven't you heard? Well, there's a family of Donnells, for one thing.
They've rented Peter Sloane's old house. Peter has hired the man to run
his mill. They belong down east and nobody knows anything about them.
Then that shiftless Timothy Cotton family are going to move up from
White Sands and they'll simply be a burden on the public. He is
in consumption . . . when he isn't stealing . . .  and his wife is a
slack-twisted creature that can't turn her hand to a thing. She washes
her dishes SITTING DOWN. Mrs. George Pye has taken her husband's orphan
nephew, Anthony Pye. He'll be going to school to you, Anne, so you may
expect trouble, that's what. And you'll have another strange pupil, too.
Paul Irving is coming from the States to live with his grandmother.
You remember his father, Marilla . . . Stephen Irving, him that jilted
Lavendar Lewis over at Grafton?"

"I don't think he jilted her. There was a quarrel . . . I suppose there
was blame on both sides."

"Well, anyway, he didn't marry her, and she's been as queer as possible
ever since, they say . . . living all by herself in that little stone
house she calls Echo Lodge. Stephen went off to the States and went
into business with his uncle and married a Yankee. He's never been home
since, though his mother has been up to see him once or twice. His wife
died two years ago and he's sending the boy home to his mother for a
spell. He's ten years old and I don't know if he'll be a very desirable
pupil. You can never tell about those Yankees."

Mrs Lynde looked upon all people who had the misfortune to be born
or brought up elsewhere than in Prince Edward Island with a decided
can-any-good-thing-come-out-of-Nazareth air. They MIGHT be good people,
of course; but you were on the safe side in doubting it. She had a
special prejudice against "Yankees." Her husband had been cheated out
of ten dollars by an employer for whom he had once worked in Boston and
neither angels nor principalities nor powers could have convinced Mrs.
Rachel that the whole United States was not responsible for it.

"Avonlea school won't be the worse for a little new blood," said Marilla
drily, "and if this boy is anything like his father he'll be all right.
Steve Irving was the nicest boy that was ever raised in these parts,
though some people did call him proud. I should think Mrs. Irving would
be very glad to have the child. She has been very lonesome since her
husband died."

"Oh, the boy may be well enough, but he'll be different from Avonlea
children," said Mrs. Rachel, as if that clinched the matter. Mrs.
Rachel's opinions concerning any person, place, or thing, were always
warranted to wear. "What's this I hear about your going to start up a
Village Improvement Society, Anne?"

"I was just talking it over with some of the girls and boys at the last
Debating Club," said Anne, flushing. "They thought it would be rather
nice . . . and so do Mr. and Mrs. Allan. Lots of villages have them now."

"Well, you'll get into no end of hot water if you do. Better leave it
alone, Anne, that's what. People don't like being improved."

"Oh, we are not going to try to improve the PEOPLE. It is Avonlea
itself. There are lots of things which might be done to make it
prettier. For instance, if we could coax Mr. Levi Boulter to pull
down that dreadful old house on his upper farm wouldn't that be an
improvement?"

"It certainly would," admitted Mrs. Rachel. "That old ruin has been an
eyesore to the settlement for years. But if you Improvers can coax
Levi Boulter to do anything for the public that he isn't to be paid for
doing, may I be there to see and hear the process, that's what. I don't
want to discourage you, Anne, for there may be something in your idea,
though I suppose you did get it out of some rubbishy Yankee magazine;
but you'll have your hands full with your school and I advise you as a
friend not to bother with your improvements, that's what. But there,
I know you'll go ahead with it if you've set your mind on it. You were
always one to carry a thing through somehow."

Something about the firm outlines of Anne's lips told that Mrs. Rachel
was not far astray in this estimate. Anne's heart was bent on forming
the Improvement Society. Gilbert Blythe, who was to teach in White
Sands but would always be home from Friday night to Monday morning, was
enthusiastic about it; and most of the other folks were willing to go in
for anything that meant occasional meetings and consequently some "fun."
As for what the "improvements" were to be, nobody had any very clear
idea except Anne and Gilbert. They had talked them over and planned them
out until an ideal Avonlea existed in their minds, if nowhere else.

Mrs. Rachel had still another item of news.

"They've given the Carmody school to a Priscilla Grant. Didn't you go to
Queen's with a girl of that name, Anne?"

"Yes, indeed. Priscilla to teach at Carmody! How perfectly lovely!"
exclaimed Anne, her gray eyes lighting up until they looked like evening
stars, causing Mrs. Lynde to wonder anew if she would ever get it
settled to her satisfaction whether Anne Shirley were really a pretty
girl or not.




II

Selling in Haste and Repenting at Leisure


Anne drove over to Carmody on a shopping expedition the next afternoon
and took Diana Barry with her. Diana was, of course, a pledged member of
the Improvement Society, and the two girls talked about little else all
the way to Carmody and back.

"The very first thing we ought to do when we get started is to have that
hall painted," said Diana, as they drove past the Avonlea hall, a rather
shabby building set down in a wooded hollow, with spruce trees hooding
it about on all sides. "It's a disgraceful looking place and we must
attend to it even before we try to get Mr. Levi Boulder to pull his
house down. Father says we'll never succeed in DOING that. Levi Boulter
is too mean to spend the time it would take."

"Perhaps he'll let the boys take it down if they promise to haul
the boards and split them up for him for kindling wood," said Anne
hopefully. "We must do our best and be content to go slowly at first.
We can't expect to improve everything all at once. We'll have to educate
public sentiment first, of course."

Diana wasn't exactly sure what educating public sentiment meant; but it
sounded fine and she felt rather proud that she was going to belong to a
society with such an aim in view.

"I thought of something last night that we could do, Anne. You know
that three-cornered piece of ground where the roads from Carmody and
Newbridge and White Sands meet? It's all grown over with young spruce;
but wouldn't it be nice to have them all cleared out, and just leave the
two or three birch trees that are on it?"

"Splendid," agreed Anne gaily. "And have a rustic seat put under the
birches. And when spring comes we'll have a flower-bed made in the
middle of it and plant geraniums."

"Yes; only we'll have to devise some way of getting old Mrs. Hiram
Sloane to keep her cow off the road, or she'll eat our geraniums
up," laughed Diana. "I begin to see what you mean by educating public
sentiment, Anne. There's the old Boulter house now. Did you ever see
such a rookery? And perched right close to the road too. An old house
with its windows gone always makes me think of something dead with its
eyes picked out."

"I think an old, deserted house is such a sad sight," said Anne
dreamily. "It always seems to me to be thinking about its past and
mourning for its old-time joys. Marilla says that a large family was
raised in that old house long ago, and that it was a real pretty place,
with a lovely garden and roses climbing all over it. It was full of
little children and laughter and songs; and now it is empty, and nothing
ever wanders through it but the wind. How lonely and sorrowful it must
feel! Perhaps they all come back on moonlit nights . . . the ghosts of the
little children of long ago and the roses and the songs . . . and for a
little while the old house can dream it is young and joyous again."

Diana shook her head.

"I never imagine things like that about places now, Anne. Don't you
remember how cross mother and Marilla were when we imagined ghosts into
the Haunted Wood? To this day I can't go through that bush comfortably
after dark; and if I began imagining such things about the old Boulter
house I'd be frightened to pass it too. Besides, those children aren't
dead. They're all grown up and doing well . . . and one of them is a
butcher. And flowers and songs couldn't have ghosts anyhow."

Anne smothered a little sigh. She loved Diana dearly and they had always
been good comrades. But she had long ago learned that when she wandered
into the realm of fancy she must go alone. The way to it was by an
enchanted path where not even her dearest might follow her.

A thunder-shower came up while the girls were at Carmody; it did
not last long, however, and the drive home, through lanes where the
raindrops sparkled on the boughs and little leafy valleys where the
drenched ferns gave out spicy odors, was delightful. But just as they
turned into the Cuthbert lane Anne saw something that spoiled the beauty
of the landscape for her.

Before them on the right extended Mr. Harrison's broad, gray-green field
of late oats, wet and luxuriant; and there, standing squarely in the
middle of it, up to her sleek sides in the lush growth, and blinking at
them calmly over the intervening tassels, was a Jersey cow!

Anne dropped the reins and stood up with a tightening of the lips that
boded no good to the predatory quadruped. Not a word said she, but she
climbed nimbly down over the wheels, and whisked across the fence before
Diana understood what had happened.

"Anne, come back," shrieked the latter, as soon as she found her voice.
"You'll ruin your dress in that wet grain . . . ruin it. She doesn't hear
me! Well, she'll never get that cow out by herself. I must go and help
her, of course."

Anne was charging through the grain like a mad thing. Diana hopped
briskly down, tied the horse securely to a post, turned the skirt of her
pretty gingham dress over her shoulders, mounted the fence, and started
in pursuit of her frantic friend. She could run faster than Anne, who
was hampered by her clinging and drenched skirt, and soon overtook her.
Behind them they left a trail that would break Mr. Harrison's heart when
he should see it.

"Anne, for mercy's sake, stop," panted poor Diana. "I'm right out of
breath and you are wet to the skin."

"I must . . . get . . . that cow . . . out . . . before . . . Mr.
Harrison . . . sees her," gasped Anne. "I don't . . . care . . . if I'm
. . . drowned . . . if we . . . can . . . only . . . do that."

But the Jersey cow appeared to see no good reason for being hustled out
of her luscious browsing ground. No sooner had the two breathless girls
got near her than she turned and bolted squarely for the opposite corner
of the field.

"Head her off," screamed Anne. "Run, Diana, run."

Diana did run. Anne tried to, and the wicked Jersey went around the
field as if she were possessed. Privately, Diana thought she was. It was
fully ten minutes before they headed her off and drove her through the
corner gap into the Cuthbert lane.

There is no denying that Anne was in anything but an angelic temper
at that precise moment. Nor did it soothe her in the least to behold a
buggy halted just outside the lane, wherein sat Mr. Shearer of Carmody
and his son, both of whom wore a broad smile.

"I guess you'd better have sold me that cow when I wanted to buy her
last week, Anne," chuckled Mr. Shearer.

"I'll sell her to you now, if you want her," said her flushed and
disheveled owner. "You may have her this very minute."

"Done. I'll give you twenty for her as I offered before, and Jim here
can drive her right over to Carmody. She'll go to town with the rest of
the shipment this evening. Mr. Reed of Brighton wants a Jersey cow."

Five minutes later Jim Shearer and the Jersey cow were marching up the
road, and impulsive Anne was driving along the Green Gables lane with
her twenty dollars.

"What will Marilla say?" asked Diana.

"Oh, she won't care. Dolly was my own cow and it isn't likely she'd
bring more than twenty dollars at the auction. But oh dear, if Mr.
Harrison sees that grain he will know she has been in again, and after
my giving him my word of honor that I'd never let it happen! Well, it
has taught me a lesson not to give my word of honor about cows. A cow
that could jump over or break through our milk-pen fence couldn't be
trusted anywhere."

Marilla had gone down to Mrs. Lynde's, and when she returned knew all
about Dolly's sale and transfer, for Mrs. Lynde had seen most of the
transaction from her window and guessed the rest.

"I suppose it's just as well she's gone, though you DO do things in a
dreadful headlong fashion, Anne. I don't see how she got out of the pen,
though. She must have broken some of the boards off."

"I didn't think of looking," said Anne, "but I'll go and see now. Martin
has never come back yet. Perhaps some more of his aunts have died. I
think it's something like Mr. Peter Sloane and the octogenarians. The
other evening Mrs. Sloane was reading a newspaper and she said to Mr.
Sloane, 'I see here that another octogenarian has just died. What is an
octogenarian, Peter?' And Mr. Sloane said he didn't know, but they must
be very sickly creatures, for you never heard tell of them but they were
dying. That's the way with Martin's aunts."

"Martin's just like all the rest of those French," said Marilla in
disgust. "You can't depend on them for a day." Marilla was looking over
Anne's Carmody purchases when she heard a shrill shriek in the barnyard.
A minute later Anne dashed into the kitchen, wringing her hands.

"Anne Shirley, what's the matter now?"

"Oh, Marilla, whatever shall I do? This is terrible. And it's all my
fault. Oh, will I EVER learn to stop and reflect a little before doing
reckless things? Mrs. Lynde always told me I would do something dreadful
some day, and now I've done it!"

"Anne, you are the most exasperating girl! WHAT is it you've done?"

"Sold Mr. Harrison's Jersey cow . . . the one he bought from Mr. Bell
. . . to Mr. Shearer! Dolly is out in the milking pen this very minute."

"Anne Shirley, are you dreaming?"

"I only wish I were. There's no dream about it, though it's very like a
nightmare. And Mr. Harrison's cow is in Charlottetown by this time. Oh,
Marilla, I thought I'd finished getting into scrapes, and here I am in
the very worst one I ever was in in my life. What can I do?"

"Do? There's nothing to do, child, except go and see Mr. Harrison about
it. We can offer him our Jersey in exchange if he doesn't want to take
the money. She is just as good as his."

"I'm sure he'll be awfully cross and disagreeable about it, though,"
moaned Anne.

"I daresay he will. He seems to be an irritable sort of a man. I'll go
and explain to him if you like."

"No, indeed, I'm not as mean as that," exclaimed Anne. "This is all my
fault and I'm certainly not going to let you take my punishment. I'll go
myself and I'll go at once. The sooner it's over the better, for it will
be terribly humiliating."

Poor Anne got her hat and her twenty dollars and was passing out when
she happened to glance through the open pantry door. On the table
reposed a nut cake which she had baked that morning . . . a particularly
toothsome concoction iced with pink icing and adorned with walnuts. Anne
had intended it for Friday evening, when the youth of Avonlea were to
meet at Green Gables to organize the Improvement Society. But what were
they compared to the justly offended Mr. Harrison? Anne thought that
cake ought to soften the heart of any man, especially one who had to do
his own cooking, and she promptly popped it into a box. She would take
it to Mr. Harrison as a peace offering.

"That is, if he gives me a chance to say anything at all," she thought
ruefully, as she climbed the lane fence and started on a short cut
across the fields, golden in the light of the dreamy August evening. "I
know now just how people feel who are being led to execution."




III

Mr. Harrison at Home


