ought not to have made such flattering speeches; they may vex a young
girl.'"

"Very good, my straightforward child," laughed her father. "But look,
there is the man! Here, good Gibbus--come here!--Now, just consider:
supposing you had flattered some one so grossly that you had offended
him instead of pleasing him: How would you explain the state of affairs
in telling me of it?"

The gardener, a short, square man, with a huge hump but a clever face
and good features, reflected a minute and then replied: "I wanted to
make an ass smell at some roses and I put thistles under his nose."

"Capital!" cried Paula; and as Gibbus turned away, laughing to himself,
the physician said:

"One might almost envy the man his hump. But yet, fair Paula, I think
we have some straight-limbed folks who can make use of such crooked
phrases, too, when occasion serves."

But Rufinus spoke before Paula could reply, referring her to his Essay
on the deformed in soul and body; and then he went on vehemently:

"I call you all to witness, does not Baste, the lame woman, restrict her
views to the lower aspect of things, to the surface of the earth indeed?
She has one leg much shorter than the other, and it is only with much
pains that we have contrived that it should carry her. To limp along
at all she is forced always to look down at the ground, and what is the
consequence? She can never tell you what is hanging to a tree, and
about three weeks since I asked her under a clear sky and a waning moon
whether the moon had been shining the evening before and she could not
tell me, though she had been sitting out of doors with the others
till quite late, evening after evening. I have noticed, too, that she
scarcely recognizes men who are rather tall, though she may have seen
them three or four times. Her standard has fallen short-like her leg.
Now, am I right or wrong?"

"In this instance you are right," replied Philippus, "still, I know some
lame people..."

And again words ran high between the friends; Pulcheria, however, put an
end to the discussion this time, by exclaiming enthusiastically:

"Baste is the best and most good-natured soul in the whole house!"

"Because she looks into her own heart," replied Rufinus. "She knows
herself; and, because she knows how painful pain is, she treats others
tenderly. Do you remember, Philippus, how we disputed after that
anatomical lecture we heard together at Caesarea?"

"Perfectly well," said the leech, "and later life has but confirmed the
opinion I then held. There is no less true or less just saying than the
Latin motto: 'Mens sana in corpore sano,' as it is generally interpreted
to mean that a healthy soul is only to be found in a healthy body. As
the expression of a wish it may pass, but I have often felt inclined to
doubt even that. It has been my lot to meet with a strength of mind,
a hopefulness, and a thankfulness for the smallest mercies in the
sickliest bodies, and at the same time a delicacy of feeling, a wise
reserve, and an undeviating devotion to lofty things such as I have
never seen in a healthy frame. The body is but the tenement of the soul,
and just as we find righteous men and sinners, wise men and fools, alike
in the palace and the hovel--nay, and often see truer worth in a cottage
than in the splendid mansions of the great--so we may discover noble
souls both in the ugly and the fair, in the healthy and the infirm, and
most frequently, perhaps, in the least vigorous. We should be careful
how we go about repeating such false axioms, for they can only do harm
to those who have a heavy burthen to bear through life as it is. In my
opinion a hunchback's thoughts are as straightforward as an athlete's;
or do you imagine that if a mother were to place her new-born children
in a spiral chamber and let them grow up in it, they could not tend
upwards as all men do by nature?"

"Your comparison limps," cried Rufinus, "and needs setting to rights. If
we are not to find ourselves in open antagonism...."

"You must keep the peace," Joanna put in addressing her husband; and
before Rufinus could retort, Paula had asked him with frank simplicity:

"How old are you, my worthy host?"

"Your arrival at my house blessed the second day of my seventieth year,"
replied Rufinus with a courteous bow. His wife shook her finger at him,
exclaiming:

"I wonder whether you have not a secret hump? Such fine phrases..."

"He is catching the style from his cripples," said Paula laughing at
him. "But now it is your turn, friend Philippus. Your exposition was
worthy of an antique sage, and it struck me--for the sake of Rufinus
here I will not say convinced me. I respect you--and yet I should like
to know how old...."

"I shall soon be thirty-one," said Philippus, anticipating her question.

"That is an honest answer," observed Dame Joanna. "At your age many a
man clings to his twenties."

"Why?" asked Pulcheria.

"Well," said her mother, "only because there are some girls who think a
man of thirty too old to be attractive."

"Stupid creatures," answered Pulcheria. "Let them find me a young
man who is more lovable than my father; and if Philippus--yes you,
Philippus--were ten or twenty years over nine and twenty, would that
make you less clever or kind?"

"Not less ugly, at any rate," said the physician. Pulcheria laughed, but
with some annoyance, as though she had herself been the object of the
remark. "You are not a bit ugly!" she exclaimed. "Any one who says so
has no eyes. And you will hear nothing said of you but that you are a
tall, fine man!"

As the warm-hearted girl thus spoke, defending her friend against
himself, Paula stroked her golden hair and added to the physician:

"Pulcheria's father is so far right that she, at any rate, measures men
by a true and straight standard. Note that, Philippus!--But do not take
my questioning ill.--I cannot help wondering how a man of one and thirty
and one of seventy should have been studying in the high schools at the
same time? The moon will not be eclipsed for a long time yet--how bright
and clear it is!--So you, Rufinus, who have wandered so far through the
wide world, if you would do me a great pleasure, will tell us something
of your past life and how you came to settle in Memphis."

"His history?" cried Joanna. "If he were to tell it, in all its details
from beginning to end, the night would wane and breakfast would get
cold. He has had as many adventures as travelled Odysseus. But tell us
something husband; you know there is nothing we should like better."

"I must be off to my duties," said the leech, and when he had taken
a friendly leave of the others and bidden farewell to Paula with less
effusiveness than of late, Rufinus began his story.

"I was born in Alexandria, where, at that time, commerce and industry
still flourished. My father was an armorer; above two hundred slaves and
free laborers were employed in his work-shops. He required the finest
metal, and commonly procured it by way of Massilia from Britain. On one
occasion he himself went to that remote island in a friend's ship, and
he there met my mother. Her ruddy gold hair, which Pul has inherited,
seems to have bewitched him and, as the handsome foreigner pleased her
well--for men like my father are hard to match nowadays--she turned
Christian for his sake and came home with him. They neither of them ever
regretted it; for though she was a quiet woman, and to her dying day
spoke Greek like a foreigner, the old man often said she was his best
counsellor. At the same time she was so soft-hearted, that she could
not bear that any living creature should suffer, and though she looked
keenly after everything at the hearth and loom, she could never see
a fowl, a goose, or a pig slaughtered. And I have inherited her
weakness--shall I say 'alas!' or 'thank God?'

"I had two elder brothers who both had to help my father, and who
were to carry on the business. When I was ten years old my calling was
decided on. My mother would have liked to make a priest of me and at
that time I should have consented joyfully; but my father would not
agree, and as we had an uncle who was making a great deal of money as
a Rhetor, my father accepted a proposal from him that I should devote
myself to that career. So I went from one teacher to another and made
good progress in the schools.

"Till my twentieth year I continued to live with my parents, and during
my many hours of leisure I was free to do or leave undone whatever I had
a fancy for; and this was always something medical, if that is not too
big a word. I was but a lad of twelve when this fancy first took me, and
that through pure accident. Of course I was fond of wandering about the
workshops, and there they kept a magpie, a quaint little bird, which my
mother had fed out of compassion. It could say 'Blockhead,' and call
my name and a few other words, and it seemed to like the noise, for it
always would fly off to where the smiths were hammering and filing their
loudest, and whenever it perched close to one of the anvils there were
sure to be mirthful faces over the shaping and scraping and polishing.
For many years its sociable ways made it a favorite; but one day it got
caught in a vice and its left leg was broken. Poor little creature!"

The old man stooped to wipe his eyes unseen, but he went on without
pausing:

"It fell on its back and looked at me so pathetically that I snatched
the tongs out of the bellows-man's hand--for he was going to put an end
to its sufferings in all kindness--and, picking it up gently, I made up
my mind I would cure it. Then I carried the bird into my own room, and
to keep it quiet that it might not hurt itself, I tied it down to a
frame that I contrived, straightened its little leg, warmed the injured
bone by sucking it, and strapped it to little wooden splints. And behold
it really set: the bird got quite well and fluttered about the workshops
again as sound as before, and whenever it saw me it would perch upon my
shoulder and peck very gently at my hair with its sharp beak.

"From that moment I could have found it in me to break the legs of every
hen in the yard, that I might set them again; but I thought of something
better. I went to the barbers and told them that if any one had a bird,
a dog, or a cat, with a broken limb, he might bring it to me, and that
I was prepared to cure all these injuries gratis; they might tell all
their customers. The very next day I had a patient brought me: a black
hound, with tan spots over his eyes, whose leg had been smashed by a
badly-aimed spear: I can see him now! Others followed; feathered or
four-footed sufferers; and this was the beginning of my surgical career.
The invalid birds on the trees I still owe to my old allies the barbers.
I only occasionally take beasts in hand. The lame children, whom you
saw in the garden, come to me from poor parents who cannot afford a
surgeon's aid. The merry, curly-headed boy who brought you a rose just
now is to go home again in a few days.--But to return to the story of my
youth.

"The more serious events which gave my life this particular bias
occurred in my twentieth year, when I had already left even the high
school behind me; nor was I fully carried away by their influence till
after my uncle had procured me several opportunities of proving my
proficiency in my calling. I may say without vanity that my speeches won
approval; but I was revolted by the pompous, flowery bombast, without
which I should have been hissed down, and though my parents rejoiced
when I went home from Niku, Arsmoe, or some other little provincial
town, with laurel-wreaths and gold pieces, to myself I always seemed
an impostor. Still, for my father's sake, I dared not give up my
profession, although I hated more and more the task of praising people
to the skies whom I neither loved nor respected, and of shedding tears
of pathos while all the time I was minded to laugh.

"I had plenty of time to myself, and as I did not lack courage and held
stoutly to our Greek confession, I was always to be found where there
was any stir or contention between the various sects. They generally
passed off with nothing worse than bruises and scratches, but now and
then swords were drawn. On one occasion thousands came forth to meet
thousands, and the Prefect called out the troops--all Greeks--to restore
order by force. A massacre ensued in which thousands were killed. I
could not describe it! Such scenes were not rare, and the fury and greed
of the mob were often directed against the Jews by the machinations of
the creatures of the archbishop and the government. The things I saw
there were so horrible, so shocking, that the tongue refuses to tell
them; but one poor Jewess, whose husband the wretches--our fellow
Christians--killed, and then pillaged the house, I have never forgotten!
A soldier dragged her down by her hair, while a ruffian snatched the
child from her breast and, holding it by its feet, dashed its skull
against the wall before her eyes--as you might slash a wet cloth against
a pillar to dry it--I shall never forget that handsome young mother and
her child; they come before me in my dreams at night even now.

"All these things I saw; and I shuddered to behold God's creatures,
beings endowed with reason, persecuting their fellows, plunging them
into misery, tearing them limb from limb--and why? Merciful Saviour,
why? For sheer hatred--as sure as man is the standard for all
things--merely carried away by a hideous impulse to spite their neighbor
for not thinking as they do--nay, simply for not being themselves--to
hurt him, insult him, work him woe. And these fanatics, these armies
who raised the standard of ruthlessness, of extermination, of
bloodthirstiness, were Christians, were baptized in the name of Him who
bids us forgive our enemies, who enlarged the borders of love from the
home and the city and the state to include all mankind; who raised the
adulteress from the dust, who took children into his arms, and would
have more joy over a sinner who repents than over ninety and nine just
persons!--Blood, blood, was what they craved; and did not the doctrine
of Him whose followers they boastfully called themselves grow out of the
blood of Him who shed it for all men alike,--just as that lotos flower
grows out of the clear water in the marble tank? And it was the highest
guardians and keepers of this teaching of mercy, who goaded on the
fury of the mob: Patriarchs, bishops, priests and deacons--instead of
pointing to the picture of the Shepherd who tenderly carries the lost
sheep and brings it home to the fold.

"My own times seemed to me the worst that had ever been; aye, and--as
surely as man is the standard of all things--so they are! for love is
turned to hatred, mercy to implacable hardheartedness. The thrones not
only of the temporal but of the spiritual rulers, are dripping with
the blood of their fellow-men. Emperors and bishops set the example;
subjects and churchmen follow it. The great, the leading men of the
struggle are copied by the small, by the peaceful candidates for
spiritual benefices. All that I saw as a man, in the open streets, I had
already seen as a boy both in the low and high schools. Every doctrine
has its adherents; the man who casts in his lot with Cneius is hated by
Caius, who forthwith speaks and writes to no other end than to vex and
put down Cneius, and give him pain. Each for his part strives his
utmost to find out faults in his neighbor and to put him in the pillory,
particularly if his antagonist is held the greater man, or is likely
to overtop him. Listen to the girls at the well, to the women at the
spindle; no one is sure of applause who cannot tell some evil of the
other men or women. Who cares to listen to his neighbor's praises? The
man who hears that his brother is happy at once envies him! Hatred,
hatred everywhere! Everywhere the will, the desire, the passion for
bringing grief and ruin on others rather than to help them, raise them
and heal them!

"That is the spirit of my time; and everything within me revolted
against it with sacred wrath. I vowed in my heart that I would live and
act differently; that my sole aim should be to succor the unfortunate,
to help the wretched, to open my arms to those who had fallen into
unmerited contumely, to set the crooked straight for my neighbor, to
mend what was broken, to pour in balm, to heal and to save!

"And, thank God! it has been vouchsafed to me in some degree to keep
this vow; and though, later, some whims and a passionate curiosity got
mixed up with my zeal, still, never have I lost sight of the great task
of which I have spoken, since my father's death and since my uncle also
left me his large fortune. Then I had done with the Rhetor's art, and
travelled east and west to seek the land where love unites men's hearts
and where hatred is only a disease; but as sure as man is the standard
of all things, to this day all my endeavors to find it have been in
vain. Meanwhile I have kept my own house on such a footing that it has
become a stronghold of love; in its atmosphere hatred cannot grow, but
is nipped in the germ.

"In spite of this I am no saint. I have committed many a folly, many an
injustice; and much of my goods and gold, which I should perhaps have
done better to save for my family, has slipped through my fingers,
though in the execution, no doubt, of what I deemed the highest duties.
Would you believe it, Paula?--Forgive an old man for such fatherly
familiarity with the daughter of Thomas;--hardly five years after my
marriage with this good wife, not long after we had lost our only son, I
left her and our little daughter, Pul there, for more than two years, to
follow the Emperor Heraclius of my own free will to the war against the
Persians who had done me no harm--not, indeed, as a soldier, but as a
surgeon eager for experience. To confess the truth I was quite as eager
to see and treat fractures and wounds and injuries in great numbers,
as I was to exercise benevolence. I came home with a broken hip-bone,
tolerably patched up, and again, a few years later, I could not keep
still in one place. The bird of passage must need drag wife and child
from the peace of hearth and homestead, and take them to where he could
go to the high school. A husband, a father, and already grey-headed,
I was a singular exception among the youths who sat listening to the
lectures and explanations of their teachers; but as sure as man is the
standard of all things, they none of them outdid me in diligence and
zeal, though many a one was greatly my superior in gifts and intellect,
and among them the foremost was our friend Philippus. Thus it came
about, noble Paula, that the old man and the youth in his prime were
fellow-students; but to this day the senior gladly bows down to his
young brother in learning and feeling. To straighten, to comfort, and
to heal: this is the aim of his life too. And even I, an old man, who
started long before Philippus on the same career, often long to call
myself his disciple."

Here Rufinus paused and rose; Paula, too, got up, grasped his hand
warmly, and said:

"If I were a man, I would join you! But Philippus has told me that even
a woman may be allowed to work with the same purpose.--And now let me
beg of you never to call me anything but Paula--you will not refuse me
this favor. I never thought I could be so happy again as I am with you;
here my heart is free and whole. Dame Joanna, do you be my mother! I
have lost the best of fathers, and till I find him again, you, Rufinus,
must fill his place!"

"Gladly, gladly!" cried the old man; he clasped both her hands and went
on vivaciously: "And in return I ask you to be an elder sister to Pul.
Make that timid little thing such a maiden as you are yourself.--But
look, children, look up quickly; it is beginning!--Typhon, in the form
of a boar, is swallowing the eye of Horns: so the heathen of old in this
country used to believe when the moon suffered an eclipse. See how the
shadow is covering the bright disk. When the ancients saw this happening
they used to make a noise, shaking the sistrum with its metal rings,
drumming and trumpeting, shouting and yelling, to scare off the evil one
and drive him away. It may be about four hundred years since that last
took place, but to this day--draw your kerchiefs more closely round
your heads and come with me to the river--to this day Christians degrade
themselves by similar rites. Wherever I have been in Christian lands, I
have always witnessed the same scenes: our holy faith has, to be sure,
demolished the religions of the heathen; but their superstitions have
survived, and have forced their way through rifts and chinks into our
ceremonial. They are marching round now, with the bishop at their head,
and you can hear the loud wailing of the women, and the cries of
the men, drowning the chant of the priests. Only listen! They are as
passionate and agonized in their entreaty as though old Typhon were even
now about to swallow the moon, and the greatest catastrophe was hanging
over the world. Aye, as surely as man is the standard of all things,
those terrified beings are diseased in mind; and how are we to forgive
those who dare to scare Christians; yes, Christian souls, with the
traditions of heathen folly, and to blind their inward vision?"




CHAPTER XXII.

Up to within a few days Katharina had still been a dependent and docile
child, who had made it a point of honor to obey instantly, not only her
mother's lightest word, but Dame Neforis, too; and, since her own Greek
instructress had been dismissed, even the acid Eudoxia. She had never
concealed from her mother, or the worthy teacher whom she had truly
loved, the smallest breach of rules, the least naughtiness or wilful act
of which she had been guilty; nay, she had never been able to rest till
she had poured out a confession, before evening prayer, of all that
her little heart told her was not perfectly right, to some one whom
she loved, and obtained full forgiveness. Night after night the
"Water-wagtail" had gone to sleep with a conscience as clear and as
white as the breast of her whitest dove, and the worst sin she had ever
committed during the day was some forbidden scramble, some dainty or,
more frequently, some rude and angry word.

But a change had first come over her after Orion's kiss in the
intoxicating perfume of the flowering trees; and almost every hour since
had roused her to new hopes and new views. It had never before occurred
to her to criticise or judge her mother; now she was constantly doing
so. The way in which Susannah had cut herself off from her neighbors in
the governor's house, to her daughter seemed perverse and in bad taste;
and the bitterly vindictive attacks on her old friends, which were
constantly on Susannah's lips, aggrieved the girl, and finally set her
in opposition to her mother, whose judgment had hitherto seemed to her
infallible. Thus, when the governor's house was closed against her,
there was no one in whom she cared to confide, for a barrier stood
between her and Paula, and she was painfully conscious of its height
each time the wish to pass it recurred to her mind. Paula was certainly
"that other" of whom Orion had spoken; when she had stolen away to see
her in the evening after the funeral, she had been prompted less by a
burning wish to pour out her heart to a sympathizing hearer, than by
torturing curiosity mingled with jealousy. She had crept through the
hedge with a strangely-mixed feeling of tender longing and sullen
hatred; when they had met in the garden she had at first given herself
up to the full delight of being free to speak, and of finding a listener
in a woman so much her superior; but Paula's reserved replies to her
bold questioning had revived her feelings of envy and grudge. Any one
who did not hate Orion must, she was convinced, love him.

Were they not perhaps already pledged to each other! Very likely Paula
had thought of her as merely a credulous child, and so had concealed the
fact!

This "very likely" was torture to her, and she was determined to try, at
any rate, to settle the doubt. She had an ally at her command; this
was her foster-brother, the son of her deaf old nurse; she knew that
he would blindly obey all her wishes--nay, to please her, would throw
himself to the crocodiles in the Nile. Anubis had been her comrade in
all her childish sports, till at the age of fourteen, after learning to
read and write, her mother had obtained an appointment for him in the
governor's household, as an assistant to be further trained by the
treasurer Nilus. Dame Susannah intended to find him employment at
a future date on her estates, or at Memphis, the centre of their
administration, as he might prove himself capable. The lad was still
living with his mother under the rich widow's roof, and only spent his
working days at the governor's house, he was industrious and clever
during office hours, though between whiles he busied himself with things
altogether foreign to his future calling. At Katharina's request he
had opened a communication between the two houses by means of
carrier-pigeons, and many missives were thus despatched with little
gossip, invitations, excuses, and the like, from Katharina to Mary and
back again. Anubis took great pleasure in the pretty creatures, and by
the permission of his superiors a dovecote was erected on the roof of
the treasurer's house. Mary was now lying ill, and their intercourse
was at an end; still, the well-trained messengers need not be idle, and
Katharina had begun to use them for a very different purpose.

Orion's envoy had been detained a long time at Rufinus' door the day
before; and she had since learnt from Anubis, who was acquainted with
all that took place in Nilus' office, that Paula's moneys were to be
delivered over to her very shortly, and in all probability by Orion
himself. They must then have an interview, and perhaps she might succeed
in overhearing it. She knew well how this could be managed; the only
thing was to be on the spot at the right moment.

On the morning after the full-moon, at two hours and a half before noon,
the little boy whose task it was to feed the feathered messengers in
their dove-cote brought her a written scrap, on which Anubis informed
her that Orion was about to set out; but he was not very warmly
welcomed, for the hour did not suit her at all. Early in the morning
Bishop Plotinus had come to inform Susannah that Benjamin, Patriarch of
Alexandria, was visiting Amru on the opposite shore, and would presently
honor Memphis with his presence. He proposed to remain one day; he had
begged to have no formal reception, and had left it to the bishop to
find suitable quarters for himself and his escort, as he did not wish
to put up at the governor's house. The vain widow had at once pressingly
urged her readiness to receive the illustrious guest under her roof: The
prelate's presence must bring a blessing on the house, and she thought,
too, that she might turn it to advantage for several ends she just now
happened to have in view.

A handsome reception must be prepared; there were but a few hours to
spare, and even before the bishop had left her, she had begun to call
the servants together and give them orders. The whole house must be
turned upside down; some of the kitchen staff were hurried off into the
town to make purchases, others bustled round the fire; the gardeners
plundered the beds and bushes to weave wreaths and nosegays for
decorations; from cellar to roof half a hundred of slaves, white, brown
and black, were toiling with all their might, for each believed that,
by rendering a service to the Patriarch, he might count on the special
favor of Heaven, while their unresting mistress never ceased screaming
out her orders as to what she wished done.

Susannah, who as a girl had been the eldest of a numerous and not
wealthy family, and had been obliged to put her own hand to things,
quite forgot now that she was a woman of position and fortune whom it
ill-beseemed to do her own household work; she was here, there, and
everywhere, and had an eye on all--excepting indeed her own daughter;
but she was the petted darling of the house, brought up to Greek
refinement, whose help in such arduous labors was not to be thought of;
indeed, she would only have been in the way.

When the bishop had taken his leave Katharina was merely desired to be
ready in her best attire, with a nosegay in her hand, to receive the
Patriarch under the awning spread outside the entrance. More than this
the widow did not require of her, and as the girl flew up the stairs
to her room she was thinking: "Orion will be coming directly: it still
wants fully two hours of noon, and if he stays there half an hour that
will be more than enough. I shall have time then to change my dress, but
I will put my new sandals on at once as a precaution; nurse and the
maid must wait for me in my room. They must have everything ready for my
return--perhaps he and Paula may have much to say to each other. He
will not get off without a lecture, unless she has already found an
opportunity elsewhere of expressing her indignation."

A few minutes later she had sprung to the top of a mound of earth
covered with turf, which she had some time since ordered to be thrown up
close behind the hedge through which she had yesterday made her way. Her
little feet were shod with handsome gold sandals set with sapphires, and
she seated herself on a low bench with a satisfied smile, as though to
assist at a theatrical performance. Some broad-leaved shrubs, placed
behind this place of ambush, screened her to some extent from the heat
of the sun, and as she sat watching and listening in this lurking place,
which she was not using for the first time, her heart began to beat
more quickly; indeed, in her excitement she quite forgot some sweetmeats
which she had brought to wile away the time and had poured into a large
leaf in her lap.

Happily she had not long to wait; Orion arrived in his mother's
four-wheeled covered chariot. By the side of the driver sat a servant,
and a slave was perched on the step to the door on each side of the
vehicle. It was followed by a few idlers, men and women, and a crowd of
half-naked children. But they got nothing by their curiosity, for
the carruca did not draw up in the road, but was driven into Rufinus'
garden, and the trees and shrubs hid it from the gaze of the expectant
mob, which presently dispersed.

Orion got out at the principal door of the house, followed by the
treasurer; and while the old man welcomed the son of the Mukaukas, Nilus
superintended the transfer of a considerable number of heavy sacks to
their host's private room.

Nothing of all this had seemed noteworthy to Katharina but the quantity
and size of the bags--full, no doubt, of gold--and the man, whom alone
she cared to see. Never had she thought Orion so handsome; the long,
flowing mourning robe, which he had flung over his shoulder in rich
folds, added to the height of his stately form; his abundant hair, not
curled but waving naturally, set off his face which, pale and grave as
it was, both touched and attracted her ir resistibly. The thought that
this splendid creature had once courted her, loved her, kissed her--that
he had once been hers, and that she had lost him to another, was a pang
like physical agony, mounting from her heart to her brain.

After Orion had vanished indoors, she still seemed to see him; and when
she thrust his image from her fancy, forced to remind herself that he
was now standing face to face with that other, and was looking at Paula
as, a few days since, he had looked at her, the anguish of her soul was
doubled. And was Paula only half as happy as she had been in that hour
of supreme bliss? Ah! how her heart ached! She longed to leap over the
hedge--she could have rushed into the house and flung herself between
Paula and Orion.

Still, there she sat; restless but without moving; wholly under the
dominion of evil thoughts, among which a good one rarely and timidly
intruded, with her eyes fixed on Rufinus' dwelling. It stood in the
broad sunshine as silent as death, as if all were sleeping. In the
garden, too, all was motionless but the thin jet of water, which danced
up from the marble tank with a soft and fitful, but monotonous tinkle,
while butterflies, dragonflies, bees, and beetles, whose hum she could
not hear, seemed to circle round the flowers without a sound. The birds
must be asleep, for not one was to be seen or broke the oppressive
stillness by a chirp or a twitter. The chariot at the door might have
been spellbound; the driver had dismounted, and he, with the other
slaves, had stretched himself in the narrow strips of shade cast by the
pillars of the verandah; their chins buried in their breasts, they spoke
not a word. The horses alone were stirring-flicking off the flies
with their flowing tails, or turning to bite the burning stings they
inflicted. This now and then lifted the pole, and as the chariot
crunched backwards a few inches, the charioteer growled out a sleepy
"Brrr."

Katharina had laid a large leaf on her head for protection against the
sun; she did not dare use a parasol or a hat for fear of being seen. The
shade cast by the shrubs was but scanty, the noontide heat was torment;
still, though minute followed minute and one-quarter of an hour after
another crept by at a snail's pace, she was far too much excited to be
sleepy. She needed no dial to tell her the time; she knew exactly how
late it was as one shadow stole to this point and another to that, and,
by risking the danger to her eyes of glancing up at the sun, she could
make doubly sure.

It was now within three-quarters of an hour of noon, and in that house
all was as still as before; the Patriarch, however, might be expected
to be punctual, and she had done nothing towards dressing but putting
on those gilt sandals. This brought her to swift decision she hurried
to her room, desired the maid not to dress her hair, contenting herself
with pinning a few roses into its natural curls. Then, in fierce haste,
she made her throw on her sea-green dress of bombyx silk edged with fine
embroidery, and fasten her peplos with the first pins that came to hand;
and when the snap of her bracelet of costly sapphires broke, as she
herself was fastening it, she flung it back among her other trinkets as
she might have tossed an unripe apple back upon a heap. She slipped
her little hand into a gold spiral which curled round half her arm, and
gathered up the rest of her jewels, to put them on out of doors as she
sat watching. The waiting-woman was ordered to come for her at noon
with the flowers for the Patriarch, and, in a quarter of an hour after
leaving her lurking place, she was back there again. Just in time;--for
while she was putting on the trinkets Nilus came out, followed by some
slaves with several leather bags which they replaced in the chariot.
Then the treasurer stepped in and with him Philippus, and the vehicle
drove away.

"So Paula has entrusted her property to Orion again," thought Katharina.
"They are one again; and henceforth there will be endless going and
coming between the governor's house and that of Rufinus. A very pretty
game!--But wait, only wait." And she set her little white teeth; but she
retained enough self-possession to mark all that took place.

During her absence indoors Orion's black horse had been brought into the
garden; a groom on horseback was leading him, and as she watched their
movements she muttered to herself with a smile of scorn: "At any rate he
is not going to carry her home with him at once."

A few minutes passed in silence, and at last Paula came out, and close
behind her, almost by her side, walked Orion.

His cheeks were no longer pale, far from it, no more than Katharina's
were; they were crimson! How bright his eyes were, how radiant with
satisfaction and gladness!--She only wished she were a viper to sting
them both in the heel!--At the same time Paula had lost none of her
proud and noble dignity--and he? He gazed at his companion like a rapt
soul; she fancied she could see the folds of his mourning cloak rising
and falling with the beating of his heart. Paula, too, was in mourning.
Of course. They were one; his sorrow must be hers, although she had fled
from his father's house as though it were a prison. And of course this
virtuous beauty knew full well that nothing became her better than dark
colors! In manner, gait and height this pair looked like two superior
beings, destined for each other by Fate; Katharina herself could not but
confess it.

Some spiteful demon--a friendly one, she thought--led them past her,
so close that her sharp ears could catch every word they said as they
slowly walked on, or now and then stood still, dogged by the agile
water-wagtail, who stole along parallel with them on the other side of
the hedge.

"I have so much to thank you for," were the first words she caught from
Orion, "that I am shy of asking you yet another favor; but this one
indeed concerns yourself. You know how deep a blow was struck me by
little Mary's childish hand; still, the impulse that prompted her had
its rise in her honest, upright feeling and her idolizing love of you."

"And you would like me to take charge of her?" asked Paula. "Such a wish
is of course granted beforehand--only...."

"Only?" repeated Orion.

"Only you must send her here; for you know that I will never enter your
doors again."

"Alas that it should be so!--But the child has been very ill and can
hardly leave the house at present; and--since I must own it--my mother
avoids her in a way which distresses the child, who is over-excited as
it is, and fills her with new terrors."

"How can Neforis treat her little favorite so?"

"Remember," said Orion, "what my father has been to my poor mother. She
is now completely crushed: and, when she sees the little girl, that last
scene of her unhappy husband's life is brought back to her, with all
that came upon my father and me, beyond a doubt through Mary. She looks
on the poor little thing as the bane of the family?"

"Then she must come away," said Paula much touched. "Send her to us.
Kind and comforting souls dwell under Rufinus' roof."

"I thank you warmly. I will entreat my mother most urgently...."

"Do so," interrupted Paula. "Have you ever seen Pulcheria, the daughter
of my worthy host?"

"Yes.--A singularly lovable creature!"

"She will soon take Mary into her faithful heart--"

"And our poor little girl needs a friend, now that Susannah has
forbidden her daughter to visit at our house."

The conversation now turned on the two girls, of whom they spoke as
sweet children, both much to be pitied; and, when Orion observed that
his niece was old for her tender years, Paula replied with a slight
accent of reproach: "But Katharina, too, has ripened much during the
last few days; the lively child has become a sober girl; her recent
experience is a heavy burden on her light heart."

"But, if I know her at all, it will soon be cast off," replied Orion.
"She is a sweet, happy little creature; and, of all the dreadful things
I did on that day of horrors, the most dreadful perhaps was the woe I
wrought for her. There is no excuse possible, and yet it was solely
to gratify my mother's darling wish that I consented to marry
Katharina.--However, enough of that.--Henceforth I must march through
life with large strides, and she to whom love gives courage to become my
wife, must be able to keep pace with me."

Katharina could only just hear these last words. The speakers now turned
down the path, sparsely shaded from the midday sun by a few trees, which
led to the tank in the centre of the garden, and they went further and
further from her.

She heard no more--still, she knew enough and could supply the rest. The
object of her ambush was gained: she knew now with perfect certainty
who was "the other." And how they had spoken of her! Not as a deserted
bride, whose rights had been trodden in the dust, but as a child who is
dismissed from the room as soon as it begins to be in the way. But she
thought she could see through that couple and knew why they had spoken
of her thus. Paula, of course, must prevent any new tie from being
formed between herself and Orion; and as for Orion, common prudence
required that he should mention her--her, whom he had but lately
loaded with tenderness--as a mere child, to protect himself against the
jealousy of that austere "other" one. That he had loved her, at any
rate that evening under the trees, she obstinately maintained in her own
mind; to that conviction she must cling desperately, or lose her last
foothold. Her whole being was a prey to a frightful turmoil of feeling.
Her hands shook; her mouth was parched as by the midday heat; she knew
that there were withered leaves between her feet and the sandals she
wore, that twigs had got caught in her hair; but she could not care and
when the pair were screened from her by the denser shrubs she flew back
to her raised seat-from which she could again discover them. At this
moment she would have given all she held best and dearest, to be the
thing it vexed her so much to be called: a water-wagtail, or some other
bird.

It must be very near noon if not already past; she dusted her sandals
and tidied her curly hair, picking out the dry leaves and not noticing
that at the same time a rose fell out on the ground. Only her hands were
busy; her eyes were elsewhere, and suddenly they brightened again,
for the couple on which she kept them fixed were coming back, straight
towards the hedge, and she would soon be able again to hear what they
were saying.




CHAPTER XXIII.

Orion and Paula had had much to talk about, since the young man had
arrived. The discussion over the safe keeping of the girl's money had
been tedious. Finally, her counsellors had decided to entrust half of
it to Gamaliel the jeweller and his brother, who carried on a large
business in Constantinople. He happened to be in Memphis, and they
had both declared themselves willing each to take half of the sum in
question and use it at interest. They would be equally responsible for
its security, so that each should make good the whole of the property
in their hands in case of the other stopping payment. Nilus undertook
to procure legal sanction and the necessary sixteen witnesses to this
transaction.

The other half of her fortune was, by the advice of Philippus, to be
placed in the hands of a brother of Haschim's, the Arab merchant, who
had a large business as money changer in Fostat, the new town on
the further shore, in which the merchant himself was a partner. This
investment had the advantage of being perfectly safe, at any rate so
long as the Arabs ruled the land.

After all this was settled Nilus departed with that half of the money
which Orion was to hand over to the keeping of the Moslem money changer
on the following morning.

Paula, though she had taken no part in the men's discussion, had
been present throughout, and had expressed her grateful consent. The
clearness, gravity, and decision which Orion had displayed had not
escaped her notice; and though the treasurer's shrewd remarks, briefly
and modestly made, had in every case proved final, it was Orion's
reasoning and explanations that had most come home to her, for it
seemed to her that he was always prompted by loftier, wider, and more
statesmanlike considerations than the others.
