which shone in her eyes as she came away from the interview.  He had
seen Bontems hurry off and summon the guardsman and his friend.  He had
heard them order their horses to be brought out in a couple of hours'
time, and finally, from a spy whom he employed among the servants, he
learned that an unwonted bustle was going forward in Madame de
Maintenon's room, that Mademoiselle Nanon was half wild with excitement,
and that two court milliners had been hastily summoned to madame's
apartment.  It was only, however, when he heard from the same servant
that a chamber was to be prepared for the reception that night of the
Archbishop of Paris that he understood how urgent was the danger.

Madame de Montespan had spent the evening stretched upon a sofa, in the
worst possible humour with everyone around her.  She had read, but had
tossed aside the book.  She had written, but had torn up the paper.
A thousand fears and suspicions chased each other through her head.
What had become of the king, then?  He had seemed cold yesterday, and
his eyes had been for ever sliding round to the clock.  And to-day he
had not come at all.  Was it his gout, perhaps?  Or was it possible that
she was again losing her hold upon him?  Surely it could not be that!
She turned upon her couch and faced the mirror which flanked the door.
The candles had just been lit in her chamber, two score of them, each
with silver backs which reflected their light until the room was as
bright as day.  There in the mirror was the brilliant chamber, the deep
red ottoman, and the single figure in its gauzy dress of white and
silver.  She leaned upon her elbow, admiring the deep tint of her own
eyes with their long dark lashes, the white curve of her throat, and the
perfect oval of her face.  She examined it all carefully, keenly, as
though it were her rival that lay before her, but nowhere could she see
a scratch of Time's malicious nails.  She still had her beauty, then.
And if it had once won the king, why should it not suffice to hold him?
Of course it would do so.  She reproached herself for her fears.
Doubtless he was indisposed, or perhaps he would come still.  Ha! there
was the sound of an opening door and of a quick step in her ante-room.
Was it he, or at least his messenger with a note from  him?

But no, it was her brother, with the haggard eyes and drawn face of a
man who is weighed down with  his own evil tidings.  He turned as he
entered, fastened the door, and then striding across the room, locked
the other one which led to her boudoir.

"We are safe from interruption," he panted.  "I have hastened here, for
every second may be invaluable.  Have you heard anything from the king?"

"Nothing."  She had sprung to her feet, and was gazing at him with a
face which was as pale as his own.

"The hour has come for action, Francoise.  It is the hour at which the
Mortemarts have always shown at their best.  Do not yield to the blow,
then, but gather yourself to meet it."

"What is it?"  She tried to speak in her natural tone, but only a
whisper came to her dry lips.

"The king is about to marry Madame de Maintenon."

"The _gouvernante_!  The widow Scarron!  It is impossible!"

"It is certain."

"To marry?  Did you say to marry?"

"Yes, he will marry her."

The woman flung out her hands in a gesture of contempt, and laughed loud
and bitterly.

"You are easily frightened, brother," said she.  "Ah, you do not know
your little sister.  Perchance if you were not my brother you might rate
my powers more highly.  Give me a day, only one little day, and you will
see Louis, the proud Louis, down at the hem of my dress to ask my pardon
for this slight.  I tell you that he cannot break the bonds that hold
him.  One day is all I ask to bring him back."

"But you cannot have it."

"What?"

"The marriage is to-night."

"You are mad, Charles."

"I am certain of it."  In a few broken sentences he shot out all that he
had seen and heard.  She listened with a grim face, and hands which
closed ever tighter and tighter as he proceeded.  But he had said the
truth about the Mortemarts.  They came of a contentious blood, and were
ever at their best at a moment of action.  Hate rather than dismay
filled her heart as she listened, and the whole energy of her nature
gathered and quickened to meet the crisis.

"I shall go and see him," she cried, sweeping towards the door.

"No, no, Francoise.  Believe me, you will ruin everything if you do.
Strict orders have been given to the guard to admit no one to the king."

"But I shall insist upon passing them."

"Believe me, sister, it is worse than useless.  I have spoken with the
officer of the guard, and the command is a stringent one."

"Ah, I shall manage."

"No, you shall not."  He put his back against the door.  "I know that it
is useless, and I will not have my sister make herself the
laughing-stock of the court, trying to force her way into the room of a
man who repulses her."

His sister's cheeks flushed at the words, and she paused irresolute.

"Had I only a day, Charles, I am sure that I could bring him back to me.
There has been some other influence here, that meddlesome Jesuit or the
pompous Bossuet, perhaps.  Only one day to counteract their wiles!
Can I not see them waving hell-fire before his foolish eyes, as one
swings a torch before a bull to turn it?  Oh, if I could but baulk them
to-night!  That woman! that cursed woman!  The foul viper which I nursed
in my bosom!  Oh, I had rather see Louis in his grave than married to
her!  Charles, Charles, it must be stopped; I say it must be stopped!
I will give anything, everything, to prevent it!"

"What will you give, my sister?"

She looked at him aghast.  "What! you do not wish me to buy you?" she
said.

"No; but I wish to buy others."

"Ha!  You see a chance, then?"

"One, and one only.  But time presses.  I want money."

"How much?"

"I cannot have too much.  All that you can spare."

With hands which trembled with eagerness she unlocked a secret cupboard
in the wall in which she concealed her valuables.  A blaze of jewellery
met her brother's eyes as he peered over her shoulder.  Great rubies,
costly emeralds, deep ruddy beryls, glimmering diamonds, were scattered
there in one brilliant shimmering many-coloured heap, the harvest which
she had reaped from the king's generosity during more than fifteen
years.  At one side were three drawers, the one over the other.
She drew out the lowest one.  It was full to the brim of glittering
_louis d'ors_.

"Take what you will!" she said.  "And now your plan! Quick!"

He stuffed the money in handfuls into the side pockets of his coat.
Coins slipped between his fingers and tinkled and wheeled over the
floor, but neither cast a glance at them.

"Your plan?" she repeated.

"We must prevent the Archbishop from arriving here.  Then the marriage
would be postponed until to-morrow night, and you would have time to
act."

"But how prevent it?"

"There are a dozen good rapiers about the court which are to be bought
for less than I carry in one pocket.  There is De la Touche, young
Turberville, old Major Despard, Raymond de Carnac, and the four Latours.
I will gather them together, and wait on the road."

"And waylay the archbishop?"

"No; the messengers."

"Oh, excellent!  You are a prince of brothers!  If no message reaches
Paris, we are saved.  Go; go; do not lose a moment, my dear Charles."

"It is very well, Francoise; but what are we to do with them when we get
them?  We may lose our heads over the matter, it seems to me.  After
all, they are the king's messengers, and we can scarce pass our swords
through them."

"No?"

"There would be no forgiveness for that."

"But consider that before the matter is looked into I shall have
regained my influence with the king."

"All very fine, my little sister, but how long is your influence to
last?  A pleasant life for us if at every change of favour we have to
fly the country!  No, no, Francoise; the most that we can do is to
detain the messengers."

"Where can you detain them?"

"I have an idea.  There is the castle of the Marquis de Montespan at
Portillac."

"Of my husband!"

"Precisely."

"Of my most bitter enemy!  Oh, Charles, you are not serious."

"On the contrary, I was never more so.  The marquis was away in Paris
yesterday, and has not yet returned.  Where is the ring with his arms?"

She hunted among her jewels and picked out a gold ring with a broad
engraved face.

"This will be our key.  When good Marceau, the steward, sees it, every
dungeon in the castle will be at our disposal.  It is that or nothing.
There is no other place where we can hold them safe."

"But when my husband returns?"

"Ah, he may be a little puzzled as to his captives.  And the complaisant
Marceau may have an evil quarter of an hour.  But that may not be for a
week, and by that time, my little sister, I have confidence enough in
you to think that you really may have finished the campaign.  Not
another word, for every moment is of value.  Adieu, Francoise!  We shall
not be conquered without a struggle.  I will send a message to you
to-night to let you know how fortune uses us."  He took her fondly in
his arms, kissed her, and then hurried from the room.

For hours after his departure she paced up and down with noiseless steps
upon the deep soft carpet, her hand still clenched, her eyes flaming,
her whole soul wrapped and consumed with jealousy and hatred of her
rival.  Ten struck, and eleven, and midnight, but still she waited,
fierce and eager, straining her ears for every foot-fall which might be
the herald of news.  At last it came.  She heard the quick step in the
passage, the tap at the ante-room door, and the whispering of her black
page.  Quivering with impatience, she rushed in and took the note
herself from the dusty cavalier who had brought it.  It was but six
words scrawled roughly upon a wisp of dirty paper, but it brought the
colour back to her cheeks and the smile to her lips.  It was her
brother's writing, and it ran:  "The archbishop will not come to-night."



CHAPTER XV.


THE MIDNIGHT MISSION.

De Catinat in the meanwhile was perfectly aware of the importance of the
mission which had been assigned to him.  The secrecy which had been
enjoined by the king, his evident excitement, and the nature of his
orders, all confirmed the rumours which were already beginning to buzz
round the court.  He knew enough of the intrigues and antagonisms with
which the court was full to understand that every precaution was
necessary in carrying out his instructions.  He waited, therefore, until
night had fallen before ordering his soldier-servant to bring round the
two horses to one of the less public gates of the grounds.  As he and
his friend walked together to the spot, he gave the young American a
rapid sketch of the situation at the court, and of the chance that this
nocturnal ride might be an event which would affect the future history
of France.

"I like your king," said Amos Green, "and I am glad to ride in his
service.  He is a slip of a man to be the head of a great nation, but he
has the eye of a chief.  If one met him alone in a Maine forest, one
would know him as a man who was different to his fellows.  Well, I am
glad that he is going to marry again, though it's a great house for any
woman to have to look after."

De Catinat smiled at his comrade's idea of a queen's duties.

"Are you armed?" he asked.  "You have no sword or pistols?"

"No; if I may not carry my gun, I had rather not be troubled by tools
that I have never learned to use.  I have my knife.  But why do you
ask?"

"Because there may be danger."

"And how?"

"Many have an interest in stopping this marriage.  All the first men of
the kingdom are bitterly against it.  If they could stop _us_, they
would stop _it_, for to-night at least."

"But I thought it was a secret?"

"There is no such thing at a court.  There is the dauphin, or the king's
brother, either of them, or any of their friends, would be right glad
that we should be in the Seine before we reach the archbishop's house
this night.  But who is this?"

A burly figure had loomed up through the gloom on the path upon which
they were going.  As it approached, a coloured lamp dangling from one of
the trees shone upon the blue and silver of an officer of the guards.
It was Major de Brissac, of De Catinat's own regiment.

"Hullo!  Whither away?" he asked.

"To Paris, major."

"I go there myself within an hour.  Will you not wait, that we may go
together?"

"I am sorry, but I ride on a matter of urgency.  I must not lose a
minute."

"Very good.  Good-night, and a pleasant ride."

"Is he a trusty man, our friend the major?" asked Amos Green, glancing
back.

"True as steel."

"Then I would have a word with him."  The American hurried back along
the way they had come, while De Catinat stood chafing at this
unnecessary delay.  It was a full five minutes before his companion
joined him, and the fiery blood of the French soldier was hot with
impatience and anger.

"I think that perhaps you had best ride into Paris at your leisure, my
friend," said he.  "If I go upon the king's service I cannot be delayed
whenever the whim takes you."

"I am sorry," answered the other quietly.  "I had something to say to
your major, and I thought that maybe I might not see him again."

"Well, here are the horses," said the guardsman as he pushed open the
postern-gate.  "Have you fed an watered them, Jacques?"

"Yes, my captain," answered the man who stood at their head.

"Boot and saddle, then, friend Green, and we shall not draw rein again
until we see the lights of Paris in front of us."

The soldier-groom peered through the darkness after them with a sardonic
smile upon his face.  "You won't draw rein, won't you?" he muttered as
he turned away.  "Well, we shall see about that, my captain;  we shall
see about that."

For a mile or more the comrades galloped along, neck to neck and knee to
knee.  A wind had sprung up from the westward, and the heavens were
covered with heavy gray clouds, which drifted swiftly across, a crescent
moon peeping fitfully from time to time between the rifts.  Even during
these moments of brightness the road, shadowed as it was by heavy trees,
was very dark, but when the light was shut off it was hard, but for the
loom upon either side, to tell where it lay.  De Catinat at least found
it so, and he peered anxiously over his horse's ears, and stooped his
face to the mane in his efforts to see his way.

"What do you make of the road?" he asked at last.

"It looks as if a good many carriage wheels had passed over it to-day."

"What! _Mon Dieu!_ Do you mean to say that you can see carriage wheels
there?"

"Certainly.  Why not?"

"Why, man, I cannot see the road at all."

Amos Green laughed heartily.  "When you have travelled in the woods by
night as often as I have," said he, "when to show a light may mean to
lose your hair, one comes to learn to use one's eyes."

"Then you had best ride on, and I shall keep just behind you.
So! _Hola!_  What is the matter now?"

There had been the sudden sharp snap of something breaking, and the
American had reeled for an instant in the saddle.

"It's one of my stirrup leathers.  It has fallen."

"Can you find it?"

"Yes; but I can ride as well without it.  Let us push on."

"Very good.  I can just see you now."

They had galloped for about five minutes in this fashion, De Catinat's
horse's head within a few feet of the other's tail, when there was a
second snap, and the guardsman rolled out of the saddle on to the
ground.  He kept his grip of the reins, however, and was up in an
instant at his horse's head, sputtering out oaths as only an angry
Frenchman can.

"A thousand thunders of heaven!" he cried.  "What was it that happened
then?"

"Your leather has gone too."

"Two stirrup leathers in five minutes?  It is not possible."

"It is not possible that it should be chance," said the American
gravely, swinging himself off his horse.  "Why, what is this?  My other
leather is cut, and hangs only by a thread."

"And so does mine.  I can feel it when I pass my hand along.  Have you a
tinder-box?  Let us strike a light."

"No, no; the man who is in the dark is in safety.  I let the other folk
strike lights.  We can see all that is needful to us."

"My rein is cut also."

"And so is mine."

"And the girth of my saddle."

"It is a wonder that we came so far with whole bones.  Now, who has
played us this little trick?"

"Who could it be but that rogue Jacques!  He has had the horses in his
charge.  By my faith, he shall know what the strappado means when I see
Versailles again."

"But why should he do it?"

"Ah, he has been set on to it.  He has been a tool in the hands of those
who wished to hinder our journey."

"Very like.  But they must have had some reason behind.  They knew well
that to cut our straps would not prevent us from reaching Paris, since
we could ride bareback, or, for that matter, could run it if need be."

"They hoped to break our necks."

"One neck they might break, but scarce those of two, since the fate of
the one would warn the other."

"Well, then, what do you think that they meant?" cried De Catinat
impatiently.  "For heaven's sake, let us come to some conclusion, for
every minute is of importance."

But the other was not to be hurried out of his cool, methodical fashion
of speech and of thought.

"They could not have thought to stop us," said he.

"What did they mean, then?  They could only have meant to delay us.
And why should they wish to delay us?  What could it matter to them if
we gave our message an hour or two sooner or an hour or two later?
It could not matter."

"For heaven's sake--" broke in De Catinat impetuously.

But Amos Green went on hammering the matter slowly out.

"Why should they wish to delay us, then?  There's only one reason that I
can see.  In order to give other folk time to get in front of us and
stop us.  That is it, captain.  I'd lay you a beaver-skin to a
rabbit-pelt that I'm on the track.  There's been a party of a dozen
horsemen along this ground since the dew began to fall.  If they were
delayed, they would have time to form their plans before we came."

"By my faith, you may be right," said De Catinat thoughtfully.  "What
would you propose?"

"That we ride back, and go by some less direct way."

"It is impossible.  We should have to ride back to Meudon cross-roads,
and then it would add ten miles to our journey."

"It is better to get there an hour later than not to get there at all."

"Pshaw! we are surely not to be turned from our path by a mere guess.
There is the St. Germain cross-road about a mile below.  When we reach
it we can strike to the right along the south side of the river, and so
change our course."

"But we may not reach it."

"If anyone bars our way we shall know how to treat with them."

"You would fight, then?"

"Yes."

"What! with a dozen of them?"

"A hundred, if we are on the king's errand."

Amos Green shrugged his shoulders.

"You are surely not afraid?"

"Yes, I am, mighty afraid.  Fighting's good enough when there's no help
for it.  But I call it a fool's plan to ride straight into a trap when
you might go round it."

"You may do what you like," said De Catinat angrily.

"My father was a gentleman, the owner of a thousand arpents of land, and
his son is not going to flinch in the king's service."

"My father," answered Amos Green, "was a merchant, the owner of a
thousand skunk-skins, and his son knows a fool when he sees one."
