
II

It seems that Fiddler Paul, the handsome ne'er-do-well of the
half-breed world, readier to hunt than to work, was prowling with his
gun along the wooded banks of the Red River by Kildonan, one day in the
June of 1880. He saw a Gray-wolf come out of a hole in a bank and fired
a chance shot that killed it. Having made sure, by sending in his Dog,
that no other large Wolf was there, he crawled into the den, and found,
to his utter amazement and delight, eight young Wolves--nine bounties
of ten dollars each. How much is that? A fortune surely. He used a
stick vigorously, and with the assistance of the yellow Cur, all the
little ones were killed but one. There is a superstition about the last
of a brood--it is not lucky to kill it. So Paul set out for town with
the scalp of the old Wolf, the scalps of the seven young, and the last
Cub alive.

The saloon-keeper, who got the dollars for which the scalps were
exchanged, soon got the living Cub. He grew up at the end of a chain,
but developed a chest and jaws that no Hound in town could match. He
was kept in the yard for the amusement of customers, and this amusement
usually took the form of baiting the captive with Dogs. The young Wolf
was bitten and mauled nearly to death on several occasions, but he
recovered, and each month there were fewer Dogs willing to face him.
His life was as hard as it could be. There was but one gleam of
gentleness in it all, and that was the friendship that grew up between
himself and Little Jim, the son of the saloonkeeper.

Jim was a wilful little rascal with a mind of his own. He took to the
Wolf because it had killed a Dog that had bitten him. He thenceforth
fed the Wolf and made a pet of it, and the Wolf responded by allowing
him to take liberties which no one else dared venture.

Jim's father was not a model parent. He usually spoiled his son, but at
times would get in a rage and beat him cruelly for some trifle. The
child was quick to learn that he was beaten, not because he had done
wrong, but because he had made his father angry. If, therefore, he
could keep out of the way until that anger had cooled, he had no
further cause for worry. One day, seeking safety in flight with his
father behind him, he dashed into the Wolf's kennel, and his grizzly
chum thus unceremoniously awakened turned to the door, displayed a
double row of ivories, and plainly said to the father: "Don't you dare
to touch him."

If Hogan could have shot the Wolf then and there he would have done so,
but the chances were about equal of killing his son, so he let them
alone and, half an hour later, laughed at the whole affair. Thenceforth
Little Jim made for the Wolf's den whenever he was in danger, and
sometimes the only notice any one had that the boy had been in mischief
was seeing him sneak in behind the savage captive.

Economy in hired help was a first principle with Hogan. Therefore his
"barkeep" was a Chinaman. He was a timid, harmless creature, so Paul
des Roches did not hesitate to bully him. One day, finding Hogan out,
and the Chinaman alone in charge, Paul, already tipsy, demanded a drink
on credit, and Tung Ling, acting on standing orders, refused. His
artless explanation, "No good, neber pay," so far from clearing up the
difficulty, brought Paul staggering back of the bar to avenge the
insult. The Celestial might have suffered grievous bodily hurt, but
that Little Jim was at hand and had a long stick, with which he
adroitly tripped up the Fiddler and sent him sprawling. He staggered to
his feet swearing he would have Jim's life. But the child was near the
back door and soon found refuge in the Wolf's kennel.

Seeing that the boy had a protector, Paul got the long stick, and from
a safe distance began to belabor the Wolf, The grizzly creature raged
at the end of the chain, but, though he parried many cruel blows by
seizing the stick in his teeth, he was suffering severely, when Paul
realized that Jim, whose tongue had not been idle, was fumbling away
with nervous fingers to set the Wolf loose, and soon would succeed.
Indeed, it would have been done already but for the strain that the
Wolf kept on the chain.

The thought of being in the yard at the mercy of the huge animal that
he had so enraged, gave the brave Paul a thrill of terror.

Jim's wheedling voice was heard--"Hold on now, Wolfie; back up just a
little, and you shall have him. Now do; there's a good Wolfie"--that
was enough; the Fiddler fled and carefully closed all doors behind him.

Thus the friendship between Jim and his pet grew stronger, and the
Wolf, as he developed his splendid natural powers, gave daily evidence
also of the mortal hatred he bore to men that smelt of whiskey and to
all Dogs, the causes of his sufferings. This peculiarity, coupled with
his love for the child--and all children seemed to be included to some
extent--grew with his growth and seemed to prove the ruling force of
his life.


III

At this time--that is, the fall of 1881--there were great complaints
among the Qu'Appelle ranchmen that the Wolves were increasing in their
country and committing great depredations among the stock. Poisoning
and trapping had proved failures, and when a distinguished German
visitor appeared at the Club in Winnipeg and announced that he was
bringing some Dogs that could easily rid the country of Wolves, he was
listened to with unusual interest. For the cattle-men are fond of
sport, and the idea of helping their business by establishing a kennel
of Wolfhounds was very alluring.

The German soon produced as samples of his Dogs, two magnificent Danes,
one white, the other blue with black spots and a singular white eye
that completed an expression of unusual ferocity. Each of these great
creatures weighed nearly two hundred pounds. They were muscled like
Tigers, and the German was readily believed when he claimed that these
two alone were more than a match for the biggest Wolf. He thus
described their method of hunting: "All you have to do is show them the
trail and, even if it is a day old, away they go on it. They cannot be
shaken off. They will soon find that Wolf, no matter how he doubles and
hides. Then they close on him. He turns to run, the blue Dog takes him
by the haunch and throws him like this," and the German jerked a roll
of bread into the air; "then before he touches the ground the white Dog
has his head, the other his tail, and they pull him apart like that."

It sounded all right; at any rate every one was eager to put it to the
proof. Several of the residents said there was a fair chance of finding
a Gray-wolf along the Assiniboine, so a hunt was organized. But they
searched in vain for three days and were giving it up when some one
suggested that down at Hogan's saloon was a Wolf chained up, that they
could get for the value of the bounty, and though little more than a
year old he would serve to show what the Dogs could do.

The value of Hogan's Wolf went up at once when he knew the importance
of the occasion; besides, "he had conscientious scruples." All his
scruples vanished, however, when his views as to price were met. His
first care was to get Little Jim out of the way by sending him on an
errand to his grandma's; then the Wolf was driven into his box and
nailed in. The box was put in a wagon and taken to the open prairie
along the Portage trail.

The Dogs could scarcely be held back, they were so eager for the fray,
as soon as they smelt the Wolf. But several strong men held their
leash, the wagon was drawn half a mile farther, and the Wolf was turned
out with some difficulty. At first he looked scared and sullen. He
tried to get out of sight, but made no attempt to bite. However, on
finding himself free, as well as hissed and hooted at, he started off
at a slinking trot toward the south, where the land seemed broken. The
Dogs were released at that moment, and, baying furiously, they bounded
away after the young Wolf. The men cheered loudly and rode behind them.
From the very first it was clear that he had no chance. The Dogs were
much swifter; the white one could run like a Greyhound. The German was
wildly enthusiastic as she flew across the prairie, gaining visibly on
the Wolf at every second. Many bets were offered on the Dogs, but there
were no takers. The only bets accepted were Dog against Dog. The young
Wolf went at speed now, but within a mile the white Dog was right
behind him--was closing in.

The German shouted: "Now watch and see that Wolf go up in the air."

In a moment the runners were together. Both recoiled, neither went up
in the air, but the white Dog rolled over with a fearful gash in her
shoulder--out of the fight, if not killed. Ten seconds later the
Blue-spot arrived, open-mouthed. This meeting was as quick and almost
as mysterious as the first. The animals barely touched each other. The
gray one bounded aside, his head out of sight for a moment in the flash
of quick movement. Spot reeled and showed a bleeding flank. Urged on by
the men, he assaulted again, but only to get another wound that taught
him to keep off.

Now came the keeper with four more huge Dogs. They turned these loose,
and the men armed with clubs and lassos were closing to help in
finishing the Wolf, when a small boy came charging over the plain on a
Pony. He leaped to the ground and wriggling through the ring flung his
arms around the Wolf's neck. He called him his "Wolfie pet," his "dear
Wolfie"--the Wolf licked his face and wagged its tail--then the child
turned on the crowd and through his streaming tears, he--Well it would
not do to print what he said. He was only nine, but he was very
old-fashioned, as well as a rude little boy. He had been brought up in
a low saloon, and had been an apt pupil at picking up the vile talk of
the place. He cursed them one and all and for generations back; he did
not spare even his own father.

If a man had used such shocking and insulting language he might have
been lynched, but coming from a baby, the hunters did not know what to
do, so finally did the best thing. They laughed aloud--not at
themselves, that is not considered good form--but they all laughed at
the German whose wonderful Dogs had been worsted by a half-grown Wolf.

Jimmie now thrust his dirty, tear-stained little fist down into his
very-much-of-a-boy's pocket, and from among marbles and chewing-gum, as
well as tobacco, matches, pistol cartridges, and other contraband, he
fished out a flimsy bit of grocer's twine and fastened it around the
Wolf's neck. Then, still blubbering a little, he set out for home on
the Pony, leading the Wolf and hurling a final threat and anathema at
the German nobleman: "Fur two cents I'd sic him on you, gol darn ye."


IV

Early that winter Jimmie was taken down with a fever. The Wolf howled
miserably in the yard when he missed his little friend, and finally on
the boy's demand was admitted to the sick-room, and there this great
wild Dog--for that is all a Wolf is--continued faithfully watching by
his friend's bedside.

The fever had seemed slight at first, so that every one was shocked
when there came suddenly a turn for the worse, and three days before
Christmas Jimmie died. He had no more sincere mourner than his
"Wolfie." The great gray creature howled in miserable answer to the
church-bell tolling when he followed the body on Christmas Eve to the
graveyard at St. Boniface. He soon came back to the premises behind the
saloon, but when an attempt was made to chain him again, he leaped a
board fence and was finally lost sight of.

Later that same winter old Renaud, the trapper, with his pretty
half-breed daughter, Ninette, came to live in a little log-cabin on the
river bank. He knew nothing about Jimmie Hogan, and he was not a little
puzzled to find Wolf tracks and signs along the river on both sides
between St. Boniface and Fort Garry. He listened with interest and
doubt to tales that the Hudson Bay Company's men told of a great
Gray-wolf that had come to live in the region about, and even to enter
the town at night, and that was in particular attached to the woods
about St. Boniface Church.

On Christmas Eve of that year when the bell tolled again as it had done
for Jimmie, a lone and melancholy howling from the woods almost
convinced Renaud that the stories were true. He knew the
wolf-cries--the howl for help, the love song, the lonely wail, and the
sharp defiance of the Wolves. This was the lonely wail.

The trapper went to the riverside and gave an answering howl. A shadowy
form left the far woods and crossed on the ice to where the man sat,
log-still, on a log. It came up near him, circled past and sniffed,
then its eye glowed; it growled like a Dog that is a little angry, and
glided back into the night.

Thus Renaud knew, and before long many townfolk began to learn, that a
huge Gray-wolf was living in their streets, "a Wolf three times as big
as the one that used to be chained at Hogan's gin-mill." He was the
terror of Dogs, killing them on all possible occasions, and some said,
though it was never proven, that he had devoured more than one
half-breed who was out on a spree.

And this was the Winnipeg Wolf that I had seen that day in the wintry
woods. I had longed to go to his help, thinking the odds so hopelessly
against him, but later knowledge changed the thought. I do not know how
that fight ended, but I do know that he was seen many times afterward
and some of the Dogs were not.

Thus his was the strangest life that ever his kind had known. Free of
all the woods and plains, he elected rather to lead a life of daily
hazard in the town--each week at least some close escape, and every day
a day of daring deeds; finding momentary shelter at times under the
very boardwalk crossings. Hating the men and despising the Dogs, he
fought his daily way and held the hordes of Curs at bay or slew them
when he found them few or single; harried the drunkard, evaded men with
guns, learned traps--learned poison, too--just how, we cannot tell, but
learn it he did, for he passed it again and again, or served it only
with a Wolf's contempt.

Not a street in Winnipeg that he did not know; not a policeman in
Winnipeg that had not seen his swift and shadowy form in the gray dawn
as he passed where he would; not a Dog in Winnipeg that did not cower
and bristle when the telltale wind brought proof that old Garou was
crouching near. His only path was the warpath, and all the world his
foes. But throughout this lurid, semi-mythic record there was one
recurring pleasant thought--Garou never was known to harm a child.


V

Ninette was a desert-born beauty like her Indian mother, but gray-eyed
like her Normandy father, a sweet girl of sixteen, the belle of her
set. She might have married any one of the richest and steadiest young
men of the country, but of course, in feminine perversity her heart was
set on that ne'er-do-well, Paul des Roches. A handsome fellow, a good
dancer and a fair violinist, Fiddler Paul was in demand at all
festivities, but he was a shiftless drunkard and it was even whispered
that he had a wife already in Lower Canada. Renaud very properly
dismissed him when he came to urge his suit, but dismissed him in vain.
Ninette, obedient in all else, would not give up her lover. The very
day after her father had ordered him away she promised to meet him in
the woods just across the river. It was easy to arrange this, for she
was a good Catholic, and across the ice to the church was shorter than
going around by the bridge. As she went through the snowy wood to the
tryst she noticed that a large gray Dog was following. It seemed quite
friendly, and the child (for she was still that) had no fear, but when
she came to the place where Paul was waiting, the gray Dog went forward
rumbling in its chest. Paul gave one look, knew it for a huge Wolf,
then fled like the coward he was. He afterward said he ran for his gun.
He must have forgotten where it was, as he climbed the nearest tree to
find it. Meanwhile Ninette ran home across the ice to tell Paul's
friends of his danger. Not finding any firearms up the tree, the
valiant lover made a spear by fastening his knife to a branch and
succeeded in giving Garou a painful wound on the head. The savage,
creature growled horribly but thenceforth kept at a safe distance,
though plainly showing his intention to wait till the man came down.
But the approach of a band of rescuers changed his mind, and he went
away.

Fiddler Paul found it easier to explain matters to Ninette than he
would to any one else. He still stood first in her affections, but so
hopelessly ill with her father that they decided on an elopement, as
soon as he should return from Fort Alexander, whither he was to go for
the Company, as dog-driver. The Factor was very proud of his train
Dogs--three great Huskies with curly, bushy tails, big and strong as
Calves, but fierce and lawless as pirates. With these the Fiddler Paul
was to drive to Fort Alexander from Fort Garry--the bearer of several
important packets. He was an expert Dog-driver, which usually means
relentlessly cruel. He set off blithely down the river in the morning,
after the several necessary drinks of whiskey. He expected to be gone a
