The little shuttle-car settled down softly on the green terrace near
the center of the city. The building was a masterpiece of smoothly
curving walls and tasteful lines, opening a full side to the south to
catch the soft sunlight and warm breezes. Ravdin strode across the deep
carpeting of the terrace. There was other music here, different music, a
wilder, more intimate fantasy of whirling sound. An oval door opened for
him, and he stopped short, staggered for a moment by the overpowering
beauty in the vaulted room.

A girl with red hair the color of new flame was dancing with enthralling
beauty and abandon, her body moving like ripples of wind to the music
which filled the room with its throbbing cry. Her beauty was exquisite,
every motion, every flowing turn a symphony of flawless perfection as
she danced to the wild music.

"Lord Nehmon!"

The dancer threw back her head sharply, eyes wide, her body frozen in
mid-air, and then, abruptly, she was gone, leaving only the barest
flickering image of her fiery hair. The music slowed, singing softly,
and Ravdin could see the old man waiting in the room. Nehmon rose, his
gaunt face and graying hair belying the youthful movement of his body.
Smiling, he came forward, clapped Ravdin on the shoulder, and took his
hand warmly. "You're too late for the concert--it's a shame. Mischana is
the master tonight, and the whole city is there."

Ravdin's throat tightened as he tried to smile. "I had to let you know,"
he said. "_They're coming_, Nehmon! I saw them, hours ago."

The last overtones of the music broke abruptly, like a glass shattered
on stone. The room was deathly still. Lord Nehmon searched the young
man's face. Then he turned away, not quite concealing the sadness and
pain in his eyes. "You're certain? You couldn't be mistaken?"

"No chance. I found signs of their passing in a dozen places. Then I
saw _them_, their whole fleet. There were hundreds. They're coming, I
saw them."

"Did they see you?" Nehmon's voice was sharp.

"No, no. The Warp is a wonderful thing. With it I could come and go in
the twinkling of an eye. But I could see them in the twinkling of an
eye."

"And it couldn't have been anyone else?"

"Could anyone else build ships like the Hunters?"

Nehmon sighed wearily. "No one that we know." He glanced up at the young
man. "Sit down, son, sit down. I--I'll just have to rearrange my
thinking a little. Where were they? How far?"

"Seven light years," Ravdin said. "Can you imagine it? Just seven, and
moving straight this way. _They know where we are_, and they are coming
quickly." His eyes filled with fear. "They _couldn't_ have found us so
soon, unless they too have discovered the Warp and how to use it to
travel."

The older man's breath cut off sharply, and there was real alarm in his
eyes. "You're right," he said softly. "Six months ago it was eight
hundred light years away, in an area completely remote from us. Now just
_seven_. In six months they have come so close."

The scout looked up at Nehmon in desperation. "But what can we do? We
have only weeks, maybe days, before they're here. We have no time to
plan, no time to prepare for them. What can we do?"

The room was silent. Finally the aged leader stood up, wearily, some
fraction of his six hundred years of life showing in his face for the
first time in centuries. "We can do once again what we always have done
before when the Hunters came," he said sadly. "We can run away."

       *       *       *       *       *

The bright street below the oval window was empty and quiet. Not a
breath of air stirred in the city. Ravdin stared out in bitter silence.
"Yes, we can run away. Just as we always have before. After we have
worked so hard, accomplished so much here, we must burn the city and
flee again." His voice trailed off to silence. He stared at Nehmon,
seeking in the old man's face some answer, some reassurance. But he
found no answer there, only sadness. "Think of the concerts. It's taken
so long, but at last we've come so close to the ultimate goal." He
gestured toward the thought-sensitive sounding boards lining the walls,
the panels which had made the dancer-illusion possible. "Think of the
beauty and peace we've found here."

"I know. How well I know."

"Yet now the Hunters come again, and again we must run away." Ravdin
stared at the old man, his eyes suddenly bright. "Nehmon, when I saw
those ships I began thinking."

"I've spent many years thinking, my son."

"Not what I've been thinking." Ravdin sat down, clasping his hands in
excitement. "The Hunters come and we run away, Nehmon. Think about that
for a moment. We run, and we run, and we run. From what? We run from the
Hunters. They're hunting _us_, these Hunters. They've never quite found
us, because we've always already run. We're clever, we're fortunate, and
we have a way of life that they do not, so whenever they have come close
to finding us, we have run."

Nehmon nodded slowly. "For thousands of years."

Ravdin's eyes were bright. "Yes, we flee, we cringe, we hide under
stones, we break up our lives and uproot our families, running like
frightened animals in the shadows of night and secrecy." He gulped a
breath, and his eyes sought Nehmon's angrily. "_Why do we run, my
