Creek, the Tenawa chief had observed a flock of turkey-buzzards circling
about in the air.  Not the one accompanying him and his marauders on
their march, as is the wont of these predatory birds.  But another quite
separate gang, seen at a distance behind, apparently above the path
along which he and his freebooters had lately passed.

As the Comanche well knows, a sign too significant to be treated lightly
or with negligence.  And so, too, his second in command.  Therefore have
they climbed the cliff to obtain a better view of the birds--those
flying afar--and, if possible, draw a correct conclusion as to the cause
of their being there.

On reaching the summit they again see them, though so far off as to be
barely visible--black specks against the blue canopy of the sky.  Still
near enough to show a large number circling about over some object that
appears stationary.

This last observation seems satisfactory to the Tenawa chief, who,
turning to his fellow-freebooter, shouts out,--

"Nothing to fear.  Don't you remember, Barbato, one of our horses gave
out there, and was left?  It's over him the zopilotes are swooping.
He's not dead yet; that's why they don't go down."

"It may be," rejoins the renegade.  "Still I don't like the look of it.
Over a dead horse they'd hardly soar so high.  True, they keep in one
place.  If it were Texans pursuing us they'd be moving onward--coming
nearer and nearer.  They're not.  It must be, as you say, the horse.  I
don't think the people of the settlement we struck would be strong
enough to come after us--at least not so soon.  They may in time, after
they've got up a gathering of their Rangers.  That isn't likely to be
till we've got safe beyond their reach.  They won't gain much by a march
to the Witchita mountains.  _Por cierte_! the zopilotes out yonder are
over something; but, as they're not moving on, most likely it's the
horse."

Again the Horned Lizard gives a grunt, expressing satisfaction; after
which the two scramble back down the cliff, to seek that repose which
fighting and forced marching make necessary to man, be he savage or
civilised.



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

PURSUERS ON THE PATH.

Despite common belief, the instinct of the Indian is not always sure,
nor his intellect unerring.  An instance of the contrary is afforded by
the behaviour of the Tenawa chief and his subordinate Barbato.

About the buzzards both have been mistaken.  The second flock seen by
them is not hovering over a horse, but above an encampment of horsemen.
Not correctly an encampment, but a halt _en bivouac_--where men have
thrown themselves from their saddles, to snatch a hurried repast, and
take quick consultation about continuing on.

They are all men, not a woman or child among them, bearded men with
white skins, and wearing the garb of civilisation.  This not of the most
fashionable kind or cut, nor are they all in the exact drew of civilised
life.  For many of them wear buckskin hunting shirts, fringed leggings,
and moccasins; more a costume peculiar to the savage.  Besides these
there are some in blanket-coats of red, green, and blue; all
sweat-stained and dust-tarnished, till the colours nearly correspond.
Others in Kentucky jeans, or copper-coloured homespun.  Still others in
sky-blue _cottonade_, product of the hand-mills of Attakapas.  Boots,
shoes, and brogans fabricated out of all kinds of leather; even that
from the corrugated skin of the illigator.  Hats of every shape,
fashion, size, and material--straw, chip, Panama, wool, felt, silk, and
beaver.

In one respect they are all nearly alike--in their armour and
accoutrements.  All are belted, pouched, and powder-horned.  Each
carries a bowie-knife and a revolving pistol--some two--and none are
without a rifle.  Besides this uniformity there are other points of
resemblance--extending to a certain number.  It is noticeable in their
guns, which are jagers of the US army-brand.  Equally apparent is the
caparison of their horses; these carrying cavalry saddles, with peaks
and cantles brass mounted.  Among the men to whom these appertain there
is a sort of half-military discipline, indicated by some slight
deference shown to two or three, who appear to act with the authority of
officers.  It is, in fact, a troop--or, as by themselves styled, a
"company"--of Texan Rangers.

About one-half the band belongs to this organisation.  The others are
the people of the plundered settlement--the fathers, brothers, and
husbands, whom the Horned Lizard and his red robbers have bereft of
daughters, sisters, and wives.

They are in pursuit of the despoilers; a chase commenced as soon as they
could collect sufficient force to give it a chance of success.  Luckily,
a troop of Rangers, scouting in the neighbourhood, came opportunely
along, just in time to join them.  Soldiers and settlers united, they
are now on the trail of the Tenawas, and have only halted to breathe and
water their horses, eat some food themselves, and then on.

Not strange their hot haste--men whose homes have been made desolate,
their kindred carried into captivity.  Each has his own painful
reflections.  In that hour, at that very moment, his beloved wife, his
delicate daughter, his fair sister, or sweetheart, may be struggling in
the embrace of a brawny savage.  No wonder that to them every hour seems
a day, every minute an hour.

Though with a different motive, not much less impatient are their
associates in the pursuit--the Rangers.  It chances to be a company
especially rabid for defence against the incursions of the Tenawa tribe;
and more than once baffled by these cunning red-skins, they are anxious
to make up for past disappointment.  Twice before have they followed the
retreating trail of these same savages, on both occasions returning
foiled and empty-handed.  And, now that they are again on it, with surer
signs to guide them, the young men of the corps are mad to come up with
the red marauders, while the elder ones are almost equally excited.
Both resemble hounds in a hunt where the scent is hot--the young dogs
dashing forward without check, the old ones alike eager, but moving with
more circumspection.

Between them and the settlers there is the same earnestness of purpose,
though stimulated by resentment altogether different.  The latter only
think of rescuing their dear ones, while the former are stirred by
soldier pride and the instinctive antagonism which a Texan Ranger feels
for a Tenawa.  Many of them have old scores to settle with the Horned
Lizard, and more than one longs to send a bullet through his heart.

But, despite the general reckless impatience to proceed, there are some
who counsel caution.  Chief among those is a man named Cully, a thin
wiry sexagenarian, who looks as if he had been at least half a century
upon the prairies.  All over buckskin, fitting tight to his body,
without tag or tail, he is not one of the enrolled Rangers, though
engaged to act as their guide.  In this capacity he exercises an
influence over the pursuers almost equalling that of their leader, the
Ranger captain, who, with a group gathered around, is now questioning
the guide as to the next move to be made.

"They can't be very far off now," replies Cully, in answer to the
captain's interrogatory.  "All the signs show they passed this hyar
point a good hour arter sun-up.  The dew war off the grass as they druv
over it, else the blades 'ud a been pressed flatter down.  Besides,
there's the dead hoss they've left ahint.  Ye see some o' 'em's cut out
his tongue an' tuk it along for a tit-bit at thar next campin' place.
Now, as the blood that kim out o' the animal's mouth ain't been long
cruddled up, thet shows to a sartinty they can't be far forrad.  I
reck'n I know the adzact spot whar they're squatted."

"Where?"

"Peecawn creek.  There they'll get good water for thar stock, an' the
shade o' trees to rest unner; the which last they'll take to in this
hottish spell o' sun."

"If they're upon the Pecan," puts in a third speaker, a tall, lathy
individual, in a green blanket coat, badly faded, "and anywhere near its
mouth, we can't be more than five miles from them.  I know this part of
the country well.  I passed through it last year along with the Santa Fe
expedition."

"Only five miles!" exclaims another man, whose dress bespeaks a planter
of respectability, while his woe-begone countenance proclaims him to be
one of the bereaved.  "Oh, gentlemen I surely our horses are now rested
enough.  Let us ride forward and fall upon them at once!"

"We'd be durned foolish to do so," responded Cully.  "Thet, Mr Wilton,
'ud be jest the way to defeet all our plans an' purpisses.  They'd see
us long afore we ked git sight o' them, an' maybe in time to run off all
the stolen hosses an' cattle, but sartinly the keptyves."

"What's your way, Cully?" interrogates a lieutenant of the Rangers.

"My way air to wait till the sun go down, then steal torst 'm.  Thar
boun' to hev fires, an' thet'll guide us right into thar camp.  Ef it's
in the Peecawn bottom, as I'm pretty sure it air, we kin surround 'em
eesy.  Thar's bluffs a-both sides, an' we kin divide inter two lots--one
slippin' roun' an' comin' from up the creek, while t'other approaches
'em from below.  In thet way we'll make sure o' keepin' 'em from runnin'
off the weemen; beside it'll gie us the more likelier chance to make a
good count o' the redskin sculps."

"What do you say, boys?" asks the Ranger captain, addressing himself
more especially to the men composing his command.

"Cully's right," is the response from a majority of voices.

"Then we must stay here till night.  If we go forward now, they may see
us before we get within shooting distance.  So you think, Cully, you can
take up the trail at night, supposing it to be a dark one?"

"Pish!" retorts the old prairie-man, with a disdainful toss of his head.

"Take up the trail o' a Tenawa Injun?  I'd do that in the darkest night
as iver shet down over a prairie.  The skunks!  I ked smell the place
they'd passed over."

There is no further discussion.  Cully's opinion is all-powerful, and
determines the course to be pursued.  The halt intended to be temporary,
is to continue till near sunset, despite expostulations, almost
prayerful appeals, from those who have left desolate homes behind, and
who burn with impatience to ride forward and rescue their captive
kindred.



CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

THE SAVAGES SURPRISED.

Throughout the afternoon hours both parties remained stationary; the
pursued indulging in a siesta, which days of rough riding and raiding,
with nights of watchfulness, have made necessary; the pursuers, on their
part, wearied as well, but unable to sleep so long as their vengeance
remains unappeased, and such dread danger hangs over the heads of those
near and dear to them.

Above the bivouacs the black vultures spread their shadowy wings,
soaring and circling, each "gang" over the cohort it has been all day
accompanying.

Every now and then between the two "gangs" one is seen coming and going,
like so many mutual messengers passing between; for, although the flocks
are far apart, they can see one another, and each is aware, by instinct
clearer than human ken, what the other is after.  It is not the first
time for them to follow two such parties travelling across the Texan
prairie.  Nor will it be the first for them to unite in the air as the
two troops come into collision on the earth.  Often have these birds,
poised in the blue ether, looked down upon red carnage like that now
impending.  Their instincts--let us call them so, for the sake of
keeping peace with the naturalists of the closet--then admonish them
what is likely to ensue.  For if not reason, they have at least
recollection; and as their eyes rest upon men with dusky skins, and
others dimly white, they know that between such is a terrible
antagonism, oft accruing to their own interest.  Many a time has it
given them a meal.  Strange if they should not remember it!

They do.  Though tranquilly soaring on high--each bird with outstretched
neck and eye bent, in hungry concupiscence, looks below on the forms
moving or at rest, saying to itself, "Ere long these vermin will furnish
a rich repast."  So sure are they of this--the birds of both flocks--
that, although the sun is nigh setting, instead of betaking themselves
to their roosts, as is their wont, they stay, each by its own pet party.
Those accompanying the pursuers still fly about in the air.  They can
tell that these do not intend to remain much longer on that spot.  For
they have kindled no fires, nor taken other steps that indicate an
encampment for the night.

Different with those that soar over the halting-place of the pursued.
As night approaches they draw in their spread wings and settle down to
roost; some upon trees, others on the ledges of rock, still others on
the summits of the cliffs that overhang the camping place of the
Indians.

The blazing fires, with meat on spits sputtering over them; the arms
abandoned, spears stuck in the ground, with shields suspended; the noise
and revelry around--all proclaim the resolve of the savages to stay
there till morning.

An intention which, despite their apparent stolidity--in contradiction
to the ideas of the closet naturalist and his theory of animal
instinct--the vultures clearly comprehend.

About the behaviour of the birds the marauders take no note.  They are
used to seeing turkey-buzzards around--better known to them by the name
"zopilotes."

For long ere the Anglo-American colonists came in contact with the
Comanche Indians a Spano-Mexican vocabulary had penetrated to the
remotest of these tribes.

No new thing for the Tenawas to see the predatory birds swooping above
them all day and staying near them all night.  Not stranger than a wolf
keeping close to the sheepfold, or a hungry dog skulking around
shambles.

As night draws near, and the purple twilight steals over the great Texan
plain, the party of chasing pursuers is relieved from a stay by all
deemed so irksome.  Remounting their horses, they leave the scene of
their reluctant halt, and continue the pursuit silently, as if moving in
funeral march.

The only sounds heard are the dull thumping of their horses' hoofs upon
the soft prairie turf; now and then a clink, as one strikes against a
stone; the occasional tinkle of a canteen as it comes in contact with
saddle mounting or pistol butt; the champing of bits, with the breathing
of horses and men.

These last talk in low tones, in mutterings not much louder than
whispers.  In pursuit of their savage foe, the well-trained Rangers
habitually proceed thus, and have cautioned the settlers to the same.
Though these need no compulsion to keep silent; their hearts are too
sore for speech; their anguish, in its terrible intensity, seeks for no
expression, till they stand face to face with the red ruffians who have
caused, and are still causing, it.  The night darkens down, becoming so
obscure that each horseman can barely distinguish the form of him riding
ahead.  Some regret this, thinking they may get strayed.  Not so Cully.
On the contrary, the guide is glad, for he feels confident in his
conjecture that the pursued will be found in Pecan Creek, and a dark
night will favour the scheme of attack he has conceived and spoken of.
Counselled by him, the Ranger captain shares his confidence, and they
proceed direct towards the point where the tributary stream unites with
the main river--the little Witchita, along whose banks they have been
all that day tracking.  Not but that Cully could take up the Indian
trail.  Despite the obscurity he could do that, though not, as he
jestingly declared, by the smell.  There are other indices that would
enable him, known but to men who have spent a lifetime upon the
prairies.  He does not need them now, sure he will find the savages, as
he said, "squatted on the Peecawn."

And, sure enough, when the pursuers, at length at the creek's mouth,
enter the canon through which it disembogues its crystal water into the
grander and more turbid stream, they discovered certain traces of the
pursued having passed along its banks.

Another mile of travelling, the same silence observed, with caution
increased, and there is no longer a doubt about the truth of Cully's
conjecture.  Noises are heard ahead, sounds disturbing the stillness of
the night air that are not those of the uninhabited prairie.  There is
the lowing of cattle, in long monotonous moans, like when being driven
to slaughter, with, at intervals, the shriller neigh of a horse, as if
uneasy at being away from his stable.

On hearing these sounds, the Ranger captain, acting by the advice of the
guide, orders a halt.  Then the pursuing party is separated into two
distinct troops.  One, led by Cully, ascends the cliff by a lateral
ravine, and pursues its way along the upper table-land.  The other,
under the command of the captain, is to remain below until a certain
time has elapsed, its length stipulated between the two leaders before
parting.

When it has passed, the second division moves forward up the creek,
again halting as a light shines through the trees, which, from its
reddish colour, they know to be the glare of log fires.

They need not this to tell them they are close to an encampment--that of
the savages they have been pursuing.  They can hear their barbarous
jargon, mingled with shouts and laughter like that of demons in the
midst of some fiendish frolic.

They only stay for a signal the guide arranged to give as soon as he has
got round to attack on the opposite side.  The first shot heard, and
they will dash forward to the fires.

Seated in their saddles, with reins tight drawn, and heels ready to
drive home the spur--with glances bent greedily at the gleaming lights,
and ears keenly alert to catch every sound--the hearts of some trembling
with fear, others throbbing with hope, still others thrilling with the
thought of vengeance--they wait for the crack that is to be the signal--
wait and listen, with difficulty restraining themselves.

It comes at length.  Up the glen peals a loud report, quickly followed
by another, both from a double-barrelled gun.

This was the signal for attack, arranged by Cully.

Soon as hearing it, the reins are slackened, the spurs sent home, and,
with a shout making the rocks ring, and the trees reverberate its
echoes, they gallop straight towards the Indian encampment, and in a
moment are in its midst.

They meet little resistance--scarce any.  Too far from the settlements
to fear pursuit--in full confidence they have not been followed, the red
robbers have been abandoning themselves to pleasure, spending the night
in a grand gluttonous feast, furnished by the captured kine.

Engrossed with sensual joys, they have neglected guard; and, in the
midst of their festivities, they are suddenly set upon from all sides;
the sharp cracking of rifles, with the quick detonation of repeating
pistols, soon silences their cacchinations, scattering them like chaff.

After the first fusillade, there is but little left of them.  Those not
instantly shot down retreat in the darkness, skulking of! among the
pecan trees.  It is altogether an affair of firearms: and for once the
bowie--the Texan's trusted weapon--has no part in the fray.

The first rays of next morning's sun throw light upon a sanguinary
scene--a tableau terrible, though not regrettable.  On the contrary, it
discloses a sight which, but for the red surroundings, might give
gladness.  Fathers, half frantic with joy, are kissing children they
never expected to see again; brothers clasping the hands of sisters late
deemed lost for ever; husbands, nigh broken-hearted, once more happy,
holding their wives in fond, affectionate embrace.

Near by, things strangely contrasting--corpses strewn over the ground,
stark and bleeding, but not yet stiff, all of coppery complexion, but
bedaubed with paint of many diverse colours.  All surely savages.

A fearful spectacle, but one too often witnessed on the far frontier
land of Texas.



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

A FORCED CONFESSION.

The party of Texans has made what prairie men call a "coup."  On
counting the corpses of their slain enemies they find that at least
one-half of the Tenawa warriors have fallen, including their chief.
They can make an approximate estimate of the number that was opposed to
them by the signs visible around the camp, as also upon the trail they
have been for several days following.  Those who escaped have got off,
some on their horses, hastily caught and mounted; others afoot, by
taking to the timber.  They were not pursued, as it was still dark night
when the action ended, and by daylight these wild centaurs, well
acquainted with the country, will have scattered far and wide, beyond
all likelihood of being again encountered.

The settlers are satisfied at having recovered their relatives, as also
their stolen stock.  As to the Rangers, enough has been accomplished to
slake their revengeful thirst--for the time.  These last, however, have
not come off unscathed; for the Comanches, well armed with guns, bows,
and lances, did not die unresistingly.  In Texas Indians rarely do, and
never when they engage in a fight with Rangers.  Between them and these
border _guerrilleros_--in one sense almost as much savages as
themselves--war is an understood game--to the bitter end, with no
quarter either asked or given.

The Rangers count three of their number killed and about twice as many
wounded--enough, considering the advantage they had in their unwarned
attack upon enemies who for once proved unwatchful.

When the conflict has finally come to a close, and daylight makes
manifest the result, the victors take possession of the spoil--most of
it their own property.  The horses that strayed or stampeded during the
fight are again collected into a drove--those of the Indians being
united to it.  This done, only a short stay is intended--just long
enough to bury the bodies of the three Rangers who have been killed, get
stretchers prepared for such of the wounded as are unable to sit in the
saddle, and make other preparations for return towards the settlements.

They do not hasten their departure through any apprehension of a
counter-attack on the side of the Comanches.  Fifty Texan Rangers--and
there are this number of them--have no fear on any part of the plains,
so long as they are mounted on good horses, carry rifles in their hands,
bowie-knives and pistols in their belts, with a sufficient supply of
powder in their flasks, and bullets in their pouches.  With all these
items they are amply provided; and were there now any necessity for
continuing the pursuit, or the prospect of striking another coup, they
would go on, even though the chase should conduct them into the defiles
of the Rocky Mountains.  To pursue and slay the savage is their
vocation, their duty, their pastime and pleasure.

But the settlers are desirous of a speedy return to their homes, that
they may relieve the anxiety of other dear ones, who there await them.
They long to impart the glad tidings they will take with them.

While the preparations for departure are going on, Cully--who, with
several others, has been collecting the arms and accoutrements of their
slain enemies--gives utterance to a cry that brings a crowd of his
comrades around him.

"What is it, Nat?" inquires the Ranger captain.

"Look hyar, cap!  D'ye see this gun?"

"Yes; a hunter's rifle.  Whose is it?"

"That's jess the questyin; though thar ain't no questyin about it.
Boys, do any o' ye recognise this hyar shootin' iron?"

One after another the Rangers step up, and look at the rifle.

"I do," says one.

"And I," adds another.

And a third, and fourth, make the same affirmation, all speaking in
tones of surprise.

"Walt Wilder's gun," continues Cully, "sure an' sartin.  I know it, an
oughter know it.  See them two letters in the stock thar--`WW.'  Old Nat
Cully hez good reezun to recconise them, since 'twas hisself that cut
'em.  I did it for Walt two yeern ago, when we war scoutin' on the
Collyrado.  It's his weepun, an' no mistake."
