fighting again, and all the more if it is against kinsmen of the Bretons,
against whom he feels a special grudge."

"The feeling would be more natural the other way," Harold said smiling,
"seeing that he inflicted upon them far greater damage than he received.
You will find fresh horses awaiting you. None of those that carried us from
Bosham yesterday are fit for another such journey to-day."

Wulf had told Osgod the first thing in the morning that he could return to
his family for a few days, only coming to the palace to serve his meals,
and he now hurried away to the armourer's shop, where he found that but
little work was going on, the men being absorbed in listening to Osgod's
account of his adventures. Ulred and the men rose and saluted respectfully
as Wulf entered.

"I am sorry to disturb you, Ulred," he said, "but I have come to fetch
Osgod away again. That is if he would prefer riding with me to remaining
quiet with you at home."

"If you are going, master, assuredly I am going with you," Osgod said. "I
am dry with talking already, and father must wait for the rest of my story
until I come back again. Are we going down to Steyning, my lord?"

"There first and afterwards elsewhere, but that is all I can tell you now.
The horses are ready, and there is not a moment to lose. We must get as far
on our way as possible before nightfall, for the matter is an urgent one."

"I am ready," Osgod said, girding on his sword and putting his cap on his
head. "Good-bye, father. Tell mother I shall be back when I am back, and
that is all I can say about it."

They reached Steyning at two o'clock on the following afternoon, and
messengers were instantly sent round to the farms, bidding the men who were
bound as housecarls to appear on horseback and armed, with two days' food
in their wallets, an hour before daybreak next morning. Then a messenger
was despatched with a letter to the prior of Bramber, telling him of Wulf's
safe return, and begging him to excuse his coming over to see him, as he
had ridden nigh a hundred and fifty miles in three days, and was forced to
set out again at daybreak the next morning. As Wulf had hoped, the letter
was answered by the prior in person, and to him Wulf related that evening
the incidents of their stay in Normandy.

The prior shook his head.

"I have feared ever since I heard that Harold had fallen into the clutches
of the duke, that he would never get off scot free, but would either have
to pay a heavy ransom or make some concessions that would be even worse for
England. It is a bad business, Wulf, a bad business. The church has ever
been ready to grant absolution from oaths extracted by violence, but this
affair of the relics makes it more serious, and you may be sure that
William will make the most of the advantage he has gained. Harold is
absolutely powerless to fulfil his oath. Neither he nor the king, nor any
other man, can force a foreign monarch upon free England. And did Harold
declare for the Duke of Normandy, powerful and beloved as he is, he would
be driven into exile instantly. If he himself is elected king by the
people, as there is no doubt whatever will be the case, he must needs obey
their voice, and will have no choice between being King of England or an
exile. Still it is unfortunate. He will be branded as a perjurer. William's
influence may even induce the pope to excommunicate him, and although the
ban would go for but little here, it would serve as an excuse for the other
great earls to refuse to submit to his authority. Now tell me, how is it
that you have to ride again so suddenly when but just arrived?"

"I can tell you, father, though I can tell no one else. Harold has ordered
us to bring out our housecarls, and with them he means to deal a blow
against the Welsh, who have been devastating our western counties. The
expedition is to be secret and sudden, although against what point and in
what manner the blow is to be struck Harold has kept his own counsel."

"The Welsh are ever a thorn in our side," the prior said, "and treaties
with them are useless. I trust that Harold will succeed in thoroughly
reducing them to obedience, for whenever there is trouble in the kingdom
they take advantage of it, and are ready to form alliances with any
ambitious earl who hoists the standard of revolt. And so you say Harold has
already made you full thane? I am well pleased to hear it, if for no other
reason than that it is good for people when they are ruled over by their
own lord and not by a stranger; though I say nothing against Egbert,
Harold's steward. Still no man can rule like the master himself."

At the first dawn of day Wulf mounted, and rode away from the palace
followed by Osgod. He was clad now in the ringed armour, a suit of which he
had had made of lighter material than usual. Only on the shoulders and over
the chest was the leather of the usual thickness, elsewhere it was thin and
extremely soft, and the rings did not overlap each other as much as usual.
The weight, therefore, was much less than that ordinarily worn by thanes,
although it differed but little from it in appearance. The helmet, also,
was of stout leather, thickly covered with metal rings, and the flap fell
down over the neck and ears, having a bar coming down in front to protect
the nose.

Osgod's suit was thicker and heavier, and was similar to that of the forty
men who were drawn up in two lines under the soldier whom Harold had sent
down to train them. They were a stout set of young fellows, well mounted
and armed, and as they broke into a cry of "Welcome to our thane," Wulf
felt proud to command such a body.

"Thanks, my friends," he said heartily. "I am glad to see that not one is
missing from your number, and feel sure that you will do credit to my
banner."

They rode that day to Fareham, where they received a hearty welcome from
Beorn, and starting in the morning with his troop of thirty men, reached
Salisbury late that evening. They were met at the entrance to the town by
one of Harold's officers, who conducted them to a large barn, where straw
had been thickly strewn for the men to sleep on. The horses were fastened
outside.

"Earl Harold arrived an hour since," the officer said, "and bade me tell
you that he is lodged at the reeve's, where he expects you."

They found on arriving at the house that many of the thanes had already
come in, and that some six hundred horsemen were bestowed in the town. On a
great sideboard were pies, cold joints of meat, wine and ale, and each
thane as he arrived helped himself to such food as he desired, and then
joined the party gathered round Harold.

"We shall pick up another hundred or two as we march along to-morrow,"
Harold was saying when the two young thanes joined the group, "and shall
have a good nine hundred men by the time we reach Gloucester, where I
expect to find four or five hundred more awaiting us. I hear that our
coming has made a great stir here in Salisbury, the citizens do not know
what to make of so large a body of housecarls arriving in their midst. The
reeve tells me that they were in some fear of being eaten out of house and
home until they heard that we were to march on in the morning; after that
they did their best for us, and have arranged that every man shall have his
fill of meat and ale to-night, and again before starting."

Travelling as fast and as far as the horses could carry them, the force
reached Gloucester. Here they received an even warmer welcome than had
greeted them elsewhere, for the citizens had been greatly alarmed at the
Welsh forays, and as soon as they knew that the great earl himself was with
the troops they had no doubt that he had come to give them protection and
to punish their enemies. The contingents from Somerset and Dorset had
already arrived, and without the delay of a single day the troops again
started.

The housecarls, although mounted, were not trained to fight on horseback.
Their steeds were valuable only as enabling them to move with greater
celerity across the country than they could do on foot, and to bring them
fresh and in fighting condition to the scene of action. Once there they
dismounted, and a portion being told off to look after the horses, the main
body advanced on foot against the enemy.

There was yet a long ride before them. Following the Severn on its western
side so as to avoid the passage of the Avon, they rode to Worcester, and
then up through Dudley and Shrewsbury.

It would have been shorter to have passed through Hereford and Ludlow, but
Harold feared that they might there come upon some marauding party of the
Welsh, and any of these who escaped might carry the news across the border,
when the fleet-footed mountaineers would quickly have conveyed it to the
Welsh king at his castle at Rhuddlaw. Rhuddlaw, now a small village, is
situated in Denbighshire, and was an important military position, situated
as it was at no great distance from the sea, and commanding the Vale of
Clwyd, the most important avenue into Wales from the north. From Shrewsbury
they pushed forward as rapidly as possible to Rhuddlaw; but quickly as they
had journeyed, the news of their coming was borne more rapidly. Griffith
received the news an hour before their arrival, and mounting, rode down to
the Avon and embarked on board ship.

Great was the disappointment of the earl and his followers when they found
that the object of their long march across England had failed, and that the
capture of the Welsh king, which would have put an end to the trouble, had
been missed so narrowly. The castle was at once set on fire, the Welsh
ships on the Avon were also given to the flames, and the very same day
Harold led his troops away and by easy marches took them back to
Gloucester. Here they halted. The housecarls from the south, who had never
been in contact with the Welsh, were inclined to murmur among themselves at
having been led back without striking a blow, but the contingents from the
western counties, who had had experience of this wild warfare, told them
that they might consider themselves fortunate.

"You know not what a war with these savages is," an old housecarl who had
fought them again and again said to a listening group of Wulf's men. "You
might as well fight with the evil spirits of the air as with them. Fight!
there is no fighting in it, save when they have with them Danes from the
North, or Norwegians. With these to bear the brunt of the battle the Welsh
will fight valiantly in their fashion, but alone they know that they cannot
withstand us for a moment. I have been after them a score of times, and it
is a night-mare. You go up hills and through forests, you plunge into
morasses, you scramble up precipices; you are wet, you are hungry, you are
worn out, but never do you catch sight of one of them.

"Now and then, as you wind along the face of a hill, rocks will come
thundering down; in the woods and swamps you hear their mocking yells and
laughter. At the end of the day you drop down where you halt, and then just
as you fall off to sleep there is a wild yell, and in a moment they are
swarming among you, slashing and ripping with their long knives, crawling
on the ground and springing upon you, getting among the horses and
hamstringing or cutting them open. By the time those of you that are alive
have got together they have gone, and all is so quiet that were it not for
the scattered bodies you might believe that it was all a dream. Two or
three times before morning the attack will be repeated, until you are
forced to keep under arms in military array. As soon as it is light you
recommence your march, and so it goes on day after day, until at last,
worn-out and spent, and less in strength by half than when you started, you
gather under the shelter of the walls of one of the border towns.

"I should have been glad indeed if we had caught their king, for if he had
been held hostage in London we might have had peace; but well content am I
that Harold has abstained from entering upon a campaign which, terrible as
it is even in summer, would be beyond endurance of the strongest in
winter."

"Well, for my part," Osgod, who was one of the listeners, remarked, "I
would rather go on by myself and take the chance of getting a good blow at
some of these wild men than ride all the way back to Steyning to be laughed
at by the women there, as brave soldiers who have marched across England
and back and never unsheathed their swords. Nor will I believe that Earl
Harold can intend so to make a laughing-stock of us. The Bretons were just
as active as are these Welshmen, but he brought them to reason there, and I
warrant me he will do the same here. At any rate, he seems in no hurry to
move. We have been here nigh a week already, and why should he keep us here
if we are not to be employed?"

It was not very long before it became known that Harold had no intention of
marching away and leaving the Welsh unpunished, and that in the spring a
campaign on a great scale was to be undertaken against them. The thanes of
all the western counties were ordered to hold themselves in readiness to
join with their levies in the spring. The Somerset and Devon men were to
gather at Bristol, and thence to be conveyed by ships to the southern coast
of Wales; the troops at Gloucester were to march west, and Tostig was to
bring down a body of Northumbrian horse, and to enter Wales from Chester.
The housecarls, to their surprise, were ordered to lay aside their ringed
armour and heavy helmets, in place of which leather jerkins and caps were
served out to them; their heavy axes were to be left behind, and they were
to trust to the sword alone. They were to abandon the tactics in which
they had been trained of fighting shoulder to shoulder, with shield
overlapping shield, and were to exercise themselves in running and
climbing, in skirmishing with an imaginary foe, and rapidly gathering in
close formation to resist anticipated attack. Harold himself gave them
these instructions.

"You will have no foe to meet breast to breast," he said; "if we are to
conquer and to root out these hornets it must be by showing ourselves even
more active than they are. Speed and activity go for everything in a war
like this, while our own methods of fighting are absolutely useless. Unless
we make an end of this matter you may be called away from your homes once a
year to repel these attacks, while if you conquer now there will be no
Welsh foray again during your lifetime. Therefore it is worth while to make
a great effort, and for once to lay aside our own method of fighting. Your
commanders will see that all the exercises are well carried out, and will
report to me regarding those who show most zeal and energy. Extra pay will
be given to all, and I shall know how to reward those who are reported to
me as most deserving of it."

The troops set to work with great energy, and soon recognized the advantage
they gained by laying aside their heavy arms and armour. Swimming, running,
and climbing were practised incessantly, and when May arrived, and with it
the time for the commencement of the campaign, all felt confident of their
ability to cope with the Welsh in their own methods of warfare.




CHAPTER IX.


IN THE WELSH VALLEYS.

Wulf and Beorn did not form part of the expedition which was to embark with
Harold from Bristol, and to enter Wales by one of its southern valleys. It
was necessary that the gathering of the levies at Gloucester should be
strengthened by having as a nucleus three hundred trained soldiers. The
levies were lightly armed, and accustomed to fight in the same irregular
manner as their Welsh adversaries, whom they held in considerable dread,
for the fierce hillmen had again and again proved themselves more than a
match for the peaceable natives on the English side of the border. The
addition then of three hundred housecarls was required to give them
confidence. These had indeed abandoned for the time their armour, heavy
weapons, and solid formation, but they could still were it necessary gather
in a line, behind which the levies could rally, and which would be
impregnable to the undisciplined attacks of the Welsh.

The young thanes were somewhat disappointed at finding that they were not
to accompany the earl, but, as he told them, it was a mark of his
confidence that he should post them with the force where the fighting was
likely to be more severe and the risk greater than with that he himself
led.

"I shall penetrate into the heart of Wales," he said. "I shall have
horsemen with me, a strong force of trained soldiers and the levies, and
the enemy will, I feel sure, be unable to oppose us successfully; but it is
likely enough that when the Welsh find that my force from the south and
Tostig's from the north cannot be withstood, they will pour out on their
eastern frontier, and try to light such a flame in Worcester, Hereford, and
Gloucester, that we should be obliged to abandon our work, and hurry back
to stem the tide of their invasion. It is necessary therefore that from
this side also there should be a forward movement. My brother, Gurth, will
command here. I have strongly recommended you to him. Your experience in
the Breton war will be of assistance to you, and I have told him that you
can be far better trusted than many older than yourselves in carrying out
expeditions among their hills and valleys.

"I do not anticipate there will be any pitched battles; the Welsh know that
they cannot withstand our trained soldiers. It will be a war of
skirmishes, of detached fighting, of surprises, long marches, and great
fatigues. Every valley in the country is to be harried with fire and sword.
They are to be made to feel that even in their mountains they are not safe
from us, and as they never take prisoners nor give quarter in the forays on
our side of the border, so we will hunt them down like wolves in their own
forests. The work must be done so thoroughly that for a hundred years at
least the lesson will not be forgotten."

In the last week of May Gurth moved forward, marching first to Hereford as
a more central point of attack, and then crossing the border and entering
Wales. The troops carried no heavy baggage. Meat they expected to find;
flour was carried on two hundred pack-horses. The force was about 4000
strong. The housecarls marched in a body, keeping solid order. Behind them
came the pack animals, each led separately, so that they could the more
easily make their way through forests or over broken ground. They marched
in lines, forty abreast. The light-armed levies, led by their respective
thanes, moved as they chose on the flanks of the trained troops or followed
in the rear.

When they halted on the first evening after crossing the frontier they
lighted their fires and bivouacked. Wulf and Beorn walked together through
the camp.

"In spite of the fact that they are all dressed somewhat alike in leather
jerkins, it is easy to see which are the trained soldiers," Wulf said. "The
housecarls are as merry over the food they have brought with them as if
they were going upon a march of pleasure through the hills, while the
border levies evidently regard the business as a serious one."

"That is no wonder," Beorn replied, "seeing how for years they have
suffered at the hands of the Welsh. Look at those hills, Wulf, I can count
a dozen beacons alight. Of course, they have heard of the preparations for
attack, and they are flashing the news from hill to hill of the advance of
our force. It will not be long before they gather to oppose us."

"It is like enough they may attack us to-night, Beorn. They may have had
spies at Hereford, and will have known two days ago of our coming. They may
reckon that we should anticipate no attack until farther among their hills,
and that we shall in consequence be careless, as in truth we seem to be. I
think it would be well to offer Gurth our housecarls to stand sentry
to-night."

"He might laugh at us," Beorn said doubtfully.

"Well, let him laugh; he will laugh good-humouredly anyhow, for he is of a
kindly and light-hearted disposition. At any rate there cannot be any harm
in proposing it, and after the surprise we got from the Bretons we cannot
be too cautious."

They walked to the fire where Gurth was sitting with four or five of his
friends, all of whom had furnished bodies of housecarls. The border thanes
had by his orders each remained with his own following, so that at all
times they should be in readiness to give orders and lead them in case of
surprise.

"Where have you been, young thanes?" Gurth asked. "You slipped away as soon
as our meal was finished, as if you were afraid of the wine-cup."

"We care not much for drinking," Beorn said, "and have been going through
the force to see how it was disposed. We have come to offer that our men
shall to-night furnish guards for the camp."

"There is no occasion for it," Gurth said, "the Welshmen will not attack us
until we are entangled among their hills."

"It depends upon how well they are led, my Lord Gurth," Wulf said. "If they
are well led they may attack us to-night, for they must know of our
approach, and will think it probable that we shall, being so near our own
border, be at first careless. The Bretons gave us just such a lesson, and
inflicted heavy loss upon the Norman army."

"Well, post your men as you like," Gurth said; "though it seems to me that
it would be better for them to husband their strength for to-morrow's
march."

"They shall have half a night's sleep each," Wulf said.

"If I had not known how stoutly you fought, and how your courage saved the
Norman camp, I should have said you were over-cautious," Gurth laughed.
"However I will not refuse your offer, young thanes, though methinks there
is no chance whatever of the Welsh disturbing us here."

Having obtained the permission, Beorn and Wulf returned to the fires of
their men.

"We are to have the honour of furnishing the guards to-night, Osgod. Tell
the men that Gurth relies upon our watchfulness. We don't want a
repetition of the surprise we had from the Bretons. It will be but a short
night's watch. 'Tis nine now, and by four it will be broad daylight.
Beorn's men and ours will march a hundred yards out from the camp. Half can
lie down to sleep at once, the other half we can post as sentries and
relieve them at half-past twelve. An attack if it comes will come from the
front, therefore we will post the men twenty or thirty yards apart along
there, and for some distance round the flanks. One of us will remain with
the party that lies down, so as to be in readiness to lead them at once
against any point attacked, the other will move round and round to see that
the sentries are vigilant."

"That is good news to me," Osgod said. "Methinks that affair in the Breton
wood has shaken my courage, for I have been looking at those trees in front
of us, and wondering whether the Welsh are gathering there, and thinking
how it would be with all these raw levies if they came down upon us
to-night It went hard for a bit with the Normans, tried soldiers though
they were, but I would not trust these levies to stand for a moment, for
they hold the Welsh in mighty respect."

The men cheerfully took their arms and fell in. They considered it a
compliment that they had been chosen to furnish the first guard. Beorn's
men, with a portion of Wulf's, were to furnish the first line of sentries.
The two young thanes, accompanied by Osgod, went round with them and posted
them, after giving them strict injunctions to be watchful and vigilant.

"These savages," Beorn said, "will creep up through the grass as
noiselessly as cats, so you must keep your ears as well as your eyes well
open; and if you hear but the breaking of a twig challenge at once. Then,
if they rise, shout the alarm at the top of your voice, and do the whole of
you run back to us here if the cry comes from the front, if from either
flank hurry to that spot, and we shall do the same from here; but be
careful not to rouse the camp by a false alarm, for if you do, instead of
gaining credit we shall become the jest of the whole force."

When the sentries were placed, Beorn, with the leader of his band, began to
go the rounds, while Wulf and Osgod returned to their party.

"You can sleep, master, while I watch beside you," Osgod said. "I could not
sleep if I lay down, for I have got the yells of those Bretons in my ears,
and could not close an eye."

"Very well, Osgod; in that case I may as well take a nap."

He was soon sound asleep, and remained so until Osgod touched him. He sat
up in a moment.

"By the stars it is past midnight, my lord, and it is time for us to
