
"About sixty dollars."

"You're unlucky, that's a fact. Have you nothing left?"

Just then it flashed across Herbert's mind that when he had paid for his
supper he had changed a five-dollar bill, and placed the balance, about
four dollars and a half in his vest pocket. He at once felt in that
pocket, and found it still there. Greenleaf had contented himself with
the pocketbook.

"I have a little left," he said.

He paid for his room in advance for another day, and went down to
breakfast.




CHAPTER XXIII

A BUSINESS CALL


It was certainly a startling discovery for Herbert to make, that out of
sixty dollars he had only four left, now that he had paid for another
day at the hotel, and this small sum must be further diminished by the
expense of a breakfast. Unfortunately, too, he was quite hungry, for his
misfortune had not taken away his appetite.

"I will make a good breakfast, at any rate," said Herbert,
philosophically. "Afterwards, I will consider what to do."

He ordered a substantial breakfast, which, even at the low prices of a
dozen years ago, amounted to fifty cents, and did full justice to what
was set before him.

After paying at the desk, he went outside.

It was a bright, sunshiny morning, and this, with the comfortable
feeling produced by having eaten a good breakfast, gave him courage for
the new career upon which he was about to enter.

While considering what he should do first, the thought of the letter
given him by Mr. Carroll flashed upon him. He felt for it hastily, and
was rejoiced to find that that was safe, at least. Greenleaf had not
taken that away, fortunately.

He looked at the direction. It was addressed to

"Messrs. Godfrey & Lynn,

"No. ---- Pearl St."

It was not sealed, and was probably meant to be read by Herbert. At
any rate, our hero so concluded, and opened the letter, not without
curiosity as to what Mr. Carroll had written about him. He knew it must
be favorable, of course, but found it even more so than he anticipated.

Here it is:

"MY DEAR MR. GODFREY: This letter will be handed you by a young friend
of mine, by name Herbert Mason. My acquaintance with him has been brief,
but he has been able, by his coolness and bravery, to do me a most
important service, having saved me from being robbed of a large sum of
money while acting as my escort from Ohio to Philadelphia. I have talked
with him freely about his plans, and find that he will reach New York
without friends, and with a very small sum of money, hoping before it
is gone to secure a place in some counting-room, where he can make an
honest living. I feel a strong interest in his success, and am persuaded
that wherever he is placed, he will show rare capacity and fidelity.
I wish it might be in your power to receive him into your own
counting-room. But, of course, that must be according to your
convenience. At any rate, may I rely on you to act a friendly part by
my young friend, and to exert your influence toward procuring him a
position elsewhere, if you cannot employ him yourself? Anything that you
may have it in your power to do for Herbert, I shall consider as a favor
done to myself.

I have just left my daughter, who, with her family, is well. Sincerely,
your friend,

JAMES CARROLL."

"That is a very kind letter," thought Herbert, gratefully. "I hope it
will do me good."

He decided to call and deliver it the same forenoon. If he had not been
robbed of nearly the whole of his small capital, he would, first, have
gone about the city, which was entirely new to him. But, with less than
four dollars between himself and utter destitution, he felt that he had
no time for sight-seeing. It was necessary that he should get to work as
soon as possible.

He waited till ten o'clock, thinking it possible that the heads of the
firm might not reach the counting-room till about that time. It was now
eight o'clock only. He had two hours, therefore, to look about him.

"Shine yer boots?" said a ragged urchin, approaching, with a suggestive
look at his soiled shoes.

It occurred to Herbert that it would be best to look as well as possible
when visiting Godfrey.

"Ten cents."

"It's too much," said Herbert, thinking how few dimes constituted his
entire worldly wealth.

"Well, five, then," said the bootblack, coming down to his regular
price.

"Do you get much to do?" asked our hero.

"Some days I get considerable."

"How much do you make?"

"Pleasant days I makes a dollar, but when it rains, there ain't much to
do."

"How much do you have to pay for sleeping?"

"Six cents."

"Six cents!" repeated Herbert, in surprise. "Where can you get lodged
for that?"

"At the lodgin' house, corner of Fulton and Nassau Streets."

"Well," thought Herbert, "I needn't starve. If I can't get anything
better to do, I can buy a box of blacking and a brush, and set up in
business for myself."

To be sure, this would not be an agreeable occupation, but Herbert was
bound to make a living by honest labor. If one avenue was closed to
him, he must enter such as were open to him. He could not afford to be
particular.

After his shoes were brushed, he crossed the park, and walked up
Broadway. It was a wonderful sight to the country-bred boy, this gay
thoroughfare, with its busy and bustling crowds, and its throngs of
vehicles, never ceasing wholly, save at the dead hours of night. He
thought to himself what a quantity of business there must be to do.
Certainly, there must be room for one more worker. So, on the whole, the
busy scene gave him courage, and he sauntered along as cheerfully as if
he were not next-door to a beggar.

But at last the time came when he might safely seek out the gentleman
to whom he had an introduction. Being a stranger in the city, he had to
inquire for Pearl Street from a policeman, who answered his inquiry
very civilly. He followed the direction, and found it at length. But the
number of which he was in search was not so easily found, for he found
the street meandered in a very perplexing way, so that at times he was
not quite sure whether he was still in it, or had wandered from his way.

At last he found the place. It was a large, solid-looking building,
of four stories in height. There were a number of boxes outside on the
sidewalk. Inside, there was a large apartment occupying the entire
first floor, with the exception of a room in the rear, which had been
partitioned off for a counting-room. The partition was of glass, and, as
he looked from the entrance, he could see a couple of high desks and a
table.

"Is this Godfrey & Lynn's?" he asked of a porter at the entrance.

"Yes," said the porter.

"I want to see Mr. Godfrey."

"I don't think he's in. You can go to the office and inquire."

Accordingly, Herbert passed down the length of the warehouse, and,
pausing a moment before the door, he opened it, and entered.

There were two persons in the office. One was a thin-faced man, who sat
on a high stool at one of the desks, making entries apparently in the
ledger. This was the bookkeeper, Mr. Pratt, a man with a melancholy
face, who looked as if he had lived to see the vanity of all things
earthly. He had a high forehead naturally--made still higher by the loss
of his front hair. Apparently, he was not a man to enjoy conviviality,
or to shine on any festive occasion.

Besides Mr. Pratt, there was a boy, if we may take the liberty of
calling him such, of about Herbert's age. He was fashionably dressed,
and his hair was arranged with exceeding care. In fact, as Herbert
entered, he was examining the set of his necktie in a little hand-glass,
which he had taken from his coat pocket. Not quite suiting him, he set
himself to rearranging it.

"Have you copied that bill, Thomas?" asked Mr. Pratt, looking up.

"Not yet, sir."

"You have been long enough about it. Put back that glass. You are quite
too much troubled about your appearance."

"Yes, sir.

"If I didn't look any better than some people," said Thomas, sotto voce,
"I shouldn't look in a glass very often."

Herbert naturally concluded that Mr. Pratt was the man to whom his
inquiries should be addressed.

"I would like to see Mr. Godfrey, sir." he said.

"He is out of the city."

"Out of the city!" repeated Herbert, disappointed. "When will he be
back?"

"Nor till day after to-morrow."

Herbert's countenance fell. In his reduced circumstances, he could
hardly afford to wait two days. At his present rate of expenditure, he
would be penniless by that time.

"Is Mr. Lynn likely to be in soon?" he asked, thinking that perhaps he
would do in Mr. Godfrey's absence.

"No; he is sick at home. He may not be here for a week. Perhaps, I can
attend to your business," he added. "What is it?"

"I think," said Herbert, "that I will wait till day after to-morrow, if
you think Mr. Godfrey will be back then. I have a letter for him."

"If it's a business letter, you had better leave it."

"It is a letter of introduction," said Herbert. "I would rather present
it in person."

"Very well," and Mr. Pratt went back to his ledger.

Thomas looked critically at the boy who had a letter of introduction
to Mr. Godfrey, and said to himself, "He got his clothes from a country
tailor, I'll bet a hat."




CHAPTER XXIV

FINDING A BOARDING PLACE


Herbert left the counting-room of Godfrey & Lynn, not a little depressed
in spirits. The two days which must elapse before he could see Mr.
Godfrey were to him a formidable delay. By that time his money would be
almost exhausted. Then, suppose, which was very probable, Mr. Godfrey
could do nothing for him immediately, but only hold out his promise of
future assistance, how was he to live in the meantime? After all, he
might have to realize his thought of the morning, and join the ranks
of the bootblacks. That was not a pleasant thought to a boy of
his education. All labor is honorable, to be sure, but, then, some
occupations are more congenial than others.

If Greenleaf had not robbed him so basely, he could have afforded to
wait. He felt sore and indignant about that. Nobody likes to own that he
has been victimized, but Herbert was obliged to confess to himself that
such was the case with him.

He walked about rather aimlessly, feeling miserable enough. But, all at
once, it occurred to him, "Would it not be cheaper for him to take board
by the week in some boarding-house?" Reckoning up, he found that his
hotel bill would be three dollars and a half a week, while his meals,
even if he were quite abstemious, would make as much more; in all, seven
dollars. Surely, he could be boarded somewhere for less than that.

In the reading-room of the hotel he found a daily paper, and carefully
ran his eye down the advertisements for boarders and lodgers. The
following attracted his attention:

"BOARDERS WANTED.--A few mechanics may obtain comfortable rooms and
board at No. ---- Stanton Street, at three dollars per week."

This, be it remembered, was previous to the war, and before the price of
board had doubled.

"Three dollars a week!" repeated Herbert. "Less than half my present
rate of expense. I must go at once and secure it."

He found the way to Stanton Street, and found that No. ---- was a
shabby-looking house in a shabby neighborhood. But he could not afford
to be fastidious. He accordingly stepped up without hesitation, and rang
the bell, which emitted a shrill sound in reply.

A middle-aged woman, with a red handkerchief tied around her head, and a
broom in her hand, opened the door and looked inquiringly at our hero.

"What's wanted?" she said.

"I saw your advertisement for boarders," said Herbert.

"Yes; I advertised in the paper this morning."

"Will you let me see your rooms?"

"Who are you looking for?"

"Myself."

"I don't know as you'll be suited. My price is low, and I can't give
first-class accommodations for three dollars."

"No; I suppose not."

"Come up, if you would like to see what I've got."

The interior of the house was shabby like the outside, the oilcloth
carpet faded, and the wall paper torn off in places. The stairs, too,
were narrow and uncarpeted. All this Herbert observed, but he could not
afford to be critical.

On the third floor, his guide threw open the door of a dark, little hall
bedroom, meagerly furnished.

"I could give you this room by yourself," she said, "or a larger room
with someone else."

"I would rather be alone."

"That's the only single room I have. Will you take it?"

"I think so," said Herbert, though he did not anticipate much enjoyment
in such a poor place.

"When do you want to come?"

"To-morrow morning."

"Very well. I shall expect a deposit, so that I may be sure the room is
let."

"How much?"

"A dollar will do."

Herbert drew a dollar from his pocket, and handed it to Mrs. Morgan, for
such, she informed him, was her name.

Then he went downstairs and out into the air again.

"Well," he said to himself, "I'm sure of a home, such as it is, for a
week. In that time something must turn up."

Examining his pocketbook he found that he had two dollars and a half
left. Of that sum, two dollars must be reserved to pay the balance of
his week's board. Out of the remaining fifty cents he must pay for his
meals until the next morning, when he would take possession of his new
boarding place. He wished that he had proposed to come to breakfast, but
it was too late now.

With such a small sum in hand, he could not afford to dine on the
same magnificent scale as he had breakfasted, but he must be rigidly
economical. He decided that the cheapest food he could buy was a
five-cent loaf at some baker's. This would probably last him through the
day, and might prove sufficient for breakfast also, since he would
take a regular dinner, though he doubted, from what he had seen of the
establishment in Stanton Street, whether it would be a very inviting
repast. But it was the best he could afford, and that was all he need
consider.

Late in the afternoon, it occurred to Herbert to wonder where, in the
city, his Uncle Stanton lived. Not that he had any intention of applying
to him for assistance, even if matters came to a crisis, but he felt
a natural curiosity as to how his uncle was situated. He found the
directory readily, and, turning to the letter S, ran down the list of
names till he came to Stanton, Benjamin.

He learned that his uncle's store was in the lower part of Broadway,
while his house was in West Seventeenth Street, between Fifth and Sixth
Avenues.

"I should like to see what sort of a house Uncle Benjamin lives in,"
thought Herbert.

There was nothing to prevent his gratifying this wish, as he had plenty
of time on his hands. If he had had more money, he would have taken the
horse cars, but in his present circumstances this would be imprudent.
He decided, as it was only five o'clock, to take a leisurely walk up
Broadway, noticing his uncle's place of business on the way.

A few minutes brought him in front of the latter--an imposing-looking
building, with all the appearance of belonging to a prosperous merchant.
Appearances are deceitful, to be sure, and no doubt there are some
merchants, as outwardly prosperous, who might profitably change places
with their head clerks. But Herbert naturally judged from appearances,
and he could not help contrasting in his mind his own condition with
that of his uncle's. But he was too manly to be despondent on this
account, and thought rather, "I am young and ready to work, Some time,
if I am patient and work hard. I may be as well off as Uncle Benjamin."
The thought of applying to him for assistance was as far off as ever.

He pursued his way uptown, finding it a longer walk than he anticipated,
arriving at half-past five at Union Square. At the upper end he turned
off, and went down Seventeenth Street.

Carefully noting the numbers, he at length found his uncle's house. It
was a handsome, substantial city mansion, and seemed appropriate as the
residence of a rich New York merchant.

"So my uncle lives here," thought Herbert, and there rose involuntarily
in his mind the memory of the humble Western home where he and his
mother had struggled against poverty, while his uncle, who was evidently
so amply provided with the world's goods, coldly held aloof, and forbore
to offer the assistance which he could so well afford.

"If I had a sister, I could never treat her like that," thought Herbert,
indignantly. "He would not help my mother. I will starve before I ask
him to help me."

He paused a moment on the opposite side of the street to look at his
uncle's house. While he was standing there, a boy of about his own age,
apparently, came down the street whistling, and ascended the steps of
his uncle's house.

"I wonder if that is my cousin Tom," thought Herbert. He knew the names
of his cousins from his mother, though he had never seen them.

While he looked, he was struck by something familiar in the appearance
of this boy. Where had he seen him before?

All at once it flashed upon him. It was the same boy he had seen in
the counting-room of Godfrey He knew him by his dandified dress and his
face, which he had noticed at the time.

This was certainly a strange coincidence, that his cousin, for it was
doubtless he, should be the first boy he encountered after reaching
New York. It would be still stranger if Mr. Godfrey should offer him
employment, and he should find himself a clerk in the same office as the
son of his rich uncle. But it was by no means certain that he would be
lucky enough to obtain such employment. Therefore there was no need of
wondering whether, under such circumstances, Tom would recognize him as
a relation.

Herbert walked thoughtfully back, and on reaching his room ate the
remainder of the loaf which he had purchased at the baker's in the
