those who had heard the news that waited them there.

I knew not how to bear this meeting, but I was not alone in my
trouble, for nearer me crept Osritha, saying to me alone, while the
people cheered and shouted:

"How shall we tell Halfden?"

The two jarls were busy at the mooring place, and I could only
answer her that I could look to her alone for help. Now at that I
knew what had sprung up in my heart for Osritha, and that not in
this only should I look for help from her and find it, but if it
might be, all my life through. For now in my trouble she looked at
me with a new look, answering:

"I will help you, whatever betide."

I might say no more then, nor were words needed, for I knew all
that she meant. And so my heart was lightened, for now I held that
I was repaid for all that had gone before, and save for that which
had brought me here, gladly would I take my perilous voyage over
again to find this land and the treasure it now held for me.

At last the ship's keel grated on the sand, and the men sprang from
shore waist deep in water, to take her the mighty cables that
should haul her into her berth; and then the long gangplank was run
out, and Halfden came striding along it, looking bright and
handsome--and halfway over, he stopped where none could throng him,
and lifting his hand for silence cried for all to hear.

"Hearken all to good news! Lodbrok our Jarl lives!"

Then, alas! instead of the great cheer that should have broken from
the lips of all that throng, was at first a silence, and then a
groan--low and pitiful as of a mourning people who wail for the
dead and the sorrowful living--and at that sound Halfden paled, and
stayed no more, hurrying ashore and to where his brothers stood.

"What is this?" he said, and his voice was low, and yet clear in
the silence that had fallen, for all his men behind him had stopped
as if turned to stone where they stood.

Then from my side sprang Osritha before any could answer, meeting
him first of all, and she threw her arms round his neck, saying:

"Dead is Lodbrok our father, and nigh to death for his sake has
been Wulfric, your friend. Yet he at least is well, and here to
speak with you and tell you all."

Then for the great and terrible sorrow that came at the end of the
joyous homeward sailing, down on the hard sand Halfden the Jarl
threw himself, and there lay weeping as these wild Danes can weep,
for their sorrow is as terrible as their rage, and they will put no
bounds to the way of grief of which there is no need for shame. Nor
have they the hope that bids us sorrow not as they.

And while he lay there, all men held their peace, looking in one
another's faces, and only the jarls and Osritha and myself stood
near him.

Very suddenly he raised himself up, and was once more calm; then he
kissed the maiden, and grasped his brothers' hands, and then held
out both hands to me, holding mine and looking in my face.

"Other was the meeting I had planned for you and me, Wulfric, my
brother-in-arms. Yet you are most welcome, for you at least are
here to tell me of the days that are past."

"It is an ill telling," said Ingvar.

"That must needs be, seeing what is to be told," Hubba said
quickly.

But those wise words of Osritha's had made things easier for me,
for now Halfden knew that into the story of the jarl's death, I and
my doings must come, so Ingvar's words meant little to him.

"You went not to Reedham?" I said, for now the men were at work
again, and all was noise and bustle round us.

"I have come here first by Orkneys from Waterford, where we
wintered," he answered. "And I have been over sure that no mishap
might be in a long six months."

"What of the voyage?--let us speak of this hereafter," said Hubba.

And Halfden, wearily, as one who had lost all interest in his own
doings, told him that it had been good, and that Thormod would give
him the full tale of plunder.

Then came a chief from the ship whose face I knew, though he was
not of our crew. It was that Rorik whose ship the Bosham bell had
sunk, and who had been saved by Halfden's boats. He knew me, after
scanning me idly for a moment, and greeted me, asking why I was not
at Reedham to make that feast of which Halfden was ever speaking,
and so passed on.

So we went up to the great hall in silence, sorely cast down; and
that was Halfden's homecoming.

Little joy was there on the high place at the feast that night,
though at the lower tables the men of our crew (for so I must ever
think of those whose leader I had been for a little while, with
Halfden) held high revelling with their comrades. Many were the
tales they told, and when a tale of fight and victory was done, the
scald would sing it in verse that should be kept and sung by the
winter fire till new deeds brought new songs to take its place.

Presently Halfden rose up, after the welcome cup had gone round and
feasting was done, and the ale and mead began to flow, and he
beckoned me to come with him. Hubba would have come also, but
Ingvar held him back.

"Let Wulfric have his say first," he growled; and I thanked him in
my mind for his thought.

So we went to the inner chamber, where Osritha would sit with her
maidens, and Halfden said:

"This matter is filling all my thoughts so that I am but a gloomy
comrade at the board. Tell me all, and then what is done is done.
One may not fight against the Norn maidens {xiv}."

There I told him all my story, and he remembered how I had told
him, laughing, of Beorn's jealousy at first. And when my tale was
nearly done Osritha crept from her bower and came and sat beside
Halfden, pushing her hand into his, and resting her head on his
shoulder.

Then I ended quickly, saying that Ingvar had done justice on Beorn.
And at that remembrance the maiden shivered, and Halfden's face
showed that he knew what the man's fate was like to have been at
the great jarl's hands.

"So, brother," he said, when I left off speaking, "had I gone to
Reedham there would have been burnt houses in East Anglia."

"In Reedham?" said I.

"Wherever this Beorn had a house; and at Caistor where that old
fool Ulfkytel lives, and maybe at one or two other places on the
way thither. And I think your father and Egfrid your brother would
have helped me, or I them."

So he doubted me not at all, any more than I should have doubted
his tale, were he in my place and I in his.

Then I said that I myself had no grudge against Earl Ulfkytel, for
he had sent me here.

"Why then, no more have I," answered Halfden; "for he is a wiseacre
and an honest one, and maybe meant kindly. Ingvar would have slain
both guilty and innocent, and told them to take their wrangle
elsewhere, to Hela or Asgard as the way might lead them."

Now as he said that, I, who looked ever on the face of her whom I
loved, saw that a new fear had come into Osritha's heart, and that
she feared somewhat for me. Nor could I tell what it was. But
Halfden and I went on talking, and at last she could not forbear a
little sob, and at that Halfden asked what ailed her.

"May I speak to you, my brother, very plainly, of one thing that I
dread?" she asked, drawing closer to him.

"Aye, surely," he answered in surprise.

"Remember you the words that Ingvar said to the priest of the White
Christ who came from Ansgar at Hedeby {xv}, while our father
was away in the ships?"

"Why, they were like words. He bade him go and settle the matter
with Odin whom he would not reverence, and so slew him."

"Aye, brother. And he said that so he would do to any man who would
not honour the gods."

"Why do you remember that, Osritha?"

"Because--because there will be the great sacrifice tomorrow, and
Wulfric, your friend, is not of our faith."

Then Halfden was silent, looking across at me, and all at once I
knew that here was a danger greater than any I had yet been
through. Fire I had passed through, and water, and now it was like
to be trial by steel. And the first had tried my courage, and the
next my endurance, as I thought; but this would try both, and my
faith as well.

"That is naught," said Halfden, lightly. "It is but the signing of
Thor's hammer, and I have seen Wulfric do that many a time, only
not quite in our way, thus;" and he signed our holy sign all
unknowing, or caring not. "And to eat of the horse that is
sacrificed--why, you and I, Wulfric, did eat horse on the Frankish
shores; and you thought it good, being nigh starved--you remember?"

I remembered, but that was different; for that we did because the
shores were so well watched that we ran short of food, and had to
take what we could under cover of night at one time. But this of
which Osritha spoke was that which Holy Writ will by no means
suffer us to do--to eat of a sacrifice to idols knowingly, for that
would be to take part therein. Nor might I pretend that the holy
sign was as the signing of Thor's Hammer.

"Halfden," I said, having full trust in him, "I may not do this. I
may not honour the old gods, for so should I dishonour the White
Christ whom I serve."

"This is more than I can trouble about in my mind," said Halfden;
"but if it troubles you, I will help you somehow, brother Wulfric.
But you must needs come to the sacrifice."

"Cannot I go hunting?"

"Why, no; all men must be present. And to be away would but make
things worse, for there would be question."

Then I strengthened myself, and said that I must even go through
with the matter, and so would have no more talk about it. But
Osritha kept on looking sadly at me, and I knew that she was in
fear for me.

Now presently we began to talk of my home and how they would mourn
me as surely lost. And I said that this mourning would be likely to
hinder my sister's wedding for a while. And then, to make a little
more cheerful thought, I told Halfden what his father had said
about his wishing that he had been earlier with us.

"Why, so do I," said my comrade, laughing a little; "for many
reasons," he added more sadly, thinking how that all things would
have been different had he sailed back at once.

Then he must needs go back to the question of the sacrifice.

"Now I would that you would turn good Dane and Thor's man, and bide
here with us; and then maybe--"

But Osritha rose up quickly and said that she must begone, and so
bade us goodnight and went her way into the upper story of that end
of the great hall where her own place was. Whereat Halfden laughed
quietly, looking at me, and when she was quite gone, and the heavy
deerskins fell over the doorway, said, still smiling:

"How is this? It is in my mind that my father's wish might easily
come to pass in another way not very unlike."

That was plain speaking, nor would I hesitate to meet the kindly
look and smile, but said that indeed I had come to long that it
might be so. But I said that the jarl, his father, had himself
shown me that no man should leave his old faith but for better
reasons than those of gain, however longed for. For that is what he
had answered Eadmund the king when the land was offered him, and he
was asked to become a Christian.

"Yet if such a thing might be," said Halfden, "gladly would I hail
you as brother in very truth."

So we sat without speaking for a while, and then Halfden said that
were I to stand among the crowd of men on the morrow there would
surely be no notice taken of me.

Yet as I lay on my wolf skins at the head of the great hall, and
prayed silently--as was my wont among these heathen--I asked for
that same help that had been given to men of old time who were in
the same sore strait as I must very likely be in tomorrow.

Then came to me the thought: "What matters if outwardly I reverence
Thor and Odin while I inwardly deny them?" and that excuse had nigh
got the better of me. But I minded what our king had told me many a
time: how that in the first christening of our people it had ever
been held to be a denying of our faith to taste the heathen
sacrifices, or to bow the head in honour, even but outward, of the
idols, so that many had died rather than do so. And he had praised
those who thus gave up their life.

Then, too, I remembered the words of the Prior of Bosham concerning
martyrs. And we had been led to speak of them by this very question
as to sacrifice to the Danish gods. So I made up my mind that if I
might escape notice, I would do so--and if not, then would I bear
the worst.

So I fell asleep at last. And what it may have been I know
not--unless the wind as it eddied through the high windows clashed
some weapon against shield on the walls with a clear ringing
sound--but I woke with the voice of Bosham bell in my ears--and
Rorik and Halfden each in his place started also, and Rorik
muttered a curse before he lay down again, for he sat up, looking
wildly.

But greatly cheered with that token was I, for I knew that help was
not far from me, and after that I had no more fear, but slept
peacefully, though I thought it was like to be my last night on
earth.



CHAPTER X. WHAT BEFELL AT THE GREAT SACRIFICE.


Very early in the gray morning Halfden woke me, and he was fully
armed, while at the lower end of the hall the courtmen were rising
and arming themselves also, for Vikings must greet Odin as warriors
ready to do battle for him when Ragnaroek {xvi} and the last
great fight shall come.

"Rise and arm yourself," he said; "here are the arms in which you
fought well in your first fight, and axe and sword beside. Now you
shall stand with our crew, and so none of them will heed you, for
they love you, and know your ways are not as ours. So will all be
well."

Then I thanked him, for I surely thought it would be so; and I
armed myself, and that man who had been my own shield man when I
led the midship gang helped me. One thing only I wished, and that
was that I had the axe which Lodbrok made for me, for then, I told
the man, I should feel as a Viking again, and that pleased him.

"However," he said, "I think I have found an axe that is as near
like your own as may be."

And he had done so, having had that kindly thought for me. Then we
went out, for the horns were blowing outside the town in the ash
grove where the Ve, as they call the temple of Odin and Thor and
the other gods, was. And overhead, high and unseen in the air,
croaked the ravens, Odin's birds, scared from their resting places
by the tramp of men, yet knowing that their share in the feast was
to come.

I shivered, but the sound of the war horns, and the weight and
clank of the well-known arms, stirred my blood at last, and when we
fell in for our short march, Halfden and Thormod, Rorik and myself
leading our crew, I was ready for all that might come, if need for
a brave heart should be.

Silently we filed through the bare trunks of the ashes, the trees
of Thor, where many a twisted branch and dead trunk showed that the
lightning had been at work, until we came to the place of the Ve in
