
"I know not, my lord."

"I can tell you," said Redwald; "the banishment of the holy fox,
Dunstan, and very shame prevents my adding that--"

"No more," said Edwy; "I can guess the rest."

He wished to spare Elgiva.

He walked up and down the hall several times. His festive air had gone.

"And on my wedding day, too," he said. "Redwald, you knew this."

"Yes, my lord, but I wished to spare my king upon his wedding day, still
I have not spared myself. The necessary steps are taken, your immediate
vassals are summoned, and my own men are ready to march; we will sweep
these rebels off the field."

"Elfric," said the king, "you must be my right hand in the field: you
will be ready to invade your native Mercia tomorrow. Think you your own
friends are firm?"

"My father, although he has disowned me, would never disown his lawful
king; the duty and love he bore to your murdered father would forbid."

"Well, Redwald, have you known this many hours?"

"I heard it at the frontier town of Mercia, Reading, last night, and
took all my measures immediately."

"Then, can we really depend upon Wessex?"

"I treat so indeed, my lord, else we should be in a very bad way indeed."

"Well, we must rest now. Elgiva, darling, this is a cold termination to
our first anniversary, but your husband's love shall ever protect you
until he be cold in death.

"Goodnight, Elfric, be ready for the morrow.

"Goodnight, Redwald, trustiest warrior who ever served grateful lord.

"Goodnight, gentlemen all."

And thus the royal party broke up, and thus ended the first anniversary
of the ill-starred union.

On the morrow all was haste and confusion in the royal palace. Elgiva
departed early for Winchester, which, being farther removed from the
frontier, was safer than London from any sudden excursion on the part of
the Mercians, and the city was also devoted to the royal family. The
citizens of London were directed to provide for the defence of their
city, while the royal guards, attended by the immediate vassals of the
crown, prepared to march into the heart of the rebellious district.

It is too often supposed that the feudal system was of Norman
importation, whereas its very foundation--the act of homage, or of
"becoming your man,"--was brought by the Saxons and Angles from their
German home. The lord was the protector of the vassal, but the vassal
was bound to attend his feudal superior both in peace and war.

So imperative was this obligation, that a vassal who abandoned his lord
in the field of battle was liable to the death of a traitor.

Therefore Edwy soon found himself at the head of a compact body of ten
thousand men, all bound to stand by him to death. But there was one very
disheartening circumstance, which attracted notice. No volunteers joined
the little army, although a royal proclamation had promised lands from
the territories of the rebels to each successful combatant in the cause
of Edwy and Elgiva.

The fear of the Church hung on all, the conviction that the law of both
Church and State had been broken by the young king; the universal belief
in the sanctity of Dunstan, and in the true patriotism of Odo whom they
called "the good;" the thoughtless misgovernment since the wiser
counsellors had dispersed--all these things weakened the hearts of the
followers of Edwy.

There was therefore but little enthusiasm when the inhabitants saw the
soldiers of the king march out by the Watling Street, and the soldiers
themselves looked dispirited.

It was early dawn on the second day from the feast that the departure
took place. Cynewulf, a valiant Earl of Wessex, was the real commander;
nominally, Edwy commanded in person, and Elfric rode out of London by
his side. Redwald's rank would not have entitled him to the chief command.

Passing through the environs of the city, they gained the open country,
and marched steadily along the causeway the Romans had so firmly laid,
until they reached Verulam or St. Alban's, where they passed the night.
It excited great discontent amongst the inhabitants that Edwy did not
visit the shrine of the saint, the glory of their town; and his
departure again took place amidst gloomy silence.

They were now about to cross the frontier and enter Mercia, then in many
respects an independent state; governed, it might be, by the same
monarch and Witan as Wessex, even as Scotland and England are governed
by the same sovereign and Parliament, yet retaining like them its own
peculiar code of laws in many respects.

And now Mercia had sternly refused to be governed any longer by the
"enemy of the Church," and chose the Etheling, Edgar, to be its king.

Acting with the sanction of Odo, whom he deeply revered, the young
Edgar, then only in his fifteenth year, accepted the offer, and the
whole force of Mercia was gathering to support him when Edwy crossed the
border.

It must not be supposed that either Cynewulf or Redwald expected to
conquer the Mercians with ten thousand men. No, their design was
simpler: they had learned where Edgar was residing, and that the forces
around him were small. One bold stroke might secure his person, and then
Edwy might make his own terms. This was the secret of the advice they
both gave to the young king.

Redwald had, as we shall see, deep designs of his own to serve also, but
they had been locked for years in his own breast, and no servant could
seem more trusty and faithful than he did, or act with more energy in
his master's cause.

The forces of Edwy, as we have related, left St. Alban's on the second
morning, and travelled, horse and foot, very rapidly all that day.

Crossing the Icknield Street at Dunstable, where the remains of a huge
temple, once sacred to Diana, were visible, they entered Mercia, and
soon reached Towcester, a town which had been walled round by King
Athelstane; here they found no force prepared to receive them, and the
town opened its gates at once.

They tarried here for a day, while they sent scouts and spies in all
directions, many of whom never returned. The troops were quartered
freely upon the inhabitants, who were evidently very hostile; and, in
return, the soldiers of Edwy insulted the women and bullied the men.
Every hour some quarrel arose, and generally ended in bloodshed; the
citizens being commonly the victims.

Late at night messengers arrived at the royal quarters, bringing
information that Edgar was at Alcester, the ancient Alauna, beyond the
Avon, and that Osric, the great Earl of Mercia, was with him collecting
troops.

A council was held at once, and it was decided to leave the Watling
Street and to march for the Avon by cross-country routes. They rested
that night amidst the ruins of the ancient Brinavae, and here another
council was held, to deliberate on their future movements, and it was
decided to march westward at once, for tidings came that Edgar's forces
were rapidly increasing, and prudence suggested prompt measures. Edwy
was becoming very anxious.

The route for the next day was then made out and, with beating heart,
Elfric learned that they purposed crossing the river not far from
Aescendune.

"Elfric, my friend," said Edwy, "there will be a chance for you to visit
Aescendune, and to obtain the old man's forgiveness."

He said this with a slight sneer.

"I cannot go there; I would die first."

Edwy started at the tone of deep feeling with which the words were said;
he knew nothing of the rencontre of Elfric with his brother.

"Still I think that I must spend this coming night there, and I will try
and act the Christian for the occasion: perhaps I may do you a good
turn, while I renew my acquaintance with your people."

In his very heart Elfric wished that Edwy might never arrive there, yet
he knew not what to say.

"Well," said the prince, observing his hesitation, "you may go on with
Cynewulf and the main body of the army, which will cross the Avon higher
up, and I will make excuse that your duties detain you. I must go--I
have special reasons, I wish at least to secure the fidelity of the few
--and Redwald will accompany me; we join the army on the morrow,
without losing any time by the move."

And so the matter was settled.


    CHAPTER XV. THE ROYAL GUEST.

It was the morning of the first of August, and the sun, dispersing the
early mists, gave promise of a bright summer day.

The inhabitants of Aescendune, lord and vassals alike, were astir from
the early daybreak; for that day the harvest was to be commenced, and
the crops were heavier than had been known for many a year. A good
harvest meant peace and prosperity in those times, a bad harvest famine,
and perhaps rebellion; for if the home crop failed, commerce did not, as
now, supply the deficiency.

So it was with joy and gladness that the people went forth that day to
reap with their sharp sickles in their hands, while the freshness of the
early morn filled each heart insensibly with energy and life. The corn
fell on the upland before their sharp strokes, while behind each reaper
the younger labourers gathered it into sheaves.

Old Ella stood in their midst looking on the familiar scene, while his
pious heart returned many a fervent thanksgiving to the Giver of all
good. Under the shade of some spreading beeches, which bordered the
field, the domestics from the manor house were spreading the banquet for
the reapers--mead and ale, corn puddings prepared in various modes
with milk, huge joints of cold roast beef--for the hour when toil
should have sharpened the appetite of the whole party.

By the side of his father stood young Alfred administering with filial
affection to all his wants, as if he felt constrained to supply a double
service in his own person now that Elfric was no more, or, at least,
dead to home ties.

Thicker and thicker fell the wheat, and they thought surely such heavy
sheaves had never fallen to their lot before.

At last the blowing of a horn summoned all the reapers to their dinner,
and when Father Cuthbert had said grace, the whole party fell to--the
thane at the head of them; and when the desire of eating and drinking
was appeased, the labourers lay on the grass, in the cool shade, to pass
away the hour of noontide heat, before resuming their toil.

"Father," said Alfred, "a horseman is coming."

"My old eyes are somewhat dim; I do not see any one approaching."

"Nor I, as yet, but I hear him; listen, he is just crossing the brook; I
can hear the splashing."

"Some royal messenger, perhaps, from Edgar or from Edwy, my son. I fear
such may be the case; yet I wish I could be left in peace, afar from the
strife which must convulse the land, if the ill-advised brothers cannot
agree to reign--the one over Mercia, the other over Wessex."

"We have repeatedly said that we should be quite neutral, father."

"And yet, my son, we offend both parties, and, I fear me, we shall be
forced to defend ourselves in the end. But God is our refuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble. And now that I am old I can
lean more and more upon Him. He will be a father to you, my Alfred, when
these hoary hairs are hidden in the grave."

It was seldom that the old thane expressed his devotion in this strain;
it seemed to Alfred as if there were a foreboding of coming trial in it,
and he felt as when a cloud veils the face of the sun in early spring.

The messenger now came in sight--a tall, resolute looking man, well
armed and well mounted, and evidently bound for the hall. But when he
saw the party beneath the trees he bent his course aside, and saluting
the thane with all deference, inquired if he spoke to Ella of Aescendune.

"I am he," replied Ella. "I trust you are not the bearer of other than
good tidings; but will you first refresh yourself, since it is ill
talking between the full and the fasting?"

"With gladness do I accept your bounty; for I have ridden since early
dawn, and rider and horse are both exhausted."

"There is corn for your horse, and food and wine for his master.

"Uhred, take charge of the steed.

"Alfred, my son, place that best joint of beef before the stranger, and
those wheaten cakes.

"I drink to you, fair sir."

The messenger seemed in no hurry to open his tale until he had eaten and
drunk, and it was with the greatest patience that the thane, who was one
of nature's gentlemen, awaited his leisure.

At length the messenger looked up, and pushed his wooden platter aside.

"I have come to be the bearer of good tidings to you, noble thane. Edwy,
your king, with a small troop of horse, his royal retinue, proposes
honouring your roof with his presence, and asks bed and board of his
loyal subject, Ella of Aescendune."

"The king's will is my law; and since it pleases the son of my late
beloved master, King Edmund, to visit me, he shall find no lack of
hospitality. But may I ask what sudden event has brought him into the
heart of our country?"

"He comes to chastise rebellion. A large force of several thousand men
crosses the river a few miles higher this evening, and, not to incommode
you with numbers, King Edwy comes apart from his followers."

Although he foresaw grave inconvenience, and even danger, in the
proposal, yet Ella could not appear churlish and inhospitable;
therefore, learning from the messenger that the king might be expected
before sunset, he returned home to make such preparations as should
suggest themselves for the entertainment of his royal master, for so he
still would have styled Edwy, deeply as he felt he had been wronged by him.

"Father," said Alfred, as he walked homeward by his side, "think you
Elfric will be in his train? I wish he may be."

"Alas, my son! I fear I shall never see poor Elfric again. My mind
always seems to misgive me when I think of him; and I have so strong a
foreboding that he has received my last blessing, that I cannot overcome
it. No, Alfred, I fear we shall not see Elfric tonight."

No more was said upon the subject; they reached the hall in good time,
and startled the lady Edith by their tidings.

Instantly all was in preparation: the best casks of wine were broached,
fowls and wild birds alike had cause to lament that their lives were
shortened, chamberlain and cook were busy, clean rushes were brought in
to adorn the floor of the hall, sweet flowers and aromatic grass for
that of the royal bedchamber; and it was not till a flourish of trumpets
announced the approach of the cavalcade that all was ready, and the
maidens and men servants, arrayed in their best holiday attire, stood
grouped without the gate to receive their king.

At last the glitter of the departing ray upon pointed lances announced
the approach, and soon the whole party might be seen--a hundred horse
accompanying the king's person, and one or two nobles of distinction,
including Redwald, riding by his side.

