to repair its machinery. With it in our possession, and in good shape, we
shall be in a position to run away whenever it may seem necessary to do
so, and in the meantime to impose our legend upon them by the possession
of so apparently miraculous a means of conveying ourselves through space.
It will be overwhelming proof of the truth of our assertion of an origin
outside their world, and perhaps, upon the whole, it is just as well that
they should think that we belong to the sun, of whose existence they have
some knowledge, rather than to the earth, of which they know nothing, in
spite of the inkling that Juba succeeded in conveying to them."

"The car is here, isn't it?" I asked.

"Yes, it is in the great tower, but it is useless in its present
condition."

"And what materials do you want to find?"

"Primarily nothing but uranium. They understand chemistry here. They have
the apparatus that I need, but they do not know how to use it as I do.
The uranium certainly exists somewhere. They mine gold and silver, and
other things, and when I can find their mines, without exciting their
suspicion, and can get the use of a laboratory in secret, I shall soon
have what I need. But I must be very circumspect, for it would not do to
let them perceive that chemistry really lies at the basis of our miracle.
It is this necessity for secrecy which troubles me most. But I shall find
a way."

"For God's sake, find it quick," Henry burst out. "And then get away from
this accursed planet."

Edmund looked at him a moment before replying:

"We shall go when the necessity for going arises, and not before. We have
not yet seen all the interesting things of this world."

I believe that even Jack and I shared to some extent Henry's
disappointment on hearing this announcement. We should have been glad to
know that we were to start on the return journey as soon as the car was
in shape to transport us. But the event proved that Edmund's instinct
was, as usual, right, and that the things which were yet to be seen and
experienced were well worth the fearful risk we ran in remaining.

While Edmund undertook the delicate inquiries which were necessary in
order to determine the direction that his search for uranium should take,
and to enable him to conduct his chemical processes without awaking
suspicion as to his real purpose, we were left much of the time in charge
of a party of attendants who, by his intercession, had been selected to
act as our guides when we wished to examine the wonders of the palace and
the capital. Sometimes he accompanied us; but more often he was with Ala
and her suite, including her uneludable satellite, Ingra.

"I bless my stars that he doesn't favor _us_ with his delightful
company," was Jack's comment, when he saw Ingra tagging along after Ala
and Edmund.

I privately believed that Ingra had his spies among our attendants, but I
was careful not to mention my suspicions to Jack.

But, oh, the delight of those excursions! Those streets; and those aerial
towers, which rose like forests of coral in a gulf of liquid ether! They
shine often in my dreams. A thousand times I have tried to put into
words, simply for my own satisfaction, a description of the things that
we saw, and the impressions that they made on my mind--but it is
impossible. I understand now why the tales of travelers into strange
lands never convey a tithe of what is in the writers' minds; they
simply cannot; the necessary words and analogies do not exist. I can only
use general terms, ransacking the vocabulary of adjectives--"beautiful,"
"wonderful," "fascinating," "marvelous," "indescribable," "magical,"
"enchanting," "amazing," "inexplicable," "_sans pareil_"--what you
will--but all that says nothing except to my own mind. Only the language
of Venus could describe the charms and the wonders of Venus!

There was one thing, however, which was sufficiently comprehensible--_the
great library_. Edmund was not with us when we paid our first visit to
it; but he had predicted its existence during one of our conversations,
when we were talking of the silent language.

"This people," he had said, "has a great history behind it, extending
over periods which would amaze our disinterrers of human antiquity, but
an intelligent race cannot make history without also keeping records of
it. Tradition alone, handed on from mind to mind, would not answer their
requirements. The possession of the power to communicate thought without
spoken language does not presuppose a power of memory any more perfect
than we have. The brain forgets, the imagination misleads, with them as
with us, and consequently they must have books of some kind--which
implies a written or printed language. It is probable that this language
does not correspond with the very meager one of which we occasionally
hear them pronounce a few words. The latter is, I am convinced, used only
for names and interjections, and sometimes to call the attention of the
person addressed, while the former must be a rich and carefully
elaborated system of literary expression, which may not be phonetic at
all. We shall find that this is so; and there are unquestionably
libraries--probably a great imperial library--devoted to history and
science. There must be schools also."

Thus Edmund had spoken, and thus we found it to be. The great library was
in a building separate from the palace. It was admirably lighted from
without, and its nature was apparent the moment we were led into it. The
"books" were long scrolls, which might have been taken for parchment or
papyrus, and the characters written on them resembled those of the
Chinese language, but worked out in exquisite colors, which might
themselves have had a meaning. The rolls were kept in proper receptacles
under the charge of librarians, and we saw many grave persons at desks
poring over them. Absolute silence reigned, and as I gazed at the scene I
found admiration for this extraordinary people taking the place of the
prejudice which I had recently been led to feel against them.

Jack, unusually impressed, whispered to me that Edmund must have been
playing us some Hindoo bedevilment trick, for he could not believe that
we were actually in a foreign world. The same impression came over me.
This was too earthlike; too much as if, instead of being on the planet
Venus, we had been transported to some land of antique civilization in
our own world. But, after all, we _knew where we were_, and as the
realization of that fact came to us we could only stare with increasing
astonishment at the scene before us. I may say here that Edmund
subsequently visited this great library, and also some of the schools,
and I know that he made notes of what he discovered and learned in them,
with the purpose, as I supposed, of writing upon the subject after his
return. But the expected book, which would have supplemented and
clarified much of what I have undertaken to tell, with but a half
understanding of what we saw, never appeared.

Our wonderful excursions came to an end when Edmund at length announced
that he had obtained the information he needed, and that we were about to
make a trip to some of the mines of Venus.

"I have discovered," he said, "that Venus is exceedingly rich in the
precious metals, as well as in iron and lead. They mine them all, and
we shall visit the mines under Ala's escort. My real purpose, of
course, is to find uranium, of whose properties, strangely--and for us
luckily--enough, they seem to have no knowledge. Nevertheless, they are
capital chemists as far as they go, and possess laboratories provided
with all that I shall need. They refine the metals at the mines
themselves, so that I am sure of finding everything necessary to do my
work right on the ground. The substance which I obtain from uranium is so
concentrated that I can carry in my pocket all that will be required to
repair the damage done to the transformers in the car. A careful
examination, which I have made of the car, proves that the terrific
shocks the machinery suffered in the crystal mountains caused an atomic
readjustment which destroyed the usefulness of the material in the
transformers, and while I might, by laboratory treatment, possibly
restore its properties, I think it safer to obtain an entirely fresh
supply. We shall start with the queen's ship within a few hours; so you
had better make your preparations at once."



CHAPTER XV


AT THE MERCY OF FEARFUL ENEMIES

If we could have foreseen what was to happen during this trip, even
Edmund, I believe, would have shrunk from undertaking it. But we all
embarked upon it gladly, because we had conceived the highest
expectations of the delight that it would afford us; and at the news that
we were to visit mines of gold richer than any on the earth, Henry
exhibited the first enthusiasm that he had shown since our departure from
home.

Embarked on Ala's splendid "yacht," as Jack called it, and attended by
her usual companions, we rapidly left the city behind, and sped away
toward the purple mountains, so often seen in the distance. The voyage
was a long one, but at length we drew near the foothills, and beheld the
mountains towering into peaks behind. Lofty as they looked, there was no
snow on their summits. We now descended where plumes of smoke had for
some time attracted our attention, and found ourselves at one of the
mines. It was a gold mine. The processes of extracting the ore,
separating the metal, etc., were conducted with remarkable silence, but
they showed a knowledge of metallurgy that would have amazed us if we had
not already seen so much of the capacity of this people. Yet similarly to
the scene in the library, its earth-likeness was startling.

"This sort of thing is uncanny," said Jack, as we were led through the
works. "It makes me creep to see them doing things just as we do them at
home, except that they are so quiet about it. If everything was different
from our ways it would seem more natural."

"Anyhow," I replied, "we may take it as a great compliment to ourselves,
for it shows that we have found out ways of doing things which cannot be
improved even in Venus."

I should like to describe in detail the wonders of this mine, but I have
space for only a few words about it. It was, Edmund learned, the richest
on the planet, and was the exclusive property of the government,
furnishing the larger part of its revenues, which were not comparable
with those of a great terrestrial nation because of the absence of all
the expenditures required by war. No fleets and no armies existed here,
and no tariffs were needed where commerce was free. This great mine was
the Laurium of Venus. The display of gold in the vaults connected with it
exceeded a hundredfold all that the most imaginative historian has ever
written of the treasures of Montezuma and Atahualpa. Henry's eyes fairly
shone as he gazed upon it, and he could not help saying to Edmund:

"You might have had riches equal to this if you had stayed at home and
developed your discovery."

Edmund contemptuously shrugged his shoulders, and turned away without a
word.

We were afterwards conducted to a silver mine, which we also inspected,
and finally to a lead mine in another part of the hills. This was in
reality the goal at which Edmund had been aiming, for he had told us that
uranium was sometimes found in association with lead. Our joy was very
great when, after a long inspection, he informed us that he had
discovered uranium, and that it now remained only to submit it to certain
operations in a laboratory in order to prepare the substance that was to
give renewed life to those lilliputian monsters in the car, which fed
upon men's breath and begot power illimitable.

"I must now contrive," said Edmund, "to get admission to the laboratory
connected with the mine, and to do my work without letting them suspect
what I am about."

He managed it somehow, as he managed all things that he undertook, and
within forty-eight hours after our arrival he was hard at work, evidently
exciting the admiration of the native chemists by the knowledge and skill
which he displayed. At first they crowded around him so that he was
hampered in his efforts to conceal the real object of his labors; but at
last they left him comparatively alone, and I could see by his expression
whenever I visited the laboratory that things were going to his liking.
But the work was long and delicate. Edmund had to fabricate secretly some
of the chemical apparatus he needed, destroying it as fast as it served
its purpose, so that weeks of time rolled by before he had what he called
the "thimbleful of omnipotence" that was to make us masters of our fate.
As fast as he produced it he put it in a metal box, shaped like a
snuffbox, and covertly he showed it to us. It consisted of brilliant
black grains, finer than millet seeds.

"Every one of those minute grains," he told us, "is packed with as much
potential energy as that of a ton's weight suspended a mile above the
earth."

But while the little box was being gradually filled with crystallized
powder, we, who could lend no aid in the fabrication of Edmund's miracle,
improved the opportunity to make acquaintance with the beauties of the
surrounding country. Ala had returned to the capital, leaving an air ship
at our disposal, and, of all persons in the world, _Ingra in command_! We
refused all invitations to accompany him in the air ship, preferring to
make our excursions on foot, accompanied at first by some of the
attendants that Ala had left. Edmund did not share our fears that Ingra
meditated mischief.

"He doesn't dare," was his reply to all our representations. But nothing
could induce Jack and me to trust to Ingra's tender mercies.

Among the favorite spots which we had found to visit in the neighborhood
of the mine was a little knoll crowned with a group of the most beautiful
trees that I ever saw, and washed at its base by a brook of exquisitely
transparent water which tinkled over a bed of white and clear-yellow
pebbles, sparkling like jewels. More than once at the beginning I fished
some of them out in the belief that they were nuggets of pure gold
polished by the water. In a pool under the translucent shadow of the
overhanging trees played small fish so splendid in their varied hues that
they looked like miniature rainbows darting about beneath the water.
Birds of vivid color sometimes flitted among the branches overhead. There
was but one "rainy day" while we were at the mine; all the rest of the
time not a cloud appeared under the great dome, and a scented zephyr
continually drew down from the mountains and fanned us. Here, then, we
passed many hours and many days, chatting of our adventures and our
chances, drowsily happy in the pure physical enjoyment which this
charming spot afforded.

When at last Edmund informed us that his box was full, and he was ready
to return to the capital, we would not let him go without first
conducting him to our little paradise. All together, then, with the
exception of Juba, who, by some interference of an overlooking
providence, was left at the mine, we set out in the highest spirits to be
for once our leader's leaders in the exploration of some of the charms of
Venus. Edmund was no less delighted than we had been with the place, and
yielding to its somnolent influences we were soon stretched side by side
on the spreading roots of a giant tree, and sleeping the sleep of
sensuous languor.

Our waking was as terrible as it was sudden. I heard a cry, and at the
same instant felt an irresistible hand grasping me by the throat. As I
opened my eyes I saw that the whole party were prisoners. Nearby an air
ship was quivering, as, held in leash, it lightly touched the ground; and
a dozen gigantic fellows, whipping our hands behind our backs, hurried us
aboard, the great mechanical bird, which instantly rose, describing a
circle that carried us above the treetops. I did not try to struggle, for
I felt how vain would be any effort that I could make.

Glancing about me, the very first features I recognized were those of
Ingra. At last he had us in his power!

I looked at Edmund, but his face was set in thought, and he did not
return my glance. Henry, as usual, had plunged into silent hopelessness,
and Jack was a picture of mingled rage and despair. Although we were
loosely fastened side by side to a rail on the deck, neither of us spoke
for perhaps half an hour. In the meantime the air ship rose to a height
greater than that of the nearby mountains, and then more slowly
approached them. At last it began to circle, as if an uncertainty
concerning the route to be chosen had arisen, and I observed, for we
could look all about in spite of our bonds, that Ingra and one who
appeared to be his lieutenant were engaged in an animated discussion.
They pointed this way and that, and the debate grew every moment more
earnest. This continued for a long time, while the ship hovered, running
slowly in the wide circles. We could not then know how much this
hesitation meant for us. If Ingra had been as rapid in his decision now
as he was in the act of taking us prisoners, this history would never
have been written. I watched Edmund, and saw that his attention was
absorbed by what our captors were about, and even in that emergency I
felt a touch of comfort through my unfailing confidence in our leader.

Finally a decision seemed to have been reached, and we set off over the
crest of the range. As its huge peaks towered behind us and we descended
nearer the ground, my heart sank again, for now we were cut off from the
world beyond, and in the improbable event of any pursuit, how could the
pursuers know what course we had taken, or where to look for us? And,
then, who would pursue? Juba could do nothing, Ala was far away at the
capital, even supposing that she should be disposed to set out in search
of us, and hours, perhaps days, must elapse before she could be informed
of what had happened. Not even when Jack and I were in the dungeon had
our case seemed so desperate.

But how the gods repent when they have sunk men in the blackest pit of
despair, sending them a messenger of hope to steady their hearts!

Good fortune had willed that we should be so placed upon the deck that we
faced most easily sternward. Suddenly, as I gazed despondently at the
serrated horizon receding in the distance, a thrill ran through my nerves
at the sight of a dark speck in the sky, which seemed to float over one
of the highest peaks. A second look assured me that it was moving; a
third gave birth to the wild thought that it was in chase. Then I turned
to Edmund and whispered:

"There is something coming behind us."

"Very well, do nothing to attract attention," he returned. "I have seen
it. They are following us."

I said nothing to Jack or Henry, who had not yet caught sight of the
object; but I could not withdraw my eyes from it. Sometimes I persuaded
myself that it was growing larger, and then, with the intensity of my
gaze, it blurred and seemed to fade. At last Jack spied it, and
instantly, in his impetuous way, he exclaimed:

"Edmund! Look there!"

His voice drew Ingra's attention, and immediately the latter observed the
direction of our glances, and himself saw the growing speck. He turned
with flushed face to his lieutenant and in a trice the vessel began
fairly to leap through the air.

"Ah, Jack," said Edmund reproachfully, but yet kindly, "if only you could
always think before you speak! It is certain from Ingra's alarm that we
are pursued by somebody whom he does not wish to meet. Most likely it is
the queen, although it seems impossible that she could so quickly have
learned of our mishap. Peter and I have been watching that object, which
is unquestionably an air ship, in silence for the last twenty minutes,
during which it has perceptibly gained upon us. But for your lack of
caution it might have come within winning distance before it was
discovered by Ingra, but now--"

The rebuke was deserved, perhaps, but yet I wished that Edmund had not
given it, so painful was the impression that it made upon Jack's
generous heart. His countenance was convulsed, and a tear rolled down his
cheek--all the more pitiful to see because his arms were pinioned, and he
could do nothing to conceal his agitation. Edmund was stricken with
remorse when he saw the effect of his words.

"Jack," he said, "forgive me; I am sorry from the bottom of my heart. I
should not have blamed you for a little oversight, when I alone am to
blame for the misfortunes of us all."

"All right, Edmund, all right," returned Jack in his usual cheerful
tones. "But, see here, I don't admit that you are to blame for anything.
We're all in this boat together and hanged if we won't get out of it
together, too, and you'll be the man to fetch us out."

Edmund smiled sadly, and shook his head.

Meanwhile Ingra, with the evident intention of concealing the movements
of the vessel, dropped her so low that we hardly skipped the tops of the
trees that we were passing over, for now we had entered a wide region of
unbroken forest. Still that black dot followed straight in our wake, and
I easily persuaded myself that it was yet growing larger. Edmund declared
that I was right, and expressed his surprise, for we were now flying at
the greatest speed that could be coaxed out of the motors. Suddenly a
shocking thought crossed my mind. I tried to banish it, fearing that
Ingra might read it in my eyes, and act upon it. Suppose that he should
hurl us overboard! It was in his power to do so, and it seemed a quick
and final solution. But he showed no intention to do anything of the
kind. He may have had good reasons for refraining, but, at the time I
could only ascribe his failure to take a summary way out of his
difficulty to a protecting hand which guarded us even in this extremity.

On we rushed through the humming air, and still the pursuing speck chased
us. And minute by minute it became more distinct against the background
of the great cloud dome. Presently Edmund called our attention to
something ahead.

"There," he said, "is Ingra's hope and our despair."
