
She acknowledged it with a smile of thanks. Her cheeks were a little
flushed, her movements quick, her manner high-strung, as all well
might be, seeing the horrible sacrilege she had in mind. But she was
undeniably lovely; yes, more adorably beautiful than ever with her
present thrill of excitement; and when the stair was brought, and she
walked down from the mammoth's back to the ground, those near fell
to their knees and gave her worship, out of sheer fascination for her
beauty and charm.

Ylga, the fan-girl, alone of all that vast multitude round the Sun
temple contained herself with her formal paces and duties. She looked
pained and troubled. It was plain to see, even from the distance where
I stood, that she carried a heavy heart under the jewels of her robe.
It was fitting, too, that this should be so. Though she had been long
enough divorced from his care and fostered by the Empress, Ylga was
a daughter of Zaemon, and he was the chiefest of our Lord the Sun's
ministers here on earth. She could not forget her upbringing now at
this supreme moment when the highest of the old Gods was to be formally
defied. And perhaps also (having a kindness for Phorenice) she was not a
little dreadful of the consequences.

But the Empress had no eye for one sad look amongst all that sea of
glowing faces. Boldly and proudly she strode out into the circle, as
though she had been the duly appointed priest for the sacrifice. And
after her came a knot of men, dressed as priests, and bearing the
victim. Some of these were creatures of her own, and it was easy to
forgive mere ignorant laymen, won over by the glamour of Phorenice's
presence. But some, to their shame, were men born in the Priests' Clan,
and brought up in the groves and colleges of the Sacred Mountain, and
for their apostasy there could be no palliation.

The wood had already been stacked on the altar-stone in the due form
required by the ancient symbolism, and the Empress stood aside whilst
those who followed did what was needful. As they opened out, I saw that
the victim was one of the small, cloven-hoofed horses that roam the
plains--a most acceptable sacrifice. They bound its feet with metal
gyves, and put it on the pyre, where, for a while, it lay neighing. Then
they stepped aside, and left it living. Here was an innovation.

The false priests went back to the farther side of the circle, and
Phorenice stood alone before the altar. She lifted up her voice, sweet,
tuneful, and carrying, and though the din of the siege still came from
over the city, no ear there lost a word of what was spoken.

She raised her glance aloft, and all other eyes followed it. The heaven
was clear as the deep sea, a gorgeous blue. But as the words came from
her, so a small mist was born in the sky, wheeling and circling like a
ball, although the day was windless, and rapidly growing darker and more
compact. So dense had it become, that presently it threw a shadow on
part of the sacred circle and soothed it into twilight, though all
without where the people stood was still garish day. And in the ball of
mist were little quick stabs and splashes of noiseless flame.

She spoke, not in the priests' sacred tongue--though such was her wicked
cleverness, that she may very well have learned it--but in the common
speech of the people, so that all who heard might understand; and she
told of her wondrous birth (as she chose to name it), and of the
direct aid of the most High Gods, which had enabled her to work so many
marvels. And in the end she lifted both of her fair white arms towards
the blackness above, and with her lovely face set with the strain of
will, she uttered her final cry:

"O my high Father, the Sun, I pray You now to acknowledge me as Your
very daughter. Give this people a sign that I am indeed a child of the
Gods and no frail mortal. Here is sacrifice unlit, where mortal priests
with their puny fires had weekly, since the foundation of this land,
sent savoury smoke towards the sky. I pray You send down the heavenly
fire to burn this beast here offered, in token that though You still
rule on high, You have given me Atlantis to be my kingdom, and the
people of the Earth to be my worshippers."

She broke off and strained towards the sky. Her face was contorted. Her
limbs shook. "O mighty Father," she cried, "who hast made me a God and
an equal, hear me! Hear me!"

Out of the black cloud overhead there came a blinding flash of light,
which spat downwards on to the altar. The cloven-hoofed horse gave one
shrill neigh, and one convulsion, and fell back dead. Flames crackled
out from the wood pile, and the air became rich with the smell of
burning flesh. And lo! in another moment the cloud above had melted into
nothingness, and the flames burnt pale, and the smoke went up in a thin
blue spiral towards the deeper blueness of the sky.

Phorenice, the Empress, stood there before the great stone, and before
the snake and the outstretched hand of life which were inscribed upon
it, flushed, exultant, and once more radiantly lovely; and the knot of
priests within the circle, and the great mob of people without, fell to
the ground adoring.

"Phorenice, Goddess!" they cried. "Phorenice, Goddess of all Atlantis!"

But for myself I did not kneel. I would have no part in this apostasy,
so I stood there awaiting fate.




10. A WOOING


A murmur quickly sprang up round me, which grew into shouts. "Kneel,"
one whispered, "kneel, sir, or you will be seen." And another cried:
"Kneel, you without beard, and do obeisance to the only Goddess, or by
the old Gods I will make myself her priest and butcher you!" And so the
shouts arose into a roar.

But presently the word "Deucalion" began to be bandied about, and there
came a moderation in the zeal of these enthusiasts. Deucalion, the man
who had left Atlantis twenty years before to rule Yucatan, they might
know little enough about, but Deucalion, who rode not many days back
beside the Empress in the golden castle beneath the canopy of snakes,
was a person they remembered; and when they weighed up his possible
ability for vengeance, the shouts died away from them limply.

So when the silence had grown again, and Phorenice turned and saw me
standing alone amongst all the prostrate worshippers, I stepped out from
the crowd and passed between two of the great stones, and went across
the circle to where she stood beside the altar. I did not prostrate
myself. At the prescribed distance I made the salutation which she
herself had ordered when she made me her chief minister, and then hailed
her with formal decorum as Empress.

"Deucalion, man of ice," she retorted.

"I still adhere to the old Gods!"

"I was not referring to that," said she, and looked at me with a
sidelong smile.

But here Ylga came up to us with a face that was white, and a hand that
shook, and made supplication for my life. "If he will not leave the old
Gods yet," she pleaded, "surely you will pardon him? He is a strong
man, and does not become a convert easily. You may change him later. But
think, Phorenice, he is Deucalion; and if you slay him here for this
one thing, there is no other man within all the marches of Atlantis who
would so worthily serve--"

The Empress took the words from her. "You slut," she cried out. "I have
you near me to appoint my wardrobe, and carry my fan, and do you dare
to put a meddling finger on my policies? Back with you, outside this
circle, or I'll have you whipped. Ay, and I'll do more. I'll serve you
as Zaemon served my captain, Tarca. Shall I point a finger at you, and
smite your pretty skin with a sudden leprosy?"

The girl bowed her shoulders, and went away cowed, and Phorenice turned
to me. "My lord," she said, "I am like a young bird in the nest that has
suddenly found its wings. Wings have so many uses that I am curious to
try them all."

"May each new flight they take be for the good of Atlantis."

"Oh," she said, with an eye-flash, "I know what you have most at heart.
But we will go back to the pyramid, and talk this out at more leisure. I
pray you now, my lord, conduct me back to my riding beast."

It appeared then that I was to be condoned for not offering her worship,
and so putting public question on her deification. It appeared also that
Ylga's interference was looked upon as untimely, and, though I could not
understand the exact reasons for either of these things, I accepted
them as they were, seeing that they forwarded the scheme that Zaemon had
bidden me carry out.

So when the Empress lent me her fingers--warm, delicate fingers they
were, though so skilful to grasp the weapons of war--I took them
gravely, and led her out of the great circle, which she had polluted
with her trickeries. I had expected to see our Lord the Sun take
vengeance on the profanation whilst it was still in act; but none had
come: and I knew that He would choose his own good time for retribution,
and appoint what instrument He thought best, without my raising a puny
arm to guard His mighty honour.

So I led this lovely sinful woman back to the huge red mammoth which
stood there tamely in waiting, and the smell of the sacrifice came
after us as we walked. She mounted the stair to the golden castle on the
shaggy beast's back, and bade me mount also and take seat beside her.
But the place of the fan-girl behind was empty, and what we said as we
rode back through the streets there was none to overhear.

She was eager to know what had befallen me after the attack on the gate,
and I told her the tale, laying stress on the worthiness of Nais,
and uttering an opinion that with care the girl might be won back to
allegiance again. Only the commands that Zaemon laid upon me when he
and I spoke together in the sacred tongue, did I withhold, as it is
not lawful to repeat these matters save only in the High Council of the
Priests itself as they sit before the Ark of the Mysteries.

"You seem to have an unusual kindliness for this rebel Nais," said
Phorenice.

"She showed herself to me as more clever and thoughtful than the common
herd."

"Ay," she answered, with a sigh that I think was real enough in its way,
"an Empress loses much that meaner woman gets as her common due."

"In what particular?"

"She misses the honest wooing of her equals."

"If you set up for a Goddess--" I said.

"Pah! I wish to be no Goddess to you, Deucalion. That was for the common
people; it gives me more power with them; it helps my schemes. All you
Seven higher priests know that trick of calling down the fire, and it
pleased me to filch it. Can you not be generous, and admit that a woman
may be as clever in finding out these natural laws as your musty elder
priests?"

"Remains that you are Empress."

"Nor Empress either. Just think that there is a woman seated beside you
on this cushion, Deucalion, and look upon her, and say what words
come first to your lips. Have done with ceremonies, and have done with
statecraft. Do you wish to wait on as you are till all your manhood
withers? It is well not to hurry unduly in these matters: I am with you
there. Yet, who but a fool watches a fruit grow ripe, and then leaves it
till it is past its prime?"

I looked on her glorious beauty, but as I live it left me cold. But I
remembered the command that had been laid upon me, and forced a smile.
"I may have been fastidious," I said, "but I do not regret waiting this
long."

"Nor I. But I have played my life as a maid, time enough. I am a woman,
ripe, and full-blooded, and the day has come when I should be more than
what I have been."

I let my hand clench on hers. "Take me to husband then, and I will be a
good man to you. But, as I am bidden speak to Phorenice the woman now,
and not to the Empress, I offer fair warning that I will be no puppet."

She looked at me sidelong. "I have been master so long that I think
it will come as enjoyment to be mastered sometimes. No, Deucalion, I
promise that--you shall be no puppet. Indeed, it would take a lusty lung
to do the piping if you were to dance against your will."

"Then, as man and wife we will live together in the royal pyramid, and
we will rule this country with all the wit that it has pleased the High
Gods to bestow on us. These miserable differences shall be swept aside;
the rebels shall go back to their homes, and hunt, and fight the beasts
in the provinces, and the Priests' Clan shall be pacified. Phorenice,
you and I will throw ourselves brain and soul into the government, and
we will make Atlantis rise as a nation that shall once more surpass all
the world for peace and prosperity."

Petulantly she drew her hand away from mine. "Oh, your conditions, and
your Atlantis! You carry a crudeness in these colonial manners of yours,
Deucalion, that palls on one after the first blunt flavour has worn
away. Am I to do all the wooing? Is there no thrill of love under all
your ice?"

"In truth, I do not know what love may be. I have had little enough
speech with women all these busy years."

"We were a pair, then, when you landed, though I have heard sighs and
protestations from every man that carries a beard in all Atlantis. Some
of them tickled my fancy for the day, but none of them have moved me
deeper. No, I also have not learned what this love may be from my own
personal feelings. But, sir, I think that you will teach me soon, if you
go on with your coldness."

"From what I have seen, love is for the poor, and the weak, and for
those of flighty emotions."

"Then I would that another woman were Empress, and that I were some
ill-dressed creature of the gutter that a strong man could pick up by
force, and carry away to his home for sheer passion. Ah! How I could
revel in it! How I could respond if he caught my whim!" She laughed.
"But I should lead him a sad life of it if my liking were not so strong
as his."

"We are as we are made, and we cannot change our inwards which move us."

She looked at me with a sullen glance. "If I do not change yours, my
Deucalion, there will be more trouble brewed for this poor Atlantis
that you set such store upon. There will be ill doings in this coming
household of ours if my love grows for you, and yours remains still
unborn."

I believe she would have had me fondle her there in the golden castle on
the mammoth's shabby back, before the city streets packed with curious
people. She had little enough appetite for privacy at any time. But for
the life of me I could not do it. The Gods know I was earnest enough
about my task, and They know also how it repelled me. But I was a true
priest that day, and I had put away all personal liking to carry out the
commands which the Council had laid upon me. If I had known how to set
about it, I would have fallen in with her mood. But where any of those
shallow bedizened triflers about the court would have been glibly in his
element, I stuck for lack of a dozen words.

There was no help for it but to leave all, save what I actually felt,
unsaid. Diplomacy I was trained in, and on most matters I had a glib
enough tongue. But to palter with women was a lightness I had always
neglected, and if I had invented would-be pretty speeches out of my
clumsy inexperience, Phorenice would have seen through the fraud on the
instant. She had been nurtured during these years of her rule on a
pap of these silly protestations, and could weigh their value with an
expert's exactness.

Nor was it a case where honest confession would have served my purpose
better. If I had put my position to her in plain words, it would have
made relations worse. And so perforce I had to hold my tongue, and
submit to be considered a clown.

"I had always heard," she said, "that you colonists in Yucatan were far
ahead of those in Egypt in all the arts and graces. But you, sir, do
small credit to your vice-royalty. Why, I have had gentry from the Nile
come here, and you might almost think they had never left their native
shores."

"They must have made great strides this last twenty years, then. When
last I was sent to Egypt to report, the blacks were clearly masters of
the land, and our people lived there only on sufferance. Their pyramids
were puny, and their cities nothing more than forts."

"Oh," she said mockingly, "they are mere exiles still, but they remember
their manners. My poor face seemed to please them, at least they all
went into raptures over it. And for ten pleasant words, one of them cut
off his own right hand. We made the bargain, my Egyptian gallant and
I, and the hand lies dried on some shelf in my apartment to-day as a
pleasant memento."

But here, by a lucky chance for me, an incident occurred which saved me
from further baiting. The rebels outside the walls were conducting their
day's attack with vigour and some intelligence. More than once during
our procession the lighter missiles from their war engines had sung
up through the air, and split against a building, and thrown splinters
which wounded those who thronged the streets. Still there had been
nothing to ruffle the nerves of any one at all used to the haps of
warfare, or in any way to hinder our courtship. But presently, it seems,
they stopped hurling stones from their war engines, and took to loading
