temple at Gaya called Bishnupad the chief object of veneration is a
foot-like mark. Such impressions are venerated in many parts of the
world as Buddha's feet and it seems probable, considering the
locality, that this footprint was attributed to Buddha before it was
transferred to Vishnu.]

[Footnote 332: There are no very early references to this Avatara. It
is mentioned in some of the Puranas (_e.g._ Bhagavata and Agni) and by
Kshemendra.]

[Footnote 333: But see the instances quoted above from Kashmir and
Nepal.]




BOOK V

HINDUISM


The present book deals with Hinduism and includes the period just
treated in Book IV. In many epochs the same mythological and
metaphysical ideas appear in a double form, Brahmanic and Buddhist,
and it is hard to say which form is the earlier.

Any work which like the present adopts a geographical and historical
treatment is bound to make Buddhism seem more important than Hinduism
and rightly, for the conversion and transformation of China, Japan and
many other countries are a series of exploits of great moment for the
history not merely of religion but of civilization. Yet when I think
of the antiquity, variety and vitality of Hinduism in India--no small
sphere--the nine chapters which follow seem very inadequate. I can
only urge that though it would be easy to fill an encyclopaedia with
accounts of Indian beliefs and practices, yet there is often great
similarity under superficial differences: the main lines of thought
are less numerous than they seem to be at first sight and they tend to
converge.




CHAPTER XXV

SIVA AND VISHNU

1


The striking difference between the earlier and later phases of Indian
religious belief, between the Vedic hymns, Brahmanas, Upanishads and
their accessory treatises on the one hand, and the epics, Puranas,
Tantras and later literature on the other, is due chiefly to the
predominance in the latter of the great gods Siva and Vishnu, with
the attendant features of sectarian worship and personal devotion to a
particular deity. The difference is not wholly chronological, for late
writers sometimes take the Vedic standpoint and ignore the worship of
these deities, but still their prominence in literature, and probably
in popular mythology, is posterior to the Vedic period. The change
created by their appearance is not merely the addition of two imposing
figures to an already ample pantheon; it is a revolution which might
be described as the introduction of a new religion, except that it
does not come as the enemy or destroyer of the old. The worship of the
new deities grows up peacefully in the midst of the ancient rites;
they receive the homage of the same population and the ministrations
of the same priests. The transition is obscured but also was
facilitated by the strength of Buddhism during the period when it
occurred. The Brahmans, confronted by this formidable adversary, were
disposed to favour any popular religious movement which they could
adapt to their interests.

When the Hindu revival sets in under the Guptas, and Buddhism begins
to decline, we find that a change has taken place which must have
begun several centuries before, though our imperfect chronology does
not permit us to date it. Whereas the Vedic sacrificers propitiated
all the gods impartially and regarded ritual as a sacred science
giving power over nature, the worshipper of the later deities is
generally sectarian and often emotional. He selects one for his
adoration, and this selected deity becomes not merely a great god
among others but a gigantic cosmical figure in whom centre the
philosophy, poetry and passion of his devotees. He is almost God in
the European sense, but still Indian deities, though they may have a
monopoly of adoration in their own sects, are never entirely similar
to Jehovah or Allah. They are at once more mythical, more human and
more philosophical, since they are conceived of not as creators and
rulers external to the world, but as forces manifesting themselves in
nature. An exuberant mythology bestows on them monstrous forms,
celestial residences, wives and offspring: they make occasional
appearances in this world as men and animals; they act under the
influence of passions which if titanic, are but human feelings
magnified. The philosopher accommodates them to his system by saying
that Vishnu or Siva is the form which the Supreme Spirit assumes as
Lord of the visible universe, a form which is real only in the same
sense that the visible world itself is real.

Vishnu and Rudra are known even to the Rig Veda but as deities of no
special eminence. It is only after the Vedic age that they became,
each for his own worshippers, undisputed Lords of the Universe. A
limiting date to the antiquity of Sivaism and Vishnuism, as their
cults may be called, is furnished by Buddhist literature, at any rate
for north-eastern India. The Pali Pitakas frequently[334] introduce
popular deities, but give no prominence to Vishnu and Siva. They are
apparently mentioned under the names of Venhu and Isana, but are not
differentiated from a host of spirits now forgotten. The Pitakas have
no prejudices in the matter of deities and their object is to
represent the most powerful of them as admitting their inferiority to
the Buddha. If Siva and Vishnu are not put forward in the same way as
Brahma and Indra, the inference seems clear: it had not occurred to
anyone that they were particularly important.

The suttas of the Digha Nikaya in which these lists of deities occur
were perhaps composed before 300 B.C.[335] About that date
Megasthenes, the Greek envoy at Pataliputra, describes two Indian
deities under the names of Dionysus and Herakles. They are generally
identified with Krishna and Siva. It might be difficult to deduce
this identity from an analysis of each description and different
authorities have identified both Siva and Krishna with Dionysus, but
the fact remains that a somewhat superficial foreign observer was
impressed with the idea that the Hindus worshipped two great gods. He
would hardly have derived this idea from the Vedic pantheon, and it is
not clear to what gods he can refer if not to Siva and Vishnu. It
thus seems probable that these two cults took shape about the fourth
century B.C. Their apparently sudden appearance is due to their
popular character and to the absence of any record in art. The
statuary and carving of the Asokan period and immediately succeeding
centuries is exclusively Buddhist. No temples or images remain to
illustrate the first growth of Hinduism (as the later form of Indian
religion is commonly styled) out of the earlier Brahmanism. Literature
(on which we are dependent for our information) takes little account
of the early career of popular gods before they win the recognition of
the priesthood and aristocracy, but when that recognition is once
obtained they appear in all their majesty and without any hint that
their honours are recent.

As already mentioned, we have evidence that in the fifth or sixth
century before Christ the Vedic or Brahmanic religion was not the only
form of worship and philosophy in India. There were popular deities
and rites to which the Brahmans were not opposed and which they
countenanced when it suited them. What takes place in India to-day
took place then. When some aboriginal deity becomes important owing to
the prosperity of the tribe or locality with which he is connected, he
is recognized by the Brahmans and admitted to their pantheon, perhaps
as the son or incarnation of some personage more generally accepted as
divine. The prestige of the Brahmans is sufficient to make such
recognition an honour, but it is also their interest and millennial
habit to secure control of every important religious movement and to
incorporate rather than suppress. And this incorporation is more than
mere recognition: the parvenu god borrows something from the manners
and attributes of the olympian society to which he is introduced. The
greater he grows, the more considerable is the process of fusion and
borrowing. Hindu philosophy ever seeks for the one amongst the many
and popular thought, in a more confused way, pursues the same goal. It
combines and identifies its deities, feeling dimly that taken singly
they are too partial to be truly divine, or it piles attributes upon
them striving to make each an adequate divine whole.

Among the processes which have contributed to form Vishnu and Siva we must
reckon the invasions which entered India from the north-west.[336] In
Bactria and Sogdiana there met and were combined the art and religious
ideas of Greece and Persia, and whatever elements were imported by the
Yueeh-chih and other tribes who came from the Chinese frontier. The
personalities of Vishnu and Siva need not be ascribed to foreign
influence. The ruder invaders took kindly to the worship of Siva, but there
is no proof that they introduced it. But Persian and Graeco-Bactrian
influence favoured the creation of more definite deities, more personal and
more pictorial. The gods of the Vedic hymns are vague and indistinct: the
Supreme Being of the Upanishads altogether impersonal, but Mithra and
Apollo, though divine in their majesty, are human in their persons and in
the appeal they make to humanity. The influence of these foreign
conceptions and especially of their representation in art is best seen in
Indian Buddhism. Hinduism has not so ancient an artistic record and
therefore the Graeco-Bactrian influence on it is less obvious, for the
sculpture of the Gupta period does not seem due to this inspiration.
Neither in outward form nor in character do Vishnu and Siva show much more
resemblance to Apollo and Mithra than to the Vedic gods. Their exuberant,
fantastic shapes, their many heads and arms, are a symbol of their complex
and multiple attributes. They are not restricted by the limits of
personality but are great polymorphic forces, not to be indicated by the
limits of one human shape.[337]


2


Though alike in their grandeur and multiplicity, Vishnu and Siva are
not otherwise similar. In their completely developed forms they
represent two ways of looking at the world. The main ideas of the
Vaishnavas are human and emotional. The deity saves and loves: he
asks for a worship of love. He appears in human incarnations and is
known as well or better by these incarnations than in his original
form. But in Sivaism the main current of thought is scientific and
philosophic rather than emotional.[338] This statement may seem
strange if one thinks of the wild rites and legends connected with
Siva and his spouse. Nevertheless the fundamental conception of
Sivaism, the cosmic force which changes and in changing both destroys
and reproduces, is strictly scientific and contrasts with the human,
pathetic, loving sentiments of Vishnuism. And scandalous as the
worship of the generative principle may become, the potency of this
impulse in the world scheme cannot be denied. Agreeably to his
character of a force rather than an emotion Siva does not become
incarnate[339] as a popular hero and saviour like Rama or Krishna,
but he assumes various supernatural forms for special purposes. Both
worships, despite their differences, show characteristics which are
common to most phases of Indian religion. Both seek for deliverance
from transmigration and are penetrated with a sense of the sorrow
inherent in human and animal life: both develop or adopt philosophical
doctrines which rise high above the level usually attained by popular
beliefs, and both have erotic aspects in which they fall below the
standard of morality usually professed by important sects whether in
Asia or Europe.

The name Siva is euphemistic. It means propitious and, like Eumenides,
is used as a deprecating and complimentary title for the god of
terrors. It is not his earliest designation and does not occur as a
proper name in the Rig Veda where he is known as Rudra, a word of
disputed derivation, but probably meaning the roarer. Comparatively
few hymns are addressed to Rudra, but he is clearly distinguished from
the other Vedic gods. Whereas they are cheerful and benevolent
figures, he is maleficent and terrible: they are gods of the heaven
but he is a god of the earth. He is the "man-slayer" and the sender of
disease, but if he restrains these activities he can give safety and
health. "Slay us not, for thou art gracious," and so the Destroyer
comes to be the Gracious One.[340] It has been suggested that the name
Siva is connected with the Tamil word _civappu_ red and also that
Rudra means not the roarer but the red or shining one. These
etymologies seem to me possible but not proved. But Rudra is different
in character from the other gods of the Rig Veda. It would be rash to
say that the Aryan invaders of India brought with them no god of this
sort but it is probable that this element in their pantheon increased
as they gradually united in blood and ideas with the Dravidian
population. But we know nothing of the beliefs of the Dravidians at
this remote period. We only know that in later ages emotional
religion, finding expression as so-called devil-dancing in its lower
and as mystical poetry in its higher phases, was prevalent among them.

The White Yajur Veda[341] contains a celebrated prayer known as the
Satarudriya addressed to Rudra or the Rudras, for the power invoked
seems to be now many and now one. This deity, who is described by a
long string of epithets, receives the name of Sankara (afterwards a
well-known epithet of Siva) and is blue-necked. He is begged to be
_Siva_ or propitious, but the word is an epithet, not a proper name.
He haunts mountains and deserted, uncanny places: he is the patron of
violent and lawless men, of soldiers and robbers (the two are
evidently considered much the same), of thieves, cheats and
pilferers,[342] but also of craftsmen and huntsmen and is himself "an
observant merchant": he is the lord of hosts of spirits, "ill-formed
and of all forms." But he is also a great cosmic force who "dwells in
flowing streams and in billows and in tranquil waters and in rivers
and on islands ... and at the roots of trees ...": who "exists in
incantations, in punishments, in prosperity, in the soil, in the
threshing-floor ... in the woods and in the bushes, in sound and in
echo ... in young grass and in foam ... in gravel and in streams ... in
green things and in dry things.... Reverence to the leaf and to him
who is in the fall of the leaf, the threatener, the slayer, the vexer
and the afflicter." Here we see how an evil and disreputable god, the
patron of low castes and violent occupations, becomes associated with
the uncanny forces of nature and is on the way to become an
All-God.[343]

Rudra is frequently mentioned in the Atharva Veda. He is conceived
much as in the Satarudriya, and is the lord of spirits and of animals.
"For thee the beasts of the wood, the deer, swans and various winged
birds are placed in the forest: thy living creatures exist in the
waters: for thee the celestial waters flow. Thou shootest at the
monsters of the ocean, and there is to thee nothing far or near."[344]

These passages show that the main conceptions out of which the
character of the later Siva is built existed in Vedic times. The Rudra
of the Yajur and Atharva Vedas is not Brahmanic: he is not the god of
priests and orderly ritual, but of wild people and places. But he is
not a petty provincial demon who afflicts rustics and their cattle.
Though there is some hesitation between one Rudra and many Rudras, the
destructive forces are unified in thought and the destroyer is not
opposed to creation as a devil or as the principle of evil, but with
profounder insight is recognized as the Lord and Law of all living
things.

But though the outline of Siva is found in Vedic writings, later
centuries added new features to his cult. Chief among these is the
worship of a column known as the Linga, the emblem under which he is
now most commonly adored. It is a phallic symbol though usually decent
in appearance. The Vedas do not countenance this worship and it is not
clear that it was even known to them.[345] It is first enjoined in the
Mahabharata and there only in two passages[346] which appear to be
late additions. The inference seems to be that it was accepted as part
of Hinduism just about the time that our edition of the Mahabharata
was compiled.[347] The old theory that it was borrowed from aboriginal
and especially from Dravidian tribes[348] is now discredited. In the
first place the instances cited of phallic worship among aboriginal
tribes are not particularly numerous or striking. Secondly, linga
worship, though prevalent in the south, is not confined to it, but
flourishes in all parts of India, even in Assam and Nepal. Thirdly, it
is not connected with low castes, with orgies, with obscene or
bloodthirsty rites or with anything which can be called un-Aryan. It
forms part of the private devotions of the strictest Brahmans, and
despite the significance of the emblem, the worship offered to it is
perfectly decorous.[349] The evidence thus suggests that this cultus
grew up among Brahmanical Hindus in the early centuries of our era.
The idea that there was something divine in virility and generation
already existed. The choice of the symbol--the stone pillar--may have
been influenced by two circumstances. Firstly, the Buddhist veneration
of stupas, especially miniature stupas, must have made familiar the
idea that a cone or column is a religious emblem,[350] and secondly
the linga may be compared to the carved pillars or stone standards
erected in honour of Vishnu. Some lingas are carved and bear one or
four faces, thus entirely losing any phallic appearance. The wide
extension of this cult, though its origin seems late, is remarkable.
Something similar may be seen in the worship of Ganesa: the first
records of it are even later, but it is now universal in India.

It may seem strange that a religion whose outward ceremonies though
unassuming and modest consist chiefly of the worship of the linga,
should draw its adherents largely from the educated classes and be
under no moral or social stigma. Yet as an idea, as a philosophy,
Sivaism possesses truth and force. It gives the best picture which
humanity has drawn of the Lord of this world, not indeed of the ideal
to which the saint aspires, nor of the fancies with which hope and
emotion people the spheres behind the veil, but of the force which
rules the Universe as it is, which reproduces and destroys, and in
performing one of these acts necessarily performs the other, seeing
that both are but aspects of change. For all animal and human
existence[351] is the product of sexual desire: it is but the
temporary and transitory form of a force having neither beginning nor
end but continually manifesting itself in individuals who must have a
beginning and an end. This force, to which European taste bids us
refer with such reticence, is the true creator of the world. Not only
is it unceasingly performing the central miracle of producing new
lives but it accompanies it by unnumbered accessory miracles, which
provide the new born child with nourishment and make lowly organisms
care for their young as if they were gifted with human intelligence.
But the Creator is also the Destroyer, not in anger but by the very
nature of his activity. When the series of changes culminates in a
crisis and an individual breaks up, we see death and destruction, but
in reality they occur throughout the process of growth. The egg is
destroyed when the chicken is hatched: the embryo ceases to exist when
the child is born; when the man comes into being, the child is no
more. And for change, improvement and progress death is as necessary
as birth. A world of immortals would be a static world.

When once the figure of Siva has taken definite shape, attributes and
epithets are lavished on it in profusion. He is the great ascetic, for
asceticism in India means power, and Siva is the personification of
the powers of nature. He may alternate strangely between austerities
and wild debauch, but the sentimentality of some Krishnaite sects is
alien to him. He is a magician, the lord of troops of spirits, and
thus draws into his circle all the old animistic worship. But he is
also identified with Time (Mahakala) and Death (Mrityu) and as
presiding over procreation he is Ardhanaresvara, half man, half woman.
Stories are invented or adapted to account for his various attributes,
and he is provided with a divine family. He dwells on Mount Kailasa:
he has three eyes: above the central one is the crescent of the moon
and the stream of the Ganges descends from his braided hair: his
throat is blue and encircled by a serpent and a necklace of skulls. In
his hands he carries a three-pronged trident and a drum. But the
effigy or description varies, for Siva is adored under many forms. He
is Mahadeva, the Great God, Hara the Seizer, Bhairava the terrible
one, Pasupati, the Lord of cattle, that is of human souls who are
compared to beasts. Local gods and heroes are identified with him.
Thus Gor Baba,[352] said to be a deified ghost of the aboriginal
races, reappears as Goresvara and is counted a form of Siva, as is
also Khandoba or Khande Rao, a deity connected with dogs. Ganesa, "the
Lord of Hosts," the God who removes obstacles and is represented with
an elephant's head and accompanied by a rat, is recognized as Siva's
son. Another son is Skanda or Kartikeya, the God of War, a great deity
in Ceylon and southern India. But more important both for the
absorption of aboriginal cults and for its influence on speculation
and morality is the part played by Siva's wife or female counterpart.

The worship of goddesses, though found in many sects, is specially
connected with Sivaism. A figure analogous to the Madonna, the kind
and compassionate goddess who helps and pities all, appears in later
Buddhism but for some reason this train of thought has not been usual
in India. Lakshmi, Sarasvati and Sita are benevolent, but they hold no
great position in popular esteem,[353] and the being who attracts
millions of worshippers under such names as Kali, Durga, or Mahadevi,
though she has many forms and aspects, is most commonly represented as
a terrible goddess who demands offerings of blood. The worship of this
goddess or goddesses, for it is hard to say if she is one or many, is
treated of in a separate chapter. Though in shrines dedicated to Siva
his female counterpart or energy (Sakti) also receives recognition,
yet she is revered as the spouse of her lord to whom honour is
primarily due. But in Saktist worship adoration is offered to the
Sakti as being the form in which his power is made manifest or even as
the essential Godhead.


3


Let us now pass on to Vishnu. Though not one of the great gods of the
Veda, he is mentioned fairly often and with respect. Indian
commentators and comparative mythologists agree that he is a solar
deity. His chief exploit is that he took (or perhaps in the earlier
version habitually takes) three strides. This was originally a
description of the sun's progress across the firmament but grew into a
myth which relates that when the earth was conquered by demons,
Vishnu became incarnate as a dwarf and induced the demon king to
promise him as much space as he could measure in three steps. Then,
appearing in his true form, he strode across earth and heaven and
recovered the world for mankind. His special character as the
Preserver is already outlined in the Veda. He is always benevolent: he
took his three steps for the good of men: he established and preserves
the heavens and earth. But he is not the principal solar deity of the
Rig Veda: Surya, Savitri and Pushan receive more invocations. Though
one hymn says that no one knows the limits of his greatness, other
passages show that he has no pre-eminence, and even in the Mahabharata
and the Vishnu-Purana itself he is numbered among the Adityas or
sons of Aditi. In the Brahmanas, he is somewhat more important than
in the Rig Veda,[354] though he has not yet attained to any position
like that which he afterwards occupies.

Just as for Siva, so for Vishnu we have no clear record of the steps
by which he advanced from a modest rank to the position of having but
one rival in the popular esteem. But the lines on which the change
took place are clear. Even in his own Church, Vishnu himself claims
comparatively little attention. He is not a force like Siva that makes
and mars, but a benevolent and retiring personality who keeps things
as they are. His worship, as distinguished from that of his
incarnations, is not conspicuous in modern India, especially in the
north. In the south he is less overshadowed by Krishna, and many
great temples have been erected in his honour. In Travancore, which is
formally dedicated to him as his special domain, he is adored under
the name of Padmanabha. But his real claim to reverence, his appeal to
the Indian heart, is due to the fact that certain deified human
heroes, particularly Rama and Krishna, are identified with him.

Deification is common in India.[355] It exists to the present day and
even defunct Europeans do not escape its operation. In modern times,
when the idea of reincarnation had become familiar, eminent men like
Caitanya or Vallabhacarya were declared after their death to be
embodiments of Krishna without more ado, but in earlier ages the
process was probably double. First of all the departed hero became a
powerful ghost or deity in his own right, and then this deity was
identified with a Brahmanic god. Many examples prove that a remarkable
man receives worship after death quite apart from any idea of
incarnation.

The incarnations of Vishnu are most commonly given as ten[356] but
are not all of the same character. The first five, namely, the Fish,
Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion and Dwarf, are mythical, and due to his
identification with supernatural creatures playing a benevolent role
in legends with which he had originally no connection. The sixth,
however, Parasu-rama or Rama with the axe, may contain historical
elements. He is represented as a militant Brahman who in the second
age of the world exterminated the Kshatriyas, and after reclaiming
Malabar from the sea, settled it with Brahmans. This legend clearly
refers to a struggle for supremacy between the two upper castes,
though we may doubt if the triumphs attributed to the priestly
champion have any foundation in fact. The Ramayana[357] contains a
singular account of a contest between this Rama and the greater hero
of the same name in which Parasu-rama admits the other's superiority.
That is to say an epic edited under priestly supervision relates how
the hero-god of the warriors vanquishes the hero-god of the priests,
and this hero-god of the warriors is then worshipped by common
consent as the greater divinity, but under priestly patronage. The
tenacity and vitality of the Brahmans enabled them ultimately to lead
the conqueror captive, and Ramacandra became a champion of Brahmanism
as much as Parasu-rama.

Very interesting too is the ninth avatara (to leave for a moment the
strict numerical order) or Buddha.[358] The reason assigned in
Brahmanic literature for Vishnu's appearance in this character is
that he wished to mislead the enemies of the gods by false teaching,
or that out of compassion for animals he preached the abolition of
Vedic sacrifices. Neither explanation is very plausible and it is
pretty clear that in the period when degenerate Buddhism offered no
objection to deification and mythology, the Brahmans sanctioned the
worship of the Buddha under their auspices. But they did so only in a
half-hearted way. The Buddha was so important a personage that he had
to be explained by the intervention, kindly or hostile, of a
deity.[359]

In his tenth incarnation or Kalki,[360] which has yet to take place,
Vishnu will appear as a Messiah, a conception possibly influenced by
Persian ideas. Here, where we are in the realm of pure imagination, we
see clearly what the signs of his avataras are supposed to be. His
mission is to sweep away the wicked and to ensure the triumph of the
pious, but he comes as a warrior and a horseman, not as a teacher, and
if he protects the good he does so by destroying evil. He has thus all
the attributes of a Kshatriya hero, and that is as a matter of fact
the real character of the two most important avataras to which we now
