lose such basics as the smelting of iron, gunpowder, the use of coal as
a fuel?"

Plekhanov was heavy with condescension. "Roberts, you seem to have
entered upon this expedition with a lack of background. Consider. You
put down a hundred colonists, products of the most advanced culture.
Among these you have one or two who can possibly repair an I.B.M.
machine, but is there one who can smelt iron, or even locate the ore? We
have others who could design an automated textile factory, but do any
know how to weave a blanket on a hand loom?

"The first generation gets along well with the weapons and equipment
brought with them from Earth. They maintain the old ways. The second
generation follows along but already ammunition for the weapons runs
short, the machinery imported from Earth needs parts. There is no local
economy that can provide such things. The third generation begins to
think of Earth as a legend and the methods necessary to survive on the
new planet conflict with those the first settlers imported. By the
fourth generation, Earth is no longer a legend but a fable ..."

"But the books, the tapes, the films ..." Roberts injected.

"Go with the guns, the vehicles and the other things brought from Earth.
On a new planet there is no leisure class among the colonists. Each
works hard if the group is to survive. There is no time to write new
books, nor to copy the old, and the second and especially the third
generation are impatient of the time needed to learn to read, time that
should be spent in the fields or at the chase. The youth of an
industrial culture can spend twenty years and more achieving a basic
education before assuming adult responsibilities but no pioneer society
can afford to allow its offspring to so waste its time."

Natt Roberts was being stubborn. "But still, a few would carry the torch
of knowledge."

Plekhanov nodded ponderously. "For a while. But then comes the reaction
against these nonconformists, these crackpots who, by spending time at
books, fail to carry their share of the load. One day they wake up to
find themselves expelled from the group--if not knocked over the head."

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe Chessman had been following Plekhanov's argument. He said dourly,
"But finally the group conquers its environment to the point where a
minimum of leisure is available again. Not for everybody, of course."

Amschel Mayer bounced back into the discussion. "Enter the priest, enter
the war lord. Enter the smart operator who talks or fights himself into
a position where he's free from drudgery."

Joe Chessman said reasonably, "If you don't have the man with leisure,
society stagnates. Somebody has to have time off for thinking, if the
whole group is to advance."

"Admittedly!" Mayer agreed. "I'd be the last to contend that an upper
class is necessarily parasitic."

Plekhanov grumbled, "We're getting away from the subject. In spite of
Mayer's poorly founded opinions, it is quite obvious that only a
collectivized economy is going to enable these Rigel planets to achieve
an industrial culture in as short a period as half a century."

Amschel Mayer reacted as might have been predicted. "Look here,
Plekhanov, we have our own history to go by. Man made his greatest
strides under a freely competitive system."

"Well now ..." Chessman began.

"Prove that!" Plekhanov insisted loudly. "Your so-called free economy
countries such as England, France and the United States began their
industrial revolution in the early part of the nineteenth century. It
took them a hundred years to accomplish what the Soviets did in fifty,
in the next century."

"Just a _moment_, now," Mayer simmered. "That's fine, but the Soviets
were able to profit by the pioneering the free countries did. The
scientific developments, the industrial techniques, were handed to her
on a platter."

Specialist Martin Gunther, thus far silent, put in his calm opinion.
"Actually, it seems to me the fastest industrialization comes under a
paternal guidance from a more advanced culture. Take Japan. In 1854 she
was opened to trade by Commodore Perry. In 1871 she abolished feudalism
and encouraged by her own government and utilizing the most advanced
techniques of a sympathetic West, she began to industrialize." Gunther
smiled wryly, "Soon to the dismay of the very countries that originally
sponsored bringing her into the modern world. By 1894 she was able to
wage a successful war against China and by 1904 she took on and trounced
Czarist Russia. In a period of thirty-five years she had advanced from
feudalism to a world power."

Joe Chessman took his turn. He said obdurately, "Your paternalistic
guidance, given an uncontrolled competitive system, doesn't always work
out. Take India after she gained independence from England. She tried to
industrialize and had the support of the free nations. But what
happened?"

Plekhanov leaned forward to take the ball. "Yes! There's your classic
example. Compare India and China. China had a planned industrial
development. None of this free competition nonsense. In ten years time
they had startled the world with their advances. In twenty years--"

"Yes," Stevens said softly, "but at what price?"

Plekhanov turned on him. "At any price!" he roared. "In one generation
they left behind the China of famine, flood, illiteracy, war lords and
all the misery that had been China's throughout history."

Stevens said mildly, "Whether in their admitted advances they left
behind all the misery that had been China's is debatable, sir."

Plekhanov began to bellow an angry retort but Amschel Mayer popped
suddenly to his feet and lifted a hand to quiet the others. "Our
solution has just come to me!"

Plekhanov glowered at him.

Mayer said excitedly, "Remember what the Co-ordinator told us? This
expedition of ours is the first of its type. Even though we fail, the
very mistakes we make will be invaluable. Our task is to learn how to
bring backward peoples into an industrialized culture in roughly half a
century."

The messroom's occupants scowled at him. Thus far he'd said nothing new.

Mayer went on enthusiastically. "Thus far in our debates we've had two
basic suggestions on procedure. I have advocated a system of free
competition; my learned colleague has been of the opinion that a strong
state and a planned, not to say totalitarian, economy would be the
quicker." He paused dramatically. "Very well, I am in favor of trying
them both."

They regarded him blankly.

He said with impatience, "There are two planets, at different ethnic
periods it is true, but not so far apart as all that. Fine, eight of us
will take Genoa and eight Texcoco."

Plekhanov rumbled, "Fine, indeed. But which group will have the use of
the _Pedagogue_ with its library, its laboratories, its shops, its
weapons?"

For a moment, Mayer was stopped but Joe Chessman growled, "That's no
problem. Leave her in orbit around Rigel. We've got two small boats with
which to ferry back and forth. Each group could have the use of her
facilities any time they wished."

"I suppose we could have periodic conferences," Plekhanov said. "Say
once every decade to compare notes and make further plans, if
necessary."

Natt Roberts was worried. "We had no such instructions from the
Co-ordinator. Dividing our forces like that."

Mayer cut him short. "My dear Roberts, we were given _carte blanche_. It
is up to us to decide procedure. Actually, this system realizes twice
the information such expeditions as ours might ordinarily offer."

"Texcoco for me," Plekhanov grumbled, accepting the plan in its whole.
"The more backward of the two, but under my guidance in half a century
it will be the more advanced, mark me."

"Look here," Martin Gunther said. "Do we have two of each of the basic
specialists, so that we can divide the party in such a way that neither
planet will miss out in any one field?"

Amschel Mayer was beaming at the reception of his scheme. "The point is
well taken, my dear Martin, however you'll recall that our training was
deliberately made such that each man spreads over several fields. This
in case, during our half century without contact, one or more of us
meets with accident. Besides, the _Pedagogue's_ library is such that any
literate can soon become effective in any field to the extent needed on
the Rigel planets."




III.


Joe Chessman was at the controls of the space lighter. At his side sat
Leonid Plekhanov and behind them the other six members of their team.
They had circled Texcoco twice at great altitude, four times at a lesser
one. Now they were low enough to spot man-made works.

"Nomadic," Plekhanov muttered. "Nomadic and village cultures."

"A few dozen urbanized cultures," Chessman said. "Whoever compared the
most advanced nation to the Aztecs was accurate, except for the fact
that they base themselves along a river rather than on a mountain
plateau."

Plekhanov said, "Similarities to the Egyptians and Sumerians." He looked
over his beefy shoulder at the technician who was photographing the
areas over which they passed. "How does our geographer progress,
Roberts?"

Natt Roberts brought his eyes up from his camera viewer. "I've got most
of what we'll need for a while, sir."

[Illustration]

Plekhanov turned back to Chessman. "We might as well head for their
principal city, the one with the pyramids. We'll make initial contact
there. I like the suggestion of surplus labor available."

"Surplus labor?" Chessman said, setting the controls. "How do you know?"

"Pyramids," Plekhanov rumbled. "I've always been of the opinion that
such projects as pyramids, whether they be in Yucatan or Egypt, are
make-work affairs. A priesthood, or other ruling clique, keeping its
people busy and hence out of mischief."

Chessman adjusted a speed lever and settled back. "I can see their
point."

"But I don't agree with it," Plekhanov said ponderously. "A society that
builds pyramids is a static one. For that matter any society that
resorts to make-work projects to busy its citizenry has something
basically wrong."

Joe Chessman said sourly, "I wasn't supporting the idea, just
understanding the view of the priesthoods. They'd made a nice thing for
themselves and didn't want to see anything happen to it. It's not the
only time a group in the saddle has held up progress for the sake of
remaining there. Priests, slave-owners, feudalistic barons, or
bureaucrats of a twentieth-century police state, a ruling clique will
never give up power without pressure."

Barry Watson leaned forward and pointed down and to the right. "There's
the river," he said. "And there's their capital city."

The small spacecraft settled at decreasing speed.

Chessman said, "The central square? It seems to be their market, by the
number of people."

"I suppose so," Plekhanov grunted. "Right there before the largest
pyramid. We'll remain inside the craft for the rest of today and
tonight."

Natt Roberts, who had put away his camera, said, "But why? It's crowded
in here."

"Because I said so," Plekhanov rumbled. "This first impression is
important. Our flying machine is undoubtedly the first they've seen.
We've got to give them time to assimilate the idea and then get together
a welcoming committee. We'll want the top men, right from the
beginning."

"The equivalent of the Emperor Montezuma meeting Cortez, eh?" Barry
Watson said. "A real red carpet welcome."

The _Pedagogue's_ space lighter settled to the plaza gently, some fifty
yards from the ornately decorated pyramid which stretched up several
hundred feet and was topped by a small templelike building.

Chessman stretched and stood up from the controls. "Your anthropology
ought to be better than that, Barry," he said. "There was no Emperor
Montezuma and no Aztec Empire, except in the minds of the Spanish." He
peered out one of the heavy ports. "And by the looks of this town we'll
find an almost duplicate of Aztec society. I don't believe they've even
got the wheel."

The eight of them clustered about the craft's portholes, taking in the
primitive city that surrounded them. The square had emptied at their
approach, and now the several thousand citizens that had filled it were
peering fearfully from street entrances and alleyways.

Cogswell, a fiery little technician, said, "Look at them! It'll take
hours before they drum up enough courage to come any closer. You were
right, doctor. If we left the boat now, we'd make fools of ourselves
trying to coax them near enough to talk."

Watson said to Joe Chessman "What do you mean, no Emperor Montezuma?"

Chessman said absently, as he watched, "When the Spanish got to Mexico
they didn't understand what they saw, being musclemen rather than
scholars. And before competent witnesses came on the scene, Aztec
society was destroyed. The conquistadors, who did attempt to describe
Tenochtitlan, misinterpreted it. They were from a feudalistic world and
tried to portray the Aztecs in such terms. For instance, the large
Indian community houses they thought were palaces. Actually, Montezuma
was a democratically elected war chief of a confederation of three
tribes which militarily dominated most of the Mexican valley. There was
no empire because Indian society, being based on the clan, had no method
of assimilating newcomers. The Aztec armies could loot and they could
capture prisoners for their sacrifices, but they had no system of
bringing their conquered enemies into the nation. They hadn't reached
that far in the evolution of society. The Incas could have taught them a
few lessons."

Plekhanov nodded. "Besides, the Spanish were fabulous liars. In Cortez's
attempt to impress Spain's king, he built himself up far beyond reality.
To read his reports you'd think the pueblo of Mexico had a population
pushing a million. Actually, if it had thirty thousand it was doing
well. Without a field agriculture and with their primitive transport,
they must have been hard put to feed even that large a town."

A tall, militarily erect native strode from one of the streets that
debouched into the plaza and approached to within twenty feet of the
space boat. He stared at it for at least ten full minutes then spun on
his heel and strode off again in the direction of one of the stolidly
built stone buildings that lined the square on each side except that
which the pyramid dominated.

Cogswell chirped, "Now that he's broken the ice, in a couple of hours
kids will be scratching their names on our hull."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the morning, two or three hours after dawn, they made their
preparations to disembark. Of them all, only Leonid Plekhanov was
unarmed. Joe Chessman had a heavy handgun holstered at his waist. The
rest of the men carried submachine guns. More destructive weapons were
hardly called for, nor available for that matter; once world government
had been established on Earth the age-old race for improved arms had
fallen away.

Chessman assumed command of the men, growled brief instructions. "If
there's any difficulty, remember we're civilizing a planet of nearly a
billion population. The life or death of a few individuals is
meaningless. Look at our position scientifically, dispassionately. If it
becomes necessary to use force--we have the right and the might to back
it up. MacBride, you stay with the ship. Keep the hatch closed and
station yourself at the fifty-caliber gun."

The natives seemed to know intuitively that the occupants of the craft
from the sky would present themselves at this time. Several thousands of
them crowded the plaza. Warriors, armed with spears and bronze headed
war clubs, kept the more adventurous from crowding too near.

The hatch opened, the steel landing stair snaked out, and the hefty
Plekhanov stepped down, closely followed by Chessman. The others brought
up the rear, Watson, Roberts, Stevens, Hawkins and Cogswell. They had
hardly formed a compact group at the foot of the spacecraft than the
ranks of the natives parted and what was obviously a delegation of
officials approached them. In the fore was a giant of a man in his late
middle years, and at his side a cold-visaged duplicate of him, obviously
a son.

Behind these were variously dressed others, military, priesthood, local
officials, by their appearance.

Ten feet from the newcomers they stopped. The leader said in quite
understandable Amer-English, "I am Taller, Khan of all the People. Our
legends tell of you. You must be from First Earth." He added with a
simple dignity, a quiet gesture, "Welcome to the World. How may we serve
you?"

Plekhanov said flatly, "The name of this planet is Texcoco and the
inhabitants shall henceforth be called Texcocans. You are correct, we
have come from Earth. Our instructions are to civilize you, to bring you
the benefits of the latest technology, to prepare you to enter the
community of planets." Phlegmatically he let his eyes go to the
pyramids, to the temples, the large community dwelling quarters. "We'll
call this city Tula and its citizens Tulans."

Taller looked thoughtfully at him, not having missed the tone of
arrogant command. One of the group behind the Khan, clad in gray flowing
robes, said to Plekhanov, mild reproof in his voice, "My son, we are the
most advanced people on ... Texcoco. We have thought of ourselves as
civilized. However, we--"
