that ship must have been very upset. The bathyscaphe had cost more money
than is usually allotted to most scientific researchers, and now it was
smashed. How would they justify themselves? They could hardly blame the
_Esperance_.

The yacht sailed in a closed pattern over this area of the Luzon Deep.
Deirdre served dinner on deck. Stars shone down almost instantly after a
sunset of unusual magnificence, even for the China Sea. Tony brought his
guitar aft, and a contagious feeling of exhilaration spread about the
_Esperance_ and an improvised party took place on deck. Maybe the mood
for festivity arose from the realization that at least nine-tenths of
the world's population would have graded them as lunatics, had it known
their project for the evening.

It would have been unjust, of course. Terry reflected that it had not
been their idea to make an appointment with a shooting star. They were
doing it out of some sort of professional courtesy, "from one set of
crackpots to another," Terry phrased it in his own mind. It was a wild
attempt to secure proof of the starkly impossible. So there was chatter,
singing, and some dancing. The high spot was perhaps the time when Jug
bashfully serenaded the rigging and the stars above it with howling
melodies he'd learned in college.

Eventually, Nick went down to the short-wave set. Doug passed out the
gun-cameras again, after checking each one. Nick popped his head out of
the hatch.

"Dr. Morton's been calling like crazy," he reported. "The bolide's made
four orbital turns, coming in all the while. It ought to touch the
atmosphere next time around. ETO is nine-twelve-seventeen-seconds. I
told him we're all set."

His head disappeared.

"Don't forget!" Doug said anxiously. "The cameras will feel like
shotguns but don't lead your target! And don't forget to press the
film-changer!"

Terry lifted his gun-camera experimentally. It did feel like a shotgun.
And then, suddenly, he disbelieved everything: the purpose of the
_Esperance's_ original investigation; the phenomena that had been
observed; the guesses that had been made. It was pure insanity! He felt
a quick impatience with himself for becoming entangled in anything so
ridiculous.

Deirdre leaned toward him and whispered forlornly, "Terry! It's
dreadful! I've just had an attack of common sense! What are we doing
here? We're crazy!"

He put his hand consolingly over hers. The act was unpremeditated and
the sensation was startling. He found that they were staring at each
other intently in the starlight.

"I think ..." said Terry, unsteadily, "that it's very sensible to be
crazy. We've got to ... talk this over."

Deirdre smiled at him shakily.

"Y-yes, we will."

Then Davis pointed out positions for the camera operators. The bolide's
course should be three hundred fifty degrees, not quite on a north-south
line. It might land short of, or beyond, the _Esperance_. Or it might
pass many miles to the east or west. Dr. Morton needed as many pictures
of it against recognizable stars as could possibly be secured.

Suddenly, there was a faint, dull rumbling in the heavens. It grew
louder. Presently, cruising lights appeared in the sky. They maintained
a fixed relationship to each other. They looked like moving stars,
flying in formation from star-cluster to star-cluster.

Nick popped abovedecks again.

"The planes just called us," he reported. "They've just had a Loran
position-check and they're on the mark. They've got orders to observe
any unusual phenomena occurring around nine-twelve P.M., Manila time.
Using civilian terminology, it sounds like they're saying the Philippine
Government asked them to come out and take a look."

"It's five after nine now," said Davis.

The _Esperance_ headed into the wind. Her bow rose and fell. Waves
washed past, and roarings trundled about under the stars overhead, and
very tiny lights moved in a compact group across the firmament.

Time passed.

At twenty-two seconds after nine-twelve--which is to say at twenty-one
hours, twelve minutes, twenty-two seconds--a light appeared in the sky
from the north. It grew steadily brighter. It suddenly flared very
brightly indeed, then dimmed, and continued to rise above the horizon.
Seconds later it flared again, very briefly.

Terry found himself aiming the gun-camera. He pulled trigger and changed
film and pulled trigger and changed film.

The bright light ceased to climb. It grew steadily brighter and
brighter, and then it flared for the third time--Terry's mind asked
skeptically, 'Braking rockets?'--and the light was so intense that the
cracks in the yacht's deck-planking could be seen. Then the extra
brilliance vanished, and suddenly the moving light was no longer white,
but reddish.

Terry aimed again and fired the gun-camera.

The light passed almost directly overhead. Terry had the impression that
he felt its heat upon his skin.

It plunged into the sea two miles beyond the _Esperance_. The shock-wave
caused by the impact tapped on the yacht's side-planking a few seconds
later. Starlight shone upon a plume of steam.

Then there was nothing but the noise of the circling planes above. Then
a sound, as of thunder. It disappeared northward. It was the sound of
the bolide's passage, arriving after the object itself had dived into
the sea.

The people on the _Esperance_ were dumfounded. Nick went below and came
up again a few minutes latter.

"The planes were calling," he reported. "They say they noted the unusual
phenomenon. They ask if they should stay around for something else."

"I think," said Davis caustically, "that that's all that's scheduled
just now. Tell them so."

The _Esperance_ went on steadily again, a trifle west of north. Davis
was below, talking via radio to Dr. Morton at the satellite tracking
base.

Terry and Deirdre went to look for a place where they could talk over
something privately. It was of enormous importance to them, but it was
not connected with fish or meteorites or plastic objects or anything at
all but the two of them. And to them the yacht seemed crowded with
people, even though there was nobody else abovedecks but one of the
crew-cuts at the wheel.

When the _Esperance_ entered the lagoon the next morning, though, their
private talk had evidently come to a satisfactory conclusion. Deirdre
smiled at Terry without any reason whatever, and he looked at once smug
and embarrassed and uneasy, as if he possessed a new status to which he
was still unaccustomed.

The recorder, trailing a submarine ear overboard, had duly reported the
presence of the hum in the water, just outside the lagoon. It had not
been operating for forty hours or thereabouts. During that time the fish
inside could go out of the lagoon, if they chose. And other fish could
come in. Terry said suddenly, as the yacht went under power toward the
tracking station wharf, "Suppose there was a cone of noise just outside
the lagoon, and the flanks of the submarine mountain under us were
included in the cone? And suppose the cone grew smaller, like the other
one. What would happen?"

Deirdre shook her head, smiling at him.

"The fish," said Terry, "could escape into the lagoon."

"Probably," agreed Deirdre.

"And if fish could be driven downward along a certain path," said Terry,
"the way we saw it happen, why, fish could be driven up in a certain
path, too."

"Obviously," said Deirdre.

"So if something wanted to replace the fish in the lagoon, or to add to
their number, why, it would puncture their swim bladders far, far down,
and then drive them up to the surface and into the lagoon, and then keep
the noise going to keep them inside."

"Is this a new idea?" asked Deirdre.

"N-n-o," admitted Terry. "I've had it for some time."

"So," said Deirdre, "have I."

The _Esperance's_ engine stopped, and she floated to gentle contact with
the wharf. Members of the tracking station staff made the yacht fast.
With others, Dr. Morton came on board. His expression was the picture of
unrelieved gloom.

"I'm in a nice spot!" he told Davis. "I predicted a second bolide
correctly! I had to use a different retardation factor to make the math
come out right. Now I'm asked to explain that! How can I tell them I
knew where it would fall, and only had to compute when?"

"Come below and look at the pictures we got," said Davis.

They disappeared down the after-cabin hatch. Terry knew about the
pictures. Doug had developed them with sweating care, developing each
negative separately and adjusting the development-time to the varying
exposures of the bright object.

There was a total of twenty reasonably good pictures of the bolide, from
its first appearance to its plunge into the ocean, two miles from the
_Esperance_. Doug had enlarged some of them. There were distinct
star-patterns in most. In nearly all, though, the object was more or
less blurred by its own motion. In those taken when it flared most
brightly, the blurriness was especially marked. There was only one
picture of professional, if accidental, quality, and it was the least
convincing of all. It showed the fore-part of a conical shape traveling
point-first. Nobody would conceivably believe that it was a meteorite.
It looked artificial.

Terry and Deirdre, as it happened, stayed on deck. The people of the
tracking station made a babbling uproar. It appeared that the most
important event in history, as history was viewed on Thrawn Island, had
taken place the night before. It was revealed--Terry had not suspected
his own success--that in asking Horta to see that there was
foreknowledge of a meteoric fall, Terry had arranged for the matter to
be taken immediately to high Philippine Government officials. The
American flattop, at their request, had sent planes to the place of the
fall, with orders which were enigmatic only until the descending object
appeared. Then every man in every plane knew that he'd been sent there
to see it.

So there could be no question but that Dr. Morton had predicted it. That
meant that he knew more about meteoric objects than anybody else in the
world. What he had to say was of vast importance, and Thrawn Island
shared in his achievement. But it was a strictly professional triumph.
The news would not break in the newspapers. No ordinary reader would
believe in it. And nobody anywhere would believe in Morton's knowledge
of the place of the fall before he began to calculate.

Terry observed that the people of Thrawn Island were definitely no
longer interested in fish. They'd kept their eyes open for oddities
because a deep-sea fish with a plastic object attached had been caught
in the lagoon a long while before. They'd been intensely interested when
Terry herded all the lagoon fish into one small inner bay, and they
speared sixty fish that had no business being at the surface. They'd
found eight more plastic objects. Such things had been interesting, if
not important. But now the head of the Thrawn Island staff had computed
the place and time of arrival of a meteoric mass from space! And he did
it when that mass was five thousand miles out! From a professional
standpoint, this was stupendous! They tried to make Terry see how
important it was.

Davis and Morton came up from below. They headed for the shore. The
crew-cuts trailed off to the land with most of the visitors. Only
Deirdre and Terry remained on the yacht, with a mere short-wave operator
from the island.

"We're going to have a fancy lunch, with champagne and speeches," the
operator said hopefully. "You'll come?"

"Naturally!" said Terry. "But first we're going swimming. We haven't had
a chance to be overboard since the last time we were here."

"We'll be back in time for lunch," Deirdre assured the operator, "but
swimming here is so wonderful! We've been talking about it for days!"

She went below to change. The operator shrugged. After a further attempt
to interest Terry in the celebration of an astronomical first, he went
ashore. Terry went with him to get the outboard motorboat he and Deirdre
had used before. He was already wearing swimming trunks.

A little later the small boat putt-putted away from the _Esperance_ upon
the glassy-rippled waters of the lagoon.

There was a very great tranquillity everywhere. The booming roar of the
surf came from unseen rollers on the reef outside. Seabirds squawked.
Palms along the edge of the lagoon waved their fronds very, very gently.

"How far will you go before we swim?" asked Deirdre. "All the lagoon's
perfect. One place is as good as another."

He cut off the motor.

"Hmmm. There's a deep place yonder," he observed. "That's where I went
with the aqualung and speared the freak fish. Stay away from it."

She jumped over in a clean dive. He joined her in the water. She came
up, blowing bubbles.

"All right, Terry. What are your troubles?"

"That bolide bothers me," he told her. "It had a specific destination!
It was meant to hit the water over the Luzon Deep!"

She dived again. This time Terry followed her. The underwater world was
beautifully bright, with ripplings making everything seem to shimmer
because of the changing light. When they came up again Deirdre said,
"Funny!"

"It had a purpose!" insisted Terry. "There were others before it, and
they had a purpose too! That's not funny!"

"I didn't mean that," said Deirdre. "I meant ... just now, under the
water.... What's that?"

There was a swirling at the surface, some tens of yards away. It was not
the curling eddy made by a fish about to break surface. It was too big a
disturbance for that. It looked as if something stirred, barely
submerged, but something very large. Terry, staring, thought of a
porpoise cavorting just below the ripples. Or perhaps a shark. But
sharks and porpoises are too small to have made this eddying. It
reappeared.

"Get in the boat!" snapped Terry. "Quick!"

While she climbed in he let himself sink, his eyes open. There was a
clouding of the water underneath, where the surface-disturbance had
been. It was mud from the bottom which had been stirred up. He could see
nothing clearly through it, though nearby and around him he could easily
see the colorings of coral and fan sponges, and he could see small fish
darting here and there.

He broke surface. Deirdre bent anxiously over the gunwale.

"What is it?"

"I don't know," he said curtly. "But give me a fish spear."

"You won't...."

