"I 'speck dat's 'bout de upshot un it," said Uncle Remus. "Dey tells me
dat w'ence you year chilluns talkin' en gwine on periently wid deyse'f,
der er bleedz ter see ha'nts."

The little boy moved his stool closer to his venerable partner. Daddy
Jack roused himself.

"Oona no bin-a see dem ghos'? Oona no bin-a see dem harnt? Hi! I is
bin-a see plenty ghos'; I no 'fraid dem; I is bin-a punch dem 'way wit'
me cane. I is bin-a shoo dem 'pon dey own sied da' road. Dem is bin walk
w'en da' moon stan' low; den I is bin shum. Oona no walk wit' me dun. 'E
berry bahd. Oona call, dey no answer. Wun dey call, hol' you' mout'
shet. 'E berry bahd fer mek answer, wun da' harnt holler. Dem call-a you
'way fum dis lan'. I yeddy dem call; I shetty me y-eye, I shekkey me
head.

"Wun I is bin noung mahn, me der go fer git water, un wun I der dip
piggin 'neat' da' crik, I yeddy v'ice fer call me--'_Jahck! O Jahck!_' I
stan', I lissen, I yeddy de v'ice--'_Jahck! Jahck! O Jahck!_' I t'ink 'e
bin Titty Ann;[26] I ahx um:--

"Wey you bin call-a me, Titty Ann?' Titty Ann 'tretch 'e y-eye big:--

"'I no bin-a call. Dead ghos' is bin-a call. Dem harnt do call-a you.'

"Dun I rise me y-eye, un I is bin shum gwan by sundown; 'e is bin gwan
bahckwud. I tell Titty Ann fer look at we nuncle, gwan bahckwud by
sundown. Titty Ann pit 'e two han' 'pon me y-eyes, en 'e do bline me. 'E
say I bin-a see one dead ghos'."

"What then, Daddy Jack?" asked the little boy, as the old African
paused.

"Ki! nuff dun. 'Kaze bumbye, so long tam, folks come fetch-a we nuncle
'tretch out. 'E is bin-a tek wit' da' _he_cup; 'e t'row 'e head dis way;
'e t'row 'e head dat way." Daddy Jack comically suited the action to the
word. "'E is bin tek-a da' _he_cup; da' _he_cup is bin tek um--da' cramp
is bin fetch um. I is bin see mo' dead ghos', but me no spot um lak
dis."

"I boun' you is," said Uncle Remus. "Dey tells me, Brer Jack," he
continued, "dat w'en you meets up wid one er deze ha'nts, ef you'll
take'n tu'n yo' coat wrong-sud-outerds, dey won't use no time in makin'
der disappearance."

"Hey!" exclaimed Daddy Jack, "tu'n coat no fer skeer dead ghos'. 'E
skeer dem Jack-me-Lantun. One tam I is bin-a mek me way troo t'ick
swamp. I do come hot, I do come cole. I feel-a me bahck quake; me bre't'
come fahs'. I look; me ent see nuttin'; I lissen; me ent yeddy nuttin'.
I look, dey de Jack-me-Lantun mekkin 'e way troo de bush; 'e comin'
stret by me. 'E light bin-a flick-flicker; 'e git close un close. I yent
kin stan' dis; one foot git heffy, da' heer 'pon me head lif' up. Da'
Jack-me-Lantun, 'e git-a high, 'e git-a low, 'e come close. Dun I t'ink
I bin-a yeddy ole folks talk _tu'n you' coat-sleef_ wun da'
Jack-me-Lantun is bin run you. I pull, I twis', I yerk at dem jacket; 'e
yent come. 'E is bin grow on me bahck. Jack-me-Lantun fly close. I say
me pray 'pon da' jacket; 'e is bin-a yerk loose; da' sleef 'e do tu'n.
Jack-me-Lantun, 'e see dis, 'e lif' up, 'e say '_Phew!_' 'E done gone!
Oona no walk in da' swamp 'cep' you is keer you' coat 'cross da' arm.
Enty!"

"Dat w'at make me say," remarked Aunt Tempy, with a little shiver, "dat
'oman like me, w'at ain't w'ar no jacket, ain't got no business
traipsin' un trollopin' 'roun' thoo the woods atter dark."

"You mout tu'n yo' head-hankcher, Sis Tempy," said Uncle Remus,
reassuringly, "en ef dat ain't do no good den you kin whirl in en gin um
leg-bail."

"I year tell," continued Aunt Tempy, vouchsafing no reply to Uncle
Remus, "dat dish yer Jacky-ma-Lantun is a sho' nuff sperit. Sperits
ain't gwine to walk un walk less'n dey got sump'n' n'er on der min', un
I year tell dat dish yer Jacky-ma-Lantun is 'casioned by a man w'at got
kilt. Folks kilt 'im un tuck his money, un now his ha'nt done gone un
got a light fer ter hunt up whar his money is. Mighty kuse ef folks kin
hone atter money w'en dey done _gone_. I dunner w'at he wanter be
ramblin' 'roun' wid a light w'en he done _dead_. Ef anybody got any hard
feelin's 'gin' me, I want um ter take it out w'ile deyer in de flesh;
w'en dey come a-ha'ntin' me, den I'm done--I'm des _done_."

"Are witches spirits?" the little boy asked.

The inquiry was not especially directed at Daddy Jack, but Daddy Jack
was proud of his reputation as a witch, and he undertook to reply.

"None 't all. Witch, 'e no dead ghos'--'e life folks, wey you shekky
han' wit'. Oona witch mebbe; how you is kin tell?"

Here Daddy Jack turned his sharp little eyes upon the child. The latter
moved closer to Uncle Remus, and said he hoped to goodness he was n't a
witch.

"How you is kin tell diffran 'cep' you bin fer try um?" continued Daddy
Jack. "'E good t'ing fer be witch; 'e mek-a dem folks fred. 'E mek-a dem
fred; 'e mek-a dem hol' da' bre't', wun dey is bin-a come by you'
place."

"In de name er de Lord, Daddy Jack, how kin folks tell wh'er dey er
witches er no?" asked Aunt Tempy.

"Oo! 'e easy nuff. Wun da' moon is shiuen low, wet-a you' han' wit' da'
pot-licker grease; rub noung heifer 'pon 'e nose; git 'pon 'e bahck.
Mus' hol' um by 'e year; mus' go gallop, gallop down da' lane, tel 'e do
come 'cross one-a big gully. Mus' holler, '_Double, double, double up!
double, double, double up!_' Heifer jump, oona witch; heifer no jump,
oona no witch."

"Did you ever ride a heifer, Daddy Jack?" asked the little boy.

"Mo' tam es dem," replied the old negro, holding up the crooked fingers
of one withered hand.

"Did--did she jump across the big gully?"

The child's voice had dropped to an awed whisper, and there was a glint
of malicious mischief in Daddy Jack's shrewd eyes, as he looked up at
Uncle Remus. He got his cue. Uncle Remus groaned heavily and shook his
head.

"Hoo!" exclaimed Daddy Jack, "wun I is bin-a tell all, dey no mo' fer
tell. Mus' kip some fer da' Sunday. Lilly b'y no fred dem witch; 'e no
bodder lilly b'y. Witch, 'e no rassel wit' 'e ebry-day 'quaintan'; 'e do
go pars 'e own place."

It was certainly reassuring for the child to be told that witches did
n't trouble little boys, and that they committed their depredations
outside of their own neighborhood.

"I is bin-a yeddy dem talk 'bout ole witch. 'E do leaf 'e skin wey 'e is
sta't fum. Man bin-a come pars by; 'e is fine dem skin. 'E say:--

"'Ki! 'E one green skin; I fix fer dry um.'

"Man hang um by da' fier. Skin, 'e do swink, i' do swivel. Bumbye 'e do
smell-a bahd; man, 'e hol' 'e nose. 'E do wait. Skin swink, skin stink,
skin swivel. 'E do git so bahd, man pitch um in da' ya'd. 'E wait; 'e is
wait, 'e is lissen. Bumbye, 'e yeddy da' witch come. Witch, e' do sharp'
'e claw on-a da' fence; 'e is snap 'e jaw--_flick! flick! flick!_ 'E
come-a hunt fer him skin. 'E fine um. 'E trey um on dis way; 'e no fit.
'E trey um on dat way; 'e no fit. 'E trey um on turrer way; 'e no fit.
'E pit um 'pon 'e head; skin 'e no fit. 'E pit um 'pon 'e foot; skin 'e
no fit. 'E cuss, 'e sweer; skin 'e no fit. 'E cut 'e caper; skin 'e no
fit. Bumbye 'e holler:--

"''Tiss-a me, Skin! wey you no know me? Skin, 'tiss-a me! wey you no
know me?'

"Skin, 'e no talk nuttin' 'tall. Witch 'e do jump, 'e do holler; a mek
no diffran. Skin 'e talk nuttin' 'tall. Man, 'e tekky to'ch, 'e look in
ya'd. 'E see big blahck Woolf lay by da' skin. E toof show; 'e y-eye
shiuen. Man drife um 'way; 'e is come bahck. Man bu'n da' skin; 'e is
bin-a come bahck no mo'."

The little boy asked no more questions. He sat silent while the others
talked, and then went to the door and looked out. It was very dark, and
he returned to his stool with a troubled countenance.

"Des wait a little minnit, honey," said Uncle Remus, dropping his hand
caressingly on the child's shoulder. "I bleedz ter go up dar ter de big
house fer ter see Mars John, en I'll take you 'long fer comp'ny."

And so, after a while, the old man and the little boy went hand in hand
up the path.


FOOTNOTE:

[26] Sissy Ann.




XXIX

A GHOST STORY


The next time the little boy visited Uncle Remus he persuaded 'Tildy to
go with him. Daddy Jack was in his usual place, dozing and talking to
himself, while Uncle Remus oiled the carriage-harness. After a while
Aunt Tempy came in.

The conversation turned on Daddy Jack's story about "haunts" and
spirits. Finally 'Tildy said:--

"W'en it come ter tales 'bout ha'nts," said she, "I year tell er one
dat'll des nat'ally make de kinks on yo' head onquile deyse'f."

"W'at tale dat, chile?" asked Aunt Tempy.

"Unk' Remus, mus' I tell it?"

"Let 'er come," said Uncle Remus.

"Well, den," said 'Tildy, rolling her eyes back and displaying her white
teeth, "one time dey wuz a 'Oman en a Man. Seem like dey live close ter
one er n'er, en de Man he sot his eyes on de 'Oman, en de 'Oman, she des
went 'long en 'ten' ter her bizness. Man, he keep his eyes sot on 'er.
Bimeby, de 'Oman, she 'ten' ter her bizness so much tel she tuck'n tuck
sick en die. Man, he up'n tell de folks she dead, en de folks dey come
en fix 'er. Dey lay 'er out, en dey light some candles, en dey sot up
wid 'er, des like folks does now; en dey put two great big roun' shiny
silver dollars on 'er eyes fer ter hol' 'er eyeleds down."

In describing the silver dollars 'Tildy joined the ends of her thumbs
and fore-fingers together, and made a figure as large as a saucer.

"Dey wuz lots bigger dan dollars is deze days," she continued, "en dey
look mighty purty. Seem like dey wuz all de money de 'Oman got, en de
folks dey put um on 'er eyeleds fer to hol' um down. Den w'en de folks
do dat dey call up de Man en take'n tell 'im dat he mus' dig a grave en
bury de 'Oman, en den dey all went off 'bout der bizness.

"Well, den, de Man, he tuck'n dig de grave en make ready fer ter bury de
'Oman. He look at dat money on 'er eyeleds, en it shine mighty purty.
Den he tuck it off en feel it. Hit feel mighty good, but des 'bout dat
time de Man look at de 'Oman, en he see 'er eyeleds open. Look like she
lookin' at 'im, en he take'n put de money whar he git it fum.

"Well, den, de Man, he take'n git a waggin en haul de 'Oman out ter de
buryin'-groun', en w'en he git dar he fix ever'thing, en den he grab de
money en kivver up de grave right quick. Den he go home, en put de money
in a tin box en rattle it 'roun.' Hit rattle loud en hit rattle nice,
but de Man, he ain't feel so good. Seem like he know de 'Oman eyeled
stretch wide open lookin' fer 'im. Yit he rattle de money 'roun', en hit
rattle loud en hit rattle nice.

"Well, den, de Man, he take'n put de tin box w'at de money in on de
mantel-shel-uf. De day go by, en de night come, en w'en night come de
win' 'gun ter rise up en blow. Hit rise high, hit blow strong. Hit blow
on top er de house, hit blow und' de house, hit blow 'roun' de house.
Man, he feel quare. He set by de fier en lissen. Win' say
'_Buzz-zoo-o-o-o-o!_' Man lissen. Win' holler en cry. Hit blow top er de
house, hit blow und' de house, hit blow 'roun' de house, hit blow in de
house. Man git closte up in de chimbly-jam. Win' fin' de cracks en blow
in um. '_Bizzy, bizzy, buzz-zoo-o-o-o-o!_'

"Well, den, Man, he lissen, lissen, but bimeby he git tired er dis, en
he 'low ter hisse'f dat he gwine ter bed. He tuck'n fling a fresh
light'd knot in de fier, en den he jump in de bed, en quile hisse'f up
en put his head und' de kivver. Win' hunt fer de cracks--_bizzy-buzz,
bizzy-buzz, buzz-zoo-o-o-o-o-o!_ Man keep his head und' de kivver.
Light'd knot flar' up en flicker. Man ain't dast ter move. Win' blow en
w'issel _Phew-fee-e-e-e!_ Light'd knot flicker en flar'. Man, he keep
his head kivvud.

"Well, den, Man lay dar, en git skeer'der en skeer'der. He ain't dast
ter wink his eye skacely, en seem like he gwine ter have swamp agur.
W'iles he layin' dar shakin', en de win' a-blowin', en de fier flickin',
he year someyuther kind er fuss. Hit mighty kuse kind er fuss.
_Clinkity, clinkalinkle!_ Man 'low:--

"'Hey! who stealin' my money?'

"Yit he keep his head kivvud w'iles he lay en lissen. He year de win'
blow, en den he year dat yuther kinder fuss--_Clinkity, clink, clinkity,
clinkalinkle!_ Well, den, he fling off de kivver en sot right up in de
bed. He look, he ain't see nothin'. De fier flicker en flar' en de win'
blow. Man go en put chain en bar 'cross de do'. Den he go back to bed,
en he ain't mo'n totch his head on de piller tel he year de yuther
fuss--_clink, clink, clinkity, clinkalinkle!_ Man rise up, he ain't see
nothin' 'tall. Mighty quare!

"Des 'bout time he gwine ter lay down 'g'in, yer come de
fuss--_clinkity, clinkalinkle_. Hit soun' like it on de mantel-shel-uf;
let 'lone dat, hit soun' like it in de tin box on de mantel-shel-uf; let
'lone dat, hit soun' like it de money in de tin box on de
man-tel-shel-uf. Man say:--

"'Hey! rat done got in box!'

"Man look; no rat dar. He shet up de box, en set it down on de shel-uf.
Time he do dat yer come de fuss--_clinkity, clinkity, clinkalinkle!_ Man
open de box en look at de money. Dem two silver dollars layin' in dar
des like he put um. W'iles de man dun dis, look like he kin year sump'n'
say 'way off yander:--

"'_Whar my money? Oh, gim me my money!_'

"Man, he sot de box back on de shel-uf, en time he put it down he year
de money rattle--_clinkity, clinkalinkle, clink!_--en den fum 'way off
yander sump'n' say:--

"'_Oh, gim me my money! I want my money!_'

"Well, den, de Man git skeer'd sho' nuff, en he got er flat-iuen en put
on de tin box, en den he tuck'n pile all de cheers 'gin' de do', en run
en jump in de bed. He des know dey's a booger comin'. Time he git in bed
en kivver his head, de money rattle louder, en sump'n' cry way off
yander:--

"'_I want my money! Oh, gim me my money!_'

"Man, he shake en he shiver; money, hit clink en rattle; booger, hit
holler en cry. Booger come closter, money clink louder. Man shake wusser
en wusser. Money say: _'Clinkity, clinkalinkle!'_ Booger cry, _'Oh, gim
me my money!'_ Man holler, '_O Lordy, Lordy!_'

"Well, den, hit keep on dis a-way, tel dreckly Man year de do' open. He
peep fum und' de kivver, en in walk de 'Oman w'at he done bury in de
buryin'-groun'. Man shiver en shiver, win' blow en blow, money rattle
en rattle, 'Oman cry en cry. '_Buzz-zoo-o-o-o-o!_' sez de win';
'_Clinkalink!_' sez de box; '_Oh, gim me my money!_' sez de 'Oman; '_O
Lordy!_' sez de Man. 'Oman year de money, but look like she ain't kin
see, en she grope 'roun', en grope 'roun', en grope 'roun' wid 'er han'
h'ist in de a'r des dis away."

Here 'Tildy stood up, pushed her chair back with her foot, raised her
arms over her head, and leaned forward in the direction of Daddy Jack.

"Win' blow, fier flicker, money rattle, Man shake en shiver, 'Oman grope
'roun' en say, '_Gim me my money! Oh, who got my money?_'"

'Tildy advanced a few steps.

"Money look like it gwine ter t'ar de tin box all ter flinders. 'Oman
grope en cry, grope en cry, tel bimeby she jump on de man en holler:--

"'_You got my money!_'"

As she reached this climax, 'Tildy sprang at Daddy Jack and seized him,
and for a few moments there was considerable confusion in the corner.
The little boy was frightened, but the collapsed appearance of Daddy
Jack convulsed him with laughter. The old African was very angry. His
little eyes glistened with momentary malice, and he shook his cane
threateningly at 'Tildy. The latter coolly adjusted her ear-rings, as
she exclaimed:--

"Dar, now! I know'd I'd git even wid de ole vilyun. Come a-callin' me
pidjin-toed!"

"Better keep yo' eye on 'im, chile," said Aunt Tempy. "He 'witch you,
sho'."

"'Witch who? Ef he come witchin' roun' me, I lay I break his back. I
tell you dat right pine-blank."




[Illustration: Brother Rabbit and his Famous Foot]

XXX

BRER RABBIT AND HIS FAMOUS FOOT


The little boy was very glad, one night shortly after he had heard about
Daddy Jack's ghosts and witches and 'Tildy's "ha'nts," to find Uncle
Remus alone in his cabin. The child liked to have his venerable partner
all to himself. Uncle Remus was engaged in hunting for tobacco crumbs
with which to fill his pipe, and in turning his pockets a rabbit foot
dropped upon the hearth.

"Grab it, honey!" he exclaimed. "Snatch it up off'n de h'a'th. In de
name er goodness, don't let it git in de embers; 'kaze ef dat ar rabbit
foot git singe, I'm a goner, sho'!"

It was the hind foot of a rabbit, and a very large one at that, and the
little boy examined it curiously. He was in thorough sympathy with all
the superstitions of the negroes, and to him the rabbit foot appeared to
be an uncanny affair. He placed it carefully on Uncle Remus's knee, and
after the pipe had been filled, he asked:--

"What do you carry that for, Uncle Remus?"

"Well, honey," responded the old man, grimly, "ef you want me ter make
shorts out'n a mighty long tale, dat rabbit foot is fer ter keep off
boogers. W'en I hatter run er'n's fer myse'f all times er night, en take
nigh cuts thoo de woods, en 'cross by de buryin'-groun', hits monst'us
handy fer ter have dat ar rabbit foot. Keep yo' head studdy, now; mine
yo' eye; I ain't sayin' deyer any boogers anywhars. Brer Jack kin say
w'at he mineter; I ain't sayin' nothin'. But yit, ef dey wuz any, en dey
come slinkin' atter me, I let you know dey'd fine out terreckly dat de
ole nigger heel'd wid rabbit foot. I 'ud hol' it up des dis a-way, en I
boun' you I'd shoo um off'n de face er de yeth. En I tell you w'at,"
continued Uncle Remus, seeing that the little boy was somewhat troubled,
"w'en it come to dat pass dat you gotter be dodgin' 'roun' in de dark,
ef you'll des holler fer me, I'll loan you dish yer rabbit foot, en
you'll be des ez safe ez you is w'en Miss Sally stannin' by yo' bed wid
a lit can'le in 'er han'.

"Strip er red flannil tied 'roun' yo' arm'll keep off de rheumatis;
stump-water 'll kyo 'spepsy; some good fer one 'zeeze,[27] en some good
fer n'er, but de p'ints is dat dish yer rabbit foot 'll gin you good
luck. De man w'at tote it mighty ap' fer ter come out right een' up w'en
dey's any racket gwine on in de neighborhoods, let 'er be whar she will
en w'en she may; mo' espeshually ef de man w'at got it know 'zactly w'at
he got ter do. W'ite folks may laugh," Uncle Remus went on, "but w'en
rabbit run 'cross de big road front er me, w'at does I do? Does I shoo
at um? Does I make fer ter kill um? Dat I don't--_dat_ I don't! I des
squots right down in de middle er de road, en I makes a cross-mark in de
san' des dis way, en den I spits in it."[28]

Uncle Remus made a practical illustration by drawing a cross-mark in the
ashes on the hearth.

"Well, but, Uncle Remus, what good does all this do?" the little boy
asked.

"Lots er good, honey; bless yo' soul, lots er good. W'en rabbit crosses
yo' luck, w'at you gwine do, less'n you sets down en crosses it out,
right den en dar? I year talk er folks shootin' rabbit in de big road,
yit I notices dat dem w'at does de shootin' ain't come ter no good
een'--dat w'at I notices."

"Uncle Remus," the little boy asked, after a while, "how did people
happen to find out about the rabbit's foot?"

"Oh, you let folks 'lone fer dat, honey! You des let um 'lone. W'at de
wimmen ain't up'n tell bidout anybody axin' un um, folks mighty ap' fer
ter fine out fer deyse'f. De wimmen, dey does de talkin' en de flyin',
en de mens, dey does de walkin' en de pryin', en betwixt en betweenst
um, dey ain't much dat don't come out. Ef it don't come out one day it
do de nex', en so she goes--Ant'ny over, Ant'ny under--up one row en
down de udder, en clean acrosst de bolly-patch!"

It may be that the child did n't understand all this, but he had no
doubt of its wisdom, and so he waited patiently for developments.

"Dey's a tale 'bout de rabbit foot," continued Uncle Remus, "but yo' eye
look watery, like ole man Nod 'bout ter slip up behime you; en let 'lone
dat, I 'speck Miss Sally clock clickin' fer you right now."

"Oh, no, it is n't, Uncle Remus," said the child, laughing. "Mamma said
she'd make 'Tildy call me."

"Dar, now!" exclaimed the old man, indignantly, "'Tildy dis en 'Tildy
dat. I dunner w'at yo' mammy dreamin' 'bout fer ter let dat nigger gal
be a-holl'in' en a-bawlin' atter you all 'roun' dish yer plan'ation. She
de mos' uppity nigger on de hill, en de fus' news you know dey ull all
hatter make der bows en call 'er Mistiss. Ef ole Miss wuz 'live, dey
would n't be no sech gwines on 'roun' yer. But nummine.[29] You des let
'er come a-cuttin' up front er my do', en I lay you'll year squallin'.
Now, den," continued the old man, settling himself back in his chair,
"wharbouts wuz I?"

"You said there was a tale about the rabbit foot," the little boy
replied.

"So dey is, honey! so dey is!" Uncle Remus exclaimed, "but she got so
many crooks en tu'ns in 'er dat I dunner but w'at I ain't done gone en
fergotted some un um off'n my min'; 'kaze ole folks lak me knows lots
mo' dan w'at dey kin 'member.

"In de days w'ence Brer Rabbit wuz sorter keepin' de neighborhoods
stirred up, de yuther creeturs wuz studyin' en studyin' de whole blessid
