not want to attract his attention. I was very happy as I was, with
you all. As for my suggestion about the straw, anyone might have
thought of it. I should never have given the matter another
moment's consideration, and I should be much better pleased if the
king had not done so, either, instead of telling the colonel about
it, and the colonel speaking to the officers, and such a ridiculous
fuss being made about nothing."

"My dear Charlie," Harry said seriously, "you seem to be forgetting
that we all came out here, together, to make our fortune, or at any
rate to do as well as we could till the Stuarts come to the throne
again, and our fathers regain their estates, a matter concerning
which, let me tell you, I do not feel by any means so certain as I
did in the old days. Then, you know, all our friends were of our
way of thinking, and the faith that the Stuarts would return was
like a matter of religion, which it was heresy to doubt for an
instant. Well, you see, in the year that we have been out here
one's eyes have got opened a bit, and I don't feel by any means
sanguine that the Stuarts will ever come to the throne of England
again, or that our fathers will recover their estates.

"You have seen here what good soldiers can do, and how powerless
men possessing but little discipline, though perhaps as brave as
themselves, are against them. William of Orange has got good
soldiers. His Dutch troops are probably quite as good as our best
Swedish regiments. They have had plenty of fighting in Ireland and
elsewhere, and I doubt whether the Jacobite gentlemen, however
numerous, but without training or discipline, could any more make
head against them than the masses of Muscovites could against the
Swedish battalions at Narva. All this means that it is necessary
that we should, if possible, carve out a fortune here. So far, I
certainly have no reason to grumble. On the contrary, I have had
great luck. I am a lieutenant at seventeen, and, if I am not shot
or carried off by fever, I may, suppose the war goes on and the
army is not reduced, be a colonel at the age of forty.

"Now you, on the other hand, have, by that happy suggestion of
yours, attracted the notice of the king, and he is pleased to
nominate you to a mission in which there is a chance of your
distinguishing yourself in another way, and of being employed in
other and more important business. All this will place you much
farther on the road towards making a fortune, than marching and
fighting with your company would be likely to do in the course of
twenty years, and I think it would be foolish in the extreme for
you to exhibit any disinclination to undertake the duty."

"I suppose you are right, Harry, and I am much obliged to you for
your advice, which certainly puts the matter in a light in which I
had not before seen it. If I thought that I could do it well, I
should not so much mind, for, as you say, there will be some fun to
be got out of it, and some excitement, and there seems little
chance of doing anything here for a long time. But what am I to say
to the fellows? How can I argue with them? Besides, I don't talk
Polish."

"I don't suppose there are ten men in the army who do so, probably
not five. As to what to say, Count Piper will no doubt give you
full instructions as to the line you are to take, the arguments you
are to use, and the inducements you are to hold out. That is sure
to be all right."

"Well, do not say anything about it, Harry, when you get back. I
still hope the colonel will dissuade the king."

"Then you are singularly hopeful, Charlie, that is all I can say.
You might persuade a brick wall to move out of your way, as easily
as induce the King of Sweden to give up a plan he has once formed.
However, I will say nothing about it."

At nine o'clock, an orderly came to the hut with a message that the
colonel wished to speak to Lieutenant Carstairs. Harry gave his
friend a comical look, as the latter rose and buckled on his sword.

"What is the joke, Harry?" his father asked, when Charlie had left.
"Do you know what the colonel can want him for, at this time of the
evening? It is not his turn for duty."

"I know, father; but I must not say."

"The lad has not been getting into a scrape, I hope?"

"Nothing serious, I can assure you; but really, I must not say
anything until he comes back."

Harry's positive assurance, as to the impossibility of changing the
king's decision, had pretty well dispelled any hopes Charlie might
before have entertained, and he entered the colonel's room with a
grave face.

"You know why I have sent for you, Carstairs?"

"Yes, sir; I am afraid that I do."

"Afraid? That is to say, you don't like it."

"Yes, sir; I own that I don't like it."

"Nor do I, lad, and I told his majesty so. I said you were too
young for so risky a business. The king scoffed at the idea. He
said, 'He is not much more than two years younger than I am, and if
I am old enough to command an army, he is old enough to carry out
this mission. We know that he is courageous. He is cool, sharp, and
intelligent. Why do I choose him? Has he not saved me from the loss
of about four or five thousand men, and probably a total defeat? A
young fellow who can do that, ought to be able to cope with Jewish
traders, and to throw dust in the eyes of the Poles.

"I have chosen him for this service for two reasons. In the first
place, because I know he will do it well, and even those who
consider that I am rash and headstrong, admit that I have the knack
of picking out good men. In the next place, I want to reward him
for the service he has done for us. I cannot, at his age, make a
colonel of him, but I can give him a chance of distinguishing
himself in a service in which age does not count for so much, and
Count Piper, knowing my wishes in the matter, will push him
forward. Moreover, in such a mission as this, his youth will be an
advantage, for he is very much less likely to excite suspicion than
if he were an older man.'

"The king's manner did not admit of argument, and I had only to
wait and ask what were his commands. These were simply that you are
to call upon his minister tomorrow, and that you would then receive
full instructions.

"The king means well by you, lad, and on turning it over, I think
better of the plan than I did before. I am convinced, at any rate,
that you will do credit to the king's choice."

"I will do my best, sir," Charlie said. "At present, it all seems
so vague to me that I can form no idea whatever as to what it will
be like. I am sure that the king's intentions are, at any rate,
kind. I am glad to hear you say that, on consideration, you think
better of the plan. Then I may mention the matter to Major
Jervoise?"

"Certainly, Carstairs, and to his son, but it must go no farther. I
shall put your name in orders, as relieved from duty, and shall
mention that you have been despatched on service, which might mean
anything. Come and see me tomorrow, lad, after you have received
Count Piper's instructions. As the king reminded me, there are many
Scotchmen at Warsaw, and it is likely that some of them passed
through Sweden on the way to establish themselves there, and I may
very well have made their acquaintance at Gottenburg or Stockholm.

"Once established in the house of one of my countrymen, your
position would be fairly safe and not altogether unpleasant, and
you would be certainly far better off than a Swede would be engaged
on this mission. The Swedes are, of course, regarded by the Poles
as enemies, but, as there is no feeling against Englishmen or
Scotchmen, you might pass about unnoticed as one of the family of a
Scottish trader there, or as his assistant."

"I don't fear its being unpleasant in the least, colonel. Nor do I
think anything one way or the other about my safety. I only fear
that I shall not be able to carry out properly the mission
intrusted to me."

"You will do your best, lad, and that is all that can be expected.
You have not solicited the post, and as it is none of your
choosing, your failure would be the fault of those who have sent
you, and not of yourself; but in a matter of this kind there is no
such thing as complete failure. When you have to deal with one man
you may succeed or you may fail in endeavouring to induce him to
act in a certain manner, but when you have to deal with a
considerable number of men, some will be willing to accept your
proposals, some will not, and the question of success will probably
depend upon outside influences and circumstances over which you
have no control whatever. I have no fear that it will be a failure.
If our party in Poland triumph, or if our army here advances, or if
Augustus, finding his position hopeless, leaves the country, the
good people of Warsaw will join their voices to those of the
majority. If matters go the other way, you may be sure that they
will not risk imprisonment, confiscation, and perhaps death, by
getting up a revolt on their own account. The king will be
perfectly aware of this, and will not expect impossibilities, and
there is really no occasion whatever for you to worry yourself on
that ground."

Upon calling upon Count Piper the next morning, Charlie found that,
as the colonel had told him, his mission was a general one.

"It will be your duty," the minister said, "to have interviews with
as many of the foreign traders and Jews in Warsaw as you can, only
going to those to whom you have some sort of introduction from the
persons you may first meet, or who are, as far as you can learn
from the report of others, ill disposed towards the Saxon party.
Here is a letter, stating to all whom it may concern, that you are
in the confidence of the King of Sweden, and are authorized to
represent him.

"In the first place, you can point out to those you see that,
should the present situation continue, it will bring grievous evils
upon Poland. Proclamations have already been spread broadcast over
the country, saying that the king has no quarrel with the people of
Poland, but, as their sovereign has, without the slightest
provocation, embarked on a war, he must fight against him and his
Saxon troops, until they are driven from the country. This you will
repeat, and will urge that it will be infinitely better that Poland
herself should cast out the man who has embroiled her with Sweden,
than that the country should be the scene of a long and sanguinary
struggle, in which large districts will necessarily be laid waste,
all trade be arrested, and grievous suffering inflicted upon the
people at large.

"You can say that King Charles has already received promises of
support from a large number of nobles, and is most desirous that
the people of the large towns, and especially of the capital,
should use their influence in his favour. That he has himself no
ambition, and no end to serve save to obtain peace and tranquillity
for his country, and that it will be free for the people of Poland
to elect their own monarch, when once Augustus of Saxony has
disappeared from the scene.

"In this sealed packet you will find a list of influential
citizens. It has been furnished me by one well acquainted with the
place. The Jews are to be assured that, in case of a friendly
monarch being placed on the throne, Charles will make a treaty with
him, insuring freedom of commerce to the two countries, and will
also use his friendly endeavours to obtain, from the king and Diet,
an enlargement of the privileges that the Jews enjoy. To the
foreign merchants you will hold the same language, somewhat
altered, to suit their condition and wants.

"You are not asking them to organize any public movement, the time
has not yet come for that; but simply to throw the weight of their
example and influence against the party of the Saxons. Of course
our friends in Warsaw have been doing their best to bring round
public opinion in the capital to this direction, but the country is
so torn by perpetual intrigues, that the trading classes hold aloof
altogether from quarrels in which they have no personal interest,
and are slow to believe that they can be seriously affected by any
changes which will take place.

"Our envoy will start tomorrow morning. His mission is an open one.
He goes to lay certain complaints, to propose an exchange of
prisoners, and to open negotiations for peace. All these are but
pretences. His real object is to enter into personal communication
with two or three powerful personages, well disposed towards us.

"Come again to me this evening, when you have thought the matter
over. I shall then be glad to hear any suggestion you may like to
make."

"There is one thing, sir, that I should like to ask you. It will
evidently be of great advantage to me, if I can obtain private
letters of introduction to Scotch traders in the city. This I
cannot do, unless by mentioning the fact that I am bound for
Warsaw. Have I your permission to do so, or is it to be kept a
close secret?"

"No. I see no objection to your naming it to anyone you can
implicitly trust, and who may, as you think, be able to give you
such introductions, but you must impress upon them that the matter
must be kept a secret. Doubtless the Saxons have in their pay
people in our camp, just as we have in theirs, and were word of
your going sent, you would find yourself watched, and perhaps
arrested. We should, of course wish you to be zealous in your
mission, but I would say, do not be over anxious. We are not trying
to get up a revolution in Warsaw, but seeking to ensure that the
feeling in the city should be in our favour; and this, we think,
may be brought about, to some extent, by such assurances as you can
give of the king's friendship, and by such expressions of a belief
in the justice of our cause, and in the advantages there would be
in getting rid of this foreign prince, as might be said openly by
one trader to another, when men meet in their exchanges or upon the
street. So that the ball is once set rolling, it may be trusted to
keep in motion, and there can be little doubt that such expressions
of feeling, among the mercantile community of the capital, will
have some effect even upon nobles who pretend to despise trade, but
who are not unfrequently in debt to traders, and who hold their
views in a certain respect."

"Thank you, sir. At what time shall I come this evening?"

"At eight o'clock. By that time, I may have thought out farther
details for your guidance."



Chapter 9: In Warsaw.


Upon leaving the quarters of Count Piper, Charlie returned to the
camp, and, after discussing the matter with Major Jervoise,
proceeded with him to the colonel's hut.

"Well, you look brighter this morning, Carstairs. Are you better
pleased, now you have thought the matter over?"

"Yes, sir. What you said last night has been quite confirmed by
Count Piper, and the matter does not really seem so difficult. I am
merely, as a foreigner in the employment of the King of Sweden, to
talk with foreigners in Warsaw, to assure them that the king is
sincere in his desire to avoid war with Poland, and will gladly
make a lasting peace between the two countries, to urge upon them
to show themselves favourable to his project for securing such a
peace, by forcing Augustus to resign the crown, and to use what
influence they can in that direction, both upon their fellow
traders and upon the Poles."

"There is nothing very difficult about that," Colonel Jamieson said
cheerfully, "as it happens to be quite true; and there can be no
real question as to the true interest of Poland, and especially of
the trading classes in the great towns, from whom heavy
contributions towards the expenses of war are always exacted by
their own rulers, and who have to pay a ruinous ransom in case of
their city being captured by the enemy. The traders of Warsaw will
need no reminder of such well-known facts, and will be only too
glad to be assured that, unless as a last resource, our king has no
intention of making war upon Poland, and they will certainly be
inclined to bestir themselves to avert such a possibility. You
have, I suppose, a list of names of the people with whom you had
best put yourself into communication?"

"Yes, sir. Here is a list. There are, I see, ten Scotchmen, fifteen
Frenchmen, and about as many Jews."

"I know nothing of the Frenchmen, and less of the Jews," the
colonel said, taking the list; "but I ought to know some of the
Scotchmen. They will hail from Dundee and Glasgow, and, it may be,
Dumfries."

He ran his eye down the list.

"Aha! Here is one, and we need go no further. Allan Ramsay; we were
lads together at the High School of Glasgow, and were classmates at
the College. His father was a member of the city council, and was
one of the leading traders in the city. Allan was a wild lad, as I
was myself, and many a scrape did we get into together, and had
many a skirmish with the watch. Allan had two or three half
brothers, men from ten to twenty years older than himself, and, a
year or two after I came out to Sweden and entered the army as an
ensign, who should I meet in the streets of Gottenburg, but Allan
Ramsay.

"We were delighted to see each other, and he stopped with me nearly
a week. He had, after leaving the College, gone into his father's
business, but when the old man died he could not get on with his
half brothers, who were dour men, and had little patience with
Allan's restlessness and love of pleasure. So, after a final
quarrel, they had given him so much money for his share of the
business, and a letter of introduction to a trader in Poland, who
had written to them saying that he wanted a partner with some
capital; and Allan was willing enough to try the life in a strange
country, for he was a shrewd fellow, with all his love of fun.

"Five years afterwards, he came through Gottenburg again. I did not
see him, for my regiment was at Stockholm at the time, but he wrote
me a letter saying that he had been in Scotland to marry and bring
back one Janet Black, the daughter of a mercer, whom I remember
well enough as an old flame of his.

"He reported that he was doing well, and that the Poles were not
bad fellows to live among, though less punctual in their payments
than might be wished. He said he did not suppose that, as a Swedish
officer, I should ever be in Poland, unless Sweden produced another
Gustavus Adolphus; but if I was, he would be delighted to welcome
me, and that anyone I asked in Warsaw would direct me to his shop.
I wonder that I did not think of him before; but that is ten years
ago, and it had altogether passed out of my mind, till I saw his
name here. Unless he is greatly changed, you may be sure of a
hearty welcome from Allan Ramsay, for my sake. We need not trouble
about the other names. He will know all about them, and will be
able to put you in the way of getting at them."

This was a great relief to Charlie, who felt that it would be an
immense advantage to have the house of someone, from whom he might
expect a welcome, to go to on his arrival in Warsaw; and he was
able, during the day, to talk over the prospects of the journey,
with Harry Jervoise, with a real sense of interest and excitement
in his mission.

In the evening, he again went to the house of the minister. The
latter, a close observer of men, saw at once that the young officer
was in much better spirits than he had been in the morning.

"Have you obtained information respecting any of the persons whose
names I gave you?" he asked.

"Yes, sir. It seems that, most fortunately, the trader named Allan
Ramsay is an old friend of Colonel Jamieson, and the colonel has
given me a letter to him which will, he assures me, procure me a
hearty welcome."

"And have you thought anything more of your best plan of action?"

"Yes, sir. It seems to me that I had better dress myself in an
attire such as might be worn by a young Scotchman, journeying
through the country to place himself with a relation established in
business. I could ride behind the royal envoy, as if I had received
permission to journey under the protection of his escort, and could
drop behind a few miles from the capital, and make my way in alone.
I could not, of course, inquire for Allan Ramsay in Polish, but I
know enough French to ask for him at any shop having a French name
over it, if I did not happen to light upon one kept by a
Scotchman."

"Yes, that plan will do very well. But you will have no difficulty
in finding the house, as I have arranged that a man shall accompany
you as servant. He is a Lithuanian, and is the grandson of a
soldier of Gustavus Adolphus, who married and settled there. His
grandfather kept up his connection with his native country, and the
young fellow speaks Swedish fairly, and, of course, Polish. For the
last three weeks I have employed him in various matters, and find
him shrewd and, I believe, faithful. Such a fellow would be of
great use to you, and could, if necessary, act as your interpreter
in any interviews you may have with Polish Jews, although you will
find that most of these men speak other languages besides their
own."

He touched a bell, and on a servant entering, said:

"Bring Stanislas Bistron here."

An active, well-built young fellow of some four and twenty years of
age entered the room a minute later. His fair hair and blue eyes
showed that he took after his Swedish ancestors.

"This is the gentleman, Stanislas, that you are to accompany to
Warsaw, as his servant. You will obey him, in all respects, as if
he had hired you in his service, and, should he arrive at any
situation of danger or difficulty, I trust that you will not be
found wanting."

The man had looked closely at Charlie.

"I will do my best, sir, and I doubt not that the gentleman's
service will suit me. He has the look of one who would be kind to
his servants."

