to the main body. He kept on until he saw a small shed. The door was
unfastened; opening it he found that the place was empty, though there
were signs that it was usually used as a shelter for cattle.

A rough ladder led to a loft. This was nearly full of hay. Malcolm threw
himself down on this, and covering himself up thickly, felt the blood
again begin to circulate in his limbs. It brought, however, such
a renewal of his pain, that it was not until morning that fatigue
overpowered his sufferings and he fell asleep.

It was late in the afternoon when he woke at the sound of shouts and
holloaing. Springing to his feet he looked out between the cracks in the
boards and saw a party of forty or fifty peasants passing close by the
shed. They were armed with hatchets, scythes, and pikes. On the heads of
four of the pikes were stuck gory heads, and in the centre of the party
were three prisoners, two Swedes and a Scot. These were covered with
blood, and were scarcely able to walk, but were being urged forward with
blows and pike thrusts amid the brutal laughter of their captors.

Malcolm retired to his bed full of rage and sorrow. It would have been
madness to have followed his first impulse to sally out sword in hand
and fall upon the ruffians, as such a step would only have ensured his
own death without assisting the captives.

"Hitherto," he said to himself, "I have ever restrained my men, and have
endeavoured to protect the peasants from violence; henceforward, so long
as we remain in Bavaria, no word of mine shall be uttered to save one
of these murderous peasants. However, I am not with my company yet.
The army is two marches ahead, and must by this time be in front of
Ingolstadt. I have been two days without food, and see but little chance
of getting any until I rejoin them, and the whole country between us is
swarming with an infuriated peasantry. The prospect is certainly not
a bright one. I would give a year's pay to hear the sound of a Swedish
trumpet."

When darkness had fairly set in Malcolm started on his way again.
Although his limbs still smarted from the weals and sores left by the
cords they had now recovered their lissomeness; but he was weak from
want of food, and no longer walked with the free elastic stride which
distinguished the Scottish infantry. His wrists gave him great pain,
being both terribly burned, and every movement of the hand sent a thrill
of agony up the arm. He persisted, however, in frequently opening and
clenching his hands, regardless of the pain, for he feared that did he
not do so they would stiffen and he would be unable to grasp a sword.
Fortunately the wounds were principally on the upper side of the thumbs,
where the flesh was burned away to the bone, but the sinews and muscles
of the wrists had to a great extent escaped.

He had not journeyed very far when he saw a light ahead and presently
perceived the houses of a village. A fire was lit in the centre, and a
number of figures were gathered round it.

"Something is going on," Malcolm said to himself; "as likely as not they
have got some unfortunate prisoner. Whatever it be, I will steal in and
try to get some food. I cannot go much further without it; and as their
attention is occupied, I may find a cottage empty."

Making his way round to the back of the houses, he approached one of the
cottages in the rear. He lifted the latch of the door and opened it a
little. All was still. With his drawn sword he entered. The room was
empty; a fire burned on the hearth, and on the table were some loaves
which had evidently been just baked. Malcolm fell upon one of them and
speedily devoured it, and, taking a long draught of rough country wine
from a skin hanging against the wall, he felt another man.

He broke another loaf in two and thrust the pieces into his doublet, and
then sallied out from the cottage again. Still keeping behind the houses
he made his way until he got within view of the fire. Here he saw a
sight which thrilled him with horror. Some eight or ten peasants and
forty or fifty women were yelling and shouting. Fastened against a
post in front of the fire were the remains of a prisoner. He had been
stripped, his ears, nose, hands, and feet cut off, and he was slowly
bleeding to death.

Four other men, bound hand and foot, lay close to the fire. By its
flames Malcolm saw the green scarves that told they were Scotchmen of
his own brigade, and he determined at once to rescue them or die in the
attempt. He crept forward until he reached the edge of the road; then he
raised a pistol and with a steady aim fired at one of the natives, who
fell dead across the fire.

Another shot laid another beside him before the peasants recovered from
their first surprise. Then with a loud shout in German, "Kill--kill! and
spare none!" Malcolm dashed forward. The peasants, believing that they
were attacked by a strong body, fled precipitately in all directions.
Malcolm, on reaching the prisoners, instantly severed their bonds.

"Quick, my lads!" he exclaimed; "we shall have them upon us again in a
minute."

The men in vain tried to struggle to their feet--their limbs were too
numbed to bear them.

"Crawl to the nearest cottage!" Malcolm exclaimed; "we can hold it until
your limbs are recovered."

He caught up from the ground some pikes and scythes which the peasants
had dropped in their flight, and aided the men to make their way to the
nearest cottage. They were but just in time; for the peasants, finding
they were not pursued, had looked round, and seeing but one opponent had
gained courage and were beginning to approach again. Malcolm barred the
door, and then taking down a skin of wine bade his companions take a
drink. There were loaves on the shelves, and these he cut up and handed
to them.

"Quick, lads!" he said; "stamp your legs and swing your arms, and get
the blood in motion. I will keep these fellows at bay a few minutes
longer."

He reloaded his pistols and fired through the door, at which the
peasants were now hewing with axes. A cry and a heavy fall told him that
one of the shots had taken effect. Suddenly there was a smell of smoke.

"They have fired the roof," Malcolm said. "Now, lads, each of you put a
loaf of bread under his jerkin. There is no saying when we may get more.
Now get ready and sally out with me. There are but six or eight men in
the village, and they are no match for us. They only dared to attack us
because they saw that you couldn't walk."

The door was opened, and headed by Malcolm the four Scotchmen dashed
out. They were assailed by a shower of missiles by the crowd as they
appeared, but as soon as it was seen that the men were on foot again the
peasants gave way. Malcolm shot one and cut down another, and the rest
scattered in all directions.

"Now, lads, follow me while we may," and Malcolm again took to the
fields. The peasants followed for some distance, but when the soldiers
had quite recovered the use of their limbs Malcolm suddenly turned on
his pursuers, overtaking and killing two of them. Then he and his men
again continued their journey, the peasants no longer following. When at
some distance from the village he said:

"We must turn and make for the Lech again. It is no farther than it is
to Ingolstadt, and we shall find friends there. These peasants will go
on ahead and raise all the villagers against us, and we should never get
through. What regiment do you belong to, lads?" for in the darkness he
had been unable to see their faces.

"Your own, Captain Graheme. We were in charge of one of the wagons with
sick. The wheel came off, and we were left behind the convoy while we
were mending it. As we were at work, our weapons laid on the ground,
some twenty men sprang out from some bushes hard by and fell upon us. We
killed five or six of them, but were beaten down and ten of our number
were slain. They murdered all the sick in the wagons and marched us
away, bound, to this village where you found us. Sandy McAlister they
had murdered just as you came up, and we should have had a like horrible
fate had you been a few minutes later. Eh, sir! but it's an awful death
to be cut in pieces by these devils incarnate!"

"Well, lads," Malcolm said, "we will determine that they shall not take
us alive again. If we are overtaken or met by any of these gangs of
peasants we will fight till we die. None of us, I hope, are afraid of
death in fair strife, but the bravest might well shrink from such a
death as that of your poor comrade. Now let us see what arms we have
between us."

Malcolm had his sword and pistols, two of the men had pikes, the other
two scythes fastened to long handles.

"These are clumsy weapons," Malcolm said. "You had best fit short
handles to them, so as to make them into double handed swords."

They were unable to travel far, for all were exhausted with the
sufferings they had gone through, but they kept on until they came upon
a village which had been fired when the troops marched through. The
walls of a little church were alone standing. It had, like the rest of
the village, been burned, but the shell still remained.

"So far as I can see," Malcolm said, "the tower has escaped. Had it been
burned we should see through the windows. We may find shelter in the
belfry."

On reaching the church they found that the entrance to the belfry tower
was outside the church, and to this, no doubt, it owed its escape from
the fire which had destroyed the main edifice. The door was strong and
defied their efforts to break it in.

"I must fire my pistol through the lock," Malcolm said. "I do not
like doing so, for the sound may reach the ears of any peasants in the
neighbourhood; but we must risk it, for the cold is extreme, and to lie
down in the snow would be well nigh certain death."

He placed his pistol to the keyhole and fired. The lock at once yielded
and the party entered the door.

"Before we mount," Malcolm said, "let each pick up one of these blocks
of stone which have fallen from the wall. We will wedge the door from
behind, and can then sleep secure against a surprise."

When the door was closed one of the men, who was a musketeer, struck
some sparks from a flint and steel on to a slow match which he carried
in his jerkin, and by its glow they were enabled to look around them.
The stone steps began to ascend close to the door, and by laying the
stones between the bottom step and the door they wedged the latter
firmly in its place. They then ascended the stairs, and found themselves
in a room some ten feet square, in which hung the bell which had called
the village to prayers. It hung from some beams which were covered with
a boarded floor, and a rough ladder led to a trapdoor, showing that
there was another room above. The floor of the room in which they stood
was of stone.

"Now, lads," Malcolm said, "two of you make your way up that ladder and
rip up some of the planks of the flooring. See if there are any windows
or loopholes in the chamber above, and if so stuff your jerkins into
them; we will close up those here. In a few minutes we will have a
roaring fire; but we must beware lest a gleam of light be visible
without, for this belfry can be seen for miles round."

Some of the boards were soon split up into fragments; but before the
light was applied to them Malcolm carefully examined each window and
loophole to be sure that they were perfectly stopped. Then the slow
match was placed in the centre of a number of pieces of dry and rotten
wood. One of the men kneeling down blew lustily, and in a few seconds a
flame sprang up. The wood was now heaped on, and a bright fire was soon
blazing high.

A trapdoor leading out on to the flat top of the tower was opened for
the escape of the smoke, and the party then seated themselves round the
fire, under whose genial warmth their spirits speedily rose. They now
took from their wallets the bread which they had brought away with them.

"If we had," one of the soldiers said, "but a few flasks of Rhine wine
with us we need not envy a king."

"No," Malcolm replied, "we are better off at present than our comrades
who are sleeping in the snow round the watchfires; but for all that I
would that we were with them, for we have a long and dangerous march
before us. And now, lads, you can sleep soundly. There will be no
occasion to place a watch, for the door is securely fastened; but at the
first dawn of light we must be on our feet; for although I do not mean
to march until nightfall, we must remove the stoppings from the windows,
for should the eye of any passing peasant fall upon them, he will guess
at once that some one is sheltering here, and may proceed to find out
whether it be friend or foe."

Having finished half their bread, for Malcolm had warned them to save
the other half for the next day, the men lay down round the fire, and
soon all were sound asleep.



CHAPTER XIV IN THE CHURCHTOWER


Malcolm was the first to awake, and was vexed to find by a stream of
light pouring down through the half open trapdoor above that it was
broad day. He roused the men, and the stoppings were at once removed
from the loopholes. The sun was already high, for the party, overpowered
with fatigue, had slept long and soundly.

Malcolm looked cautiously from the window; no one was in sight, and the
ruins of the village below lay black and deserted. The men resumed the
clothes which had been used for blocking the loopholes, and sat down
to pass the long hours which would elapse before the time for action
arrived. It was exceedingly cold, for there were loopholes on each side
of the chamber, and the wind blew keenly through.

"Sergeant," Malcolm said, "we will risk a bit of fire again, for the
cold pierces to the bone; only be sure that you use perfectly dry wood.
Examine each piece to see that no drip from the roof has penetrated it.
If it is dry it will give but little smoke, and a slight vapour is not
likely to be observed rising from the top of the tower."

The fire was again lighted, and the smoke was so slight that Malcolm had
little fear of its being observed.

An hour later, as the men were talking, Malcolm suddenly held up his
hand for silence, and the murmur of voices was heard without. Malcolm
rose to his feet to reconnoitre, standing far back from the loophole as
he did so. A group of some eight or ten peasants were standing looking
at the tower, while a woman was pointing to it and talking eagerly.

It was towards the windows that she was pointing, and Malcolm guessed at
once that, having returned in the early morning to see what remained
of her home, she had happened to notice the garments stuffed in the
windows, and had carried the news to some of her companions. Malcolm
regretted bitterly now that he had not set a watch, so that at the first
gleam of daylight the windows might have been unblocked; but it was now
too late.

"We shall have to fight for it, lads," he said, turning round. "Our
clothes must have been seen early this morning, and there is a party
of peasants watching the tower. Of course they cannot know at present
whether we are friends or foes; but no doubt the news of last evening's
doings has travelled through the country, and the peasants are on the
lookout for us, so they may well guess that we are here. However, we
shall soon see. Sergeant, place one of your men on sentry at the foot of
the stairs, but do not let him speak or give any signs of his presence
if the door is tried."

One of the soldiers was placed on guard. Scarcely had he taken his
station when there was a knocking at the door, and shouts were heard
outside from the peasants calling on those within, if they were friends,
to come out. No answer was returned.

"It's fortunate for you," Malcolm muttered, "that we don't come out, or
we should make short work of you; but I know you would fly like hares
if you saw us, and would bring the whole country down on us. No; we
must hold out here. Our only hope is to escape at night, or to hold this
place till some of our troops come along. At any moment some regiments
from the Lech may be marching forward to join the king.

"We must make our bread last, lads," he said cheerfully to the men,
"for we may have to stand a long siege. Methinks we can hold this stone
staircase against all the peasants of this part of Bavaria; and we must
do so until we hear the sound of the Swedish drums; they may come along
at any time. If the worst comes to the worst one of us must start at
night and carry news of our peril to the Lech. We made a good supper
last night, and can fast for a bit. If we cut our bread up into small
portions we can hold out for days. There should be snow enough on the
tower top to furnish us with drink."

After hammering at the door for some time, the peasants retired
convinced that there were none of their own people within the tower, and
that those who had slept there were the fugitives of whom they had been
in search during the night. These might, indeed, have departed in the
interval between the time when the woman first saw the traces of their
presence and her return with them; but they did not think that this was
so, for in that case they could not have fastened the door behind them.
The peasants accordingly withdrew a short distance from the church, and
three of their number were sent off in different directions to bring
up reinforcements. As soon as Malcolm saw this movement he knew that
concealment was useless, and began to make preparations for the defence.
First, he with the sergeant ascended to the roof of the tower. To his
disappointment he saw that the heat of the flames had melted the snow,
and that most of the water had run away. Some, however, stood in the
hollows and inequalities of the stone platform, where it had again
frozen into ice.

As the supply would be very precious, Malcolm directed that before any
moved about on the platform every piece of ice should be carefully taken
up and carried below. Here it was melted over the fire in one of
the iron caps, and was found to furnish three quarts of water. The
appearance of Malcolm and his companion on the tower had been hailed by
a shout of hatred and exultation by the peasants; but the defenders had
paid no attention to the demonstration, and had continued their work as
if regardless of the presence of their enemies.

On his return to the platform Malcolm found, looking over the low
parapet, that on the side farthest from the church great icicles hung
down from the mouth of the gutter, the water having frozen again as it
trickled from the platform. These icicles were three or four inches in
diameter and many feet in length. They were carefully broken off, and
were laid down on the platform where they would remain frozen until
wanted. Malcolm now felt secure against the attacks of thirst for
some days to come. The stones of the parapet were next tried, and were
without much trouble moved from their places, and were all carried to
the side in which the door was situated, in readiness to hurl down upon
any who might assault it. Some of the beams of the upper flooring were
removed from their places, and being carried down, were wedged against
the upper part of the door, securing it as firmly as did the stones
below. These preparations being finished, Malcolm took a survey of the
situation outside.

The group of peasants had increased largely, some thirty or forty men
armed with pikes, bills, and scythes being gathered in a body, while
many more could be seen across the country hurrying over the white plain
towards the spot. The windows of the lower apartment had been barricaded
with planks, partly to keep out missiles, partly for warmth. A good fire
now blazed in the centre, and the soldiers, confident in themselves and
their leader, cracked grim jokes as, their work being finished, they sat
down around it and awaited the attack, one of their number being placed
on the summit of the tower to give warning of the approach of the enemy.

"I would that we had a musket or two," Malcolm said; "for we might then
keep them from the door. I have only some twenty charges for my pistols,
and the most of these, at any rate, I must keep for the defence of the
stairs."

Presently the sentry from above called out that the peasants were moving
