
By noon, the news was out. It was hard to pin down the exact source, but
it seemed to revolve around the new recruits. One of them had told their
net-pals about the high drama in Liberty Square, and mentioned my name.

There were already a couple of sites vilifying me, and I expected more.
I needed some kind of help, that was for sure.

I thought about leaving then, turning my back on the whole business and
leaving Walt Disney World to start yet another new life, Whuffie-poor
and fancy-free.

It wouldn't be so bad. I'd been in poor repute before, not so long ago.
That first time Dan and I had palled around, back at the U of T, I'd
been the center of a lot of pretty ambivalent sentiment, and Whuffie-
poor as a man can be.

I slept in a little coffin on-campus, perfectly climate controlled. It
was cramped and dull, but my access to the network was free and I had
plenty of material to entertain myself. While I couldn't get a table in
a restaurant, I was free to queue up at any of the makers around town
and get myself whatever I wanted to eat and drink, whenever I wanted it.
Compared to 99.99999 percent of all the people who'd ever lived, I had a
life of unparalleled luxury.

Even by the standards of the Bitchun Society, I was hardly a rarity. The
number of low-esteem individuals at large was significant, and they got
along just fine, hanging out in parks, arguing, reading, staging plays,
playing music.

Of course, that wasn't the life for me. I had Dan to pal around with, a
rare high-net-Whuffie individual who was willing to fraternize with a
shmuck like me. He'd stand me to meals at sidewalk cafes and concerts at
the SkyDome, and shoot down any snotty reputation-punk who sneered at my
Whuffie tally. Being with Dan was a process of constantly reevaluating
my beliefs in the Bitchun Society, and I'd never had a more vibrant,
thought-provoking time in all my life.

I could have left the Park, deadheaded to anywhere in the world, started
over. I could have turned my back on Dan, on Debra, on Lil and the whole
mess.

I didn't.

I called up the doc.

========= CHAPTER 8 =========

Doctor Pete answered on the third ring, audio-only. In the background, I
heard a chorus of crying children, the constant backdrop of the Magic
Kingdom infirmary.

"Hi, doc," I said.

"Hello, Julius. What can I do for you?" Under the veneer of professional
medical and castmember friendliness, I sensed irritation.

_Make it all good again_. "I'm not really sure. I wanted to see if I
could talk it over with you. I'm having some pretty big problems."

"I'm on-shift until five. Can it wait until then?"

By then, I had no idea if I'd have the nerve to see him. "I don't think
so -- I was hoping we could meet right away."

"If it's an emergency, I can have an ambulance sent for you."

"It's urgent, but not an emergency. I need to talk about it in person.
Please?"

He sighed in undoctorly, uncastmemberly fashion. "Julius, I've got
important things to do here. Are you sure this can't wait?"

I bit back a sob. "I'm sure, doc."

"All right then. When can you be here?"

Lil had made it clear that she didn't want me in the Park. "Can you meet
me? I can't really come to you. I'm at the Contemporary, Tower B, room
2334."

"I don't really make house calls, son."

"I know, I know." I hated how pathetic I sounded. "Can you make an
exception? I don't know who else to turn to."

"I'll be there as soon as I can. I'll have to get someone to cover for
me. Let's not make a habit of this, all right?"

I whooshed out my relief. "I promise."

He disconnected abruptly, and I found myself dialing Dan.

"Yes?" he said, cautiously.

"Doctor Pete is coming over, Dan. I don't know if he can help me -- I
don't know if anyone can. I just wanted you to know."

He surprised me, then, and made me remember why he was still my friend,
even after everything. "Do you want me to come over?"

"That would be very nice," I said, quietly. "I'm at the hotel."

"Give me ten minutes," he said, and rang off.

#

He found me on my patio, looking out at the Castle and the peaks of
Space Mountain. To my left spread the sparkling waters of the Seven Seas
Lagoon, to my right, the Property stretched away for mile after
manicured mile. The sun was warm on my skin, faint strains of happy
laughter drifted with the wind, and the flowers were in bloom. In
Toronto, it would be freezing rain, gray buildings, noisome rapid
transit (a monorail hissed by), and hard-faced anonymity. I missed it.

Dan pulled up a chair next to mine and sat without a word. We both
stared out at the view for a long while.

"It's something else, isn't it?" I said, finally.

"I suppose so," he said. "I want to say something before the doc comes
by, Julius."

"Go ahead."

"Lil and I are through. It should never have happened in the first
place, and I'm not proud of myself. If you two were breaking up, that's
none of my business, but I had no right to hurry it along."

"All right," I said. I was too drained for emotion.

"I've taken a room here, moved my things."

"How's Lil taking it?"

"Oh, she thinks I'm a total bastard. I suppose she's right."

"I suppose she's partly right," I corrected him.

He gave me a gentle slug in the shoulder. "Thanks."

We waited in companionable silence until the doc arrived.

He bustled in, his smile lines drawn up into a sour purse and waited
expectantly. I left Dan on the patio while I took a seat on the bed.

"I'm cracking up or something," I said. "I've been acting erratically,
sometimes violently. I don't know what's wrong with me." I'd rehearsed
the speech, but it still wasn't easy to choke out.

"We both know what's wrong, Julius," the doc said, impatiently. "You
need to be refreshed from your backup, get set up with a fresh clone and
retire this one. We've had this talk."

"I can't do it," I said, not meeting his eye. "I just can't -- isn't
there another way?"

The doc shook his head. "Julius, I've got limited resources to allocate.
There's a perfectly good cure for what's ailing you, and if you won't
take it, there's not much I can do for you."

"But what about meds?"

"Your problem isn't a chemical imbalance, it's a mental defect. Your
_brain_ is _broken_, son. All that meds will do is mask the symptoms,
while you get worse. I can't tell you what you want to hear,
unfortunately. Now, If you're ready to take the cure, I can retire this
clone immediately and get you restored into a new one in 48 hours."

"Isn't there another way? Please? You have to help me -- I can't lose
all this." I couldn't admit my real reasons for being so attached to
this singularly miserable chapter in my life, not even to myself.

The doctor rose to go. "Look, Julius, you haven't got the Whuffie to
make it worth anyone's time to research a solution to this problem,
other than the one that we all know about. I can give you mood-
suppressants, but that's not a permanent solution."

"Why not?"

He boggled. "You _can't_ just take dope for the rest of your life, son.
Eventually, something will happen to this body -- I see from your file
that you're stroke-prone -- and you're going to get refreshed from your
backup. The longer you wait, the more traumatic it'll be. You're robbing
from your future self for your selfish present."

It wasn't the first time the thought had crossed my mind. Every passing
day made it harder to take the cure. To lie down and wake up friends
with Dan, to wake up and be in love with Lil again. To wake up to a
Mansion the way I remembered it, a Hall of Presidents where I could find
Lil bent over with her head in a President's guts of an afternoon. To
lie down and wake without disgrace, without knowing that my lover and my
best friend would betray me, _had_ betrayed me.

I just couldn't do it -- not yet, anyway.

Dan -- Dan was going to kill himself soon, and if I restored myself from
my old backup, I'd lose my last year with him. I'd lose _his_ last year.

"Let's table that, doc. I hear what you're saying, but there're
complications. I guess I'll take the mood-suppressants for now."

He gave me a cold look. "I'll give you a scrip, then. I could've done
that without coming out here. Please don't call me anymore."

I was shocked by his obvious ire, but I didn't understand it until he
was gone and I told Dan what had happened.

"Us old-timers, we're used to thinking of doctors as highly trained
professionals -- all that pre-Bitchun med-school stuff, long
internships, anatomy drills... Truth is, the average doc today gets more
training in bedside manner than bioscience. 'Doctor' Pete is a
technician, not an MD, not the way you and I mean it. Anyone with the
kind of knowledge you're looking for is working as a historical
researcher, not a doctor.

"But that's not the illusion. The doc is supposed to be the authority on
medical matters, even though he's only got one trick: restore from
backup. You're reminding Pete of that, and he's not happy to have it
happen."

#

I waited a week before returning to the Magic Kingdom, sunning myself on
the white sand beach at the Contemporary, jogging the Walk Around the
World, taking a canoe out to the wild and overgrown Discovery Island,
and generally cooling out. Dan came by in the evenings and it was like
old times, running down the pros and cons of Whuffie and Bitchunry and
life in general, sitting on my porch with a sweating pitcher of
lemonade.

On the last night, he presented me with a clever little handheld, a
museum piece that I recalled fondly from the dawning days of the Bitchun
Society. It had much of the functionality of my defunct systems, in a
package I could slip in my shirt pocket. It felt like part of a costume,
like the turnip watches the Ben Franklin streetmosphere players wore at
the American Adventure.

Museum piece or no, it meant that I was once again qualified to
participate in the Bitchun Society, albeit more slowly and less
efficiently than I once may've. I took it downstairs the next morning
and drove to the Magic Kingdom's castmember lot.

At least, that was the plan. When I got down to the Contemporary's
parking lot, my runabout was gone. A quick check with the handheld
revealed the worst: my Whuffie was low enough that someone had just
gotten inside and driven away, realizing that they could make more
popular use of it than I could.

With a sinking feeling, I trudged up to my room and swiped my key
through the lock. It emitted a soft, unsatisfied _bzzz_ and lit up,
"Please see the front desk." My room had been reassigned, too. I had the
short end of the Whuffie stick.

At least there was no mandatory Whuffie check on the monorail platform,
but the other people on the car were none too friendly to me, and no one
offered me an inch more personal space than was necessary. I had hit
bottom.

#

I took the castmember entrance to the Magic Kingdom, clipping my name
tag to my Disney Operations polo shirt, ignoring the glares of my fellow
castmembers in the utilidors.

I used the handheld to page Dan. "Hey there," he said, brightly. I could
tell instantly that I was being humored.

"Where are you?" I asked.

"Oh, up in the Square. By the Liberty Tree."

In front of the Hall of Presidents. I worked the handheld, pinged some
Whuffie manually. Debra was spiked so high it seemed she'd never come
down, as were Tim and her whole crew in aggregate. They were drawing
from guests by the millions, and from castmembers and from people who'd
read the popular accounts of their struggle against the forces of petty
jealousy and sabotage -- i.e., me.

I felt light-headed. I hurried along to costuming and changed into the
heavy green Mansion costume, then ran up the stairs to the Square.

I found Dan sipping a coffee and sitting on a bench under the giant,
lantern-hung Liberty Tree. He had a second cup waiting for me, and
patted the bench next to him. I sat with him and sipped, waiting for him
to spill whatever bit of rotten news he had for me this morning -- I
could feel it hovering like storm clouds.

He wouldn't talk though, not until we finished the coffee. Then he stood
and strolled over to the Mansion. It wasn't rope-drop yet, and there
weren't any guests in the Park, which was all for the better, given what
was coming next.

"Have you taken a look at Debra's Whuffie lately?" he asked, finally, as
we stood by the pet cemetery, considering the empty scaffolding.

I started to pull out the handheld but he put a hand on my arm. "Don't
bother," he said, morosely. "Suffice it to say, Debra's gang is number
one with a bullet. Ever since word got out about what happened to the
Hall, they've been stacking it deep. They can do just about anything,
Jules, and get away with it."

My stomach tightened and I found myself grinding my molars. "So, what is
it they've done, Dan?" I asked, already knowing the answer.

Dan didn't have to respond, because at that moment, Tim emerged from the
Mansion, wearing a light cotton work-smock. He had a thoughtful
expression, and when he saw us, he beamed his elfin grin and came over.

"Hey guys!" he said.

"Hi, Tim," Dan said. I nodded, not trusting myself to speak.

"Pretty exciting stuff, huh?" he said.

"I haven't told him yet," Dan said, with forced lightness. "Why don't
you run it down?"

"Well, it's pretty radical, I have to admit. We've learned some stuff
from the Hall that we wanted to apply, and at the same time, we wanted
to capture some of the historical character of the ghost story."

I opened my mouth to object, but Dan put a hand on my forearm. "Really?"
he asked innocently. "How do you plan on doing that?"

"Well, we're keeping the telepresence robots -- that's a honey of an
idea, Julius -- but we're giving each one an uplink so that it can
flash-bake. We've got some high-Whuffie horror writers pulling together
a series of narratives about the lives of each ghost: how they met their
tragic ends, what they've done since, you know.
