"Well, may-be he didn't tell on us," suggested Toby.

"'Course he did!"

"Dick has always acted pretty decently."

"Huh! If neither he nor any of his gang told, then who did?" demanded
Ben, as though that settled it.

"Ben Alvord, what have you been doing?" demanded his mother, as Ben
showed up at the kitchen door.

"Why?"

"Your face is all bruised. Have you been fighting?"

"Yes, ma'am. I had to. I thumped Dick Prescott for telling on us and
getting us all arrested."

"Did Dick say that he told on you?" asked Mrs. Alvord.

"No, ma'am."

"Denied it, didn't he?"

"Yes'm."

"And I guess Dick told the truth. I know who did tell on all you boys,"
announced his mother.

"Who?" demanded Ben sullenly.

"Your little brother, Will."

Willie Alvord was only between four and five; not yet old enough to go
to school.

"I got it all out of the baby this afternoon," continued Mrs. Alvord. "I
saw him playing with a new baseball bat, and I made him tell me where he
got it. It seems that Willie heard you and Toby, and the other boys
talking about your Hallowe'en pranks yesterday morning before you went
to school. Then, later, Willie was out in the street playing, when 'a
nice man'--as Willie called him--came along and got to talking with him.
The man talked about you, it seems, Ben, and he made believe he didn't
think Willie's big brother was very smart. Then Willie up and boasted of
your smartness down at the railroad. The 'nice man' took Willie to the
corner and bought him some candy and a baseball bat, and kept on talking
about you and Toby, and the rest, and of course Willie told the 'nice
man' all he'd heard about the railroad business."

"That 'nice man' must have been the detective," growled Ben. "Oh, he's a
real 'nice man.' If Willie was larger I'd take the baseball bat to him
for talking too much!"

"Well, you won't," warned his mother dryly. "Willie is only a baby, and
didn't know what he was saying. But you'd better go and apologize to
Dick Prescott."

"Huh!" was Ben's undutiful retort. Then he went outside with Toby.

"So Dick didn't tell?" mused Toby. "It was your kid brother?"

"Don't you tell that to any one!" warned Ben Alvord, flushing.

"Why, you'll have to tell it yourself," protested Toby. "You'll surely
have to beg Dick Prescott's pardon after what you said to him before the
whole crowd. If you don't, then I'll tell myself. I'm not going to see
Dick blamed for what he didn't do."

"If you blab to any one," warned Ben angrily, "I'll give you a good
thrashing."

"Try it, and perhaps you'll get more of what Dick gave you this
afternoon," Toby shot back as he walked through the gate.

Toby was as good as his word. He told the news at school the next day,
and Ben Alvord's stock went even lower. After school that afternoon Dave
Darrin made Ben apologize. So did Reade, Holmes, Hazelton and Dalzell.
It was a bitter pill for young Alvord to swallow. The fights that the
other chums had claimed were now called off. They felt Ben to be beneath
their notice.




CHAPTER XXI

AB. DEXTER MAKES A NEW MOVE


"Did you hear the latest from Ab. Dexter?" asked Dave, as he met Dick
one Saturday afternoon in November.

"No; nothing very good, was it?"

"That's hardly to be expected," laughed Dave, as the two chums came to a
halt on a street corner. "Did you happen to remember that Dexter and
Driggs were due to come up for trial in court this afternoon?"

"No; I had forgotten the date."

"Well, this was the day. Justice Lee, if you remember, bound them over
to answer at court."

"Yes; I remember that."

"Well, neither of them showed up, and so the court declared forfeited
the cash bail that Dexter put up for the pair."

"The money ought to be worth more to the county than both men put
together," laughed Dick.

"I guess that's the way the court looked at it."

"I hope Dexter and Driggs are both a mighty long way from Gridley, and
that they will stay. Mrs. Dexter isn't having any bother at all, these
days, is she?"

"You ought to be the one to know that," teased Dave. "You're the one she
sends for whenever she takes it into her head that she wants to reward
us for some jolly good fun that we had in helping her."

"I had a note from Mrs. Dexter a few days ago," Dick went on. "Maybe I
forgot to tell you about it. She wanted me to call on her, and I wrote
back that I was awfully sorry but that my evenings just then had to be
put in getting ready for the monthly exams. I haven't heard a word from
her since then."

"She's a fine woman," nodded Dave, "but she certainly has the reward
habit in bad shape."

"Feels some like snow, doesn't it?" inquired Dick, looking up at a
lead-colored sky.

"It'll rain," predicted Dave. "It isn't yet cold enough for snow."

"I'll be mighty glad when the snow comes."

"Maybe I won't," uttered Darrin. "That's the best time of the
year--winter."

"Unless you call summer the finest time."

"Of course in summer we have the long vacation and plenty of time to
have fun."

"Better duck," advised Dick suddenly. "Here comes Mrs. Dexter now."

"Looks as though she'd been crying, too," murmured Dave, scanning the
approaching woman.

"Then we won't scoot," advised Dick, changing front instantly. "It
doesn't look very fine to run away from any one who's in trouble."

Strangely enough Mrs. Dexter didn't appear, at first, to want to talk
with the boys. She nodded, smiled wanly and said:

"Good afternoon, boys! Are things dull to-day?"

"Just quiet, Mrs. Dexter," Dick answered.

Then Dave, with some of his usual impulsiveness, put in, earnestly:

"You look as though you had heard bad news, Mrs. Dexter."

The woman had started to go on her way. Then she turned about again.

"Perhaps I have heard bad news," she smiled wearily.

"It isn't anything that we could help you about, is it?" asked Dick. He
felt that he was taking a liberty in putting the question, yet he could
not hold his inquiry back.

"I--I am afraid not, this time," she answered slowly. "Besides, I don't
want to see any of you get into any more trouble on my account."

"Then it's--it's Mr. Dexter?" hazarded Dave.

The woman swallowed hard, seemed to be trying to choke back something,
and then replied:

"Yes."

"Has he dared to get troublesome again?" flashed Dick.

"N-n-n-o matter. Please don't ask me. You can't help me any this time."

Once more Mrs. Dexter looked as though she would follow her way, but
some other instinct prompted her to add:

"Don't think I don't appreciate my excellent young friends. But you
can't help me this time. No one can. Mr. Dexter is too dangerous a man,
and when he threatens disaster, and says he'll wait patiently a year to
bring it about, he means every word that he says."

"Whew! So he has threatened that, has he?" Dick inquired.

"Yes. I guess I may as well tell you the rest of it. Well, this morning
I received a letter from Mr. Dexter. He wanted more money before. Now he
puts his demand at thirty thousand dollars. He says that, if I don't
arrange to meet him and turn over the cash, he'll wait patiently for a
year or more, if necessary, but that he'll watch and find his chance to
burn my home down and destroy Myra and me in it."

"Dexter threatened that, did he?" chuckled Dave Darrin, almost merrily.
"Why Dexter hasn't the nerve to do such a thing. Excuse me, Mrs. Dexter,
but all that fellow is good for is frightening timid women."

"I wish I could believe that," sighed the woman nervously.

"You have a special policeman still in the house, haven't you, Mrs.
Dexter?"

"Yes. He's there, now, watching over Myra."

"Well, at the worst," pursued Dick, "hire a second man and put him on
guard nights outside the house, and you'll never hear from
Dexter--except by mail, anyway. But how does the man expect you to send
him word about the money? Did he give you any address?"

"He told me to put an advertisement, worded in a certain way, in the
morning 'Blade.'"

"And--pardon me--you've been up and inserted the advertisement?"
questioned Dick.

"Ye-es."

"And have arranged to get the money?"

"Yes; I've seen Mr. Dodge at the bank."

"When are you to meet Dexter!"

"When he sees my advertisement in the 'Blade' to-morrow he'll send me
word where to meet him."

"You ought to send a detective, instead," blazed Dave Darrin.

"If I did, Dexter would wait his time and then destroy my child and
myself," answered the woman, her under-lip quivering.

"You don't really believe that, do you?" asked Dave.

"No; I know it."

"You haven't been to see a lawyer, have you?" inquired Prescott.

"No; I don't dare that, for a lawyer would advise, as you did, sending a
detective to keep the appointment, and then Mr. Dexter would be put in
prison. I don't want Myra to grow up with the shame of having a father
in prison. I--I am glad that Dexter jumped his bail on the other little
charge."

"I see just this much about it, Mrs. Dexter," followed Dick. "But--you
don't mind my speaking, do you?"

"No; I like to hear you, for you boys have already saved me some
heartaches."

"What I was going to say, Mrs. Dexter, is that, no matter how much money
you give that man, he'll always keep bothering you as long as you have
any left. A man who won't work can't be very brave, and a man who
doesn't work can spend an awful lot of money. If you surrender to Dexter
I'm sure you'll have to keep on giving in just as long as you have any
money left."

"Then you think I ought not to give him the money, and that I ought to
hire another good man to guard the house outside?"

"Yes; if you 're really afraid. It'll be cheaper to hire another man
than to give all your fortune away."

"But I've put the advertisement in the 'Blade.'"

"There's time enough to take it out."

"I--I believe I'll do that," murmured Mrs. Dexter. Talking with the boys
had given her a new little rise in courage.

"That's what I'd do if it were my case," added Darrin.

"Thank you! I'll go right up and take the advertisement out at once."

As though afraid that her courage might fail her, if she delayed, Mrs.
Dexter turned and walked rapidly back in the direction whence she had
just come.

"There flies a pot of money out of Dexter's window!" grinned Dave.

"I'm far from being sorry," returned Prescott.

Though neither boy had paid any heed to the fact a cab had moved slowly
down Main Street past them while Mrs. Dexter was talking. The curtains
were drawn just enough to make the interior of the vehicle a black
shadow. Lolling on the back seat, with one curtain adjusted just so that
he could look out sufficiently, sat a man, disguised somewhat, though
none the less Abner Dexter.

"My wife has been up to the 'Blade' office and has put an advertisement
in," muttered Dexter. "Now, she's talking to those two meddlesome boys.
About me, I wonder? Blazes! There she is, turning about again. I wonder
if she's going back to take that advertisement out?"

The cab turned a corner. Then, on directions from inside, the driver
moved his horses along at a brisk trot. The same cab was passing near
the "Blade" office when Mrs. Dexter went there for a second time.

The next morning Ab. Dexter and Driggs unfolded a copy of the "Blade"
between them.

"I've got a misgiving that we won't find the advertisement," muttered
Dexter gloomily. "No, sir. It isn't here, Driggs. Hang the woman, and
twenty times hang those meddling youngsters! Driggs, I never shall win
while those confounded boys are loose in Gridley!"

"We'll take real care of 'em this time," muttered Driggs, with an oath.

"We will!" confirmed Dexter. "We'll stop their troubling us!"




CHAPTER XXII

TRICKED INTO BAD COMPANY


The heads of fifty eighth grade pupils were bent over as many broad
volumes on geography. It was study period; recitation would be called in
five minutes.

Old Dut looked up from a report blank over which he had been poring, to
shoot out this question:

"Why doesn't the tide rise and fall in inland rivers?"

It was a habit of Old Dut's to throw out questions like this in study
time, for the purpose of waking up some of the intellects that needed
rousing.

"Master Holmes, you may answer that," proclaimed the principal.

Greg started out of a brown study at hearing his name spoken. He had a
vague recollection of having heard a question asked. But his mind was
still far away, so he did not realize the enormity of his offense as he
replied:

"I don't know, but I'll be the goat. What's the answer?"

A gasp of amazement sounded around the room.

"Master Gregory Holmes," uttered Old Dut sternly, "ten checks for that
impertinence. And go and stand in the corner by the piano. Turn your
back to the school that you've insulted!"

At that moment there came a rap on the door. Then a young man entered,
handing a sealed envelope to the principal.

"Master Prescott, put your books away and come here," directed Old Dut.

The class looked on wonderingly, while Dick obeyed.

"Here is a note from your mother, which requests that you be allowed to
go home at once, as your father has been injured in an accident. I hope,
my boy, that it is nothing serious," said the principal in a low tone.
"Your mother has sent a carriage in order that you may get home sooner.
Go at once, Master Prescott, and may you learn that the news is not too
bad."

Old Dut held out the note, but Dick barely saw it. Instead, he turned
and ran to the coat room, caught up his coat and cap and sped
downstairs. The messenger had already started downstairs.

"There's the rig," announced the messenger, as Dick appeared on the
steps.

Alongside a surrey was drawn up. A rain curtain and side panels covered
the rear seat, but the driver, a silent individual, who had a full,
heavy red beard and wore smoked glasses over his eyes moved to make room
for Dick on the front seat.

"How badly is dad hurt?" demanded Dick breathlessly, as he bundled
himself in on the front seat.

"Can't say," replied the driver, in a low, weak voice. "I was only hired
to come after you."

"Hurry!" appealed Dick. The driver nodded, and started the horse away
briskly.

Young Prescott was fearfully worried. His mother was a woman of cool,
calm judgment. She was not likely to send a driver after him unless his
father's injuries were dangerous.

"I hope dad isn't going to die," breathed the boy to himself. "If he
must, then I hope I get home in time before he goes."

So absorbed was he in his own gloomy thoughts that Dick gave no heed to
the road that was taken. Nor had the surrey gone far when the rain
curtain behind parted, but Prescott did not see that.

Yet he had no suspicion of foul play until a pair of hands from behind
gripped him about the throat.
