alone with sufficient money to supply his humble needs, the timed
existence had grown on him gradually.

So he turned on Lexington and back on Oak. The dog at the corner
of Oak and Jefferson was waiting for him once again and came out
snarling and growling, snapping at his heels. But Mr. Chambers
pretended not to notice and the beast gave up the chase.

A radio was blaring down the street and faint wisps of what it
was blurting floated to Mr. Chambers.

"... still taking place ... Empire State building disappeared ...
thin air ... famed scientist, Dr. Edmund Harcourt...."

The wind whipped the muted words away and Mr. Chambers grumbled
to himself. Another one of those fantastic radio dramas,
probably. He remembered one from many years before, something
about the Martians. And Harcourt! What did Harcourt have to do
with it? He was one of the men who had ridiculed the book
Mr. Chambers had written.

But he pushed speculation away, sniffed the clean, crisp air again,
looked at the familiar things that materialized out of the late
autumn darkness as he walked along. For there was nothing ...
absolutely nothing in the world ... that he would let upset him.
That was a tenet he had laid down twenty years ago.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a crowd of men in front of the drugstore at the corner
of Oak and Lincoln and they were talking excitedly. Mr. Chambers
caught some excited words: "It's happening everywhere.... What
do you think it is.... The scientists can't explain...."

But as Mr. Chambers neared them they fell into what seemed an
abashed silence and watched him pass. He, on his part, gave them
no sign of recognition. That was the way it had been for many
years, ever since the people had become convinced that he did not
wish to talk.

One of the men half started forward as if to speak to him, but
then stepped back and Mr. Chambers continued on his walk.

Back at his own front door he stopped and as he had done a
thousand times before drew forth the heavy gold watch from his
pocket.

He started violently. It was only 7:30!

For long minutes he stood there staring at the watch in
accusation. The timepiece hadn't stopped, for it still ticked
audibly.

But 15 minutes too soon! For twenty years, day in, day out, he
had started out at seven and returned at a quarter of eight.
Now....

It wasn't until then that he realized something else was wrong.
He had no cigar. For the first time he had neglected to purchase
his evening smoke.

Shaken, muttering to himself, Mr. Chambers let himself in his
house and locked the door behind him.

He hung his hat and coat on the rack in the hall and walked
slowly into the living room. Dropping into his favorite chair, he
shook his head in bewilderment.

Silence filled the room. A silence that was measured by the
ticking of the old fashioned pendulum clock on the mantelpiece.

But silence was no strange thing to Mr. Chambers. Once he had
loved music ... the kind of music he could get by tuning in
symphonic orchestras on the radio. But the radio stood silent in
the corner, the cord out of its socket. Mr. Chambers had pulled
it out many years before. To be precise, upon the night when the
symphonic broadcast had been interrupted to give a news flash.

He had stopped reading newspapers and magazines too, had exiled
himself to a few city blocks. And as the years flowed by, that
self exile had become a prison, an intangible, impassable wall
bounded by four city blocks by three. Beyond them lay utter,
unexplainable terror. Beyond them he never went.

But recluse though he was, he could not on occasion escape from
hearing things. Things the newsboy shouted on the streets, things
the men talked about on the drugstore corner when they didn't see
him coming.

And so he knew that this was the year 1960 and that the wars in
Europe and Asia had flamed to an end to be followed by a terrible
plague, a plague that even now was sweeping through country after
country like wild fire, decimating populations. A plague
undoubtedly induced by hunger and privation and the miseries of
war.

But those things he put away as items far removed from his own
small world. He disregarded them. He pretended he had never heard
of them. Others might discuss and worry over them if they wished.
To him they simply did not matter.

But there were two things tonight that did matter. Two curious,
incredible events. He had arrived home fifteen minutes early. He
had forgotten his cigar.

Huddled in the chair, he frowned slowly. It was disquieting to
have something like that happen. There must be something wrong.
Had his long exile finally turned his mind ... perhaps just a
very little ... enough to make him queer? Had he lost his sense
of proportion, of perspective?

No, he hadn't. Take this room, for example. After twenty years it
had come to be as much a part of him as the clothes he wore.
Every detail of the room was engraved in his mind with ...
clarity; the old center leg table with its green covering and
stained glass lamp; the mantelpiece with the dusty bric-a-brac;
the pendulum clock that told the time of day as well as the day
of the week and month; the elephant ash tray on the tabaret and,
most important of all, the marine print.

