The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Galaxy Primes, by Edward Elmer Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Galaxy Primes

Author: Edward Elmer Smith

Release Date: March 25, 2007 [EBook #20898]

Date last Updated: August 18, 2007

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GALAXY PRIMES ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, V. L. Simpson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







    [Transcriber's Note:

    Typographic errors have been corrected.

    This etext was produced from Amazing Stories March, April
    and May 1959. Extensive research did not uncover any
    evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was
    renewed.]

       *       *       *       *       *




    THE GALAXY PRIMES

    By E. E. SMITH


    They were four of the greatest minds in the Universe:
    Two men, two women, lost in an experimental spaceship
    billions of parsecs from home. And as they mentally
    charted the Cosmos to find their way back to earth,
    their own loves and hates were as startling as the worlds
    they encountered. Here is E. E. Smith's great new novel....


    [Illustration:

    The guardian struggled to immobilize the beast's
    gigantic talons as the frightened girl leaped to the
    safety of Garlock's arms.]




CHAPTER 1


Her hair was a brilliant green. So was her spectacularly filled halter.
So were her tight short-shorts, her lipstick, and the lacquer on her
finger-and toe-nails. As she strolled into the Main of the starship,
followed hesitantly by the other girl, she drove a mental probe at the
black-haired, powerfully-built man seated at the instrument-banked
console.

Blocked.

Then at the other, slenderer man who was rising to his feet from the
pilot's bucket seat. His guard was partially down; he was telepathing a
pleasant, if somewhat reserved greeting to both newcomers.

She turned to her companion and spoke aloud. "So _these_ are the
system's best." The emphasis was somewhere between condescension and
sneer. "Not much to choose between, I'd say ... 'port me a tenth-piece,
Clee? Heads, I take the tow-head."

She flipped the coin dexterously. "Heads it is, Lola, so I get
Jim--James James James the Ninth himself. You have the honor of pairing
with Clee--or should I say His Learnedness Right the Honorable Director
Doctor Cleander Simmsworth Garlock, Doctor of Philosophy, Doctor of
Science, Prime Operator, President and First Fellow of the Galaxian
Society, First Fellow of the Gunther Society, Fellow of the Institute of
Paraphysics, of the Institute of Nuclear Physics, of the College of
Mathematics, of the Congress of Psionicists, and of all the other
top-bracket brain-gangs you ever heard of? Also, for your information,
his men have given him a couple of informal degrees--P.D.Q. and S.O.B."

        *           *           *

The big psionicist's expression of saturnine, almost contemptuous
amusement had not changed; his voice came flat and cold. "The less you
say, Doctor Bellamy, the better. Obstinate, swell-headed women give me
an acute rectal pain. Pitching your curves over all the vizzies in space
got you aboard, but it won't get you a thing from here on. And for your
information, Doctor Bellamy, one more crack like that and I take you
over my knee and blister your fanny."

"Try it, you big, clumsy, muscle-bound gorilla!" she jeered. "_That_ I
want to see! Any time you want to get both arms broken at the elbows,
just try it!"

"Now's as good a time as any. I like your spirit, babe, but I can't say
a thing for your judgment." He got up and started purposefully toward
her, but both non-combatants came between.

"Jet back, Clee!" James protested, both hands against the heavier man's
chest. "What the hell kind of show is _that_ to put on?" And,
simultaneously:

"Belle! Shame on you! Picking a fight already, and with nobody knows how
many million people looking on! You know as well as I do that we may
have to spend the rest of our lives together, so act like civilized
beings--please--both of you! And don't...."

"Nobody's watching this but us," Garlock interrupted. "When pussy there
started using her claws I cut the gun."

"That's what _you_ think," James said sharply, "but Fatso and his number
one girl friend are coming in on the tight beam."

"Oh?" Garlock whirled toward the hitherto dark and silent
three-dimensional communications instrument. The face of a bossy-looking
woman was already bright.

"Garlock! How _dare_ you try to cut Chancellor Ferber off?" she
demanded. Her voice was deep-pitched, blatant with authority. "Here you
are, sir."

The woman's face shifted to one side and a man's appeared--a face to
justify in full the nickname "Fatso."

"'Fatso', eh?" Chancellor Ferber snarled. Pale eyes glared from the fat
face. "That costs you exactly one thousand credits, James."

"How much will this cost me, Fatso?" Garlock asked.

"Five thousand--and, since nobody can call me that deliberately,
demotion three grades and probation for three years. Make a note, Miss
Foster."

"Noted, sir."

"Still sure we aren't going anywhere," Garlock said. "_What_ a brain!"

"Sure I'm sure!" Ferber gloated. "In a couple of hours I'm going to buy
your precious starship in as junk. In the meantime, whether you like it
or not, I'm going to watch your expression while you push all those
pretty buttons and nothing happens."

"The trouble with you, Fatso," Garlock said dispassionately, as he
opened a drawer and took out a pair of cutting pliers, "is that all your
strength is in your glands and none in your alleged brain. There are a
lot of things--including a lot of tests--you know nothing about. How
much will you see after I've cut one wire?"

"You wouldn't dare!" the fat man shouted. "I'd fire you--blacklist you
all over the sys...."

Voice and images died away and Garlock turned to the two women in the
Main. He began to smile, but his mental shield did not weaken.

"You've got a point there, Lola," he said, going on as though Ferber's
interruption had not occurred. "Not that I blame either Belle or myself.
If anything was ever calculated to drive a man nuts, this farce was. As
the only female Prime in the system, Belle should have been in
automatically--she had no competition. And to anybody with three brain
cells working the other place lay between you, Lola, and the other three
female Ops in the age group.

"But no. Ferber and the rest of the Board--stupidity _uber
alles_!--think all us Ops and Primes are psycho and that the ship will
never even lift. So they made a Grand Circus of it. But they succeeded
in one thing--with such abysmal stupidity so rampant I'm getting more
and more reconciled to the idea of our not getting back--at least, for a
long, long time."

"Why, they said we had a very good chance...." Lola began.

"Yeah, and they said a lot of even bigger damn lies than that one. Have
you read any of my papers?"

"I'm sorry. I'm not a mathematician."

"Our motion will be purely at random. If it isn't, I'll eat this whole
ship. We won't get back until Jim and I work out something to steer us
with. But they must be wondering no end, outside, what the score is, so
I'm willing to call it a draw--temporarily--and let 'em in again. How
about it, Belle?"

"A draw it is--temporarily." Neither, however, even offered to shake
hands.

"Smile pretty, everybody," Garlock said, and pressed a stud.

"... the matter? What's the matter? Oh...." the worried voice of the
System's ace newscaster came in. "Power failure _already_?"

"No," Garlock replied. "I figured we had a couple of minutes of privacy
coming, if you can understand the meaning of the word. Now all four of
us tell everybody who is watching or listening _au revoir_ or good-bye,
whichever it may turn out to be." He reached for the switch.

"Wait a minute!" the newscaster demanded. "Leave it on until the last
poss...." His voice broke off sharply.

"Turn it back on!" Belle ordered.

"Nix."

"Scared?" she sneered.

"You chirped it, bird-brain. I'm scared purple. So would you be, if you
had three brain cells working in that glory-hound's head of yours. Get
set, everybody, and we'll take off."

"Stop it, both of you!" Lola exclaimed. "Where do you want us to sit,
and do we strap down?"

"You sit here; Belle at that plate beside Jim. Yes, strap down. There
probably won't be any shock, and we should land right side up, but
there's no sense in taking chances. Sure your stuff's all aboard?"

"Yes, it's in our rooms."

The four secured themselves; the two men checked, for the dozenth time,
their instruments. The pilot donned his scanner. The ship lifted
effortlessly, noiselessly. Through the atmosphere; through and far
beyond the stratosphere. It stopped.

"Ready, Clee?" James licked his lips.

"As ready as I ever will be, I guess. Shoot!"

The pilot's right hand, forefinger outstretched, moved
unenthusiastically toward a red button on his panel ... slowed ...
stopped. He stared into his scanner at the Earth so far below.

"Hit it, Jim!" Garlock snapped. "_Hit_ it, for goodness sake, before we
_all_ lose our nerve!"

James stabbed convulsively at the button, and in the very instant of
contact--instantaneously; without a fractional microsecond of
time-lapse--their familiar surroundings disappeared. Or, rather, and
without any sensation of motion, of displacement, or of the passage of
any time whatsoever, the planet beneath them was no longer their
familiar Earth. The plates showed no familiar stars nor patterns of
heavenly bodies. The brightly-shining sun was very evidently not their
familiar Sol.

"Well--we went _somewhere_ ... but not to Alpha Centauri, not much to
our surprise." James gulped twice; then went on, speaking almost
jauntily now that the attempt had been made and had failed. "So now it's
up to you, Clee, as Director of Project Gunther and captain of the good
ship _Pleiades_, to boss the more-or-less simple--more, I hope--job of
getting us back to Tellus."

        *           *           *

Science, both physical and paraphysical, had done its best. Gunther's
Theorems, which define the electromagnetic and electrogravitic
parameters pertaining to the annihilation of distance, had been studied,
tested, and applied to the full. So had the Psionic Corollaries; which,
while not having the status of paraphysical laws, do allow computation
of the qualities and magnitudes of the stresses required for any given
application of the Gunther Effect.

The planning of the starship _Pleiades_ had been difficult in the
extreme; its construction almost impossible. While it was practically a
foregone conclusion that any man of the requisite caliber would already
be a member of the Galaxian Society, the three planets and eight
satellites were screened, psionicist by psionicist, to select the two
strongest and most versatile of their breed.

These two, Garlock and James, were heads of departments of, and under
iron-clad contract to, vast Solar System Enterprises, Inc., the only
concern able and willing to attempt the building of the first starship.

Alonzo P. Ferber, Chancellor of SSE, however, would not risk a
tenth-piece of the company's money on such a bird-brained scheme.
Himself a Gunther First, he believed implicitly that Firsts were in fact
tops in Gunther ability; that these few self-styled "Operators" and
"Prime Operators" were either charlatans or self-deluded crackpots.
Since he could not feel that so-called "Operator Field," no such thing
did or could exist. No Gunther starship could ever, possibly, work.

He did loan Garlock and James to the Galaxians, but that was as far as
he would go. For salaries and for labor, for research and material, for
trials and for errors; the Society paid and paid and paid.

Thus the starship _Pleiades_ had cost the Galaxian Society almost a
thousand million credits.

Garlock and James had worked on the ship since its inception. They were
to be of the crew; for over a year it had been taken for granted that
would be its only crew.

