
    [1] Alcuin contra Felicem, ii. sec. 12.

    [2] Alcuin (_ibid.,_ i. sec. 13) also answers: "If Christ be
    the adopted Son of God, because as man, he could not be of
    God's substance: then must he also be Mary's adopted son in
    respect to his Deity. But then Mary cannot be the mother of
    God." But this Alcuin thinks an impious conclusion. Cp. also
    Contra Felic., vii. sec. 2.

    [3] Contra Felic, iii. sec. 2.

    [4] Cp. 1 Corinth, xi. 3, "The Head of Christ is God." This
    position of dependence was due, says Felix, "ad ignobilitatem
    beatae Virginis, quae se ancillam Dei humili voce protestatur."

    [5] Cp. Elipandus' "Confession of Faith": "... per istum Dei
    simul et hominis Filium, adoptivum humanitate et nequaquam
    adoptivum Divinitate ... qui est Deus inter Deos (John x. 35)
    ... quia, si conformes sunt omnes sancti huic Filio Dei
    secundum gratiam, profecto et cum adoptione (sunt) adoptivi, et
    cum advocato advocati, et cum Christo Christi, et _cum servo
    servi_."

    [6] Cf. Acts iii. 13.

    [7] Koran, iv. v. 170.

    [8] Koran, xliii. v. 59.

Conceiving, then, that it was logically necessary to speak of Christ the
Man as Son of God by adoption, Felix yet admits that this adoption,
though the same in kind[1] as that which enables _us_ to cry Abba,
Father, yet was more excellent in degree, and even perhaps specifically
higher. It differed also from man's adoption in not being entered into
at baptism, since Christ's baptism was only the point at which His
adoption was outwardly made manifest by signs of miraculous power, which
continued till the resurrection. Christ's adoption--according to Felix,
was assumed at His conception, "His humanity developing in accordance
with its own laws, but in union with the Logos."[2] It will be seen
that though Felix wished to keep clear the distinction between Christ as
God, and as Man, yet he did not carry this separation so far as to
acknowledge two persons in Christ. "The Adoptionists acknowledged the
unity of Persons, but meant by this a juxtaposition of two distinct
personal beings in such a way that the Son of God should be recognised
as the vehicle for all predicates, but not in so close a manner as to
amount to an absorption of the human personality into the Divine
Person."[3] The two natures of Christ had been asserted by the Church
against the Monophysites, and the two wills against the Monothelites,
but the Church never went on to admit the two Persons.[4] With regard to
the contention of Felix, we are consequently driven to the conclusion
that either the personality ascribed to Christ was "a mere abstraction,
a metaphysical link joining two essentially incompatible natures,"[5] or
that the dispute was only about names, and that by adopted son Felix and
the others meant nothing really different from the orthodox doctrine.[6]

    [1] See John x. 35. Cp. Neander, v. p. 222.

    [2] Neander (l.l.) Blunt, Art. on Adopt., puts this
    differently: "There were (according to Felix) two births in our
    Lord's life--(a) the assumption of man at the conception; (_b_)
    the adoption of that man at baptism. Cp. Contra Felic., iii.
    16: "Qui est Secundus Adam, accepit has geminas generationes;
    primam quae secundum carnem est, secundum vero spiritatem, quae
    per adoptionem fit, idem redemptor noster secundum hominem
    complexus, in semet ipso continet, primam videlicet, quam
    suscepit ex virgine nascendo, secundam vero quam initiavit in
    lavacro [ ] a mortuis resurgendo."

    [3] Blunt, article on Adopt.

    [4] Cp. Paschasius: "In Christo gemina substantia, non gemina
    persona est, quia persona personam consumere potest, substantia
    vero substantiam non potest, siquidem persona res iuris est,
    substantia res naturae."

    [5] Blunt, _ibid._ Cp. also Alcuin contra Felic., iv. 5, where
    he says that Felix, although he shrank from asserting the dual
    personality of Christ, yet insisted on points which involved
    it.

    [6] So Walchius.

The first mention of the new theory appears in a letter of Elipandus to
the Abbot Fidelis, written in 783,[1] but it did not attract notice
till a little later. The pope Adrian, in his letter to the orthodox
bishops of Spain (785), speaks of the melancholy news of the heresy
having reached him--a heresy, he remarks, never before propounded,
unless by Nestorius. Together with Elipandus, he mentions Ascarius,[2]
Bishop of Braga, whom Elipandus had won over to his views. The new
doctrine seems to have made its way quickly over a great part of
Spain,[3] while Felix propagated it with considerable success in
Septimania. The champions of the orthodox party in Spain were Beatus and
Etherius, whom we have mentioned above, and Theudula, Bishop of Seville;
while beyond its borders Alcuin, Paulinus of Aquileia, and Agobard of
Lyons, under the direction of Charles the Great and the Pope, defended
the orthodox position.

    [1] See Migne, 96 p. 848.

    [2] Fleury, v. 236, mentions a letter of his to Elipandus,
    asking the latter's opinion on some doubtful points in the new
    doctrine.

    [3] Jonas of Orleans, in his work against Claudius, says: "Hac
    virulenta doctrina uterque Hispaniam magna ex parte infecit."

Felix, being bishop in a province of which Charles claimed the
overlordship, was amenable to his ecclesiastical superiors, and suffered
for his opinions at their hands; but Elipandus, living under a
Mohammedan government, could only be reached by letters or messages. He
seems even to have received something more than a mere negative support
from the Arabs, if we are right in so interpreting a passage in the
letter of Beatus and Etherius.[1] But it is hard to believe that
Elipandus was on such friendly terms with the Arab authorities; indeed,
from passages in his writings, we should infer that the opposite was
rather the case.[2] Neander suggests that it may have been a Gothic
king in Galicia who supported Elipandus, but this seems even more
unlikely than the other supposition.

The first council called to consider this question was held by the
suggestion of the Emperor and the Pope at Narbonne in 788, when the
heresy was condemned by twenty-five bishops of Gaul.[3]

A similar provincial council was held by Paulinus at Friuli in 791, with
the same results.[4] But in the following year the heresy was formally
condemned at a full council held at Ratisbon, under the presidency of
the Emperor. Here Felix abjured his error, and was sent to Rome to be
further condemned by the Pope, that the whole Western Church might take
action in the matter. Felix was there induced to write a book condemning
his own errors, but in spite of this he was not restored to his see.[5]
On his return, however, to Spain, Felix relapsed into his old heresy,
which he had never really abjured.[6]

    [1] I. sec. 13. "Et episcopus metropolitanus et princeps terrae
    pari certamine schismata haereticorum, unus verbi gladio, alter
    virga regiminis ulciscens, de terra vestra funditus
    auferantur." See on this passage Neander, v. 227, and cp. sec.
    65, "haereticus tamen scripturarum non facit rationem, sed cum
    potentibus saeculi ecclesiam vincere quaerit."

    [2] Elip. ad. Albinum, sec. 7--"Oppressione gentis afflicti non
    possumus tibi rescribere cuncta;" also, Ad Felic. "quotidiana
    dispendia quibus duramus potius quam vivimus."

    [3] There are some doubts about this council.

    [4] Fleury, v. 236. Hefele dates it 796.

    [5] See letter of Spanish bishops to Charles, asking for
    Felix's restoration (794).

    [6] Leo III. said of him, at a council held in Rome (799):
    "_Fugiens ad paganos consentaneos_ perjuratus effectus est."
    See Froben, "Dissert," sec. 24; apud Migne, ci, pp. 305-336.

In 792 Alcuin was summoned from England to come and defend the orthodox
position. He wrote at once to Felix a kindly letter, admonishing him of
his errors, and acknowledging that all his previous utterances on
theology had been sound and true. Felix answered this letter, but his
reply is not preserved. To the same, or following, year belongs the
letter of Elipandus and the bishops of Spain to Charles and the bishops
of Gaul, defending their doctrine, and asking for the restoration of
Felix.

In 794 was held another council at Frankfurt, at which Alcuin and other
English clergy were present. Felix was summoned to attend, and heard his
heresy again condemned and anathematised, the decree to this effect
being sent to Elipandus.[1] Alcuin's book was read by Charles, and sent
into Septimania by the hands of the abbot Benedict.

The next council was held at Rome in 798 to confirm the one at
Frankfurt.[2] In 799 came out Felix's answer to Alcuin, sent by him
first to Elipandus, and, after being shewn to the Cordovan clergy, sent
on to Charles. Alcuin is charged to answer it, with Paulinus and the
Pope as his coadjutors.

In the same year another council was held at Aix, where Alcuin argued
for a week with Felix, and apparently convinced him, for Felix again
recanted, and even wrote a confession of faith discarding the word
adoption, but still preserving the distinction of predicates belonging
to the two natures.[3] Alcuin's book, after being revised by Charles,
was published 800 A.D. Previously to this he had written to Elipandus,
who answered in no measured terms, accusing Alcuin, among other things,
of enormous wealth. This letter was sent through Felix, and, in answer,
Alcuin wrote the book against Elipandus, which we now have, and which
was the means of converting twenty thousand heretics in Gothic Gaul.[4]
But in spite of Emperor or Pope, of the books of Alcuin, or the
anathemas of the councils, neither Felix nor Elipandus really gave up
his new doctrines, and even the former continued to make converts.
Elipandus, though very old[5] at this time (800 A.D.), lived ten years
longer, and Felix survived him eight years;[6] and they both died
persisting in their error.[7]

    [1] Fleury, v. 243, says there was no anathema; but Migne,
    xcvi. 858, gives us the canon: "Anathematizata esto impia ac
    nefanda haeresis Elipandi Toletanae sedis Episcopi, et Felix
    (_sic_) Orgellitani, eorumque sequacium."

    [2] Neander, v. 228.

    [3] _Ibid._, p. 232.

    [4] Froben, sec, 82. Neander says 10,000.

    [5] Alcuin adv. Elip. Preface to Leidrad: "Non pro eius
    tantummodo laboravi salute, quem timeo forsan citius vel morte
    praereptum esse propter decrepitam in eo senectutem."

    [6] Or perhaps six.

    [7] No reliance can be placed in the statement of the
    Pseudo-Luitprand, who, in a letter to Recemundus, speaking of
    Elipandus, says: "Postquam illius erroris sui de adoptione
    Christi sero et vere poenituit, ad quod manifestandum concilium
    (795) episcoporum ... collegit; et coram omnibus abiurato
    publice errore _fidem sanctae ecclesiae Romanae_ confessus
    est." These words in italics reveal a later hand. Cp. also sec.
    259 and Julianus. Alcuin, in a letter to Aquila, bishop of
    Salisbury, says that Elipandus in 800 A.D. still adhered to his
    error.

We have dealt somewhat at length with the Adoptionist heresy, both from
its interest and importance, and because, as mentioned above, there are
some reasons for thinking that it was the outcome of a wish to
conciliate Mohammedan opinion. It will be as well to recapitulate such
evidence as we have obtained on this point. But we must not expect to
find the traces of Mohammedan influence in the development, so much as
in the origination, of the theory. What we do find is slight enough,
amounting to no more than this:--

(_a._) That the one point, which repelled the Mohammedan from genuine
Christianity--setting aside for a moment the transcendental mystery of
the Trinity--was the Divinity of Christ. Anything, therefore, that
tended to emphasise the humanity of Jesus, or to obscure the great fact
of Christ the Man, being Son of God, which sounded so offensive to
Mohammedan ears, would so far bring the Christian creed nearer to the
Mohammedan's acceptance, by assimilating the Christian conception of
Christ, to that which appears so often in the Koran.[1] There can be no
doubt that the theory of adoption, if carried to its logical
conclusion, did contribute to this result:

(_b._) That Elipandus was accused of receiving the help of the secular
arm in disseminating his heretical opinions:

(_c._) That the application of the term _Servant_ to Christ, besides
being authorised by texts from Scripture, is countenanced in two
passages from the Koran:

(_d._) That Leo III., speaking of, Felix's return to Spain, and his
relapse into error, implies that it was due to his renewed contact with
infidels who held similar views:

(_e._) That in a passage, quoted by Enhueber, Elipandus is said to have
lost his hold on the truth in consequence of his close intercourse with
the Arabs:

(_f._) That Elipandus accused Etherius of being a false prophet, that
is, for giving, as has been conjectured, a Mohammedan interpretation to
the Beast in the Revelation of St John.

Something must now be said of one more doctrine, which, though it did
not arise in Spain, nor perhaps much affected it, yet was originated by
a Spaniard, and a disciple of Felix,[2]--Claudius, Bishop of Turin. Some
have seen in this doctrine, which was an offshoot of Iconoclasm, traces
of Adoptionism, a thing not unlikely in itself.[3]

Of the relations of Claudius to the Saracens we have the direct
statement of one of his opponents, who said that the Jews praised him,
and called him the wisest among the Christians; and that he on his side
highly commended them _and the Saracens_.[4] Yet his tendency seems to
have been against the Judaizing of the Church.[5]

    [1] Fifty years later Alvar ("Ind. Lum.," sec. 9), accuses
    certain Christians of dissembling their religion under fear of
    persecution:--"Deum Christum non aperte coram eis (_i.e._
    Saracenis) sed fugatis sermonibus proferunt, Verbum Dei et
    Spiritum, ut illi asserunt, profitentes, suasque confessiones
    corde, quasi Deo omnia inspiciente, servantes."

    [2] Jonas of Orleans (Migne, cvi. p. 330) calls him so, and
    says elsewhere, "Felix resuscitur in Claudio."

    [3] Neander, vi. 119.

    [4] Fleury, v. 398.

    [5] Neander, vi. 125.

The great Iconoclastic reform, which arose in the East, undoubtedly
received its originating impulse from the Moslems. In 719 the Khalif
destroyed all images in Syria. His example was followed in 730 by the
Eastern Emperor, Leo the Isaurian. He is said to have been persuaded to
this measure by a man named Bezer, who had been some years in captivity
among the Saracens.[1] In 754 the great council of Constantinople
condemned images. Unfortunately neither the great patriarchates nor the
Pope were represented, and so this council never obtained-the sanction
of all Christendom; and its decrees were reversed in 787 at the Council
of Nicaea. In 790 appeared the Libri Carolini, in which we rejoice to
find our English Alcuin helping Charles the Great to make a powerful and
reasonable protest against the worship of images.[2] In 794 this protest
was upheld by the German Council of Frankfurt. But the Pope, and his
militia,[3] the monks, made a strenuous opposition to any reform in this
quarter, and the recognition of images became part and parcel of Roman
Catholic Christianity.

Claudius was made bishop of Turin in 828.[4] Though placed over an
Italian diocese, he soon shewed the independence, which he had imbibed
in the free air of Spain, where the Mohammedan supremacy had at least
the advantage of making the supremacy of the Pope impossible. Finding
that the people of his diocese paid worship to their images, Claudius
set to work to deface, burn, and abolish, all images and crosses in his
bishopric. In respect to the crosses he went further than other
Iconoclasts, in which we can perhaps trace his Adoptionist training.[5]

These new views did not, as might be expected, find favour with the
Catholic party, whose cause was taken up by Theodemir, abbot of Nimes, a
friend of Claudius', by Jonas of Orleans, and Dungal, an Irish priest.
But, as in the case of Felix, the heresiarch was more than a match for
his opponents in argument.[6]

    [1] Fleury, xl. ii. 1, says he was an apostate. See Mendham,
    Seventh General Council, Introd., pp. xii. xiv.

    [2] "Adorationem soli Deo debitam imaginibus impertire aut
    segnitiae est, si utcumque agitur, aut insaniae, vel potius
    infidelitatis, si pertinaciter defenditur."--III. c. 24.

    "Imagines vero, omni cultura et adoratione seclusa, utrum in
    basilicis propter memoriam rerum gestarum sint, nullum fidei
    Catholicae afferre poterunt praeiudicium, quippe cum ad
    peragenda nostrae salutis mysteria nullum penitus officium
    habere noscantur."--III. c. 21.

    [3] Prescott.

    [4] Neander says 814, Herzog 820.

    [5] Neander, v. 119. The Spanish Christians were not free from
    the charge of adoring the cross, as we can see from the answer
    of the Khalif Abdallah (888) when advised to leave his
    brother's body at Bobastro: shall I, he said, leave my
    brother's body to the mercy of those who ring bells and adore
    the cross. Ibn Hayyan, apud Al Makk., ii. 446.

    [6] Fleury, v. 398, confesses that the case of the
    image-worshippers rests mainly on tradition and the usage of
    the Church--meaning that they can draw no support from the
    Bible. He might have remembered Matt. xv. 7--"Ye make void the
    Word of God because of your tradition."

Claudius' own defence has been lost, but we gather his views from his
opponents' quotation of them.

Briefly expressed, they are as follows:--

_(a.)_ Image-worship is really idol-worship:

_(b.)_ If images are to be adored, much more should those living beings
be adored, whom the images represent. But we are not permitted to adore
God's works, much less may we worship the work of men:[1]

_(c.)_ The cross has no claim to be adored, because Jesus was fastened
to it: else must we adore other things with which Jesus was similarly
connected; virgins, for example, for Christ was nine months in a
virgin's womb; mangers, asses, ships, thorns, for with all these Jesus
was connected. To adore the cross we have never been told, but to bear
it,[2] that is to deny ourselves. Those generally are the readiest to
adore it, who are least ready to bear it either spiritually or
physically.[3]

Claudius also had very independent views on the question of papal
supremacy.[4] Being summoned before a council, with more wisdom than
Felix, he refused to attend it, knowing that his cause would be
prejudged, and contented himself with calling the proposed assembly a
congregation of asses. He died in 839 in secure possession of his see,
and with his Iconoclastic belief unshaken.

Such were the heresies which connect themselves with Spain during the
first three hundred years of Arab domination, and which seem to have
been, in part at least, due to Mohammedan influence. One more there was,
the Albigensian heresy, which broke out one hundred and fifty years
later, and was perhaps the outcome of intercourse with the Mohammedanism
of Spain.[5]

    [1] Jonas of Orleans, apud Migne, vol. cvi. p. 326.

    [2] Luke xiv. 27.
