"He was that very person," nodded Mr. Ackerman. "He evidently had plenty
of ideas; the only trouble was that they did not work very well. He had
already applied steam to mills and wagons, and now he wanted to see what
he could do with it aboard a boat. Either he was very impractical or
else hard luck pursued his undertakings. At any rate, he had a boat
built in Kentucky, an engine installed on it, and then he had the craft
floated to New Orleans from which point he planned to make a trip up the
Mississippi. But alas, before his boat was fully ready, there was a drop
in the river and the vessel was left high and dry on the shore."

"Jove!" exclaimed Dick involuntarily.

"Pretty tough, wasn't it?" remarked Mr. Ackerman.

"What did he do then?" demanded Stephen. "Did he resurrect the boat?"

"No, it did not seem to be any use; instead he had the engine and boiler
taken out and put into a saw mill where once again hard luck pursued
him, for the mill was burned not long after. That was the end of Oliver
Evans's steamboating."

Mr. Ackerman paused thoughtfully.

"Now while Fitch and those following him were working at the steamboat
idea here in America, Robert Fulton, also a native of this country, was
turning the notion over in his mind. Strangely enough, he had not
intended to be an inventor for he was in France, studying to be a
painter. During a visit to England he had already met several men who
were interested in the steam engine and through them had informed
himself pretty thoroughly about the uses and action of steam. In Paris
he made the acquaintance of a Mr. Barlow and the two decided to raise
funds and build a steamboat to run on the Rhone. This they did, but
unfortunately the boat sank before any degree of success had been
achieved. Then Fulton, not a whit discouraged, told the French
Government that if they would furnish the money he would build a similar
boat to navigate the Seine. The French, however, had no faith in the
plan and promptly refused to back it."

"I'll bet they wished afterward they had!" interrupted Dick.

"I presume they did," agreed Mr. Ackerman. "It is very easy to see one's
mistakes after a thing is all over. Anyway, Mr. Barlow came back to
America, where Fulton joined him, and immediately the latter went to
building a steamboat that should be practical. On his way home he had
stopped in England and purchased various parts for his engine and when
he got to New York he had these set up in an American boat. You must not
for a moment imagine that everything about this first steamboat of
Fulton's was original. On the contrary he combined what was best in the
experiments of previous inventors. He adopted the English type of
engine, the side paddle, everything that seemed to him workable. Barlow
and a rich New Yorker named Livingston backed the enterprise. Now some
time before the State of New York, half in jest and half in irony, had
granted to Livingston the sole right to navigate the New York waters by
means of ships driven by steam or fire engines. At the time the
privilege had caused much mirth for there were nothing but sailing ships
in existence, and there was no prospect of there ever being any other
kind of vessel. Hence the honor was a very empty one and nobody expected
a time would arrive when it would ever be of any value to its owner. But
Livingston was a shrewder and more far-seeing man than were the old
legislators at Albany, and to Fulton he was an indispensable ally."

The boy listened breathlessly.

"How these three men managed to keep their secret so well is a mystery;
but apparently they did, and when Fulton suddenly appeared on the
Hudson with a steamboat named the _Clermont_ for Mr. Livingston's
country seat on the Palisades, the public was amazed. A model of the
boat with a miniature engine had previously been tried out so the three
promoters had little doubt that their project would work, and it did. As
the new craft moved along without any sails to propel it the sensation
it made was tremendous. People were divided as to whether to flee from
it in terror or linger and marvel at it. It is a pity that the
newspapers of the period did not take the advent of this remarkable
invention more seriously for it would have been interesting to know more
of the impression it created. As it was little is recorded about it.
Probably the very silence of the press is significant of the fact that
there was scant faith in the invention, and that it was considered too
visionary a scheme to dignify with any notice. However that may be, the
newspapers passed this wonderful event by with almost no comment.
History, however, is more generous and several amusing stories have come
down to us of the fright the _Clermont_ caused as she crept along the
river at dusk with a shower of vermilion sparks rising from her funnel.
One man who came around a bend of the stream in his boat and encountered
the strange apparition for the first time told his wife afterward that
he had met the devil traveling the river in a sawmill."

There was a shout of laughter from the boys.

"The trial trip, to which many distinguished guests were invited, took
place a few days later, and after improving some of the defects that
cropped up the steamboat was advertised to run regularly between New
York and Albany. Now if you think this announcement was hailed with joy
you are much mistaken," continued Mr. Ackerman, smiling to himself at
some memory that evidently amused him. "On the contrary the owners of
the sailing ships which up to this time had had the monopoly of traffic
were furious with rage. So vehemently did they maintain that the river
belonged to them that at last the matter went to the courts and Daniel
Webster was retained as Fulton's counsel. The case attracted wide
attention throughout the country, and when it was decided in Fulton's
favor there was great excitement. Every sort of force was brought to
bear to thwart the new steamboat company. Angry opponents tried to blow
up the boat as it lay at the dock; attempts were made to burn it. At
length affairs became so serious that a clause was appended to the
court's decree which made it a public crime punishable by fine or
imprisonment to attempt to injure the _Clermont_."

Mr. Ackerman paused to light a fresh cigar.

"From the moment the law took this stand the success of the undertaking
became assured and it is interesting to see how quickly the very men who
jeered loudest at the enterprise now came fawning and begging to have a
part in it. Other steamboats were added to the line and soon rival
firms began to construct steamboats of their own and try to break up
Fulton's monopoly of the waters of the State. For years costly lawsuits
raged, and in defiance of the right the New York legislature had granted
to Livingston, the fiercest competition took place. Sometime I should
like to tell you more of this phase of the story for it is a very
exciting and interesting yarn. Yet in spite of all the strife and hatred
that pursued him Fulton's river-boats and ferries continued to run."

"The State stuck to its bargain, then," murmured Steve, "and left
Livingston the rights awarded him?"

"No," replied Mr. Ackerman. "For a time they clung to their agreement;
but at last the courts withdrew the right as illegal, and poor
Livingston, who had sunk the greater part of his fortune in the
steamboat business, lived to see the fruit of his toil wrested from him.
In point of fact, I believe the decision of the courts to have been a
just one for no one person or group of persons should control the
waterways of the country. You can see the wisdom of this yourself.
Nevertheless, the decree hit Livingston pretty hard. It was the first
step in the destruction of a monopoly," added Mr. Ackerman whimsically.
"Since then such decrees have become common happenings in America,
monopolies being considered a menace to national prosperity. Certainly
in this case it was well that the Supreme Court of the United States
decided that all waters of the country should be free to navigators, no
matter in what kind of vessel they chose to sail."

"It was tough on Fulton and his friends, though, wasn't it?" observed
Dick, who was plainly unconvinced as many another had been of the
justice of the arguments.

"Yes," agreed Mr. Ackerman, smiling into his troubled eyes, "I grant you
it was tough on them."




CHAPTER XIV

A STEAMBOAT TRIP BY RAIL


It was with a sense of deep regret that Stephen bade good-by to Mr.
Ackerman and Dick and returned to the hotel to join his father. For the
steamboat financier he had established one of those ardent admirations
which a boy frequently cherishes toward a man of attractive personality
who is older than himself; and for Dick he had a genuine liking. There
was a quality very winning in the youthful East-sider and now that the
chance for betterment had come his way Steve felt sure that the boy
would make good. There was a lot of pluck and grit in that wiry little
frame; a lot of honesty too, Stephen reflected, with a blush. He was not
at all sure but that in the matter of fearlessness and moral courage the
New York lad had the lead of him. Certainly he was not one who shrank
from confessing when he had been at fault which, Steve owned with shame,
could not be said of himself.

For several days he had not thought of his automobile escapade but now
once more it came to his mind, causing a cloud to chase the joyousness
from his face. Alas, was he never to be free of the nagging
mortification that had followed that single act? Was it always to lurk
in the background and make him ashamed to confront the world squarely?
Well, it was no use regretting it now. He had made his choice and he
must abide by it.

Nevertheless he was not quite so spontaneously happy when he met his
father at luncheon and recounted to him the happenings of the morning.

"Mr. Ackerman is taking a big chance with that boy," was Mr. Tolman's
comment, when a pause came in the narrative. "I only hope he will not
disappoint him. There must be a great difference between the standards
of the two. However, Dick has some fine characteristics to build
on--honesty and manliness. I think the fact that he showed no coward
blood and was ready to stand by what he had done appealed to Ackerman.
It proved that although they had not had the same opportunity in life
they at least had some good stuff in common. You can't do much with a
boy who isn't honest."

Stephen felt the blood beating in his cheeks.

Fortunately his father did not notice his embarrassment and as they soon
were on their way to a picture show the memory that had so importunately
raised its unwelcome head was banished by the stirring story of a
Californian gold mine. Therefore by the time Stephen was ready to go to
bed the ghost that haunted him was once more thrust into the background
and he had gained his serenity. No, he was not troubled that night by
dreams of his folly nor did he awaken with any remembrance of it.
Instead he and his father chatted as they packed quite as pleasantly as
if no specter stood between them.

"Well, son, have you enjoyed your holiday?" inquired Mr. Tolman, as they
settled themselves in the great plush chairs of the parlor car and
waited for the train to start.

"Yes, I've had a bully time, Dad."

"I'm glad of that," was the kind reply. "It was unlucky that my business
took up so much more of my time than I had expected and that I had to
leave you to amuse yourself instead of going about with you, as I had
planned. It was too bad. However, if you have managed to get some fun
out of your visit that is the main thing. In fact, I am not sure but
that you rather enjoyed going about alone," concluded he mischievously.

Stephen smiled but did not reply. There was no denying that he had found
being his own master a pleasant experience which had furnished him with
a gratifying sense of freedom and belief in his own importance. What a
tale he would have to tell the fellows at home! And how shocked his
mother would be to hear that he had been turned loose in a great city in
this unceremonious fashion! He could hear her now saying to his father:

"I don't see what you were thinking of, Henry, to let Stephen tear about
all alone in a city like New York. I should have worried every instant
if I had known what he was doing. Suppose anything had happened to
him!"

Well, mercifully, nothing had happened,--that is, nothing worse than his
falling into the hands of a detective and being almost arrested for
robbery, reflected the boy with a grin.

Perhaps Mr. Tolman interpreted his thoughts for presently he observed
with a smile:

"It is time you were branching out some for yourself, anyway, son. You
are old enough now to be treated like a man, not like a little boy."

As he spoke he looked toward Stephen with an expression of such pride
and affection that the force of it swept over the lad as it never had
done before. What a bully sort his father was, he suddenly thought; and
how genuinely he believed in him! Why not speak out now and clear up the
wretched deception he had practiced, and start afresh with a clean
conscience? With impulsive resolve he gripped the arms of the chair and
pulled himself together for his confession. But just at the crucial
moment there was a stir in the aisle and a porter followed by two
belated passengers hurried into the train which was on the brink of
departure. That they had made their connection by a very narrow margin
was evident in their appearance, for both were hot and out of breath,
and the stout colored porter puffed under the stress of his haste and
the heavy luggage which weighed him down.

"It's these two chairs, sir," he gasped, as he tossed the new leather
suit case into the rack. "Is there anything else I can do for you?"

"No," replied the traveler, thrusting a bill into the darkey's hand.
Already the train was moving. "Keep the change," he added quickly.

"Thank you, sir! Thank you!" stammered the vanishing negro.

"Well, we caught it, didn't we, Dick? It didn't look at one time as if
it were possible. That block of cars on the avenue was terrible. But we
are off now! It was about the closest shave I ever made." Then he turned
around. "Hullo!" he cried. "Who's this? Bless my soul!"

Both Mr. Tolman and Steve joined in the laugh of amazement.

"Well, if this isn't a great note!" went on Mr. Ackerman, still beaming
with surprise. "I thought you people were not going until the afternoon
train."

"I managed to finish up my business yesterday and get off earlier than I
planned," Mr. Tolman explained. "But I did not know _you_ had any
intention of going in this direction."

"I hadn't until this morning," laughed the financier. "Then a telegram
arrived saying they could take Dick at the New Haven school to which I
had written if he entered right away, at the beginning of the term. So I
dropped everything and here we are _en route_. It was rather short
notice and things were a bit hectic; but by turning the whole apartment
upside down, rushing our packing, and keeping the telephone wire hot we
contrived to make the train."

"It is mighty nice for us," put in Mr. Tolman cordially. "So Dick is
setting forth on his education, is he?"

"Yes, he is starting out to make of himself a good scholar, a good
sport, a good athlete, and I hope a good man," returned the New Yorker.

"A pretty big order, isn't it, Dick?" laughed Mr. Tolman.

"It seems so," returned the boy.

"It is not a bit too big," interrupted Mr. Ackerman. "Dick knows he
hasn't got to turn the trick all in a minute. He and I understand such
things take time. But they _can be done_ and we expect we are going to
do them."

He flashed one of his rare smiles toward his protege and the lad smiled
back frankly.

"I expect so, too," echoed Mr. Tolman. "You've got plenty of backers
behind you, Dick, and you have a clear path ahead. That is all any boy
needs."

"You're going back to school, aren't you, youngster?" Mr. Ackerman
suddenly inquired of Stephen.

"Yes, sir. I start in next week."

"Decided yet whether you will be a railroad man like your Dad, or a
steamboat man like me?" went on the New Yorker facetiously.

"Not yet."

"Oh, for shame! It should not take you any time at all to decide a
question like that," the capitalist asserted teasingly. "What's
hindering you?"

Stephen gave a mischievous chuckle.

"I can't decide until I have heard both sides," said he. "So far I know
only half the steamboat story."

"I see! In other words you think that between here and New Haven I might
beguile the time by going on with the yarn I began yesterday."

"That thought crossed my mind, sir,--yes."

"You should go into the diplomatic service, young man. Your talents are
being wasted," observed Mr. Ackerman good-humoredly. "Well, I suppose I
could romance for the benefit of you two boys for part of the way, at
least. It will give your father, Steve, a chance to go into the other
car and smoke. Where did we break off our story? Do you remember?"

"Where the United States said anybody had the right to sail anywhere he
wanted to, in any kind of a boat he chose," piped Dick with promptness.

"Yes, yes. I recall it all now," said Mr. Ackerman. "The courts withdrew
the grant giving Livingston the sole right to navigate the waters of New
York State by means of steamboats. So you want to hear more about it, do
you?"

"Yes!" came simultaneously from both the boys.

"Then all aboard! Tolman, you can read, or run off and enjoy your cigar.
We are going on a steamboat cruise."

"Push off! You won't bother me," was the tolerant retort, as the elder
man unfolded the morning paper.

Mr. Ackerman cleared his throat.

"Before this decree to give everybody an equal chance in navigating the
waters of the country was handed down by the courts," he began, "various
companies, in defiance of Livingston's contract, began building and
running steamboats on the Hudson. Two rival boats were speedily in
operation and it was only after a three years' lawsuit that they were
legally condemned and handed over to Fulton to be broken up. Then the
ferryboat people got busy and petitioned the New York Legislature for
the right to run their boats to and fro between the New York and New
Jersey sides of the river, and it is interesting to remember that it was
on one of these ferry routes that Cornelius Vanderbilt, the great
American financier, began his career."

"I never knew that!" ejaculated Dick, intent on the story.

"After the ruling of the Supreme Court in 1818 that all the waters of
the country were free there was a rush to construct and launch steamers
on the Hudson. The route was, you see, not only the most direct one
