
"_Fellow-sufferer, who are you? how long have you been imprisoned? Be
good enough to answer_."

Monsieur the Viscount hesitated for a moment, and then determined to
risk all. He tore off a bit of the paper, and with the little pencil
hurriedly wrote this reply:--

"_In secret, June 12, 1794_.

"_Louis Archambaud Jean-Marie Arnaud, Vicomte de B., supposed to have
perished in the massacres of September_, 1792. _Keep my secret. I have
been imprisoned a year and nine months. Who are_ you? _how long have_
you _been here_?"

The letter was drawn up, and he watched anxiously for the reply. It
came, and with it some sheets of blank paper.

"_Monsieur_,--_We have the honour to reply to your inquiries, and
thank you for your frankness. Henri Edouard Clermont, Baron de St.
Claire. Valerie de St. Claire. We have been here but two days. Accept
our sympathy for your misfortunes_."

Four words in this note seized at once upon Monsieur the Viscount's
interest--_Valerie de St. Claire_;--and for some reasons, which I do
not pretend to explain, he decided that it was she who was the author
of these epistles, and the demon of curiosity forthwith took
possession of his mind. Who was she? was she old or young? And in
which relation did she stand to Monsieur le Baron--that of wife, of
sister, or of daughter? And from some equally inexplicable cause
Monsieur the Viscount determined in his own mind that it was the
latter. To make assurance doubly sure, however, he laid a trap to
discover the real state of the case. He wrote a letter of thanks and
sympathy, expressed with all the delicate chivalrous politeness of a
nobleman of the old _regime_, and addressed it to _Madame la Baronne_.
The plan succeeded. The next note he received contained these
sentences:--"_I am not the Baroness. Madame my mother is, alas! dead.
I and my father are alone. He is ill, but thanks you, Monsieur, for
your letters, which relieve the_ ennui _of imprisonment. Are you
alone?_"

Monsieur the Viscount, as in duty bound, relieved the _ennui_ of the
Baron's captivity by another epistle. Before answering the last
question, he turned round involuntarily, and looked to where Monsieur
Crapaud sat by the broken pitcher. The beautiful eyes were turned
towards him, and Monsieur the Viscount took up his pencil, and wrote
hastily, "_I am not alone--I have a friend._"

Henceforward the oyster-shell took a long time to fill, and patience
seemed a harder virtue than ever. Perhaps the last fact had something
to do with the rapid decline of Monsieur the Viscount's health. He
became paler and weaker, and more fretful. His prayers were
accompanied by greater mental struggles, and watered with more tears.
He was, however, most positive in his assurances to Monsieur Crapaud
that he knew the exact nature and cause of the malady that was
consuming him. It resulted, he said, from the noxious and unwholesome
condition of his cell; and he would entreat Antoine to have it swept
out. After some difficulty the gaoler consented.

It was nearly a month since Monsieur the Viscount had first been
startled by the appearance of the little pincushion. The stock of
paper had long been exhausted. He had torn up his cambric ruffles to
write upon, and Mademoiselle de St. Claire had made havoc of her
pocket-handkerchiefs for the same purpose. The Viscount was feebler
than ever, and Antoine became alarmed. The cell should be swept out
the next morning. He would come himself, he said, and bring another
man out of the town with him to help him, for the work was heavy, and
he had a touch of rheumatism. The man was a stupid fellow from the
country, who had only been a week in Paris; he had never heard of the
Viscount, and Antoine would tell him that the prisoner was a certain
young lawyer who had really died of fever in prison the day before.
Monsieur the Viscount thanked him; and it was not till the next
morning arrived, and he was expecting them every moment, that Monsieur
the Viscount remembered the toad, and that he would without doubt be
swept away with the rest in the general clearance. At first he thought
that he would beg them to leave it, but some knowledge of the petty
insults which that class of men heaped upon their prisoners made him
feel that this would probably be only an additional reason for their
taking the animal away. There was no place to hide it in, for they
would go all round the room; unless--unless Monsieur the Viscount took
it up in his hand. And this was just what he objected to do. All his
old feelings of repugnance came back; he had not even got gloves on;
his long white hands were bare, he could not touch a toad. It was true
that the beast had amused him, and that he had chatted to it; but,
after all, this was a piece of childish folly--an unmanly way, to say
the least, of relieving the tedium of captivity. What was Monsieur
Crapaud but a very ugly (and most people said a venomous) reptile? To
what a folly he had been condescending! With these thoughts, Monsieur
the Viscount steeled himself against the glances of his topaz-eyed
friend, and when the steps of the men were heard upon the stairs, he
did not move from the window where he had placed himself, with his
back to the stone.

The steps came nearer and nearer, Monsieur the Viscount began to
whistle--the key was rattled in the lock, and Monsieur the Viscount
heard a bit of bread fall, as the toad hastily descended to hide
itself as usual in the corners. In a moment his resolution was gone;
another second, and it would be too late. He dashed after the
creature, picked it up, and when the men came in he was standing with
his hands behind him, in which Monsieur Crapaud was quietly and safely
seated.

The room was swept, and Antoine was preparing to go, when the other,
who had been eyeing the prisoner suspiciously, stopped and said with a
sharp sneer, "Does the citizen always preserve that position?"

"Not he," said the gaoler, good-naturedly. "He spends most of his time
in bed, which saves his legs. Come along, Francois."

"I shall not come," said the other, obstinately. "Let the citizen show
me his hands."

"Plague take you!" said Antoine, in a whisper. "What sulky fit
possesses you, my comrade? Let the poor wretch alone. What wouldst
thou with his hands? Wait a little, and thou shall have his head."

"We should have few heads or prisoners either, if thou hadst the care
of them," said Francois, sharply. "I say that the prisoner secretes
something, and that I will see it. Show your hands, dog of an
aristocrat!"

Monsieur the Viscount set his teeth to keep himself from speaking, and
held out his hands in silence, toad and all.

Both the men started back with an exclamation, and Francois got behind
his comrade, and swore over his shoulder.

Monsieur the Viscount stood upright and still, with a smile on his
white face. "Behold, citizen, what I secrete, and what I desire to
keep. Behold all that I have left to secrete or to desire! There is
nothing more."

"Throw it down!" screamed Francois; "many a witch has been burnt for
less--throw it down."

The colour began to flood over Monsieur the Viscount's face; but still
he spoke gently, and with bated breath. "If you wish me to suffer,
citizen, let this be my witness that I have suffered. I must be very
friendless to desire such a friend. I must be brought very low to ask
such a favour. Let the Republic give me this."

"The Republic has one safe rule for aristocrats," said the other; "she
gives them nothing but their keep till she pays for their
shaving--once for all. She gave one of these dogs a few rags to dress
a wound on his back with, and he made a rope of his dressings, and let
himself down from the window. We will have no more such games. You may
be training the beast to spit poison at good citizens. Throw it down
and kill it."

Monsieur the Viscount made no reply. His hands had moved towards his
breast, against which he was holding his golden-eyed friend. There are
times in life when the brute creation contrasts favourably with the
lords thereof, and this was one of them. It was hard to part just now.

Antoine, who had been internally cursing his own folly in bringing
such a companion into the cell, now interfered. "If you are going to
stay here to be bitten or spit at, Francois, my friend," said he, "I
am not. Thou art zealous, my comrade, but dull as an owl. The Republic
is far-sighted in her wisdom beyond thy coarse ideas, and has more
ways of taking their heads from these aristocrats than one. Dost thou
not see?" And he tapped his forehead significantly, and looked at the
prisoner; and so, between talking and pushing, got his sulky companion
out of the cell, and locked the door after them.

"And so, my friend--my friend!" said Monsieur the Viscount, tenderly,
"we are safe once more; but it will not be for long, my Crapaud.
Something tells me that I cannot much longer be overlooked. A little
while, and I shall be gone; and thou wilt have, perchance, another
master, when I am summoned before mine."

Monsieur the Viscount's misgivings were just. Francois, on whose
stupidity Antoine had relied, was (as is not uncommon with people
stupid in other respects) just clever enough to be mischievous.
Antoine's evident alarm made him suspicious, and he began to talk
about the too-elegant-looking young lawyer who was imprisoned "in
secret," and permitted by the gaoler to keep venomous beasts. Antoine
was examined and committed to one of his own cells, and Monsieur the
Viscount was summoned before the revolutionary tribunal.

There was little need even for the scanty inquiry that in those days
preceded sentence. In every line of his beautiful face, marred as it
was by sickness and suffering--in the unconquerable dignity, which
dirt and raggedness were powerless to hide, the fatal nobility of his
birth and breeding were betrayed. When he returned to the ante-room,
he did not positively know his fate; but in his mind there was a moral
certainty that left him no hope.

The room was filled with other prisoners awaiting trial; and, as he
entered, his eyes wandered round it to see if there were any familiar
faces. They fell upon two figures standing with their backs to him--a
tall, fierce-looking man, who, despite his height and fierceness, had
a restless, nervous despondency expressed in all his movements; and a
young girl who leant on his arm as if for support, but whose steady
quietude gave her more the air of a supporter. Without seeing their
faces, and for no reasonable reason, Monsieur the Viscount decided
with himself that they were the Baron and his daughter, and he begged
the man who was conducting him for a moment's delay. The man
consented. France was becoming sick of unmitigated carnage, and even
the executioners sometimes indulged in pity by way of a change.

As Monsieur the Viscount approached the two they turned round, and he
saw her face--a very fair and very resolute one, with ashen hair and
large eyes. In common with almost all the faces in that room, it was
blanched with suffering; and, it is fair to say, in common with many
of them, it was pervaded by a lofty calm. Monsieur the Viscount never
for an instant doubted his own conviction; he drew near and said in a
low voice, "Mademoiselle de St. Claire!"

The Baron looked first fierce, and then alarmed. His daughter's face
illumined; she turned her large eyes on the speaker, and said simply,
"Monsieur le Vicomte?"

The Baron apologized, commiserated, and sat down on a seat near, with
a look of fretful despair; and his daughter and Monsieur the Viscount
were left standing together. Monsieur the Viscount desired to say a
great deal, and could say very little. The moments went by, and hardly
a word had been spoken.

Valerie asked if he knew his fate.

"I have not heard it," he said; "but I am morally certain. There can
be but one end in these days."

She sighed. "It is the same with us. And if you must suffer, Monsieur,
I wish that we may suffer together. It would comfort my father--and
me."

Her composure vexed him. Just, too, when he was sensible that the
desire of life was making a few fierce struggles in his own breast.

"You seem to look forward to death with great cheerfulness,
Mademoiselle."

The large eyes were raised to him with a look of surprise at the
irritation of his tone.

"I think," she said, gently, "that one does not look forward _to_, but
_beyond_ it." She stopped and hesitated, still watching his face, and
then spoke hurriedly and diffidently:--

"Monsieur, it seems impertinent to make such suggestions to you, who
have doubtless a full fund of consolation; but I remember, when a
child, going to hear the preaching of a monk who was famous for his
eloquence. He said that his text was from the Scriptures--it has been
in my mind all to-day--'_There the wicked cease from troubling, and
there the weary be at rest._' The man is becoming impatient. Adieu!
Monsieur. A thousand thanks and a thousand blessings."

She offered her cheek, on which there was not a ray of increased
colour, and Monsieur the Viscount stooped and kissed it, with a thick
mist gathering in his eyes, through which he could not see her face.

"Adieu! Valerie!"

"Adieu! Louis!"

So they met, and so they parted; and as Monsieur the Viscount went
back to his prison, he flattered himself that the last link was broken
for him in the chain of earthly interests.

When he reached the cell he was tired, and lay down, and in a few
seconds a soft scrambling over the floor announced the return of
Monsieur Crapaud from his hiding-place. With one wrinkled leg after
another he clambered on to the stone, and Monsieur the Viscount
started when he saw him.

"Friend Crapaud! I had actually forgotten thee. I fancied I had said
adieu for the last time;" and he gave a choked sigh, which Monsieur
Crapaud could not be expected to understand. In about five minutes he
sprang up suddenly. "Monsieur Crapaud, I have not long to live, and no
time must be lost in making my will." Monsieur Crapaud was too wise to
express any astonishment; and his master began to hunt for a
tidy-looking stone (paper and cambric were both at an end). They were
all rough and dirty; but necessity had made the Viscount inventive,
and he took a couple and rubbed them together till he had polished
both. Then he pulled out the little pencil, and for the next half hour
composed and wrote busily. When it was done he lay down, and read it
to his friend. This was Monsieur the Viscount's last will and
Testament:--

"_To my successor in this cell._

"To you whom Providence has chosen to be the inheritor of my sorrows
and my captivity, I desire to make another bequest. There is in this
prison a toad. He was tamed by a man (peace to his memory!) who
tenanted this cell before me. He has been my friend and companion for
nearly two years of sad imprisonment. He has sat by my bedside, fed
from my hand, and shared all my confidence. He is ugly, but he has
beautiful eyes; he is silent, but he is attentive; he is a brute, but
I wish the men of France were in this respect more his superiors! He
is very faithful. May you never have a worse friend! He feeds upon
insects, which I have been accustomed to procure for him. Be kind to
him; he will repay it. Like other men, I bequeath what I would take
with me if I could.

"Fellow-sufferer, adieu! GOD comfort you as He has comforted
me! The sorrows of this life are sharp but short; the joys of the next
life are eternal. Think sometimes on him who commends his friend to
your pity, and himself to your prayers.

"This is the last will and testament of Louis Archambaud Jean-Marie
Arnaud, Vicomte de B----."

Monsieur the Viscount's last will and testament was with difficulty
squeezed into the surface of the larger of the stones. Then he hid it
where the priest had hidden _his_ bequest long ago, and then lay down
to dream of Monsieur the Preceptor, and that they had met at last.

The next day was one of anxious suspense. In the evening, as usual, a
list of those who were to be guillotined next morning, was brought
into the prison; and Monsieur the Viscount begged for a sight of it.
It was brought to him. First on the list was Antoine! Halfway down was
his own name, "Louis de B----," and a little lower his fascinated
gaze fell upon names that stirred his heart with such a passion of
regret as he had fancied it would never feel again, "Henri de St.
Claire, Valerie de St. Claire."

Her eyes seemed to shine on him from the gathering twilight, and her
calm voice to echo in his ears. "_It has been in my mind all to-day.
There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at
rest._"

_There_! He buried his face and prayed.

He was disturbed by the unlocking of the door, and the new gaoler
appeared with Antoine! The poor wretch seemed overpowered by terror.
He had begged to be imprisoned for this last night with Monsieur the
Viscount. It was only a matter of a few hours, as they were to die at
daybreak, and his request was granted.

Antoine's entrance turned the current of Monsieur the Viscount's
thoughts. No more selfish reflections now. He must comfort this poor
creature, of whose death he was to be the unintentional cause.
Antoine's first anxiety was that Monsieur the Viscount should bear
witness that the gaoler had treated him kindly, and so earned the
blessing and not the curse of Monsieur le Cure, whose powerful
presence seemed to haunt him still. On this score he was soon set at
rest, and then came the old, old story. He had been but a bad man. If
his life were to come over again, he would do differently. Did
Monsieur the Viscount think that there was any hope?

Would Monsieur the Viscount have recognized himself, could he, two
years ago, have seen himself as he was now? Kneeling by that rough,
uncultivated figure, and pleading with all the eloquence that he could
master to that rough uncultivated heart, the great Truths of
Christianity--so great and few and simple in their application to our
needs! The violet eyes had never appealed more tenderly, the soft
voice had never been softer than now, as he strove to explain to this
ignorant soul, the cardinal doctrines of Faith and Repentance, and
Charity, with an earnestness that was perhaps more effectual than his
preaching.

Monsieur the Viscount was quite as much astonished as flattered by the
success of his instructions. The faith on which he had laid hold with
such mortal struggles, seemed almost to "come natural" (as people say)
to Antoine. With abundant tears he professed the deepest penitence for
his past life, at the same time that he accepted the doctrine of the
Atonement as a natural remedy, and never seemed to have a doubt in the
Infinite Mercy that should cover his infinite guilt.
