       *       *       *       *       *

Hardly more than a village, this cluster of strangely beautiful
shelters for the People of the Light. Beyond, Rawson saw the country,
pastures where animals, weird and strange, were cropping the grass so
vividly green; fields of growing things; little crystal houses like
fanciful, glistening toys that had miraculously grown to greater size.
The dwellings were sprinkled far into the distance across the
landscape. Beyond them was the base of the mountain, magnificent and
glorious in its crystal purity of white, and the striations, vertical
and diagonal, that flashed brilliantly with black jet and peacock
green.

Rawson knew them for mineral intrusions, and knew that the mountain
was only one crystalline mass of all the quartz formation that made of
the world's inner core a gigantic geode, gleaming in eternal
brilliance under the glow of the central sun. And still, in it all,
Dean Rawson had seen a lack without which perfection could not be
complete.

"Where is Loah?" he asked of Gor. "I thought--I had hoped...."

Something in Gor's face told Rawson that his companion was troubled.
"She refused to come," he said. "But the wish of one of the great ones
from the Land of the Sun is a command." He shouted an order before
Rawson could put in a protest. A man darted away.

"Always happy, my little Loah-San," said Gor. His eyes held a puzzled
look. "Always until now. And now she weeps and will not say why. Come,
we will walk more slowly. There were questions you wished to ask. I
will answer them as we walk."

"Questions?" exclaimed Rawson. "A thousand of them."

       *       *       *       *       *

And now for the first time since, at the top of a barren peak, in the
dark of the desert night, his wild journey had begun, he found
answers, definite and precise, to the puzzles he had been unable to
solve.

Their speech--their language--how was it they could talk with him? He
fired the questions out with furious eagerness, and Gor replied.

As to their speech--the Holy Mountain itself would explain. And yes,
truly, this was the center of the world, or the sun above them was.
The central sun did not attract, but instead repelled all matter from
it--all things but one, the sun-stone, of which Gor would speak
later.

Rawson pounced upon that and demanded corroboration.

"All the power of earth tends to draw every object to its center, yet
we're here on an inner surface. We're walking actually head down. And
our bodies, every stone, every particle of matter, ought by well-known
laws to fall into that flaming center. But we don't! That proves your
point--proves a counter gravitation. Then there must be a neutral
zone. A place where this upward thrust is exactly equalled by
gravity's downward pull.

"The zone of fire," said Gor. "You passed through it. Did you not
see?"

"Saw it and felt it!" Rawson's mind leaped immediately to the next
question.

"And we must have come through it at, surely, a thousand miles an
hour. What drove us? That shell must have gone in from here. I can
understand its falling one way, but not two. We should have come to
rest in that very spot--and we'd have lasted about half a second if we
had."

"Oro and Grah," said Gor. "Oro, the sun-stone, and Grah, the
stone-that-loves-the-dark. But they are not stones, neither are they
metal. We find them deep in the ground, clinging to the caves. A fine
powder, both of them."

"Still I don't get it," said Rawson. "You drive that shell in from
here, and then you drive it back again."

"That, too, I will explain later. It is simple; even the Dwellers in
the Dark--those whom you call the mole-men--have Oro and Grah to serve
them."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gor launched into a long account of their tribal legends, of that time
in the long ago when an angry sun god had driven his children inside
the earth; of how Gor, and the son of Gor, and his son's sons tried
always to return.

Rawson was listening only subconsciously. They were circling the white
mountain, ascending its lower slope. Now he could see beyond it as far
as the land extended, and he was startled to find this distance so
short. They were on an island, ten miles or so in length, and beyond
it was the sea; he must ask Gor about that.

"It is all that is left," said Gor, when Rawson interrupted his
narrative. "Once the land was great and the sea small--this also in
the long ago--but always it has risen. The air we breathe and the
water in the sea come from the central sun. The air rushes out, as you
know; the water has no place to retreat."

Again he took up his tale, but Rawson's eyes were following the upward
curve of that sea. They, seemed to be in the bottom of a great bowl;
he was trying to estimate, trying to gage distance.

"... and so, after many generations had lived and died, they found the
Pathway to the Light," Gor was saying. "It is our name for the shaft
through which you came. This was thousands of your years ago, when he
who was then Gor, and the bravest of the tribe, descended. Even then
they were workers in metal and they knew of Oro and Grah. They were
our fathers, the first People of the Light."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rawson had a question ready on his tongue, but Gor's words suggested
another. "That shaft," he said, "the Pathway to the Light--do you mean
it extends clear up to the mole-men's world? Why don't they come
down?"

"To them the way is lost; the Pathway is closed above the zone of
fire. That other Gor did that. And those who remained--the
mole-men--have forgotten. They could break their way through if they
knew--they are master-workers with fire--but for them the Pathway
ends, and below is the great heat. But we know of a way around the
closed place, the hidden way to the great Lake of Fire."

"They could break their way through if they knew!" repeated Rawson
softly. For an instant he stood silent and unbreathing; he was
remembering the ugly eyes in a priest's hideous face. The eyes were
watching him as the White Ones took him away.

He forced his thoughts to come back to the earlier question. "What,"
he asked, "is the diameter, the distance across the inside world? How
far is it from here to your sun? How many miles?"

"Miles?" questioned Gor. "We know the word, for the Mountain has told
us, but the length of a mile we could not know. This I can say: there
were wise men in the past when our own world was larger. They worked
magic with little marks on paper. It is said that they knew that if
one came here from our sun and kept on as far again through the solid
rock, he would reach the outside--the land, of the true sun, from
which our forefathers came."

Rawson nodded his head, while his eyes followed that sweeping green
bowl of the sea. "Not far off," he said abstractedly. "Two thousand
miles radius--and the earth itself not a solid ball, but a big
globular shell two thousand miles thick. I could rig up a level, I
suppose; work out an approximation of the curvature."

From the smooth winding path which they had followed there sounded
behind them hurrying footsteps; a moment later Loah stood beside him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her eyes gave unmistakable corroboration of what Gor had said of that
torrent of tears, but she looked at Dean bravely, while every show of
emotion was erased from her face. "You sent for me," she said.

And Rawson, though now he knew he could speak to her and be
understood, found himself at a loss for words.

"We wanted you with us, Gor and I," he began, then paused. She was so
different from the girl whose smiling eyes had welcomed him. The
change had come when he spoke those first words on his arrival, and
now she was so coldly impersonal.

"I wanted to thank you. You saved my life; you were so brave, so...."
Again he hesitated; he wanted to tell her how dear, how utterly
lovely, she had seemed.

"It was nothing; it has pleased me to do it," she said quietly, then
walked on ahead while the others followed. But Rawson knew that that
slim body was tense with repressed emotion. He had not realized how he
had looked forward to seeing again that welcoming light in her eyes.
He was still puzzling over the change as they entered a natural cave
in the mountainside.

A winding passage showed between sheer walls of snow white, where
giant crystals had parted along their planes of cleavage. Then the
passage grew dark, but he could see that ahead of them it opened to
form a wider space. There were lights on the walls of the room, lights
like the one that Loah had carried. And on the floor were rows of
tables where men were busy at work, writing endlessly on long scrolls
of parchment.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Wise Ones," Gor was saying. "Servants of the Holy Mountain." Yet
even then men knelt at Rawson's coming as had the other more humble
people. They then returned to their tables, and in that crystal
mountain was only the sound of their scratching pens and the faint
sigh of a breeze that blew in through a hidden passage to furnish
ventilation.

Yet there were some at those tables whose pens did not move; they
seemed to be waiting expectantly. One of them spoke. "The time is
near," he said. "Are the Servants prepared?"

And the waiting ones answered: "We are prepared."

Rawson glanced sharply about. "What hocus-pocus is this?" he was
asking himself. Still the silence persisted. He looked at the waiting
men, motionless, their heads bent, their hands ready above the
parchment scrolls. He saw again the white walls, the single broad band
of some glittering metal that made a continuous black stripe around
walls and ceiling and floor.

"What kind of ore is that?" he was asking himself silently. "It's
metallic; it runs right through the mountain. I wonder--"

His idle thoughts were never finished. A ripping crash like the
crackle of lightning in the vaulted room! Then a voice--the mountain
itself was speaking--speaking in words whose familiar accent brought a
sob into his throat.

"Station K-twenty-two-A," said the voice of the mountain, "the
super-power station of the Radio-news Service at Los Angeles,
California."

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's tuned in!" gasped Rawson. "Tuned in on the big L. A. station! A
gigantic crystal detector! Those heavy laminations of imbedded metal
furnish the inductance." Then his incoherent words ended--the mountain
was speaking.

"Radiopress dispatch: The invasion of the mole-men has not been
checked. Army Air Force fought a terrific engagement about midnight,
last night, and met defeat. Over one hundred fighting planes were
brought down in flames. Even the new battle-plane type, the latest
dreadnoughts of the air, succumbed.

"Heavy loss of life, although civilian population of three towns had
been evacuated before the mole-men destroyed them. Gordon Smith is
reported killed. Smith was associated with Dean Rawson in the Tonah
Basin where the mole-men first appeared. With Colonel Culver of the
California National Guard, Smith was returning from Washington in an
Army dreadnought which crashed back of the enemy's lines."

Rawson's tanned face had gone white; he knew the others were looking
at him curiously, all but the men at the tables whose pens were flying
furiously across the waiting scrolls. Before him the face of Loah,
suddenly wide-eyed and troubled, swam dizzily. He could scarcely see
it--he was seeing other sights of another world.

"They're out," he half whispered. "The red devils are out--and
Smithy--Smithy's gone!"




CHAPTER XX

_Taloned Hands_


Simple, pastoral folk, the People of the Light! In their inner world,
a vanishing world, where nearly all of what once had been a vast
country was now covered by the steadily encroaching sea, they had
resisted the degeneration which might easily have followed the
destruction of a complex civilization. Living simply, and clean of
mind, they had clung to the culture of the past as it was taught them
by their Wise Ones. And now the People of the Light had found a new
god.

Not that Dean Rawson had asked for that exalted position; on the
contrary he had tried his best to make them understand that he was
only one of many millions, some better, some worse, but all of them
merely humans.

His speaking the language of the holy mountain had convinced them
first. But when old Rotan, oldest and grayest of the mountain's
servants, went into a trance, then Rawson could no longer escape the
honors being thrust upon him.

"The time of deliverance is at hand," old Rotan said when he awoke.
His voice that so long had been cracked and feeble was suddenly
strong, vibrant with belief in the visions that had come to him.

They were in the inner chamber of the white mountain, where Dean
Rawson, heartsick, lonely and hopeless, had spent most of his time
listening to the voice from the outer world. Gor was there, and Loah;
and the writers had left their desks to gather around old Rotan, where
now the old servant of the mountain stood erect, his glistening eyes
fixed unwaveringly upon Rawson.

"Listen," he commanded. "Rotan speaks the truth. Never shall the
People of the Light return to the outer world; it is here we stay. For
now our world which is lost shall be returned to us." His eyes,
unnaturally bright, met the wondering gaze of his own people gathered
around, then came back to rest again upon Rawson.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Dean--Rah--Sun!" he said. "'Rah'--do you not see? It is our own word,
Rah--the Messenger! Dean--Messenger of the Sun! The sun-god has sent
him--he will set us free. He will restore our lost cities. The People
of the Light will spread out to fill the new land; they will multiply,
and once more will be a mighty nation, living happily as of old in
their own lost world.

"Dean!" he called. "Dean--Messenger of the Sun!" He was drawn to his
full frail height, his arms outstretched. But Rawson saw the old eyes
close, sensed the first slackening of that tense body; it was he who
sprang and caught the sagging figure in his arms, then lowered the
lifeless body to the floor of crystal white.

Even happiness can kill. A feeble heart can cease to beat under the
stress of emotions too beautiful to be borne. And Rotan, wisest of the
wise, had passed on to serve his sun-god in another world.

And thereafter, Rawson, Dean-Rah-Sun, was undeniably a god. But he
wondered, even then, while the others dropped to their knees in humble
worship, why Loah, her eyes brimming over with tears, had broken
suddenly into uncontrollable sobs and had rushed blindly, swiftly,
from the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

To Rawson the unwavering, simple faith of the White Ones was only an
added misery. Rotan's vision was accepted by them unquestioningly;
their adoring eyes followed Rawson wherever he went, while the
children carpeted his path to the holy mountain with golden flowers.

And there Rawson would sit, cursing silently his own helplessness,
while the voice of the mountain told of further devastation up above.
His plans for leading a force against the mole-men were abandoned. On
the island, all that was left of this inner world, were only some two
thousand persons, men, women and children. And the children were few;
the population had been rigorously kept down. Their present number was
all that the island would support, though every possible foot of
ground was tilled.

"Only a handful of them," Rawson admitted despondently, "and not a
weapon of any sort. They've kept by themselves. Only Loah and a few
of the others had enough curiosity and nerve to scout around where the
mole-men live. She even understands their talk! Lord, what I'd give
for a thousand like her, a thousand men with her nerve! Then, with
weapons, and means of transportation...." But at that he stopped,
aware of the futility of all such thoughts.

He had tried to talk to Gor, tried to tell him of his own limitations.
And Gor had only smiled pleasantly and repeated "Rotan has spoken. It
will come to pass!"

Ceaselessly his thoughts revolved about the hopelessness of his
situation. He was alone. Whatever was to be done he must do
single-handed--and there was nothing he could do! But he would not
admit to himself that the aching loneliness came to a focus in the
memory of a girl's smiling eyes, the touch of her soft hand.

"They're fighting up there," he argued, "fighting for their lives, and
I can't help. What right have I to think of Loah or myself?" In spite
of which he sprang abruptly to his feet, left the mountain and the
voice of the mountain behind him, and went in search of the girl.

"I've got to make her understand," he exclaimed. "I've got to have
someone to talk to. But I can't make her out. She's so confoundedly
respectful--acts as if I were a little tin god. And yet--she wasn't
always that way!"

       *       *       *       *       *
