earth, even if he tired of her, ill-used her, despised her. And slowly,
day by day, Wulf's sneers bad awakened in her a dread that perhaps the
Amal might despise her.... Why, she could not guess: but what sort of
women were those Alrunas of whom Wulf sang, of whom even the Amal and
his men spoke with reverence, as something nobler, not only than her,
but even than themselves? And what was it which Wulf had recognised in
Hypatia which had bowed the stern and coarse old warrior before her in
that public homage?.... it was not difficult to say what.... But why
should that make Hypatia or any one else attractive? And the poor
little child of nature gazed in deep bewilderment at a crowd of new
questions, as a butterfly might at the pages of the book on which it has
settled, and was sad and discontented--not with herself, for was she
not Pelagia the perfect?--but with these strange fancies which came
into other people's heads.--Why should not every one be as happy as they
could? And who knew better than she how to be happy, and to make others
happy?....

'Look at that old monk standing on the pavement, Amalric! Why does he
stare so at me? Tell him to go away.'

The person at whom she pointed, a delicate-featured old man, with a
venerable white beard, seemed to hear her; for he turned with a sudden
start, and then, to Pelagia's astonishment, put his hands before his
face, and burst convulsively into tears.

'What does he mean by behaving in that way? Bring him here to me this
moment! I will know!' cried she, petulantly catching at the new object,
in order to escape from her own thoughts.

In a moment a Goth had led up the weeper, who came without demur to the
side of Pelagia's mule.

'Why were you so rude as to burst out crying in my face?' asked she
petulantly.

The old man looked up sadly and tenderly, and answered in a low voice,
meant only for her ear--

'And how can I help weeping, when I see anything as beautiful as you are
destined to the flames of hell for ever?'

'The flames of hell?' said Pelagia, with a shudder. 'What for?'

'Do you not know?' asked the old man, with a look of sad surprise. 'Have
you forgotten what you are?'

'I? I never hurt a fly!'

'Why do you look so terrified, my darling? What have you been saying to
her, you old villain?' and the Amal raised his whip.

'Oh! do not strike him. Come, come to-morrow, and tell me what you
mean.'

'No, we will have no monks within our doors, frightening silly women.
Off, sirrah! and thank the lady that you have escaped with a whole
skin.' And the Amal caught the bridle of Pelagia's mule, and pushed
forward, leaving the old man gazing sadly after them.

But the beautiful sinner was evidently not the object which had brought
the old monk of the desert into a neighbourhood so strange and ungenial
to his habits; for, recovering himself in a few moments, he hurried on
to the door of the Museum, and there planted himself, scanning earnestly
the faces of the passers-out, and meeting, of course, with his due share
of student ribaldry.

'Well, old cat, and what mouse are you on the watch for, at the hole's
mouth here?'

'Just come inside, and see whether the mice will not singe your whiskers
for you....'

'Here is my mouse, gentlemen,' answered the old monk, with a bow and
a smile, as he laid his hand on Philammon's arm, and presented to his
astonished eyes the delicate features and high retreating forehead of
Arsenius.

'My father,' cried the boy, in the first impulse of affectionate
recognition; and then--he had expected some such meeting all along, but
now that it was come at last, he turned pale as death. The students saw
his emotion.

'Hands off, old Heautontimoroumenos! He belongs to our guild now! Monks
have no more business with sons than with wives. Shall we hustle him for
you, Philammon?'

'Take care how you show off, gentlemen: the Goths are not yet out of
hearing!' answered Philammon, who was learning fast how to give a smart
answer; and then, fearing the temper of the young dandies, and shrinking
from the notion of any insult to one so reverend and so beloved as
Arsenius, he drew the old man gently away, and walked up the street with
him in silence, dreading what was coming.

'And are these your friends?'

'Heaven forbid! I have nothing in common with such animals but flesh and
blood, and a seat in the lecture-room!'

'Of the heathen woman?'

Philammon, after the fashion of young men in fear, rushed desperately
into the subject himself, just because he dreaded Arsenius's entering on
it quietly.

'Yes, of the heathen woman. Of course you have seen Cyril before you
came hither?'

'I have, and--'

'And,' went on Philammon, interrupting him, 'you have been told every
lie which prurience, stupidity, and revenge can invent. That I have
trampled on the cross--sacrificed to all the deities in the pantheon-and
probably'--(and he blushed scarlet)--'that that purest and holiest of
beings--who, if she were not what people call a pagan, would be, and
deserves to be, worshipped as the queen of saints--that she--and I--'
and he stopped.

'Have I said that I believed what I may have heard?'

'No--and therefore, as they are all simple and sheer falsehoods, there
is no more to be said on the subject. Not that I shall not be delighted
to answer any questions of yours, my dearest father--'

'Have I asked any, my child?'

'No. So we may as well change the subject for the present,'--and he
began overwhelming the old man with inquiries about himself, Pambo, and
each and all of the inhabitants of the Laura to which Arsenius, to
the boy's infinite relief, answered cordially and minutely, and even
vouchsafed a smile at some jest of Philammon's on the contrast between
the monks of Nitria and those of Scetis.

Arsenius was too wise not to see well enough what all this flippancy
meant; and too wise, also, not to know that Philammon's version was
probably quite as near the truth as Peter's and Cyril's; but for reasons
of his own, merely replied by an affectionate look, and a compliment to
Philammon's growth.

And yet you seem thin and pale, my boy.'

'Study,' said Philammon, 'study. One cannot burn the midnight oil
without paying some penalty for it.... However, I am richly repaid
already; I shall be more so hereafter.'

'Let us hope so. But who are those Goths whom I passed in the streets
just now?'

'Ah! my father,' said Philammon, glad in his heart of any excuse to
turn the conversation, and yet half uneasy and suspicious at Arsenius's
evident determination to avoid the very object of his visit. 'It must
have been you, then, whom I saw stop and speak to Pelagia at the farther
end of the street. What words could you possibly have had wherewith to
honour such a creature?'

'God knows. Some secret sympathy touched my heart.... Alas! poor child!
But how came you to know her?'

'All Alexandria knows the shameless abomination,' interrupted a voice
at their elbow--none other than that of the little porter, who had
been dodging and watching the pair the whole way, and could no longer
restrain his longing to meddle. 'And well it had been for many a rich
young man had odd Miriam never brought her over, in an evil day, from
Athens hither.'

'Miriam?'

'Yes, monk; a name not unknown, I am told, in palaces as well as in
slave-markets.'

'An evil-eyed old Jewess?'

'A Jewess she is, as her name might have informed you; and as for her
eyes, I consider them, or used to do so, of course--for her injured
nation have been long expelled from Alexandria by your fanatic tribe--as
altogether divine and demoniac, let the base imagination of monks call
them what it likes.'

'But how did you know this Pelagia, my son? She is no fit company for
such as you.'

Philammon told, honestly enough, the story of his Nile journey, and
Pelagia's invitation to him.

'You did not surely accept it?'

'Heaven forbid that Hypatia's scholar should so degrade himself!'

Arsenius shook his head sadly.

'You would not have had me go?'

'No, boy. But how long hast thou learned to call thyself Hypatia's
scholar, or to call it a degradation to visit the most sinful, if
thou mightest thereby bring back a lost lamb to the Good Shepherd?
Nevertheless, thou art too young for such employment--and she meant to
tempt thee doubtless.'

'I do not think it. She seemed struck by my talking Athenian Greek, and
having come from Athens.'

'And how long since she came from Athens?' said Arsenius, after a pause.
'Who knows?'

'Just after it was sacked by the barbarians,' said the little porter,
who, beginning to suspect a mystery, was peaking and peering like
an excited parrot. 'The old dame brought her hither among a cargo of
captive boys and girls.'

'The time agrees.... Can this Miriam be found?'

'A sapient and courteous question for a monk to ask! Do you not know
that Cyril has expelled all Jews four months ago?'

'True, true.... Alas!' said the old man to himself, 'how little
the rulers of this world guess their own power! They move a finger
carelessly, and forget that that finger may crush to death hundreds
whose names they never heard--and every soul of them as precious in
God's sight as Cyril's own.'

'What is the matter, my father?' asked Philammon. 'You seem deeply moved
about this woman....'

'And she is Miriam's slave?'

'Her freedwoman this four years past,' said the porter. 'The good
lady--for reasons doubtless excellent in themselves, though not
altogether patent to the philosophic mind--thought good to turn her
loose on the Alexandrian republic, to seek what she might devour.'

'God help her! And you are certain that Miriam is not in Alexandria?'

The little porter turned very red, and Philammon did so likewise; but he
remembered his promise, and kept it.

'You both know something of her, I can see. You cannot deceive an
old statesman, sir!'--turning to the little porter with a look of
authority--'poor monk though he be now. If you think fitting to tell me
what you know, I promise you that neither she nor you shall be losers by
your confidence in me. If not, I shall find means to discover.'

Both stood silent.

'Philammon, my son! and art thou too in league against--no, not against
me; against thyself, poor misguided boy?'

'Against myself?'

'Yes--I have said it. But unless you will trust me, I cannot trust you.'

'I have promised.'

'And I, sir statesman, or monk, or both, or neither, have sworn by the
immortal gods!' said the porter, looking very big.

Arsenius paused.

'There are those who hold that an oath by an idol, being nothing, is of
itself void. I do not agree with them. If thou thinkest it sin to break
thine oath, to thee it is sin. And for thee, my poor child, thy promise
is sacred, were it made to Iscariot himself. But hear me. Can either of
you, by asking this woman, be so far absolved as to give me speech of
her? Tell her--that is, if she be in Alexandria, which God grant--all
that has passed between us here, and tell her, on the solemn oath of a
Christian, that Arsenius, whose name she knows well, will neither injure
nor betray her. Will you do this?'

'Arsenius?' said the little porter, with a look of mingled awe and pity.

The old man smiled. 'Arsenius, who was once called the Father of the
Emperors. Even she will trust that name.'

'I will go this moment' sir; I will fly!' and off rushed the little
porter.

'The little fellow forgets,' said Arsenius, with a smile, 'to how much
he has confessed already, and how easy it were now to trace him to the
old hag's lair.... Philammon, my son.... I have many tears to weep over
thee--but they must wait a while, I have thee safe now,' and the old man
clutched his arm. 'Thou wilt not leave thy poor old father? Thou wilt
not desert me for the heathen woman?'

'I will stay with you, I promise you, indeed! if--if you will not say
unjust things of her.'

'I will speak evil of no one, accuse no one, but myself. I will not say
one harsh word to thee, my poor boy. But listen now! Thou knowest that
thou camest from Athens. Knowest thou that it was I who brought thee
hither?'

'You?'

'I, my son: but when I brought thee to the Laura, it seemed right that
thou, as the son of a noble gentleman, shouldest hear nothing of it.
But tell me: dost thou recollect father or mother, brother or sister; or
anything of thy home in Athens?'

'No.'

'Thanks be to God. But, Philammon, if thou hadst had a sister-hush! And
if--I only say if--,

'A sister!' interrupted Philammon. 'Pelagia?'

'God forbid, my son! But a sister thou hadst once--some three years
older than thee she seemed.'

'What! did you know her?'

'I saw her but once--on one sad day.--Poor children both! I will not
sadden you by telling you where and how.'

'And why did you not bring her hither with me? You surely had not the
heart to part us?'

'Ah, my son, what right had an old monk with a fair young girl? And,
indeed, even had I had the courage, it would have been impossible. There
were others, richer than I, to whose covetousness her youth and beauty
seemed a precious prize. When I saw her last, she was in company with an
ancient Jewess. Heaven grant that this Miriam may prove to be the one!'

'And I have a sister!' gasped Philammon, his eyes bursting with tears.
'We must find her! You will help me?--Now--this moment! There is nothing
else to be thought of, spoken of, done, henceforth, till she is found!'

'Ah, my son, my son! Better, better, perhaps, to leave her in the hands
of God! What if she were dead? To discover that, would be to discover
needless sorrow. And what if--God grant that it be not so! she had only
a name to live, and were dead, worse than dead, in sinful pleasure--'

'We would save her, or die trying to save her! Is it not enough for
me that she is my sister?' Arsenius shook his head. He little knew the
strange new light and warmth which his words had poured in upon the
young heart beside him. 'A sister!' What mysterious virtue was there in
that simple word, which made Philammon's brain reel and his heart throb
madly? A sister! not merely a friend, an equal, a help-mate, given
by God Himself, for loving whom none, not even a monk, could blame
him.--Not merely something delicate, weak, beautiful--for of course she
must be beautiful-whom he might cherish, guide, support, deliver, die
for, and find death delicious. Yes--all that, and more than that, lay
in the sacred word. For those divided and partial notions had flitted
across his mind too rapidly to stir such passion as moved him now; even
the hint of her sin and danger had been heard heedlessly, if heard at
all. It was the word itself which bore its own message, its own spell
to the heart of the fatherless and motherless foundling, as he faced for
the first time the deep, everlasting, divine reality of kindred.... A
sister! of his own flesh and blood--born of the same father, the
same mother--his, his, for ever! How hollow and fleeting seemed all
'spiritual sonships,' 'spiritual daughterhoods,' inventions of the
changing fancy, the wayward will of man! Arsenius--Pambo--ay, Hypatia
herself--what were they to him now? Here was a real relationship .... A
sister! What else was worth caring for upon earth?

'And she was at Athens when Pelagia was'--he cried at last--'perhaps
knew her--let us go to Pelagia herself!'

'Heaven forbid!' said Arsenius. 'We must wait at least till Miriam's
answer comes.'

'I can show you her house at least in the meanwhile; and you can go in
yourself when you will. I do not ask to enter. Come! I feel certain that
my finding her is in some way bound up with Pelagia. Had I not met her
on the Nile, had you not met her in the street, I might never have heard
that I had a sister. And if she went with Miriam, Pelagia must know
her--she may be in that very house at this moment!'

Arsenius had his reasons for suspecting that Philammon was but too
right. But he contented himself with yielding to the boy's excitement,
and set off with him in the direction of the dancer's house.

They were within a few yards of the gate, when hurried footsteps behind
them, and voices calling them by name, made them turn; and behold,
evidently to the disgust of Arsenius as much as Philammon himself, Peter
the Reader and a large party of monks!

Philammon's first impulse was to escape; Arsenius himself caught him by
the arm, and seemed inclined to hurry on.

'No!' thought the youth, 'am I not a free man, and a philosopher?' and
facing round, he awaited the enemy.

'Ah, young apostate! So you have found him, reverend and ill-used sir.
Praised be Heaven for this rapid success!'

'My good friend,' asked Arsenius, in a trembling voice, 'what brings you
here?'

'Heaven forbid that I should have allowed your sanctity and age to
go forth without some guard against the insults and violence of this
wretched youth and his profligate companions. We have been following you
afar off all the morning, with hearts full of filial solicitude.'

'Many thanks; but indeed your kindness has been superfluous. My son
here, from whom I have met with nothing but affection, and whom, indeed,
I believe far more innocent than report declared him, is about to return
peaceably with me. Are you not, Philammon?'

'Alas! my father'' said Philammon, with an effort, 'how can I find
courage to say it'?--but I cannot return with you.'

'Cannot return?'

'I vowed that I would never again cross that threshold till--'

'And Cyril does. He bade me, indeed he bade me, assure you that he would
receive you back as a son, and forgive and forget all the past.'

'Forgive and forget? That is my part--not his. Will he right me against
that tyrant and his crew? Will he proclaim me openly to be an innocent
and persecuted man, unjustly beaten and driven forth for obeying his own
commands? Till he does that, I shall not forget that I am a free man.'

'A free man!' said Peter, with an unpleasant smile; 'that remains to
be proved, my gay youth; and will need more evidence than that smart
philosophic cloak and those well-curled locks which you have adopted
since I saw you last.'

'Remains to be proved?'

Arsenius made an imploring gesture to Peter to be silent.

'Nay, sir. As I foretold to you, this one way alone remains; the
blame of it, if there be blame, must rest on the unhappy youth whose
perversity renders it necessary.'

'For God's sake, spare me!' cried the old man, dragging Peter aside,
while Philammon stood astonished, divided between indignation and vague
dread.

'Did I not tell you again and again that I never could bring myself to
call a Christian man my slave? And him, above all, my spiritual son?'

'And, most reverend sir, whose zeal is only surpassed by your tenderness
and mercy, did not the holy patriarch assure you that your scruples were
groundless? Do you think that either he or I can have less horror than
you have of slavery in itself? Heaven forbid! But when an immortal soul
is at stake--when a lost lamb is to be brought back to the fold--surely
you may employ the authority which the law gives you for the salvation
of that precious charge committed to you? What could be more conclusive
than his Holiness's argument this morning? "Christians are bound to
obey the laws of this world for conscience' sake, even though, in the
abstract, they may disapprove of them, and deny their authority. Then,
by parity of reasoning, it must be lawful for them to take the advantage
which those same laws offer them, when by so doing the glory of God may
be advanced."'

Arsenius still hung back, with eyes brimming with tears; but Philammon
himself put an end to the parley.

'What is the meaning of all this? Are you, too, in a conspiracy against
me? Speak, Arsenius!'

'This is the meaning of it, blinded sinner!' cried Peter. 'That you are
by law the slave of Arsenius, lawfully bought with his money in the city
of Ravenna; and that he has the power, and, as I trust, for the sake of
your salvation, the will also, to compel you to accompany him.'

Philammon recoiled across the pavement, with eyes flashing defiance. A
slave! The light of heaven grew black to him.... Oh, that Hypatia might
never know his shame! Yet it was impossible. Too dreadful to be true....

'You lie!' almost shrieked he. 'I am the son of a noble citizen of
Athens. Arsenius told me so, but this moment, with his own lips!'

'Ah, but he bought you--bought you in the public market; and he can
prove it!'

'Hear me--hear me, my son!' cried the old man, springing toward him.
Philammon, in his fury, mistook the gesture and thrust him fiercely
back.

'Your son!--your slave! Do not insult the name of son by applying it to
me. Yes, sir; your slave in body, but not in soul! Ay, seize me--drag
home the fugitive--scourge him--brand him--chain him in the mill, if you
can; but even for that the free heart has a remedy. If you will not let
me live as a philosopher, you shall see me die like one!'

'Seize the fellow, my brethren!' cried Peter, while Arsenius, utterly
unable to restrain either party, hid his face and wept.

'Wretches!' cried the boy; 'you shall never take me alive, while I have
teeth or nails left. Treat me as a brute beast, and I will defend myself
as such!'

'Out of the way there, rascals! Place for the Prefect! What are you
squabbling about here, you unmannerly monks?' shouted peremptory voices
from behind. The crowd parted, and disclosed the apparitors of Orestes,
who followed in his robes of office.

A sudden hope flashed before Philammon, and in an instant he had burst
through the mob, and was clinging to the Prefect's chariot.

'I am a free-born Athenian, whom these monks wish to kidnap back into
slavery! I claim your protection!'

'And you shall have it, right or wrong, my handsome fellow. By Heaven,
you are much too good-looking to be made a monk of! What do you mean,
you villains, by attempting to kidnap free men? Is it not enough for you
to lock up every mad girl whom you can dupe, but you must--'

'His master is here present, your Excellency, who will swear to the
purchase.'

'Or to anything else for the glory of God. Out of the way! And take
care, you tall scoundrel, that I do not get a handle against you. You
have been one of my marked men for many a month. Off!'

'His master demands the rights of the law as a Roman citizen,' said
Peter, pushing forward Arsenius.

'If he be a Roman citizen, let him come and make his claim at the
tribune to-morrow, in legal form. But I would have you remember, ancient
sir, that I shall require you to prove your citizenship before we
proceed to the question of purchase.'

'The law does not demand that,' quoth Peter.

'Knock that fellow down, apparitor!' Whereat Peter vanished, and an
ominous growl rose from the mob of monks.

'What am I to do, most noble sir?' said Philammon.

'Whatever you like, till the third hour to-morrow--if you are fool
enough to appear at the tribune. If you will take my advice' you will
knock down these fellows right and left, and run for your life.' And
Orestes drove on.

Philammon saw that it was his only chance, and did so; and in another
minute he found himself rushing headlong into the archway of Pelagia's
house, with a dozen monks at his heels. As luck would have it, the outer
gates, at which the Goths had just entered, were still open; but the
inner ones which led into the court beyond were fast. He tried them,
but in vain. There was an open door in the wall on his right: he rushed
through it, into a long range of stables, and into the arms of Wulf and
Smid, who were unsaddling and feeding, like true warriors, their own
horses.

'Souls of my fathers!' shouted Smid, 'here's our young monk come back!
What brings you here head over heels in this way, young curly-pate?'

'Save me from those wretches!' pointing to the monks, who were peeping
into the doorway.

Wulf seemed to understand it all in a moment; for, snatching up a heavy
whip, he rushed at the foe, and with a few tremendous strokes cleared
the doorway, and shut-to the door.

Philammon was going to explain and thank, but Smid stopped his mouth.

'Never mind, young one, you are our guest now. Come in, and you shall be
as welcome as ever. See what comes of running away from us at first.'

'You do not seem to have benefited much by leaving me for the monks,'
said old Wulf. 'Come in by the inner door. Smid! go and turn those monks
out of the gateway.'

But the mob, after battering the door for a few minutes, had yielded
to the agonised entreaties of Peter, who assured them that if those
incarnate fiends once broke out upon them, they would not leave a
Christian alive in Alexandria. So it was agreed to leave a few to watch
for Philammon's coming out; and the rest, balked of their prey, turned
the tide of their wrath against the Prefect, and rejoined the mass
of their party, who were still hanging round his chariot, ready for
mischief.

In vain the hapless shepherd of the people attempted to drive on. The
apparitors were frightened and hung back; and without their help it
was impossible to force the horses through the mass of tossing arms and
beards in front. The matter was evidently growing serious.

'The bitterest ruffians in all Nitria, your Excellency,' whispered one
of the guards, with a pale face; 'and two hundred of them at the least.
The very same set, I will be sworn, who nearly murdered Dioscuros.'

'If you will not allow me to proceed, my holy brethren,' said Orestes,
trying to look collected, 'perhaps it will not be contrary to the canons
of the Church if I turn back. Leave the horses' heads alone. Why, in
God's name, what do you want?'

'Do you fancy we have forgotten Hieracas?' cried a voice from the rear;
and at that name, yell upon yell arose, till the mob, gaining courage
from its own noise, burst out into open threats. 'Revenge for the
blessed martyr Hieracas!' 'Revenge for the wrongs of the Church!' 'Down
with the friend of Heathens, Jews, and Barbarians!' 'Down with the
favourite of Hypatia!' 'Tyrant!' 'Butcher!' And the last epithet so
smote the delicate fancy of the crowd, that a general cry arose of
'Kill the butcher!' and one furious monk attempted to clamber into the
chariot. An apparitor tore him down, and was dragged to the ground in
his turn. The monks closed in. The guards, finding the enemy number ten
to their one, threw down their weapons in a panic, and vanished; and in
another minute the hopes of Hypatia and the gods would have been lost
for ever, and Alexandria robbed of the blessing of being ruled by the
most finished gentleman south of the Mediterranean, had it not been for
unexpected succour; of which it will be time enough, considering who and
what is in danger, to speak in a future chapter.



CHAPTER XVII: A STRAY GLEAM


THE last blue headland of Sardinia was fading fast on the north-west
horizon, and a steady breeze bore before it innumerable ships, the
wrecks of Heraclian's armament, plunging and tossing impatiently in
their desperate homeward race toward the coast of Africa. Far and
wide, under a sky of cloudless blue, the white sails glittered on
the glittering sea, as gaily now, above their loads of shame and
disappointment terror and pain, as when, but one short month before,
they bore with them only wild hopes and gallant daring. Who can
calculate the sum of misery in that hapless flight?.... And yet it
was but one, and that one of the least known and most trivial, of the
tragedies of that age of woe; one petty death-spasm among the unnumbered
throes which were shaking to dissolution the Babylon of the West. Her
time had come. Even as Saint John beheld her in his vision, by agony
after agony, she was rotting to her well-earned doom. Tyrannising
it luxuriously over all nations, she had sat upon the mystic
beast--building her power on the brute animal appetites of her dupes and
slaves: but she had duped herself even more than them. She was finding
out by bitter lessons that it was 'to the beast', and not to her, that
her vassal kings of the earth had been giving their power and strength;
and the ferocity and lust which she had pampered so cunningly in them,
had become her curse and her destruction.... Drunk with the blood of the
saints; blinded by her own conceit and jealousy to the fact that she had
been crushing and extirpating out of her empire for centuries past all
which was noble, purifying, regenerative, divine, she sat impotent
