The Project Gutenberg EBook Last Of The Barons, by Lytton, Volume 8.
#149 in our series by Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Last Of The Barons, Volume 8.

Author: Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Release Date: March 2005  [EBook #7722]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 6, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII




*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAST OF THE BARONS, V8 ***


This eBook was produced by Tapio Riikonen
and David Widger





BOOK VIII.

IN WHICH THE LAST LINK BETWEEN KING-MAKER AND KING SNAPS ASUNDER.




CHAPTER I.

THE LADY ANNE VISITS THE COURT.

It was some weeks after the date of the events last recorded.  The
storm that hung over the destinies of King Edward was dispersed for
the hour, though the scattered clouds still darkened the horizon: the
Earl of Warwick had defeated the Lancastrians on the frontier, [Croyl.
552] and their leader had perished on the scaffold; but Edward's
mighty sword had not shone in the battle.  Chained by an attraction
yet more powerful than slaughter, he had lingered at Middleham, while
Warwick led his army to York; and when the earl arrived at the capital
of Edward's ancestral duchy, he found that the able and active
Hastings--having heard, even before he reached the Duke of
Gloucester's camp, of Edward's apparent seizure by the earl and the
march to Middleham--had deemed it best to halt at York, and to summon
in all haste a council of such of the knights and barons as either
love to the king or envy to Warwick could collect.  The report was
general that Edward was retained against his will at Middleham; and
this rumour Hastings gravely demanded Warwick, on the arrival of the
latter at York, to disprove.  The earl, to clear himself from a
suspicion that impeded all his military movements, despatched Lord
Montagu to Middleham, who returned not only with the king, but the
countess and her daughters, whom Edward, under pretence of proving the
complete amity that existed between Warwick and himself, carried in
his train.  The king's appearance at York reconciled all differences;
but he suffered Warwick to march alone against the enemy, and not till
after the decisive victory, which left his reign for a while without
an open foe, did he return to London.

Thither the earl, by the advice of his friends, also repaired, and in
a council of peers, summoned for the purpose, deigned to refute the
rumours still commonly circulated by his foes, and not disbelieved by
the vulgar, whether of his connivance at the popular rising or his
forcible detention of the king at Middleham.  To this, agreeably to
the counsel of the archbishop, succeeded a solemn interview of the
heads of the Houses of York and Warwick, in which the once fair Rose
of Raby (the king's mother) acted as mediator and arbiter.  The earl's
word to the commons at Olney was ratified.  Edward consented to the
temporary retirement of the Woodvilles, though the gallant Anthony yet
delayed his pilgrimage to Compostella.  The vanity of Clarence was
contented by the government of Ireland, but, under various pretences,
Edward deferred his brother's departure to that important post. A
general amnesty was proclaimed, a parliament summoned for the redress
of popular grievances, and the betrothal of the king's daughter to
Montagu's heir was proclaimed: the latter received the title of Duke
of Bedford; and the whole land rejoiced in the recovered peace of the
realm, the retirement of the Woodvilles, and the reconciliation of the
young king with his all-beloved subject.  Never had the power of the
Neviles seemed so secure; never did the throne of Edward appear so
stable.

It was at this time that the king prevailed upon the earl and his
countess to permit the Lady Anne to accompany the Duchess of Clarence
in a visit to the palace of the Tower.  The queen had submitted so
graciously to the humiliation of her family, that even the haughty
Warwick was touched and softened; and the visit of his daughter at
such a time became a homage to Elizabeth which it suited his chivalry
to render.

The public saw in this visit, which was made with great state and
ceremony, the probability of a new and popular alliance.  The
archbishop had suffered the rumour of Gloucester's attachment to the
Lady Anne to get abroad, and the young prince's return from the North
was anxiously expected by the gossips of the day.

It was on this occasion that Warwick showed his gratitude for
Marmaduke Nevile's devotion.  "My dear and gallant kinsman," he said,
"I forget not that when thou didst leave the king and the court for
the discredited minister and his gloomy hall,--I forget not that thou
didst tell me of love to some fair maiden, which had not prospered
according to thy merits.  At least it shall not be from lack of lands,
or of the gold spur, which allows the wearer to ride by the side of
king or kaisar, that thou canst not choose thy bride as the heart bids
thee.  I pray thee, sweet cousin, to attend my child Anne to the
court, where the king will show thee no ungracious countenance; but it
is just to recompense thee for the loss of thy post in his highness's
chamber.  I hold the king's commission to make knights of such as can
pay the fee, and thy lands shall suffice for the dignity.  Kneel down
and rise up, Sir Marmaduke Nevile, lord of the Manor of Borrodaile,
with its woodlands and its farms, and may God and our Lady render thee
puissant in battle and prosperous in love!"

Accordingly, in his new rank, and entitled to ruffle it with the
bravest, Sir Marmaduke Nevile accompanied the earl and the Lady Anne
to the palace of the Tower.

As Warwick, leaving his daughter amidst the brilliant circle that
surrounded Elizabeth, turned to address the king, he said, with simple
and unaffected nobleness,--

"Ah, my liege, if you needed a hostage of my faith, think that my
heart is here, for verily its best blood were less dear to me than
that slight girl,--the likeness of her mother, when her lips first
felt the touch of mine!"

Edward's bold brow fell, and he blushed as he answered, "My Elizabeth
will hold her as a sister.  But, cousin, part you not now for the
North?"

"By your leave I go first to Warwick."

"Ah, you do not wish to approve of my seeming preparations against
France?"

"Nay, your Highness is not in earnest. I promised the commons that you
would need no supplies for so thriftless a war."

"Thou knowest I mean to fulfil all thy pledges.  But the country so
swarms with disbanded soldiers, that it is politic to hold out to them
a hope of service, and so let the clouds gradually pass away."

"Alack, my liege," said Warwick, gravely, "I suppose that a crown
teaches the brow to scheme; but hearty peace or open war seems ever
the best to me."

Edward smiled, and turned aside.  Warwick glanced at his daughter,
whom Elizabeth flatteringly caressed, stifled a sigh, and the air
seemed lighter to the insects of the court as his proud crest bowed
beneath the doorway, and, with the pomp of his long retinue, he
vanished from the scene.

"And choose, fair Anne," said the queen, "choose from my ladies whom
you will have for your special train.  We would not that your
attendance should be less than royal."

The gentle Anne in vain sought to excuse herself from an honour at
once arrogant and invidious, though too innocent to perceive the
cunning so characteristic of the queen; for, under the guise of a
special compliment, Anne had received the royal request to have her
female attendants chosen from the court, and Elizabeth now desired to
force upon her a selection which could not fail to mortify those not
preferred.  But glancing timidly round the circle, the noble damsel's
eye rested on one fair face, and in that face there was so much that
awoke her own interest, and stirred up a fond and sad remembrance,
that she passed involuntarily to the stranger's side, and artlessly
took her hand.  The high-born maidens, grouped around, glanced at each
other with a sneer, and slunk back.  Even the queen looked surprised;
but recovering herself, inclined her head graciously, and said, "Do we
read your meaning aright, Lady Anne, and would you this gentlewoman,
Mistress Sibyll Warner, as one of your chamber?"

"Sibyll, ah, I knew that my memory failed me not," murmured Anne; and,
after bowing assent to the queen, she said, "Do you not also recall,
fair demoiselle, our meeting, when children long years ago?"

"Well, noble dame," [The title of dame was at that time applied
indiscriminately to ladies whether married or single, if of high
birth.] answered Sibyll.  And as Anne turned, with her air of modest
gentleness, yet of lofty birth and breeding, to explain to the queen
that she had met Sibyll in earlier years, the king approached to
monopolize his guest's voice and ear.  It seemed natural to all
present that Edward should devote peculiar attention to the daughter
of Warwick and the sister of the Duchess of Clarence; and even
Elizabeth suspected no guiltier gallantry in the subdued voice, the
caressing manner, which her handsome lord adopted throughout that day,
even to the close of the nightly revel, towards a demoiselle too high
(it might well appear) for licentious homage.

But Anne herself, though too guileless to suspect the nature of
Edward's courtesy, yet shrank from it in vague terror.  All his
beauty, all his fascination, could not root from her mind the
remembrance of the exiled prince; nay, the brilliancy of his qualities
made her the more averse to him.  It darkened the prospects of Edward
of Lancaster that Edward of York should wear so gracious and so
popular a form.  She hailed with delight the hour when she was
conducted to her chamber, and dismissing gently the pompous retinue
allotted to her, found herself alone with the young maiden whom she
had elected to her special service.

"And you remember me, too, fair Sibyll?" said Anne, with her dulcet
and endearing voice.

"Truly, who would not? for as you, then, noble lady, glided apart from
the other children, hand in hand with the young prince, in whom all
dreamed to see their future king, I heard the universal murmur of--a
false prophecy!"

"Ah! and of what?" asked Anne.

"That in the hand the prince clasped with his small rosy fingers--the
hand of great Warwick's daughter--lay the best defence of his father's
throne."

