his ponderous mail. But his surprise ceased when the earl pointed out
to him the immense strength of the steed's ample loins, the sinewy
cleanness, the iron muscle, of the stag-like legs, the bull-like breadth
of chest, and the swelling power of the shining neck.

"And after all," added the earl, "both in man and beast, the spirit
and the race, not the stature and the bulk, bring the prize. Mort Dieu,
Richard! it often shames me of mine own thews and broad breast,--I had
been more vain of laurels had I been shorter by the head!"

"Nevertheless," said young George of Montagu, with a page's pertness, "I
had rather have thine inches than Prince Richard's, and thy broad breast
than his grace's short neck."

The Duke of Gloucester turned as if a snake had stung him. He gave but
one glance to the speaker, but that glance lived forever in the boy's
remembrance, and the young Montagu turned pale and trembled, even before
he heard the earl's stern rebuke.

"Young magpies chatter, boy,--young eagles in silence measure the space
between the eyry and the sun!"

The boy hung his head, and would have slunk off, but Richard detained
him with a gentle hand. "My fair young cousin," said he, "thy words gall
no sore, and if ever thou and I charge side by side into the foeman's
ranks, thou shalt comprehend what thy uncle designed to say,--how, in
the hour of strait and need, we measure men's stature not by the body
but the soul!"

"A noble answer," whispered Anne, with something like sisterly
admiration.

"Too noble," said the more ambitious Isabel, in the same voice, "for
Clarence's future wife not to fear Clarence's dauntless brother."

"And so," said the prince, quitting the stall with Warwick, while the
girls still lingered behind, "so Saladin hath no son! Wherefore? Can you
mate him with no bride?"

"Faith," answered the earl, "the females of his race sleep in yonder
dell, their burial-place, and the proud beast disdains all meaner loves.
Nay, were it not so, to continue the breed, if adulterated, were but to
mar it."

"You care little for the legend, meseems."

"Pardieu! at times, yes, over much; but in sober moments I think that
the brave man who does his duty lacks no wizard prophecy to fulfil his
doom; and whether in prayer or in death, in fortune or defeat, his soul
goes straight to God!"

"Umph," said Richard, musingly; and there was a pause. "Warwick,"
resumed the prince, "doubtless, even on your return to London, the
queen's enmity and her mother's will not cease. Clarence loves Isabel,
but Clarence knows not how to persuade the king and rule the king's
womankind. Thou knowest how I have stood aloof from all the factions
of the court. Unhappily I go to the Borders, and can but slightly serve
thee. But--" (he stopped short, and sighed heavily).

"Speak on, Prince."

"In a word, then, if I were thy son, Anne's husband, I see--I see--I
see--" (thrice repeated the prince, with a vague dreaminess in his eye,
and stretching forth his hand)--"a future that might defy all foes,
opening to me and thee!"

Warwick hesitated in some embarrassment.

"My gracious and princely cousin," he said at length, "this proffer is
indeed sweet incense to a father's pride. But pardon me, as yet, noble
Richard, thou art so young that the king and the world would blame
me did I suffer my ambition to listen to such temptation. Enough, at
present, if all disputes between our House and the king can be smoothed
and laid at rest without provoking new ones. Nay, pardon me, prince, let
this matter cease--at least, till thy return from the Borders."

"May I take with me hope?"

"Nay," said Warwick, "thou knowest that I am a plain man; to bid thee
hope were to plight my word. And," he added seriously, "there be reasons
grave and well to be considered why both the daughters of a subject
should not wed with their king's brothers. Let this cease now, I pray
thee, sweet lord."

Here the demoiselles joined their father, and the conference was over;
but when Richard, an hour after, stood musing alone on the battlements,
he muttered to himself, "Thou art a fool, stout earl, not to have
welcomed the union between thy power and my wit. Thou goest to a court
where without wit power is nought. Who may foresee the future? Marry,
that was a wise ancient fable, that he who seized and bound Proteus
could extract from the changeful god the prophecy of the days to come.
Yea! the man who can seize Fate can hear its voice predict to him. And
by my own heart and brain, which never yet relinquished what affection
yearned for, or thought aspired to, I read, as in a book, Anne, that
thou shalt be mine; and that where wave on yon battlements the ensigns
of Beauchamp, Monthermer, and Nevile, the Boar of Gloucester shall liege
it over their broad baronies and hardy vassals."




BOOK VI

WHEREIN ARE OPENED SOME GLIMPSES OF THE FATE BELOW THAT ATTENDS THOSE
WHO ARE BETTER THAN OTHERS, AND THOSE WHO DESIRE TO MAKE OTHERS BETTER.
LOVE, DEMAGOGY, AND SCIENCE ALL EQUALLY OFF-SPRING OF THE SAME PROLIFIC
DELUSION,--NAMELY, THAT MEAN SOULS (THE EARTH'S MAJORITY) ARE WORTH
THE HOPE AND THE AGONY OF NOBLE SOULS, THE EVERLASTING SUFFERING AND
ASPIRING FEW.




CHAPTER I. NEW DISSENSIONS.

We must pass over some months. Warwick and his family had returned to
London, and the meeting between Edward and the earl had been cordial
and affectionate. Warwick was reinstated in the offices which gave him
apparently the supreme rule in England. The Princess Margaret had left
England as the bride of Charles the Bold; and the earl had attended
the procession in honour of her nuptials. The king, agreeably with the
martial objects he had had long at heart, had then declared war on
Louis XI., and parliament was addressed and troops were raised for that
impolitic purpose. [Parliamentary Rolls, 623. The fact in the text has
been neglected by most historians.] To this war, however, Warwick was
inflexibly opposed. He pointed out the madness of withdrawing from
England all her best-affected chivalry, at a time when the adherents of
Lancaster, still powerful, would require no happier occasion to raise
the Red Rose banner. He showed how hollow was the hope of steady aid
from the hot but reckless and unprincipled Duke of Burgundy, and how
different now was the condition of France under a king of consummate
sagacity and with an overflowing treasury to its distracted state in the
former conquests of the English. This opposition to the king's will gave
every opportunity for Warwick's enemies to renew their old accusation
of secret and treasonable amity with Louis. Although the proud and hasty
earl had not only forgiven the affront put upon him by Edward, but had
sought to make amends for his own intemperate resentment, by public
attendance on the ceremonials that accompanied the betrothal of the
princess, it was impossible for Edward ever again to love the minister
who had defied his power and menaced his crown. His humour and his
suspicions broke forth despite the restraint that policy dictated to
him: and in the disputes upon the invasion of France, a second and more
deadly breach between Edward and his minister must have yawned, had not
events suddenly and unexpectedly proved the wisdom of Warwick's distrust
of Burgundy. Louis XI. bought off the Duke of Bretagne, patched up a
peace with Charles the Bold, and thus frustrated all the schemes and
broke all the alliances of Edward at the very moment his military
preparations were ripe. [W. Wyr, 518.]

Still the angry feelings that the dispute had occasioned between Edward
and the earl were not removed with the cause; and under pretence of
guarding against hostilities from Louis, the king requested Warwick to
depart to his government of Calais, the most important and honourable
post, it is true, which a subject could then hold: but Warwick
considered the request as a pretext for his removal from the court. A
yet more irritating and insulting cause of offence was found in Edward's
withholding his consent to Clarence's often-urged demand for permission
to wed with the Lady Isabel. It is true that this refusal was
accompanied with the most courteous protestations of respect for the
earl, and placed only upon the general ground of state policy.

"My dear George," Edward would say, "the heiress of Lord Warwick is
certainly no mal-alliance for a king's brother; but the safety of the
throne imperatively demands that my brothers should strengthen my
rule by connections with foreign potentates. I, it is true, married
a subject, and see all the troubles that have sprung from my boyish
passion! No, no! Go to Bretagne. The duke hath a fair daughter, and we
will make up for any scantiness in the dower. Weary me no more, George.
Fiat voluntas mea!"

But the motives assigned were not those which influenced the king's
refusal. Reasonably enough, he dreaded that the next male heir to his
crown should wed the daughter of the subject who had given that crown,
and might at any time take it away. He knew Clarence to be giddy,
unprincipled, and vain. Edward's faith in Warwick was shaken by the
continual and artful representations of the queen and her family. He
felt that the alliance between Clarence and the earl would be the union
of two interests almost irresistible if once arrayed against his own.

But Warwick, who penetrated into the true reason for Edward's obstinacy,
was yet more resentful against the reasons than the obstinacy itself.
The one galled him through his affections, the other through his pride;
and the first were as keen as the last was morbid. He was the more
chafed, inasmuch as his anxiety of father became aroused. Isabel was
really attached to Clarence, who, with all his errors, possessed every
superficial attraction that graced his House,--gallant and handsome, gay
and joyous, and with manners that made him no less popular than Edward
himself.

And if Isabel's affections were not deep, disinterested, and tender,
like those of Anne, they were strengthened by a pride which she
inherited from her father, and a vanity which she took from her sex.
It was galling in the extreme to feel that the loves between her and
Clarence were the court gossip, and the king's refusal the court jest.
Her health gave way, and pride and love both gnawed at her heart.

It happened, unfortunately for the king and for Warwick, that
Gloucester, whose premature acuteness and sagacity would have the more
served both, inasmuch as the views he had formed in regard to Anne
would have blended his interest in some degree with that of the Duke of
Clarence, and certainly with the object of conciliation between Edward
and his minister,--it happened, we say, unfortunately, that Gloucester
was still absent with the forces employed on the Scottish frontier,
whither he had repaired on quitting Middleham, and where his
extraordinary military talents found their first brilliant opening; and
he was therefore absent from London during all the disgusts he might
have removed and the intrigues he might have frustrated.

But the interests of the House of Warwick, during the earl's sullen and
indignant sojourn at his government of Calais, were not committed to
unskilful hands; and Montagu and the archbishop were well fitted to cope
with Lord Rivers and the Duchess of Bedford.

Between these able brothers, one day, at the More, an important
conference took place.

"I have sought you," said Montagu, with more than usual care upon his
brow--"I have sought you in consequence of an event that may lead
to issues of no small moment, whether for good or evil. Clarence has
suddenly left England for Calais."

"I know it, Montagu; the duke confided to me his resolution to proclaim
himself old enough to marry,--and discreet enough to choose for
himself."

"And you approved?"

"Certes; and, sooth to say, I brought him to that modest opinion of his
own capacities. What is more still, I propose to join him at Calais."

"George!"

"Look not so scared, O valiant captain, who never lost a battle,--where
the Church meddles, all prospers. Listen!" And the young prelate
gathered himself up from his listless posture, and spoke with earnest
unction. "Thou knowest that I do not much busy myself in lay schemes;
when I do, the object must be great. Now, Montagu, I have of late
narrowly and keenly watched that spidery web which ye call a court, and
I see that the spider will devour the wasp, unless the wasp boldly break
the web,--for woman-craft I call the spider, and soldier-pride I style
the wasp. To speak plainly, these Woodvilles must be bravely breasted
and determinately abashed. I do not mean that we can deal with the
king's wife and her family as with any other foes; but we must convince
them that they cannot cope with us, and that their interests will best
consist in acquiescing in that condition of things which places the rule
of England in the hands of the Neviles."

"My own thought, if I saw the way!"

"I see the way in this alliance; the Houses of York and Warwick must
become so indissolubly united, that an attempt to injure the one must
destroy both. The queen and the Woodvilles plot against us; we must
raise in the king's family a counterpoise to their machinations. It
brings no scandal on the queen to conspire against Warwick, but it would
ruin her in the eyes of England to conspire against the king's brother;
and Clarence and Warwick must be as one. This is not all! If our
sole aid was in giddy George, we should but buttress our House with a
weathercock. This connection is but as a part of the grand scheme on
which I have set my heart,--Clarence shall wed Isabel, Gloucester wed
Anne, and (let thy ambitious heart beat high, Montagu) the king's eldest
daughter shall wed thy son,--the male representative of our triple
honours. Ah, thine eyes sparkle now! Thus the whole royalty of England
shall centre in the Houses of Nevile and York; and the Woodvilles will
be caught and hampered in their own meshes, their resentment impotent;
for how can Elizabeth stir against us, if her daughter be betrothed
to the son of Montagu, the nephew of Warwick? Clarence, beloved by the
shallow commons; [Singular as it may seem to those who know not that
popularity is given to the vulgar qualities of men, and that where a
noble nature becomes popular (a rare occurrence), it is despite the
nobleness,--not because of it. Clarence was a popular idol even to the
time of his death.--Croyl., 562.] Gloucester, adored both by the army
and the Church; and Montagu and Warwick, the two great captains of the
age,--is not this a combination of power that may defy Fate?"

"O George!" said Montagu, admiringly, "what pity that the Church should
spoil such a statesman!"

"Thou art profane, Montagu; the Church spoils no man,--the Church
leads and guides ye all; and, mark, I look farther still. I would have
intimate league with France; I would strengthen ourselves with Spain
and the German Emperor; I would buy or seduce the votes of the sacred
college; I would have thy poor brother, whom thou so pitiest because he
has no son to marry a king's daughter, no daughter to wed with a king's
son--I would have thy unworthy brother, Montagu, the father of the whole
Christian world, and, from the chair of the Vatican, watch over the weal
of kingdoms. And now, seest thou why with to-morrow's sun I depart for
Calais, and lend my voice in aid of Clarence's for the first knot in
this complicated bond?"

"But will Warwick consent while the king opposes? Will his pride--"

"His pride serves us here; for so long as Clarence did not dare to
gainsay the king, Warwick in truth might well disdain to press his
daughter's hand upon living man. The king opposes, but with what right?
Warwick's pride will but lead him, if well addressed, to defy affront
and to resist dictation. Besides, our brother has a woman's heart for
his children; and Isabel's face is pale, and that will plead more than
all my eloquence."

"But can the king forgive your intercession and Warwick's contumacy?"

"Forgive!--the marriage once over, what is left for him to do? He
is then one with us, and when Gloucester returns all will be smooth
again,--smooth for the second and more important nuptials; and the
second shall preface the third; meanwhile, you return to the court. To
these ceremonials you need be no party: keep but thy handsome son from
breaking his neck in over-riding his hobby, and 'bide thy time!'"

Agreeably with the selfish but sagacious policy thus detailed, the
prelate departed the next day for Calais, where Clarence was already
urging his suit with the ardent impatience of amorous youth. The
archbishop found, however, that Warwick was more reluctant than he
had anticipated, to suffer his daughter to enter any House without
the consent of its chief; nor would the earl, in all probability, have
acceded to the prayers of the princely suitor, had not Edward, enraged
at the flight of Clarence, and worked upon by the artful queen,
committed the imprudence of writing an intemperate and menacing letter
to the earl, which called up all the passions of the haughty Warwick.

"What!" he exclaimed, "thinks this ungrateful man not only to dishonour
me by his method of marrying his sisters, but will he also play the
tyrant with me in the disposal of mine own daughter! He threats!
he!--enough. It is due to me to show that there lives no man whose
threats I have not the heart to defy!" And the prelate finding him in
this mood had no longer any difficulty in winning his consent. This
ill-omened marriage was, accordingly, celebrated with great and regal
pomp at Calais, and the first object of the archbishop was attained.

While thus stood affairs between the two great factions of the state,
those discontents which Warwick's presence at court had a while laid at
rest again spread, broad and far, throughout the land. The luxury and
indolence of Edward's disposition in ordinary times always surrendered
him to the guidance of others. In the commencement of his reign he
was eminently popular, and his government, though stern, suited to the
times; for then the presiding influence was that of Lord Warwick. As the
queen's counsels prevailed over the consummate experience and masculine
vigour of the earl, the king's government lost both popularity and
respect, except only in the metropolis; and if, at the close of his
reign, it regained all its earlier favour with the people, it must be
principally ascribed to the genius of Hastings, then England's most
powerful subject, and whose intellect calmly moved all the springs of
action. But now everywhere the royal authority was weakened; and while
Edward was feasting at Shene and Warwick absent at Calais, the provinces
were exposed to all the abuses which most gall a population. The poor
complained that undue exactions were made on them by the hospitals,
abbeys, and barons; the Church complained that the queen's relations had
seized and spent Church moneys; the men of birth and merit complained
of the advancement of new men who had done no service: and all these
several discontents fastened themselves upon the odious Woodvilles, as
the cause of all. The second breach, now notorious, between the king and
the all-beloved Warwick, was a new aggravation of the popular hatred to
the queen's family, and seemed to give occasion for the malcontents to
appear with impunity, at least so far as the earl was concerned: it
was, then, at this critical time that the circumstances we are about to
relate occurred.




CHAPTER II. THE WOULD-BE IMPROVERS OF JOVE'S FOOTBALL, EARTH.--THE SAD
FATHER AND THE SAD CHILD.--THE FAIR RIVALS.

Adam Warner was at work on his crucible when the servitor commissioned
to attend him opened the chamber door, and a man dressed in the black
gown of a student entered.

He approached the alchemist, and after surveying him for a moment in a
silence that seemed not without contempt, said, "What, Master Warner,
are you so wedded to your new studies that you have not a word to bestow
on an old friend?"

Adam turned, and after peevishly gazing at the intruder a few moments,
his face brightened up into recognition.

"En iterum!" he said. "Again, bold Robin Hilyard, and in a scholar's
garb! Ha! doubtless thou hast learned ere this that peaceful studies do
best insure man's weal below, and art come to labour with me in the high
craft of mind-work!"

"Adam," quoth Hilyard, "ere I answer, tell me this: Thou with thy
science wouldst change the world: art thou a jot nearer to thy end?"

"Well-a-day," said poor Adam, "you know little what I have undergone.
For danger to myself by rack and gibbet I say nought. Man's body is
fair prey to cruelty, and what a king spares to-day the worm shall gnaw
to-morrow. But mine invention--my Eureka--look!" and stepping aside, he
lifted a cloth, and exhibited the mangled remains of the unhappy model.

"I am forbid to restore it," continued Adam, dolefully. "I must work day
and night to make gold, and the gold comes not; and my only change of
toil is when the queen bids me construct little puppet-boxes for her
children! How, then, can I change the world? And thou," he added,
doubtingly and eagerly--"thou, with thy plots and stratagem, and active
demagogy, thinkest thou that thou hast changed the world, or extracted
one drop of evil out of the mixture of gall and hyssop which man is born
to drink?"

Hilyard was silent, and the two world-betterers--the philosopher and the
demagogue--gazed on each other, half in sympathy, half in contempt. At
last Robin said,--

"Mine old friend, hope sustains us both; and in the wilderness we yet
behold the Pisgah! But to my business. Doubtless thou art permitted to
visit Henry in his prison."

"Not so," replied Adam; "and for the rest, since I now eat King Edward's
bread, and enjoy what they call his protection, ill would it beseem me
to lend myself to plots against his throne."

"Ah, man, man, man," exclaimed Hilyard, bitterly, "thou art like all the
rest,--scholar or serf, the same slave; a king's smile bribes thee from
a people's service!"

Before Adam could reply, a panel in the wainscot slid back and the bald
head of a friar peered into the room. "Son Adam," said the holy man,
"I crave your company an instant, oro vestrem aurem;" and with this
abominable piece of Latinity the friar vanished.

With a resigned and mournful shrug of the shoulders, Adam walked across
the room, when Hilyard, arresting his progress, said, crossing himself,
and in a subdued and fearful whisper, "Is not that Friar Bungey, the
notable magician?"

"Magician or not," answered Warner, with a lip of inexpressible contempt
and a heavy sigh, "God pardon his mother for giving birth to such
a numskull!" and with this pious and charitable ejaculation Adam
disappeared in the adjoining chamber, appropriated to the friar.

"Hum," soliloquized Hilyard, "they say that Friar Bungey is employed
by the witch duchess in everlasting diabolisms against her foes. A peep
into his den might suffice me for a stirring tale to the people."

No sooner did this daring desire arise than the hardy Robin resolved to
gratify it; and stealing on tiptoe along the wall, he peered cautiously
through the aperture made by the sliding panel. An enormous stuffed
lizard hung from the ceiling, and various strange reptiles, dried into
mummy, were ranged around, and glared at the spy with green glass eyes.
A huge book lay open on a tripod stand, and a caldron seethed over a
slow and dull fire. A sight yet more terrible presently awaited the rash
beholder.

"Adam," said the friar, laying his broad palm on the student's reluctant
shoulders, "inter sapentes."

"Sapientes, brother," groaned Adam.

"That's the old form, Adam," quoth the friar, superciliously,--"sapentes
is the last improvement. I say, between wise men there is no envy. Our
noble and puissant patroness, the Duchess of Bedford, hath committed to
me a task that promiseth much profit. I have worked at it night and day
stotis filibus."

"O man, what lingo speakest thou?--stotis filibus!"

"Tush, if it is not good Latin, it does as well, son Adam. I say I have
worked at it night and day, and it is now advanced eno' for experiment.
But thou art going to sleep."

"Despatch! speak out! speak on!" said Adam, desperately,--"what is thy
achievement?"

"See!" answered the friar, majestically; and drawing aside a black pall,
he exhibited to the eyes of Adam, and to the more startled gaze of Robin
Hilyard, a pale, cadaverous, corpse-like image, of pigmy proportions,
but with features moulded into a coarse caricature of the lordly
countenance of the Earl of Warwick.

"There," said the friar, complacently, and rubbing his hands, "that is
no piece of bungling, eh? As like the stout earl as one pea to another."

"And for what hast thou kneaded up all this waste of wax?" asked Adam.
"Forsooth, I knew not you had so much of ingenious art; algates, the toy
is somewhat ghastly."

"Ho, ho!" quoth the friar, laughing so as to show a set of jagged,
discoloured fangs from ear to ear, "surely thou, who art so notable a
wizard and scholar, knowest for what purpose we image forth our enemies.
Whatever the duchess inflicts upon this figure, the Earl of Warwick,
whom it representeth, will feel through his bones and marrow,--waste
wax, waste man!"

"Thou art a devil to do this thing, and a blockhead to think it, O
miserable friar!" exclaimed Adam, roused from all his gentleness.

"Ha!" cried the friar, no less vehemently, and his burly face purple
with passion, "dost thou think to bandy words with me? Wretch! I will
set goblins to pinch thee black and blue! I will drag thee at night over
all the jags of Mount Pepanon, at the tail of a mad nightmare! I will
put aches in all thy bones, and the blood in thy veins shall run into
sores and blotches. Am I not Friar Bungey? And what art thou?"

At these terrible denunciations, the sturdy Robin, though far less
superstitious than most of his contemporaries, was seized with a
trembling from head to foot; and expecting to see goblins and imps start
forth from the walls, he retired hastily from his hiding-place, and,
without waiting for further commune with Warner, softly opened the
chamber door and stole down the stairs. Adam, however, bore the storm
unquailingly, and when the holy man paused to take breath, he said
calmly,--

"Verily, if thou canst do these things, there must be secrets in Nature
which I have not yet discovered. Howbeit, though thou art free to try
all thou canst against me, thy threats make it necessary that this
communication between us should be nailed up, and I shall so order."

The friar, who was ever in want of Adam's aid, either to construe a bit
of Latin, or to help him in some chemical illusion, by no means relished
this quiet retort; and holding out his huge hand to Adam, said, with
affected cordiality,--

"Pooh! we are brothers, and must not quarrel. I was over hot, and thou
too provoking; but I honour and love thee, man,--let it pass. As for
this figure, doubtless we might pink it all over, and the earl be never
the worse. But if our employers order these things and pay for them, we
cunning men make profit by fools!"

"It is men like thee that bring shame on science," answered Adam,
sternly; "and I will not listen to thee longer."

"Nay, but you must," said the friar, clutching Adam's robe, and
concealing his resentment by an affected grin. "Thou thinkest me a mere
ignoramus--ha! ha!--I think the same of thee. Why, man, thou hast never
studied the parts of the human body, 1'11 swear."

"I'm no leech," said Adam. "Let me go."

"No, not yet. I will convict thee of ignorance. Thou dost not even know
where the liver is placed."

"I do," answered Adam, shortly; "but what then?"

"Thou dost?--I deny it. Here is a pin; stick it into this wax, man,
where thou sayest the liver lies in the human frame."

Adam unsuspiciously obeyed.

"Well! the liver is there, eh? Ah, but where are the lungs?"

"Why, here."

"And the midriff?"

"Here, certes."

"Right!--thou mayest go now," said the friar, dryly. Adam disappeared
through the aperture, and closed the panel.

"Now I know where the lungs, midriff, and liver are," said the friar
to himself, "I shall get on famously. 'T is a useful fellow, that, or I
should have had him hanged long ago!"

Adam did not remark on his re-entrance that his visitor, Hilyard,
had disappeared, and the philosopher was soon reimmersed in the fiery
interest of his thankless labours.

It might be an hour afterwards, when, wearied and exhausted by perpetual
hope and perpetual disappointment, he flung himself on his seat; and
that deep sadness, which they who devote themselves in this noisy
world to wisdom and to truth alone can know, suffused his thoughts, and
murmured from his feverish lips.

"Oh, hard condition of my life!" groaned the sage,--"ever to strive,
and never to accomplish. The sun sets and the sun rises upon my eternal
toils, and my age stands as distant from the goal as stood my youth!
Fast, fast the mind is wearing out the frame, and my schemes have but
woven the ropes of sand, and my name shall be writ in water. Golden
dreams of my young hope, where are ye? Methought once, that could I
obtain the grace of royalty, the ear of power, the command of wealth,
my path to glory was made smooth and sure; I should become the grand
inventor of my time and land; I should leave my lore a heritage and
blessing wherever labour works to civilize the round globe. And now my
lodging is a palace, royalty my patron; they give me gold at my desire;
my wants no longer mar my leisure. Well, and for what? On condition that
I forego the sole task for which patronage, wealth, and leisure were
desired! There stands the broken iron, and there simmers the ore I am to
turn to gold,--the iron worth more than all the gold, and the gold
never to be won! Poor, I was an inventor, a creator, the true magician;
protected, patronized, enriched, I am but the alchemist, the bubble, the
dupe or duper, the fool's fool. God, brace up my limbs! Let me escape!
give me back my old dream, and die at least, if accomplishing nothing,
hoping all!"

He rose as he spoke; he strode across the chamber with majestic step,
with resolve upon his brow. He stopped short, for a sharp pain shot
across his heart. Premature age and the disease that labour brings were
at their work of decay within: the mind's excitement gave way to the
body's weakness, and he sank again upon his seat, breathing hard,
gasping, pale, the icy damps upon his brow. Bubblingly seethed the
molten metals, redly glowed the poisonous charcoal, the air of death was
hot within the chamber where the victim of royal will pandered to the
desire of gold. Terrible and eternal moral for Wisdom and for Avarice,
for sages and for kings,--ever shall he who would be the maker of gold
breathe the air of death!

"Father," said the low and touching voice of one who had entered
unperceived, and who now threw her arms round Adam's neck, "Father, thou
art ill, and sorely suffering--"

"At heart--yes, Sibyll. Give me thine arm; let us forth and taste the
fresher air."

It was so seldom that Warner could be induced to quit his chamber, that
these words almost startled Sibyll, and she looked anxiously in his
face, as she wiped the dews from his forehead.

"Yes--air--air!" repeated Adam, rising.

Sibyll placed his bonnet over his silvered locks, drew his gown more
closely round him, and slowly and in silence they left the chamber, and
took their way across the court to the ramparts of the fortress-palace.

The day was calm and genial, with a low but fresh breeze stirring gently
through the warmth of noon. The father and child seated themselves on
the parapet, and saw, below, the gay and numerous vessels that glided
over the sparkling river, while the dark walls of Baynard's Castle,
the adjoining bulwark and battlements of Montfichet, and the tall
watch-tower of Warwick's mighty mansion frowned in the distance against
the soft blue sky. "There," said Adam, quietly, and pointing to the
feudal roofs, "there seems to rise power, and yonder (glancing to the
river), yonder seems to flow Genius! A century or so hence the walls
shall vanish, but the river shall roll on. Man makes the castle, and
founds the power,--God forms the river and creates the Genius. And yet,
Sibyll, there may be streams as broad and stately as yonder Thames, that
flow afar in the waste, never seen, never heard by man. What profits the
river unmarked; what the genius never to be known?"

It was not a common thing with Adam Warner to be thus eloquent. Usually
silent and absorbed, it was not his gift to moralize or declaim. His
soul must be deeply moved before the profound and buried sentiment
within it could escape into words.

Sibyll pressed her father's hand, and, though her own heart was very
heavy, she forced her lips to smile and her voice to soothe. Adam
interrupted her.

"Child, child, ye women know not what presses darkest and most bitterly
on the minds of men. You know not what it is to form out of immaterial
things some abstract but glorious object,--to worship, to serve it,
to sacrifice to it, as on an altar, youth, health, hope, life,--and
suddenly in old age to see that the idol was a phantom, a mockery, a
shadow laughing us to scorn, because we have sought to clasp it."

"Oh, yes, Father, women have known that illusion."

"What! Do they study?"

"No, Father, but they feel!"

"Feel! I comprehend thee not."

"As man's genius to him is woman's heart to her," answered Sibyll, her
dark and deep eyes suffused with tears. "Doth not the heart create,
invent? Doth it not dream? Doth it not form its idol out of air? Goeth
it not forth into the future, to prophesy to itself? And sooner or
later, in age or youth, doth it not wake at last, and see how it hath
wasted its all on follies? Yes, Father, my heart can answer, when thy
genius would complain."

"Sibyll," said Warner, roused and surprised, and gazing on her
wistfully, "time flies apace. Till this hour I have thought of thee but
as a child, an infant. Thy words disturb me now."

"Think not of them, then. Let me never add one grief to thine."

"Thou art brave and gay in thy silken sheen," said Adam, curiously
stroking down the rich, smooth stuff of Sibyll's tunic; "her grace the
duchess is generous to us. Thou art surely happy here!"

"Happy!"

"Not happy!" exclaimed Adam, almost joyfully, "wouldst thou that we were
back once more in our desolate, ruined home?"

"Yes, ob, yes!--but rather away, far away, in some quiet village, some
green nook; for the desolate, ruined home was not safe for thine old
age."

"I would we could escape, Sibyll," said Adam, earnestly, in a whisper,
and with a kind of innocent cunning in his eye, "we and the poor Eureka!
This palace is a prison-house to me. I will speak to the Lord Hastings,
a man of great excellence, and gentle too. He is ever kind to us."

"No, no, Father, not to him," cried Sibyll, turning pale,--"let him not
know a word of what we would propose, nor whither we would fly."

"Child, he loves me, or why does he seek me so often, and sit and talk
not?"

Sibyll pressed her clasped hands tightly to her bosom, but made no
answer; and while she was summoning courage to say something that seemed
to oppress her thoughts with intolerable weight, a footstep sounded
gently near, and the Lady of Bonville (then on a visit to the queen),
unseen and unheard by the two, approached the spot. She paused, and
gazed at Sibyll, at first haughtily; and then, as the deep sadness of
that young face struck her softer feelings, and the pathetic picture of
father and child, thus alone in their commune, made its pious and sweet
effect, the gaze changed from pride to compassion, and the lady said
courteously,--

"Fair mistress, canst thou prefer this solitary scene to the gay company
about to take the air in her grace's gilded barge?"

Sibyll looked up in surprise, not unmixed with fear. Never before had
the great lady spoken to her thus gently. Adam, who seemed for a while
restored to the actual life, saluted Katherine with simple dignity, and
took up the word,--

"Noble lady, whoever thou art, in thine old age, and thine hour of care,
may thy child, like this poor girl, forsake all gayer comrades for a
parent's side!"

The answer touched the Lady of Bonville, and involuntarily she extended
her hand to Sibyll. With a swelling heart, Sibyll, as proud as herself,
bent silently over that rival's hand. Katherine's marble cheek coloured,
as she interpreted the girl's silence.

"Gentle sir," she said, after a short pause, "wilt thou permit me a few
words with thy fair daughter? And if in aught, since thou speakest of
care, Lord Warwick's sister can serve thee, prithee bid thy young maiden
impart it, as to a friend."

"Tell her, then, my Sibyll,--tell Lord Warwick's sister to ask the king
to give back to Adam Warner his poverty, his labour, and his hope," said
the scholar, and his noble head sank gloomily on his bosom.

The Lady of Bonville, still holding Sibyll's hand, drew her a few paces
up the walk, and then she said suddenly, and with some of that blunt
frankness which belonged to her great brother, "Maiden, can there be
confidence between thee and me?"

"Of what nature, lady?"

Again Katherine blushed, but she felt the small hand she held tremble in
her clasp, and was emboldened,--

"Maiden, thou mayst resent and marvel at my words; but when I had fewer
years than thou, my father said, 'There are many carks in life which a
little truth could end.' So would I heed his lesson. William de Hastings
has followed thee with an homage that has broken, perchance, many as
pure a heart,--nay, nay, fair child, hear me on. Thou hast heard that in
youth he wooed Katherine Nevile,--that we loved, and were severed.
They who see us now marvel whether we hate or love,--no, not love--that
question were an insult to Lord Bonville's wife!--Ofttimes we seem
pitiless to each other,--why? Lord Hastings would have wooed me, an
English matron, to forget mine honour and my House's. He chafes that he
moves me not. I behold him debasing a great nature to unworthy triflings
with man's conscience and a knight's bright faith. But mark me!--the
heart of Hastings is everlastingly mine, and mine alone! What seek I in
this confidence? To warn thee. Wherefore? Because for months, amidst all
the vices of this foul court-air, amidst the flatteries of the softest
voice that ever fell upon woman's ear, amidst, peradventure, the
pleadings of thine own young and guileless love, thine innocence is
unscathed. And therefore Katherine of Bonville may be the friend of
Sibyll Warner."

However generous might be the true spirit of these words, it was
impossible that they should not gall and humiliate the young and
flattered beauty to whom they were addressed. They so wholly discarded
all belief in the affection of Hastings for Sibyll; they so haughtily
arrogated the mastery over his heart; they so plainly implied that his
suit to the poor maiden was but a mockery or dishonour, that they made
even the praise for virtue an affront to the delicate and chaste ear
on which they fell. And, therefore, the reader will not be astonished,
though the Lady of Bonville certainly was, when Sibyll, drawing her hand
from Katherine's clasp, stopping short, and calmly folding her arms upon
her bosom, said,--

"To what this tends, lady, I know not. The Lord Hastings is free to
carry his homage where he will. He has sought me,--not I Lord Hastings.
And if to-morrow he offered me his hand, I would reject it, if I were
not convinced that the heart--"

"Damsel," interrupted the Lady Bonville, in amazed contempt, "the hand
of Lord Hastings! Look ye indeed so high, or has he so far paltered with
your credulous youth as to speak to you, the daughter of the alchemist,
of marriage? If so, poor child, beware!

"I knew not," replied Sibyll, bitterly, "that Sibyll Warner was more
below the state of Lord Hastings than Master Hastings was once below the
state of Lady Katherine Nevile."

"Thou art distraught with thy self-conceit," answered the dame,
scornfully; and, losing all the compassion and friendly interest she had
before felt, "my rede is spoken,--reject it if thou wilt in pride. Rue
thy folly thou wilt in shame!"

She drew her wimple round her face as she said these words, and,
gathering up her long robe, swept slowly on.




CHAPTER III. WHEREIN THE DEMAGOGUE SEEKS THE COURTIER.

On quitting Adam's chamber, Hilyard paused not till he reached a stately
house, not far from Warwick Lane, which was the residence of the Lord
Montagu.

That nobleman was employed in reading, or rather, in pondering over, two
letters, with which a courier from Calais had just arrived, the one
from the archbishop, the other from Warwick. In these epistles were
two passages, strangely contradictory in their counsel. A sentence in
Warwick's letter ran thus:--

"It hath reached me that certain disaffected men meditate a rising
against the king, under pretext of wrongs from the queen's kin. It is
even said that our kinsmen, Copiers and Fitzhugh, are engaged therein.
Need I caution thee to watch well that they bring our name into no
disgrace or attaint? We want no aid to right our own wrongs; and if the
misguided men rebel, Warwick will best punish Edward by proving that he
is yet of use."

On the other hand, thus wrote the prelate:--

"The king, wroth with my visit to Calais, has taken from me the
chancellor's seal. I humbly thank him, and shall sleep the lighter for
the fardel's loss. Now, mark me, Montagu: our kinsman, Lord Fitzhugh's
son, and young Henry Nevile, aided by old Sir John Copiers, meditate
a fierce and well-timed assault upon the Woodvilles. Do thou keep
neuter,--neither help nor frustrate it. Howsoever it end, it will answer
our views, and shake our enemies."

Montagu was yet musing over these tidings, and marvelling that he
in England should know less than his brethren in Calais of events so
important, when his page informed him that a stranger, with urgent
messages from the north country, craved an audience. Imagining that
these messages would tend to illustrate the communications just
received, he ordered the visitor to be admitted.

He scarcely noticed Hilyard on his entrance, and said abruptly, "Speak
shortly, friend,--I have but little leisure."

"And yet, Lord Montagu, my business may touch thee home."

Montagu, surprised, gazed more attentively on his visitor: "Surely, I
know thy face, friend,--we have met before."

"True; thou wert then on thy way to the More."

"I remember me; and thou then seemedst, from thy bold words, on a still
shorter road to the gallows."

"The tree is not planted," said Robin, carelessly, "that will serve for
my gibbet. But were there no words uttered by me that thou couldst
not disapprove? I spoke of lawless disorders, of shameful malfaisance
throughout the land, which the Woodvilles govern under a lewd tyrant--"

"Traitor, hold!"

"A tyrant," continued Robin, heeding not the interruption nor the
angry gesture of Montagu, "a tyrant who at this moment meditates the
destruction of the House of Nevile. And not contented with this world's
weapons, palters with the Evil One for the snares and devilries of
witchcraft."

"Hush, man! Not so loud," said Montagu, in an altered voice. "Approach
nearer,--nearer yet. They who talk of a crowned king, whose right hand
raises armies, and whose left hand reposes on the block, should beware
how they speak above their breath. Witchcraft, sayest thou? Make thy
meaning clear."

Here Robin detailed, with but little exaggeration, the scene he had
witnessed in Friar Bungey's chamber,--the waxen image, the menaces
against the Earl of Warwick, and the words of the friar, naming the
Duchess of Bedford as his employer. Montagu listened in attentive
silence. Though not perfectly free from the credulities of the time,
shared even by the courageous heart of Edward and the piercing intellect
of Gloucester, he was yet more alarmed by such proofs of determined
earthly hostility in one so plotting and so near to the throne as the
Duchess of Bedford, than by all the pins and needles that could be
planted into the earl's waxen counterpart.

"A devilish malice, indeed," said he, when Hilyard had concluded; "and
yet this story, if thou wilt adhere to it, may serve us well at need. I
thank thee, trusty friend, for thy confidence, and beseech thee to come
at once with me to the king. There will I denounce our foe, and, with
thine evidence, we will demand her banishment."

"By your leave, not a step will I budge, my Lord Montagu," quoth Robin,
bluntly,--"I know how these matters are managed at court. The king will
patch up a peace between the duchess and you, and chop off my ears and
nose as a liar and common scandal-maker. No, no; denounce the duchess
and all the Woodvilles I will; but it shall not be in the halls of the
Tower, but on the broad plains of Yorkshire, with twenty thousand men at
my back."

"Ha! thou a leader of armies,--and for what end,--to dethrone the king?"

"That as it may be,--but first for justice to the people; it is the
people's rising that I will head, and not a faction's. Neither White
Rose nor Red shall be on my banner; but our standard shall be the gory
head of the first oppressor we can place upon a pole."

"What is it the people, as you word it, would demand?"

"I scarce know what we demand as yet,--that must depend upon how we
prosper," returned Hilyard, with a bitter laugh; "but the rising will
have some good, if it shows only to you lords and Normans that a Saxon
people does exist, and will turn when the iron heel is upon its neck. We
are taxed, ground, pillaged, plundered,--sheep, maintained to be
sheared for your peace or butchered for your war. And now will we have
a petition and a charter of our own, Lord Montagu. I speak frankly. I
am in thy power; thou canst arrest me, thou canst strike off the head of
this revolt. Thou art the king's friend,--wilt thou do so? No, thou and
thy House have wrongs as well as we, the people. And a part at least of
our demands and our purpose is your own."

"What part, bold man?"

"This: we shall make our first complaint the baneful domination of the
queen's family; and demand the banishment of the Woodvilles, root and
stem."

"Hem!" said Montagu, involuntarily glancing over the archbishop's
letter,--"hem, but without outrage to the king's state and person?"
