The walnut tree stood in the playground near the wall, and had
often proved useful as a ladder to boys at Tulloch's. One of its
branches extended over the wall and, from this, it was easy to drop
down beyond it. The return was more difficult, and was only to be
accomplished by means of an old ivy, which grew against the wall at
some distance off. By its aid the wall could be scaled without much
difficulty, and there was then the choice of dropping twelve feet
into the playground, or of walking on the top of the wall until the
walnut tree was reached.

Tulloch's stood some little distance along the Lower Richmond Road.
There were but one or two houses, standing back from the road
between it and the main road up the hill, and there was little fear
of anyone being abroad at that time in the morning. There was, as
yet, but a faint gleam of daylight in the sky; and it was dark in
the road up the hill, as the trees growing in the grounds of the
houses, on either side, stretched far over it.

"I say," Jim Sankey said, "won't it be a go, if Johnny Gibson isn't
there, after all?"

"He will be up there by four," Bob said, confidently. "He said his
father would be going out in his boat to fish, as soon as it began
to be daylight--because the tide served at that hour--and that he
would start, as soon as his father shoved off the boat.

"My eye, Jim, what is that ahead of us? It looks to me like a
coach."

"It is a coach, or a carriage, or something of that sort."

"No, it isn't, it is a light cart. What can it be doing here, at
this hour? Let us walk the other side of the road."

They crossed to the left, as they got abreast of the cart. A man,
whom they had not noticed before, said sharply:

"You are about early."

"Yes, we are off to work," Bob replied, and they walked steadily
on.

"He couldn't see what we were like," Jim Sankey said, when they had
got a hundred yards further.

"Not he," Bob said. "I could not make out his figure at all, and it
is darker on this side of the road than it is on the other.

"I say, you fellows, I think he is up to no good."

"What do you mean, Bob?"

"Well, what should a cart be standing on the hill for, at this time
in the morning? That's Admiral Langton's, I know; the door is just
where the cart was stopping."

"Well, what has that got to do with it, Bob? The cart won't do him
any harm."

"No, but there may be some fellows with it, who may be breaking
into his house."

"Do you think so, Bob?"

"Well, it seems likely to me it may be his house, or one of the
others."

"Well, what are we to do, Bob?"

"I vote we see about it, Jim. We have pretty nearly half an hour to
spare, now, before Johnny Gibson will come along. We have got our
hockey sticks, you know."

"But suppose there shouldn't be any men there, Bob, and we should
be caught in the grounds; They would think we were going to steal
something."

"That would be a go," Bob said, "but there isn't likely to be
anyone about, at half past three; and if there were, I don't
suppose he would be able to catch us. But we must risk something,
anyhow. It will be a bit of fun, and it will be better than waiting
at the top of the hill, with nothing to do till, Johnny Gibson
comes."

They were now past the wall in front of Admiral Langton's, and far
out of sight of the man in the cart.

"There is some ivy on this wall," Bob said. "We can climb over it,
by that. Then we will make our way along, until we can find some
place where we can climb over into the admiral's garden."

"Perhaps there are some dogs about," Wharton objected.

"Well, if there are, they are most likely chained up. We must risk
something.

"Well, here goes. If you don't like it, Wharton, you can stay
behind."

So saying, he put his hockey stick between his teeth, and then
proceeded to climb up the wall, by means of the ivy.

The wall was but nine feet high and, as soon as he gained the top,
Bob said:

"Come on, you fellows. I am going to drop down."

In two minutes he was joined by the other three.

"There is a path, just beyond," Bob said; "let us go by that. Don't
you fellows say a word. As Wharton says, there may be some dogs
about."

Quietly they stole along the path, which ran parallel to the road,
until it turned off at right angles.

"Now, the first tree that grows against the wall we will get over
by," Bob whispered.

After going twenty yards, he stopped.

"This tree will do."

"But what are you going to do, if there should be some men?"
Wharton asked, in a tone that showed he objected, altogether, to
the proceeding.

"It depends upon how many of them there are," Bob replied. "Of
course, the admiral has got some men in the house; and they will
wake up, and help us, if we give the alarm. Anyhow, we ought to be
able to be a match for two men, with these sticks, especially if we
take them by surprise.

"What do you say, Jim?"

"I should think so," Jim replied. "Anyhow, if you are game to go
on, I am.

"What do you say, Fullarton?"

"Oh, I am ready," Fullarton, who was a boy of few words, replied.

"Only, if there is anyone, Bob, and we get into a row with them, of
course it will all come out about us; and then shan't we get it,
just!"

"I suppose we shall," Bob admitted, "but I don't see we can help
that.

"Well, we are in for it, now," and he began to climb the tree and,
working along a limb which extended over the wall, he dropped down
into the garden.

The others soon joined, Wharton being more afraid of staying
behind, by himself, than of going with the rest.

"Now, what are we to do next?"

"I should say we ought to find out whether anyone has got into the
house. That is the first thing. Then, if they have, we have got to
try to wake up the people, and to frighten the men inside.

"Have you got some string in your pockets?"

"I have got some."

They all had string.

"What do you want string for, Bob?"

"String is always useful, Jim. We may want to tie their hands. But
what I was thinking was, we might fasten it across the stairs, or
some of the passages; and then set up a sudden shout, and they
would think the watchmen had come, and would make a bolt; and when
they got to the string over they would go, and then we would drop
on them with these hockey sticks, before they could get up.

"Well, come on. There mayn't be anyone here, after all. Now we will
go up to the house, and creep round."

The house stood thirty or forty yards away and, stepping as
noiselessly as they could, the boys crossed the lawn and moved
along the front. Suddenly, Tom Fullarton caught hold of Bob's arm.

"Look, Bob, there is a light in that room! Do you see--through the
slit in the shutters?"

"So there is. Well, there is no mistake, now. There must be some
fellows belonging to that cart inside. That must be the drawing
room, or dining room, and they would never have lights there at
this time of night.

"Now, let us find out where they got in. This is something like
fun. It beats rabbit hunting all to nothing.

"Now mind, you fellows, if we do come upon them, and there is a
fight, you remember the best place to hit, to begin with, is the
ankle. You have only just got to fancy that it is a bung, and swipe
at it with all your might. Anyone you hit there is sure to go down
and, if he wants it, you can hit him over the head, afterwards.

"Now, come along. I expect they got in at the back of the house."

They soon came upon a door at the side of the house. It was open.

"That looks as if they had been let in," Bob whispered. "See, there
is a light in there, somewhere! Come on.

"Now, let us take our shoes off."

The others were thoroughly excited now, and followed Bob without
hesitation.

"Bob, is the key in the door?" Jim whispered.

"Yes, on the inside. They have been let in. I wish I dare lock it,
and take the key away. Let me see if it turns easy."

Very gently he turned the key, and found the bolt shot noiselessly.
It had doubtless been carefully oiled. He turned it again, shut the
door, locked it, and put the key in his pocket.

Then they crept on tiptoe along the passage. At the end were two
large chests, strengthened with iron bands. A lighted lantern stood
upon them. Bob peered round the corner into the hall. No one was to
be seen, but he heard a noise through an open door, from which came
a stream of light.

Motioning the others to stand still, he crept forward noiselessly
till he could look into the room. A man was occupied in packing
some articles of massive plate, clocks, and other valuables into a
sack. He was alone.

Bob made his way back to the others.

"There's only one fellow there," he said. "If there are any more,
they are upstairs. Let us have this one first--his back is to the
door.

"Now, Wharton, you hold our handkerchiefs and the string. If he
don't look round, I will jump on his back and have him down.

"The moment he is down, you two throw yourselves on him, and you
shove the handkerchiefs into his mouth, Wharton. In the surprise,
he won't know that we are only boys; and we will tie his hands
before he has time to resist.

"Now, come on."

They were all plucky boys--for Wharton, although less morally
courageous than the others, was no coward, physically. Their
stockinged feet made no sound, and the man heard nothing until Bob
sprang on to his back, the force sending him down on to his face.
Bob's arm was tightly round his throat; and the other two threw
themselves upon him, each seizing an arm, while Wharton crammed two
handkerchiefs into his mouth. The man's hands were dragged behind
his back, as he lay on his face, and his wrists tied firmly
together. He was rendered utterly helpless before he had recovered
from the first shock of surprise.

"Tie his ankles together with the other two handkerchiefs," Bob
said, still lying across him.

"That is right. You are sure they are tight? There, he will do,
now. I must lock him in."

This was done.

"Now, then, let's go upstairs.

"Now, fasten this last piece of string across between the
banisters, six or eight steps up.

"Make haste," he added, as a faint cry was heard, above.

It did not take a second to fasten the string at each end; and
then, grasping their sticks, the boys sprang upstairs. On gaining
the landing, they heard voices proceeding from a room along a
corridor and, as they crept up to it, they heard a man's voice say,
angrily:

"Now we ain't going to waste any more time. If you don't tell us
where your money is, we will knock you and the girl on the head.

"No, you can't talk, but you can point out where it is. We know
that you have got it.

"Very well, Bill, hit that young woman over the head with the butt
of your pistol. Don't be afraid of hurting her.

"Ah! I thought you would change your mind. So it is under the bed.

"Look under, Dick. What is there?"

"A square box," another voice said.

"Well, haul it out."

"Come on," Bob Repton whispered to the others; "the moment we are
in, shout."

Illustration: Bob and his Companions surprise the Burglars.

He stood for a moment in the doorway. A man was standing, with his
back to him, holding a pistol in his hand. Another, similarly
armed, stood by the side of a young woman who, in a loose dressing
gown, sat shrinking in an armchair, into which she had evidently
been thrust. A third was in the act of crawling under the bed. An
elderly man, in his nightshirt, was standing up. A gag had been
thrust into his mouth; and he was tightly bound, by a cord round
his waist, to one of the bedposts.

Bob sprang forward, whirling his hockey stick round his head, and
giving a loud shout of "Down with the villains!" the others
joining, at the top of their voices.

Before the man had time to turn round, Bob's stick fell, with all
the boy's strength, upon his ankle; and he went down as if he had
been shot, his pistol exploding as he fell. Bob raised his stick
again and brought it down, with a swinging blow, on the robber's
head.

The others had made a rush, together, towards the man standing by
the lady. Taken utterly by surprise, he discharged his pistol at
random, and then sprang towards the door. Two blows fell on him,
and Sankey and Fullarton tried to grapple with him; but he burst
through them, and rushed out.

Bob and Wharton sprang on the kneeling man, before he could gain
his feet; and rolled him over, throwing themselves upon him. He was
struggling furiously, and would soon have shaken them off, when the
other boys sprang to their assistance.

"You help them, Jim. I will get this cord off!" Fullarton said and,
running to the bed, began to unknot the cord that bound the
admiral.

The ruffian on the ground was a very powerful man, and the three
boys had the greatest difficulty in holding him down; till
Fullarton slipped a noose round one of his ankles and then, jumping
on the bed, hauled upon it with all his strength--the admiral
giving his assistance.

"Get off him, he is safe!" he shouted; but the others had the
greatest difficulty in shaking themselves free from the man--who
had, fortunately, laid his pistol on the bed, before he crawled
under it to get at the box.

Jim Sankey was the first to shake himself free from him and, seeing
what Fullarton was doing, he jumped on to the bed and gave him his
assistance and, in half a minute, the ruffian's leg was lashed to
the bedpost, at a height of five feet from the ground.

Just as this was done there was a rush of feet outside; and three
men, one holding a cutlass and the other two armed with pokers, ran
into the room. It was fortunate they did so, for the man whom Bob
had first felled was just rising to his feet; but he was at once
struck down again, by a heavy blow over the head with the cutlass.
By this time the admiral had torn off the bandage across his mouth.

"Another of them ran downstairs, Jackson. Give chase. We can deal
with these fellows."

The three men rushed off.

"Well, I don't know who you are," the admiral went on, turning to
the boys, "but you turned up at the nick of time; and I am deeply
indebted to you, not only for saving my money--although I should
not have liked to lose that--but for having captured these pirates.

"That villain has not hurt you much, I hope?" for both Bob and Jim
Sankey were bleeding freely, from the face, from the heavy blows
the robber had dealt them.

"No, sir, we are not hurt to speak of," Bob said. "We belong to
Tulloch's school."

"To the school!" the admiral exclaimed. "What on earth are you
doing here, at four o'clock in the morning?

"But never mind that now. What is it, Jackson, has he got away?"

"No, sir; he was lying in a heap, at the bottom of the stairs.
There was a lanyard fastened across."

"We tied a string across, sir, as we came up," Bob explained.

"Well done, lads!

"Are there any more of them, Jackson?"

"Don't see any signs of any more, admiral. There are the two plate
chests in the passage, as if they had been brought out from the
butler's strong room, in readiness to take away."

"Where is the butler? He must have heard the pistol shots!" the
admiral exclaimed angrily.

"He is not in his room, admiral. We looked in to bring him with us.
The door was open, but he isn't there."

"There is another man in the drawing room, tied." Bob said. "He was
putting a lot of things into a sack."

"The scoundrel! Perhaps that is the butler," the admiral said.

"Well, Emma, you had better go back to bed again.

"Jackson, you stand guard over these two villains here, and split
their heads open, if they venture to move.

"Now, let us go and see to this other fellow."

The admiral proceeded downstairs, followed by the boys. The other
two servants were standing beside the third robber, who was still
insensible.

"You keep watch over him, John," the admiral said.

"William, you come with us. There is another man in the drawing
room, but he is tied."

"There is the key, sir," Bob said, producing it. "We thought it
safest to lock him up."

"Upon my word, young gentlemen, you seem to have thought of
everything. If I were in command of a ship, I should like to have
you all as midshipmen."

The door was opened. The man was still lying on the ground, but had
rolled some distance from where they had left him. He had succeeded
in getting his feet loosened from the handkerchief, but the
whipcord round his wrists had resisted all his efforts to break or
slacken it. He was panting heavily from the exertions he had made.

"It is Harper," the admiral said, in a tone of indignation and
disgust.

"So, you treacherous scoundrel, it was you who let these men in,
was it? Well, it is a hanging matter, my lad; and if any fellow
deserves the rope, you do.

"You had better go and get some more cord, Williams, and tie all
these four fellows up, securely. Let Jackson see to the knots.

"Where did the scoundrels get in?" he asked, turning to the boys.

"At the door at the end of the passage, sir, where the plate chests
are standing. We found it open--here is the key of it. We locked
it, after we came in, so as to prevent anyone from getting away.

"There is another man, with a cart, in the road."

"We will see to him, directly we have got the others all tied up
safely," the admiral said. "That is the first thing to see to."

In five minutes, the four men were laid side by side in the hall,
securely bound hand and foot.

"Now, Williams, you keep guard over them.

"Jackson, do you and John sally out. There is a cart standing
outside the gate, and a fellow in it. Bring him in, and lay him
alongside the others."

The boys followed the two men, to see the capture. The light had
broadened out over the sky, and it was almost sunrise as they
sallied out. They went quietly along, until they reached the
gate--which stood ajar--then they flung it open and rushed out. To
their disappointment, the cart was standing about fifty yards lower
down the hill. The man was in it, with his whip in one hand and the
reins in another, and was looking back; and the moment he saw them,
he struck the horse and drove off at the top of his speed. The pace
was such that it was hopeless for them to think of following him.

