Project Gutenberg's Gascoyne, the Sandal-Wood Trader, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Gascoyne, the Sandal-Wood Trader

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Illustrator: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: November 6, 2007 [EBook #23384]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GASCOYNE, THE SANDAL-WOOD TRADER ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Gascoyne, the Sandal-Wood Trader, by R.M. Ballantyne.

________________________________________________________________________
An exciting story set in the Pacific.  Is Gascoyne a pirate, or isn't
he?  Quite a gripping tale, and well worth reading.

________________________________________________________________________
GASCOYNE, THE SANDAL-WOOD TRADER, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE SCHOONER.

The Great Pacific is the scene of our story.  On a beautiful morning,
many years ago, a little schooner might have been seen floating, light
and graceful as a sea-mew, on the breast of the slumbering ocean.  She
was one of those low black-hulled vessels, with raking, taper masts,
trimly cut sails, and elegant form, which we are accustomed to associate
with the idea of a yacht or a pirate.

She might have been the former, as far as appearance went, for the sails
and decks were white as snow, and every portion of brass and copper
above her water-line shone in the hot sun with dazzling brilliancy.  But
pleasure-seekers were not wont, in those days, to take such distant
flights, or to venture into such dangerous seas--dangerous alike from
the savage character of the islanders, and the numerous coral-reefs that
lie hidden a few feet below the surface of the waves.

Still less probable did it seem that the vessel in question could belong
to the lawless class of craft to which we have referred; for, although
she had what may be styled a wicked aspect, and was evidently adapted
for swift sailing, neither large guns nor small arms of any kind were
visible.

Whatever her nature or her object, she was reduced, at the time we
introduce her to the reader, to a state of inaction by the dead calm
which prevailed.  The sea resembled a sheet of clear glass.  Not a cloud
broke the softness of the sky, in which the sun glowed hotter and hotter
as it rose towards the zenith.  The sails of the schooner hung idly from
the yards; her reflected image was distorted, but scarcely broken, by
the long gentle swell; her crew, with the exception of the watch, were
asleep either on deck or down below, and so deep was the universal
silence, that, as the vessel rose and fell with a slow, quiet motion,
the pattering of the reef points on her sails forcibly attracted the
listener's attention, as does the ticking of a clock in the deep silence
of night.  A few sea-birds rested on the water, as if in the enjoyment
of the profound peace that reigned around; and, far away on the horizon
might be seen the tops of the palm-trees that grew on one of those coral
islands which lie scattered in thousands, like beautiful gems, on the
surface of that bright blue sea.

Among the men who lay sleeping in various easy off-hand attitudes on the
schooner's deck was one who merits special attention--not only because
of the grotesque appearance of his person, but also because he is one of
the principal actors in our tale.

He was a large powerful man, of that rugged build and hairy aspect that
might have suggested the idea that he would be difficult to kill.  He
was a fair man, with red hair and a deeply sun-burned face, on which
jovial good-humour sat almost perpetually enthroned.  At the moment when
we introduce him to the reader, however, that expression happened to be
modified in consequence of his having laid him down to sleep in a
sprawling manner on his back--the place as well as the position being,
apparently, one of studied discomfort.  His legs lay over the heel of
the bowsprit; his big body reposed on a confused heap of blocks and
cordage, and his neck rested on the stock of an anchor, so that his head
hung down over it, presenting the face to view, with the large mouth
wide open, in an upside down position.  The man was evidently on the
verge of choking, but, being a strong man, and a rugged man, and a
healthy man, he did not care.  He seemed to prefer choking to the
trouble of rousing himself and improving his position.

How long he would have lain in this state of felicity it is impossible
to say, for his slumbers were rudely interrupted by a slight lurch of
the schooner, which caused the blocks and cordage attached to the sheet
of the jib to sweep slowly, but with rasping asperity, across his face.
Any ordinary man would have been seriously damaged--at least in
appearance--by such an accident; but this particular sea-dog was tough
in the skin--he was only awakened by it--nothing more.  He yawned,
raised himself lazily, and gazed round with that vacant stare of
unreasonable surprise which is common to man on passing from a state of
somnolence to that of wakefulness.

Gradually the expression of habitual good-humour settled on his visage,
as he looked from one to another of his sleeping comrades, and at last,
with a bland smile, he broke forth into the following soliloquy:--

"Wot a goose, wot a grampus you've bin, John Bumpus: firstly, for goin'
to sea; secondly, for remainin' at sea; thirdly, for not forsakin' the
sea; fourthly, for bein' worried about it at all, now that you've made
up your mind to retire from the sea, and, fifthly--"

Here John Bumpus paused as if to meditate on the full depth and meaning
of these polite remarks, or to invent some new and powerful expression
wherewith to deliver his fifth head.  His mental efforts seemed to fail,
however, for instead of concluding the sentence, he hummed the following
lines, which, we may suppose, were expressive of his feelings as well as
his intentions:--

  "So goodbye to the mighty ocean,
  And adoo to the rollin' sea,
  For it's nobody has no notion
  Wot a grief it has bin' to me."

"Ease off the sheets and square the topsail yards," was at that moment
said, or rather murmured, by a bass voice so deep and rich, that,
although scarcely raised above a whisper, it was distinctly heard over
the whole deck.

John Bumpus raised his bulky form with a degree of lithe activity that
proved him to be not less agile than athletic, and, with several others,
sprang to obey the order.  A few seconds later, the sails were swelled
out by a light breeze, and the schooner moved through the water at a
rate which seemed scarcely possible under the influence of so gentle a
puff of air.  Presently the breeze increased, the vessel cut through the
blue water like a knife, leaving a long track of foam in her wake as she
headed for the coral-island before referred to.  The outer reef, or
barrier of coral which guarded the island, was soon reached.  The narrow
opening in this natural bulwark was passed.  The schooner stood across
the belt of perfectly still water that lay between the reef and the
shore, and entered a small bay, where the calm water reflected the strip
of white sand, green palms, and tropical plants that skirted its margin,
as well as the purple hills of the interior.

Here she swept round in a sudden, but graceful curve, until all her
canvas fluttered in the breeze, and then dropt anchor in about six
fathoms water.



CHAPTER TWO.

BUMPUS IS FIERY AND PHILOSOPHICAL--MURDEROUS DESIGNS FRUSTRATED.

The captain of the schooner, whose deep voice had so suddenly terminated
the meditations of John Bumpus, was one of those men who seem to have
been formed for the special purpose of leading and commanding their
fellows.

He was not only unusually tall and powerful--physical qualities which,
in themselves, are by no means sufficient to command respect--but, as we
have said, he possessed a deep full-toned bass voice in which there
seemed to lie a species of fascination, for its softest tones riveted
attention, and when it thundered forth commands in the fiercest storms
it inspired confidence and a feeling of security in all who heard it.
The countenance of the captain, however, was that which induced men to
accord to him a position of superiority in whatever sphere of action he
chanced to move.  It was not so much a handsome as a manly and
singularly grave face, in every line of which was written inflexible
determination.  His hair was short, black, and curly.  A small moustache
darkened his upper lip, but the rest of his face was closely shaven, so
that his large chin and iron jaw were fully displayed.  His eyes were of
that indescribable blue colour which can exhibit the intensest passion,
or the most melting tenderness.

He wore a sombre but somewhat picturesque costume--a dark-coloured
flannel shirt and trousers, which latter were gathered in close round
his lower limbs by a species of drab gaiter that appeared somewhat
incongruous with the profession of the man.  The only bit of bright
colour about him was a scarlet belt round his waist, from the side of
which depended a long knife in a brown leather sheath.  A pair of light
shoes and a small round cap, resembling what is styled in these days a
pork-pie, completed his costume.  He was about forty years of age.

Such was the commander, or captain, or skipper, of this
suspicious-looking schooner--a man pre-eminently fitted for the
accomplishment of much good or the perpetration of great evil.

As soon as the anchor touched the ground, the captain ordered a small
boat to be lowered, and, leaping into it with two men, one of whom was
our friend John Bumpus, rowed towards the shore.

"Have you brought your kit with you, John?" inquired the captain, as the
little boat shot over the smooth waters of the bay.

"Wot's of it, sir," replied our rugged seaman, holding up a small bundle
tied in a red cotton handkerchief.  "I s'pose our cruise ashore won't be
a long one."

"It will be long for you, my man, at least as far as the schooner is
concerned, for I do not mean to take you aboard again."

"Not take me aboard agin!" exclaimed the sailor, with a look of surprise
which quickly degenerated into an angry frown, and thereafter gradually
relaxed into a broad grin as he continued--"why, capting, wot _do_ you
mean to do with me then, for I'm a heavy piece of goods, d'ye see, and
can't be easily moved about without a small touch o' my own consent, you
know."

Jo Bumpus, as he was fond of styling himself, said this with a
serio-comic air of sarcasm, for he was an exception to the general rule
of his fellows.  He had little respect for, and no fear of, his
commander.  Indeed, to say truth, (for truth must be told, even though
the character of our rugged friend should suffer,) Jo entertained a most
profound belief in the immense advantage of muscular strength and vigour
in general, and of his own prowess in particular.  Although not quite so
gigantic a man as his captain, he was nearly so, and, being a bold
self-reliant fellow, he felt persuaded in his own mind that he could
thrash him, if need were.  In fact, Jo was convinced that there was no
living creature under the sun, human or otherwise, that walked upon two
legs, that he could not pommel to death with more or less ease by means
of his fists alone.  And in this conviction he was not far wrong.  Yet
it must not be supposed that Jo Bumpus was a boastful man or a bully.
Far from it.  He was so thoroughly persuaded of his invincibility, that
he felt there was no occasion to prove it.  He therefore followed the
natural bent of his inclinations, which led him at all times to exhibit
a mild, amiable, and gentle aspect--except, of course, when he was
roused.  As occasion for being roused was not wanting in the South Seas
in those days, Jo's amiability was frequently put to the test.  He
sojourned, while there, in a condition of alternate calm and storm; but
riotous joviality ran, like a rich vein, through all his chequered life,
and lit up its most sombre phases like gleams of light on an April day.

"You entered my service with your own consent," replied the captain to
Jo's last remark, "and you may leave it, with the same consent, whenever
you choose; but you will please to remember that I did not engage you to
serve on board the schooner.  Back there you do not go either with or
without your consent, my fine fellow, and if you are bent on going to
sea on your own account--you've got a pair of good arms and legs--you
can swim!  Besides," continued the captain, dropping the tone of sarcasm
in which this was said, and assuming a more careless and good-natured
air, "you were singing something not long since, if I mistake not, about
`farewell to the rolling sea,' which leads me to think you will not
object to a short cruise on shore for a change, especially on such a
beautiful island as this is."

"I'm your man, capting," cried the impulsive seaman, at the same time
giving his oar a pull that well-nigh spun the boat round.  "And, to say
wots the plain truth, d'ye see, I'm not sorry to ha done with your
schooner, for, although she is as tight a little craft as any man could
wish for to go to sea in, I can't say much for the crew,--saving your
presence, Dick"--(he added, glancing over his shoulder at the
surly-looking man who pulled the bow oar.) "Of all the rascally set I
ever clapped eyes on, they seems to me the worst.  If I didn't know you
for a sandal-wood trader, I do believe I'd take ye for a pirate."

"Don't speak ill of your messmates behind their backs, Jo," said the
captain with a slight frown.  "No good and true man ever does that."

"No more I do," replied John Bumpus; while a deep red colour suffused
his bronzed countenance.  "No more I do; leastwise if they wos here I'd
say it to their faces, for they're a set of as ill-tongued villains as I
ever had the misfortune to--"

"Silence!" exclaimed the captain, suddenly, in a voice of thunder.

Few men would have ventured to disobey the command given by such a man,
but John Bumpus was one of those few.  He did indeed remain silent for
two seconds, but it was the silence of astonishment.

"Capting," said he, seriously, "I don't mean no offence, but I'd have
you to know that I engaged to work for you, not to hold my tongue at
your bidding, d'ye see.  There aint the man living as'll make Jo Bumpus
shut up w'en he's got a mind to--"

The captain put an abrupt end to the remarks of his refractory seaman by
starting up suddenly in fierce anger and seizing the tiller, apparently
with the intent to fell him.  He checked himself, however, as suddenly,
and, breaking into a loud laugh, cried--"Come, Jo, you must admit that
there is at least one living man who has made you `shut up' before you
had finished what you'd got to say."

John Bumpus, who had thrown up his left arm to ward off the anticipated
blow, and dropped his oar in order to clench his right fist, quietly
resumed his oar, and shook his head gravely for nearly a minute, after
which he made the following observation:--

"Capting, I've seed, in my experience o' life, that there are some
constitootions as don't agree with jokin'; an' yours is one on 'em.
Now, if you'd take the advice of a plain man, you'd never try it on.
You're a grave man by natur', and you're so bad at a joke that a feller
can't quite tell w'en you're a-doin' of it.  See, now, I do declare I
wos as near drivin' you right over the stern o' your own boat as could
be, only by good luck I seed the twinkle in your eye in time."

"Pull away, my lad," said the captain, in the softest tones of his deep
voice, at the same time looking his reprover straight in the face.

There was something in the tone in which that simple command was given,
and in the look by which it was accompanied; that effectually quelled
John Bumpus in spite of himself.  Violence had no effect on John,
because in most cases he was able to meet it with superior violence, and
in all cases he was willing to try.  But to be put down in this mild way
was perplexing.  The words were familiar, the look straightforward and
common enough.  He could not understand it at all, and, being naturally
of a philosophical turn of mind, he spent the next three minutes in a
futile endeavour to analyse his own feelings.  Before he had come to any
satisfactory conclusion on the subject, the boat's keel grated on the
white sand of the shore.

Now, while all that we have been describing in the last and present
chapters was going on, a very different series of events was taking
place on the coral-island, for there, under the pleasant shade of the
cocoa-nut palms, a tall, fair, and handsome youth was walking lightly
down the green slopes towards the shore in anticipation of the arrival
of the schooner, and a naked dark-skinned savage was dogging his steps,
winding like a hideous snake among the bushes, and apparently seeking an
opportunity to launch the short spear he carried in his hand at his
unsuspecting victim.

As the youth and the savage descended the mountain-side together, the
former frequently paused when an opening in the rich foliage peculiar to
these beautiful isles enabled him to obtain a clear view of the
magnificent bay and its fringing coral reef, on which the swell of the
great Pacific--so calm and undulating out beyond--fell in tremendous
breakers, with a long, low, solemn roar like distant thunder.  As yet no
object broke the surface of the mirror-like bay within the reef.

Each time the youth paused the savage stopped also, and more than once
he poised his deadly spear, while his glaring eyeballs shone amid the
green foliage like those of a tiger.  Yet upon each occasion he
exhibited signs of hesitation, and finally lowered the weapon, and
crouched into the underwood.

To any one ignorant of the actors in this scene, the indecision, of the
savage would have appeared unaccountable; for there could be no doubt of
his desire to slay the fair youth--still less doubt of his ability to
dart his formidable spear with precision.  Nevertheless, there was good
reason for his hesitating, for young Henry Stuart was well known, alike
by settlers and savages, as possessing the swiftest foot, the strongest
arm, and the boldest heart in the island, and Keona was not celebrated
for the possession of these qualities in any degree above the average of
his fellows, although he did undoubtedly exceed them in revenge, hatred,
and the like.  On one occasion young Stuart had, while defending his
mother's house against an attack of the savages, felled Keona with a
well-directed blow of his fist.  It was, doubtless, out of revenge for
this that the latter now dogged the former through the lonely recesses
of the mountain-pass by which he had crossed the island from the little
settlement in which was his home, and gained the sequestered bay in
which he expected to find the schooner.  Up to this point, however, the
savage had not summoned courage to make the attack, although, with the
exception of a hunting-knife, his enemy was altogether unarmed, for he
knew that in the event of missing his mark the young man's speed of foot
would enable him to outstrip him, while his strength of frame would
quickly terminate a single combat.

As the youth gained the more open land near the beach, the possibility
of making a successful cast of the spear became more and more doubtful.
Finally the savage shrunk into the bushes and abandoned the pursuit.

"Not here yet, Master Gascoyne," muttered Henry as he sat down on a rock
to rest; for although the six miles of country he had crossed was a
trifle, as regarded distance, to a lad of nineteen, the rugged
mountain-path by which he had come would have tried the muscles of a Red
Indian, and the nerve of a goat.  "You were wont to keep to time better
in days gone by.  Truly it seems to me a strange thing that I should
thus be made a sort of walking post between my mother's house and this
bay, all for the benefit of a man who seems to me no better than he
should be, and whom I don't like, and yet whom I _do_ like in some
