CHAPTER XXXII. THE RACE ACROSS FIELDS.



It so happened that Professor Riccabocca had once before visited
Knoxville, and remembered the location of the railroad station.
Moreover, at the hotel, before the arrival of Philip, he had consulted
a schedule of trains posted up in the office, and knew that one would
leave precisely at ten o'clock.

The impulse to leave town by this train was sudden. He had in his pocket
the wallet containing the hundred and fifty dollars, of which a large
part belonged to Philip, and could have settled at once, without the
trouble of going upstairs to his room.

He only asked leave to go up there in order to gain time for thought.
At the head of the staircase he saw another narrower flight of stairs
descending to the back of the house. That gave him the idea of eluding
his two creditors by flight.

I have said before that Professor Riccabocca was not a wise man, or
he would have reflected that he was only postponing the inevitable
reckoning. Moreover, it would destroy the last chance of making an
arrangement with Philip to continue the combination, which thus far had
proved so profitable.

The professor did not take this into consideration, but dashed down the
back stairs, and opened the back door into the yard.

"Do you want anything, sir?" asked a maidservant, eyeing the professor
suspiciously.

"Nothing at all, my good girl," returned the professor.

"You seem to be in a hurry," she continued, with renewed suspicion.

"So I am. I am in a great hurry to meet an engagement."

"Why didn't you go out the front door?" asked the girl.

"Oh, bother! What business is it of yours?" demanded the professor
impatiently.

And, not stopping for further inquiries, he vaulted over a fence and
took his way across the fields to the station.

"Here, Sam," called the girl, her suspicions confirmed that something
was wrong, "go after that man as fast as you can!"

This was addressed to a boy who was employed at the hotel to go on
errands and do odd jobs.

"What's he done?" asked Sam.

"I don't know; but he's either run off without paying his bill, or he's
stolen something."

"What good'll it do me to chase him?" asked Sam.

"If he's cheated master, he'll pay you for catching the man."

"That's so," thought Sam. "Besides, I'll be a detective, just like that
boy I read about in the paper. I'm off!"

Fired by youthful ambition, Sam also vaulted the fence, and ran along
the foot-path in pursuit of the professor.

Lorenzo Riccabocca did not know he was pursued. He felt himself so safe
from this, on account of the secrecy of his departure, that he never
took the trouble to look behind him. He knew the way well enough, for
the fields he was crossing were level, and half a mile away, perhaps a
little more, he could see the roof of the brown-painted depot, which was
his destination. Once there, he would buy a ticket, get on the train,
and get started away from Knoxville before the troublesome acquaintances
who were waiting for him to come down-stairs had any idea where he was
gone.

The professor ran at a steady, even pace, looking straight before him.
His eyes were fixed on the haven of his hopes, and he did not notice a
stone, of considerable size, which lay in his path. The result was that
he stumbled over it, and fell forward with considerable force. He rose,
jarred and sore, but there was no time to take account of his physical
damages. He must wait till he got on the train.

The force with which he was thrown forward was such that the wallet
was thrown from his pocket, and fell in the grass beside the path. The
professor went on his way, quite unconscious of his loss, but there were
other eyes that did not overlook it.

Sam, who was thirty rods behind, noticed Professor Riccabocca's fall,
and he likewise noticed the wallet when he reached the spot of the
catastrophe.

"My eyes!" he exclaimed, opening those organs wide in delight; "here's
luck! The old gentleman has dropped his pocketbook. Most likely it's
stolen. I'll carry it back and give it to Mr. Perry."

Sam very sensibly decided that it wasn't worth while to continue the
pursuit, now that the thief, as he supposed Riccabocca to be, had
dropped his booty.

Sam was led by curiosity to open the wallet. When he saw the thick roll
of bills, he was filled with amazement and delight.

"Oh, what a rascal he was!" ejaculated the boy. "I guess he's been
robbing a safe. I wonder how much is here?"

He was tempted to sit down on the grass and count the bills, but he was
prevented by the thought that the professor might discover his loss, and
returning upon his track, question him as to whether he had found it.
Sam determined that he wouldn't give it up, at any rate.

"I guess I could wrastle with him," he thought. "He looks rather
spindlin', but then he's bigger than I am, and he might lick me, after
all."

I desire to say emphatically that Sam was strictly honest, and never for
a moment thought of appropriating any of the money to his own use. He
felt that as a detective he had been successful, and this made him feel
proud and happy.

"I may as well go home," he said. "If he's stolen this money from Mr.
Perry, I'll come in for a reward."

Sam did not hurry, however. He was not now in pursuit of any one, and
could afford to loiter and recover his breath.

Meanwhile, Professor Riccabocca, in happy unconsciousness of his loss,
continued his run to the station. He arrived there breathless, and
hurried to the ticket-office.

"Give me a ticket to Chambersburg," he said.

"All right, sir. Ninety cents."

If Riccabocca had been compelled to take out his wallet, he would
at once have discovered his loss, and the ticket would not have been
bought. But he had a two-dollar bill in his vest, and it was out of this
that he paid for the ticket to Chambersburg. Armed with the ticket,
he waited anxiously for the train. He had five minutes to wait--five
anxious moments in which his flight might be discovered. He paced the
platform, looking out anxiously for the train.

At length he heard the welcome sound of the approaching locomotive. The
train came to a stop, and among the first to enter it was the eminent
elocutionist. He took a seat beside the window looking out toward the
village. What did he see that brought such an anxious look in his face?

A buggy was approaching the depot at breakneck speed. It contained Mr.
Gates, the landlord, and the young musician. Mr. Gates was lashing the
horse, and evidently was exceedingly anxious to arrive at the depot
before the train started.

Beads of perspiration stood on the anxious brow of the professor. His
heart was filled with panic terror.

"The girl must have told them of my flight," he said to himself. "Oh,
why didn't I think to give her a quarter to keep her lips closed? Why
doesn't the train start?"

The buggy was only about ten rods away. It looked as if Philip and his
companion would be able to intercept the fugitive.

Just then the scream of the locomotive was heard. The train began to
move. Professor Riccabocca gave a sigh of relief.

"I shall escape them after all," he said triumphantly, to himself.

He opened the window, and, with laughing face, nodded to his pursuers.

"We've lost him!" said Philip, in a tone of disappointment. "What can we
do?"

"Find out where he is going, and telegraph to have him stopped," said
Mr. Gates. "That will put a spoke in his wheel."



CHAPTER XXXIII. THE LOST WALLET.



Mr. Gates was acquainted with the depot-master, and lost no time in
seeking him.

"Too late for the train?" asked the latter, who observed in the landlord
evidences of haste.

"Not for the train, but for one of the passengers by the train,"
responded the landlord. "Did you take notice of a man dressed in a
shabby suit of black, wearing a soft hat and having very long black
hair?"

"Yes."

"Where is he going?" asked Mr. Gates eagerly.

"He bought a ticket for Chambersburg."

"Ha! Well, I want you to telegraph for me to Chambersburg."

The station-master was also the telegraph-operator, as it chanced.

"Certainly. Just write out your message and I will send it at once."

Mr. Gates telegraphed to a deputy sheriff at Chambersburg to be at the
depot on arrival of the train, and to arrest and detain the professor
till he could communicate further with him.

"Now," said he, turning to Philip, "I think we shall be able to stop the
flight of your friend."

"Don't call him my friend," said Philip. "He is anything but a friend."

"You are right there. Well, I will amend and call him your partner. Now,
Mr. de Gray--"

"My name is Gray--not de Gray. The professor put in the 'de' because he
thought it would sound foreign."

"I presume you have as much right to the name as he has to the title of
professor," said Gates.

"I don't doubt it," returned Philip, smiling.

"Well, as I was about to say, we may as well go back to the hotel, and
await the course of events. I think there is some chance of your getting
your money back."

When they reached the hotel, they found a surprise in store for them.

Sam had carried the professor's wallet to Mr. Perry, and been told by
them to wait and hand it in person to Philip and his friend, Mr. Gates,
who were then at the depot.

When they arrived, Sam was waiting on the stoop, wallet in hand.

"What have you got there, Sam?" asked Mr. Gates, who often came to
Knoxville, and knew the boy. "It's the wallet of that man you were
after," said Sam.

"How did you get it?" asked Philip eagerly.

"I chased him 'cross lots," said Sam.

"You didn't knock him over and take the wallet from him, did you, Sam?"
asked Mr. Gates.

"Not so bad as that," answered Sam, grinning. "You see, he tripped over
a big rock, and came down on his hands and knees. The wallet jumped
out of his pocket, but he didn't see it. I picked it up and brought it
home."

"Didn't he know you were chasing him?"

"I guess not. He never looked back."

"What made you think of running after him?"

"One of the girls told me to. The way he ran out of the back door made
her think there was something wrong."

"Suppose he had turned round?"

"I guess I could have wrastled with him," said Sam, to the amusement of
those who heard him.

"It is well you were not obliged to."

"Who shall I give the wallet to?" asked Sam.

"Mr. Gray, here, is the professor's partner, and half the money belongs
to him. You can give it to him."

"Have I a right to take it?" asked Philip, who did not wish to do
anything unlawful.

He was assured that, as the business partner of the professor, he had as
much right as Riccabocca to the custody of the common fund.

"But half of it belongs to the professor."

"He'll come back for it, in the custody of the sheriff. I didn't think I
was doing the man a good turn when I telegraphed to have him stopped."

The first thing Philip did was to take from his own funds a five-dollar
bill, which he tendered to Sam.

"Is it all for me?" asked the boy, his eyes sparkling his joy.

"Yes; but for you I should probably have lost a good deal more. Thank
you, besides."

And Philip offered his hand to Sam, who grasped it fervently.

"I say, you're a tip-top chap," said Sam. "You ain't like a man that
lost a pocketbook last summer, with a hundred dollars in it, and gave me
five cents for finding it."

"No; I hope I'm not as mean as that," said Philip, smiling.

He opened the wallet and found a memorandum containing an exact
statement of the proceeds of the concert. This was of great service to
him, as it enabled him to calculate his own share of the profits.

The aggregate receipts were one hundred and fifty dollars and fifty
cents. Deducting bills paid, viz.:

Rent of hall........................ $5.00

Printing, etc........................ 5.00

Bill-poster......................... 1.00

Total...........................$11.00

there was a balance of $138.50, of which Philip was entitled to
one-half, namely, $69.25. This he took, together with the eleven dollars
which he had himself paid to the creditors of the combination, and
handed the wallet, with the remainder of the money, to Mr. Perry,
landlord of the Knoxville Hotel, with a request that he would keep it
till called for by Professor Riccabocca.

"You may hand me three dollars and a half, Mr. Perry," said Mr. Gates.
"That is the amount the professor owes me for a day and three-quarters
at my hotel. If he makes a fuss, you can tell him he is quite at liberty
to go to law about it."

Meanwhile, where was the professor, and when did he discover his loss?

After the train was a mile or two on its way he felt in his pocket for
the wallet, meaning to regale himself with a sight of its contents--now,
as he considered, all his own.

Thrusting his hand into his pocket, it met--vacancy.

Pale with excitement, he continued his search, extending it to all his
other pockets. But the treasure had disappeared!

Professor Riccabocca was panic-stricken. He could hardly suppress a
groan.

A good woman sitting opposite, judging from his pallor that he was ill,
leaned over and asked, in a tone of sympathy:

"Are you took sick?"

"No, ma'am," answered the professor sharply.

"You look as if you was goin' to have a fit," continued the sympathizing
woman. "Jest take some chamomile tea the first chance you get. It's the
sovereignest thing I know of--"

"Will chamomile tea bring back a lost pocket-book?" demanded the
professor sharply.

"Oh, Lor'! you don't say you lost your money?"

"Yes, I do!" said Riccabocca, glaring at her.

"Oh, dear! do you think there's pickpockets in the car?" asked the old
lady nervously.

"Very likely," answered the professor tragically.

The good woman kept her hand in her pocket all the rest of the way,
eyeing all her fellow passengers sharply.

But the professor guessed the truth. He had lost his wallet when he
stumbled in the field. He was in a fever of impatience to return and
hunt for it. Instead of going on to Chambersburg, he got out at the
next station--five miles from Knoxville--and walked back on the
railroad-track. So it happened that the telegram did no good.

The professor walked back to the hotel across the fields, hunting
diligently, but saw nothing of the lost wallet. He entered the hotel,
footsore, weary, and despondent. The first person he saw was Philip,
sitting tranquilly in the office.

"Did you just come down from your room?" asked our hero coolly.

"I am a most unfortunate man!" sighed Riccabocca, sinking into a seat.

"What's the matter?"

"I've lost all our money."

"I am glad you say 'our money.' I began to think you considered it all
yours. Didn't I see you on the train?"

"I had a bad headache," stammered the professor, "and I didn't know what
I was doing."

"Does riding in the cars benefit your head?"

Professor Riccabocca looked confused.

"The wallet was found," said Philip, not wishing to keep him any longer
in suspense.

"Where is it?" asked the professor eagerly.

"Mr. Perry will give it to you. I have taken out my share of the money,
and Mr. Gates has received the amount of his bill. It would have been
better for you to attend to these matters yourself like an honest man."

Professor Riccabocca was so overjoyed to have back his own money that
he made no fuss about Philip's proceedings. Indeed, his own intended
dishonesty was so apparent that it would have required even more
assurance than he possessed to make a protest.



CHAPTER XXXIV. A NEW BUSINESS PROPOSAL.



Professor Riccabocca put the wallet in his pocket with a sigh of
satisfaction. There were still sixty dollars or more in it, and it was
long since he had been so rich.
