close together, the other a considerable distance away, arranged to form
a very long pointed triangle, the short base of which ran close to the
equator, its longer sides reaching toward one of the poles; the north
pole, as we happened to view the image.

The columns of steam seemed to increase in size. Certainly they mounted
higher into the air. I could imagine the terrific roar of them as they
blasted their way through the sullen water and hurled it in steaming
spray around their bases, while huge stones fell hissing into the water
on all sides. The eruption must have shaken the entire sphere; the
gushing of those vomiting throats was a cataclysm of such magnitude that
I could not guess its effect.

Correy and I watched tensely, hardly breathing. I think we both felt
that something was about to happen: a pent-up force had been released,
and it was raging. We could almost hear the rumble of the volcanic
explosions and the ear-splitting hiss of the escaping steam.

Suddenly Correy clutched my arm.

"Look!" he whispered, "_Look!_"

I nodded, not trusting myself to speak. I could see the water crawling
inside the triangle formed by the three wisps of steam: crawling in
white, foaming waves like tiny scraps of thread as it rushed headlong,
in mighty tidal waves, away from the center of that triangle.

The columns of steam flared up with fresh strength, darkening as though
with smoke. Here and there within the triangle black specks appeared,
grew larger, and ran together in crooked lines that widened continually.

"A--a new continent, sir!" said Correy almost reverently. "We've seen a
new continent born."

Correy had put my thoughts into words. We had seen a new continent born;
on the gray surface of Hydrot there was now a great irregular black
blotch from which mounted three waving pillars of smoke and steam.
Around the shores of the new continent the waters raged, white and
angry, and little threads of white crawled outward from those
shores--the crests of tidal waves that must have towered into the air
twice the _Ertak's_ length.

Slowly, the shore-line changed form as fresh portions arose, and others,
newly-risen, sank again beneath the gray water. The wisps of steam
darkened still more, and seemed to shrivel up, as though the fires that
fed them had been exhausted by the travail of a new continent.

"Think, sir," breathed Correy, "what we might find if we landed there on
that new continent, still dripping with the water from which it sprang!
A part of the ocean's bed, thrust above the surface to be examined at
will--Couldn't we leave our course long enough to--to look her over?"

I confess I was tempted. Young John Hanson, Commander of the Special
Patrol ship, _Ertak_, had his good share of natural curiosity, the
spirit of adventure, and the explorer's urge. But at the same time, the
Service has a discipline that is as rigid and relentless as the passing
of time itself.

Hydrot lay off to starboard of our course: Arpan, where we were to
re-outfit, was ahead and to port, and we were already swinging in that
direction. The _Ertak_ was working on a close schedule that gave us no
latitude.

"I'm afraid it can't be done, Mr. Correy," I said, shaking my head.
"We'll report it immediately, of course, and perhaps we'll get orders to
make an investigation. In that case--"

"Not the _Ertak_!" interrupted Correy passionately. "They'll send a crew
of bug-eyed scientists there, and a score or so of laboratory men to
analyze this, and run a test on that, and the whole mess of them will
write millions of words apiece about the expedition that nobody will
ever read. I know."

"Well, we'll hope you're wrong." I said, knowing in my heart that he was
perfectly right. "Keep her on her present course, Mr. Correy."

"Present course it is, sir!" snapped Correy. Then we bent together over
the old-fashioned hooded television disk staring down silently and
regretfully at the continent we had seen born, and which, with all its
promise of interest and adventure, we must leave behind, in favor of a
routine stop at the sub-base on Arpan.

I think both of us would have gladly given years of our lives to turn
the _Ertak's_ blunt nose toward Hydrot, but we had our orders, and in
the Service as it was in those days, an officer did not question his
orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correy mooned around the Arpan sub-base like a fractious child. Kincaide
and I endeavored to cheer him up, and Hendricks, the _Ertak's_ young
third officer, tried in vain to induce Correy to take in the sights.

"All I want to know," Correy insisted, "is whether there's any change in
orders. You got the news through to Base, didn't you, sir?"

"Right. All that came back was the usual 'Confirmed.' No comment."
Correy muttered under his breath and wandered off to glare at the
Arpanians who were working on the _Ertak_. Kincaide shrugged and shook
his head.

"He's spoiling for action, sir," he commented. Kincaide was my second
officer; a cool-headed, quick-witted fighting man, and as fine an
officer as ever wore the blue-and-silver uniform of the Service. "I only
hope--message for you, sir." He indicated an Arpanian orderly who had
come up from behind, and was standing at attention.

"You're wanted immediately in the radio room, sir," said the orderly,
saluting.

"Very well," I nodded, returning the salute and glancing at Kincaide.
"Perhaps we will get a change in orders after all."

I hurried after the orderly, following him down the broad corridors of
the administration building to the radio room. The commander of the
Arpan sub-base was waiting there, talking gravely with the operator.

"Bad news, Commander," he said, as I entered the room. "We've just
received a report from the passenger liner _Kabit_, and she's in
desperate straits. At the insistence of the passengers, the ship made
contact with Hydrot and is unable to leave. She has been attacked by
some strange monster, or several of them--the message is badly confused.
I thought perhaps you'd like to report the matter to Base yourself."

"Yes. Thank you, sir. Operator, please raise Base immediately!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Kabit_? That was the big liner we had spoken to the day before
Correy and I had seen the new continent rise above the boundless waters
of Hydrot. I knew the ship; she carried about eighteen hundred
passengers, and a crew of seventy-five men and officers. Beside her, the
_Ertak_ was a pygmy; that the larger ship, so large and powerful, could
be in trouble, seemed impossible. Yet--

