The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wild Kitty, by L. T. Meade

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Wild Kitty

Author: L. T. Meade

Posting Date: November 12, 2011 [EBook #9986]
Release Date: February, 2006
First Posted: November 5, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILD KITTY ***




Produced by Kevin Handy, Dave Maddock, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team











WILD KITTY.

BY L. T. MEADE





CONTENTS

CHAPTER I. Bessie, Alice, Gwin, and Elma

CHAPTER II. The Blarney Stone

CHAPTER III. Is that the Girl?

CHAPTER IV. Tiffs all Round

CHAPTER V. Incorrigible Kitty

CHAPTER VI. The Tug-of-War

CHAPTER VII. Elma

CHAPTER VIII. The Little House in Constantine Road

CHAPTER IX. The Head Mistress and the Cabbage-Rose

CHAPTER X. Paddy Wheel-About

CHAPTER XI. In Carrie's Bedroom

CHAPTER XII. The "Spotted Leopard"

CHAPTER XIII. Coventry

CHAPTER XIV. The Lost Packet

CHAPTER XV. Gwin Harley's Scheme

CHAPTER XVI. Paddy Wheel-About's Old Coat

CHAPTER XVII. "We Are Both in the Same Boat"

CHAPTER XVIII. "I Cannot Help You"

CHAPTER XIX. Kitty Tells the Truth

CHAPTER XX. An Eye-Opener

CHAPTER XXI. The Lady from Buckinghamshire

CHAPTER XXII. Stunned and Cold

CHAPTER XXIII. Stars and Moon, and God Behind

CHAPTER XXIV. Sunshine Again

CHAPTER XXV. Kitty "Go-Bragh" (Forever)




CHAPTER I.

BESSIE, ALICE, GWIN, ELMA.


Bessie! Bessie!

"Yes, mother," replied Bessie Challoner. "You'll be late for school,
child, if you are not quick."

"Bessie!" shouted her father at the top of his voice from below stairs.
"Bessie; late as usual."

"I am really going, father; I am just ready," was the eager reply.
Bessie caught up her sailor hat, shoved it carelessly over her mass of
thick hair, and searched frantically round her untidy bedroom for the
string bag which contained her schoolbooks.

"Oh, Bessie, you'll get into a scrape," said Judy, one of her younger
sisters, dancing into the room. "Why, you are late. I hear the
schoolbell ringing; it will stop in a moment."

"Don't worry me, Judy," cried Bessie. "Do you know where my bag is?"

Judy ran into the middle of the room, turned round, and began to laugh
ecstatically. "Do you know where it is, you little good-for-nothing?
Have you put it hiding?"

"Yes, yes, yes," screamed the child, jumping up and down in her joy.

"Then, if you don't give it to me at once, I'll--"

But Judy had dodged her and was out of the room. Up to the attic flew
the child, and after her dashed Bessie. The bag was found in the corner
of the linen-cupboard. Bessie aimed a frenzied blow at Judy, who once
again dodged her, then the schoolgirl ran downstairs and was out of the
house.

"Bessie, for shame!" said her brother, who was standing smoking his
cigarette in a very lazy manner in the garden. "Why, you'll never get
full marks."

"Don't," said Bessie. "I feel quite hunted between you all."

She had got on the highroad now, and could walk away in peace. She was a
tall girl, somewhat bony-looking at present, with a face which showed
abundance of intellect, large dreamy eyes, a wide mouth, a flat nose, a
long chin. Bessie was certainly not at all a pretty girl; but,
notwithstanding this fact, there were few of all the pupils at Middleton
School who approached her in popularity. She was clever without being a
scrap conceited, and was extremely good-natured, doing her work for the
pleasure of doing it and not because she wanted to outstrip a
schoolfellow. She was conscientious too, and would have scorned to do a
mean or shabby thing; but she was hopelessly untidy, careless to a
fault, late for school half her days, getting into countless scrapes and
getting out of them as best she could--the butt of her class as well as
the favorite, always true to herself and indifferent to the censures or
the praise of her fellow-creatures.

"Well, Bess, is that you? Do wait for me," called out a panting voice
in the distance.

Late as she was, Bessie stopped. It was never her way to leave a
fellow-creature in the lurch.

A girl with dancing eyes and rosy cheeks came panting and puffing round
the corner.

"I just caught a sight of the red ribbon with which you tie your hair,"
she said. "I am so glad you are late; I am too, and I am quite ashamed
of myself."

"Why in the world should you be ashamed of yourself, Alice?" asked
Bessie. "I don't suppose you meant to be late."

"Of course not; but I shall lose my mark for punctuality; and you know,
Bessie, I am feverishly anxious to get a move, and to--to win the
scholarship at the midsummer break-up."

Bessie yawned slightly.

"Come on, Alice," she said; "I am disgracefully late as usual, and we
need not make matters worse. I suppose we must wait in the hall now
until prayers are over."

"It's too bad," said Alice. "I'll tell you afterward how it happened,
Bessie. I am glad you waited for me. They always scold you so much for
being late that they will not take so much notice of me. May I slip into
my place in form behind you?"

"If you like," said, Bessie.

They entered the great schoolhouse, turned down a long corridor,
deposited their hats and jackets on the pegs provided for the purpose,
and went into the schoolroom just when the pupils were filing into their
different classes.

Both girls had marks against their names for unpunctuality. Alice
frowned and fidgeted, turned scarlet, glanced nervously at her
fellow-pupils, but Bessie took the matter with her wonted calm. Soon she
forgot all about it. She became absorbed in her different studies, each
one of which she had prepared with extreme attention. As she answered
question after question her great, full, dreamy eyes seemed to lighten
with hidden fire, her face lost its plainness, the intellect in it
transformed it. One or two other girls in the class watched her with a
slight degree of envy.

Bessie was very high up in the school. As usual she quickly rose to the
head of the form; this position she kept without the slightest
difficulty during lesson after lesson.

Alice, muddled already by that mark for unpunctuality, got through her
work badly; as Bessie rose in the class Alice went down. At the end of
the morning's work the two girls were far as the poles asunder.

"I can't think how you do it," said Alice, coming up to Bessie during
recess, and linking her hand through her arm. "You never seem to mind
disgrace at all."

"Of course I mind disgrace," answered Bessie. "Come out into the
playground, won't you Alice? We can't talk in here."

They went out and began pacing up and down the wide quadrangle devoted
to the purpose. Other girls passed them two and two, each girl talking
to her special companion.

"How very handsome Gwin Harley looks this morning," said Alice, pausing
in her grumbling to gaze at a slender and lovely girl who passed them,
walking with another dark-eyed, somewhat plain girl of the name of Elma
Lewis.

"I wish she was not such friends with Elma," said Bessie. "I like Gwin
very much indeed; I suppose every one in the school does."

"Catch Elma not making up to her," said Alice. "Why, you know Gwin is as
rich as ever she can be; she has a pony-carriage of her own. I cannot
make out why she comes to Middleton School."

"Because it is the best school in the neighborhood," said Bessie
somewhat proudly. "It is not a question of money, nor of anything but
simply of learning; we learn better at Middleton School than anywhere
else; there are better teachers and--"

"But such a rum lot of girls," said Alice. "Of course we all go in sets,
and our set is quite the nicest in the school; but all the same, I
wonder a rich man like Mr. Harley allows Gwin to come here."

Gwin and Elma drew up at that moment in front of the other two.

"Bessie," said Gwin, "I saw you carrying everything before you this
morning. But," she added hastily, "that is neither here nor there. I
shall never be a great learned genius like you, but I shall admire
geniuses all the same. Now, I want to say that Elma is coming to tea
with me this afternoon, and will you both come as well? We have a good
deal to talk over."

Bessie's face lightened.

"I should like it very much indeed," she said; "but you know I must get
through my studies first."

"Oh, you won't take long over them."

"Yes, but I shall," answered Bessie; "there is a very stiff piece of
German to translate this afternoon. I can manage French and mathematics
of course, and--"

"Oh, don't begin to rehearse your different studies," said Gwin, holding
up her hand in a warning attitude. "I don't care in the least what you
learn, Bessie; I want you to come. Because," she added, "you are such an
honest creature."

"Why should not I be honest?" said Bessie, opening her eyes wide. "I
have never had any temptation to be anything else."

"My dear Bessie, you are too painfully matter-of-fact," said Elma. "Gwin
meant that your nature is transparent--it is a beautiful trait in any
character."

"Well, Bessie, will you come or will you not?" interrupted Gwin.

"Yes, I'll come. I'll manage it somehow," said Bessie. I can't resist
the temptation."

"And you too, Alice?" said Gwin, turning to Alice Denvers, who was
watching Bessie with envious eyes.

"I don't suppose mother will let me. I am ever so vexed," said Alice.

"But why not, dear; you have nothing special to do to-day?"

"Well, I had a bad mark for unpunctuality, and--"

"What does that signify?"

"But listen; I have gone down several places in class. Father and mother
are so particular; they seem to think my whole future life depends upon
my position in school. Of course I know we are not very rich, like
you--" Here she flushed and hesitated.

Gwin Harley flushed also.

"When you talk like that," she said, "I feel quite ashamed of being well
off. I often long to be poor like--like dear little Elma here." As she
spoke she patted her somewhat squat little companion on her arm. "But
never mind, girls; I am not one of those who intend to throw away all my
money; that is one reason why I want to have a good talk this afternoon.
You must come, Alice; you simply must."

"But there is another reason," said Alice. "Kitty Malone is coming
to-day."

"Kitty Malone! Who in the name of fortune is she?"

"Oh, a wild Irish girl."

"Truly wild, I should think, with that name. 'Kitty Malone, ohone!' I
seem to hear the refrain somewhere now. Isn't there a song called 'Kitty
Malone'?"

"There is a song called 'The Widow Malone,'" said Bessie; "don't you
know it? You read all about it in 'Harry Lorrequer.'"

"But who is Kitty Malone, Alice?"

"I say a wild Irish girl."

"And what has she got to do with you?"

"She is coming to board with us. She is going to join the school, and
mother is to have the charge of her. A precious bore I shall find it."

"When did you say she was coming?" asked Gwin eagerly.

"I expect she is at home by now; she was to arrive this morning."

"Delightful!" said Gwin, clapping her hands, "she shall come too. I want
beyond anything to become acquainted with a real aborigine, and of
course any girl called Kitty Malone hailing from the sister-isle must
belong to that species. Bring the wild Irish girl with you by all means,
Alice; and now, as you have no manner of excuse, I'll say ta-ta for the
present." She kissed her pretty hand lightly to the two girls, and went
on her way, once more accompanied by her faithful satellite, Elma.

"Isn't she fascinating?" said Alice; "aren't you quite in love with her,
Bessie?"

"Dear me, no," answered Bessie Challoner. "I never fall in love in that
sort of headlong fashion; but all the same," she added, "I admire Gwin
very much, only I do wish she would not take up with Elma."

"So do I," said Alice.

