The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cat and Mouse, by Ralph Williams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cat and Mouse

Author: Ralph Williams

Release Date: January 21, 2008 [EBook #24392]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAT AND MOUSE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                              CAT AND MOUSE

                            BY RALPH WILLIAMS

                        Illustrated by van Dongen

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction June 1959. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


     _The Warden needed to have a certain very obnoxious pest
     eliminated ... and he knew just the pest-eradicator he needed...._


_The Harn first came to the Warden's attention through its effect on the
game population of an area in World 7 of the Warden's sector. A natural
ecology was being maintained on World 7 as a control for experimental
seedings of intelligent life-forms in other similar worlds. How the Harn
got there, the Warden never knew. In its free-moving larval state, the
Harn was a ticklike creature which might have sifted through a natural
inter-dimensional rift; or it might have come through as a hitchhiker on
some legitimate traveler, possibly even the Warden himself._

_In any event, it was there now. Free of natural enemies and
competition, it had expanded enormously. So far, the effect in the
control world was localized, but this would not be the case when the
Harn seeded. Prompt action was indicated._

_The Warden's inclination and training was in the direction of avoiding
direct intervention in the ecology of the worlds under his
jurisdiction, even in the field of predator control. He considered
introduction of natural enemies of the Harn from its own world, and
decided against it. That cure was as bad, if not worse, than the disease
itself._

_There was, however, in one adjacent world, a life-form not normally
associated with the Harn; but which analysis indicated would be inimical
to it, and reasonably amenable to control._

_It was worth trying, anyway._

       *       *       *       *       *

October 3rd, Ed Brown got up to the base cabin of his trap line with his
winter's outfit.

He hung an N. C. Company calendar on the wall and started marking off
the days.

October 8th, the hole into the other world opened.

In the meantime, of course, Ed had not been idle. All summer the cabin
had stood empty. He got his bedding, stove, and other cabin gear down
from the cache and made the place livable. The mice were thick, a good
fur sign, but a nuisance otherwise. Down in the cellar hole, when he
went to clear it out for the new spud crop, he found burrowings
everywhere.

Well, old Tom would take care of that in short order. Tom was a big,
black, bobtailed cat eleven years old who had lived with Ed since he was
a kitten. Not having any feline companionship to distract him, his only
interest was hunting mice. Generally he killed a lot more than he could
eat, racking the surplus in neat piles beside the trail, on the
doorstep, or on a slab in the cellar. He was the best mouser in interior
Alaska.

Ed propped the cellar hatch with a stick so old Tom could come and go as
he pleased, and went on about his chores, working with a methodical
efficiency that matched Tom's and went with his thinning gray hair and
forty years in the woods. He dug the spuds he had planted that spring.
He made a swing around his beaver lakes, tallying the blankets in each
house. He took the canoe and moved supplies to his upper cabin. He
harvested some fat mallards that had moved down on the river with the
coming of skim ice on the lakes. He bucked up firewood and stacked it to
move into camp with the first snow.

On the fifth morning, as he was going down to the boat landing with a
pail for water, he found the hole into the other world.

Ed had never seen a hole into another world, of course, nor even heard
of such a thing. He was as surprised as any one would naturally be to
find one not fifty feet from their front door.

Still, his experience had been all in the direction of believing what
his eyes told him. He had seen a lot of strange things in his life, and
one more didn't strain him too much. He stood stockstill where he had
first noticed the hole and studied it warily.

It was two steps off the trail to the left, right beside the old leaning
birch, a rectangular piece of scenery that did not fit. It looked to be,
as nearly as he could judge, about man-size, six by three. At the
bottom it was easy enough to see where this world left off and that one
began. On the left side the two worlds matched pretty well, but on the
right side there was a niggerhead in this world, the moss-covered relic
of a centuries old stump, while that world continued level, so that the
niggerhead was neatly sliced in two. Also, the vegetation was different,
mossy on this side, grassy on that.

On up around the hole, though, it was harder to tell. There was no
clear-cut line, just the difference in what you could see through it. In
the other world, the ground seemed to fall away, with low scrubby brush
in the foreground. Then, a mile or so away, there were rising hills with
hardwood forests of some kind, still green with summer, covering them.

Ed stepped cautiously to one side. The view through the hole narrowed,
as if it faced the trail squarely. He edged around the old birch to get
behind it, and from that side there was no hole, just the same old
Alaskan scenery, birch and rose bushes and spruce. From the front,
though, it was still there.

