
But Beorn ate little and drank much, while the guards bade him take
example from me, but he would not; and after a while sat silent in
a corner and ghastly to look upon, for no one cared to meddle with
him.

As soon as it grew dusk they bade us eat again, for in half an hour
we should set forth to the coast. At that Beorn started up and
cried out, wringing his hands and groaning, though he said no word,
except that I should surely slay him in the boat.

Then I spoke to him for the first time since he had claimed the
falcon, and said that from me, at least, he was safe. And I spoke
roughly, so that I think he believed me, so plain did I make it
that I thought one who was surely cowardly in word and deed was not
worth harming, and he ceased his outcry.

At last we were set on horseback, and with two score or more
mounted spearmen round us, we rode quickly out of Caistor town. A
few men shouted and ran after us, but the guards spurred their
horses, and it was of no use for them to try and follow. And the
night was dark and foggy, though not cold for the time of year.

I feared lest we were going to Reedham, for there my folk would
certainly rise in arms to rescue me, and that would have made
things hard for them; but we went on southward, riding very fast,
until after many long miles we came to the little hill of the other
Burgh that stands where Waveney parts in two streams, one eastward
to the sea, and the other northward to join the Yare mouth.

The moon had risen by the time we came there, and I could see a
large fishing boat at the staithe, and, alas! alongside of her a
smaller boat that I knew so well--that in which Lodbrok had come,
and in which I had passed so many pleasant hours with him. Then the
thought crossed my mind that what he had taught me of her was like
to be my safety now; but my mind was dazed by all the strange
things that came into it, and I tried not to think. Only I wondered
if Ulfkytel had got the boat without a struggle with our people.

The earl was there with a few more thanes and many more guards, and
they waited by the waterside.

One man started from beside the earl as we came, and rode swiftly
towards us. It was Egfrid, my brother-in-law to be--if this did not
bring all that fair plan to naught.

He cried out to the men to stay, and they, knowing who he was, did
so, and made no trouble about his coming to my side. There he
reined up his horse, and laid his hand on my shoulder.

"Alas for this meeting, my brother!" he cried. "What can I do? Men
came and told me of rumour that was flying about concerning this
business, and I have ridden hard to get to Reedham, but I met the
earl, who told me all. And I have prayed him to let the king judge,
but he will not, saying that his mind is fixed on higher
judgment--and you know what he is."

Then I said:

"So that you hold me not guilty, my brother, I mind not so much;
for if I must die you will take my place, and my father will not be
without a son.

"I think you guilty!" he cried; "how could that be? Shame on me
were I to dream thereof--and on any man of all who know you who
would deem you could be so."

"Have you heard all?"

"Aye, for the earl has told me very patiently, being kind, for all
his strange ways. At last I told him that his wish for justice
blinded his common sense. And at that, instead of being wrath, he
smiled at me as on a child, and said, 'What know you of justice?';
so that I was as one who would beat down a stone wall with his
fists---helpless. He is not to be moved. What can I do?" and almost
did he weep for my hard case.

"Let things go their own way, my brother," I said gently. "I do not
fear the sea, nor this man here--Beorn. Do you go to Reedham and
tend Lodbrok's hawk for me, and send word to my father, that he may
come home, and to the king, so that Lodbrok may have honourable
burial."

He promised me those things, and then went back upon the slaying of
Lodbrok, asking how it came about.

I told him what I thought thereof; and Beorn, who must needs listen
to all this, ground his teeth and cursed under his breath, for
there seemed to have come some desperate fury on him in place of
his cold despair of an hour since.

And when Egfrid had heard all, he raised his hand and swore that
not one stone of Beorn's house should be unblackened by fire by
this time tomorrow night, and as he said it he turned to Beorn,
shaking and white with wrath.

"Let that be," I answered him quickly; "no good, but much harm may
come therefrom. Wait but six months, and then maybe I shall be
back."

Now while we had thus spoken together, Ulfkytel had dismounted and
was holding some converse with a man whose figure I could not well
make out, even had I cared to try, in the dark shadow of horses and
riders which stayed the moonlight from them. But at this time the
stranger came towards us, and I saw that it was the priest who
served the Church of St. Peter, hard by where we stood. He came to
Beorn first, and spoke to him in a low voice, earnestly; but Beorn
paid no sort of heed to him, but turned his head away, cursing yet.
So after a few more words, the priest came to me.

"Wulfric," he said, "sad am I to see you thus. But justice is
justice, and must be done."

"Aye, Father," I answered, "and right will prevail."

"Maybe we shall see it do so," he answered shortly, not seeming
willing to hold much converse with me; "but it is likely that you
go to your death on the wide sea. Many a man have I shriven at the
point of death--and Ulfkytel the Earl will not hold me back from
your side--an you will."

Thereat I was very glad, for I knew that the risks before me were
very great, and I said as much.

Then he took the bridle of my horse and began to lead me on one
side, and the guards hindered him until Ulfkytel shouted to them to
draw aside in such wise as to prevent my riding off, though, bound
as I was, it had been of little use to try to do so. Then they let
the priest take me out of earshot, and maybe posted themselves in
some way round us, though I heeded them not.

So then in that strange way I, bound and on horseback, confessed;
and weeping over me at last, with all his coldness forgotten, the
priest of Burgh shrived me and blessed me, bidding me keep a good
heart; for, if not in this world, then at the last would all be
made right, and I should have honour.

After that he went once more to Beorn, but he was deaf to his
pleading, and so he went away to the church, speaking no word to
any man, and with his head bent as with the weight of knowledge
that must not be told, and maybe with sorrow that the other
prisoner, if guilty, would not seek for pardon from the Judge into
whose hand he was about to go.

But as for me, this thing was good, and a wondrous comfort to me,
and I went back to Egfrid with a cheerful heart, ready to face
aught that might come.

Now the earl called to the guards from the water's edge, saying
that the time was come, and we rode towards him, and I made Egfrid
promise that he would hold his hand, at least till my father came.

Now they drew my boat to the shore, and they took Beorn from his
horse first, and often have I wondered that he did not confess, but
he said no word, and maybe his senses had left him by reason of his
terror. They haled him to the boat and unbound him, setting him in
the bows, where he sank down, seeming helpless, but staring away
from shore over the sparkling waters that he feared.

Then came my turn, and of my own will I stepped into the boat,
looking her over to see that all was there as when Lodbrok came.
And all was there, though that was little enough. The one oar, the
baler, and a few fathoms of line on the floorboards.

Now as I had nothing to lose by speaking, I cried to the earl
concerning the one matter that troubled me.

"Earl Ulfkytel, I pray you forgive my poor folk if they fought for
me when you took the boat."

"They knew not why it was taken," he answered quietly. "I sent a
messenger before I gave sentence. But I should not have blamed them
had they fought, knowing all."

Then a rough man who tended the boat called out:

"Ho, Lord Earl, are these murderers to go forth with gold on arm
and hand?" for we had been stripped of naught but our arms, and I
suppose the man coveted these things.

But the earl answered:

"Which is the murderer? I know not. When his time comes stripped he
will be of life itself. Let the men be," and then in a moment he
asked one by him; "what weapons had Lodbrok when he came?"

"Only a dagger," answered the thane to whom he spoke. "Or so men
say."

"That is true," I said plainly.

"Give the men their daggers," then said the earl; and when one told
him that we should use them on each other, he answered:

"I think they will not; do my bidding!"

So they threw my hunting knife to me, and I girded it on. But
Beorn's dagger fell on the floor of the boat, and he paid no heed
to it, not even turning his head.

Then the earl and three thanes went on board the fishing boat, and
Egfrid would fain have come with him. But I signed him back, and
when the fishermen put out oars and pushed from the shore, towing
us with them, he ran waist deep into the water, and clasped my hand
for the last time, weeping.

Then the shore grew dim to my eyes, and I put my head in my hands
and would look no more. Soon I heard only the wash and creak of the
large boat's oars, and a murmured word or two from those on board
her. Then from Burgh Tower came the tolling of the bell, as for the
dying, and that was the last voice of England that I heard as we
went from shore to sea.

But at that sound came hope back to me, for it seemed to me as the
voice of Bosham bell calling for help that should come to myself,
as I had been called in time of need by the like sound to the help
of St. Wilfrith's men. And straightway I remembered the words of
the good prior, and was comforted, for surely if St. Wilfrith's
might could sink the pirate ship it would be put forth for me upon
the waters. So I prayed for that help if it might be given, and for
the Hand of Him who is over all things, even as the prior had
bidden me understand.

Whereupon I was in no more trouble about myself, and now I began to
hope that the still weather might even bring Halfden's ship to find
me.

So we passed from river to broad, and from broad to sea, and went
in tow of the fishing boat until we came to that place, as nearly
as might be, where I had saved Lodbrok. I could see the sparkle of
our village lights, or thought I could.

There they cast us off, and for a few minutes the two boats lay
side by side on the gently-heaving water, for the wind was
offshore, and little sea was running.

Then the earl rose up, lifting his hand and saying, very solemnly:

"Farewell, thou who art innocent. Blame not my blindness, nor think
ill of me. For I do my best, leaving you in the Hand of God, and
not of man!"

So he spoke; then the oars swung and fell, and in a few moments his
boat was gone into the shoreward shadows and we were alone, and I
was glad.

Now I looked at Beorn, and I thought him strangely still, and so
watched him. But I soon saw that he was in some sort of fit or
swoon, and paid no heed to aught. Yet I thought it well to take his
dagger from where it lay, lest he should fall on me in some frenzy.

I took up the weapon, and straightway I longed to draw it and end
his life at once, while all sorts of plans for escape thereafter
came into my mind. But I could not slay a helpless man, even this
one, though I sat fingering the dagger for a long while. At last
the evilness of these thoughts was plain to me; so quickly I cast
the dagger overboard, and it was gone.

Then I thought I would sleep while I might, for there was no sea to
fear, and the tide set with the wind away from shore from the river
mouth, as I knew well, for it was ebbing. It was weary work to
watch the land growing less and less plain under the moon. Yet I
feared Beorn's treachery, and doubted for a while, until the coil
of rope that lay at my feet caught my eye as I pondered. With that
I made no more ado, but took it and bound him lightly, so that at
least he could not rise up unheard by me. Nor did he stir or do
aught but breathe heavily and slowly as I handled him. When he
roused I knew that I could so deal with him that I might unbind
him.

After that I slept, and slept well, rocked by the gentle rise and
fall of the waves, until daylight came again.



CHAPTER VII. HOW WULFRIC CAME TO JUTLAND.


It was Beorn who woke me. Out of his swoon, or whatever it was that
had taken his senses, he woke with a start and shudder that brought
me from sleep at once, thinking that the boat had touched ground.
But there was no land in sight now, and all around me was the wide
circle of the sea, and over against me Beorn, my evil companion,
glowering at me with a great fear written on his face.

Now as I woke and saw him, my hand went at once to the dagger at my
side, as my first waking thoughts felt troubled by reason of all he
had done, though it was but for a moment. Thereat he cried out,
praying me to have mercy on him, and tried to rise, going near to
capsize the boat. Indeed, I cannot believe that the man had ever
been in a boat before.

"Lie down," I said, speaking sharply, as to a dog, "or you will
drown us both before the time!"

He was still enough then, fearing the water more than steel, as it
seemed, or seeing that I meant him no harm.

Then I spoke plainly to him.

"I will harm you not. But your life is in my hands in two ways. I
can slay you by water or dagger for one thing; or for another, I
think I can take this boat to shore at some place where you are not
known, and so let you live a little longer. And in any case I have
a mind to try to save my own life; thus if you will obey me so that
I may tend the boat, yours shall be saved with it, so far as I am
concerned. But if you hinder me, die you must in one way or
another!"

Now he saw well enough that his only hope lay in my power to take
the boat safely across the water, and so promised humbly to obey me
in all things if I would but spare him and get the boat to shore
quickly. So I unbound him and coiled the rope at my feet again,
bidding him lie down amidships and be still.

Many a time men have asked me why I slew him not, or cast him not
overboard, thus being troubled no more with him. Most surely I
would have slain him when we fought, in the white heat of
anger--and well would it have been if Ulfkytel had doomed him to
death, as judge. But against this helpless, cringing wretch, whose
punishment was even now falling on him, how could I lift hand? It
seemed to me, moreover, that I was, as it were, watching to see
when the stroke of doom would fall on him, as the earl said it
surely must on the guilty.

The wind freshened, and the boat began to sing through the water,
for it needed little to drive her well. My spirits rose, so that I
felt almost glad to be on the sea again, but Beorn waxed sick and
lay groaning till he was worn out and fell asleep.

Now the breeze blew from the southwest, warm and damp, as it had
held for a long time during this winter, which was open and mild so
far. And this was driving us over the same track which Lodbrok had
taken as he came from his own place. There was no hope of making
the English shore again, and so I thought it well to do even as the
jarl, and rear up the floorboards in such wise as to use them for a
