"Sick of the whole combination.  I thought I was smart, but you and
your people are smarter.  Young Dawson convinced me that we could
run things so our airship could make trips for a long time, and here
you are on our trail within seventy-two hours."

"Yes, Mr. Ridgely," acknowledged the young aviator.  "They found a
clew and started pursuit right after you stole the Drifter."

"You mean you did.  Don't be modest, Dashaway.  I've learned a good
deal about you, and if I hadn't about decided to quit business I'd
offer you a job."

"What!" smiled Dave--"smuggling?"

"Well, it pays pretty big, you know."

"Does it?" replied Dave.  "I fail to see it.  I wouldn't like to be
in a position where I was being chased half over the country."

"H'm, we won't discuss it," retorted Ridgely in a moody tone.  "I
came to tell you that you won't be hurt any."

"But I want to get away from here," insisted Dave.

"That will be all, too," Ridgely assured him.  "You see, we know now
that things are going to break up.  I don't suppose you would tell
me how closely the revenue officers are on our track."

"So close," replied Dave gravely, "that you won't dare to cross the
border any more."

"Are they on the Canadian side yet?" questioned Ridgely anxiously.

"I don't know that, and I shouldn't feel right in telling you if I
did," replied Dave.  "You had better let me go, Mr. Ridgely.  It
won't sound well, when things get righted, that you kept me a
prisoner here."

"I haven't all the say about that, Dashaway," confessed Ridgely in a
rueful way.  "I don't think the Dawsons will let you go until they
are sure of making themselves safe."

"Do you know what became of our airship, Mr. Ridgely?" Dave asked
pointedly.

"No, I don't--none of us do.  Young Dawson is pretty good in the
air, but he didn't seem to know how to get off the water quickly.
After we got you aboard, we lost a lot of time getting you ashore,
and, up in the air again, when we started in the direction we had
seen your airship go, we could find no trace of it."

"I hope nothing his happened to Hiram," thought Dave, very
anxiously.

"If I get away," resumed Ridgely, "I want you to tell the people
after me, if you can, that I'm all through with the smuggling
business.  I've had my fill of it."

The speaker turned to leave the room, but Dave halted him with the
question:

"What are you going to do about me, Mr. Ridgely?"

"I am going to order the people here to treat you the best they know
how," was the prompt response.

"That's all very well enough," said Dave, "but I have business to
attend to."

"What business, Dashaway?"

"Our airship and my friend."

Ridgely looked troubled.  He was thoughtfully, silent for a moment
or two.  Then he said:

"Look here, Dashaway, our men are looking for your airship, and that
means your friend, too, of course.  I've got to go to Brantford, but
I shall leave word that they must look after your friend, and let
you go the minute I send back word that the coast is clear for them
to scatter."

"But what about the Drifter, Mr. Ridgley?" persisted Dave.  "It is
the property of my employers.  I came after it, and I want it."

A faint smile of mingled amusement and admiration crossed the face
of Ridgely.  Reckless fellow that he was, he could not fail to
recognize the fact that Dave, indeed, had business to attend to.

"You take it pretty cool, Dashaway," he observed.

"Because I am in the right," asserted Dave, "as you well know.  The
Dawsons are malicious people.  I want you to warn them that if they
do, any unnecessary injury to the Drifter, it will make it the worse
for them in the final reckoning that is bound to come."

"I don't think they will do the airship any injury."

"You don't know them as I do.  Desperate fellows like the Dawsons
will do anything at times."

"Dashaway, don't you think you are rather hard on them--and on me?"

"I know the Dawsons--I don't know much about you."

"I am not so bad as you think I am."

"Then why don't you set me free?"

"We won't discuss that, now.  You had better think it over."

"I have thought it over. I am grateful to you for saving me,
but--well at present I can't do anything."

"You mean, you won't."

"Well, have it that way if you wish."

"You'll be sorry some day," said Dave, bluntly.

Ridgely left the room.  He closed the door after him with an
assurance to Dave that things would be "all right."  Just then there
was the sound of some one hurrying into the next room, and an
excited voice shouted out in an exultant tone:

"Say, father, we've got the other one, too!"





CHAPTER XXIII

HIRAM'S ADVENTURES


The young aviator at once recognized the voice in the adjoining room
which spoke the excited, words:

"We've got the other one, too!"

It was Jerry Dawson who had spoken.  Dave knew that the statement
could refer to no other than his missing chum.  Dave was in
something of a flutter of suspense.  Then his eye brightened and a
cheery smile overspread his face, as he caught the words in a dearly
familiar tone:

"Say, do you want to kill a fellow?"

It was Hiram who spoke, in a resentful and disgusted voice.  Its
accents were as pert and ringing as ever, and Dave was overjoyed to
know that his loyal comrade was alive and apparently unhurt.

"Say, Dawson," here broke in Ridgely, "I want to speak to you."

"Put this fellow in with Dashaway," ordered Jerry, and then the door
of Dave's prison place was pulled open.  A familiar form came
limping and stumbling across the threshold, and the door was slammed
to and locked after him.

"Hiram!" cried Dave in genuine delight.

He drew back as his friend faced him.  He had noticed that Hiram
limped.  Now he saw that one arm was in a sling.  Besides that,
Hiram's face was one mass of cuts and scratches.  One eye was nearly
closed.

"Oh, Hiram!" cried Dave aghast.

"Look is if I'd been through a threshing machine, do I?" grinned the
plucky lad.

"What happened?" asked Dave seriously.

"Dave," declared Hiram almost solemnly, "I honestly don't know.  The
machine drove upwards so quickly I wondered if some jar or the
broken wire that was switching about didn't start the lever.  By the
time I got to the pilot's seat the machine was on a terrific whiz."

"What did you do?" asked Dave.

"Not much of anything, except to get rattled," confessed Hiram.  "I
tried to circle, and she went banking.  Then the Machine took the
prettiest drift you ever saw.  All of a sudden one of the planes
dropped and then we landed."

"Where?"

"On top of some trees.  Right beyond was a deep basin, chuck full of
undergrowth.  The machine just took a slide off the tops of the
trees, and slipped down to the bottom of the basin.  Then she
turned, I was thrown out."

"What then, Hiram?" pressed Dave in a concerned way.

"Well, Dave, we had briers and brambles on the farm, but nothing to
compare with those Canadian thistles, or whatever they were.  Look
at my face."

"And your arm?"

Hiram shrugged his shoulders resignedly.

"The half breed who looked at it said it was broken.  He seemed to
be some kind of an Indian doctor.  He rubbed my scratches and
bruises with some leaves and set my arm in splints."

"Why, where did the half breed come in?" inquired Dave.

"Well, as soon as I got my wits from the tumble, I thought of you.
I tried to get up out of the basin, but the sides were so steep I
couldn't make it.  So I--well, Dave," added Hiram with a queer
laugh, "I sort of busied myself about the airship.  It wasn't much
battered up.  I feared the Dawson crowd might come hunting for the
machine, so--well, I sort of busied myself about the airship,"
repeated Hiram, with a strange chuckle.  "I was resting when that
half breed and another fellow came along.  The Indian is a great
trailer, I guess, for he was sharp enough to notice the tree tops
and the bushes the machine had rolled over.  Anyhow, down he came on
a rope into the basin and found me."

"And the Monarch II," said Dave.

"No, he didn't find the machine," declared Hiram.

"But--"

"Let me tell my story, Dave," interrupted Hiram.  "He got me up
aloft.  Then he said I was badly hurt, and started in to mend me up.
Then they brought me here. They kept talking about the airship, and
tried to make me tell where it was.  I wouldn't, and didn't."

"Wasn't it in the basin you spoke of?" inquired Dave wonderingly.

"Yes."

"Then why--?"

"Hush!  We're going to have visitors."

This was true.  There was a sound at the door of their prison room,
and the padlock was displaced.  Jerry Dawson stepped into view, his
father behind him.

"Well," he said, with a leer meant to be clever, "I suppose you
fellows know me?"

"We know you, Jerry," retorted Hiram, "only too well."

"I'm boss here," boasted Jerry.

"That's fine, isn't it?" said Hiram.

"And I've got you.  We'll have your airship soon, too.  You'll do
some walking getting back home, I'm thinking."

"What do you want of us, Jerry?" inquired Dave, coolly.

"I want to know where that airship of yours is in the first place."

"Put it in the last place, Jerry," suggested Hiram, "for you won't
find out from me."

"I'll bet I will," vaunted Jerry.  "I have a good mind to punch you
for making all the mischief you have."

"You're safe, Jerry, seeing I'm disabled," said Hiram.

"Bah!  Say, Dashaway, who's working against us here or across the
lake besides yourself?"

"You will have to, guess that, Jerry," replied Dave.

"You won't tell?"

"No.  I'll say this, though: You had better try to even up things in
some way.  The Interstate people and the government know all about
you, and you are likely to have some explaining to do."

Jerry looked worried, but he feigned indifference.

"I'll keep you two safe and quiet till I get ready to quit, all the
same," he snapped out, and slammed the door shut and locked it.

Dave and Hiram listened in silence for some minutes to sounds in the
next room.

They could only catch the echo of voices.  Jerry and his father
seemed to be engaged in conversation.

Suddenly there was an interruption.  There was the sound of an
excited voice, drawing nearer each moment.

A door slammed.  Then heavy running footsteps echoed out, ending
only as some one appeared to burst unceremoniously into the next
room.

"What's the row?" the boys heard in the gruff tones of Jerry's
father.

"Say!" shouted the intruder, evidently a member of their group,
"they've done it!"

"Who have?" shouted out Jerry quickly.

"The revenuers."

"What do you mean?"

"They got Ridgely."

A cry of dismay and excitement ran through the next room.

"How do you know?" demanded the elder Dawson.

"I saw them myself--right near Brantford.  What's more, they're
coming this way to get the rest of us."

At this announcement came another cry.

"You are sure of that?"

"When was this?"

"How soon will they be here?"

"Who is responsible for this?"
