Christian, but grieved away the spirit of God, and he has never
thought earnestly since, and he can not be roused. I do not believe he
will be roused until eternity flashes on his astonished vision.

It does seem as if sometimes, in quite early life, the Holy Spirit
moves upon a heart, and being grieved away and rejected, never comes
back. You say that is all imaginary? A letter, the address of which I
will not give, dated last Monday morning, came to me on Tuesday,
saying this: "Your sermon last night (that is, last Sabbath night)
did not fit my case, although I believe it did all others in the
Academy; but your sermon of a week ago did fit my case, for I am 'past
feeling.' I am not ashamed to be a Christian. I would as soon be known
to be a Christian as anything else. Indeed, I wish I was, but I have
not the least power to become one. Don't you know that with some
persons there is a tide in their spiritual natures which, if taken at
the flood, leads on to salvation? Such a tide I felt two years ago. I
want you to pray for me, not that I may be led to Christ--for that
prayer would not be answered--but that I may be kept from the
temptation to suicide!"

What I had to say to the author of that I said in a private letter;
but what I have to say to this audience is: Beware lest you grieve the
Holy Ghost, and He be gone, and never return. Next Wednesday, at two
or three o'clock, a Cunard steamer will put out from Jersey City wharf
for Liverpool. After it has gone one hour, and the vessel is down by
the Narrows, or beyond, go out on the Jersey City wharf, and wave your
hand, and shout, and ask that steamer to come back to the wharf. Will
it? Yes, sooner than the Holy Ghost will come back when once He has
taken his final flight from thy soul. With that Holy Spirit some of
you have been in treaty, my dear friends.

The Holy Spirit said: "Come, come to Christ." You said: "No, I won't."
The Spirit said, more importunately: "Come to Christ." You said:
"Well, I will after awhile, when I get my business fixed up; when my
friends consent to my coming; when they won't laugh at me--then I'll
come." But the Holy Spirit more emphatically said: "Come now." You
said: "No, I can't. I can't come now." And that Holy Spirit stands in
your heart to-night, with His hand on the door of your soul, ready to
come out. Will you let Him depart? If so, then, with a pen of light,
dipped in ink of eternal blackness, the sentence may be now writing:
"Ephraim is joined to his idols. Let him alone! Let him alone!" When
that fatal record is made, you might as well brace yourselves up
against the sorrows of the last day, against the anguish of an
unforgiven death-bed, against the flame and the overthrow of an undone
eternity; for though you might live thirty years after that in the
world, your fate would be as certain as though you had already entered
the gates of darkness. That is the dead line. Look out how you cross
it!

    "'There is a line by us unseen,
      That crosses every path;
    The hidden boundary between
      God's patience and His wrath.'"

And some of you, to-night, have come up to that line. Ay, you have
lifted your foot, and when you put it down, it will be on the other
side! Look out how you cross it! Oh, grieve not the Spirit of God,
lest He never come back!

III. This fatal stroke spoken of in the text may be our exit from this
world. I hear aged people sometimes saying: "I can't live much
longer." But do you know the fact that there are a hundred young
people and middle-aged people who go out of this life to one aged
person, for the simple reason that there are not many aged people to
leave life? The aged seem to stand around like stalks--separate stalks
of wheat at the corner of the field; but when death goes a-mowing, he
likes to go down amid the thick of the harvest. What is more to the
point: a man's going out of this world is never in the way he
expects--it is never at the time he expects. The moment of leaving
this world is always a surprise. If you expect to go in the winter, it
may be in the summer; if in the summer, it may be in the winter; if in
the night, it maybe in the day-time; if you think to go in the
day-time, it may be in the night. Suddenly the event will rush upon
you, and you will be gone. Where? If a Christian--into joy. If not a
Christian--into suffering.

The Gospel call stops outside of the door of the sepulcher. The
sleeper within can not hear it. If that call should be sounded out
with clarion voice louder than ever rang through the air, that sleeper
could not hear it. I suppose every hour of the day, and now, while I
am speaking, there are souls rushing into eternity unprepared. They
slide from the pillow, or they slip from the pavement, and in an
eye-twinkling they are gone. Elegant and eloquent funeral oration will
not do them any good. Epitaph, cut on polished Scotch granite, will
not do them any good. Wailing of beloved kindred can not call them
back.

But, says some one: "I'll keep out of peril; I will not go on the sea,
I will not go into battle--I'll keep out of all danger." That is no
defense. Thousands of people, last night, on their couches, with the
front door locked, and no armed assassin anywhere around, surrounded
by all defended circumstances, slipped out of this life into the
next. If time had been on one side of the shuttle and eternity on the
other side of the shuttle, they could not have shot quicker across it.
A man was saying: "My father was lost at sea, and my grandfather, and
my great-grandfather. Wasn't it strange?" A man, talking to him, said:
"You ought never to venture on the sea, lest you, yourself, be lost at
sea." The man turned to the other, and said: "Where did your father
die?" He replied: "In his bed." "Where did your grandfather die?" "In
his bed." "Where did your great-grandfather die?" "In his bed."
"Then," he said, "be careful, lest some night, while you are asleep on
your couch, your time may come!"

Death alone is sure. Suddenly, you and I will go out of life. I am not
saying anything to your soul that I am not going to say to my own
soul. We have got to go suddenly out of this life. If I am prepared
for that change, I do not care where my body is taken from--at what
point I am taken out of this life. If I am ready, all is well. If I am
not ready, though I might be at home, and though my loved ones might
be standing around me, and though there might be the best surgical and
medical ability in the room, I tell you, if I were not prepared, I
would be frightened more than tongue can tell. It may seem like
cowardice, but I am not ashamed to say that I should have the most
indescribable horror about going out of this world if I thought I was
unprepared for the next--if I had no Christ in my soul; for it would
be a plunge compared with which a leap from the top of Mont Blanc
would be nothing.

But this brings me to the most tremendous thought of my text. The text
supposes that a man goes into ruin, and that an effort is made
afterward for his rescue, and then says the thing can not be done. Is
that so? After death seizes upon that soul, is there no resurrection?
If a man topples off the edge of life, is there nothing to break his
fall? If an impenitent man goes overboard, are there no
grappling-hooks to hoist him into safety? The text says distinctly:
"Then a great ransom can not deliver thee."

I know there are people who call themselves "Restorationists," and
they say a sinful man may go down into the world of the lost; he stays
there until he gets reformed, and then comes up into the world of
light and blessedness. It seems to me to be a most unreasonable
doctrine--as though the world of darkness were a place where a man
could get reformed. Is there anything in the society of the lost
world--the abandoned and the wretched of God's universe--to elevate a
man's character and lift him at last to heaven? Can we go into
companionship of the Neroes and the Herods, and the Jim Fisks, and
spend a certain number of years in that lost world, and then by that
society be purified and lifted up? Is that the kind of society that
reforms a man and prepares him for heaven? Would you go to Shreveport
or Memphis, with the yellow fever there, to get your physical health
restored? Can it be that a man may go down into the diseased world--a
world overwhelmed by an epidemic of transgressions--and by that
process, and in that atmosphere, be lifted up to health and glory?
Your common sense says: "No! no!" In such society as that, instead of
being restored, you would go down worse and worse, plunging every hour
into deeper depths of suffering and darkness. What your common sense
says the Bible reaffirms, when it says: "These shall go away into
three months of punishment." I have quoted it wrong. "These shall go
away into ten years of punishment." I have quoted it wrong. "These
shall go into a thousand years of punishment." I have quoted it wrong.
"These shall go into _everlasting_ punishment." And now I have quoted
it right; or, if you prefer, in the words of my text: "Then a great
ransom can not deliver thee."

Now just suppose that a spirit should come down from heaven and knock
at the gates of woe and say: "Let that man out! Let me come in and
suffer in his stead. I will be the sacrifice. Let him come out." The
grim jailer would reply: "No, you don't know what a place this is, or
you would not ask to come in; besides that, this man had full warning
and full opportunity of escape. He did not take the warning, and now a
great ransom shall not deliver him."

Sometimes men are sentenced to imprisonment for life. There comes
another judge on the bench, there comes another governor in the chair,
and in three or four years you find the man who was sentenced for life
in the street. You say: "I thought you were sentenced for life." "Oh!"
he says, "politics are changed, and I am now a free man." But it will
not be so for a soul at the last. There will be no new judge or new
governor. If at the end of a century a soul might come out, it would
not be so bad. If at the end of a thousand years it might come out,
it would not be so bad. If there were any time in all the future, in
quadrillions and quadrillions of years, that the soul might come out,
it would not be so bad; but if the Bible be true, it is a state of
unending duration.

Far on in the ages one lost soul shall cry out to another lost soul:
"How long have you been here?" and the soul will reply: "The years of
my ruin are countless. I estimated the time for thousands of years;
but what is the use of estimating when all these rolling cycles bring
us no nearer the terminus." Ages! Ages! Ages! Eternity! Eternity!
Eternity! The wrath to come! The wrath to come! The wrath to come! No
medicine to cure that marasmus of the soul. No hammer to strike off
the handcuff of that incarceration. No burglar's key to pick the locks
which the Lord hath fastened. Sir Francis Newport, in his last moment,
caught just one glimpse of that world. He had lived a sinful life.
Before he went into the eternal world he looked into it. The last
words he ever uttered were, as he gathered himself up on his elbows in
the bed: "Oh, the insufferable pangs of hell!" The lost soul will cry
out: "I can not stand this! I can not stand this! Is there no way
out?" and the echo will answer: "No way out." And the soul will cry:
"Is this forever?" and the echo will answer: "Forever!"

Is it all true? "These shall go away into everlasting punishment,
while the righteous go into life eternal." Are there two destinies?
and must all this audience share one or the other? Shall I give an
account for what I have told you to-night? Have I held back any truth,
though it were plain, though it were unpalatable? Must I meet you
there, oh, you dying but immortal auditory? I wish that my text, with
all its uplifted hands of warning, could come upon your souls: "Beware
lest He take thee away with His stroke: then a great ransom can not
deliver thee."

Glory be to God, there is a ransom that can now deliver you, braver
than Grace Darling putting out in a life-boat from Eddystone
Light-house for the rescue of the crew of the Forfarshire
steamer--Christ the Lord launched from heaven, amid the shouting of
the angels. Thirty-three years afterward, Christ the Lord launched
from earth to heaven, amid human and infernal execration; yet staying
here long enough to save all who will believe in Him. Do you hear
that? To save all who will believe in Him. Oh, that pierced side! Oh,
that bleeding brow! Oh, that crushed foot! Oh, that broken heart! That
is your hope, sinner. That is your ransom from sin, and death, and
hell.

Why have I told you all these things to-night, plainly and frankly? It
is because I know there is redemption for you, and I would have you
now come and get it. Oh, men and women long prayed for, and striven
with, and coaxed of the mercy of God--have you concentrated all your
physical, mental, and spiritual energies in one awful determination to
be lost? Is there nothing in the value of your soul, in the
graciousness of Christ, in the thunders of the last day, in the
blazing glories of heaven, and the surging wrath of an undone eternity
to start you out of your indifference, and make you pray? Oh, must God
come upon you in some other way? Must He take another darling child
from your household? Must He take another installment from your
worldly estate? Must life come upon you with sorrow after sorrow, and
smite you down with sickness before you will be moved, and before you
will feel?

Oh, weep now, while Jesus will count the tears! Sigh, now in
repentance, while Jesus will hear the grief. Now clutch the cross of
the Son of God before it be swept away. Beware, lest the Holy Spirit
leave thy heart. Beware, lest this night thy soul be required of thee.
"Beware, lest he take thee away with His stroke: then a great ransom
can not deliver thee." Oh, Lord God of Israel, see these impenitent
souls on the verge of death ready to topple over! See them! Is there
no help? Is this plea all in vain? I can not believe it, blessed God.
Oh, thou mighty One, whose garments are red with the wine-press of
Thine own sufferings, in the greatness of Thy strength ride through
this audience, and may all this people fall into line, the willing
captives of Thy grace. Men and women immortal! I lay hold of you
to-night with both hands of entreaty and of prayer, and I beg of you,
prepare for death, judgment, and eternity.




THE THREE GROUPS.

    "And they sat down in ranks by hundreds and by fifties."--MARK
    vi: 40.


The sun was far down in the west, night was coming on, and there were
five thousand people tired, hungry, shelterless. You know how
Washington felt at Valley Forge, when his army was starving and
freezing. You may imagine how any great-hearted general would feel
while his troops were suffering. Imagine, then, how Christ, with His
great heart, must have felt as He saw these five thousand
hunger-bitten people. Yes, I suppose there were ten thousand there,
for the Bible says there were five thousand men, besides women and
children. The case is put in that way, not because the women and
children were of less importance than the men, but because they would
eat less; and the whole force of the miracle turns on the amount of
food required.

How shall this great multitude be supplied? I see a selfish man in
that crowd pulling a luncheon out of his own pocket, and saying: "Let
the people starve. They had no business to come out here in the desert
without any provisions. They are improvident, and the improvident
ought to suffer." There is another man, not quite so heartless, who
says: "Go up into the village and buy bread." What a foolish
proposition! There is not enough food in all the village for this
crowd; besides that, who has the money to pay for it? Xerxes' army,
one million strong, was fed by a private individual of great wealth
for only one day, but it broke him. Who, then, shall feed this
multitude?

I see a man rising in that great crowd and asking: "Is there any one
here who has bread or meat?" A kind of moan goes through the whole
throng. "No bread--no meat." But just at that time a lad steps up. You
know when a great crowd goes off upon an excursion, there are always
men and boys to go along for the purpose of merchandise and to strike
a bargain: and so, I suppose, this boy had gone along for the purpose
of merchandise; but he was nearly all sold out, having only five
loaves and two fishes left. He is a generous boy, and he turns them
over to Christ.

But these loaves would not feed twenty people, how much less ten
thousand! Though the action was so generous on the part of the boy, so
far as satisfying the multitude, it was a dead failure. Then Jesus
comes to the rescue. He is apt to come when there is a dead lift. He
commands the people that they sit down "in ranks, by hundreds and by
fifties," as much as to say: "Order! order! so that none be missed."
It was fortunate that that arrangement was made; otherwise, at the
very first appearance of bread, the strong ones would have clutched
it, while the feeble and the modest would have gone unsupplied.

I suppose it was no easy work to get that crowd seated, for they all
wanted to be in the front row, lest the bread give out before their
turn come. No sooner are they seated than there comes a great hush
over all the people. Jesus stands there, His light complexion and
auburn locks illumined by the setting sun. Every eye is on Him. They
wonder what He will do next. He takes one of the loaves that the boy
furnished and breaks off it a piece, which immediately grows to as
large a size as the original loaf, the original loaf staying as large
as it was before the piece was broken off. And they leaned forward
with intense scrutiny, saying: "Look! look!" When some one, anxious to
see more minutely what is going on, rises in front, they cry: "Sit
down in front! Let us look for ourselves."

And then, when the bread is passed around, they taste of it
skeptically and inquiringly, as much as to say: "Is it bread? Really,
is it bread?" Yes, the best bread that was ever made, for Christ made
it. Bread for the first fifty and second fifty. Bread for the first
hundred and the second hundred. Bread for the first thousand and the
second thousand. Pass it all around the circle: there, where that aged
