his.  Put from you all the prejudice which the ill conduct of his
officers have excited, and you must perceive that in accepting his
terms you will best repay your country's confidence by giving it peace."

"So great would be my damning sin in such an acceptance," cried
Wallace, "that I should be abhorred by God and man.  You talk of noble
minds, earl; look into your own, and will it not tell you that in the
moment a people bring themselves to put the command of their actions,
and with that, their consciences, into the hands of a usurper (and that
Edward is one in Scotland our annals and his tyrannies declare), they
sell their birthright and become unworthy the name of men?  In that
deed they abjure the gift with which God had intrusted them; and
justly, the angels of his host depart from them.  You know the sacred
axiom, Virtue is better than life!  By that we are commanded to
preserve the one at the expense of the other; and we are ready to obey.
Neither the threats nor the blandishments of Edward have power to
shake the resolves of those who draw the sword of the Lord and of
Gideon!"

"Rebellious man!" exclaimed Beck, who had listened impatiently; and
whose haughty spirit could ill brook such towering language being
directed to his sovereign; "since you dare quote Scripture to sanction
crime, hear my embassage.  To meet the possibility of this flagitious
obstinacy, I came armed with the thunder of the church, and the
indignation of a justly incensed monarch.  Accept his most gracious
offers, delivered to you by the Earl of Arundel.  Here is the cross, to
receive your oath of fealty," cried he, stretching it forth, as if he
thought his commands were irrestible; "but beware! keep it with a truer
faith than did the traitor Baliol, or expect the malediction of Heaven,
the exterminating vengeance of your liege lord!"

Wallace was not discomposed by this attack from the stormy prelate.
"My Lord of Durham," replied he with his usual tranquil air, "had your
sovereign sent me such proposals as became a just king, and were
possible for an honest Scot to admit, he should have found me ready to
have treated him with the respect due to his rank and honor; but when
he demands the sacrifice of my integrity; when he asks me to sign a
deed that would again spread this renovated land with devastation, were
I to consider the glozing language of his embassy as grace and
nobleness.  I should belie my own truth, which tramples alike on his
menaces and his pretended claims.  And I ask you, priest of Heaven! is
he a god greater than Jehovah, that I should fear him?"

"And durst thou presume, audacious rebel!" exclaimed Beck "that the
light of Israel deign, to shine on a barbarian nation in arms against a
hero of the cross?  Reprobate that thou art, answer to thine own
condemnation?  Does not the church declare the claims of Edward to be
just! and who dare gainsay her decrees?"

"The voice of Him you pretend to serve!  He is no respecter of persons;
he raises the poor from the dust; and by his arm the tyrant and his
host are plunged into the whelming waves!  Bishop, I know in whom I
trust.  Is the minister greater than his lord, that I should believe
the word of a synod against the declared will of God?  Neither anathema
nor armed thousands shall make me acknowledge the supremacy of Edward.
He may conquer the body, but the soul of a patriot he can never subdue."

"Then," cried Beck, suddenly rising, black with choler, and stretching
his crosier over the head of Wallace, "as the rod of Moses shed
plagues, miseries, and death over the land of Egypt, I invoke the like
judgments to fall on this rebellious land, on its blasphemous leader!
And thus I leave it my curse."

Wallace smiled as the terrific words fell from the lips of this demon
in sacred guise.  Lord Arundel observed him.  "You despise this
malediction, Sir William Wallace!  I thought more piety had dwelt with
so much military nobleness!"

"I should not regard the curses of a congregated world," replied
Wallace, "when my conscience as loudly proclaims that God is on my
side.  And is he not omniscient, that he should be swayed by the
prejudices of men?  Does he not read the heart?  Is he not master of
all causes?  And shall I shrink when I know that I hold his commission?
Shall I not regard those anathemas even as the artillery with which
the adversary would drive me from my post?  But did the clouds rain
fire, and the earth open beneath me, I would not stir; for I know who
planted me here; and as long as he wills me to stand, neither men nor
devils can move me hence."

"Thou art incorrigible!" cried Beck.

"I would say, firm," rejoined Arundel, overawed by the majesty of
virtue, "could I regard, as he does, the cause he has espoused.  But,
as it is, noble Wallace," continued he, "I must regret your
infatuation; and instead of the peace I thought to leave with you, hurl
war, never-ending, extirpating war, upon the head of this devoted
nation!"  As he spoke, he threw his lance** against the opposite wall,
in which it stuck and stood shivering; then taking up the casket, with
its splendid contents, he replaced it in his bosom.

**To throw a spear was an ancient mode of denouncing war.

Beck had turned away in wrath from the table, and advancing with a
magisterial step to the door, he threw it open; as if he thought, that
longer to breathe the same air with the person he had excommunicated,
would infect him with his own curses.  On opening the door, a group of
Scots, who waited in the antechamber, hastened forward.  At the sight
of the prelate they raised their bonnets, and hesitated to pass.  He
stood on the threshold, proudly neglectful of their respect.  In the
next minute, Wallace appeared with Lord Arundel.

"Brave knight," said the earl, "the adieus of a man, as sensible of
your private worth as he regrets the errors of your public opinion,
abide with you."

"Were Edward sensible to virtue, like his brave subjects," replied the
chief, "I should not fear that another drop of blood need be shed in
Scotland to convince him of his present injustice.  Farewell, noble
earl; the generous candor of yourself and of your brother-in-law will
ever live in the remembrance of William Wallace."

While he yet spoke, a youth broke from the group before them, and
rushing toward the regent, threw himself with a cry of joy at his feet.
"My Edwin, my brother!" exclaimed Wallace; and immediately raising
him, clasped him in his arms.  The throng of Scots who had accompanied
their young leader from Stirling, now crowded about the chief; some
kneeling and kissing his garments; others ejaculating, with uplifting
hands, their thanks at seeing their protector in safety, and with
redoubled glory.

"You forgive me, my master and friend?" cried Edwin, forgetting, in the
happy agitation of his mind, the presence of the English embassadors.

"It was only as a master I condemned you, my brother," returned
Wallace; "every proof of your affection must render you dearer to me;
and had it been exerted against an offender not so totally in my power,
you would not have met my reprimand.  But ever remember that the
persons of prisoners are inviolable, for they lie on the bosom of
mercy; and who that has honor would take them thence?"

Lord Arundel, who had lingered to observe this short but animated
scene, now ventured to interrupt it: "May I ask, noble Wallace," said
he, "if this interesting youth be the brave young Ruthven, who
distinguished himself at Dumbarton, and who, De Warenne told me,
incurred a severe though just sentence from you, in consequence of his
attack upon one whom, as a soldier, I blush to name?"

"It is the same," replied Wallace; "the valor and fidelity of such as
he are as sinews to my arms, and bring a more grateful empire to my
heart than all the crowns which may be in the power of Edward to
bestow."

"I have often seen the homage of the body," said the earl; "but here I
see that of the soul; and were I a king, I should envy Sir William
Wallace!"

"This speech is that of a courtier or a traitor!" suddenly exclaimed
Beck, turning with a threatening brow on Lord Arundel.  "Beware, earl!
for what has now been said must be repeated to the royal Edward; and he
will judge whether flattery to this proud rebel be consistent with your
allegiance."

"Every word that has been uttered in this conference** I will myself
deliver to King Edward," replied Lord Arundel; "he shall know the man
on whom he may be forced by justice to denounce the sentence of
rebellion; and when the pruissance of his royal arm lays this kingdom
at his feet, the virtues of Sir William Wallace may then find the
clemency he now contemns!"

Beck did not condescend to listen to the latter part of this
explanation; but proceeding to the court-yard, had mounted his horse
before his worthier colleague appeared from the hall.  Taking a
gracious leave of Sir John Graham, who attended him to the door, the
earl exclaimed, "What miracle is before me?  Not the mighty mover only
of this wide insurrection is in the bloom of manhood, but all his
general that I have seen appear in the very morning of youth!  And you
conquer our veterans; by long experience, and hairs grown gray in camps
and battles!"

"Then by our morning judge what our day may be," replied Graham; "and
show your monarch that as surely as the night of death will in some
hour close upon prince and peasant, this land shall never again be
overshadowed by his darkness."

"Listen not to their bold treasons!" cried Beck; and setting spurs to
his horse, in no very clerical style he galloped out of the gates.
Arundel made some courteous reply to Graham; then, bowing to the rest
of the Scottish officers who stood around, turned his steed, and
followed by his escort, pursued the steps of the bishop along the
snow-covered banks of the Clyde.




Chapter XLVII.

Lammington.


When Wallace was left alone with Edwin, the happy youth (after
expressing delight that Murray then held his headquarters in Bothwell
Castle) took from his bosom two packets; one from Lord Mar, the other
from the countess.  "My dear cousin," said he, "has sent you many
blessings; but I could not persuade her to register even one on paper
while my aunt wrote all this.  Almost ever since her own recovery,
Helen has confined herself to my uncle's sick chamber, now totally
deserted by the fair countess, who seems to have forgotten all duties
in the adulation of the audience-hall."

Wallace remarked on the indisposition of Mar, and the attention of his
daughter, with tenderness.  And Edwin, with the unrestrained vivacity
of happy friendship, proceeded sportively to describe the regal style
which the countess had affected, and the absurd group with which she
had welcomed the Earls Badenoch and Athol to their native country.
"Indeed," continued he, "I cannot guess what vain idea has taken
possession of her; but when I went to Snawdoun, to receive her commands
for you, I found her seated on a kind of throne, with ladies standing
in her presence, and our younger chieftains thronging the gallery, as
if she were the regent himself.  Helen entered for a moment, but,
amazed, started back, never before having witnessed the morning courts
of stepmother."

But Edwin did not relate to his friend all that had passed in the
succeeding conference between him and his gentle cousin.

Blushing for her father's wife, Helen would have retired immediately to
her own apartments, but Edwin drew her into one of Lady Mar's rooms,
and seating her beside him, began to speak of his anticipated meeting
with Wallace.  He held her hand in his.  "My dearest cousin," said he,
"will not this tender hand, which has suffered so much for our brave
friend, write him one word of kind remembrance?  Our queen here will
send him volumes."

"Then he would hardly have time to attend to one of mine," replied
Helen, with a smile.  "Besides, he requires no new assurance to
convince him that Helen Mar can never cease to remember her benefactor
with the most grateful thoughts."

"And is this all I am to say to him, Helen?"

"All, my Edwin."

"What! not one word of the life you have led since he quitted Stirling?
Shall I not tell him that, when this lovely arm no longer wore the
livery of its heroism in his behalf, instead of your appearing at the
gay assemblies of the countess, you remained immured within your
oratory?  Shall I not tell him that since the sickness of my uncle you
have sat days and nights by his couch-side, listening to the dispatches
from the borders--subscribing, with smiles and tears, to his praises of
our matchless regent?  Shall I not tell him of the sweet maid who lives
here the life of a nun for him?  Or, must I entertain him with the
pomps and vanities of my most unsaintly aunt?"

Helen had in vain attempted to stop him, while, with an arch glance at
her mantling blushes, he half whispered these insidious questions.
"Ah, my sweet cousin, there is something more at the bottom of that
beating heart than you will allow your faithful Edwin to peep into."

Helen's heart did beat violently, both before and after this remark;
but conscious, whatever might be there, of the determined purpose of
her soul, she turned on him a steady look.  "Edwin," said she, "there
is nothing in my heart that you may not see.  That it reveres Sir
William Wallace beyond all other men, I do not deny.  But class not my
deep veneration with a sentiment which may be jested on!  He has spoken
to me the language of friendship--you know what it is to be his
friend--and having tasted of heaven, I cannot stoop to earth.  What
pleasure can I find in pageants?-what interest in the admiration of
men?  Is not his esteem of a value that puts to naught the homages of
all else in the world?  Do me then justice, my Edwin! believe me, I am
no gloomy, no sighing, recluse.  I am happy with my thoughts, and
thrice happy at the side of my father's couch; for there I meet the
image of the most exemplary of human beings, and there I perform the
duties of a child to a parent deserving all my love and honor."

"Ah, Helen!  Helen!" cried Edwin; "dare I speak the wish of my heart!
But you and Sir William Wallace would frown on me, and I may not!"

"Then, never utter it!" exclaimed Helen, turning pale, and trembling
from head to foot; too well guessing, by the generous glow in his
countenance, what would have been that wish.

At this instant the door opened, and Lady Mar appeared.  Both rose at
her entrance.  She bowed her head coldly to Helen.  To Edwin she
graciously extended her hand.  "Why, my dear nephew, did you not come
into the audience-hall?"

Edwin answered, smiling, that as he "did not know the Governor of
Stirling's lady lived in the state of a queen, he hoped he should be
excused for mistaking lords and ladies in waiting for company; and for
that reason, having retired till he could bid her adieu in a less
public scene."

Lady mar, with much stateliness, replied, "Perhaps it is necessary to
remind you, Edwin, that I am more than Lord Mar's wife.  I am not only
heiress to the sovereignty of the northern isles, but, like Badenoch,
am of the blood of the Scottish kings."

To conceal an irrepressible laugh at this proud folly in a woman,
otherwise of shrewd understanding, Edwin turned toward the window; but
not before the countess had observed the ridicule which played on his
lips.  Vexed, but afraid to reprimand one who might so soon resent it,
by speaking of her disparagingly to Wallace, she unburdened the
swelling of her anger upon the unoffending Helen.  Not doubting that
she felt as Edwin did, and fancying that she saw the same expression in
her countenance.  "Lady Helen," cried she, "I request an explanation of
that look of derision which I now see on your face.  I wish to know
whether the intoxication of your vanity dare impel you to despise
claims which may one day be established to your confusion."

This attack surprised Helen, who, absorbed in other meditations, had
scarcely heard her mother's words to Edwin.  "I neither deride you,
Lady Mar, nor despise the claims of your kinsman, Badenoch.  But since
you have condescended to speak to me on the subject, I must, out of
respect to yourself, and duty to my father, frankly say, that the
assumption of honors not legally in your possession may excite ridicule
on him, and even trouble to our cause."

Provoked at the just reasoning of this reply and at being
misapprehended with regard to the object with whom she hoped to share
all the reflected splendors of a throne, Lady Mar answered, rather
inconsiderately, "Your father is an old man, and has outlived every
noble emulation.  He neither understands my actions, nor shall he
control them."  Struck dumb by this unexpected declaration, Helen
suffered her to proceed.  "And as to Lord Badenoch giving me the rank
to which my birth entitled me, that is a foolish dream--I look to a
greater hand."

"What!" inquired Edwin, with a playful bow, "does my highness aunt
expect my uncle to die, and that Bruce will come hither to lay the
crown of Scotland at her feet?"

"I expect nothing of Bruce, nor of your uncle," returned she, with a
haughty rearing of her head; "but I look for respect from the daughter
of Lord Mar, and from the friend of Sir William Wallace."

She rose from her chair, and presenting Edwin with a packet for
Wallace, told Helen she might retire to her own room.

"To my father's I will, madam," returned she.

Lady Mar colored at this reproof, and, turning to Edwin, more gently
said, "You know that the dignity of his situation must be maintained;
and while others attend his couch, I must his reputation."

"I have often heard that 'Fame is better than life!'" replied Edwin,
still smiling; "and I thank Lady mar for showing me how differently
people may translate the same lesson.  Adieu, dear Helen!" said he,
touching her mantling cheek with his lips.

"Farewell," returned she, "may good angels guard you!"

The substance of the latter part of this scene Edwin did relate to
Wallace.  He smiled at the vain follies of the countess, and broke the
seal of her letter.  It was in the same style with her conversation; at
one moment declaring herself his disinterested friend, in the next,
uttering wild professions of never-ending attachment.  She deplored the
sacrifice which had been made of her, when quite a child, to the doting
passion of Lord Mar; and complained of his want of sympathy with any of
her feelings.  Then picturing the happiness which must result from the
reciprocal love of congenial hearts, she ventured to show how truly
hers would unite with Wallace's.  The conclusion of this strange
epistle told him that the devoted gratitude of all her relations of the
house of Cummin was ready, at any moment, to relinquish their claims on
the crown, to place it on brows so worthy to wear it.

The words of this letter were so artfully and so persuasively penned,
that had not Edwin described the inebriated vanity of Lady Mar, Wallace
might have believed that she was ambitious only for him, and that could
she share his heart, his throne would be a secondary object.  To
establish this deception in his mind, she added, "I live here as at the
head of a court, and fools around me think I take pleasure in it; but
did they look into my actions, they would see that I serve while I seem
to reign.  I am working in the hearts of men for your advancement."

But whether this were her real motive or not, it was the same to
Wallace; he felt that she would always be, were she even free, not
merely the last object in his thoughts, but the first in his aversion.
Therefore, hastily running over her letter, he recurred to a second
perusal of Lord Mar's.  In this he found satisfactory details of the
success of his dispositions.  Lord Lochawe had possessed himself of the
western coast of Scotland, from the Mull of Kintyre, to the furthest
mountains of Glenmore.  There the victorious Lord Ruthven had met him,
having completed the recovery of the Highlands, by a range of conquests
from the Spey to the Murray frith and Inverness-shire.  Lord Bothwell,
also, as his colleague, had brought from the shore of Ross and the
hills of Caithness, every Southron banner which had disgraced their
embattled towers.

Graham was sent for by Wallace to hear these pleasant tidings.

"Ah!" cried Edwin, in triumph, "not a spot north of the Forth now
remains, that does not acknowledge the supremacy of the Scottish lion!"

"Nor south of it either," returned Graham; "from the Mull of Galloway
to my gallant father's government on the Tweed; from the Cheviots to
the Northern Ocean, all now is our own.  The door is locked against
England, and Scotland must prove unfaithful to herself before the
Southrons can again set feet on her borders."

The more private accounts were not less gratifying to Wallace; for he
found that his plans for disciplining and bringing the people into
order were everywhere adopted, and that in consequence, alarm and
penury had given way to peace and abundance.  To witness the success of
his comprehensive designs, and to settle a dispute between Lord Ruthven
and the Earl of Athol, relative to the government of Perth, Lord Mar
strongly urged him (since he had driven the enemy so many hundred miles
into their own country) to repair immediately to the scene of
controversy.  "Go," added the earl, "through the Lothians, and across
the Queens ferry, directly into Perthshire.  I would not have you come
to Stirling, lest it should be supposed that you are influenced in your
judgment either my myself or my wife.  But I think there cannot be a
question that Lord Ruthven's services to the great cause invest him
with a claim which his opponent does not possess.  Lord Athol has none
beyond that of superior rank; but being the near relation of my wife, I
believe she is anxious for his elevation.  Therefore come not near us,
if you would avoid female importunity, and spare me the pain of hearing
what I must condemn."

Wallace now recollected a passage in Lady Mar's letter which, though
not speaking out, insinuated how she expected he would decide.  She
said: "As your interest is mine, my noble friend, all that belongs to
me is yours.  My kindred are not withheld in the gift my devoted heart
bestows on you.  Use them as your own; make them bulwarks around your
power, the creatures of your will, the instruments of your benevolence,
the defenders of your rights."

Well pleased to avoid another rencounter with this lady's love and
ambition, Wallace sent off the substance of these dispatches to Murray;
and next morning, taking a tender leave of the venerable Gregory and
his family, with Edwin and Sir John Graham, he set off for the Frith of
Forth.




Chapter XLVIII.

Loch Awe.


It was on the eve of St. Nicholas that the boat which contained Wallace
drew near to the coast of Fife.  A little of the right towered the
tremendous precipice of Kinghorn.

"Behold, Edwin," said he, "the cause of all our woe!  From those
horrible cliffs fell the best of kings, the good Alexander.  My father
accompanied him in that fatal ride, and was one of the unhappy group
who had the evil hap to find his mangled body among the rocks below."

"I have heard," observed Graham, "that the sage of Ercildown prophesied
this dreadful calamity to Scotland."

"He did prognosticate," replied Wallace, "that on the eighteenth of
April, a storm should burst over this land which would lay the country
in ruins.  Fear seized the farmers; but his prophecy regarded a nobler
object than their harvests.  The day came, rose unclouded, and
continued perfectly serene.  Lord March, to whom the seer had presaged
the event, at noon reproached him with the unlikeliness of its
completion.  But even at the moment he was ridiculing the sage, a man
on a foaming steed arrived at the gate, with tidings that the king had
accidentally fallen from the precipice of Kinghorn, and was killed.
'This,' said the Lord of Ercildown, 'is the scathing wind and dreadful
tempest which shall long blow calamity and trouble on the realm of
Scotland!'  And surely his words have been verified, for still the
storm rages around our borders--and will not cease, I fear, till the
present dragon of England be laid as low as our noble lion was by that
mysterious blast."**

**Alexander III. was killed in this manner on the 18th of April, 1290,
just seven years before the consequent calamities of his country made
it necessary for Wallace to rise in its defense.

The like discourse held the friends till they landed at Roseyth Castle,
where they lodged for the night; and next morning recommencing their
journey at daybreak, they crossed the Lomonds under a wintery sun, and
entered Perth in the midst of a snow-storm.

The regent's arrival soon spread throughout the province, and the hall
of the castle was speedily crowded with chieftains, come to pay their
respects to their benefactor; while an army of grateful peasantry from
the hills filled the suburbs of the town, begging for one glance only
of their beloved lord.  To oblige them, Wallace mounted his horse, and
between the Lords Ruthven and Athol, with his bonnet off, rode from the
castle to the populace-covered plain, which lay to the west of the
city.  He gratified their affectionate eagerness by this condescension,
and received in return the sincere homage of a thousand grateful
hearts.  The snow-topped Grampians echoed with the proud acclamations
of "Our deliverer," "Our prince," "The champion of Scotland," "The
glorious William Wallace!" and the shores of the Tay resounded with
similar rejoicings at sight of him who made the Scottish seamen lords
of the Northern Ocean.

Ruthven beheld this eloquence of nature with sympathetic feelings.  His
just sense of the unequaled merits of the regent had long internally
acknowledged him as his sovereign; and he smiled with approbation at
every breathing amongst the people which intimated what would at last
be their general shout.  Wallace had proved himself not only a warrior
but a legislator.  In the midst of war he had planted the fruits of
peace, and now the olive and the vine waved abundant on every hill.

Different were the thoughts of the gloomy Athol as he rode by the side
of the regent.  Could he by a look have blasted those valiant arms--have
palsied that youthful head, whose judgment shamed the hoariest
temples--gladly would he have made Scotland the sacrifice so that he
might never again find himself in the triumphant train of one whom he
deemed a boy and an upstart!  Thus did he muse, and thus did envy open
a way into his soul for those demons to enter which were so soon to
possess it with the fellest designs.

The issue of Ruthven's claims did not lessen Lord Athol's hatred of the
regent.  Wallace simply stated the case to him, only changing the
situations of the opponents; he supposed Athol to be in the place of
Ruthven and then asked the frowning earl if Ruthven had demanded a
government which Athol had bravely won and nobly secured, whether he
should deem it just to be sentenced to relinquish it into the hands of
his rival?  By this question he was forced to decide against himself.
But while Wallace generously hoped that, by having made him his own
judge, he had found an expedient both to soften the pain of
disappointment and to lessen the humiliation of defeat, he had only
redoubled the hatred of Athol, who thought he had thus been cajoled out
of even the privilege of complaint.  He, however, affected to be
reconciled to the issue of the affair, and, taking a friendly leave of
the regent, retired to Blair; and there, amongst the numerous
fortresses which owned his power--amongst the stupendous strongholds of
nature, the cloud invested mountains and the labyrinthine winding of
his lochs and streams--he determined to pass his days and nights in
devising the sure fall of this proud usurper; for so the bitterness of
an envy he durst not yet breathe to any impelled him internally to
designate the unpretending Wallace.

Meanwhile, the unconscious object of this hatred, oppressed by the
overwhelming crowds constantly assembling at Perth to do him homage,
retired to Huntingtower--a castle of Lord Ruthven's, at some distance
from the town.  Secluded from the throng, he there arranged, with the
chiefs of several clans, matters of consequence to the internal repose
of the country; but receiving applications for similar regulations from
the counties further north, he decided on going thither himself.
Severe as the weather was at that season, he bade adieu to the warm
hospitalities of Huntingtower, and, accompanied by Graham and his young
friend Edwin, with a small but faithful train he commenced a journey
which he intended should comprehend the circuit of the Highlands.

With the chieftain of almost every castle in his progress he passed a
day, and according to the interest which the situation of the
surrounding peasantry created in his mind he lengthened his sojourn.
Everywhere he was welcomed with enthusiasm, and his glad eye beheld the
festivities of Christmas with a delight which recalled past emotions,
till they wrung his heart.

The last day of the old year he spent with Lord Loch-awe, in Kichurn
Castle; and after a bounteous feast, in which lord and vassal joined,
sat up the night to hail the coming in of the new season.  Wallace had
passed that hour, twelve months ago, alone with his Marion.  They sat
together in the window of the eastern tower of Ellerslie: and while he
listened to the cheerful lilts to which their servants were dancing,
the hand of his lovely bride was clasped in his.  Marion smiled and
talked of the happiness which should await them in the year to come.
"Ay, my beloved," answered he, "more than thy beauteous self will then
fill these happy arms!  Thy babe, my wife, will then hand at thy bosom,
to bless with a parent's joys thy grateful husband!"

That time was now come round, and where was Marion?-cold in the grave.
Where that smiling babe?-a murderer's steel had reached it ere it saw
the light.

Wallace groaned at these recollections; he struck his hand forcibly on
his bursting heart, and fled from the room.  The noise of the harps,
the laughing of the dancers, prevented his emotions from being
observed; and rushing far from the joyous tumult, till its sounds died
in the breeze, or were only brought to his ear by fitful gusts, he
speeded along the margin of the lake, as if he would have flown even
from himself.  But memory, racking memory, followed him.  Throwing
himself on a bank, over which the ice hung in pointed masses, he felt
not the roughness of the ground, for all within him was disturbed and
at war.

"Why," cried he, "O! why was I selected for this cruel sacrifice?  Why
was this heart, to whom the acclaim of multitudes could bring no
selfish joy--why was it to be bereft of all that ever made it beat with
transport?  Companion of my days, partner of my soul! my lost, lost
Marion!  And are thine eyes forever closed on me?  Shall I never more
clasp that hand which ever thrilled my frame with every sense of
rapture?  Gone, gone forever--and I am alone!"

Long and agonizing was the pause which succeeded to this fearful
tempest of feeling.  In that hour of grief, renewed in all its former
violence, he forgot country, friends and all on earth.  The
recollection of his fame was mockery to him; for where was she to whom
the sound of his praises would have given so much joy?

"Ah!" said he, "it was indeed happiness to be brightened in those eyes!
When the gratitude of our poor retainers met thine ear, how didst thou
lay thy soft cheek to mine, and shoot its gentle warmth into my heart!"
At that moment he turned his face on the gelid bank; starting with
wild horror, he exclaimed, "Is it now so cold?  My Marion, my murdered
wife!" and, rushing from the spot, he again hastened along the margin
of the loch.  But there he still heard the distant sound of the pipes
from the castle; he could not bear their gay notes; and, darting up the
hill which overhung Loch-awe's domain, he ascended, with swift and
reckless steps, the rocky sides of Ben Cruachan.  Full of distracting
thoughts, and impelled by a wild despair, he hurried from steep to
steep, and was rapidly descending the western side of the mountain,
regardless of the piercing sleet, when his course was suddenly checked
by coming with a violent shock against another human being, who,
running as hastily through the storm, had driven impetuously against
Wallace; but, being the weaker of the two, was struck to the ground.
The accident rallied the scattered senses of the chief.  He now felt
that he was out in the midst of a furious winter tempest, had wandered
he knew not whither, and probably had materially injured some poor
traveler by his intemperate motion.

He raised the fallen man, and asked whether he were hurt.  The
traveler, perceiving by the kind tone of the inquirer that no harm had
been intended, answered, "Not much, only a little lamed, and all the
recompense I ask for this unlucky upset is to give me a helping hand to
my father's cot--it is just by.  I have been out at a neighbor's to
dance in the new year with a bonny lass, who, however, may not thank
you for my broken shins!"

As the honest lad went on telling his tale, with a great many
particulars dear to his simple wishes, Wallace helped him along; and
carefully conducting him through the gathering snow, descended the
declivity which led to the shepherd's cottage.  When within a few yards
of it, Wallace heard the sound of singing, but it was not the gay
caroling of mirth; the solemn chant of more serious music mingled with
the roaring blast.

"I am not too late yet!" cried the communicative lad; "I should not
have run so fast had I not wanted to get home in time enough to make
one in the New-year's hymn."

They had now arrived at the little door, and the youth, without the
ceremony of knocking, opened the latch; as he did so, he turned and
said to his companion, "We have no occasion for bolts, since the brave
Lord Wallace has cleared the country of our Southron robbers."  He
pushed the door as he spoke, and displayed to the eyes of the chief a
venerable old man on his knees before a crucifix; around him knelt a
family of young people and an aged dame, all joining in the sacred
thanksgiving.  The youth, without a word, dropped on his knees near the
door, and making a sign to his companion to do the same, Wallace
obeyed; and as the anthems rose in succession on the ear, to which the
low breathings of the lightly touched harp echoed its heavenly strains,
he felt the tumult of his bosom gradually subside; and when the
venerable sire laid down the instrument and clasped his hands in
prayer, the natural pathos of his invocations, and the grateful
devotions with which the young people gave their response, all tended
to tranquilize his mind into a holy calm.

At the termination of the concluding prayer, how sweet were the
emotions of Wallace when he heard these words, uttered with augmented
fervor by the aged petitioner!

"While we thus thank thee, O gracious God! for the mercies bestowed
upon us, we humbly implore thee to hold in thine Almighty protection
him by whose arm thou has wrought the deliverance of Scotland.  Let our
preserver be saved from his sins by the blood of Christ!  Let our
benefactor be blessed in mind, body, and estate, and all prosper with
him that he takes in hand!  May the good he has dispensed to his
country be returned four-fold into his bosom; and may he live to see a
race of his own reaping the harvest of his virtues, and adding fresh
honors to the stalwart name of Wallace!"

Every mouth echoed a fervent amen to this prayer, and Wallace himself
inwardly breathed, "And have I not, even now, sinned, all-gracious God!
in the distraction of this night's remembrance?  I mourned--I would not
be comforted.  But in thy mercy thou hast led me hither to see the
happy fruits of my labors; and I am resigned and thankful!"

The sacred rites over, two girls ran to the other side of the room, and
between them brought forward a rough table covered with dishes and
bread; while the mother, taking off a large pot, emptied its smoking
contents into the different vessels.  Meanwhile the young man,
introducing the stranger to his father, related the accident of the
meeting, and the good old shepherd, bidding him a hearty welcome,
desired him to draw near the fire and partake of their New-year's
breakfast.

"We need the fire, I assure you," cried the lad, "for we are dripping."

Wallace now advanced from the shadowed part of the room, where he had
knelt, and drawing toward the light, certainly displayed to his host
the truth of his son's observation.  He had left the castle without his
bonnet, and hurrying on regardless of the whelming storm, his hair
became saturated with wet, and now streamed in water over his
shoulders.  The good old wife, seeing the stranger's situation was
worse than her son's snatched away the bottle out of which he was
swallowing a heavy cordial, and poured it over the exposed head of her
guest; then ordering one of her daughters to rub it dry, she took off
his plaid, and wringing it, hung it to the fire.

During these various operations--for the whole family seemed eager to
show their hospitality--the old man discovered, not so much by the
costliness of his garments as by the noble mien and gentle manners of
the stranger, that he was some chieftain from the castle.  "Your
honor," said he, "must pardon the uncourtliness of our ways; but we
give you the best we have: and the worthy Lord Loch-awe cannot do more."

Wallace gave smiling answers to all their remarks, and offers of
service.  He partook of their broth, praised the good wife's cakes, and
sat discoursing with the family with all the gayety and frankness of
one of themselves.  His unreserved manners opened every heart around
him, and with confidential freedom the venerable shepherd related his
domestic history, dwelling particularly on the projected marriages of
his children, which he said, "should now take place, since the good Sir
William Wallace had brought peace to the land."

Wallace gratified the worthy father, he appearing to take an interest
in all his narratives, and then allowing the happy spirits of the young
people to break in upon these graver discussions, he smiled with them,
or looked serious with the garrulous matron, who turned the discourse
to tales of other times.  He listened with complacency to every legend
of witch, fairy, and ghost; and his enlightened remarks sometimes
pointed out natural causes for the extraordinary appearances she
described; or, at better--attested and less equivocal accounts of
supernatural apparitions, he acknowledged that there are "more things
in heaven and earth than are dreamed of in philosophy."

Morning dawned before the tranquilized, nay, happy Wallace, happy in
the cheerful innocence of the scene, discovered that the night was
past.  As the gray light gleamed through the wooden shutters he arose.
"My friends, I must leave you," said he; "there are those not far off
who may be alarmed at my disappearance, for none knew when I walked
abroad, and unwittingly I have been charmed all these hours to remain,
enjoying the happiness of your circle, forgetful of the anxiety I have
perhaps occasioned in my own."

The old man declared his intention of seeing him over the hill.
Wallace declined giving him that trouble, saying that as it was
daylight, and the snow had ceased, he could easily retrace his steps to
the castle.

"No, no," returned the shepherd; "and besides," said he, "as I hear the
good lord regent is keeping the New Year with our noble earl, who knows
but I may get a glimpse of his noble countenance, and that will be a
sight to tell of till I die!"

"God's blessing on his sweet face!" cried the old woman; "but I would
give all the yarn in my muckle chest to catch one look of his lucky
eye!  I warrant you, witch nor fairy could never harm me more."

"Ah, father," cried the eldest of the girls, blushing, "if you go near
enough to him!  Do you know, Madgie Grant told me, if I could but get
even the least bit of Sir William Wallace's hair, and give it to Donal
Cameron to wear in a true lover's know on his breast, no Southron will
be able to do him harm as long as he lives!"

"And do you believe it would protect your lover, my pretty Jeannie?"
inquired Wallace, with a sweet smile.

"Surely," she replied; "for Madgie is a wise woman, and has the second
sight."

"Well, then," returned he, "you shall be gratified.  For, though I must
for once contradict the testimony of a wise woman, and tell you that
nothing can render a man absolutely safe but the protection of Heaven,
yet, if a hair from the head of Sir William Wallace would please you,
and a glance from his eye gratify your mother, both shall be
satisfied," and lifting up the old woman's shears, which lay on a
working-stool before him, he cut off a golden lock from the middle of
his head and put it into the hand of Jeannie.  At this action--which was
performed with such noble grace that not one of the family now doubted
who had been their guest--the good dame fell on her knees, and Jeannie,
with a cry of joy, putting the beautiful lock into her bosom, followed
the example, and in a woman all were clinging around him.  The old man
grasped his hand.  "Bravest of men!" cried he, "the Lord has indeed
blessed this house, since he has honored it with the presence of the
deliverer of Scotland!  My prayers, and the benedictions of all good
men, friend or foe, must ever follow your footsteps!"

Tears of pleasure started into the eyes of Wallace.  He raised the
family one by one from the ground, and putting his purse into the hand
of the dame, "There, my kind hostess," said he, "let that fill the
chests of your daughters on their bridal day; they must receive it as a
brother's portion to his sisters, for it is with fraternal affection
that William Wallace regards the sons and daughters of Scotland."

The happy sobs of the old woman stopped the expressions of her
gratitude, but her son, fearing his freedom of the night before might
have offended, stood abashed at a distance.  Wallace stretched out his
hand to him.  "My good Archibald," cried he, "do not hold back from one
who will always be your friend.  I shall send from the castle this day
sufficient to fill your bridal coffers also."

Archibald now petitioned to be allowed to follow him in his army.  "No,
my brave youth," replied the chief; "Lord Lochawe will lead you forth,
whenever there is occasion; and, meanwhile, your duty is to imitate the
domestic duties of your worthy father.  Make the neighboring valley
smile with the fruits of your industry; and raise a family to bless
you, as you now bless him."

Wallace, having wrapped himself in his plaid, now withdrew amidst the
benedictions of the whole group; and swiftly recrossing the mountain
heights, was soon on the western brow of Ben Cruachan.  In ten minutes
afterward he entered the hall of Kilchurn Castle.  A few servants only
were astir; the rest of the family were still asleep.  About an hour
after their friend's departure, the earl and Graham had missed him; but
supposing that, whithersoever he was gone, he would soon return, they
made no inquiries; and when the tempest began, on Edwin expressing his
anxiety to know where he was, one of the servants said he was gone to
his chamber.  This answer satisfied every one, and they continued to
enjoy the festal scene until the Countess of Loch-awe made the signal
for repose.

Next morning, when the family met at the breakfast-board, they were not
a little surprised to hear Wallace recount the adventure of the night;
and while Loch-awe promised every kindness to the shepherd, and a
messenger was dispatched with a purse to Archibald Edwin learned from
the earl's servant, that his reason for supposing the regent was gone
to his room arose from the sight of his bonnet in the outer hall.
Wallace was glad that such an evidence had prevented his friends being
alarmed; and retiring with Lord Loch-awe, with his usual equanimity of
mind resumed the graver errand of his tour.

The hospitable rites of the season being over, in the course of a few
days the earl accompanied his illustrious guest to make the circuit of
Argyleshire.  At Castle Urguhart they parted; and Wallace, proceeding
with his two friends, performed his legislative visits from sea to sea.
Having traversed with perfect satisfaction the whole of the northern
part of the kingdom, he returned to Huntingtower on the very morning
that a messenger had reached it from Murray.  That vigilant chieftain
informed the regent of King Edward's arrival from Flanders, and that he
was preparing a large army to march into Scotland.

"We must meet him," cried Wallace, "on his own shores; and so let the
horrors attending the seat of war full on the country whose king would
bring desolation to ours."




Chapter XLIX.

Stanmore.


The gathering word was dispatched from chief to chief, to call the
clans of the Highlands to meet their regent by a certain day in
Clydesdale.  Wallace himself set forward to summon the strength of the
Lowlands; but at Kinclavin Castle, on the coast of Fife, he was
surprised with another embassy from Edward--a herald, accompanied by
that Sir Hugh le de Spencer who had conducted himself so insolently on
his first embrassage.

On his entering the chamber where the regent sat with the chiefs who
had accompanied him from Perthsire, the two English men walked forward;
but before the herald could pay the customary respects, Le de Spencer
advanced to Wallace; and to the price of a little mind, elated at being
empowered to insult with impunity, he broke forth: "Sir William
Wallace, the contumely with which the embassadors of Prince Edward were
treated, is so resented by the King of England, that he invests his own
majesty in my person to tell you, that your treasons have filled up
their measure! that now, in the plenitude of his continental victories,
he descends upon Scotland, to annihilate this rebellious nation; and-"

"Stop, Sir Hugh le de Spencer," cried the herald, touching him with his
scepter; "whatever may be the denunciations with which our sovereign
has intrusted you, you must allow me to perform my duty before you
declare them.  And thus I utter the gracious message with which his
Majesty has honored my mouth."

He then addressed Wallace; and in the king's name, accusing him of
rebellion, and of unfair and cruel devastations made in Scotland and in
England, promised him pardon for all if he would immediately disband
his followers and acknowledge his offense.

Wallace motioned with his hand for his friends to keep silence (for he
perceived that two or three of the most violent were ready to break
forth in fierce defiance of King Edward), and being obeyed, he calmly
replied to the herald: "When we were desolate, your king came to us as
a comforter, and he put us in chains!  While he was absent, I invaded
his country as an open enemy.  I rifled your barns, but it was to feed
a people whom his robberies had left to perish!  I marched through your
lands, I made your soldiers fly before me; but what spot in all your
shores have I made black with the smoke of ruin?  I leave the people of
Northumberland to judge between me and your monarch.  And that he never
shall be mine or Scotland's, with God's blessing on the right, our
deeds shall further prove!"

"Vain and ruinous determination!" exclaimed Le de Spencer; "King Edward
comes against you, with an army that will reach from sea to sea.
Wherever the hoofs of his war-horse strike, there grass never grows
again.  The sword and the fire shall make a desert of this devoted
land; and your arrogant head, proud Scot, shall bleed upon the
scaffold!"

"He shall first see my fires, and meet my sword in his own fields,"
returned Wallace; "and if God continues my life, I will keep my Easter
in England, in despite of King Edward, and of all who bear armor in his
country!"

As he spoke he rose from his chair, and bowing his head to the herald,
the Scottish marshals conducted the embassadors from his presence.  Le
de Spencer twice attempted to speak, but the marshals would not allow
him.  They said that the business of the embassy was now over; and
should he presume further to insult their regent, the privilege of his
official character should not protect him from the wrath of the Scots.
Intimidated by the frowning brows and nervous arms of all around, he
held his peace, and the doors were shut on him.

Wallace foresaw the heavy tempest to Scotland threatened by these
repeated embassies.  He perceived that Edward, by sending overtures
which he knew could not be accepted--by making a show of pacific
intentions, meant to throw the blame of the continuation of hostilities
upon the Scots, and so overcome the reluctance of his more equitable
nobility, to further persecute a people whom he had made suffer so
unjustly.  The same insidious policy was likewise meant to change the
aspect of the Scottish cause in the eyes of Philip of France, who had
lately sent congratulations to the regent, on the victory of
Cambus-Kenneth; and by that means deprive him of a powerful ally and
zealous negotiator for an honorable peace.

To prevent this last injury, Wallace dispatched a quick-sailing vessel
with Sir Alexander Ramsay, to inform King Philip of the particulars of
Edward's proposals, and of the consequent continued warfare.

On the twenty-eighth of February, Sir William Wallace joined Lord
Andrew Murray, on Bothwell Moor, where he had the happiness of seeing
his brave friend again lord of the domains he had so lately lost in the
Scottish cause.  Wallace did not visit the castle.  At such a crisis,
he forbore to unnerve his mind, by awakening the griefs which lay
slumbering at the bottom of his heart.  Halbert came from his convent
once more to look upon the face of his beloved master.  The meeting
cost Wallace many agonizing pangs, but he smiled on his faithful
servant.  He pressed the venerable form in his manly arms, and promised
him news of his life and safety.  "May I die," cried the old man, "ere
I hear it is otherwise!  But youth is no warrant for life; the vigor of
those arms cannot always assure themselves of victory; and should you
fall, where would be our country?"

"With a better than I," returned the chief, "in the arms of God.  He
will fight for Scotland when Wallace is laid low."  Halbert wept.  But
the trumpet sounded for the field.  He blessed his lord, and they
parted forever.

A strong force from the Highlands joined the troops from Stirling; and
Wallace had the satisfaction of seeing before him thirty thousand
well-appointed men eager for the fight.  With all Scotland pressing on
his heart, his eye lingered for a moment on the distant towers of
Bothwell; but not delaying a moment, he placed himself at the head of
his legions, and set forth through a country now budding with all the
charms of the cultivation he had spread over it.  In the midst of a
fine glen of renovated corn fields, he was met by a courier from Sir
Roger Kirkpatrick, with information that the Northumbrians, being
apprised of King Edward's approach, were assembling in immense bodies;
and having crossed the debatable land in the night, had driven Sir
Eustace Maxwell, with great loss, into Carlaveroch; and though harassed
by Kirkpatrick himself, were ravaging the country as far as Dumfries.
The letter of the brave knight added, "These Southron thieves blow the
name of Edward before them, and with its sound have spell-bound the
courage of every soul I meet.  Come then, valiant Wallace, and conjure
it down again, else I shall not be surprised if the men of Annandale
bind me hand and foot, and deliver me up to Algernon Percy (the leader
of this inroad), to purchase mercy to their cowardice."

Wallace made no reply to this message, and proclaiming to his men that
the enemy were in Dumfriesshire, every foot was put to the speed; and
in a short time they arrived on the ridgy summits of the eastern
mountains of Clydesdale.  His troops halted for rest near the village
of Biggar; and it being night, he ascended to the top of the highest
craig, and lighted a fire, whose far-streaming light he hoped would
send the news of his approach to Annandale.  The air being calm and
clear, the signal rose in such a long pyramid of flame, that distant
shouts of rejoicing were heard breaking the deep silence of the hour.
A moment after a hundred answering beacons burned along the horizon.
Torthorald saw the propitious blaze; he showed it to his terrified
followers.  "Behold that hill of fire!" cried he, "and cease to
despair."  "Wallace comes!" was their response; "and we will do or
die!"**

**The mountain from which this beacon sent its rays has from that hour
been called Tinto or Tintoc (which signifies the Hill of Fire), and is
yet regarded by the country people with a devotion almost idolatrous.
Its height is about 2,260 feet from the sea.

Day broke upon Wallace as he crossed the heights of Drumlaurig, and
pouring his thousands over the almost deserted valleys of Annandale,
like a torrent he swept the invaders back upon their steps.  He took
young Percy prisoner, and leaving him shut up in Lochmaben, drove his
flying vassals far beyond the borders.

Annandale again free, he went into its various quarters, and summoning
the people (who now crept from their caves and woods, to shelter under
his shield), he reproved them for their cowardice; and showed them,
that unless every man possesses a courage equal to his general, he must
expect to fall under the yoke of the enemy.  "Faith in a leader is
good," said he; "but not such a faith as leaves him to act, without
yourselves rendering that assistance to your own preservation, which
Heaven itself commands.  When absent from you in person, I left my
spirit with you in the brave Knights of Carlaveroch and Torthorald, and
yet you fled.  Had I been here, and you done the same, the like must
have been the consequence.  What think you is in my arm, that I should
alone stem your enemies?  The expectation is extravagant and false.  I
am but the head of the battle, you are the aims; if you shrink, I fall,
and the cause is ruined.  You follow my call to the field, you fight
valiantly, and I win the day!  Respect then yourselves; and believe
that you are the sinews, the nerves, the strength of Sir William
Wallace!"

Some looked manfully up at this exhortation; but most hung their heads
in remembered shame, while he continued: "Dishonor not your fathers and
your trust in God by relying on any one human arm, or doubting that
from heaven.  Be confident that while the standard of true liberty is
before you, you fight under God's banner.  See how I in that faith
drove these conquering Northumbrians before me like frighted roes.  You
