The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Worshippers, by Damon Francis Knight

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Worshippers

Author: Damon Francis Knight

Illustrator: Emsh

Release Date: September 10, 2007 [EBook #22560]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORSHIPPERS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 THE
 WORSHIPPERS

 BY DAMON KNIGHT

 ILLUSTRATED BY EMSH


         Destiny reached out a hand to Algernon Weaver--but he
         was a timid man, at first. But on the strange world of
         Terranova, there was much to be learned--of destiny,
         and other things....


It was a very different thing, Algernon Weaver decided, actually to
travel in space. When you read about it, or thought about it in terms of
what you read, it was more a business of going from one name to another.
Algol to Sirius. Aldebaran to Epsilon Ceti. You read the names, and the
descriptions that went with them, and the whole thing--although
breathtaking in concept, of course, when you really stopped to
_meditate_ on it--became rather ordinary and prosaic and somehow more
understandable.

Not that he had ever approved. No. He had that, at least, to look back
upon; he had seen the whole enterprise as pure presumption, and had said
so. Often. The heavens were the heavens, and Earth was Earth. It would
have been better--_much_ better for all concerned--if it had been left
that way.

He had held that opinion, he reminded himself gratefully, from the very
beginning, when it was easy to think otherwise. Afterward, of
course--when the first star ships came back with the news that space
was aswarm with creatures who did not even resemble Man, and had never
heard of him, and did not think much of him when they saw him.... Well,
who but an idiot could hold any other opinion?

If only the Creator had not seen fit to make so many human beings in His
image but without His common sense....

Well, if He hadn't then for one thing, Weaver would not have been where
he was now, staring out an octagonal porthole at an endless sea of
diamond-pierced blackness, with the empty ship humming to itself all
around him.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an entirely different thing, he told himself; there were no
names, and no descriptions, and no feeling of going from one known place
to another known place. It was more like--

It was like standing outdoors, on a still summer night, and looking up
at the dizzying depths of the stars. And then looking down, to discover
that there was no planet under your feet--and that you were all alone in
that alien gulf....

It was enough to make a grown man cry; and Weaver had cried, often, in
the empty red twilight of the ship, feeling himself hopelessly and
forever cut off, cast out and forgotten. But as the weeks passed, a kind
of numbness had overtaken him, till now, when he looked out the porthole
at the incredible depth of sky, he felt no emotion but a thin,
disapproving regret.

Sometimes he would describe himself to himself, just to refute the
feeling that he was not really here, not really alive. But his mind was
too orderly, and the description would come out so cold and
terse--"Algernon James Weaver (1942-    ) historian, civic leader, poet,
teacher, philosopher. Author of _Development of the School System in
Schenectady and Scoharie Counties, New York_ (pamphlet, 1975); _An
Address to the Women's Clubs of Schenectady, New York_ (pamphlet, 1979);
_Rhymes of a Philosopher_ (1981); _Parables of a Philosopher_ (1983),
_Reflections of a Philosopher_ (1986). Born in Detroit, Michigan, son of
a Methodist minister; educated in Michigan and New York public schools;
B.A., New York State University, 1959; M.A., N.Y.S.U. Extension, 1964.
Unmarried. Surviving relatives--"

That was the trouble, it began to sound like an obituary. And then the
great humming metal shell would begin to feel like a coffin....

[Illustration]

Presumption. Pure presumption. None of these creatures should have been
allowed to get loose among the stars, Man least of all. It cluttered
up the Universe. It undermined Faith. And it had got Algernon Weaver
into the devil of a fix.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was his sister's fault, actually. She would go, in spite of his
advice, up to the Moon, to the UN sanatorium in Aristarchus. Weaver's
sister, a big-framed, definite woman, had a weak heart and seventy-five
superfluous pounds of fat. Doctors had told her that she would live
twenty years longer on the Moon; therefore she went, and survived the
trip, and thrived in the germ-free atmosphere, weighing just one-sixth
of her former two hundred and ten pounds.

Once, she was there, Weaver could hardly escape visiting her. Harriet
was a widow, with large resources, and Weaver was her only near
relative. It was necessary, it was prudent, for him to keep on her good
side. Moreover, he had his family feeling.

He did not like it, not a minute of it. Not the incredible trip, rising
till the Earth lay below like a botched model of itself; not the silent
mausoleum of the Moon. But he duly admired Harriet's spacious room in
the sanatorium, the recreation rooms, the auditorium; space-suited, he
walked with her in the cold Earthlight; he attended her on the excursion
trip to Ley Field, the interstellar rocket base on the far side of the
Moon.

The alien ship was there, all angles and planes--it came from Zeta
Aurigae, they told him, and was the second foreign ship to visit Sol.
Most of the crew had been ferried down to Earth, where they were
inspecting the people (without approval, Weaver was sure). Meanwhile,
the remaining crewman would be pleased to have the sanatorium party
inspect _him_.
