grabbed Lee by the arm leading him to the other side of the hangar where
stood her little jetticopter plane. "Let's get in here," she said. "I'm
freezing and I don't want you to be seen around here."

She didn't put on the lights, yet even in the dark Lee could see the
golden helmet of her hair shimmering like the pale gold in the halo of
the Virgin as the primitive art of Tuscany presented her a thousand
years ago. She nestled the soft fur of her coat against Lee's shoulders
and as she did he felt her shivering. He put a protecting arm around
her, careful to do it as a friend, careful to suppress the surge of
blood which started burning in his veins. She seemed to be groping for
words; it took a little while before she began to speak, with clarity
and simplicity as she always did but with an audible effort to keep
composed:

"I've brought you a suitcase, Semper, with a few necessities. And I
brought you some money, later you can send me your check. And here are
the keys of the plane. Fly over to Mexico; go back to Australia from
there or anywhere you want, but _do_ get out of this country and do it
quick. I couldn't tell you that over the phone and I shouldn't be
telling this to you now, but I feel I must.

"You're in danger and it's serious. Why? I don't know, but Howard seems
to suspect your loyalty. He also seems to think that you've gone out of
your mind. And Howard has taken measures; he has ordered re-examination
of your broad aptitude test. He has voiced his suspicion as to your
sanity to Bondy and Mellish and you know what kind of yes-men those
fellows are in the face of an authority like Scriven's. Trust them to
discover something wrong with you, trust them to give the test some kind
of a convenient twist. They're going to have you certified, they're
going to put you into a mental institution, Semper.

"Do you get that? Do you realize that it's fate worse than death? Do you
understand that there is nothing you can do to escape that fate except
by flight? I have no idea when it's going to be, this trap they're going
to spring on you; but for God's sake, Semper, get going as long as
there's still time. Any moment now some plainclothesman might grab you
by the arm and then...."

It was she who had grabbed him by the arm, Oona who looked into his
face, her big eyes moist.

Lee strained his willpower so it would control the tremor of his voice:

"Oona; there's one thing I have got to know: What made you tell me
this--and do all this so I could get away?"

The girl's eyes didn't waver from his. "I remember," she said slowly,
"I remember that I felt as if I could throw conventions into the wind
at the very first time we met. I've always been frank with you, as
much as I could be in my position. So then I don't mind telling you now
that ... I like you immensely, Semper."

As if agitated by some electric shock, Lee's arm tightened around the
girl's waist. "Oona, I have asked you once before to be my wife. You
said you couldn't and I thought it was because you didn't like me well
enough. But now, after what you've just told me, now that we both know
about The Brain and that I wasn't insane in my observations, I'm asking
you again: Be my wife, Oona, and then let's go together--anywhere--away
from all this, to the end of the world."

In the darkness her uplifted white face shone like the moon; there were
two limpid luminous pools in it. All of a sudden they overflowed with
tears streaming down her cheeks. Her mouth half opened, swallowed hard.
There was now nothing left of that "integrated personality", nothing of
the calm and the poise which the younger set of scientists admired so
much. There was only a young woman torn with torment.

"I would have loved to go with you to the end of the world when we were
floating over the Canyon. I would love to go with you a thousand times
more tonight," Lee heard her say and then the gnashing of her teeth as
she continued: "But it cannot be, Semper. It cannot be because my die is
cast, because my fate is made. Did nobody ever tell you? Didn't you even
guess? Howard and I--we've been living together for the past six years.
He's not a very good man; rather beyond good and evil; but then: I feel
that I have got to stick to him now more than ever."

The golden helmet of her hair dropped to Lee's breast. "I'm ashamed,"
she sobbed, "terribly, terribly ashamed, Semper. I've made such a mess
of things, of you and me--such a mess of my whole life."

He buried his face into the fragrance of the golden wave. "It's nothing,
darling," he whispered close to her ear. "It doesn't mean a thing to me;
it's less than a cloud which passes across the face of the moon, and
then it's gone and never will come back...."

She freed herself from his embrace. With both her hands upon his
shoulders she looked straight into his eyes.

"_That is not true, Semper_," she said and there was the fierceness of a
young Viking warrior in the flash of her eyes: "That is not true and
there's been already too much of lie in my life. I just cannot stand for
any more of that. _It can not be, Semper._ I've told you plainly and it
means not _ever_, not _ever_. Go now. Do as I told you. Go immediately.
If you really love me, grant me this, let me feel that I could do at
least something--this one thing for you."

"Oona!" Lee exclaimed and it sounded like a deep-throated bell in an
ancient cathedral town as it rings the last stroke of midnight and then
hangs mute in the dark sky. That happiness he had felt, that cometflight
through all the stars in heaven; it was too big for him, it couldn't
last. He had sensed the blow before it fell. It wasn't like being hit in
action; it was like in that field hospital when the doc had told him:
"This is going to hurt, Joe--I'm sorry, but we're shy of morphine."
Howard's name had cut just like that expected knife. What was there left
to say? Nothing; nothing, but one small matter.

"I love you, Oona, and that means forever just as much as you mean that
not ever you can come with me. And I thank you, Oona, for this hour.
Yes; I think I'll go back to Australia--where I belong. But not tonight.
I've set a great experiment going--the outcome is no longer in my hand.
Still I feel I mustn't run away now. In fact I cannot; it's somewhat
like a soldier's duty to stay up front. I'm going to see this to the
end."

She buried her face in her hands: "I knew it. You child, you--you Don
Quixote charging against the windmills. They're going to _kill_ you,
they're going to _kill_ you. And now there's nothing I can do."

For a second her small fists pounded against Lee's breast and the next
moment, before he could do anything, she had jumped out of the plane
slamming the door in his face. For a few seconds more he heard her
footsteps rushing across the frozen turf and the receding wails of
echoes from the hangar walls:

"And now there's nothing I can do--nothing I can do."

When after a minute of fumbling in the dark he pushed the door open, it
was too late.

       *       *       *       *       *

He walked over to the hotel; not by an act of will, but with his legs
somehow doing the job alone and by themselves. He ordered himself a car
from the Braintrust garage. He entered The Brain and went up in the
elevator to Apperception 36. Nobody seemed to notice that there was a
somnambulist passing by.... He unlocked the door and under the rows of
neon lights things were as he had left them eight hours ago. Only there
were no longer any snakes crawling across the floor towards a hole in
the wall. But the hole was still there and he thought that he had better
tidy things up a bit. If nobody had noticed the arrangements for this
new experiment so far; why should anybody be forewarned?

Lee put the lid back on the "Lignin-Filler-Spout." He closed the panel
so the wall looked whole again. He gathered the sticks of cordwood from
the floor and piled them neatly to their stacks again. All this he did
like a child putting its things away after a long day's play; a
grey-haired child, weary, with the sandman in its eyes. He looked around
and found everything done and over with. On the fluorescent screens all
curves The Brain described had dropped to the bottom. Like dead things
they lay flat. On the visi-screens some stay-behinds of the great exodus
were looming large, a hapless little ant-king scurrying about; a few
disabled workers, their blind eyes staring into the face of death. It
would come soon to them; their work on earth was done....

Lee looked at the clock: 10 p.m. He put out the lights and locked the
door behind that yawning emptiness which once had been his lab, which he
would never see again. As he descended in the elevator he felt very
tired.




CHAPTER IX


Incessant shrieks of the phone aroused Lee from the deep well of his
sleep. He didn't know the female voice which fairly jumped at him.

"Is this Dr. Lee? Dr. Semper F. Lee from Canberra; am I at last
connected with Dr. Lee?"

"Lee speaking."

"I've been phoning for you all over The Brain Lee. Have you forgotten
you had an appointment with us? Checking up on your broad aptitude test.
The doctors are waiting. This is Vivian Leahy speaking; don't you
remember me?"

"Yes, of course." The picture of the loquacious angel who had guided him
to the medical center on his first trip flashed back into his mind. "I
know I have an appointment for this afternoon; I'll be there."

"But, Dr. Lee, this _is_ this afternoon; it's four p.m. already. You
aren't ill, Dr. Lee, are you? You sound so strange."

Lee assured her that he wasn't and that he would be over right away.

"It's a miracle they left me undisturbed that long," he thought as he
shaved and dressed. His personal fate would be decided within the next
two hours he knew; it would be the end. But even as the tension mounted
in his consciousness he thought triumphantly. "I've had sixteen hours of
sleep; that's marvelous. Nobody can take that away. The body has
recharged its energies. Now I can stand the gaff."

Down at the desk they handed him a Western Union. It was from Washington
and bore no signature. "Mission completed," it read.

It made him feel fine. "Father has done it; he is a better man than I,"
he thought.

While the car streaked though the desert Lee scanned the morning papers.

"No Trace Of President Vandersloot," still was the headline. But below
new havocs were listed as they had developed overnight. This time the
West coast was the zone of catastrophes; the hostile power seemed to be
bent upon the closing of all ports in the U.S.A.

Lee gnashed his teeth as he read the number of new casualties, women and
children, too, who had become the victims of The Brain.

Arrived at "Grand Central" he kept a sharp lookout for any unusual
activity. There was none. All along elevator-row small groups of
bookish-looking men returned from their day's work in the Apperception
Centers. They looked calm and contented and with their briefcases under
their arms almost like ordinary businessmen heading for the commuter
train.

He didn't dare to linger or to look around. There was this all-pervading
sense of being shadowed, of having gone into a trap from which there was
no escape, of eyes following him everywhere. Whose eyes? That was
impossible to know. Maybe The Brain's; its sensory organs could
conceivably be installed anywhere. Maybe that janitor guiding a
polishing machine over the rubber floor was a plain clothesman; or maybe
it was that detached gentleman who seemed to wait for an elevator with a
stack of books under his arms.

As the cage shot up to Apperception 27, failure pressed down on his
heart. Now it was almost thirty hours since he had released "Ant-termes"
into the nerve paths of The Brain. Those undermining and devouring
armies; what could have happened to them? Any number of things: Perhaps
the Lignin in the nerve paths was poisonous. There had been no time for
him to test the stuff. Perhaps the maintenance engineers had replenished
the insulation in that sector overnight and all the hives were drowned.
Perhaps some kind of a detecting apparatus had found out about the pest
inside The Brain right from the start. As long as the beachhead of the
underground invasion remained small, its blocking would not impair the
functions of The Brain. What a fool he had been to pit dumb little
animals against the powers of a God. Oona had been right; he _was_ that
knight in rusty armor charging against windmills on a Rozinante....

       *       *       *       *       *

Vivian Leahy dragged him into the reception room of the medical center
almost by force. "The doctors have been waiting for you two hours now,"
she scolded him. "They never did that before for any man. How come you
forgot? And you forgot me too; last time you were so nice, I thought you
would date me up. I couldn't have resisted your invitation, you know.
Now, off with your coat."

Despite their irritation Mellish and Bondy received Lee with all their
tweedy cordiality. While they piled their weird equipment around the
operation table their tongues kept wagging: "The disappearance of the
President; what did Lee make of that? Was he dead or alive? Those
horrible catastrophes all over the country; what was behind all this?
Foreign agents, a native underground? Didn't Lee think there was a tidal
wave of anti-technology feeling arising since unemployment had again set
in? And would the international crisis lead to war? The Brain, of
course, would be the safest place in that event; but then, to think of
the civilian population, an anticipated forty, fifty million dead;
terrible wasn't it? Was Lee still able to concentrate upon his
scientific work these harrowing days? If so, the nervous strain was
terrific; they had experienced that in themselves. One reached the point
of diminishing returns, didn't one? Yes, they had noticed signs of
fatigue in Lee; discolorations under the eyes, a certain tenseness. Had
he lost weight recently? He looked it and he certainly had none to
spare. Did he suffer from insomnia? What you need is a good long rest,
Dr. Lee."

He gave his answers automatically, detached, absent-minded almost. They
were playing with him as a cat with a mouse. All their questions were
leading questions; he knew that, but it didn't seem to matter now.
Nothing mattered now after the great plan had failed, after his
beautiful dream too had vanished in the talk with Oona last night. "I've
outlived my usefulness," he thought.

The huge disk with the feeler-ray antennae sank down close to his chest,
heavy as the keystone upon a tomb. The lights went out and then there
was again that uncanny sensation of having millions of soldiers running
circles all over one's skin, The Brain's vibration rays. They had a
strange hypnotic effect. Deep instincts of life-preservation urged Lee
to jump up, to rush those medics, to make some desperate attempt to get
away. But as the rays now penetrated through the skin, they tied his
muscles, although consciousness remained. There was a ghoulish quality
in this, like being sucked into this apparatus, like having the very
essence of one's life drained out by it. The only lights Lee saw, the
glow of electronic tubes filtering through perforations in the walls of
the machines, they seemed like evil eyes staring at him and the smooth
lying voices from behind his head seemed as of mocking ghosts:

"Relax, Dr. Lee, relax. Let your mind wander at will. Think as the
spirit moves you to think. Remember, this is a routine checkup, nothing
but routine. Nothing to disturb you this time; we don't have to start
you upon any specific trend of thought. You know The Brain by now and
how it works; image-formation will start in a few moments. You have
similar equipment in your own Apperception Center we understand. How
does it work with that species you have discovered, 'Ant-termes
Pacificus'? It's marvelous what these sensory rays can do; one would
think that The Brain is really much more than a machine. The way it acts
it seems alive, a towering intelligence, a superhuman personality with a
will of its own. Don't you think so, Dr. Lee?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He didn't answer, preoccupied with the weird sensation inside his body:
the diaphragm's birdwing flutterings, the ghostly fingers playing a
pizzicato on his arteries' strings closer and closer to the heart. "Why
answer?" he thought. "Why say anything? Whatever they said was part of
the trap they were building and whatever he said they would make a part
of that trap. Why did they have to go through all of this professional
subtlety?"

The voices sounded lower now and farther away: "Go easy on the
rheostats, Mellish. I think trance has already set in."

"Yes; I remember his chart, he rates a high sensitivity, the rays work
fast on types like that."

At the footend the screen was gradually lighting up. Like an aurora
borealis the pale lights shot up in flashes, in quivering arcs, in
undulating waves. Their dance kept step with the vibrations which surged
up from Lee's chest into his brain and started racing through his
consciousness around and around, forming a vortex which swept up his
thoughts like wilted leaves. Fear froze his blood; the deadly fear of
inquisition victims in old and modern times who know that neither lie
nor truth can save them from a fate already sealed.

Images started forming out of the luminous clouds upon the screen.

There was some giant octopus, nebulous and terrifying as a diver might
see creeping out of the belly of a sunken ship. From the other side of
the screen a huge round, tentacled being crawled, radiant and somewhat
like the sun symbols of great antiquity. The two closed in and as they
did the octopus flung its arms around the shining disk obscuring it as a
