
"I couldn't get anyone else to take the part, because nobody liked it,
so finally I had to take it myself. Olive Kirk is on the concert
committee and goes against me in every single thing. But I got my way
in asking Mrs. Channing to come out from town and sing for us, anyhow.
She is a beautiful singer and will draw such a crowd that we will make
more than we will have to pay her. Olive Kirk thought our local talent
good enough and Minnie Clow won't sing at all now in the choruses
because she would be so nervous before Mrs. Channing. And Minnie is the
only good alto we have! There are times when I am so exasperated that I
feel tempted to wash my hands of the whole affair; but after I dance
round my room a few times in sheer rage I cool down and have another
whack at it. Just at present I am racked with worry for fear the Isaac
Reeses are taking whooping-cough. They have all got a dreadful cold and
there are five of them who have important parts in the programme and if
they go and develop whooping-cough what shall I do? Dick Reese's violin
solo is to be one of our titbits and Kit Reese is in every tableau and
the three small girls have the cutest flag-drill. I've been toiling for
weeks to train them in it, and now it seems likely that all my trouble
will go for nothing.

"Jims cut his first tooth today. I am very glad, for he is nearly nine
months old and Mary Vance has been insinuating that he is awfully
backward about cutting his teeth. He has begun to creep but doesn't
crawl as most babies do. He trots about on all fours and carries things
in his mouth like a little dog. Nobody can say he isn't up to schedule
time in the matter of creeping anyway--away ahead of it indeed, since
ten months is Morgan's average for creeping. He is so cute, it will be
a shame if his dad never sees him. His hair is coming on nicely too,
and I am not without hope that it will be curly.

"Just for a few minutes, while I've been writing of Jims and the
concert, I've forgotten Ypres and the poison gas and the casualty
lists. Now it all rushes back, worse than ever. Oh, if we could just
know that Jem is all right! I used to be so furious with Jem when he
called me Spider. And now, if he would just come whistling through the
hall and call out, 'Hello, Spider,' as he used to do, I would think it
the loveliest name in the world."

Rilla put away her diary and went out to the garden. The spring evening
was very lovely. The long, green, seaward-looking glen was filled with
dusk, and beyond it were meadows of sunset. The harbour was radiant,
purple here, azure there, opal elsewhere. The maple grove was beginning
to be misty green. Rilla looked about her with wistful eyes. Who said
that spring was the joy of the year? It was the heart-break of the
year. And the pale-purply mornings and the daffodil stars and the wind
in the old pine were so many separate pangs of the heart-break. Would
life ever be free from dread again?

"It's good to see P.E.I. twilight once more," said Walter, joining her.
"I didn't really remember that the sea was so blue and the roads so red
and the wood nooks so wild and fairy haunted. Yes, the fairies still
abide here. I vow I could find scores of them under the violets in
Rainbow Valley."

Rilla was momentarily happy. This sounded like the Walter of yore. She
hoped he was forgetting certain things that had troubled him.

"And isn't the sky blue over Rainbow Valley?" she said, responding to
his mood. "Blue--blue--you'd have to say 'blue' a hundred times before
you could express how blue it is."

Susan wandered by, her head tied up with a shawl, her hands full of
garden implements. Doc, stealthy and wild-eyed, was shadowing her steps
among the spirea bushes.

"The sky may be blue," said Susan, "but that cat has been Hyde all day
so we will likely have rain tonight and by the same token I have
rheumatism in my shoulder."

"It may rain--but don't think rheumatism, Susan--think violets," said
Walter gaily--rather too gaily, Rilla thought.

Susan considered him unsympathetic.

"Indeed, Walter dear, I do not know what you mean by thinking violets,"
she responded stiffly, "and rheumatism is not a thing to be joked
about, as you may some day realize for yourself. I hope I am not of the
kind that is always complaining of their aches and pains, especially
now when the news is so terrible. Rheumatism is bad enough but I
realize, and none better, that it is not to be compared to being gassed
by the Huns."

"Oh, my God, no!" exclaimed Walter passionately. He turned and went
back to the house.

Susan shook her head. She disapproved entirely of such ejaculations. "I
hope he will not let his mother hear him talking like that," she
thought as she stacked the hoes and rake away.

Rilla was standing among the budding daffodils with tear-filled eyes.
Her evening was spoiled; she detested Susan, who had somehow hurt
Walter; and Jem--had Jem been gassed? Had he died in torture?

"I can't endure this suspense any longer," said Rilla desperately.

But she endured it as the others did for another week. Then a letter
came from Jem. He was all right.

"I've come through without a scratch, dad. Don't know how I or any of
us did it. You'll have seen all about it in the papers--I can't write
of it. But the Huns haven't got through--they won't get through. Jerry
was knocked stiff by a shell one time, but it was only the shock. He
was all right in a few days. Grant is safe, too."

Nan had a letter from Jerry Meredith. "I came back to consciousness at
dawn," he wrote. "Couldn't tell what had happened to me but thought
that I was done for. I was all alone and afraid--terribly afraid. Dead
men were all around me, lying on the horrible grey, slimy fields. I was
woefully thirsty--and I thought of David and the Bethlehem water--and
of the old spring in Rainbow Valley under the maples. I seemed to see
it just before me--and you standing laughing on the other side of
it--and I thought it was all over with me. And I didn't care. Honestly,
I didn't care. I just felt a dreadful childish fear of loneliness and
of those dead men around me, and a sort of wonder how this could have
happened to me. Then they found me and carted me off and before long I
discovered that there wasn't really anything wrong with me. I'm going
back to the trenches tomorrow. Every man is needed there that can be
got."

"Laughter is gone out of the world," said Faith Meredith, who had come
over to report on her letters. "I remember telling old Mrs. Taylor long
ago that the world was a world of laughter. But it isn't so any longer."

"It's a shriek of anguish," said Gertrude Oliver.

"We must keep a little laughter, girls," said Mrs. Blythe. "A good
laugh is as good as a prayer sometimes--only sometimes," she added
under her breath. She had found it very hard to laugh during the three
weeks she had just lived through--she, Anne Blythe, to whom laughter
had always come so easily and freshly. And what hurt most was that
Rilla's laughter had grown so rare--Rilla whom she used to think
laughed over-much. Was all the child's girlhood to be so clouded? Yet
how strong and clever and womanly she was growing! How patiently she
knitted and sewed and manipulated those uncertain Junior Reds! And how
wonderful she was with Jims.

"She really could not do better for that child than if she had raised a
baker's dozen, Mrs. Dr. dear," Susan had avowed solemnly. "Little did I
ever expect it of her on the day she landed here with that soup tureen."



CHAPTER XIII

A SLICE OF HUMBLE PIE

"I am very much afraid, Mrs. Dr. dear," said Susan, who had been on a
pilgrimage to the station with some choice bones for Dog Monday, "that
something terrible has happened. Whiskers-on-the-moon came off the
train from Charlottetown and he was looking pleased. I do not remember
that I ever saw him with a smile on in public before. Of course he may
have just been getting the better of somebody in a cattle deal but I
have an awful presentiment that the Huns have broken through somewhere."

Perhaps Susan was unjust in connecting Mr. Pryor's smile with the
sinking of the Lusitania, news of which circulated an hour later when
the mail was distributed. But the Glen boys turned out that night in a
body and broke all his windows in a fine frenzy of indignation over the
Kaiser's doings.

"I do not say they did right and I do not say they did wrong," said
Susan, when she heard of it. "But I will say that I wouldn't have
minded throwing a few stones myself. One thing is
certain--Whiskers-on-the-moon said in the post office the day the news
came, in the presence of witnesses, that folks who could not stay home
after they had been warned deserved no better fate. Norman Douglas is
fairly foaming at the mouth over it all. 'If the devil doesn't get
those men who sunk the Lusitania then there is no use in there being a
devil,' he was shouting in Carter's store last night. Norman Douglas
always has believed that anybody who opposed him was on the side of the
devil, but a man like that is bound to be right once in a while. Bruce
Meredith is worrying over the babies who were drowned. And it seems he
prayed for something very special last Friday night and didn't get it,
and was feeling quite disgruntled over it. But when he heard about the
Lusitania he told his mother that he understood now why God didn't
answer his prayer--He was too busy attending to the souls of all the
people who went down on the Lusitania. That child's brain is a hundred
years older than his body, Mrs. Dr. dear. As for the Lusitania, it is
an awful occurrence, whatever way you look at it. But Woodrow Wilson is
going to write a note about it, so why worry? A pretty president!" and
Susan banged her pots about wrathfully. President Wilson was rapidly
becoming anathema in Susan's kitchen.

Mary Vance dropped in one evening to tell the Ingleside folks that she
had withdrawn all opposition to Miller Douglas's enlisting.

"This Lusitania business was too much for me," said Mary brusquely.
"When the Kaiser takes to drowning innocent babies it's high time
somebody told him where he gets off at. This thing must be fought to a
finish. It's been soaking into my mind slow but I'm on now. So I up and
told Miller he could go as far as I was concerned. Old Kitty Alec won't
be converted though. If every ship in the world was submarined and
every baby drowned, Kitty wouldn't turn a hair. But I flatter myself
that it was me kept Miller back all along and not the fair Kitty. I may
have deceived myself--but we shall see."

They did see. The next Sunday Miller Douglas walked into the Glen
Church beside Mary Vance in khaki. And Mary was so proud of him that
her white eyes fairly blazed. Joe Milgrave, back under the gallery,
looked at Miller and Mary and then at Miranda Pryor, and sighed so
heavily that every one within a radius of three pews heard him and knew
what his trouble was. Walter Blythe did not sigh. But Rilla, scanning
his face anxiously, saw a look that cut into her heart. It haunted her
for the next week and made an undercurrent of soreness in her soul,
which was externally being harrowed up by the near approach of the Red
Cross concert and the worries connected therewith. The Reese cold had
not developed into whooping-cough, so that tangle was straightened out.
But other things were hanging in the balance; and on the very day
before the concert came a regretful letter from Mrs. Channing saying
that she could not come to sing. Her son, who was in Kingsport with his
regiment, was seriously ill with pneumonia, and she must go to him at
once.

The members of the concert committee looked at each other in blank
dismay. What was to be done?

"This comes of depending on outside help," said Olive Kirk,
disagreeably.

"We must do something," said Rilla, too desperate to care for Olive's
manner. "We've advertised the concert everywhere--and crowds are
coming--there's even a big party coming out from town--and we were
short enough of music as it was. We must get some one to sing in Mrs.
Channing's place."

"I don't know who you can get at this late date," said Olive. "Irene
Howard could do it; but it is not likely she will after the way she was
insulted by our society."

"How did our society insult her?" asked Rilla, in what she called her
'cold-pale tone.' Its coldness and pallor did not daunt Olive.

"You insulted her," she answered sharply. "Irene told me all about
it--she was literally heart-broken. You told her never to speak to you
again--and Irene told me she simply could not imagine what she had said
or done to deserve such treatment. That was why she never came to our
meetings again but joined in with the Lowbridge Red Cross. I do not
blame her in the least, and I, for one, will not ask her to lower
herself by helping us out of this scrape."

"You don't expect me to ask her?" giggled Amy MacAllister, the other
member of the committee. "Irene and I haven't spoken for a hundred
years. Irene is always getting 'insulted' by somebody. But she is a
lovely singer, I'll admit that, and people would just as soon hear her
as Mrs. Channing."

"It wouldn't do any good if you did ask her," said Olive significantly.
"Soon after we began planning this concert, back in April, I met Irene
in town one day and asked her if she wouldn't help us out. She said
she'd love to but she really didn't see how she could when Rilla Blythe
was running the programme, after the strange way Rilla had behaved to
her. So there it is and here we are, and a nice failure our concert
will be."

Rilla went home and shut herself up in her room, her soul in a turmoil.
She would not humiliate herself by apologizing to Irene Howard! Irene
had been as much in the wrong as she had been; and she had told such
mean, distorted versions of their quarrel everywhere, posing as a
puzzled, injured martyr. Rilla could never bring herself to tell her
side of it. The fact that a slur at Walter was mixed up in it tied her
tongue. So most people believed that Irene had been badly used, except
a few girls who had never liked her and sided with Rilla. And yet--the
concert over which she had worked so hard was going to be a failure.
Mrs. Channing's four solos were the feature of the whole programme.

"Miss Oliver, what do you think about it?" she asked in desperation.

"I think Irene is the one who should apologize," said Miss Oliver. "But
unfortunately my opinion will not fill the blanks in your programme."

"If I went and apologized meekly to Irene she would sing, I am sure,"
sighed Rilla. "She really loves to sing in public. But I know she'll be
nasty about it--I feel I'd rather do anything than go. I suppose I
should go--if Jem and Jerry can face the Huns surely I can face Irene
Howard, and swallow my pride to ask a favour of her for the good of the
Belgians. Just at present I feel that I cannot do it but for all that I
have a presentiment that after supper you'll see me meekly trotting
through Rainbow Valley on my way to the Upper Glen Road."

Rilla's presentiment proved correct. After supper she dressed herself
carefully in her blue, beaded crepe--for vanity is harder to quell than
pride and Irene always saw any flaw or shortcoming in another girl's
appearance. Besides, as Rilla had told her mother one day when she was
nine years old, "It is easier to behave nicely when you have your good
clothes on."

Rilla did her hair very becomingly and donned a long raincoat for fear
of a shower. But all the while her thoughts were concerned with the
coming distasteful interview, and she kept rehearsing mentally her part
in it. She wished it were over--she wished she had never tried to get
up a Belgian Relief concert--she wished she had not quarreled with
Irene. After all, disdainful silence would have been much more
effective in meeting the slur upon Walter. It was foolish and childish
to fly out as she had done--well, she would be wiser in the future, but
meanwhile a large and very unpalatable slice of humble pie had to be
eaten, and Rilla Blythe was no fonder of that wholesome article of diet
than the rest of us.

By sunset she was at the door of the Howard house--a pretentious abode,
with white scroll-work round the eaves and an eruption of bay-windows
on all its sides. Mrs. Howard, a plump, voluble dame, met Rilla
gushingly and left her in the parlour while she went to call Irene.
Rilla threw off her rain-coat and looked at herself critically in the
mirror over the mantel. Hair, hat, and dress were satisfactory--nothing
there for Miss Irene to make fun of. Rilla remembered how clever and
amusing she used to think Irene's biting little comments about other
girls. Well, it had come home to her now.

Presently, Irene skimmed down, elegantly gowned, with her pale,
straw-coloured hair done in the latest and most extreme fashion, and an
over-luscious atmosphere of perfume enveloping her.

"Why how do you do, Miss Blythe?" she said sweetly. "This is a very
unexpected pleasure."

Rilla had risen to take Irene's chilly finger-tips and now, as she sat
down again, she saw something that temporarily stunned her. Irene saw
it too, as she sat down, and a little amused, impertinent smile
appeared on her lips and hovered there during the rest of the interview.

On one of Rilla's feet was a smart little steel-buckled shoe and a
filmy blue silk stocking. The other was clad in a stout and rather
shabby boot and black lisle!

Poor Rilla! She had changed, or begun to change her boots and stockings
after she had put on her dress. This was the result of doing one thing
with your hands and another with your brain. Oh, what a ridiculous
position to be in--and before Irene Howard of all people--Irene, who
was staring at Rilla's feet as if she had never seen feet before! And
once she had thought Irene's manner perfection! Everything that Rilla
had prepared to say vanished from her memory. Vainly trying to tuck her
unlucky foot under her chair, she blurted out a blunt statement.

"I have come to athk a favour of you, Irene."

There--lisping! Oh, she had been prepared for humiliation but not to
this extent! Really, there were limits!

"Yes?" said Irene in a cool, questioning tone, lifting her
shallowly-set, insolent eyes to Rilla's crimson face for a moment and
then dropping them again as if she could not tear them from their
fascinated gaze at the shabby boot and the gallant shoe.

Rilla gathered herself together. She would not lisp--she would be calm
and composed.

"Mrs. Channing cannot come because her son is ill in Kingsport, and I
have come on behalf of the committee to ask you if you will be so kind
as to sing for us in her place." Rilla enunciated every word so
precisely and carefully that she seemed to be reciting a lesson.

"It's something of a fiddler's invitation, isn't it?" said Irene, with
one of her disagreeable smiles.

"Olive Kirk asked you to help when we first thought of the concert and
you refused," said Rilla.

"Why, I could hardly help--then--could I?" asked Irene plaintively.
"After you ordered me never to speak to you again? It would have been
very awkward for us both, don't you think?"

Now for the humble pie.

"I want to apologize to you for saying that, Irene." said Rilla
steadily. "I should not have said it and I have been very sorry ever
since. Will you forgive me?"

"And sing at your concert?" said Irene sweetly and insultingly.

"If you mean," said Rilla miserably, "that I would not be apologizing
to you if it were not for the concert perhaps that is true. But it is
also true that I have felt ever since it happened that I should not
have said what I did and that I have been sorry for it all winter. That
is all I can say. If you feel you can't forgive me I suppose there is
nothing more to be said."
