above the hills when, with a start, they awoke and at once sprang
to their feet, and instinctively looked round in search of
approaching danger. All was, however, quiet. Some herds of deer
grazed in the distance, but no other living creature was visible.

Then they turned their eyes upon each other, and burst into a
simultaneous shout of laughter. Their clothes were torn literally
into rags, by the bushes through which they had forced their way;
while their faces were scratched, and stained with blood, from the
same cause.

"The first thing to be done," Ned said, when the laugh was over,
"is to look for a couple of long springy saplings, and to make bows
and arrows. Of course they will not carry far, but we might knock
down any small game we come across."

Both lads were good shots with a bow, for in those days, although
firearms were coming in, all Englishmen were still trained in the
use of the bow.

"But what about strings?" Tom asked.

"I will cut four thin strips from my belt," Ned said. "Each pair,
tied together, will make a string for a five-foot bow, and will be
fully strong enough for any weapon we shall be able to make."

After an hour's walk, they came to a small grove of trees growing
in a hollow. These were of several species and, trying the
branches, they found one kind which was at once strong and
flexible. With their hangers, or short swords, they cut down a
small sapling of some four inches in diameter, split it up, pared
each half down, and manufactured two bows; which were rough,
indeed, but sufficiently strong to send an arrow a considerable
distance. They then made each a dozen shafts, pointed and notched
them. Without feathers, or metal points, these could not fly
straight to any distance; but they had no thought of long-range
shooting.

"Now," Ned said, "we will go back to that bare space of rock we
passed, a hundred yards back. There were dozens of little lizards
running about there, it will be hard if we cannot knock some over."

"Are they good to eat?" Tom asked.

"I have no doubt they are," Ned said. "As a rule, everything is
more or less good to eat. Some things may be nicer than others, but
hardly anything is poisonous. I have eaten snakes, over and over
again, and very good they are. I have been keeping a lookout for
them, ever since we started this morning."

When they reached the rock, the lizards all darted off to their
cracks and crevices; but Ned and Tom lay down, with their bows bent
and arrows in place, and waited quietly. Ere long the lizards
popped up their heads again, and began to move about, and the lads
now let fly their arrows. Sometimes they hit, sometimes missed, and
each shot was followed by the disappearance of the lizards; but
with patience they found, by the end of an hour, that they had shot
a dozen, which was sufficient for an ample meal for them.

"How will you cook them, Ned?"

"Skin them as if they were eels, and then roast them on a stick."

"I am more thirsty than hungry," Tom said.

"Yes, and from the look of the country, water must be scarce.
However, as long as we can shoot lizards and birds, we can drink
their blood."

The fire was soon lighted, and the lizards cooked. They tasted like
little birds, their flesh being tender and sweet.

"Now we had better be proceeding," Ned said, when they had finished
their meal. "We have an unknown country to explore and, if we ever
get across, we shall have materials for yarns for the rest of our
lives."

"Well, Ned, I must say you are a capital fellow to get into a
scrape with. You got Gerald and me out of one, and if anyone could
get through this, I am sure you could do so. Gerald told me that he
always relied upon you, and found you always right. You may be sure
that I will do the same. So I appoint you captain general of this
expedition, and promise to obey all orders, unquestioningly."

"Well, my first order is," Ned said, laughing, "that we each make a
good pike. The wood we made our bows from will do capitally, and we
can harden the points in the fire. We may meet some wild beasts,
and a good, strong six-foot pike would be better than our swords."

Two hours' work completed the new weapons, and with their bows
slung at their backs, and using their pikes as walking staves,
they again set out on their journey across the continent.




Chapter 11: The Marvel of Fire.



"What are those--natives?" exclaimed Tom suddenly.

Ned looked steadily at them for some time.

"No, I think they are great birds. The ostrich abounds in these
plains; no doubt they are ostriches."

"I suppose it is of no use our chasing them?"

"Not a bit. They can run faster than a horse can gallop."

During the day's walk, they saw vast numbers of deer of various
kinds; but as they were sure that these would not allow them to
approach, they did not alter their course, which was, as nearly as
they could calculate by the sun, due west. The sun was warm during
the day, but all the higher hilltops were covered with snow.

"If the worst comes to the worst," Ned said, "we must go up and get
some snow. We can make a big ball of it, and bring it down with us
in one of our sashes. But I should think there must be some stream,
somewhere about. The snow must melt; besides, these great herds of
deer must drink somewhere."

Late in the afternoon they came on the crest of a ridge.

"There," Ned said, pointing to a valley in which were a number of
trees. "We shall find water there, or I am mistaken."

An hour's tramp brought them to the valley. Through this a stream
ran between steep banks. They followed it for half a mile, and then
came to a spot where the banks sloped away. Here the ground was
trampled with many feet, and the edge of the stream was trodden
into mud.

"Hurrah, Tom! Here is meat, and drink, too. It is hard if we do not
kill something or other here. Look at that clump of bushes, where
the bank rises. If we hide there, the deer will almost touch us as
they pass to water; and we are sure to be able to shoot them, even
with these bows and arrows.

"But first of all, for a drink. Then we will cross the stream, and
make a camping ground under the trees opposite."

The stream was but waist deep, but very cold, for it was composed
of snow water.

"Shall we light a fire, Ned? It might frighten the deer."

"No, I think it will attract them," Ned said. "They are most
inquisitive creatures, and are always attracted by anything
strange."

A fire was soon lighted and, after it got quite dark, they piled up
dry wood upon it, recrossed the river, and took their places in the
bushes. An hour passed, and then they heard a deep sound. In a
minute or two the leading ranks of a great herd of deer appeared on
the rise, and stood looking wonderingly at the fire. For some
little time they halted; and then, pushed forward by those behind,
and urged by their own curiosity, they advanced step by step, with
their eyes fixed on the strange sight. So crowded were they that as
they advanced they seemed a compact mass, those outside coming
along close to the bushes in which the boys lay.

Silently these raised their bows, bent them to the full strain, and
each launched an arrow. The deer were not five feet from them, and
two stags fell, pierced through and through. They leaped to their
feet again, but the boys had dashed out with their swords in hand,
and in an instant had cut them down.

There was a wild rush on the part of the herd, a sound of feet
almost like thunder, and then the boys stood alone, by the side of
the two deer they had killed. They were small, the two together not
weighing more than a good-sized sheep.

The boys lifted them on their shoulders, rejoicing, and waded
across the stream. One they hung up to the branch of a tree. The
other they skinned and cut up, and were soon busy roasting pieces
of its flesh over the fire.

They had just finished an abundant meal when they heard a roar at a
short distance, which brought them to their feet in a moment. Ned
seized his pike, and faced the direction from which the sound had
come.

"Throw on fresh sticks, Tom. All animals fear fire."

A bright blaze soon lit up the wood.

"Now, Tom, do you climb the tree. I will give you the pieces of
meat up, and then do you lift the other stag to a higher branch. I
don't suppose the brute can climb, but he may be able to do so. At
any rate, we will sleep in the tree, and keep watch and ward."

As soon as Tom had followed these instructions, Ned handed him up
the bows and arrows and spears, and then clambered up beside him.
As the fire again burned low, an animal was seen to approach,
cautiously.

"A lion!" whispered Tom.

"I don't think that he is as big as a lion," Ned said, "but he
certainly looks like one. A female, I suppose, as it has got no
mane."

Of course the lads did not know, nor indeed did anyone else, at
that time, that the lion is not a native of America. The animal
before them was what is now called the South American lion, or
puma.

The creature walked round and round the fire, snuffing; and then,
with an angry roar, raised itself on its hind legs and scratched at
the trunk of the tree. Several times it repeated this performance;
and then, with another roar, walked away into the darkness.

"Thank goodness it can't climb!" Ned said. "I expect, with our
spears and swords, we could have beaten it back if it had tried;
still, it is just as well not to have had to do it. Besides, now we
can both go to sleep. Let us get well up the tree, so that if
anything that can climb should come, it will fall to at the deer to
begin with. That will be certain to wake us."

They soon made themselves as comfortable as they could in crutches
of the tree, tied themselves with their sashes to a bough to
prevent a fall, and were soon asleep.

The next day they rested in the wood, made fresh bowstrings from
the twisted gut of the deer, cut the skins up into long strips,
thereby obtaining a hundred feet of strong cord, which Ned thought
might be useful for snares. Here, too, they shot several birds,
which they roasted, and from whose feathers, tied on with a
thread-like fiber, they further improved their arrows. They
collected a good many pieces of fiber for further use; for, as Tom
said, when they got on to rock again they would be sure to find
some splinters of stone, which they could fasten to the arrows for
points; and would be then able to do good execution, even at a
distance.

They cut a number of strips of flesh off the deer, and hung them in
the smoke of the fire; by which means they calculated that they
could keep for some days, and could be eaten without being cooked;
which might be an advantage, as they feared that the odor of
cooking might attract the attention of wandering Indians.

The following morning they again started, keeping their backs, as
before, to the sun.

"Look at these creatures," Tom said suddenly, as a herd of animals
dashed by at a short distance. "They do not look like deer."

"No, they look more like sheep or goats, but they have much longer
legs. I wonder what they can be!"

During the day's journey they came across no water, and by the end
of the tramp were much exhausted.

"We will not make a fire tonight," Ned said. "We must be careful of
our powder. I don't want to be driven to use sticks for getting
fire. It is a long and tedious business. We will be up at daybreak
tomorrow, and will push on till we find water. We will content
ourselves, for tonight, with a bit of this smoked venison."

They found it dry work, eating this without water; and soon
desisted, gathered some grass to make a bed, and were asleep a
short time after it became dark. They were now in an open district,
not having seen a tree since they started in the morning, and they
had therefore less fear of being disturbed by wild beasts. They
had, indeed, talked of keeping watch by turns; but without a fire,
they felt that this would be dull work; and would moreover be of
little avail, as in the darkness the stealthy tread of a lion would
not be heard, and they would therefore be attacked as suddenly as
if no watch had been kept. If he should announce his coming by a
roar, both would be sure to awake, quickly enough. So, lying down
close together, with their spears at hand, they were soon asleep,
with the happy carelessness of danger peculiar to youth.

With the first streak of daybreak, they were up and on their way.
Until midday they came upon no water, their only excitement being
the killing of an armadillo. Then they saw a few bushes in a hollow
and, making towards it, found a small pool of water. After a hearty
drink, leaves and sticks were collected, a fire made, and slices of
the smoked deer's meat were soon broiling over it.

"This is jolly," Tom said. "I should not mind how long I tramped,
if we could always find water."

"And have venison to eat with it," Ned added, laughing. "We have
got a stock to last a week, that is a comfort, and this armadillo
will do for supper and breakfast. But I don't think we need fear
starvation, for these plains swarm with animals; and it is hard if
we can't manage to kill one occasionally, somehow or other."

"How far do you think it is across to the other coast?"

"I have not an idea," Ned said. "I don't suppose any Englishman
knows, although the Spaniards can of course tell pretty closely. We
know that, after rounding Cape Horn, they sail up the coast
northwest, or in that direction, so that we have got the base of a
triangle to cross; but beyond that, I have no idea whatever.

"Hallo!"

Simultaneously, the two lads caught up their spears and leaped to
their feet. Well might they be alarmed, for close by were a party
of some twenty Indians who had, quietly and unperceived, come down
upon them. They were standing immovable, and their attitude did not
betoken hostility. Their eyes were fixed upon them, but their
expression betrayed wonder, rather than enmity.

"Lay down your spear again, Tom," Ned said. "Let us receive them as
friends."

Dropping their spears, the lads advanced a pace or two, holding out
their hands in token of amity. Then slowly, step by step, the
Indians advanced.

"They look almost frightened," Ned said. "What can they be staring
so fixedly at?"

"It is the fire!" Ned exclaimed. "It is the fire! I do believe they
have never seen a fire before."

It was so, as Sir Francis Drake afterwards discovered when landing
on the coast. The Patagonian Indians, at that time, were wholly
unacquainted with fire.

When the Indians came down, they looked from the fire to the boys,
and perceived for the first time that they were creatures of
another color from themselves. Then, simultaneously, they threw
themselves on their faces.

"They believe that we are gods, or superior beings of some kind,"
Ned said. "They have clearly never heard of the Spaniards. What
good fortune for us! Now, let us reassure them."

So saying, he stooped over the prostrate Indians, patted them on
the head and shoulders; and, after some trouble, he succeeded in
getting them to rise. Then he motioned them to sit down round the
fire, put on some more meat and, when this was cooked, offered a
piece to each, Tom and himself setting the example of eating it.

The astonishment of the natives was great. Many of them, with a
cry, dropped the meat on finding it hot; and an excited talk went
on between them. Presently, however, the man who appeared to be the
chief set the example of carefully tasting a piece. He gave an
exclamation of satisfaction, and soon all were engaged upon the
food.

When they had finished, Ned threw some more sticks on the fire, and
as these burst into flames and then consumed away, the amazement of
the natives was intense. Ned then made signs to them to pull up
some bushes, and cast on the fire. They all set to work with
energy, and soon a huge pile was raised on the fire. At first great
volumes of white smoke only poured up, then the leaves crackled,
and presently a tongue of flame shot up, rising higher and higher,
till a great bonfire blazed away, far above their heads. This
completed the wonder and awe of the natives, who again prostrated
themselves, with every symptom of worship, before the boys. These
again raised them, and by signs intimated their intention of
accompanying them.

With lively demonstrations of gladness and welcome, the Indians
turned to go, pointing to the west as the place where their abode
lay.

"We may as well leave our bows and arrows," Ned said. "Their bows
are so immensely superior to ours that it will make us sink in
their estimation, if they see that our workmanship is so inferior
to their own."

The Indians, who were all very tall, splendidly made men, stepped
out so rapidly that the lads had the greatest difficulty in keeping
up with them, and were sometimes obliged to break into a half trot;
seeing which the chief said a word to his followers, and they then
proceeded at a more reasonable rate. It was late in the evening
before they reached the village, which lay in a wooded hollow at
the foot of some lofty hills. The natives gave a loud cry, which at
once brought out the entire population, who ran up and gazed,
astonished at the newcomers. The chief said a few words, when, with
every mark of awe and surprise, all prostrated themselves as the
men had before done.

The village was composed of huts, made of sticks closely
intertwined, and covered with the skins of animals. The chief led
them to a large one, evidently his own, and invited them to enter.
They found that it was also lined with skins, and others were laid
upon the floor. A pile of skin served as a mat and bed. The chief
made signs that he placed this at their disposal, and soon left
them to themselves.

In a short time he again drew aside the skin which hung across the
entrance, and a squaw advanced, evidently in deep terror, bearing
some raw meat. Ned received it graciously, and then said to Tom:

"Now we will light a fire, and astonish them again."

So saying, the boys went outside, picked up a dry stick or two, and
motioned to the Indians who were gathered round that they needed
more. The whole population at once scattered through the grove, and
soon a huge pile of dead wood was collected.

The boys now made a little heap of dried leaves, placed a few
grains of powder in a hollow at the top and, the flint and steel
