observations in "Somnus Plantarum" verify the theory, had the principle
of radiation been discovered in his day.




GERANIUM FAMILY _(Geraniaceae)_

Wild or Spotted Geranium or Crane's-Bill; Alum-root

_Geranium maculatum_

_Flowers_--Pale magenta, purplish pink, or lavender, regular, 1 to 1-1/2
in. broad, solitary or a pair, borne on elongated peduncles, generally
with pair of leaves at their base. Calyx of 5 lapping, pointed sepals; 5
petals, woolly at base; 10 stamens; 1 pistil with 5 styles. _Fruit:_ A
slender capsule pointed like a crane's bill. In maturity it ejects seeds
elastically far from the parent plant. _Stem:_ 1 to 2 ft. high, hairy,
slender, simple or branching above. _Leaves:_ Older ones sometimes
spotted with white; basal ones 3 to 6 in. wide, 3 to 5 parted, variously
cleft and toothed; 2 stem leaves opposite.

_Preferred Habitat_--Open woods, thickets, and shady roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--April-July.

_Distribution_--Newfoundland to Georgia, and westward a thousand miles.

Sprengel, who was the first to exalt flowers above the level of mere
botanical specimens, had his attention led to the intimate relationship
existing between plants and insects by studying out the meaning of the
hairy corolla of the common Wild Geranium of Germany _(G. sylvaticum)_,
being convinced, as he wrote in 1787, that "the wise Author of Nature
has not made even a single hair without a definite design." A hundred
years before, Nehemias Grew had said that it was necessary for pollen to
reach the stigma of a flower in order that it might set fertile seed;
and Linnaeus had to come to his aid with conclusive evidence to convince
a doubting world that this was true. Sprengel made the next step
forward, but his writings lay neglected over seventy years because he
advanced the then incredible and only partially true statement that a
flower is fertilized by insects which carry its pollen from its anthers
to its stigma. In spite of his discoveries that the hairs inside the
geranium's corolla protect its nectar from rain for the insect's
benefit, just as eyebrows keep perspiration from falling into the eye;
that most flowers which secrete nectar have what he termed "honey
guides"--spots of bright color, heavy veining, or some such pathfinder
on the petals--in spite of the most patient and scientific research that
shed great light on natural selection a half-century before Darwin
advanced the theory, he left it for the author of "The Origin of
Species" to show that cross-fertilization--the transfer of pollen from
one blossom to another, not from anthers to stigma of the same
flower--is the great end to which so much marvellous mechanism is
chiefly adapted. Cross-fertilized blossoms defeat self-fertilized
flowers in the struggle for existence.

No wonder Sprengel's theory was disproved by his scornful contemporaries
in the very case of his Wild Geranium, which sheds its pollen before it
has developed a stigma to receive any; therefore no insect that had not
brought pollen from an earlier bloom could possibly fertilize this
flower. How amazing that he did not see this! Our common wild
crane's-bill, which also has lost the power to fertilize itself, not
only ripens first the outer, then the inner, row of anthers, but
actually drops them off after their pollen has been removed, to overcome
the barest chance of self-fertilization as the stigmas become receptive.
This is the geranium's and many other flowers' method to compel
cross-fertilization by insects. In cold, stormy, cloudy weather a
geranium blossom may remain in the male stage several days before
becoming female; while on a warm, sunny day, when plenty of insects are
flying, the change sometimes takes place in a few hours. Among others,
the common sulphur or puddle butterfly, that sits in swarms on muddy
roads and makes the clover fields gay with its bright little wings,
pilfers nectar from the geranium without bringing its long tongue in
contact with the pollen. Neither do the smaller bees and flies which
alight on the petals necessarily come in contact with the anthers and
stigmas. Doubtless the larger bees are the flowers' true benefactors.

The so-called geraniums in cultivation are pelargoniums, strictly
speaking.


Herb Robert; Red Robin; Red Shanks; Dragon's Blood

_Geranium Robertianum_

_Flowers_--Purplish rose, about 1/2 in. across, borne chiefly in pairs
on slender peduncles. Five sepals and petals; stamens 10; pistil with 5
styles. _Stem_: Weak, slender, much branched, forked, and spreading,
slightly hairy, 6 to 18 in. high. _Leaves_: Strongly scented, opposite,
thin, of 3 divisions, much subdivided and cleft. _Fruit_: Capsular,
elastic, the beak 1 in. long, awn-pointed.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rocky, moist woods and shady roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--May-October.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to Pennsylvania, and westward to Missouri.

Who was the Robert for whom this his "holy herb" was named? Many suppose
that he was St. Robert, a Benedictine monk, to whom the twenty-ninth of
April--the day the plant comes into flower in Europe--is dedicated.
Others assert that Robert Duke of Normandy, for whom the "Ortus
Sanitatis," a standard medical guide for some hundred of years, was
written, is the man honored; and since there is now no way of deciding
the mooted question, we may take our choice.

Only when the stems are young are they green; later the plant well earns
the name of Red Shanks, and when its leaves show crimson stains, of
Dragon's Blood.

At any time the herb gives forth a disagreeable odor, but especially
when its leaves and stem have been crushed until they emit a resinous
secretion once an alleged cure for the plague.




MILKWORT FAMILY _(Polygalaceae)_


Fringed Milkwort or Polygala; Flowering Wintergreen; Gay Wings

_Polygala paucifolia_

_Flowers_--Purplish rose, rarely white, showy, over 1/2 in. long, from 1
to 4 on short, slender peduncles from among upper leaves. Calyx of 5
unequal sepals, of which 2 are wing-like and highly colored like petals.
Corolla irregular, its crest finely fringed; 6 stamens; 1 pistil. Also
pale, pouch-like, cleistogamous flowers underground. _Stem_: Prostrate,
6 to 15 in. long, slender, from creeping rootstock, sending up flowering
shoots 4 to 7 in. high. _Leaves_: Clustered at summit, oblong, or
pointed egg-shaped, 1-1/2 in. long or less; those on lower part of
shoots scale-like.

_Preferred Habitat_--Moist, rich woods, pine lands, light soil.

_Flowering Season_--May-July.

_Distribution_--Northern Canada, southward and westward to Georgia
and Illinois.

Gay companies of these charming, bright little blossoms hidden away in
the woods suggest a swarm of tiny mauve butterflies that have settled
among the wintergreen leaves. Unlike the common milkwort and many of its
kin that grow in clover-like heads, each one of the gay wings has
beauty enough to stand alone. Its oddity of structure, its lovely color
and enticing fringe, lead one to suspect it of extraordinary desire to
woo some insect that will carry its pollen from blossom to blossom and
so enable the plant to produce cross-fertilized seed to counteract the
evil tendencies resulting from the more prolific self-fertilized
cleistogamous flowers buried in the ground below.


Common, Field, or Purple Milkwort; Purple Polygala

_Polygala sanguinea (P. viridescens)_

_Flowers_--Numerous, very small, variable; bright magenta pink, or
almost red, or pale to whiteness, or greenish, clustered in a globular
clover-like head, gradually lengthening to a cylindric spike. _Stem_: 6
to 15 in. high, smooth, branched above, leafy. _Leaves_: Alternate,
narrowly oblong, entire.

_Preferred Habitat_--Fields and meadows, moist or sandy.

_Flowering Season_--June-September.

_Distribution_--Southern Canada to North Carolina, westward to the
Mississippi.

When these bright clover-like heads and the inconspicuous greenish ones
grow together, the difference between them is so striking it is no
wonder Linnaeus thought they were borne by two distinct species,
_Sanguinea_ and _viridescens_, whereas they are now known to be merely
two forms of the same flower. At first glance one might mistake the
irregular little blossom for a member of the pea family; two of the five
very unequal sepals--not petals--are colored wings. These bright-hued
calyx-parts overlap around the flower-head like tiles on a roof. Within
each pair of wings are three petals united into a tube, split on the
back, to expose the vital organs to contact with the bee, the milkwort's
best friend.

Plants of this genus were named polygala, the Greek for much milk, not
because they have milky juice--for it is bitter and clear--but because
feeding on them is supposed to increase the flow of cattle's milk.




TOUCH-ME-NOT FAMILY _(Balsaminaceae)_


Jewel-weed; Spotted Touch-me-not; Silver Cap; Wild Balsam; Lady's
Eardrops; Snap Weed; Wild Lady's Slipper

_Impatiens biflora (I. fulva)_

_Flowers_--Orange yellow, spotted with reddish brown, irregular, 1 in.
long or less, horizontal, 2 to 4 pendent by slender footstalks on a long
peduncle from leaf axils. Sepals, 3, colored; 1 large, sac-shaped,
contracted into a slender incurved spur and 2-toothed at apex; 2 other
sepals small. Petals, 3; 2 of them 2-cleft into dissimilar lobes; 5
short stamens, 1 pistil. _Stem_: 2 to 5 ft. high, smooth, branched,
colored, succulent. _Leaves_: Alternate, thin, pale beneath, ovate
coarsely toothed, petioled. _Fruit_: An oblong capsule, its 5 valves
opening elastically to expel the seeds.

_Preferred Habitat_--Beside streams, ponds, ditches; moist ground.

_Flowering Season_--July-October.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to Oregon, south to Missouri and Florida.

These exquisite, bright flowers, hanging at a horizontal, like jewels
from a lady's ear, may be responsible for the plant's folk-name; but
whoever is abroad early on a dewy morning, or after a shower, and finds
notched edges of the drooping leaves hung with scintillating gems,
dancing, sparkling in the sunshine, sees still another reason for naming
this the Jewel-weed. In a brook, pond, spring, or wayside trough, which
can never be far from its haunts, dip a spray of the plant to transform
the leaves into glistening silver. They shed water much as the
nasturtiums do.

When the tiny ruby-throated humming bird flashes northward out of the
tropics to spend the summer, where can he hope to find nectar so deeply
secreted that not even the long-tongued bumblebee may rob him of it all?
Beyond the bird's bill his tongue can be run out and around curves no
other creature can reach. Now the early-blooming columbine, its slender
cornucopias brimming with sweets, welcomes the messenger whose
needle-like bill will carry pollen from flower to flower; presently the
coral honeysuckle and the scarlet painted-cup attract him by wearing his
favorite color; next the jewel-weed hangs horns of plenty to lure his
eye; and the trumpet vine and cardinal flower continue to feed him
successively in Nature's garden; albeit cannas, nasturtiums, salvia,
gladioli, and such deep, irregular showy flowers in men's flower beds
sometimes lure him away.

Familiar as we may be with the nervous little seed-pods of the
touch-me-not, which children ever love to pop and see the seeds fly, as
they do from balsam pods in grandmother's garden, they still startle
with the suddenness of their volley. Touch the delicate hair-trigger at
the end of a capsule, and the lightning response of the flying seeds
makes one jump. They sometimes land four feet away. At this rate of
progress a year, and with the other odds against which all plants have
to contend, how many generations must it take to fringe even one mill
pond with jewel-weed; yet this is rapid transit indeed compared with
many of Nature's processes. The plant is a conspicuous sufferer from
the dodder.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Pale Touch-me-not _(I. aurea)_--_I. pallida_ of Gray--most abundant
northward, a larger, stouter species found in similar situations, but
with paler yellow flowers only sparingly dotted if at all, has its
broader sac-shaped sepal abruptly contracted into a short, notched, but
not incurved spur. It shares its sister's popular names.




BUCKTHORN FAMILY _(Rhamnaceae)_


New Jersey Tea; Wild Snowball; Red-root

_Ceanothus americanus_

_Flowers_--Small, white, on white pedicels, crowded in dense, oblong,
terminal clusters. Calyx white, hemispheric, 5-lobed; 5 petals, hooded
and long-clawed; 5 stamens with long filaments; style short, 3-cleft.
_Stems:_ Shrubby, 1 to 3 ft. high, usually several, from a deep reddish
root. _Leaves:_ Alternate, ovate-oblong, acute at tip, finely saw-edged,
3-nerved, on short petioles.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry, open woods and thickets.

_Flowering Season_--May-July.

_Distribution_--Ontario south and west to the Gulf of Mexico.

Light, feathery clusters of white little flowers crowded on the twigs
of this low shrub interested thrifty colonial housewives of
Revolutionary days not at all; the tender, young, rusty, downy leaves
were what they sought to dry as a substitute for imported tea. Doubtless
the thought that they were thereby evading George the Third's tax and
brewing patriotism in every kettleful added a sweetness to the home-made
beverage that sugar itself could not impart. The American troops were
glad enough to use New Jersey Tea throughout the war. A nankeen or
cinnamon-colored dye is made from the reddish root.




MALLOW FAMILY _(Malvaceae)_


Swamp Rose-mallow; Mallow Rose

_Hibiscus Moscheutos_

_Flowers_--Very large, clear rose pink, sometimes white, often with
crimson centre, 4 to 7 in. across, solitary, or clustered on peduncles
at summit of stems. Calyx 5-cleft, subtended by numerous narrow
bractlets; 5 large, veined petals; stamens united into a valvular column
bearing anthers on the outside for much of its length; 1 pistil partly
enclosed in the column, and with 5 button-tipped stigmatic branches
above. _Stem_: 4 to 7 ft. tall, stout, from perennial root. _Leaves_: 3
to 7 in. long, tapering, pointed, egg-shaped, densely white, downy
beneath; lower leaves, or sometimes all, lobed at middle.

_Preferred Habitat_--Brackish marshes, riversides, lake shores, saline
situations.

_Flowering Season_--August-September.

_Distribution_--Massachusetts to the Gulf of Mexico, westward to
Louisiana; found locally in the interior, but chiefly along
Atlantic seaboard.

Stately ranks of these magnificent flowers, growing among the tall
sedges and "cat-tails" of the marshes, make the most insensate traveller
exclaim at their amazing loveliness. To reach them one must don rubber
boots and risk sudden seats in the slippery ooze; nevertheless, with
spade in hand to give one support, it is well worth while to seek them
out and dig up some roots to transplant to the garden. Here, strange to
say, without salt soil or more water than the average garden receives
from showers and hose, this handsomest of our wild flowers soon makes
itself delightfully at home under cultivation. Such good, deep earth,
well enriched and moistened, as the hollyhock thrives in, suits it
perfectly. Now we have a better opportunity to note how the bees suck
the five nectaries at the base of the petals, and collect the abundant
pollen of the newly-opened flowers, which they perforce transfer to the
five button-shaped stigmas intentionally impeding the entrance to older
blossoms. Only its cousin the hollyhock, a native of China, can vie with
the rose-mallow's decorative splendor among the shrubbery; and the Rose
of China (_Hibiscus Rosa-Sinensis_), cultivated in greenhouses here,
eclipse it in the beauty of the individual blossom. This latter flower,
