descended to press the fortress and its surroundings into rock and
earth.

Fog curled about Ross, spilled outward through the sea gates. He loosed
his grip on the pillar and dived, swimming on through the gap with the
fortress of the Foanna before him.

There was a jetty somewhere ahead; that much he knew from Torgul's
description. Those who served the Foanna sometimes took sea roads and
they had slim, fast cutters for such coastwise travel. Ross surfaced
cautiously, to discover there was no visibility to wave level. Here the
mist was thick, a smothering cover so bewildering he was confused as to
direction. He ducked below again and flippered on.

Was his confusion born of the fog, or was it also in his head? Did he,
after all, have this much reaction to the gate defense? Ross ducked that
suspicion as he had ducked the moist blanket on the surface. He had come
from the gate, which meant that the jetty must lie--there!

A few moments later Ross had proof that his sense of direction had not
altogether failed him, when his shoulder grazed against a solid
obstruction in the water and his exploring touch told him that he had
found one of the jetty piles. He surfaced again and this time he heard
not a thunder roll but the singsong chanting of the Foanna.

It was loud, almost directly above his head, but since the cotton mist
held he was not afraid of being sighted. The chanter must be on the
jetty. And to Ross's right was a dark bulk which he thought was one of
the cutters. Was a sortie by the besieged being planned?

Then, out of the night, came a dazzling beam, well above the level of
Ross's head where he clung to the piling. It centered on the cutter,
slicing into the substance of the vessel with the ease of steel piercing
clay. The chanting stopped on mid-note, broken by cries of surprise and
alarm. Ross, pressing against the pile, received a jolt from his belt
sonic.

There must be a Baldy sub in the basin inside the gate. Perhaps the
flame beam now destroying the cutter was to be turned on the walls of
the keep in turn.

Foanna chant again, low and clear. Splashes from the water as those on
the jetty cast into the sea objects Ross could not define. The Terran's
body jerked, his mask smothered a cry of pain. About his legs and
middle, immersed in the waves, there was cold so intense that it seared.
Fear goaded him to pull up on one of the under beams of the pier. He
reached that refuge and rubbed his icy legs with what vigor he could
summon.

Moments later he crept along toward the shore. The energy ray had found
another target. Ross paused to watch a second cutter sliced. If the
counter stroke of the Foanna would rout the invaders, it had not yet
begun to work.

The net holding the extra gear brought along in hopes of Ashe's escape
weighed the Terran down, but he would not abandon it as he felt his way
from one foot- and hand-hold to the next. The waves below gave off an
icy exudation which made him shiver uncontrollably. And he knew that as
long as that effect lasted he dared not venture into the sea again.

Light ... along with the cold, there was a phosphorescence on the
water--white patches floating, dipping, riding the waves. Some of them
gathered under the pier, clustering about the pilings. And the fog
thinned with their coming, as if those irregular blotches absorbed and
fed upon the mist. The Terran could see now he had reached the land end
of the jetty. He wedged his flippers into his belt, pulled on over his
feet the covers of salkar-hide Torgul had provided.

Save for his belt, his trunks, and the gill-pack, Ross's body was bare
and the cold caught at him. But, slinging the carry net over his
shoulder, he dropped to the damp sand and stood listening.

The clamor of the attack which had carried all the way offshore to the
Rover cruisers had died away. And there were no more claps of thunder.
Instead, there was now a thick wash of rain.

No more fire rays as he faced seaward. And the fog was lifting, so Ross
could distinguish the settling cutters, their bows still moored to the
jetty. There was no movement there. Had those on the pier fled?

Dot ... dash ... dot ...

Ross did not drop the net. But he crouched back in the half protection
of the piling. For a moment which stretched beyond Terran time measure
he froze so, waiting.

Dot ... dash ... dot ...

Not the prickle induced by the enemy installations, it was a real coded
call picked up by his sonic, and one he knew.

Don't rush, he told himself sharply--play it safe. By rights only two
people in this time and place would know that call. And one would have
no reason to use it. But--a trap? This could be a trap. Awe of the
Foanna powers had touched him a little in spite of his off-world
skepticism. He could be lured now by someone using Ashe's call.

Ross stripped for action after a fashion, bundling the net and its
contents into a hollow he scooped behind a pile well above water level.
The alien hand weapon he had left with Karara, not trusting it to the
sea. But he had his diver's knife and his two hands which, by training,
could be, and had been, deadly weapons.

With the sonic against the bare skin of his middle where it would
register strongest, knife in hand, Ross moved into the open. The
floating patches did not supply much light, but he was certain the call
had come from the jetty.

There was movement there--a flash or two. And the sonic? Ross had to be
sure, very sure. The broadcast was certainly stronger when he faced in
that direction. Dared he come into the open? Perhaps in the dark he
could cut Ashe away from his captors so they could swim for it together.

Ross clicked a code reply. Dot ... dot ... dot ...

The answer was quick, imperative: "Where?"

Surely no one but Ashe could have sent that! Ross did not hesitate.

"Be ready--escape."

"No!" Even more imperative. "Friends here...."

Had he guessed rightly? Had Ashe established friendly relations with the
Foanna? But Ross kept to the caution which had been his defense and
armor so long. There was one question he thought only Ashe could answer,
something out of the past they had shared when they had made their first
journey into time disguised as Beaker traders of the Bronze Age.
Deliberately he tapped that question.

"What did we kill in Britain?"

Tensely he waited. But when the reply came it did not pulse from the
sonic under his fingers; instead, a well-remembered voice called out of
the night.

"A white wolf." And the words were Terran English.

"Ashe!" Ross leaped forward, climbed toward the figure he could only
dimly see.




14

The Foanna


"Ross!" Ashe's hands gripped his shoulders as if never intending to free
him again. "Then you did come through--"

Ross understood. Gordon Ashe must have feared that he was the only one
swept through the time door by that freak chance.

"And Karara and the dolphins!"

"Here--now?" In this black bowl of the citadel bay Ashe was only a
shadow with voice and hands.

"No, out with the Rover cruisers. Ashe, do you know the Baldies are on
Hawaika? They've organized this whole thing--the attack here--trouble
all over. Right now they have one of their subs out there. That's what
cut those cutters to pieces. Five days ago five of them wiped out a
whole Rover fairing, just five of them!"

"Gordoon." Unlike the hissing speech of the Hawaikans, this new voice
made a singing, lilting call of Ashe's name. "This is your swordsman in
truth?" Another shadow drew near them, and Ross saw the flutter of cloak
edge.

"This is my friend." There was a tone of correction in Ashe's reply.
"Ross, this is the Guardian of the sea gate."

"And you come," the Foanna continued, "with those who gather to feast at
the Shadow's table. But your Rovers will find little loot to their
liking--"

"No." Ross hesitated. How did one address the Foanna? He had claimed
equality with Torgul. But that approach was not the proper one here;
instinct told him that. He fell back on the complete truth uttered
simply. "We took three of the Baldy killers. From them we learned they
move to wipe out the Foanna first. For you," he addressed himself to the
cloaked shape, "they believe to be a threat. We heard that they urged
the Wreckers to this attack and so--"

"And so the Rovers come, but not to loot? Then they are something new
among their kind." The Foanna's reply was as chill as the sea bay's
water.

"Loot does not summon men who want a blood price for their dead kin!"
Ross retorted.

"No, and the Rovers are believers in the balance of hurt against hurt,"
the Foanna conceded. "Do they also believe in the balance of aid against
aid? Now that is a thought upon which depends much. Gordoon, it would
seem that we may not take to our ships. So let us return to council."

Ashe's hand was on Ross's arm guiding him through the murk. Though the
fog which had choked the bay had vanished, thick darkness remained and
Ross noted that even the fires and flares were dimmed and fewer. Then
they were in a passage where a very faint light clung to the walls.

Robed Foanna, three of them, moved ahead with that particular gliding
progress. Then Ashe and Ross, and bringing up the rear, a dozen of the
mailed guards. The passageway became a ramp. Ross glanced at Ashe. Like
the Foanna, the Terran Agent wore a cloak of gray, but his did not shift
color from time to time as did those of the Hawaikan enigmas. And now
Gordon shoved back its folds, revealing supple body armor.

Questions gathered in Ross. He wanted to know--needed desperately to
know--Ashe's standing with the Foanna. What had happened to raise Gordon
from the status of captive in Zahur's hold to familiar companionship
with the most dreaded race on this planet?

The ramp's head faced blank wall with a sharp-angled turn to the right
of a narrower passage. One of the Foanna made a slight sign to the
guards, who turned with drilled precision to march off along the
passage. Now the other Foanna held out their wands.

What a moment earlier had been unbroken surface showed an opening. The
change had been so instantaneous that Ross had not seen any movement at
all.

Beyond that door they passed from one world to another. Ross's senses,
already acutely alert to his surroundings, could not supply him with any
reason by sight, sound, or smell for his firm conviction that this hold
was alien as neither the Wrecker castle nor the Rover ships had been.
Surely the Foanna were not the same race, perhaps not even the same
species as the other native Hawaikans.

Those robes which he had seen both silver gray and dark blue, now faded,
pearled, thinned, until each of the three still gliding before him were
opalescent columns without definite form.

Ashe's grasp fell on Ross's arm once more, and his whisper reached the
younger man thinly. "They are mistresses of illusion. Be prepared not to
believe all that you see."

Mistresses--Ross caught that first. Women, or at least female then.
Illusion, yes, already he was convinced that here his eyes could play
tricks on him. He could hardly determine what was robe, what was wall,
or if more than shades of shades swept before him.

Another blank wall, then an opening, and flowing through it to touch him
such a wave of alienness that Ross felt he was buffeted by a storm wind.
Yet as he hesitated before it, reluctant in spite of Ashe's hold to go
ahead, he also knew that this did not carry with it the cold hostility
he had known while facing the Baldies. Alien--yes. Inimical to his
kind--no.

"You are right, younger brother."

Spoken those words--or forming in his mind?

Ross was in a place which was sheer wonder. Under his feet dark
blue--the blue of a Terran sky at dusk--caught up in it twinkling points
of light as if he strode, not equal with stars, but above them!
Walls--were there any walls here? Or shifting, swaying blue curtains on
which silvery lines ran to form symbols and words which some bemused
part of his brain almost understood, but not quite.

Constant motion, no quiet, until he came to a place where those swaying
curtains were stilled, where he no longer strode above the sky but on
soft surface, a mat of gray living sod where his steps released a spicy
fragrance. And there he really saw the Foanna for the first time.

Where had their cloaks gone? Had they tossed them away during that walk
or drift across this amazing room, or had the substance which had formed
those coverings flowed away by itself? As Ross looked at the three in
wonder he knew that he was seeing them as not even their servants and
guards ever viewed them. And yet was he seeing them as they really were
or as they wished him to see them?

"As we are, younger brother, as we are!" Again an answer which Ross was
not sure was thought or speech.

In form they were humanoid, and they were undoubtedly women. The
muffling cloaks gone, they wore sleeveless garments of silver which were
girded at the waist with belts of blue gems. Only in their hair and
their eyes did they betray alien blood. For the hair which flowed and
wove about them, cascading down shoulders, rippling about their arms,
was silver, too, and it swirled, moved as if it had a separate life of
its own. While their eyes.... Ross looked into those golden eyes and was
lost for seconds until panic awoke in him, forcing him after sharp
struggle to look away.

Laughter? No, he had not heard laughter. But a sense of amusement tinged
with respect came to him.

"You are very right, Gordoon. This one is also of your kind. He is not
witches' meat." Ross caught the distaste, the kind of haunting
unhappiness which colored those words, remnants of an old hurt.

"These are the Foanna," Ashe's voice broke more of the spell. "The Lady
Ynlan, The Lady Yngram, the Lady Ynvalda."

The Foanna--these three only?

She whom Ashe had named Ynlan, whose eyes had entrapped and almost held
what was Ross Murdock, made a small gesture with her ivory hand. And in
that gesture as well as in the words witches' meat the Terran read the
unhappiness which was as much a part of this room as the rest of its
mystery.

"The Foanna are now but three. They have been only three for many weary
years, oh man from another world and time. And soon, if these enemies
have their way, they will not be three--but none!"

"But--" Ross was still startled. He knew from Loketh that the Wreckers
had deemed the Foanna few in number, an old and dying race. But that
there were only three women left was hard to believe.

The response to his unspoken wonder came clear and determined. "We may
be but three; however, our power remains. And sometimes power distilled
by time becomes the stronger. Now it would seem that time is no longer
our servant but perhaps among our enemies. So tell us this tale of yours
as to why the Rovers would make one with the Foanna--tell us all,
younger brother!"

Ross reported what he had seen, what Tino-rau and Taua had learned from
the prisoners taken at Kyn Add. And when he had finished, the three
Foanna stood very still, their hands clasped one to the other. Though
they were only an arm's distance from him, Ross had the feeling they had
withdrawn from his time and world.

So complete was their withdrawal that he dared to ask Ashe one of the
many questions which had been boiling inside him.

"Who are they?" But Ross knew he really meant: What are they?

Gordon Ashe shook his head. "I don't really know--the last of a very old
race which possesses powers and knowledge different from any we have
believed in for centuries. We have heard of witches. In the modern day
we discount the legends about them. The Foanna bring those legends
alive. And I promise you this--if they turn those powers loose"--he
paused--"it will be such a war as this world, perhaps any world has
never seen!"

"That is so." The Foanna had returned from the place to which they had
withdrawn. "And this is also the truth or one face of the truth. The
Rovers are right in their belief that we have kept some measure of
balance between one form of change and another on this world. If we were
as many as we once were, then against us these invaders could not move
at all. But we are three only and also--do we have the right to evoke
disaster which will strike not only the enemy but perhaps recoil upon
the innocent? There has been enough death here already. And those who
are our servants shall no longer be asked to face battle to keep an
empty shell inviolate. We would see with our own eyes these invaders,
probe what they would do. There is ever change in life, and if a pattern
grows too set, then the race caught in it may wither and die. Maybe our
pattern has been too long in its old design. We shall make no decision
until we see in whose hands the future may rest."

Against such finality of argument there was no appeal. These could not
be influenced by words.

"Gordoon, there is much to be done. Do you take with you this younger
brother and see to his needs. When all is in readiness we shall come."
