my thoughts might adhere to him, his were effectually sundered from me."

"Caroline," demanded Miss Keeldar abruptly, "don't you wish you had a
profession--a trade?"

"I wish it fifty times a day. As it is, I often wonder what I came into
the world for. I long to have something absorbing and compulsory to fill
my head and hands and to occupy my thoughts."

"Can labour alone make a human being happy?"

"No; but it can give varieties of pain, and prevent us from breaking our
hearts with a single tyrant master-torture. Besides, successful labour
has its recompense; a vacant, weary, lonely, hopeless life has none."

"But hard labour and learned professions, they say, make women
masculine, coarse, unwomanly."

"And what does it signify whether unmarried and never-to-be-married
women are unattractive and inelegant or not? Provided only they are
decent, decorous, and neat, it is enough. The utmost which ought to be
required of old maids, in the way of appearance, is that they should not
absolutely offend men's eyes as they pass them in the street; for the
rest, they should be allowed, without too much scorn, to be as absorbed,
grave, plain-looking, and plain-dressed as they please."

"You might be an old maid yourself, Caroline, you speak so earnestly."

"I shall be one. It is my destiny. I will never marry a Malone or a
Sykes; and no one else will ever marry me."

Here fell a long pause. Shirley broke it. Again the name by which she
seemed bewitched was almost the first on her lips.

"Lina--did not Moore call you Lina sometimes?"

"Yes. It is sometimes used as the abbreviation of Caroline in his native
country."

"Well, Lina, do you remember my one day noticing an inequality in your
hair--a curl wanting on that right side--and your telling me that it was
Robert's fault, as he had once cut therefrom a long lock?"

"Yes."

"If he is, and always was, as indifferent to you as you say, why did he
steal your hair?"

"I don't know--yes, I do. It was my doing, not his. Everything of that
sort always was my doing. He was going from home--to London, as usual;
and the night before he went, I had found in his sister's workbox a lock
of black hair--a short, round curl. Hortense told me it was her
brother's, and a keepsake. He was sitting near the table. I looked at
his head. He has plenty of hair; on the temples were many such round
curls. I thought he could spare me one. I knew I should like to have it,
and I asked for it. He said, on condition that he might have his choice
of a tress from my head. So he got one of my long locks of hair, and I
got one of his short ones. I keep his, but I dare say he has lost mine.
It was my doing, and one of those silly deeds it distresses the heart
and sets the face on fire to think of; one of those small but sharp
recollections that return, lacerating your self-respect like tiny
penknives, and forcing from your lips, as you sit alone, sudden,
insane-sounding interjections."

"Caroline!"

"I _do_ think myself a fool, Shirley, in some respects; I _do_ despise
myself. But I said I would not make you my confessor, for you cannot
reciprocate foible for foible; you are not weak. How steadily you watch
me now! Turn aside your clear, strong, she-eagle eye; it is an insult to
fix it on me thus."

"What a study of character you are--weak, certainly, but not in the
sense you think!--Come in!"

This was said in answer to a tap at the door. Miss Keeldar happened to
be near it at the moment, Caroline at the other end of the room. She saw
a note put into Shirley's hands, and heard the words, "From Mr. Moore,
ma'am."

"Bring candles," said Miss Keeldar.

Caroline sat expectant.

"A communication on business," said the heiress; but when candles were
brought, she neither opened nor read it. The rector's Fanny was
presently announced, and the rector's niece went home.




CHAPTER XIII.

FURTHER COMMUNICATIONS ON BUSINESS.


In Shirley's nature prevailed at times an easy indolence. There were
periods when she took delight in perfect vacancy of hand and
eye--moments when her thoughts, her simple existence, the fact of the
world being around and heaven above her, seemed to yield her such
fullness of happiness that she did not need to lift a finger to increase
the joy. Often, after an active morning, she would spend a sunny
afternoon in lying stirless on the turf, at the foot of some tree of
friendly umbrage. No society did she need but that of Caroline, and it
sufficed if she were within call; no spectacle did she ask but that of
the deep blue sky, and such cloudlets as sailed afar and aloft across
its span; no sound but that of the bee's hum, the leaf's whisper. Her
sole book in such hours was the dim chronicle of memory or the sibyl
page of anticipation. From her young eyes fell on each volume a glorious
light to read by; round her lips at moments played a smile which
revealed glimpses of the tale or prophecy. It was not sad, not dark.
Fate had been benign to the blissful dreamer, and promised to favour her
yet again. In her past were sweet passages, in her future rosy hopes.

Yet one day when Caroline drew near to rouse her, thinking she had lain
long enough, behold, as she looked down, Shirley's cheek was wet as if
with dew; those fine eyes of hers shone humid and brimming.

"Shirley, why do _you_ cry?" asked Caroline, involuntarily laying stress
on _you_.

Miss Keeldar smiled, and turned her picturesque head towards the
questioner. "Because it pleases me mightily to cry," she said. "My heart
is both sad and glad. But why, you good, patient child--why do you not
bear me company? I only weep tears, delightful and soon wiped away; you
might weep gall, if you choose."

"Why should I weep gall?"

"Mateless, solitary bird!" was the only answer.

"And are not you too mateless, Shirley?"

"At heart--no."

"Oh! who nestles there, Shirley?"

But Shirley only laughed gaily at this question, and alertly started up.

"I have dreamed," she said, "a mere day-dream--certainly bright,
probably baseless!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Helstone was by this time free enough from illusions: she took a
sufficiently grave view of the future, and fancied she knew pretty well
how her own destiny and that of some others were tending. Yet old
associations retained their influence over her, and it was these and the
power of habit which still frequently drew her of an evening to the
field-style and the old thorn overlooking the Hollow.

One night, the night after the incident of the note, she had been at her
usual post, watching for her beacon--watching vainly: that evening no
lamp was lit. She waited till the rising of certain constellations
warned her of lateness and signed her away. In passing Fieldhead, on her
return, its moonlight beauty attracted her glance, and stayed her step
an instant. Tree and hall rose peaceful under the night sky and clear
full orb; pearly paleness gilded the building; mellow brown gloom
bosomed it round; shadows of deep green brooded above its oak-wreathed
roof. The broad pavement in front shone pale also; it gleamed as if some
spell had transformed the dark granite to glistering Parian. On the
silvery space slept two sable shadows, thrown sharply defined from two
human figures. These figures when first seen were motionless and mute;
presently they moved in harmonious step, and spoke low in harmonious
key. Earnest was the gaze that scrutinized them as they emerged from
behind the trunk of the cedar. "Is it Mrs. Pryor and Shirley?"

Certainly it is Shirley. Who else has a shape so lithe, and proud, and
graceful? And her face, too, is visible--her countenance careless and
pensive, and musing and mirthful, and mocking and tender. Not fearing
the dew, she has not covered her head; her curls are free--they veil her
neck and caress her shoulder with their tendril rings. An ornament of
gold gleams through the half-closed folds of the scarf she has wrapped
across her bust, and a large bright gem glitters on the white hand
which confines it. Yes, that is Shirley.

Her companion then is, of course, Mrs. Pryor?

Yes, if Mrs. Pryor owns six feet of stature, and if she has changed her
decent widow's weeds for masculine disguise. The figure walking at Miss
Keeldar's side is a man--a tall, young, stately man; it is her tenant,
Robert Moore.

The pair speak softly; their words are not distinguishable. To remain a
moment to gaze is not to be an eavesdropper; and as the moon shines so
clearly and their countenances are so distinctly apparent, who can
resist the attraction of such interest? Caroline, it seems, cannot, for
she lingers.

There was a time when, on summer nights, Moore had been wont to walk
with his cousin, as he was now walking with the heiress. Often had she
gone up the Hollow with him after sunset, to scent the freshness of the
earth, where a growth of fragrant herbage carpeted a certain narrow
terrace, edging a deep ravine, from whose rifted gloom was heard a sound
like the spirit of the lonely watercourse, moaning amongst its wet
stones, and between its weedy banks, and under its dark bower of alders.

"But I used to be closer to him," thought Caroline. "He felt no
obligation to treat me with homage; I needed only kindness. He used to
hold my hand; he does not touch hers. And yet Shirley is not proud where
she loves. There is no haughtiness in her aspect now, only a little in
her port--what is natural to and inseparable from her, what she retains
in her most careless as in her most guarded moments. Robert must think,
as I think, that he is at this instant looking down on a fine face; and
he must think it with a man's brain, not with mine. She has such
generous yet soft fire in her eyes. She smiles--what makes her smile so
sweet? I saw that Robert felt its beauty, and he must have felt it with
his man's heart, not with my dim woman's perceptions. They look to me
like two great happy spirits. Yonder silvered pavement reminds me of
that white shore we believe to be beyond the death-flood. They have
reached it; they walk there united. And what am I, standing here in
shadow, shrinking into concealment, my mind darker than my hiding-place?
I am one of this world, no spirit--a poor doomed mortal, who asks, in
ignorance and hopelessness, wherefore she was born, to what end she
lives; whose mind for ever runs on the question, how she shall at last
encounter, and by whom be sustained through death.

"This is the worst passage I have come to yet; still I was quite
prepared for it. I gave Robert up, and gave him up to Shirley, the first
day I heard she was come, the first moment I saw her--rich, youthful,
and lovely. She has him now. He is her lover. She is his darling. She
will be far more his darling yet when they are married. The more Robert
knows of Shirley the more his soul will cleave to her. They will both be
happy, and I do not grudge them their bliss; but I groan under my own
misery. Some of my suffering is very acute. Truly I ought not to have
been born; they should have smothered me at the first cry."

Here, Shirley stepping aside to gather a dewy flower, she and her
companion turned into a path that lay nearer the gate. Some of their
conversation became audible. Caroline would not stay to listen. She
passed away noiselessly, and the moonlight kissed the wall which her
shadow had dimmed. The reader is privileged to remain, and try what he
can make of the discourse.

"I cannot conceive why nature did not give you a bulldog's head, for you
have all a bulldog's tenacity," said Shirley.

"Not a flattering idea. Am I so ignoble?"

"And something also you have of the same animal's silent ways of going
about its work. You give no warning; you come noiselessly behind, seize
fast, and hold on."

"This is guess-work. You have witnessed no such feat on my part. In your
presence I have been no bulldog."

"Your very silence indicates your race. How little you talk in general,
yet how deeply you scheme! You are far-seeing; you are calculating."

"I know the ways of these people. I have gathered information of their
intentions. My note last night informed you that Barraclough's trial had
ended in his conviction and sentence to transportation. His associates
will plot vengeance. I shall lay my plans so as to counteract or at
least be prepared for theirs--that is all. Having now given you as clear
an explanation as I can, am I to understand that for what I propose
doing I have your approbation?"

"I shall stand by you so long as you remain on the defensive. Yes."

"Good! Without any aid--even opposed or disapproved by you--I believe I
should have acted precisely as I now intend to act, but in another
spirit. I now feel satisfied. On the whole, I relish the position."

"I dare say you do. That is evident. You relish the work which lies
before you still better than you would relish the execution of a
government order for army-cloth."

"I certainly feel it congenial."

"So would old Helstone. It is true there is a shade of difference in
your motives--many shades, perhaps. Shall I speak to Mr. Helstone? I
will, if you like."

"Act as you please. Your judgment, Miss Keeldar, will guide you
accurately. I could rely on it myself in a more difficult crisis. But I
should inform you Mr. Helstone is somewhat prejudiced against me at
present."

"I am aware--I have heard all about your differences. Depend upon it,
they will melt away. He cannot resist the temptation of an alliance
under present circumstances."

"I should be glad to have him; he is of true metal."

"I think so also."

"An old blade, and rusty somewhat, but the edge and temper still
excellent."

"Well, you shall have him, Mr. Moore--that is, if I can win him."

"Whom can you not win?"

"Perhaps not the rector; but I will make the effort."

"Effort! He will yield for a word--a smile."

"By no means. It will cost me several cups of tea, some toast and cake,
and an ample measure of remonstrances, expostulations, and persuasions.
It grows rather chill."

"I perceive you shiver. Am I acting wrongly to detain you here? Yet it
is so calm--I even feel it warm--and society such as yours is a pleasure
to me so rare. If you were wrapped in a thicker shawl----"

"I might stay longer, and forget how late it is, which would chagrin
Mrs. Pryor. We keep early and regular hours at Fieldhead, Mr. Moore; and
so, I am sure, does your sister at the cottage."

"Yes; but Hortense and I have an understanding the most convenient in
the world, that we shall each do as we please."

"How do you please to do?"

"Three nights in the week I sleep in the mill--but I require little
rest--and when it is moonlight and mild I often haunt the Hollow till
daybreak."

"When I was a very little girl, Mr. Moore, my nurse used to tell me
tales of fairies being seen in that Hollow. That was before my father
built the mill, when it was a perfectly solitary ravine. You will be
falling under enchantment."

"I fear it is done," said Moore, in a low voice.

"But there are worse things than fairies to be guarded against," pursued
Miss Keeldar.

"Things more perilous," he subjoined.

"Far more so. For instance, how would you like to meet Michael Hartley,
that mad Calvinist and Jacobin weaver? They say he is addicted to
poaching, and often goes abroad at night with his gun."

"I have already had the luck to meet him. We held a long argument
together one night. A strange little incident it was; I liked it."

"Liked it? I admire your taste! Michael is not sane. Where did you meet
him?"

"In the deepest, shadiest spot in the glen, where the water runs low,
under brushwood. We sat down near that plank bridge. It was moonlight,
but clouded, and very windy. We had a talk."

"On politics?"

"And religion. I think the moon was at the full, and Michael was as near
crazed as possible. He uttered strange blasphemy in his Antinomian
fashion."

"Excuse me, but I think you must have been nearly as mad as he, to sit
listening to him."

"There is a wild interest in his ravings. The man would be half a poet,
if he were not wholly a maniac; and perhaps a prophet, if he were not a
profligate. He solemnly informed me that hell was foreordained my
inevitable portion; that he read the mark of the beast on my brow; that
I had been an outcast from the beginning. God's vengeance, he said, was
preparing for me, and affirmed that in a vision of the night he had
beheld the manner and the instrument of my doom. I wanted to know
further, but he left me with these words, 'The end is not yet.'"

"Have you ever seen him since?"

"About a month afterwards, in returning from market, I encountered him
and Moses Barraclough, both in an advanced stage of inebriation. They
were praying in frantic sort at the roadside. They accosted me as Satan,
bid me avaunt, and clamoured to be delivered from temptation. Again, but
a few days ago, Michael took the trouble of appearing at the
counting-house door, hatless, in his shirt-sleeves--his coat and castor
having been detained at the public-house in pledge. He delivered himself
of the comfortable message that he could wish Mr. Moore to set his house
in order, as his soul was likely shortly to be required of him."

"Do you make light of these things?"

"The poor man had been drinking for weeks, and was in a state bordering
on delirium tremens."

"What then? He is the more likely to attempt the fulfilment of his own
prophecies."

"It would not do to permit incidents of this sort to affect one's
nerves."

"Mr. Moore, go home!"

"So soon?"

"Pass straight down the fields, not round by the lade and plantations."

"It is early yet."

"It is late. For my part, I am going in. Will you promise me not to
wander in the Hollow to-night?"

"If you wish it."

"I do wish it. May I ask whether you consider life valueless?"

"By no means. On the contrary, of late I regard my life as invaluable."

"Of late?"

"Existence is neither aimless nor hopeless to me now, and it was both
three months ago. I was then drowning, and rather wished the operation
over. All at once a hand was stretched to me--such a delicate hand I
scarcely dared trust it; its strength, however, has rescued me from
ruin."

"Are you really rescued?"

"For the time. Your assistance has given me another chance."

"Live to make the best of it. Don't offer yourself as a target to
Michael Hartley; and good-night!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Helstone was under a promise to spend the evening of the next day
at Fieldhead. She kept her promise. Some gloomy hours had she spent in
the interval. Most of the time had been passed shut up in her own
apartment, only issuing from it, indeed, to join her uncle at meals, and
anticipating inquiries from Fanny by telling her that she was busy
altering a dress, and preferred sewing upstairs, to avoid interruption.

She did sew. She plied her needle continuously, ceaselessly, but her
brain worked faster than her fingers. Again, and more intensely than
ever, she desired a fixed occupation, no matter how onerous, how
irksome. Her uncle must be once more entreated, but first she would
consult Mrs. Pryor. Her head laboured to frame projects as diligently as
her hands to plait and stitch the thin texture of the muslin summer
dress spread on the little white couch at the foot of which she sat. Now
and then, while thus doubly occupied, a tear would fill her eyes and
fall on her busy hands; but this sign of emotion was rare and quickly
effaced. The sharp pang passed; the dimness cleared from her vision. She
would re-thread her needle, rearrange tuck and trimming, and work on.

Late in the afternoon she dressed herself. She reached Fieldhead, and
appeared in the oak parlour just as tea was brought in. Shirley asked
her why she came so late.

"Because I have been making my dress," said she. "These fine sunny days
began to make me ashamed of my winter merino, so I have furbished up a
lighter garment."

"In which you look as I like to see you," said Shirley. "You are a
lady-like little person, Caroline.--Is she not, Mrs. Pryor?"

Mrs. Pryor never paid compliments, and seldom indulged in remarks,
favourable or otherwise, on personal appearance. On the present occasion
she only swept Caroline's curls from her cheek as she took a seat near
her, caressed the oval outline, and observed, "You get somewhat thin, my
love, and somewhat pale. Do you sleep well? your eyes have a languid
look." And she gazed at her anxiously.

"I sometimes dream melancholy dreams," answered Caroline; "and if I lie
awake for an hour or two in the night, I am continually thinking of the
rectory as a dreary old place. You know it is very near the churchyard.
The back part of the house is extremely ancient, and it is said that the
out-kitchens there were once enclosed in the churchyard, and that there
are graves under them. I rather long to leave the rectory."

"My dear, you are surely not superstitious?"

"No, Mrs. Pryor; but I think I grow what is called nervous. I see things
under a darker aspect than I used to do. I have fears I never used to
have--not of ghosts, but of omens and disastrous events; and I have an
inexpressible weight on my mind which I would give the world to shake
off, and I cannot do it."

"Strange!" cried Shirley. "I never feel so." Mrs. Pryor said nothing.

"Fine weather, pleasant days, pleasant scenes, are powerless to give me
pleasure," continued Caroline. "Calm evenings are not calm to me.
Moonlight, which I used to think mild, now only looks mournful. Is this
weakness of mind, Mrs. Pryor, or what is it? I cannot help it. I often
struggle against it. I reason; but reason and effort make no
difference."

"You should take more exercise," said Mrs. Pryor.

"Exercise! I exercise sufficiently. I exercise till I am ready to drop."

"My dear, you should go from home."

"Mrs. Pryor, I should like to go from home, but not on any purposeless
excursion or visit. I wish to be a governess, as you have been. It would
oblige me greatly if you would speak to my uncle on the subject."

"Nonsense!" broke in Shirley. "What an idea! Be a governess! Better be a
slave at once. Where is the necessity of it? Why should you dream of
such a painful step?"

"My dear," said Mrs. Pryor, "you are very young to be a governess, and
not sufficiently robust. The duties a governess undertakes are often
severe."

"And I believe I want severe duties to occupy me."

"Occupy you!" cried Shirley. "When are you idle? I never saw a more
industrious girl than you. You are always at work. Come," she
continued--"come and sit by my side, and take some tea to refresh you.
You don't care much for my friendship, then, that you wish to leave me?"

"Indeed I do, Shirley; and I don't wish to leave you. I shall never find
another friend so dear."

At which words Miss Keeldar put her hand into Caroline's with an
impulsively affectionate movement, which was well seconded by the
expression of her face.

"If you think so, you had better make much of me," she said, "and not
run away from me. I hate to part with those to whom I am become
attached. Mrs. Pryor there sometimes talks of leaving me, and says I
might make a more advantageous connection than herself. I should as soon
think of exchanging an old-fashioned mother for something modish and
stylish. As for you--why, I began to flatter myself we were thoroughly
friends; that you liked Shirley almost as well as Shirley likes you, and
she does not stint her regard."

"I _do_ like Shirley. I like her more and more every day. But that does
not make me strong or happy."

"And would it make you strong or happy to go and live as a dependent
amongst utter strangers? It would not. And the experiment must not be
tried; I tell you it would fail. It is not in your nature to bear the
desolate life governesses generally lead; you would fall ill. I won't
hear of it."

And Miss Keeldar paused, having uttered this prohibition very decidedly.
Soon she recommenced, still looking somewhat _courroucee_, "Why, it is
my daily pleasure now to look out for the little cottage bonnet and the
silk scarf glancing through the trees in the lane, and to know that my
quiet, shrewd, thoughtful companion and monitress is coming back to me;
that I shall have her sitting in the room to look at, to talk to or to
let alone, as she and I please. This may be a selfish sort of
language--I know it is--but it is the language which naturally rises to
my lips, therefore I utter it."

"I would write to you, Shirley."

"And what are letters? Only a sort of _pis aller_. Drink some tea,
Caroline. Eat something--you eat nothing. Laugh and be cheerful, and
stay at home."

Miss Helstone shook her head and sighed. She felt what difficulty she
would have to persuade any one to assist or sanction her in making that
change in her life which she believed desirable. Might she only follow
her own judgment, she thought she should be able to find perhaps a harsh
but an effectual cure for her sufferings. But this judgment, founded on
circumstances she could fully explain to none, least of all to Shirley,
seemed, in all eyes but her own, incomprehensible and fantastic, and
was opposed accordingly.

There really was no present pecuniary need for her to leave a
comfortable home and "take a situation;" and there was every probability
that her uncle might, in some way, permanently provide for her. So her
friends thought, and, as far as their lights enabled them to see, they
reasoned correctly; but of Caroline's strange sufferings, which she
desired so eagerly to overcome or escape, they had no idea, of her
racked nights and dismal days no suspicion. It was at once impossible
and hopeless to explain; to wait and endure was her only plan. Many that
want food and clothing have cheerier lives and brighter prospects than
she had; many, harassed by poverty, are in a strait less afflictive.

"Now, is your mind quieted?" inquired Shirley. "Will you consent to stay
at home?"

"I shall not leave it against the approbation of my friends," was the
reply; "but I think in time they will be obliged to think as I do."

During this conversation Mrs. Pryor looked far from easy. Her extreme
habitual reserve would rarely permit her to talk freely or to
interrogate others closely. She could think a multitude of questions she
never ventured to put, give advice in her mind which her tongue never
delivered. Had she been alone with Caroline, she might possibly have
said something to the point: Miss Keeldar's presence, accustomed as she
was to it, sealed her lips. Now, as on a thousand other occasions,
inexplicable nervous scruples kept her back from interfering. She merely
showed her concern for Miss Helstone in an indirect way, by asking her
if the fire made her too warm, placing a screen between her chair and
the hearth, closing a window whence she imagined a draught proceeded,
and often and restlessly glancing at her. Shirley resumed: "Having
destroyed your plan," she said, "which I hope I have done, I shall
construct a new one of my own. Every summer I make an excursion. This
season I propose spending two months either at the Scotch lochs or the
English lakes--that is, I shall go there provided you consent to
accompany me. If you refuse, I shall not stir a foot."

"You are very good, Shirley."

"I would be very good if you would let me. I have every disposition to
be good. It is my misfortune and habit, I know, to think of myself
paramount to anybody else; but who is not like me in that respect?
However, when Captain Keeldar is made comfortable, accommodated with all
he wants, including a sensible, genial comrade, it gives him a thorough
pleasure to devote his spare efforts to making that comrade happy. And
should we not be happy, Caroline, in the Highlands? We will go to the
Highlands. We will, if you can bear a sea-voyage, go to the Isles--the
Hebrides, the Shetland, the Orkney Islands. Would you not like that? I
see you would.--Mrs. Pryor, I call you to witness. Her face is all
sunshine at the bare mention of it."

"I should like it much," returned Caroline, to whom, indeed, the notion
of such a tour was not only pleasant, but gloriously reviving. Shirley
rubbed her hands.

"Come; I can bestow a benefit," she exclaimed. "I can do a good deed
with my cash. My thousand a year is not merely a matter of dirty
bank-notes and jaundiced guineas (let me speak respectfully of both,
though, for I adore them), but, it may be, health to the drooping,
strength to the weak, consolation to the sad. I was determined to make
something of it better than a fine old house to live in, than satin
gowns to wear, better than deference from acquaintance and homage from
the poor. Here is to begin. This summer, Caroline, Mrs. Pryor and I go
out into the North Atlantic, beyond the Shetland, perhaps to the Faroe
Isles. We will see seals in Suderoe, and, doubtless, mermaids in
Stromoe.--Caroline is laughing, Mrs. Pryor. _I_ made her laugh; _I_ have
done her good."

"I shall like to go, Shirley," again said Miss Helstone. "I long to hear
the sound of waves--ocean-waves--and to see them as I have imagined them
in dreams, like tossing banks of green light, strewed with vanishing and
reappearing wreaths of foam, whiter than lilies. I shall delight to pass
the shores of those lone rock-islets where the sea-birds live and breed
unmolested. We shall be on the track of the old Scandinavians--of the
Norsemen. We shall almost see the shores of Norway. This is a very vague
delight that I feel, communicated by your proposal, but it _is_ a
delight."

"Will you think of Fitful Head now when you lie awake at night, of gulls
shrieking round it, and waves tumbling in upon it, rather than of the
graves under the rectory back-kitchen?"

"I will try; and instead of musing about remnants of shrouds, and
fragments of coffins, and human bones and mould, I will fancy seals
lying in the sunshine on solitary shores, where neither fisherman nor
hunter ever come; of rock crevices full of pearly eggs bedded in
seaweed; of unscared birds covering white sands in happy flocks."

"And what will become of that inexpressible weight you said you had on
your mind?"

"I will try to forget it in speculation on the sway of the whole great
deep above a herd of whales rushing through the livid and liquid thunder
down from the frozen zone--a hundred of them, perhaps, wallowing,
flashing, rolling in the wake of a patriarch bull, huge enough to have
been spawned before the Flood, such a creature as poor Smart had in his
mind when he said,--

    'Strong against tides, the enormous whale
       Emerges as he goes.'"

"I hope our bark will meet with no such shoal, or herd as you term it,
Caroline. (I suppose you fancy the sea-mammoths pasturing about the
bases of the 'everlasting hills,' devouring strange provender in the
vast valleys through and above which sea-billows roll.) I should not
like to be capsized by the patriarch bull."

"I suppose you expect to see mermaids, Shirley?"

"One of them, at any rate--I do not bargain for less--and she is to
appear in some such fashion as this. I am to be walking by myself on
deck, rather late of an August evening, watching and being watched by a
full harvest moon. Something is to rise white on the surface of the sea,
over which that moon mounts silent and hangs glorious. The object
glitters and sinks. It rises again. I think I hear it cry with an
articulate voice; I call you up from the cabin; I show you an image,
fair as alabaster, emerging from the dim wave. We both see the long
hair, the lifted and foam-white arm, the oval mirror brilliant as a
star. It glides nearer; a human face is plainly visible--a face in the
style of yours--whose straight, pure (excuse the word, it is
appropriate)--whose straight, pure lineaments paleness does not
disfigure. It looks at us, but not with your eyes. I see a preternatural
lure in its wily glance. It beckons. Were we men, we should spring at
the sign--the cold billow would be dared for the sake of the colder
enchantress; being women, we stand safe, though not dreadless. She
comprehends our unmoved gaze; she feels herself powerless; anger crosses
her front; she cannot charm, but she will appal us; she rises high, and
glides all revealed on the dark wave-ridge. Temptress-terror! monstrous
likeness of ourselves! Are you not glad, Caroline, when at last, and
with a wild shriek, she dives?"

"But, Shirley, she is not like us. We are neither temptresses, nor
terrors, nor monsters."

"Some of our kind, it is said, are all three. There are men who ascribe
to 'woman,' in general, such attributes."

"My dears," here interrupted Mrs. Pryor, "does it not strike you that
your conversation for the last ten minutes has been rather fanciful?"

"But there is no harm in our fancies; is there, ma'am?"

"We are aware that mermaids do not exist; why speak of them as if they
did? How can you find interest in speaking of a nonentity?"

"I don't know," said Shirley.

"My dear, I think there is an arrival. I heard a step in the lane while
you were talking; and is not that the garden-gate which creaks?"

Shirley stepped to the window.

"Yes, there is some one," said she, turning quietly away; and as she
resumed her seat a sensitive flush animated her face, while a trembling
ray at once kindled and softened her eye. She raised her hand to her
chin, cast her gaze down, and seemed to think as she waited.

The servant announced Mr. Moore, and Shirley turned round when Mr. Moore
appeared at the door. His figure seemed very tall as he entered, and
stood in contrast with the three ladies, none of whom could boast a
stature much beyond the average. He was looking well, better than he had
been known to look for the past twelve months. A sort of renewed youth
glowed in his eye and colour, and an invigorated hope and settled
purpose sustained his bearing. Firmness his countenance still indicated,
but not austerity. It looked as cheerful as it was earnest.

"I am just returned from Stilbro'," he said to Miss Keeldar, as he
greeted her; "and I thought I would call to impart to you the result of
my mission."

"You did right not to keep me in suspense," she said, "and your visit is
well timed. Sit down. We have not finished tea. Are you English enough
to relish tea, or do you faithfully adhere to coffee?"

Moore accepted tea.

"I am learning to be a naturalized Englishman," said he; "my foreign
habits are leaving me one by one."

And now he paid his respects to Mrs. Pryor, and paid them well, with a
grave modesty that became his age compared with hers. Then he looked at
Caroline--not, however, for the first time: his glance had fallen upon
her before. He bent towards her as she sat, gave her his hand, and asked
her how she was. The light from the window did not fall upon Miss
Helstone; her back was turned towards it. A quiet though rather low
reply, a still demeanour, and the friendly protection of early twilight
kept out of view each traitorous symptom. None could affirm that she had
trembled or blushed, that her heart had quaked or her nerves thrilled;
none could prove emotion; a greeting showing less effusion was never
interchanged. Moore took the empty chair near her, opposite Miss
Keeldar. He had placed himself well. His neighbour, screened by the very
closeness of his vicinage from his scrutiny, and sheltered further by
the dusk which deepened each moment, soon regained not merely _seeming_
but _real_ mastery of the feelings which had started into insurrection
at the first announcement of his name.

He addressed his conversation to Miss Keeldar.

"I went to the barracks," he said, "and had an interview with Colonel
Ryde. He approved my plans, and promised the aid I wanted. Indeed, he
offered a more numerous force than I require--half a dozen will suffice.
I don't intend to be swamped by redcoats. They are needed for appearance
rather than anything else. My main reliance is on my own civilians."

"And on their captain," interposed Shirley.

"What, Captain Keeldar?" inquired Moore, slightly smiling, and not
lifting his eyes. The tone of raillery in which he said this was very
respectful and suppressed.

"No," returned Shirley, answering the smile; "Captain Gerard Moore, who
trusts much to the prowess of his own right arm, I believe."

"Furnished with his counting-house ruler," added Moore. Resuming his
usual gravity, he went on: "I received by this evening's post a note
from the Home Secretary in answer to mine. It appears they are uneasy at
the state of matters here in the north; they especially condemn the
supineness and pusillanimity of the mill-owners. They say, as I have
always said, that inaction, under present circumstances, is criminal,
and that cowardice is cruelty, since both can only encourage disorder,
and lead finally to sanguinary outbreaks. There is the note--I brought
it for your perusal; and there is a batch of newspapers, containing
further accounts of proceedings in Nottingham, Manchester, and
elsewhere."

He produced letters and journals, and laid them before Miss Keeldar.
While she perused them he took his tea quietly; but though his tongue
was still, his observant faculties seemed by no means off duty. Mrs.
Pryor, sitting in the background, did not come within the range of his
glance, but the two younger ladies had the full benefit thereof.

Miss Keeldar, placed directly opposite, was seen without effort. She was
the object his eyes, when lifted, naturally met first; and as what
remained of daylight--the gilding of the west--was upon her, her shape
rose in relief from the dark panelling behind. Shirley's clear cheek was
tinted yet with the colour which had risen into it a few minutes since.
The dark lashes of her eyes looking down as she read, the dusk yet
delicate line of her eyebrows, the almost sable gloss of her curls, made
her heightened complexion look fine as the bloom of a red wild flower by
contrast. There was natural grace in her attitude, and there was
artistic effect in the ample and shining folds of her silk dress--an
attire simply fashioned, but almost splendid from the shifting
brightness of its dye, warp and woof being of tints deep and changing as
the hue on a pheasant's neck. A glancing bracelet on her arm produced
the contrast of gold and ivory. There was something brilliant in the
whole picture. It is to be supposed that Moore thought so, as his eye
dwelt long on it, but he seldom permitted his feelings or his opinions
to exhibit themselves in his face. His temperament boasted a certain
amount of phlegm, and he preferred an undemonstrative, not ungentle, but
serious aspect to any other.

He could not, by looking straight before him, see Caroline, as she was
close at his side. It was necessary, therefore, to manoeuvre a little to
get her well within the range of his observation. He leaned back in his
chair, and looked down on her. In Miss Helstone neither he nor any one
else could discover brilliancy. Sitting in the shade, without flowers
or ornaments, her attire the modest muslin dress, colourless but for its
narrow stripe of pale azure, her complexion unflushed, unexcited, the
very brownness of her hair and eyes invisible by this faint light, she
was, compared with the heiress, as a graceful pencil sketch compared
with a vivid painting. Since Robert had seen her last a great change had
been wrought in her. Whether he perceived it might not be ascertained.
He said nothing to that effect.

"How is Hortense?" asked Caroline softly.

"Very well; but she complains of being unemployed. She misses you."

"Tell her that I miss her, and that I write and read a portion of French
every day."

"She will ask if you sent your love; she is always particular on that
point. You know she likes attention."

"My best love--my very best. And say to her that whenever she has time
to write me a little note I shall be glad to hear from her."

"What if I forget? I am not the surest messenger of compliments."

"No, don't forget, Robert. It is no compliment; it is in good earnest."

"And must, therefore, be delivered punctually."

"If you please."

"Hortense will be ready to shed tears. She is tenderhearted on the
subject of her pupil; yet she reproaches you sometimes for obeying your
uncle's injunctions too literally. Affection, like love, will be unjust
now and then."

And Caroline made no answer to this observation; for indeed her heart
was troubled, and to her eyes she would have raised her handkerchief if
she had dared. If she had dared, too, she would have declared how the
very flowers in the garden of Hollow's Cottage were dear to her; how the
little parlour of that house was her earthly paradise; how she longed to
return to it, as much almost as the first woman, in her exile, must have
longed to revisit Eden. Not daring, however, to say these things, she
held her peace; she sat quiet at Robert's side, waiting for him to say
something more. It was long since this proximity had been hers--long
since his voice had addressed her; could she, with any show of
probability, even of possibility, have imagined that the meeting gave
him pleasure, to her it would have given deep bliss. Yet, even in doubt
that it pleased, in dread that it might annoy him, she received the
boon of the meeting as an imprisoned bird would the admission of
sunshine to its cage. It was of no use arguing, contending against the
sense of present happiness; to be near Robert was to be revived.

Miss Keeldar laid down the papers.

"And are you glad or sad for all these menacing tidings?" she inquired
of her tenant.
