
"I am glad you have taken one of my young men under your wing. He is a
recent acquisition, but I have reason to think well of him."

"He is to dine with us to-day. I shall be glad to extend an invitation
to you also, Mr. Barlow."

"You are very kind, and but for a previous engagement I would accept
with pleasure. I shall be glad to see you at my show to-morrow with
complimentary tickets."

"What a nice old gentleman Mr. Barlow is," said Evelyn, in a low voice.

"I have found him an excellent friend. He won't allow any of us to drink
or gamble while we are in his employ."

"I hope you wouldn't want to do either, Mr. Watson."

"I have no disposition to do so. But, Miss Evelyn, I want to ask you a
favor."

"What is it? If it isn't anything very great, I may grant it."

"Don't call me Mr. Watson."

"What shall I call you then?"

"My friends call me Kit."

"That's a nice name. Yes, I'll call you Kit."

It will be seen that the two young people were getting on famously.

"Do you live far away, Miss Evelyn?"

"About a quarter of a mile from here."

In turning the corner of a street, Kit met his friend Harry Thorne,
walking with Charlie Davis. Both regarded Kit with surprise.

"Kit seems to be getting on," said Charlie. "Do you know who he is
walking with?"

"No; do you?"

"With the daughter of the mayor."

"How do you know?"

"The gentleman in front was pointed out to me as the mayor. I shouldn't
wonder if he were going to dine there."

When Kit returned to the circus tents about four o'clock in the
afternoon, he met with some good-natured raillery which he took in good
part. He felt that he had passed the day in a much more satisfactory
manner than if, like the great majority of his companions, he had risen
late and lounged about the circus grounds, beguiling the time with
smoking and story telling.




CHAPTER XXIII.

KIT'S DARING ACT.


Kit's acts thus far had been confined to the ring, but now a new one was
expected from him. Early in the performance a series of flying leaps
from a springboard, in which all the acrobats took part, was introduced.
From a point thirty feet back the performer ran swiftly till he reached
the springboard, from which a leap was made accompanied by a somersault,
carrying him over a considerable space in advance.

It was the custom to place first one elephant, then a second, and
finally a third, in front of the springboard. There was only one man who
could leap over three elephants. The two Vincenti brothers took part
regularly, but Kit, being a new hand, had thus far been excused. But one
of the regular performers being temporarily unwell, it was considered
desirable that his place should be supplied.

"Do you think you can do it?" asked Alonzo Vincenti, somewhat
doubtfully.

"Yes," answered Kit, confidently.

"It will be sufficient if you jump over one elephant," continued his
associate. "Then you can drop out."

"I can do better than that," said Kit.

"I don't know about that. My brother can only jump over two."

"You jump over three elephants."

"Yes; but I am the only one who can do it. It takes a good spring to
clear even two. It won't do to lose your head."

"Can I have a chance to rehearse?"

"Yes, I will speak about it."

"Then I will appear this evening."

"But if you fail you are likely to hurt yourself."

"I know that. That is why I would rather make the first trial in the
evening. The lights and the crowd will excite and help me."

Kit was not foolhardy in his undertaking, for he had already had some
practice in similar feats with his old teacher. Besides, he was
ambitious. In school his ambition had shown itself in his attempt to
eclipse his schoolfellows in scholarship. In the gymnasium he had ranked
first, and now that he had joined the circus he didn't like to be
assigned to a place in the rear.

Let me take the opportunity here to advise my young readers not to
imitate Kit in essaying dangerous parts. "Be bold, but not too bold!" is
a very good motto.

During the forenoon Kit found an opportunity to practice in the empty
tent, in order to settle the question whether he had lost any of his
old-time skill. The result was satisfactory, and renewed his confidence.

"I can do better before a tent full of spectators than when practicing
by myself," he decided.

The evening came.

Standing near the ticket seller half an hour before the show began, Kit
heard his name called.

Turning quickly he saw his friends of the previous day, Mayor Grant and
his daughter Evelyn.

"Good evening, my boy!" said the mayor cordially. "We have come to see
what you can do."

"Then I hope I shall do myself credit," said Kit, shaking hands with the
mayor and his daughter. "Have you engaged seats?"

"Not yet."

"Then let me select them for you."

"With pleasure. I am glad to have a friend at court."

Kit selected seats as near as possible to the ring where he was to
perform.

"These are splendid seats," said Evelyn. "How soon do you appear?"

"In a few minutes. I shall have to leave you now, but I will be back
after my first act."

"What a nice boy he is, papa!" said Evelyn.

"Yes; it is a pity he is attached to a circus."

"Why? Isn't it a respectable business?"

"Yes; but there are many temptations connected with it, and most circus
performers never rise any higher."

Evelyn was not inclined to discuss the question, though there is no
doubt that she took a more favorable view of the circus profession than
her father. The procession had just begun to move round the inner ring
of the circus, including the elephants, the riders, the clowns, and
performers of all kinds. Kit appeared, as in the public procession,
driving a span of ponies.

This was the introduction. Then the various parts of the programme
succeeded. Soon Kit performed his act in the ring. He had a new act
to-night. Standing on the shoulders of one of the Vincenti brothers, he
turned a somersault and landed on the shoulders of the other, standing
six to eight feet away.

"I don't see how he does it, papa," said Evelyn. "He must be very
smart."

"I see you are determined to make a hero of this young man, Evelyn."

"Don't you admire him yourself, papa?"

"Admire is rather a strong word, daughter. I will admit, however, that I
like him, and hope he will soon change his business."

After the act was over, Kit came round and received congratulations.
Evelyn repeated what her father said.

"I agree with you, sir," said Kit, "I haven't selected this as my life
business, but shall keep my engagement till the end of the season."

"How, on the whole, do you like your new associates? I don't need to be
told that they are very different from those to whom you are
accustomed."

"They are very kind to me, and generous to each other when there is
need. They will divide their last dollar with a friend."

"They often come to their last dollar, don't they?"

"Yes; they can't keep money. They are always in debt when the new season
opens, no matter how much they brought home with them at the end of the
last."

"Are there no exceptions?"

"Yes, a few. I have heard of one circus manager who commenced as a candy
butcher, and now is proprietor of a very fair-sized show. Of course he
had to save up money or he would never have succeeded so well."

Kit had to cut short his visit, for the new act, already referred to,
was near at hand.

In the list of leapers Kit came last. First of all, there was a simple
somersault from the springboard. This was easy. Just after Kit came the
clown, who, though really a clever acrobat, stopped short when he came
to the board and merely jumped up and down to the amusement of the young
spectators.

"He can't jump no more'n I can," said one small boy, contemptuously.

"I shouldn't think they'd let him try," said another.

Both boys were surprised when, in the next trial, where the task was to
jump over an elephant, the despised clown made a good spring and landed
fairly on his feet.

"I guess he was afraid before," said the first boy.

"No; he only pretended for fun. Do you see that boy? I wonder if he can
jump over the elephant."

The question was soon answered. Kit took his turn and sprang with
apparent ease over the great beast.

Next another elephant was driven in alongside of the first. Again the
leapers advanced to try their skill. But two held back, not feeling
competent for the task. The clown once more made a feint of jumping, but
only jumped up and retired apparently filled with confusion.

Evelyn gazed in intense excitement.

"It must be awfully hard to jump like that, papa," she said.

"I don't think I shall ever try it, Evelyn."

Another elephant was driven alongside the other two, making three in
all. The other contestants retired, for only Alonzo had succeeded
hitherto in executing this difficult feat. He expected to be the only
one now, but noticed with surprise that Kit seemed ready to follow him.

"You don't mean to try it, Kit?" he said, in amazement.

"Why not?"

"You will fail, and if you do, you may hurt yourself seriously."

"I shall not fail," said Kit, confidently.

Alonzo looked anxious, but there was no time to expostulate. He ran
swiftly to the board, made a vigorous spring, and landed handsomely on
the bedding which had been provided beyond. He had scarcely stepped
aside, when, to the astonishment of the other acrobats, Kit gathered
himself up, ran to the springboard, and exerting himself to the utmost,
made his leap, and landed a foot ahead of Alonzo.

Then the tent rang with applause, and there were many exclamations of
astonishment, not only among the spectators, but also among the circus
performers.

Kit's face flushed with pleasure, and bowing his acknowledgments, he
withdrew.

"He is certainly a wonderful boy," said the mayor.




CHAPTER XXIV.

KIT RECEIVES A LETTER.


Kit received compliments enough to spoil him, if he had not been
strong-minded and level-headed boy. Among others Mr. Barlow, who had
been present and witnessed his daring act, took the opportunity to
congratulate him.

"You seem to be born for a circus performer, my young friend," he said.
"You have come to the front at once."

"Thank you, sir," said Kit. "I am glad that I succeeded, but such
success as that does not satisfy my ambition."

"You mean, perhaps, that you want to jump over four, perhaps five
elephants?" suggested the manager.

Kit smiled.

"No," he answered; "I don't think I shall venture beyond three. But I
don't expect to remain in the circus more than this season."

"That is almost a pity, when you are so well qualified to excel in it."

"Mr. Barlow," said Kit, seriously, "if I were a great manager like you,
I would not mind, but I don't care to go through life as a circus
performer."

"I don't know but you are right, my boy. In fact I know you are. I
shouldn't care to be a performer myself."

"I don't think you would excel in that line," said Kit, with a glance
at the portly form of the well-known showman.

"You wouldn't advise me to try jumping over elephants, I infer," said
Mr. Barlow, with an amused smile.

"No, sir."

"I will take your advice, my boy. Though your share of worldly
experience isn't great, you are certainly correct in that. I shall
relieve the fears of Mrs. Barlow at once by telling her that I have
decided not to enter the ring."

Kit also received the congratulations of the mayor and Evelyn, but the
former added: "Though your act was a daring one, I was almost sorry to
see it."

"Why, sir?"

"I feared it would confirm you in your love of your present business."

"No, sir, there is no danger," replied Kit. "I have a fair education
already, and prefer to qualify myself for something different."

"I am glad to hear you say so. You are undoubtedly right."

"I must say good-by now," said Kit; "for we get off at midnight."

"Shall you not return this way?"

"No, sir; we are to go West, I hear."

"I hope when the season is over, you will make us a visit. Come and stay
a week," said the mayor, hospitably.

"Do come," said Evelyn, earnestly.

"How can I thank you for your kindness to a stranger?" said Kit,
gratefully. "I shall certainly avail myself of your hospitality. There
are not many who would take such notice of a circus boy."

"You are something more than a circus boy," said the mayor, "or I might
not have been so drawn to you. Good-by, then, and if you ever need a
friend, don't forget that you are at liberty to call upon me."

It was a source of regret to Kit that he was obliged to part with
friends whom in so short a time he had come to value so highly. He
resolved that he would accept the mayor's offer at the close of the
season. He would need a friend and adviser, and he felt confident that
Mayor Grant's counsel would be wise and judicious.

Kit was already asleep in his bunk when the circus train started for the
next place on the route. When he woke up he was in the town of
Colebrook. Here a surprise was in store for him in the shape of a letter
from his uncle. When he saw the familiar handwriting and the postmark
"Smyrna," he broke the seal with a feeling of curiosity. He did not
expect to derive either pleasure or satisfaction from the perusal.

We will look over his shoulder while he is reading the letter.

     NEPHEW CHRISTOPHER,--I cannot express to you my surprise and
     disappointment when I rode over to Oakford to see you, and learned
     from Mr. Bickford that you had run away from his house and joined
     the circus. There must be something low and depraved in your
     tastes, that you should thus abandon the prospect of earning a
     respectable livelihood, and go tramping through the country with a
     circus. What do you think your father would say if he could come to
     life, and become aware of the course you have so rashly taken?

     I should be justified in forcibly removing you from your present
     associations, and returning you to your worthy employer, Mr. Aaron
     Bickford, and perhaps it is my duty to do so. But I think it wiser
     for you to realize for yourself the folly of your course. You have
     deliberately deserted a good home and a kind guardian and become a
     tramp, if I may so express myself. I cannot imagine my son Ralph
     doing such a thing. He is, I hope, too dutiful and too sensible to
     throw away the advantages which fortune has secured him, to become
     a mountebank.

     It is very embarrassing to me to answer questions about you. There
     are some who will be unjust enough, I doubt not, to blame me for
     your wild course, but I shall be sustained by the consciousness of
     my entire innocence in the matter. At great expense I have
     maintained you and paid the cost of your education, giving you
     privileges and advantages equal to those I have given my own boy. I
     have done so cheerfully, because you were my nephew, and I am sorry
     you have made me so poor a return. But I shall look for my reward
     to my own conscience, and hope you may yet see the folly and
     wickedness of your course.

     I have only to add that when that time comes you are welcome to
     return to my roof and protection, and I will intercede with your
     excellent employer, Mr. Bickford, to take you back and teach you
     his trade, whereby you may be enabled to earn a more respectable
     living than you are doing at present. Ralph joins with me in this
     wish.

                                       Your uncle,
                                            STEPHEN WATSON.
