faces.

"We've scared them!" cried Andy.

But he reckoned without his host, for in an instant the Esquimaux had
leaped to their feet and were rushing toward the ship.

"Here they come!" shouted the hunter. "Shoot to kill, Washington! Look
out for yourself, Professor!"

"Don't kill them!" yelled Amos Henderson. "They are too many for us, and
our only hope is to try peaceful means!"

But Washington aimed his rifle straight in the faces of the advancing
men of the snow country and pulled the trigger rapidly. Half a dozen
sharp reports rang out, and several Esquimaux fell on the ice, which
became red with their blood. However, the negro's aim was not good, and
the wounds were only in arms or legs of the natives.

This served to check their ardor for a while, and the advance was halted
while the wounded were carried back. But the Esquimaux were only made
more angry by the resistance. They came on again with wild cries and,
though Andy, Washington and the professor fought with all their
strength, clubbing their guns and cracking several of the savages over
the head, they were finally overpowered.

From one who seemed to be a leader of the natives several sharp orders
came. The others listened and then, lifting the three prisoners, who
had been securely bound, they hurried with them from the deck of the
ship.

"We's ketched agin!" cried Washington. "They'll eat us shuah dis time!
Land ob Goshen! How I does wish I'd neber come heah!"

There was little time for protest, reflection or anything else. Once the
Esquimaux had secured their prisoners they lost no time in hastening
away. The airship did not seem to interest them. Hoisting the three men
on shoulders, the natives fairly ran along over the ice.

"I wish they'd bring up a sled," said Andy. "It would be easier than
this style. The breath is 'most jolted out of me."

As if in answer to his desire, the party of Esquimaux soon came upon a
little camp. There were several ice huts, and a number of sleds, while
the yelping of scores of dogs could be heard on every side. In a few
minutes, after a short talk among the natives, the captives were tossed,
none too gently, all on one big sled, a dog team was hitched fast, and a
driver started them off across the field of ice.

"Good-bye to de ole _Monarch_!" cried Washington. "No mo' good meals in
yo'! Landy! Landy! I wisht I had some dynamite to blow dese heathen up!"

"Hush!" cried Andy. "I've got three revolvers in my pockets. I'll slip
you one if I can get my arms free, but don't fire until I give the word.
We'll have to save our shots."

"We seem to be having nothing but bad luck," said Professor Henderson.
"I am afraid it is all up with us this time. Those poor boys, and Bill
and Tom! I wish I knew what had become of them!"

"Same here!" remarked Andy.

Then the captives became silent, filled with their sad thoughts and
worry over their predicament. On and on went the sledge over the ice,
into the unknown. Mile after mile was covered. Then the driver of the
prisoners, as well as the one in charge of three sleds that followed,
halted the dogs. All the natives talked rapidly together, pointing this
way and that.

"They've missed the path!" exclaimed Andy. "We are lost in this land of
snow!"




CHAPTER XXII

MAGNETIC FIRE WORSHIPERS


Jack's only thought, when he felt himself falling from the deck of the
airship to the earth, was that he would strike on a pinnacle of ice and
be killed. Much the same were the feelings of the others, as they
admitted later. Jack was half senseless from fright when, seemingly half
an hour after he tumbled, though in reality it was but a few seconds, he
stuck head first into a big drift of soft snow.

His mouth, ears, eyes and nose were filled with the fluffy flakes, and
he nearly choked before he could struggle to an upright position and
clear a breathing space.

To his astonishment he saw similar struggles going on in several places
in the snow. First Mark stuck his head out of the drift. Then Bill's
face appeared, to be followed by Tom's, and next Dirola bobbed up,
smiling as though it was the biggest joke in the world, and as if
falling from an airship was an every-day occurrence with her.

"Well, we're alive," remarked Jack, after getting his breath.

"We couldn't have fallen so very far after all," said Mark.

"It seemed like a mighty long ways when I was a-comin'," came from Bill.

"We went fast, an' we stopped pretty suddint!" was Tom's opinion. "Lucky
we had a sort of feather bed under us. I'd hate to fall right on the
ice."

"Come down soon!" exclaimed Dirola with a laugh, in which all joined, in
spite of their sorry plight. It was still snowing and terribly cold.
They pulled the hoods of their fur coats close about their faces and
scrambled out on the ice.

"I guess the ship was closer to the earth when we fell than we thought,"
said Mark.

"I suppose we had better hunt around for the _Monarch_," observed Jack.
"It can't be a great way off, for Professor Henderson was bringing it
down and the propeller was not moving."

"Let's start right away," said Mark. "I'm hungry, and the sooner we find
the ship the better off we'll be. But this snow is every bit as bad as a
fog."

It was, indeed, and the boys and men could not distinguish each other
ten feet distant. In spite of this, however, Jack started off in the
direction he thought the ship might be.

"No go! No go!" called Dirola. "Git lost! Fall in hole! Die! Better stay
here! Snow stop! Me show you!"

"She means we'll get lost if we wander off," said Jack. "I guess we'd
better do as she says."

Dirola seemed in good spirits and not a bit discouraged by the storm.
She walked slowly about, as if looking for something. Then, with a cry,
she began digging at a certain spot.

"What in the world is she doing?" asked Mark.

"I don't know," said Jack.

"Maybe she's after a rabbit," observed Bill. "I'd like a good hot rabbit
stew myself."

Dirola's hands, encased in heavy fur gloves, made the snow fly. In a
little while she held up a, dark mass of what looked like seaweed.

"Eat! Um good!" she exclaimed.

"I guess it's some kind of moss that the people up north eat," remarked
Tom. "I remember reading something about it once. I suppose we'd better
tackle it, for we may not get a meal in some time."

Jack, who had been fumbling in the big pocket of his fur coat, gave a
sudden cry.

"What's the matter; somethin' bit ye?" asked Bill.

"Look here!" cried the boy, and he held up a large tin can.

"What is it; soup?" inquired Mark.

"It's some of those capsule foods from the ship," said Jack, reading the
label. "I remember I put it in my pocket when I thought the ship was
going to be wrecked. I felt I might need it. Now it will come in handy."

"But what is it?" insisted Mark.

"It's a combination of chocolate, wheat, malt and preserved milk,"
replied Jack, looking at the label again, "and it says that one capsule,
if chewed and swallowed, is as much as an ordinary meal. There are two
hundred capsules in here, and that will last us for a few days at
least."

"Not very hearty eatin', 'cordin' to my way of thinkin'," said Bill;
"but I guess with that and the moss Dirola can dig up we'll get along."

The Esquimaux woman had finished her simple meal. She dug up quite a
quantity of the moss and laid it on top of a big pile of ice, where she
could find it again.

"Must build house now," she announced. "Make place for sleep. I show
you!"

In a little while a large space was scooped out of the snow drift. Many
hands soon enlarged the cave until it was large enough for all to move
about inside with comfort.

"Now for dinner!" exclaimed Jack, as he opened the tin.

The meal, though simple, was satisfying, and soon the lost ones felt
more comfortable.

"It's stopped snowing!" announced Mark, going to the entrance of the
cave, "and it's much colder. I guess we'll stay here a while."

He returned to his companions. They all went as far to the rear of the
cave as they could, for the wind came in the wide entrance.

"We must make a winding passage, and then the breeze can't find it's way
in," suggested Jack. "I think--"

But what he thought he never told, for at that instant the floor of the
snow cave gave way right under where they were all standing, and the
whole five of them went slipping, sliding and tumbling down, they knew
not to where.

For an instant all were so surprised and frightened that they could not
even cry out. They were plunged into dense blackness.

"What has happened?" Jack cried.

Before any one could answer him, the blackness gave way to a glare of
light, and the two boys, with Dirola and the men, brought up suddenly
with a jolt on the floor of a big ice cavern.

It was several hundred feet long, and as many wide, with a roof fifty
feet above their heads.

The sides were of pure ice, but, strangest of all, was the rosy, golden
glow that filled the whole place. With wonder in their eyes the
adventurers gazed at the source of the illumination.

At one end of the cavern was a rude altar. Behind it, and on both sides,
there arose great streamers of fire, tongues of flame, red, green, blue,
purple, yellow and glaring white.

Yet the fire did not burn, for there was ice on every side, and the ice
did not melt. In wonder the crew of the _Monarch_ gazed.

Presently from the other end of the cave there sounded a wild, weird
song. It was like a chant. Then, before the adventurers could get to
there feet, there filed into the cavern two score of men, all dressed in
white fur. At the head of the procession marched two men who were
veritable giants, compared to those about them. They bore between them,
on a rude litter, a man, wearing only a fur cloth about his middle.

"What is it?" whispered Jack in awed accents.

"They are fire-worshipers!" exclaimed Mark. "If they see us they'll kill
us!"

"They must be going to sacrifice that poor man on the altar," spoke
Jack. "Come, let's see if we can't crawl out of the way."

The head of the procession was now close to the altar, and had passed
the adventurers, who were off to one side, in about the middle of the
cavern. Up some ice steps the two giants in white went, bearing their
victim. The poor fellow gave one loud shriek as he was brought nearer to
the colored flames.

"Oh! Oh! Oh!" screamed Dirola, sinking down on the floor of the cavern.




CHAPTER XXIII

A STRANGE SACRIFICE


The natives who had made Professor Henderson, Andy, and Washington
prisoners seemed at a loss for some little time as to which direction to
take. They talked among themselves, while the prisoners were much
alarmed, for if the Esquimaux were lost, and without food, it would mean
the death of all.

At last, however, the native in charge of the main sled prevailed on the
others, and they proceeded, turning off to the left.

The sleds, including that on which the prisoners were, bumped along over
the ice, the dogs pulling the rude vehicles along swiftly. It was about
an hour later that another halt was made. This time it did not seem to
be because the way was lost, for the natives showed no signs of alarm.
Instead, they were laughing and talking. In a little while the small
advance party was joined by a larger body of Esquimaux, who had been at
the attack on the airship, but who had taken a different route.

Then the whole crowd started forward again. Half an hour's travel
brought another halt, this time a final one, for when the professor and
his companions glanced around them they found they were in the midst of
a native village of ice huts.

"Golly! We's somewhere, anyhow," spoke Washington; "but I can't say I
thinks much ob dis place. It's too lonesome."

"Better be here than out on the ice field," spoke up the professor. "The
Esquimaux have little stone stoves in which they burn oil, and their
huts are quite warm inside."

In a few minutes the captives had a chance to test this statement. They
were unbound and carried from the sled to one of the larger huts. As is
usual in the far northern regions, each hut was made of blocks of ice
laid one on the other, forming a semicircular house, with a round dome.

The door or entrance was so small that the only way to get in was to
crawl. There was no door to keep the cold out, but the passage was made
a winding one, or there were two huts, one built over the other, so that
the openings did not come opposite, and this served to keep out the
wind.

Arriving at the doorway, the Esquimaux set their prisoners down in front
of the house, and signed to them to crawl in. The professor went first,
followed by Andy and Washington. Inside they found the place to be warm
from the flame of a crude stove. This consisted of a hollowed out stone,
filled with seal oil, the wick being made of moss. The stove, or lamp,
for it served both purposes, smoked very much.

There were several natives squatting down inside the hut, but they did
not seem surprised when the three prisoners entered. Others of the
Esquimaux crowded into the ice house, until it was uncomfortably filled.
Then a native who seemed to be a leader began a long talk to the others.

Judging from his gestures he was telling about the fight at the airship
and the capture of the captives. At times he would be interrupted by
those who wanted to question him.

At length the recital was done. All the Esquimaux, save about half a
dozen, crawled out of the hut. One of those who remained placed an
earthen pot over the flame of the stove, and soon a delicious smell
