should be sent to the camp of the Indians, with whom Brighteyes and
Live-for-ever were sojourning at the time--about a long day's march from
the little fortress--and bring those women to the hut, that they might
once again see and gladden the heart of the man whom they had formerly
known as the Preacher.

Now, it is a well-ascertained and undoubtable fact that the passion of
love animates the bosoms of red men as well as white.  It is also a
curious coincidence that this passion frequently leads to modifications
of action and unexpected, sometimes complicated, results and situations
among the red as well as among the white men.

Bearing this in mind, the reader will be better able to understand why
Rushing River, in making a raid upon his enemies, and while creeping
serpent-like through the grass in order to reconnoitre previous to a
night attack, came to a sudden stop on beholding a young girl playing
with a much younger girl--indeed, a little child--on the outskirts of
the camp.

It was the old story over again.  Love at first sight!  And no wonder,
for the young girl, though only an Indian, was unusually graceful and
pretty, being a daughter of Little Tim and Brighteyes.  From the former,
Moonlight (as she was named) inherited the free-and-easy yet modest
carriage of the pale-face, from the latter a pretty little straight nose
and a pair of gorgeous black eyes that seemed to sparkle with a private
sunshine of their own.

Rushing River, although a good-looking, stalwart man in the prime of
life, had never been smitten in this way before.  He therefore resolved
at once to make the girl his wife.  Red men have a peculiar way of
settling such matters sometimes, without much regard to the wishes of
the lady--especially if she be, as in this case, the daughter of a foe.
In pursuance of his purpose, he planned, while lying there like a snake
in the grass, to seize and carry off the fair Moonlight by force,
instead of killing and scalping the whole of the Indians in Bounding
Bull's camp with whom she sojourned.

It was not any tender consideration for his foes, we are sorry to say,
that induced this change of purpose, but the knowledge that in a night
attack bullets and arrows are apt to fly indiscriminately on men, women,
and children.  He would have carried poor Moonlight off then and there
if she had not been too near the camp to permit of his doing so without
great risk of discovery.  The presence of the little child also
increased the risk.  He might, indeed, have easily "got rid" of her, but
there was a soft spot in that red man's heart which forbade the savage
deed--a spot which had been created at that time, long, long ago, when
the white preacher had discoursed to him of "righteousness and
temperance and judgment to come."

Little Skipping Rabbit, as she was called, was the youngest child of
Bounding Bull.  If Rushing River had known this, he would probably have
hardened his heart, and struck at his enemy through the child, but
fortunately he did not know it.

Retiring cautiously from the scene, the Blackfoot chief determined to
bide his time until he should find a good opportunity to pounce upon
Moonlight and carry her off quietly.  The opportunity came even sooner
than he had anticipated.

That night, while he was still prowling round the camp, Whitewing
accompanied by Little Tim and a band of Indians arrived.

Bounding Bull received them with an air of dignified satisfaction.  He
was a grave, tall Indian, whose manner was not at all suggestive of his
name, but warriors in times of peace do not resemble the same men in
times of war.  Whitewing had been the means of inducing him to accept
Christianity, and although he was by no means as "queer" a Christian as
Little Tim had described him, he was, at all events, queer enough in the
eyes of his enemies and his unbelieving friends to prefer peace or
arbitration to war, on the ground that it is written, "If possible, as
much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men."

Of course he saw that the "if possible" justified self-defence, and
might in some circumstances even warrant aggressive action.  Such, at
all events, was the opinion he expressed at the solemn palaver which was
held after the arrival of his friends.

"Whitewing," said he, drawing himself up with flashing eyes and extended
hand in the course of the debate, "surely you do not tell me that the
Book teaches us to allow our enemies to raid in our lands, to carry off
our women and little ones, and to burn our wigwams, while we sit still
and wait till they are pleased to take our scalps?"

Having put this rather startling question, he subsided as promptly as he
had burst forth.

"That's a poser!" thought the irreverent Little Tim, who sympathised
with Bounding Bull, but he said nothing.

"My brother has been well named," replied the uncompromising Whitewing;
"he not only bounds upon his foes, but lets his mind bound to foolish
conclusions.  The Book teaches peace--if possible.  If it be not
possible, then we cannot avoid war.  But how can we know what is
possible unless we try?  My brother advises that we should go on the
war-path at once, and drive the Blackfeet away.  Has Bounding Bull tried
his best to bring them to reason? has he failed?  Does he know that
peace is _impossible_?"

"Now look here, Whitewing," broke in Little Tim at this point.  "It's
all very well for you to talk about peace an' what's possible.  I'm a
Christian man myself, an' there's nobody as would be better pleased than
me to see all the redskins in the mountains an' on the prairies at peace
wi' one another.  But you won't get me to believe that a few soft words
are goin' to make Rushin' River all straight.  He's the sworn enemy o'
Boundin' Bull.  Hates him like pison.  He hates me like brimstone, an'
it's my opinion that if we don't make away wi' him he'll make away wi'
us."

Whitewing--who was fond of silencing his opponents by quoting Scripture,
many passages of which he had learned by heart long ago from his friend
the preacher--did not reply for a few seconds.  Then, looking earnestly
at his brother chief, he said--

"With Manitou all things are possible.  A soft answer turns away wrath."

Bounding Bull pondered the words.  Little Tim gave vent to a doubtful
"humph"--not that he doubted the truth of the Word, but that he doubted
its applicability on the present occasion.

It was finally agreed that the question should not be decided until the
whole council had returned to Tim's Folly, and laid the matter before
the wounded missionary.

Then Little Tim, being freed from the cares of state, went to solace
himself with domesticity.

Moonlight was Indian enough to know that females might not dare to
interrupt the solemn council.  She was also white woman enough to scorn
the humble gait and ways of her red kindred, and to run eagerly to meet
her sire as if she had been an out-and-out white girl.  The hunter, as
we have said, rather prided himself in keeping up some of the ways of
his own race.  Among other things, he treated his wife and daughter
after the manner of white men--that is, well-behaved white men.  When
Moonlight saw him coming towards his wigwam, she bounded towards him.
Little Tim extended his arms, caught her round the slender waist with
his big strong hands, and lifted her as if she had been a child until
her face was opposite his own.

"Hallo, little beam of light!" he exclaimed, kissing her on each cheek,
and then on the point of her tiny nose.

  "Eyes of mother--heart of sire,
  Fit to set the world on fire."

Tim had become poetical as he grew older, and sometimes tried to throw
his flashing thoughts into couplets.  He spoke to his daughter in
English, and, like Big Tim with his wife, required her to converse with
him in that language.

"Is mother at home?"

"Yes, dear fasser, mosser's at home."

"An' how's your little doll Skippin' Rabbit?"

"Oh! she well as could be, an' a'most as wild too as rabbits.  Runs away
from me, so I kin hardly kitch her sometime."

Moonlight accompanied this remark with a merry laugh, as she thought of
some of the eccentricities of her little companion.

Entering the wigwam, Little Tim found Brighteyes engaged with an iron
pot, from which arose savoury odours.  She had been as lithe and active
as Moonlight once, and was still handsome and matronly.  The eyes,
however, from which she derived her name, still shone with undiminished
lustre and benignity.

"Bless you, old woman," said the hunter, giving his wife a hearty kiss,
"you're as fond o' victuals as ever, I see."

"At least my husband is, so I keep the pot boiling," retorted
Brighteyes, with a smile, that proved her teeth to be as white as in
days of yore.

"Right, old girl, right.  Your husband is about as good at emptying the
pot as he is at filling it.  Come, let's have some, while I tell you of
a journey that's in store for you."

"A long one?" asked the wife.

"No, only a day's journey on horseback.  You're goin' to meet an old
friend."

From this point her husband went on to tell about the arrival and
wounding of the preacher, and how he had expressed an earnest desire to
see her.

While they were thus engaged, the prairie chief was similarly employed
enlightening his own mother.

That kind-hearted bundle of shrivelled-up antiquity was seated on the
floor on the one side of a small fire.  Her son sat on the opposite
side, gazing at her through the smoke, with, for an Indian, an unwonted
look of deep affection.

"The snows of too many winters are on my head to go on journeys now,"
she said, in a feeble, quavering voice.  "Is it far that my son wants me
to go?"

"Only one day's ride towards the setting sun, thou dear old one."

Thus tenderly had Christianity, coupled with a naturally affectionate
disposition, taught the prairie chief to address his mother.

"Well, my son, I will go.  Wherever Whitewing leads I will follow, for
he is led by Manitou.  I would go a long way to meet that good man the
pale-face preacher."

"Then to-morrow at sunrise the old one will be ready, and her son will
come for her."

So saying, the chief rose, and stalked solemnly out of the wigwam.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE SNAKES MAKE A DART AND SECURE THEIR VICTIMS.

While the things described in the last chapter were going on in the
Indian camp, Rushing River was prowling around it, alternately engaged
in observation and meditation, for he was involved in complicated
difficulties.

He had come to that region with a large band of followers for the
express purpose of scalping his great enemy Bounding Bull and all his
kindred, including any visitors who might chance to be with him at the
time.  After attacking Tim's Folly, and being driven therefrom by its
owner's ingenious fireworks, as already related, the chief had sent away
his followers to a distance to hunt, having run short of fresh meat.  He
retained with himself a dozen of his best warriors, men who could glide
with noiseless facility like snakes, or fight with the noisy ferocity of
fiends.  With these he meant to reconnoitre his enemy's camp, and make
arrangements for the final assault when his braves should return with
meat--for savages, not less than other men, are dependent very much on
full stomachs for fighting capacity.

But now a change had come over the spirit of his dream.  He had suddenly
fallen in love, and that, too, with one of his enemy's women.  His love
did not, however, extend to the rest of her kindred.  Firm as was his
resolve to carry off the girl, not less firm was his determination to
scalp her family root and branch.

As we have said, he hesitated to attack the camp for fear that mischief
might befall the girl on whom he had set his heart.  Besides, he would
require all his men to enable him to make the attack successfully, and
these would not, he knew, return to him until the following day.  The
arrival of Whitewing and Little Tim with their party still further
perplexed him.

He knew by the council that was immediately called, and the preparations
that followed, that news of some importance had been brought by the
prairie chief, and that action of some sort was immediately to follow;
but of course what it all portended he could not divine, and in his
uncertainty he feared that Moonlight--whose name of course he did not at
that time know--might be spirited away, and he should never see her
again.  Really, for a Red Indian, he became quite sentimental on the
point and half resolved to collect his dozen warriors, make a
neck-or-nothing rush at Bounding Bull, and carry off his scalp and the
girl at the same fell swoop.

Cooler reflection, however, told him that the feat was beyond even _his_
powers, for he knew well the courage and strength of his foe, and was
besides well acquainted with the person and reputation of the prairie
chief and Little Tim, both of whom had foiled his plans on former
occasions.

Greatly perplexed, therefore, and undetermined as to his course of
procedure, Rushing River bade his followers remain in their retreat in a
dark part of a tangled thicket, while he should advance with one man
still further in the direction of the camp to reconnoitre.

Having reached an elevated spot as near to the enemy as he dared venture
without running the risk of being seen by the sentinels, he flung
himself down, and crawled towards a tree, whence he could partially
observe what went on below.  His companion, a youth named Eaglenose,
silently followed his example.  This youth was a fine-looking young
savage, out on his first war-path, and burning to distinguish himself.
Active as a kitten and modest as a girl, he was also quick-witted, and
knew when to follow the example of his chief and when to remain
inactive--the latter piece of knowledge a comparatively rare gift to the
ambitious!

After a prolonged gaze, with the result of nothing gained, Rushing River
was about to retire from the spot as wise as he went, when his companion
uttered the slightest possible hiss.  He had heard a sound.  Next
instant the chief heard it, and smiled grimly.  We may remark here in
passing that the Blackfoot chief was eccentric in many ways.  He prided
himself on his contempt for the red man's love for paint and feathers,
and invariably went on the war-path unpainted and unadorned.  In
civilised life he would certainly have been a Radical.  How far his
objection to paint was influenced by the possession of a manly, handsome
countenance, of course we cannot tell.

To clear up the mystery of the sound which had thrilled on the sharp ear
of Eaglenose, we will return to the Indian camp, where, after the
council, a sumptuous feast of venison steaks and marrow-bones was spread
in Bounding Bull's wigwam.

Moonlight not being one of the party, and having already supped, said to
her mother that she was going to find Skipping Rabbit and have a run
with her.  You see, Moonlight, although full seventeen years of age, was
still so much of a child as to delight in a scamper with her little
friend, the youngest child of Bounding Bull.

"Be careful, my child," said Brighteyes.  "Keep within the sentinels;
you know that the great Blackfoot is on the war-path."

"Mother," said Moonlight, with the spirit of her little father stirring
in her breast, "I don't fear Rushing River more than I do the sighing of
the wind among the pine-tops.  Is not my father here, and Whitewing?
And does not Bounding Bull guard our wigwams?"
