coughing nearly all night, instead of sleeping. He believed himself
dying.

The wise old Medicine Man of his tribe said, "You need the Medicine of
the Sky." He took it and got quite well and strong.

Another Indian, who had gone to visit with a distant tribe of red men,
came back with some sickness on his skin that made it very sore. It was
far worse than Poison Ivy, for it began to eat into his flesh. The
Medicine Man said, "Sky Medicine will cure you." And it did.

One day a white man, a trader, came with chest protectors to sell to the
Indians. He was sure they needed them, because he did; and, although so
well wrapped up, he was always cold. He suffered whenever the wind blew.
The old Medicine Man said, "We don't need your chest pads, and you would
not if you took the Sky Medicine." So the trader tried it, and by and
by, to his surprise and joy, no matter whether it was hot or cold
outdoors, he was comfortable.

This man had a friend who was a learned professor in a college, and he
told him about the great thing he had learned from the old Indian. The
professor was not old, but he was very sick and feeble in body. He could
not sleep nights. His hair was falling out, and his mind filled with
gloomy thoughts. The whole world seemed dark to him. He knew it was a
kind of disease, and he went away out West to see his friend. Then he
met the Medicine Man and said to him, "Can you help me?"

The wise old Indian said, "Oh, white man, where do you spend your days?"

"I spend them at my desk, in my study, or in the classroom."

"Yes, and your nights?"

"In my study among my books."

"And where do you sleep?"

"I don't sleep much, though I have a comfortable bed."

"In the house?"

"Yes, of course."

"Listen, then, O foolish white man. The Great Spirit set Big Medicine in
the sky to cure our ills. And you hide from it day and night. What do
you expect but evil? This do and be saved. Take the Sky Medicine in
measure of your strength."

He did so and it saved him. His strength came back. His cheeks grew
ruddy, his hands grew steady, his hair ceased falling out, he slept like
a baby. He was happy.

Now what is the Sky Medicine? It is the glorious sunlight, that cures so
many human ills. We ask every Woodcrafter to hold on to its blessings.

       *       *       *       *       *

And in this wise, O Guide, you must give it to the little ones. Make it
an honourable exploit to be sunburnt to the elbows without blistering;
another to be sunburnt to the shoulders; another to the waist; and
greatest of all, when sunburnt all over. How are they to get this? Let
them go to some quiet place for the last, and let the glory fall on
their naked bodies, for ten minutes each day. Some more, and some less,
according to their strength, and this is the measure--so long as it is
pleasant, it is good.

In this way they will inherit one of the good things of the woods and be
strong and hardened, for there is no greater medicine than the Sun in
the sky.


TALE 72

The Angel of the Night

O Guide of the young Tribe! Know you the Twelfth Secret of the Woods?
Know you what walked around your tent on that thirtieth night of your
camp out? No! I think you knew, if you continued for thirty nights, but
you knew not that you knew. These things, then, you should have in
heart, and give to those you are leading.

The Great Spirit does not put out good air in the daytime and poison air
at night. It is the same pure air at night, only cooler. Therefore use
more clothing while you sleep. But while the outdoor air is pure, the
indoor may be foul. Therefore sleep out of doors, and you will learn the
blessedness of the night, and the night air, with its cooling kindly
influence laden.

Those who come here to our Camp from life in town and sleeping in close
rooms, are unaccustomed, and nervous it may be, so that they sleep
little at first. But each night brings its balm of rest. Strength comes.
Some know it in a week. The town-worn and nerve-weary find it at
farthest in half a moon. And in one full moon be sure of this, when the
night comes down you will find the blessed balm that the Great Spirit
meant for all of us. You will sleep, a calm sweet vitalizing sleep.

You will know this the twelfth secret of the woods: What walked around
your tent that thirtieth night? You know not, you heard nothing, for you
slept. Yet when the morning comes you feel and know that round your
couch, with wings and hands upraised in blessed soothing influence,
there passed the Angel of the Night, with healing under her wings, and
peace. You saw her not, you heard her not, but the sweet healing of her
presence will be with you for many after moons.

FOOTNOTES:

[C] The Guide will note that there are rare exceptions to these rules.

[D] The Guide will remember that Totemism and Tabuism were ideas which
grew up long after the use of Totems began.




THINGS TO DO

[Illustration: Nests of Kingbird, Oriole, Vireo, Robin, Goldfinch,
Phoebe (1/4 life size)]




Things to Do


TALE 73

Bird-nesting in Winter

What good are old bird-nests? These are some of the ends they serve. A
Deermouse seeking the safety of a bramble thicket and a warm house, will
make his own nest in the forsaken home of a Cat-bird. A Gray Squirrel
will roof over the open nest of a Crow or Hawk and so make it a castle
in the air for himself. But one of the strangest uses is this: The
Solitary Sandpiper is a bird that cannot build a tree nest for itself
and yet loves to give to its eggs the safety of a high place; so it lays
in the old nest of a Robin, or other tree bird, and there its young are
hatched. But this is only in the Far North. There are plenty of old
bird-nests left for other uses, and for you.

Bird-nesting in summer is wicked, cruel, and against the law. But
bird-nesting in winter is good fun and harms no one, if we take only the
little nests that are built in forked twigs, or on rock ledges. For most
little birds prefer to make a new nest for themselves each season.

If you get: A Goldfinch, floss nest;

A Phoebe, moss nest;

A Robin, mud nest;

A Vireo, good nest;

A Kingbird, rag nest;

An Oriole, bag nest;

you have six different kinds of beautiful nests that are easily kept
for the museum, and you do no harm in taking them.


TALE 74

The Ox-eye Daisy or Marguerite

[Illustration: The Ox-eye Daisy or Marguerite]

Do you know that "Daisy" means "day's eye," because the old country
Daisy opens its eyes when day comes, and shuts them every night. But our
Daisy is different and much bigger, so we have got into the way of
calling it "Ox-eye." Some of our young people call it "Love-me;
love-me-not," because they think it can tell if one is loved. They pull
out the white rays of the flower one by one, saying, "He loves me; he
loves me not; he loves me; he loves me not." Then what they are saying
as the last is pulled, settles the question. If the Daisy says "He loves
me," they take a second Daisy and ask the next question, "Will he marry
me?" Then, pulling the rays as before, "This year, next year, some time,
never." And in this way they learn all that the Daisies know about these
important matters.

We call it "our Daisy," but it is not a true native of America. Its home
is Europe. The settlers of New England, missing the flower of their
homeland, brought it over and planted it in their gardens. It spread
widely in the North; but it did not reach the South until the time of
the Civil War, when it is said to have gone in with the hay for
Sherman's Army, to become a troublesome weed in the fields.

       *       *       *       *       *

This scrap of history is recorded in a popular ballad.

        There's a story told in Georgia
          'Tis in everybody's mouth,
        That 'twas old Tecumseh Sherman
          Brought the Daisy to the South.
        Ne'er that little blossom stranger
          In our land was known to be,
        Till he marched his blue-coat army
          From Atlanta to the sea.

[Illustration: The Monkeys in the Tree Tops]


TALE 75

A Monkey-hunt

We all love to go a-hunting; every one of us in some way; and it is only
the dislike of cruelty and destruction that keeps most of us from
hunting animals continually, as our forebears did.

Some of my best days were spent in hunting. The Arabs say, "Allah
reckons not against a man's allotted span the days he spends in the
chase."

I hope that I may help many of you to go a-hunting, and to get the good
things of it, with the bad things left out.

Come! Now it is the spring of the year, and just the right time for a
Monkey-hunt. We are going prowling along the brookside where we are
pretty sure of finding our game. "See, there is a Monkey tree and it is
full of the big Monkeys!"

"What! That pussy-willow?"

Yes, you think they are only pussy-willows, but wait until you see. We
shall take home a band of the Monkeys, tree and all, and you will learn
that a pussy-willow is only a baby Monkey half done.

Now let us get a branch of live elderberry and one or two limbs of the
low red sumac. It is best to use sumac because it is the only handy wood
that one can easily stick a pin through, or cut. The pieces should be
five or six inches long and about half an inch to an inch thick. They
should have as many odd features as possible, knots, bumps, fungus,
moss, etc.; all of which add interest to the picture.

To these we must add a lot of odd bits of dry cane, dry grasses, old
flower-stalks, moss, and gravel, etc., to use for background and
foreground in the little jungle we are to make for our Monkeys to play
in. It is delightful to find the new interest that all sorts of queer
weeds take on, when we view them as canes or palms for our little
jungle.

Now with the spoils of our hunt, let us go home and preserve the
trophies.

Cut off about three inches of the elderberry wood and have it clear of
knots; cut a flat ended ramrod so as just to fit the bore, and force out
the pith with one clean sharp push: or else whittle away the surrounding
wood. The latter way gives a better quality of pith.

Now take a piece of the pith about one-third the size of a big
pussy-willow, use a very sharp knife and you will find it easy to
whittle it into a Monkey's head about the shape of "a" and "b."

Use a very sharp-pointed, soft black pencil to make the eyes, nose, the
line for the mouth and the shape of the ears; or else wait till the pith
is _quite dry_, then use a fine pen with ink.

If you are skilful with the knife you may cut the ears so that they hang
as in "d."

Stick an ordinary pin right down through the crown of the head into a
big pussy-willow that will serve as a body (e). If you glue the head on
it is harder to do, but it keeps the body from being mussed up. Cut two
arms of the pith (ff) and two feet (gg), drawing the lines for the
fingers and toes, with the sharp black pencil, or else ink as before.

Cut a long, straight pointed piece of pith for a tail, dip it in boiling
water, then bend it to the right shape "h."

Cut a branch of the sumac so that it is about four inches high, and of
the style for a tree; nail this on a block of wood to make it stand.
Sometimes it is easier to bore a hole in the stand and wedge the branch
into that.

Set the Monkey on the limb by driving the pin into it as at "i," or else
glueing it on; and glue on the limbs and tail. Sometimes a little wad
of willow-down on the Monkey's crown is a great help. It hides the pin.

Now set this away for the glue to harden.

Meanwhile take an ordinary cigar box about two inches deep, line it with
white paper pasted in; or else paint it with water colour in Chinese
white. Colour the upper part sky colour; the lower, shaded into green,
getting very dark on the bottom. Lay a piece of glass or else a scrap of
an old motor-car window-isinglass on the bottom, and set in a couple of
tacks alongside to hold it; this is for a pool.

Make a mixture of liquid glue, one part; water, five parts; then stir in
enough old plaster of Paris, whitening, or even fine loam to make a soft
paste. Build banks of this paste around the pool and higher toward the
back sides. Stick the tree, with its stand and its Monkeys, in this, to
one side; dust powder or rotten wood over the ground to hide its
whiteness; or paint it with water colours.

Use all the various dry grasses, etc., to form a jungle; sticking them
in the paste, or glueing them on.

And your jungle with its Monkeys is complete.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many other things may be used for Monkeys. I have seen good ones made of
peanuts, with the features inked on, and a very young black birch catkin
for tail. Beautiful birds also can be made by using a pith body and
bright feathers or silks glued on for plumes. The pith itself is easily
coloured with water colours.

You will be delighted to see what beautiful effects you can get by use
of these simple wild materials, helped with a little imagination.

And the end of the Monkey-hunt will be that you have learned a new kind
of hunting, with nothing but pleasant memories in it, and trophies to
show for proof.

[Illustration: The Horsetail and the Jungle]


