The Project Gutenberg EBook of Despoilers of the Golden Empire, by 
Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Despoilers of the Golden Empire

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: December 31, 2007 [EBook #24091]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DESPOILERS OF THE GOLDEN EMPIRE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









 [Illustration]

 DESPOILERS
 OF THE
 GOLDEN EMPIRE

 BY DAVID GORDON

 _A handful of men, and an incredible
 adventure--a few super-men, led by a
 fanatic, seeking to conquer a new world!_

 Illustrated by Freas




I


In the seven centuries that had elapsed since the Second Empire had been
founded on the shattered remnants of the First, the nobles of the
Imperium had come slowly to realize that the empire was not to be judged
by the examples of its predecessor. The First Empire had conquered most
of the known universe by political intrigue and sheer military strength;
it had fallen because that same propensity for political intrigue had
gained over every other strength of the Empire, and the various branches
and sectors of the First Empire had begun to use it against one another.

The Second Empire was politically unlike the First; it tried to balance
a centralized government against the autonomic governments of the
various sectors, and had almost succeeded in doing so.

But, no matter how governed, there are certain essentials which are
needed by any governmental organization.

Without power, neither Civilization nor the Empire could hold itself
together, and His Universal Majesty, the Emperor Carl, well knew it. And
power was linked solidly to one element, one metal, without which
Civilization would collapse as surely as if it had been blasted out of
existence. Without the power metal, no ship could move or even be built;
without it, industry would come to a standstill.

In ancient times, even as far back as the early Greek and Roman
civilizations, the metal had been known, but it had been used, for the
most part, as decoration and in the manufacture of jewelry. Later, it
had been coined as money.

It had always been relatively rare, but now, weight for weight, atom for
atom, it was the most valuable element on Earth. Indeed, the most
valuable in the known universe.

The metal was Element Number Seventy-nine--gold.

To the collective mind of the Empire, gold was the prime object in any
kind of mining exploration. The idea of drilling for petroleum, even if
it had been readily available, or of mining coal or uranium would have
been dismissed as impracticable and even worse than useless.

Throughout the Empire, research laboratories worked tirelessly at the
problem of transmuting commoner elements into Gold-197, but thus far
none of the processes was commercially feasible. There was still, after
thousands of years, only one way to get the power metal: extract it from
the ground.

So it was that, across the great gulf between the worlds, ship after
ship moved in search of the metal that would hold the far-flung colonies
of the Empire together. Every adventurer who could manage to get aboard
was glad to be cooped up on a ship during the long months it took to
cross the empty expanses, was glad to endure the hardships on alien
terrain, on the chance that his efforts might pay off a thousand or ten
thousand fold.

Of these men, a mere handful were successful, and of these one or two
stand well above the rest. And for sheer determination, drive, and
courage, for the will to push on toward his goal, no matter what the
odds, a certain Commander Frank had them all beat.




II


Before you can get a picture of the commander--that is, as far as his
personality goes--you have to get a picture of the man physically.

He was enough taller than the average man to make him stand out in a
crowd, and he had broad shoulders and a narrow waist to match. He wasn't
heavy; his was the hard, tough, wirelike strength of a steel cable. The
planes of his tanned face showed that he feared neither exposure to the
elements nor exposure to violence; it was seamed with fine wrinkles and
the thin white lines that betray scar tissue. His mouth was
heavy-lipped, but firm, and the lines around it showed that it was
unused to smiling. The commander could laugh, and often did--a sort of
roaring explosion that burst forth suddenly whenever something struck
him as particularly uproarious. But he seldom just smiled; Commander
Frank rarely went halfway in anything.

His eyes, like his hair, were a deep brown--almost black, and they were
set well back beneath heavy brows that tended to frown most of the time.

Primarily, he was a military man. He had no particular flair for
science, and, although he had a firm and deep-seated grasp of the
essential philosophy of the Universal Assembly, he had no inclination
towards the kind of life necessarily led by those who would become
higher officers of the Assembly. It was enough that the Assembly was
behind him; it was enough to know that he was a member of the only race
in the known universe which had a working knowledge of the essential,
basic Truth of the Cosmos. With a weapon like that, even an ordinary
soldier had little to fear, and Commander Frank was far from being an
ordinary soldier.

He had spent nearly forty of his sixty years of life as an
explorer-soldier for the Emperor, and during that time he'd kept his
eyes open for opportunity. Every time his ship had landed, he'd watched
and listened and collected data. And now he knew.

If his data were correct--and he was certain that they were--he had
found his strike. All he needed was the men to take it.




III


The expedition had been poorly outfitted and undermanned from the
beginning. The commander had been short of money at the outset, having
spent almost all he could raise on his own, plus nearly everything he
could beg or borrow, on his first two probing expeditions, neither of
which had shown any real profit.

But they _had_ shown promise; the alien population of the target which
the commander had selected as his personal claim wore gold as ornaments,
but didn't seem to think it was much above copper in value, and hadn't
even progressed to the point of using it as coinage. From the second
probing expedition, he had brought back two of the odd-looking aliens
and enough gold to show that there must be more where that came from.

The old, hopeful statement, "There's gold in them thar hills," should
have brought the commander more backing than he got, considering the
Empire's need of it and the commander's evidence that it was available;
but people are always more ready to bet on a sure thing than to indulge
in speculation. Ten years before, a strike had been made in a sector
quite distant from the commander's own find, and most of the richer
nobles of the Empire preferred to back an established source of the
metal than to sink money into what might turn out to be the pursuit of
a wild goose.

Commander Frank, therefore, could only recruit men who were willing to
take a chance, who were willing to risk anything, even their lives,
against tremendously long odds.

And, even if they succeeded, the Imperial Government would take twenty
per cent of the gross without so much as a by-your-leave. There was no
other market for the metal except back home, so the tax could not be
avoided; gold was no good whatsoever in the uncharted wilds of an alien
world.

Because of his lack of funds, the commander's expedition was not only
dangerously undermanned, but illegally so. It was only by means of
out-and-out trickery that he managed to evade the official inspection
and leave port with too few men and too little equipment.

There wasn't a scientist worthy of the name in the whole outfit, unless
you call the navigator, Captain Bartholomew, an astronomer, which is
certainly begging the question. There was no anthropologist aboard to
study the semibarbaric civilization of the natives; there was no
biologist to study the alien flora and fauna. The closest thing the
commander had to physicists were engineers who could take care of the
ship itself--specialist technicians, nothing more.

There was no need for armament specialists; each and every man was a
soldier, and, as far as his own weapons went, an ordnance expert. As far
as Commander Frank was concerned, that was enough. It had to be.

Mining equipment? He took nothing but the simplest testing apparatus.
How, then, did he intend to get the metal that the Empire was screaming
for?

The commander had an answer for that, too, and it was as simple as it
was economical. The natives would get it for him.

They used gold for ornaments, therefore, they knew where the gold could
be found. And, therefore, they would bloody well dig it out for
Commander Frank.




IV


Due to atmospheric disturbances, the ship's landing was several hundred
miles from the point the commander had originally picked for the
debarkation of his troops. That meant a long, forced march along the
coast and then inland, but there was no help for it; the ship simply
wasn't built for atmospheric navigation.

That didn't deter the commander any. The orders rang through the ship:
"All troops and carriers prepare for landing!"

Half an hour later, they were assembled outside the ship, fully armed
and armored, and with full field gear. The sun, a yellow G-O star, hung
hotly just above the towering mountains to the east. The alien air
smelled odd in the men's nostrils, and the weird foliage seemed to
rustle menacingly. In the distance, the shrieks of alien fauna
occasionally echoed through the air.

A hundred and eighty-odd men and some thirty carriers stood under the
tropic blaze for forty-five minutes while the commander checked over
their equipment with minute precision. Nothing faulty or sloppy was
