After the bridging of the Tigris he reduces Adiabene, Mesopotamia, and
Ctesiphon (chapters 26-28).

He loses and regains several districts: he bestows a king upon the
Parthians (chapters 29, 30).

He besieges the Atreni without result (chapter 31). The Jews in Cyrene,
Egypt, and Cyprus rebel, and are crushed, chiefly through the activity of
Lusius (chapter 32).

The Parthians cast out the king imposed upon them: Trajan dies (chapter
33).


DURATION OF TIME.

C. Manlius Valens, C. Antistius Vetus. (A.D. 96 = a.u. 849 = First of
Nerva, from Sept. 18th).

Nerva Caes. Aug. (III), L. Verginius Rufus (III). (A.D. 97 = a.u. 850 =
Second of Nerva).

Nerva Caes. Aug. (IV), Nerva Traianus Caes. (II). (A.D. 98 = a.u. 851 =
Third of Nerva, to January 27th).

C. Sosius Senecio (II), A. Cornelius Palma. (A.D. 99 = a.u. 852 = Second
of Trajan).

Nerva Traianus Aug. (III), Sex. Iul. Frontinus (III). (A.D. 100 = a.u. 853
= Third of Trajan).

Nerva Traianus Aug. (IV), Sex. Articuleius Paetus. (A.D. 101 = a.u. 854 =
Fourth of Trajan).

C. Sosius Senecio (III), L. Licinius Sura (II). (A.D. 102 = a.u. 855 =
Fifth of Trajan).

Nerva Traianus Aug. (V), Q. Messius Maximus (II). (A.D. 103 = a.u. 856 =
Sixth of Trajan).

Suburanus (II), P. Neratius Marcellus. (A.D. 104 = a.u. 857 = Seventh of
Trajan).

Ti. Iulius Candidus (II), A. Iulius Quadratus (II). (A.D. 105 = a.u. 858 =
Eighth of Trajan).

L. Ceionius Commodus Verus, L. Cerealis. (A.D. 106 = a.u. 859 = Ninth of
Trajan).

C. Sosius Senecio (IV), L. Licinius Sura (III). (A.D. 107 = a.u. 860 =
Tenth of Trajan).

Ap. Trebonius Gallus, M. Atilius Bradua. (A.D. 108 = a.u. 861 = Eleventh
of Trajan).

A. Cornelius Palma (II), C. Calvisius Tullus (II). (A.D. 109 = a.u. 862 =
Twelfth of Trajan).

Clodius Priscinus, Solenus Orfitus. (A.D. 110 = a.u. 863 = Thirteenth of
Trajan).

C. Calpurnius Piso, M. Vettius Bolanus. (A.D. 111 = a.u. 864 = Fourteenth
of Trajan). Nerva Traianus Aug. (VI), C. Iulius Africanus. (A.D. 112 = a.u.
865=Fifteenth of Trajan).

L. Celsus (II), Clodius Crispinus. (A.D. 113 = a.u. 866=Sixteenth of
Trajan).

Q. Ninnius Hasta, P. Manilius Vopiscus. (A.D. 114 = a.u. 867=Seventeenth of
Trajan).

L. Vipsanius Messala, M. Pedo Virgilianus. (A.D. 115 = a.u. 868=Eighteenth
of Trajan).

L. Aelius Lamia, Aelianus Vetus. (A.D. 116 = a.u. 869 = Nineteenth of
Trajan).

Quinctius Niger, C. Vipsanius Apronianus. (A.D. 117 = a.u. 870=Twentieth of
Trajan, to Aug. 11th).


[Sidenote: A.D. 96 (a.u. 849)] [Sidenote:--1--] After Domitian, the Romans
appointed Nerva Cocceius emperor. The hatred felt for Domitian caused his
images, many of which were of silver and many of gold to be melted down;
and from this source large amounts of money were obtained. The arches,
too, of which more had been erected to the late emperor than previously to
any one man, were torn down. Nerva also released such as were on trial for
maiestas and restored the exiles. All the slaves and freedmen that had
conspired against their masters he put to death, and allowed that class of
persons to lodge no complaint whatever against their masters. Others were
not permitted to accuse anybody for maiestas or for "Jewish living." Many
who had been sycophants were condemned to death, among whom was Seras
[Lacuna] [Footnote: The name is suspicious and possibly a corrupt
reading.] the philosopher. Now, as a quite extraordinary disturbance arose
from the fact that everybody was accusing everybody else, Fronto, the
consul, is said to have remarked that it was bad to have an emperor under
whom no one could do anything, but worse to have one under whom any one
could do everything. Nerva, on hearing this, prohibited the future
recurrence of such scenes. But Nerva, as a result of old age and sickness
(which was always making him vomit his food), was rather weak.

[Sidenote:--2--] He also forbade gold statues being made in his honor. He
paid back to such as under Domitian had been causelessly deprived of their
property all that was still found in the imperial treasury. To the very
poor Romans he granted allotments of land worth in the aggregate fifteen
hundred myriads, and put certain senators in charge of their purchase and
distribution. When he ran short of funds he sold many robes and plate,
both silver and gold, besides furniture, both his own and what belonged to
the imperial residence, many fields and houses,--in fact, everything save
what was quite necessary. He did not, however, haggle over the prices of
them, and in this very point benefited many persons. He abolished many
sacrifices, many horse-races, and some other spectacles, in an attempt to
reduce expenses as far as possible. In the senate he took oath that he
would not cause the death of any of the senators and he kept his pledge in
spite of plots. And he did nothing without the advice of prominent men.
Among his various laws were those prohibiting any one from being made a
eunuch and from marrying one's niece. When consul he did not hesitate to
take as his colleague Verginius Rufus, though the latter had been
frequently saluted as emperor. [Footnote: Compare Book Sixty-three,
chapter 25 of Dio, and also Tacitus, _Historiae_ I, 9.] [Sidenote:
A.D. 97 (a.u. 850)] Upon his monument was inscribed when he died: "Having
conquered Vindex he ascribed the credit of victory not to himself but to
his country." [Footnote: Compare also Pliny's Letters, Book Six, number
10.]

[Sidenote:--3--] Nerva ruled so well that he once remarked: "I have done
nothing that could prevent me from laying down the imperial office and
returning to private life in safety." When Crassus Calpurnius, a grandson
of the famous Crassi, formed a plot with some others against him, he made
them sit beside him at a spectacle--they were still ignorant of the fact
that they had been informed upon--and gave them some swords, nominally to
look at and see if they were sharp (as was often done), but really by way
of showing that he did not care if he died that moment where he was.

Aelianus Casperius, who was governor under him as he had been under
Domitian, and had become one of the Pretorians, incited the soldiers to
mutiny against him; his plan was to have them demand some persons for
execution. Nerva resisted them stoutly, even to the point of baring his
collar-bone and offering them his throat: but he accomplished nothing and
those whom Aelianus wished were put out of the way. Wherefore Nerva,
subjected to such profound humiliation because of his old age, ascended
the Capitol and cried aloud: "To the good fortune of the Roman people and
senate and myself I adopt Marcus Ulpius Nerva Trajan."

Subsequently in the senate he designated him Caesar and sent a message to
him, written with his own hand (Trajan was governor of Germany):

  "The Danaans by thy weapons shall requite my tears." [Footnote: From
  Homer's Iliad, Book One, verse 42.]

[Sidenote:--4--] Thus did Trajan become Caesar and afterwards emperor,
although there were relatives of Nerva. But the man did not esteem family
relationship above the safety of the State, nor was he less inclined to
adopt Trajan because the latter was a Spaniard instead of an Italian or
Italiot, [Footnote: Dio means by _Italian_ one born in Italy, by
_Italiot_ one who settles in Italy.] or because no foreigner had
previously held the Roman sovereignty. It was a person's virtue and not
his country that he thought needed examination.

[Sidenote: A.D. 98 (a.u. 851)] Soon after this act he passed away, having
ruled during the period of one year, four months and nine days. His life
prior to that time [Footnote: Reading [Greek: proebebiochei]
(Boissevain).] had comprised sixty-five years, ten months, and ten days.

[Sidenote:--5--] Trajan, before he became emperor, had had a dream of the
following nature. He thought that an old man in purple robe and vesture,
moreover adorned with a crown, as the senate is represented in pictures,
impressed a seal upon him with a finger ring, first on the left side of
his throat and then on the right. When he had been made emperor, he sent a
despatch to the senate written with his own hand, which stated, among
other things, that he would not slay nor dishonor any man of worth. This
he confirmed by oaths not merely at that time but also later.

He sent for Aelianus and the Pretorians who had mutinied against Nerva,
pretending that he was going to employ them in some way, and relieved the
world of their presence. [Sidenote: A.D. 99 (a.u. 852)] When he had
entered Rome he did much toward the administration of state affairs and to
please the excellent. To the former business he gave unusual attention,
making many grants even to Italian cities for the support of their
children, and to good citizens he did continual favors. Plotina, his wife,
on first going into the palace turned around so as to face the Scalae and
the populace, and said: "My wish is to issue hence the same sort of person
as I am now when I enter." And she so conducted herself during the entire
sovereignty as to incur no censure.

[Sidenote: A.D. 100 (a.u. 853)] [Sidenote:--6--] After spending some time
in Rome he instituted a campaign against the Dacians; for he made their
deeds the object of thought and was irritated at the amount of money they
were annually getting. He likewise saw that their power and their pride
were increasing. Decebalus, learning of his advance, was frightened, since
he well knew that formerly he had conquered not the Romans but Domitian,
whereas now he would be fighting against both Romans and Trajan as emperor.

And Trajan had a great reputation for justice, for bravery, and for simple
living. He was strong in body (being in his forty-second year when he
began to rule) [so that in every enterprise he toiled almost as much as
the rest;] and his intellectual powers were at their highest, so that he
had neither the recklessness of youth nor the sluggishness of old age. He
did not envy nor kill any one, but honored and exalted all without
exception that were men of worth, and hence he neither feared nor hated
one of them. To slanders he paid very little heed and was no slave of
anger. He refrained equally from the money of others and from unjust
murders. [Sidenote:--7--] He expended vast sums on wars and vast sums on
works of peace; and while making very many most necessary repairs on roads
and harbors and public buildings, he drained no one's blood for these
undertakings. His nature was so noble and magnanimous that even upon the
hippodrome he merely inscribed the statement that he had made it suitable
for the Roman people when it had crumbled away in spots, and had rendered
it larger and more beautiful. For these deeds he was better satisfied to
be loved than honored. His meetings with the people were marked by
affability and his intercourse with the senate by dignity. He was loved by
all and dreaded by none save the enemy. He joined people in hunting and
banquets, and in work and plans and jokes. Often he would make a fourth in
somebody's litter, and sometimes he would enter persons' houses even
without a guard and make himself at home. He lacked education in the exact
sense,--book-learning, at least,--but he both understood and carried out
its spirit, and there was no quality of his that was not _excellent_.
I know well enough that he was given to wine and boys, but if he had ever
committed or endured any base or wicked deed as a result of this, he would
have incurred censure. As the case stood, he drank all the wine he wanted,
yet remained sober, and his pursuit of pederasty harmed no one. And even
if he did delight in war, still he was satisfied with success in it,--with
overthrowing a most hostile element and bettering his own side. Nor did
the usual thing under such circumstances,--conceit and arrogance on the
part of the soldiers,--ever manifest itself during his reign; with such a
firm hand did he rule them. For these reasons Decebalus was somewhat
justified in fearing him.

[Sidenote:--8--] When Trajan, in the course of his campaign against the
Dacians had come near Tapai, where the barbarians were encamping, a large
mushroom was brought to him, on which it said in Latin characters that the
Buri and other allies advised Trajan to turn back and make peace. At
Trajan's first encounter with the foe he visited many of the wounded on
his own side and killed many of the enemy. And when the bandages gave out,
he is said not to have spared even his own clothing, but to have cut it up
into strips. In honor of the soldiers that had died in battle he ordered
an altar erected and the performance of funeral rites annually.

[Sidenote:--9--] [Decebalus had sent envoys also before the defeat, and no
longer the long-haired men, as before, but the chief among the
cap-wearers. [Footnote: Latin, _pileati_. The distinction drawn is
that between the plebeians and the _nobles_, to whom reference is
made respectively by the terms "unshorn" and "covered." Compare here the
make up of the Marcomanian embassy in Book Seventy-two, chapter two.]
These threw down their arms and casting themselves upon the earth begged
Trajan that if possible Decebalus himself be allowed to meet and confer
with him, promising that he would do everything that might be commanded;
or, if not, that at least some one should be despatched to agree upon
terms with him. Those sent were Sura and Claudius Livianus, the prefect;
but nothing was accomplished, for Decebalus did not dare even to come near
them. He sent representatives also on this occasion.

Trajan had now seized some fortified mountains and on them found the arms
and the captured engines, as well as the standard which had been taken in
the time Fuscus. [Sidenote: A.D. 101 (a.u. 854)] Undertaking to ascend the
heights themselves, he secured one crest after another amid dangers and
approached the capital of the Dacians. Lusius, attacking in another
quarter, slaughtered numbers and captured still more alive. Then Decebalus
sent envoys.

Decebalus, for this reason, and particularly because Maximus at the same
time had possession of his sister and a strong position, was ready to
agree without exception to every demand made. It was not that he intended
to abide by his agreement, but he wanted to secure a respite from his
temporary reverses.] So, though against his will, he made a compact to
surrender his arms, engines, and manufacturers of engines, to give back
the deserters, to demolish his forts, to withdraw from captured territory,
and furthermore to consider the same persons enemies and friends as the
Romans did [besides neither giving shelter to any of the deserters,
[Footnote: Reading [Greek: automolon tina] (Boissevain).] nor employing
any soldiers from the Roman empire, for he had acquired the largest and
best part of his force by persuading them to come from that quarter]. When
he came into Trajan's presence, he fell upon the earth and did obeisance
[and cast away his arms. He also sent envoys to the senate to secure these
terms, in order that he might have the further ratification of the peace
by that body. At the conclusion of this compact the emperor left a camp in
Sarmizegethusa, and, having placed garrisons at intervals through the
remainder of the territory, returned to Italy.]

[Sidenote: A.D. 103 (a.u. 856)] [Sidenote:--10--] The envoys from
Decebalus were introduced in the senate. They laid down their arms,
clasped their hands in the posture of captives, and spoke some words of
supplication; thus they obtained peace and received back their arms.
Trajan celebrated a triumph and was given the title of Dacicus; in the
theatre he had contests of gladiators, in whom he delighted, and he
brought back dancers once more to the theatre, being in love with one of
them, Pylades. However, he did not pay less attention to general
administration, as might have been expected of a warlike personage, nor
did he hold court the less: on the contrary, he conducted trials now in
the forum of Augustus, now in the porch named the Porch of Livia, and
often elsewhere on a platform.

And since Decebalus was reported to him to be acting in many ways contrary
to the treaty, since he was gathering arms, receiving such as deserted,
repairing the forts, sending ambassadors to the neighbors, and injuring
those who had previously differed with him, since also he was devastating
some land of the Iazygae (which Trajan later would not give back to them
when they asked for it), therefore, the senate voted that he was again an
enemy. And Trajan again conducted the war against him, commanding in
person and not represented by others.

[Sidenote: A.D. 104 (a.u. 857)] [Sidenote:--11--] [As numerous Dacians
kept transferring their allegiance to Trajan, and for certain other
reasons, Decebalus again requested peace. But since he could not be
persuaded to surrender both his arms and himself, he proceeded openly to
collect troops and called the surrounding nations to his aid, saying that
if they deserted him they themselves would come into danger and that it
was safer and easier by fighting on his side to preserve their freedom,
before suffering any harm, than if they should allow his people to be
destroyed and then later be subjugated when bereft of allies.] And
Decebalus in the open field came off poorly, but by craft and deceit he
almost compassed the death of Trajan. He sent into Moesia some deserters
to see whether they could make away with him, inasmuch as the emperor was
generally accessible, and now, on account of the needs of warfare,
admitted to conference absolutely every one who desired it. But this plan
they were unable to carry out, since one of them was arrested on suspicion
and, under torture, revealed the entire plot.

[Sidenote:--12--] Longinus was the commandant of the Roman camp who had
made himself a terror to the Dacian leader in warfare. The latter,
therefore, sent him an invitation and persuaded him to meet him, on the
pretext that he would perform whatever should be enjoined. He then
arrested him and questioned him publicly about Trajan's plans. As the
Roman would not yield at all, he took him about with him under guard,
