"I'm not a man of war, Mark," he said; "but I shall have to carry a pike
instead of an eel-spear against these villains.  We shall none of us be
safe."

"Oh yes, we'll talk about that to-morrow," said Mark peevishly.  "This
hurts horribly.  I say, don't say anything to my father about my
fighting alongside that young Darley.  I was obliged to, you see."

"Of course you were, my lad!  We must all make common cause against such
an enemy.  No, I will not say anything unless you wish me to."

"Thank ye.  Father mightn't like it, you see."

"But you will tell him?"

"No, I think not--I don't know--well, there, not to-night.  I'm giddy,
and feel sick.  I didn't notice it so much when I was hot and all in the
fight, but it's very painful now.  Would you mind putting your arm round
me?  I feel as if I should fall off."

"My poor brave boy!" said the old man gently, as he supported the
wounded lad.  "There, only a little farther.  Ah!  Hoi!  Rugg!  Dummy
Rugg!  Here, quick!"

The lad, who was perched upon a block of stone half-way up the zigzag,
evidently watching for his young master's return, sprang down and came
running to them.

"What's the matter?" he cried hoarsely.  "Don't say Master Mark's hurt!"

"Hush!  Quiet, boy!" said Master Rayburn quickly.  "Help me to get him
into his own room without frightening Miss Mary."

"Yes; but what's the matter?" cried the boy.

"Been attacked--fighting--slightly wounded."

"But who done it?--I know.  It was them Darleys.  Which of 'em was it?"

"Quiet, I tell you, boy!  Can't you see he has fainted?  Why do you want
to know?"

"To kill him," said the lad, through his teeth.

"Humph! you young savage," muttered Master Rayburn; "then you will not
know from me.  Lead the pony carefully, Dummy," he continued aloud.
"Where is Sir Edward? where is your young mistress?"

"Out in the garden, waiting for him to come home to supper.  Who hurt
him?"

"Will you mind the pony's head, or must I come and lead him?" cried the
old man angrily.

"Yes; but I want to help Master Mark," cried the lad.

"Mind the pony, sir.  Ah! here is one of the men.  Here, you are
stronger than I am.  Lift Master Mark up carefully, so as not to jar his
leg.  Dummy, run in and get a chair."

This was done, another of the serving men coming out to see what was the
matter, and they lifted and bore in the half-fainting lad; while Master
Rayburn disencumbered himself of his creel and rod, and prepared to
follow, to turn chirurgeon instead of angler, when Dummy caught him by
the sleeve.

"You won't tell me who did it?" he said sharply.

"No: it is no affair of yours, boy," said the old man; and he shook him
off, and entered the gate.

"Yes, it is," muttered Dummy; and he did what he had never done before--
sprang after the old man, entered the hall, and caught him by the
sleeve.

"You here, sir!" cried Master Rayburn.  "What is it now?"

"Is Master Mark going to die?"

"Yes, when he grows to be an old man.  Not now.  Go away."

"Yes, I'll go away," muttered Dummy, as he slunk out, and away through
the gate.  "But I want to know who it was.  I know it was one of them
Darleys, and I'm going to see; and if it was, I'll kill him."

As he spoke, the lad stood for a few moments thinking of what he had
better do, and ended by dashing down the steep zigzag path leading to
the bottom of the rock, when he made his way through the gap, and began
to run at a dog-trot in the direction taken by Ralph a quarter of an
hour before.

Ralph, on parting from Mark and Master Rayburn, walked away quite
briskly till he was well out of sight, and then he stopped short to lean
against a tree and rest for a while, for he felt deadly sick.  He laid
his left hand upon his sleeve, and felt that it was very wet; but the
bandage had stopped the bleeding, though not the pain, which was like
the sensation of a hot iron being plunged into his flesh, accompanied by
throbbings which at times seemed too painful to bear.

But after a few minutes' rest he went on again, light in spirit, in
spite of the bodily suffering; and the way seemed short when he was
walking, for his mind was full of the recollections of the day.

For that day had begun well.  The walk had been delightful in the
pleasant cool breeze which blew from the hills, and promised a ripple on
the water of the open river he was bound to fish, and he had not been
deceived.  In fact the grayling had risen freely to the natural fly he
had softly thrown, and his creel had grown heavier till well on in the
afternoon, when he had started back with his load.

Then came the _pad_, _pad_ of the pony's hoofs on the soft grass, with
an occasional click when the shoe caught upon a stone.  Then he was
overtaken by Mark, and the encounter followed, one which was more full
of pleasure in its memories than pain, and the lad's lips curled in a
smile as he went over everything which had passed till they parted.

Somehow these thoughts would be pleasant, although mingled with them
came others of their next meeting.  Every now and then, though, the
lad's progress was hindered by the throbbing of his wound, and the
giddy, faint sensation which followed; and twice over, when his forehead
turned damp, he threw himself down amongst the ferns to lie for a few
minutes on the cool moist earth, with the result each time that the
sensation of swimming and sickness passed off.

Then he rose again, and plodded on, getting nearer and nearer to home;
but the darkness increased till it became hard work to avoid the stones
which lay about, and his way beneath the trees near the river grew
solemn and gloomy in the extreme.

Once he started as he was listening to the croaking of the frogs down
among the sedges and rushes, for a peculiar hoarse cry arose from close
by; but he was country boy enough to know that it was the peculiar
sonorous squawk of a heron, evidently a visitor to the river for the
sake of the aforesaid frogs.

A little farther on, after one of his rests, just as he was starting
again, a low whoo-whoo-whoo! was uttered close to his ear, and answered
from a little farther on, to be apparently echoed again from the trees
high up on the side of the cliff.

But after the first startled sensation, he walked on steadily enough,
for the cry of the brown owl was quite familiar to him, and he knew that
it was only uttered in all probability close to some patch of ivy, where
small birds roosted, to startle them out, ready for the sharp dash of
their enemy's claw, from whose four-way talon clutch there was no
escape.

"How cowardly I am to-night," he said to himself.  "Everything sounds
different.  It's being tired, and feeling the pain of my wound.  Soon be
home now."

Then he began thinking of his father, and what he would say about the
two encounters; and in imagination he saw his stern frowning face.

But he was satisfied that Sir Morton would be glad to hear the news
about Captain Purlrose and his men, and he began to think that there
would be some talk of attacking the gang of thieves in their
lurking-place; for, as Master Rayburn had said, they could not be
allowed to harbour there.

Ralph gave quite a jump now, for he heard a sharp rustling sound,
followed by the rattle of a little stone, a short distance behind him,
and he increased his pace, with his heart beating heavily.

"Just as if some one was following me," he thought, "and stepped upon a
stone, and sent it rolling."

But he soon calmed down again, though he did not slacken his pace,
keeping on as fast as his weakness and the darkness would allow, with
the result that it was not more than half of his ordinary rate.

Again he was startled by a sound behind, this time as if a piece of dead
wood had cracked sharply, from the weight of some one following.

This time it was nearer, and succeeded by a rustling, plainly enough
caused by some one or something forcing a way through the bushes.  Some
one or something?  The lad felt that it must be something.  If it had
been some one, he would have spoken; but what thing could it be?

He was in a dense part of his way now, with the sky quite hidden by the
overhanging boughs, so that it was not possible to see more than a few
feet behind or before him, and hence he looked back in vain; and though
he listened intently there was no heavy snorting breath, such as he
would probably have heard if it had been pony or cow.

"It's some one tracking me," thought the lad at last, as again he heard,
very near him now, the rustle of the leaves and the flying back of
twigs.

So impressed was he now, and satisfied that whoever followed might mean
him harm, that he essayed to draw his sword as he hurried on; but the
sheer agony caused to the stiffened wound made him drop his hand at
once, and trust to getting out of the wood to where the ground was more
open, and he could reach the cliff, for he felt that now he could not be
many hundred yards from the way leading to the step-like path cut in the
stone.

Again there was a quick rustle, as if his pursuer had tried to diminish
the distance, and a minute later this sounded so near that, convinced of
his follower being one of the men who had attacked them that evening,
Ralph suddenly faced round--just when the sensation was strong that some
one was about to leap upon him and strike him down--and shouted aloud:

"Keep back, whoever you are.  I am armed."

"Ralph! that you?" came from a short distance in his rear.

"Yes, yes, quick!" cried the lad faintly; and he staggered on now, to
find himself a minute later in his father's arms.

"Why, Ralph, boy, what does this mean?  I have half-a-dozen men out
hunting for you."

"I'll--I'll tell you presently," panted the lad, who was bathed in
sweat.  "Draw your sword, and be on your guard.  Some one has been
following me this last half-hour."

"Who?"

"I don't know.  Be on your guard."

"Not fancy, is it, my boy?" said Sir Morton, rather doubtfully.

There was a sharp rustling sound, and a foot kicked a stone, as its
owner was evidently retreating fast.

"Humph!  Then some one has been following you.--Hallo, there! stop!"

"Hoi! hillo!" came from a distance in answer.

"Quick!" said Sir Morton.  "This way, man.  Found--found!"

The cliffs echoed the words, and Sir Morton took the lad's arm and
pressed it firmly--fortunately the left.

"I beg your pardon, Ralph.  I thought you were scared by the darkness of
the wood.  Some one was after you; but it would be folly to try and
catch him in this gloomy place.  Why, what's the matter, boy? you are
reeling about.  Feel faint?"

"Yes," panted the lad heavily.  "I have been fighting--wounded.  Help
me, please."

Sir Morton Darley passed his arm under his son's, and helped him quickly
along; a whistle brought Nick Garth and another man to his side; and the
former carried the lad right up the slope to the entrance of the castle,
where a little rest and refreshment recovered the sufferer sufficiently
to enable him to relate why he had brought back no fish, a task he had
hardly ended, when Master Rayburn entered to dress his second patient's
arm.

"We must put an end to such alarms as this, Master Rayburn," said Sir
Morton angrily.

"Ay; and the sooner the better," cried that gentleman, as he carefully
re-bandaged the lad's hurt.--"I wonder," he said to himself, "whether
Ralph has told him how he obtained his wound?  Is this the beginning of
the end?"



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

WHAT SIR MORTON SAID.

Master Rayburn, the old scholar, angler, and, in a small way,
naturalist, had no pretensions to being either physician or surgeon; but
there was neither within a day's journey, and in the course of a long
career, he had found out that in ordinary cases nature herself is the
great curer of ills.  He had noticed how animals, if suffering from
injuries, would keep the place clean with their tongues, and curl up and
rest till the wounds healed; that if they suffered from over-eating they
would starve themselves till they grew better; that at certain times of
the year they would, if carnivorous creatures, eat grass, or, if
herbivorous, find a place where the rock-salt which lay amongst the
gypsum was laid bare, and lick it; and that even the birds looked out
for lime at egg-laying time to form shell, and swallowed plenty of tiny
stones to help their digestion.

He was his own doctor when he was unwell, which, with his healthy,
abstemious, open-air life, was not often; and by degrees the people for
miles round found out that he made decoctions of herbs--camomile and
dandelion, foxglove, rue, and agrimony, which had virtues of their own.
He it was who cured Dan Rugg of that affection which made the joints of
his toes and fingers grow stiff, by making him sit for an hour a day,
holding hands and feet in the warm water which gushed out of one part of
the cliff to run into the river, and coated sticks and stones with a
hard stony shell, not unlike the fur found in an old tin kettle.

He knew that if a man broke a leg, arm, or rib, and the bones were laid
carefully in their places, and bandaged so that they could not move,
nature would make bony matter ooze from the broken ends and gradually
harden, forming a knob, perhaps, at the joining, but making the place
grow up stronger than ever; and it took no great amount of gumption to
grasp the fact that what was good for a cut finger was equally good for
arm, head, leg, or thigh; that is to say, to wash the bleeding wound
clean, lay the cut edges together, and sew and bandage them so that they
kept in place.  With a healthy person, nature did all the rest, and
Master Rayburn laughed good-humouredly to himself as he found that he
got all the credit.

"Nature doesn't mind," he used to say to one or other of the lads.
"There's no vanity there, my boys; but I'm not half so clever as they
think."

But let that be as it may, Master Rayburn mended Dummy Rugg when he fell
from top to bottom of the steep slope leading down into the lead-mine,
getting thereby very much broken, the worst injury being a crack in his
skull.  He "cobbled up," as he called it, a number of other injuries
which happened to the men by pieces of rock falling upon them, slips of
the steel picks, chops from axes, and cuts from scythes and
reaping-hooks, the misfortunes of the men who toiled in the woods and
fields.

If a regular physician or surgeon had come there, the people would have
laughed at him, so great was their faith in Master Rayburn, who did his
best for the people, and never asked for payment.  In fact, his patients
never thought of offering it to him in money, but they were not
ungrateful, all the same.  Indeed, he used to protest against the
numbers of presents he was always receiving, the women bringing him pats
of butter, little mugs of cream, and the best of their apples and
potatoes; and their husbands never killed a pig without taking something
to Master Rayburn for the kind actions which he had performed.

It fell out then, as quite a matter of course, that he went on treating
Ralph Darley for the little hole in his arm, beneath the shoulder joint,
and that he also dressed and bandaged Mark Eden's thigh, so that the
injuries went on healing rapidly.

It was known, too, at the Cliff Castle and the Black Tor that he was
treating both, but the Edens never mentioned the Darleys, nor the
Darleys the Edens, the amateur surgeon saying nothing at either place;
and the wounds got better day by day.

"I wish I could heal the old sore as easily," the old man said to
himself; "but that wants a bigger doctor than I."

Master Rayburn believed in the old saw, that a still tongue maketh a
wise head, and he waited.

But in the meantime Ralph had told his father everything about his
encounter, and waited afterwards to hear what his father said.  In due
time he did say something, but it was not to the effect that Mark Eden
had behaved very gallantly in helping his son, and _vice versa_, that
his son had shown a fine spirit in forgetting family enmity, and
fighting against a common enemy.  He only frowned, and said, "Humph!"

He said something more, though upon another occasion, when, in obedience
to Master Rayburn's orders, Ralph was keeping quiet at home, and sitting
in his father's room, reading, and thinking about Mark Eden,
determining, too, that he would ask Master Rayburn how the lad was the
next time he came, for though family pride and old teachings had kept
him quiet, he had hoped that his doctor would volunteer the information
which had not come.

Sir Morton was poring over an old tome which dealt with alchemy and the
transmutation of metals, in which the learned writer gravely gave his
opinion about baser metals being turned into gold, all of which Sir
Morton Darley thought would be very satisfactory, as he could not
succeed in finding a profitable lead-mine on his estate, and had not
been any more successful than his forefathers in taking possession of
that belonging to the Edens.

He had just come to the way of thinking that he would begin to buy
ordinary lead and turn it into gold, when Ralph said suddenly:

"I say, father, why do we want to be at enmity with the Edens?"

Sir Morton looked up at his son, and then down at his book, as if
expecting to find an answer to the question there.  Then he coughed to
clear his voice, cleared it, and coughed again, which was perfectly
unnecessary.  But still the answer did not come.  Finally, he replied:

"Well, you see, my boy, we always have been at enmity with them."

"Yes, I know, ever since my great, great, ever so great, grandfather's
time."

"Exactly Ralph.  That's it, my boy."

"But what was the beginning of it?"

"The beginning of it--er--the--er--commencement of it--er--the family
feud.  Well--er--it was something in the way of oppression, as I have
told you before.  A great injury inflicted by the Edens upon the
Darleys.  But it will not do your arm any good to be fidgeting about
that.  I want it to heal.  That can be healed; but our family feud never
can."

"Why not, father?"

"Why not?  Oh, because it is contrary to nature, boy.  What a question,
when you are suffering now from the way in which the deadly hatred of
the Edens comes out!  Are you not wounded by a scion of the vile house?"
