
"I should certainly ask you to do so."

"Well, then, now as you begin to know how to read you will read all
that I write to you of the pangs of jealousy and of absence, won't you,
Rosa?"

"I shall read it, if you write with good big letters."

Then, as the turn which the conversation took began to make Rosa uneasy,
she asked,--

"By the bye, how is your tulip going on?"

"Oh, Rosa, only imagine my joy, this morning I looked at it in the sun,
and after having moved the soil aside which covers the bulb, I saw the
first sprouting of the leaves. This small germ has caused me a much
greater emotion than the order of his Highness which turned aside the
sword already raised at the Buytenhof."

"You hope, then?" said Rosa, smiling.

"Yes, yes, I hope."

"And I, in my turn, when shall I plant my bulb?"

"Oh, the first favourable day I will tell you; but, whatever you do, let
nobody help you, and don't confide your secret to any one in the world;
do you see, a connoisseur by merely looking at the bulb would be able to
distinguish its value; and so, my dearest Rosa, be careful in locking up
the third sucker which remains to you."

"It is still wrapped up in the same paper in which you put it, and just
as you gave it me. I have laid it at the bottom of my chest under my
point lace, which keeps it dry, without pressing upon it. But good
night, my poor captive gentleman."

"How? already?"

"It must be, it must be."

"Coming so late and going so soon."

"My father might grow impatient not seeing me return, and that precious
lover might suspect a rival."

Here she listened uneasily.

"What is it?" asked Van Baerle. "I thought I heard something."

"What, then?"

"Something like a step, creaking on the staircase."

"Surely," said the prisoner, "that cannot be Master Gryphus, he is
always heard at a distance."

"No, it is not my father, I am quite sure, but----"

"But?"

"But it might be Mynheer Jacob."

Rosa rushed toward the staircase, and a door was really heard rapidly to
close before the young damsel had got down the first ten steps.

Cornelius was very uneasy about it, but it was after all only a prelude
to greater anxieties.

The flowing day passed without any remarkable incident. Gryphus made his
three visits, and discovered nothing. He never came at the same hours
as he hoped thus to discover the secrets of the prisoner. Van Baerle,
therefore, had devised a contrivance, a sort of pulley, by means of
which he was able to lower or to raise his jug below the ledge of tiles
and stone before his window. The strings by which this was effected he
had found means to cover with that moss which generally grows on tiles,
or in the crannies of the walls.

Gryphus suspected nothing, and the device succeeded for eight days. One
morning, however, when Cornelius, absorbed in the contemplation of his
bulb, from which a germ of vegetation was already peeping forth, had not
heard old Gryphus coming upstairs as a gale of wind was blowing which
shook the whole tower, the door suddenly opened.

Gryphus, perceiving an unknown and consequently a forbidden object in
the hands of his prisoner, pounced upon it with the same rapidity as the
hawk on its prey.

As ill luck would have it, his coarse, hard hand, the same which he had
broken, and which Cornelius van Baerle had set so well, grasped at once
in the midst of the jug, on the spot where the bulb was lying in the
soil.

"What have you got here?" he roared. "Ah! have I caught you?" and with
this he grabbed in the soil.

"I? nothing, nothing," cried Cornelius, trembling.

"Ah! have I caught you? a jug and earth in it There is some criminal
secret at the bottom of all this."

"Oh, my good Master Gryphus," said Van Baerle, imploringly, and anxious
as the partridge robbed of her young by the reaper.

In fact, Gryphus was beginning to dig the soil with his crooked fingers.

"Take care, sir, take care," said Cornelius, growing quite pale.

"Care of what? Zounds! of what?" roared the jailer.

"Take care, I say, you will crush it, Master Gryphus."

And with a rapid and almost frantic movement he snatched the jug from
the hands of Gryphus, and hid it like a treasure under his arms.

But Gryphus, obstinate, like an old man, and more and more convinced
that he was discovering here a conspiracy against the Prince of Orange,
rushed up to his prisoner, raising his stick; seeing, however, the
impassible resolution of the captive to protect his flower-pot he was
convinced that Cornelius trembled much less for his head than for his
jug.

He therefore tried to wrest it from him by force.

"Halloa!" said the jailer, furious, "here, you see, you are rebelling."

"Leave me my tulip," cried Van Baerle.

"Ah, yes, tulip," replied the old man, "we know well the shifts of
prisoners."

"But I vow to you----"

"Let go," repeated Gryphus, stamping his foot, "let go, or I shall call
the guard."

"Call whoever you like, but you shall not have this flower except with
my life."

Gryphus, exasperated, plunged his finger a second time into the soil,
and now he drew out the bulb, which certainly looked quite black; and
whilst Van Baerle, quite happy to have saved the vessel, did not suspect
that the adversary had possessed himself of its precious contents,
Gryphus hurled the softened bulb with all his force on the flags, where
almost immediately after it was crushed to atoms under his heavy shoe.

Van Baerle saw the work of destruction, got a glimpse of the juicy
remains of his darling bulb, and, guessing the cause of the ferocious
joy of Gryphus, uttered a cry of agony, which would have melted
the heart even of that ruthless jailer who some years before killed
Pelisson's spider.

The idea of striking down this spiteful bully passed like lightning
through the brain of the tulip-fancier. The blood rushed to his brow,
and seemed like fire in his eyes, which blinded him, and he raised
in his two hands the heavy jug with all the now useless earth which
remained in it. One instant more, and he would have flung it on the bald
head of old Gryphus.

But a cry stopped him; a cry of agony, uttered by poor Rosa, who,
trembling and pale, with her arms raised to heaven, made her appearance
behind the grated window, and thus interposed between her father and her
friend.

Gryphus then understood the danger with which he had been threatened,
and he broke out in a volley of the most terrible abuse.

"Indeed," said Cornelius to him, "you must be a very mean and spiteful
fellow to rob a poor prisoner of his only consolation, a tulip bulb."

"For shame, my father," Rosa chimed in, "it is indeed a crime you have
committed here."

"Ah, is that you, my little chatter-box?" the old man cried, boiling
with rage and turning towards her; "don't you meddle with what don't
concern you, but go down as quickly as possible."

"Unfortunate me," continued Cornelius, overwhelmed with grief.

"After all, it is but a tulip," Gryphus resumed, as he began to be a
little ashamed of himself. "You may have as many tulips as you like: I
have three hundred of them in my loft."

"To the devil with your tulips!" cried Cornelius; "you are worthy of
each other: had I a hundred thousand millions of them, I would gladly
give them for the one which you have just destroyed."

"Oh, so!" Gryphus said, in a tone of triumph; "now there we have it.
It was not your tulip you cared for. There was in that false bulb some
witchcraft, perhaps some means of correspondence with conspirators
against his Highness who has granted you your life. I always said they
were wrong in not cutting your head off."

"Father, father!" cried Rosa.

"Yes, yes! it is better as it is now," repeated Gryphus, growing warm;
"I have destroyed it, and I'll do the same again, as often as you repeat
the trick. Didn't I tell you, my fine fellow, that I would make your
life a hard one?"

"A curse on you!" Cornelius exclaimed, quite beyond himself with
despair, as he gathered, with his trembling fingers, the remnants of
that bulb on which he had rested so many joys and so many hopes.

"We shall plant the other to-morrow, my dear Mynheer Cornelius,"
said Rosa, in a low voice, who understood the intense grief of the
unfortunate tulip-fancier, and who, with the pure sacred love of her
innocent heart, poured these kind words, like a drop of balm, on the
bleeding wounds of Cornelius.




Chapter 18. Rosa's Lover


Rosa had scarcely pronounced these consolatory words when a voice was
heard from the staircase asking Gryphus how matters were going on.

"Do you hear, father?" said Rosa.

"What?"

"Master Jacob calls you, he is uneasy."

"There was such a noise," said Gryphus; "wouldn't you have thought he
would murder me, this doctor? They are always very troublesome fellows,
these scholars."

Then, pointing with his finger towards the staircase, he said to Rosa:
"Just lead the way, Miss."

After this he locked the door and called out: "I shall be with you
directly, friend Jacob."

Poor Cornelius, thus left alone with his bitter grief, muttered to
himself,--

"Ah, you old hangman! it is me you have trodden under foot; you have
murdered me; I shall not survive it."

And certainly the unfortunate prisoner would have fallen ill but for the
counterpoise which Providence had granted to his grief, and which was
called Rosa.

In the evening she came back. Her first words announced to Cornelius
that henceforth her father would make no objection to his cultivating
flowers.

"And how do you know that?" the prisoner asked, with a doleful look.

"I know it because he has said so."

"To deceive me, perhaps."

"No, he repents."

"Ah yes! but too late."

"This repentance is not of himself."

"And who put it into him?"

"If you only knew how his friend scolded him!"

"Ah, Master Jacob; he does not leave you, then, that Master Jacob?"

"At any rate, he leaves us as little as he can help."

Saying this, she smiled in such a way that the little cloud of jealousy
which had darkened the brow of Cornelius speedily vanished.

"How was it?" asked the prisoner.

"Well, being asked by his friend, my father told at supper the whole
story of the tulip, or rather of the bulb, and of his own fine exploit
of crushing it."

Cornelius heaved a sigh, which might have been called a groan.

"Had you only seen Master Jacob at that moment!" continued Rosa. "I
really thought he would set fire to the castle; his eyes were like two
flaming torches, his hair stood on end, and he clinched his fist for a
moment; I thought he would have strangled my father."

"'You have done that,' he cried, 'you have crushed the bulb?'

"'Indeed I have.'

"'It is infamous,' said Master Jacob, 'it is odious! You have committed
a great crime!'

"My father was quite dumbfounded.

"'Are you mad, too?' he asked his friend."

"Oh, what a worthy man is this Master Jacob!" muttered Cornelius,--"an
honest soul, an excellent heart that he is."

"The truth is, that it is impossible to treat a man more rudely than he
did my father; he was really quite in despair, repeating over and over
again,--

"'Crushed, crushed the bulb! my God, my God! crushed!'

"Then, turning toward me, he asked, 'But it was not the only one that he
had?'"

"Did he ask that?" inquired Cornelius, with some anxiety.

"'You think it was not the only one?' said my father. 'Very well, we
shall search for the others.'

"'You will search for the others?' cried Jacob, taking my father by
the collar; but he immediately loosed him. Then, turning towards me, he
continued, asking 'And what did that poor young man say?'

"I did not know what to answer, as you had so strictly enjoined me never
to allow any one to guess the interest which you are taking in the bulb.
Fortunately, my father saved me from the difficulty by chiming in,--

"'What did he say? Didn't he fume and fret?'

"I interrupted him, saying, 'Was it not natural that he should be
furious, you were so unjust and brutal, father?'

"'Well, now, are you mad?' cried my father; 'what immense misfortune is
it to crush a tulip bulb? You may buy a hundred of them in the market of
Gorcum.'

"'Perhaps some less precious one than that was!' I quite incautiously
replied."

"And what did Jacob say or do at these words?" asked Cornelius.

"At these words, if I must say it, his eyes seemed to flash like
lightning."

"But," said Cornelius, "that was not all; I am sure he said something in
his turn."

"'So, then, my pretty Rosa,' he said, with a voice as sweet a
honey,--'so you think that bulb to have been a precious one?'

"I saw that I had made a blunder.

"'What do I know?' I said, negligently; 'do I understand anything
of tulips? I only know--as unfortunately it is our lot to live with
prisoners--that for them any pastime is of value. This poor Mynheer van
