$50 a week easily made. _We have 1000 testimonials_.

       *       *       *       *       *


RUBBER BACK SQUARE PACKING.

BEST IN THE WORLD.

[Illustration]

For Packing the Piston Rods and Valve Stems of Steam Engines and Pumps.

B represents that part of the packing which, when in use, is in contact
with the Piston Rod.

A the elastic back, which keeps the part B against the rod with
sufficient pressure to be steam-tight, and yet creates but little
friction.

This Packing is made in lengths of about 20 feet, and of all sizes from
1/4 to 2 inches square.

JOHN H. CHEEVER, Treas. NEW YORK BELTING & PACKING CO., 37 & 38 Park
Row, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

THE STEARNS MANUFACTURING CO., ERIE, PENNSYLVANIA, make a specialty of
improved SAW MILL MACHINERY.

Designed in its construction for producing lumber economically and
rapidly. Plans and estimates for Mills of any capacity furnished on
request. Also build ENGINES, BOILERS, AND MACHINERY IN GENERAL.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

Forster's Rock & Ore Breaker and Combined Crusher and Pulverizer.

_The simplest machine ever devised for the purpose._

Parties who have used it constantly for six years testify that it will
do _double_ the work of _any other Crusher_, with one-third the Power,
and one-half the expense for keeping in repair. The smaller sizes can be
run with Horse Power.

Address TOTTEN & CO., Pittsburgh, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *


The BELMONTYLE OIL

Prevents Rust, Tarnish, etc., on Firearms, Machinery, Tools, Cutlery,
Safes, Saws, Skates, Stoves, Hardware, etc., without injury to the
polish. In use over 10 years. Highest Testimonials. Samples 50 cents,
three for $1.00, sent free of expressage. Send for circular.

BELMONTYLE OIL CO., SOLE MANUFACTURERS, 150 Front Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


CARNEGIE BROS & CO UNION IRON MILLS PITTSBURGH PA WROUGHT IRON BEAMS
CHANNELS TEES & ANGLES

The attention of Architects, Engineers, and Builders is called to the
great decline in prices of wrought STRUCTURAL IRON. It is believed that,
were owners fully aware of the small difference in cost which now exists
between iron and wood, the former, in many cases, would be adopted,
thereby saving _insurance_ and avoiding all risk of _interruption_ to
_business_ in consequence of fire. Book of detailed information
furnished to Architects, Engineers, and Builders, on application.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

MICROSCOPES, TELESCOPES, FIELD GLASSES, MAGIC LANTERNS, ANEROID
BAROMETERS, SPECTROSCOPES, DRAWING INSTRUMENTS, PHILOSOPHICAL & CHEMICAL
APPARATUS.

Catalogues as follows sent on application: Part 1, Mathematical
Instruments, 162 pp.; Part 2, Optical Instruments, 186 pp.; Part 3,
Magic Lanterns, 112 pp.; Part 4, Philosophical and Chemical Apparatus,
160 pp. JAMES W. QUEEN & CO. 924 Chestnut St., Philadelphia, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *


"RELIABLE"

Engines a complete success. Prices still 40 per cent. below those of
other makers. Unequaled for efficiency, simplicity, and durability.
Prices from $250 for 10 H. P., to $400 for 30 H. P. All complete, with
Governor, Pump, and Heater. Address, for circular,

HEALD, SISCO & CO., Baldwinsville, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


UNIVERSAL GRINDER.

These Grinders consist of a series of disks with beveled edges locked
together on a shaft. They revolve towards each other at different rates
of speed. They combine strength and durability. No friction; hence no
heat. They will grind all kinds of Grain, also Quartz Rocks, Ores,
Gypsum, Brimstone Shavings, Shells, Brick Clay, Cork, Rubber, Bone, Oil
Cake, Flax Seed, Cotton Seed, and any number of articles in use by
manufacturers and farmers. These Grinders are disposed of on reasonable
terms. Send for Illustrated Catalogue with terms. NEWELL & CHAPIN, foot
of West 19th Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

23 Sizes of Direct, 24 Sizes of Boilers, and the best Indirect
Radiation.

Send for circulars.

EUREKA STEAM HEATING CO. ROCHESTER, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


OTIS' SAFETY HOISTING Machinery.

OTIS BROS. & CO., No. 348 Broadway, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


JOHN R. WHITLEY & CO.

European Representatives of American Houses, with First-class Agents in
the principal industrial and agricultural centers and cities in Europe.
London, 7 Poultry, E. C. Paris. 8 Place Vendeme. Terms on application.
J. R. W. & Co. purchase Paris goods on commission at shippers'
discounts.

       *       *       *       *       *


ROOTS' NEW IRON BLOWER.

[Illustration]

POSITIVE BLAST. IRON REVOLVERS, PERFECTLY BALANCED IS SIMPLER, AND HAS
FEWER PARTS THAN ANY OTHER BLOWER.

P. H. & F. M. ROOTS, Manuf'rs, CONNERSVILLE, IND.

S. S. TOWNSEND, Gen. Agt., 6 Cortlandt St., 8 Dey Street, NEW YORK.

WM. COOKE, Selling Agt., 6 Cortlandt Street, NEW YORK.

JAS. BEGGS & CO., Selling Agts., 8 Dey Street, NEW YORK.

SEND FOR PRICED CATALOGUE.

       *       *       *       *       *


PROPOSALS FOR MAIL LOCKS.

POST OFFICE DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON. D. C., October 23, 1880.

SEALED PROPOSALS will be received at this Department, until 12 o'clock,
noon, on the 26th day of January, 1881, for furnishing a new kind of
mail locks and keys for the sole and exclusive use of the United States
through registered mails.

As the public exposure and searching examination necessary to
intelligent bidding on any prescribed model of a lock and key would tend
to impair, if not entirely destroy, the further utility of such locks
and keys for the purposes of the mails, the Postmaster General
prescribes no model or sample for bidders, but relies for a selection on
the mechanical skill and ingenuity which a fair competition among
inventors, hereby invited, may develop in samples submitted by them.

Specifications of the conditions and requirements relating to proposals,
samples, contract, etc., as well as forms of proposal, will be furnished
on application by letter to the Second Assistant Postmaster General.

No proposal will be considered unless it shall have been submitted in
accordance with such specification and forms.

The contracts which may be made will be in conformity to the
specifications and the accepted proposal. But the right is, however,
reserved to reject any and all of the proposals.

JAS. N. TYNER, Acting Postmaster General.

       *       *       *       *       *


SHEPARD'S CELEBRATED $50 Screw Cutting Foot Lathe.

[Illustration]

Foot and Power Lathes, Drill Presses, Scrolls, Circular and Band Saws,
Saw Attachments, Chucks, Mandrels, Twist Drills, Dogs, Calipers, etc.
Send for catalogue of outfits for amateurs or artisans.

H. L. SHEPARD & CO., 331, 333, 335, & 337 West Front Street, Cincinnati,
Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *


HUB MACHINERY.--HUB TURNING, HUB MORTISING, and Hub Boring Machines.
Send for price list and circulars. DAVID JENKINS, Sheboygan, Wis.

       *       *       *       *       *


ROOFING.

For steep or flat roofs. Applied by ordinary workmen at one-third the
cost of tin. Circulars and samples free. Agents Wanted. T. NEW, 32 John
Street, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


PATENT COLD ROLLED SHAFTING.

The fact that this shafting has 75 per cent. greater strength, a finer
finish, and is truer to gauge, than any other in use renders it
undoubtedly the most economical. We are also the sole manufacturers of
the Celebrated Collins' Pat. Coupling, and furnish Pulleys, Hangers,
etc., of the most approved styles. Price list mailed on application to

JONES & LAUGHLINS, Try Street, 2d and 3d Avenues, Pittsburg, Pa.

190 S. Canal Street, Chicago, Ill.

Stocks of this shafting in store and for sale by FULLER, DANA & FITZ,
Boston, Mass. Geo. Place Machinery Agency, 121 Chambers St., N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


Model Engines.

[Illustration]

Complete sets of CASTINGS for making small Model steam Engines 11/2 in.
bore, 3 in. stroke, price,$4; ditto 2 in. bore, 4 in. stroke, price,
$10, same style as cut. Gear Wheels and Parts of Models. All kinds of
Small Tools and Materials. Catalogue Free. GOODNOW & WIGHTMAN, 176
Washington Street, Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *


SEND FOR THE BEST BAND SAW BLADE in the market to London, Berry & Orton,
Phila., Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *


COE BRASS MFG. CO. WOLCOTTVILLE CONN. BRASS AND COPPER IN SHEETS. WIRE
AND BLANKS MATERIALS FOR METALLIC. AMMUNITION A SPECIALTY.

       *       *       *       *       *


MACHINISTS' TOOLS.

New and Improved Patterns. Send for new illustrated catalogue.

Lathes, Planers, Drills, &c.

NEW HAVEN MANUFACTURING CO., New Haven, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *


SKATES AND NOVELTIES. Send for Catalogue. R. SIMPSON, 132 Nassau St., N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


PORTER MANUF'G CO.

[Illustration]

The New Economizer, the only Agricultural Engine with Return Flue Boiler
